SHIGENORI
HAS WON
HIS FIGHT
OVER POLIO
When Shigenori Kameyama was a baby living on
Kyushu Island in the south of Japan an attack of polio
paralysed him so that he could not lif: a hand nor
move a leg. His pathetic and useless life might have
continued indefinitely had he not been taken at the
age of eight to the Se/sh; Ryogo En Institution in
Tokyo, a special "hospital-school-and-home" for
the rehabilitation of crippled children which, since
1950, has been gradually transformed by the Ministry
WHO photos by Dominique Darbois
of Health and Welfare Into a demo-stration centre
for the entire country. (Beginning In 1952, Who
and Unicef helped by providing fellowships for
Japanese to learn other countries' rehabilitation
techniques.) When Shigenori entered the Tokyo
"hospital-home" he was incapable of standing on
his twisted feet, even when someone held him.
But the treatment he receivedmassages, baths, a
small surgical intervention, exercises, electrotherapy

The mysterious virus
SMALLEST ENEMY
OF MANKIND
by
A.M.-M. Payne
Chief, Section of Endemo-epidemic Diseases, World Health Organization
and above all his own tenacity, brought a wonderful
change. When he left the hospital last year he was
not I 00% rehabilitated, but he could get up unaided,
brush his teeth, dress himself, and go out into the
street unafraid. Photos show: (opposite page)
young patients in the hospital's bathing room;
(above) Shigenori smiles a victorious smile after his
first halting steps, and uses a large doll (bottom photo)
to learn simple things like buttoning his clothes.
If the era of Pasteur, Koch and Lister has been properly
called the era of bacteriological revolution, the last
twenty years equally have the right to be known as
the era of virological revolution. Technical advances in
the basic sciences have provided new tools which have
been applied to the study of viruses with remarkable
results. New techniques and methods have opened up
vast new fields in our understanding of the ecology of
micro-organisms in general and viruses in particular.
The word "ecology" needs definition since it contains a
concept which is fundamental to the modern approach
to many aspects of medicine, not only communicable
diseases but also many other problems of human life, such
as mental illness, accidents, chronic degenerative
diseases, etc. Ecology is the study of the interactions of
organisms and environments. No living thing, be it a
human being or a virus, can be studied in isolation from
its environment. Here I will confine myself to the inter¬
actions of viruses and animal organisms, especially the
human animal, and the environments in. which these
interactions occur.
It might be thought that this is an unnecessarily broad
approach to an outline of progress in the understanding
of human virus diseases, but that is not so. Indeed, it is
true to say that it is largely because of the breadth of
this approach that progress has been so rapid and
promises to continue at unreduced speed. Different
aspects of the ecology of. virus diseases have been studied
by specialists in widely different disciplines, including, as
well as virologists, biochemists, geneticists, immunologists,
epidemiologists, pathologists, clinicians, veterinarians,
sanitarians, anthropologists, zoologists, entomologists,'
plant biologists, etc., and often it is only by consideration
of the findings of all that the true picture will be seen
and a final understanding and solution of a problem
arrived at. As yet it must be admitted that we have
not reached this goal for any virus disease, although for
some diseases it appears to be within sight.
Viruses are the smallest known living things if it is
accepted that the essential quality of life is the ability
to reproduce. Viruses, however, cannot reproduce inde¬
pendently of other living cells. This, and other facts,
including the fact that certain viruses when highly puri¬
fied can be prepared in crystalline form, has led to many
arguments as to whether they are really alive. During
the past ten years a tremendous amount of information
regarding the nature of viruses, their size, shape, density,
autonomous existence, origin, reproduction, metabolic
activity, chemical composition, their antigenic qualities
which provoke defensive reactions in the animal host and
so forth has been accumulated so that now the question
as to whether they are alive seems largely philosophical.
Their ecology is that of living things.
A virus in order to survive must come into contact with
a susceptible host, or more specifically a susceptible cell
in that host, it must be able to multiply in the host, it
must be capable of being dispersed so as to reach a fresh
host, and it must be able to survive outside while seeking
a fresh host. These activities have been
neatly expressed as getting in, multiplying,
getting out, and getting about. This picture
has been modified in the process of evo¬
lution. If we can attribute a purpose to the
form of life we call a virus, that purpose is
Cont'd
next page

VIRUSES
(Continued)
Three types of polio
are now recognized
to survive and it can do this best by coming to terms with
its host as it were, living together without doing harm,
taking its nourishment and reproducing in as unobtrusive
a way as possible and having a way out so that its progeny
may get out into the world in search of new living quar¬
ters. Most virus infections are indeed inapparent, and a
lethal or damaging relationship is relatively uncommon,
yet it is just these latter which are important in medical
science.
Never before has this fact been so evident as now, as
a result of the technical advances of the last ten years.
Perhaps the most far reaching of these is the development
of tissue-culture techniques. Cultures of living tissues are
not new. They have been practised, albeit with some dif¬
ficulty, for three or four decades. The discovery of anti¬
biotics overcame one of the major problems of ensuring
the sterility of these culture, and this, in association with
advances in the composition of the media in which the
cells are grown, in the choice and methods of preparation
of the cells for culture and recognition of the destructive
effect of viruses on the cells, the cytopathogenic effect, has
made tissue cultures the most widely used method of
growing viruses in the laboratory. Application of these
new techniques has resulted in the isolation and identi¬
fication of many hitherto unknown viruses, some of which
have been proved to cause disease while others appear
to be harmless. Dozens of new viruses have thus been
discovered in the last ten years and no one knows how
many more remain to be discovered. The situation is
quite comparable 'with that of the era of the bacterio¬
logical revolution when many different kinds of bacteria
were recognized for the first time and the long process of
identification, classification and recognition of their signi¬
ficance began.
Broadly, the new viruses of medical importance may be
grouped under three headings according to their source
those isolated from the alimentary tract, often referred
to as enteroviruses ; those isolated from the respiratory
tract, which include the adenoviruses and the influenza
viruses; and those isolated from insects, the arthropod-
borne or "arbor" viruses.
More victims among older people
The enteroviruses include the well-known polioviruses
responsible for poliomyelitis as well as others less
well known: the Coxsackie viruses and the so-called
echo viruses. The Coxsackie viruses, named after the small
town in New York State where they were first isolated,
fall into two groups, A and B, and two dozen types have
been recognized. Many of them can be isolated from
stools or from the throat in tissue culture but their most
striking characteristic is the ability of most of them to
infect infant but not adult mice. They have been shown
to be responsible for a variety of diseases including aseptic
(i. e. non-bacterial) meningitis, herpangina (an affection
of the throat), pharyngitis, pleurodynia (a painful affec¬
tion of the chest which occurs in epidemics), and a severe
form of encephalomyocarditis in infants (an affection of
the heart and brain).
Some of the nineteen echo viruses so far discovered have
been identified as the cause of extensive epidemics of
aseptic meningitis, others cause summer diarrhoea, parti¬
cularly of infants and young children, the role of others
in producing disease is still unknown and it is quite prob¬
able that some are harmless parasites.
The most important of the enteroviruses are the polio-
viruses which I will consider in some detail, partly because
10
of the dramatic advances made during the last ten years,
and partly because it is an admirable example of the
importance of understanding the ecology of diseases in
developing control measures.
Before the last World War poliomyelitis was regarded
as a problem confined to a few countries and believed to
be rare in most parts of the world. It was thought then
to be primarily a disease of the central nervous system,
transmitted by the respiratory route, the virus probably
reaching the nervous system along the nerves of the nose
and throat. During and after the war, there was an
alarming increase in the incidence of the disease, not only
in countries already affected, but many other countries
also began to suffer epidemics of increasing severity and
frequency. Furthermore, the disease in some countries no
longer took the form of an infantile paralysis but began
to affect more and more people in older age groups, until
in some countries one third or more of the cases were
over the age of fifteen and older people seemed to suffer
more severely.
Is vaccine the final solution ?
Ten years ago the prospects for controlling such a
disease seemed remote indeed. The first big step
forward was the recognition that the infection was
widespread in areas where the clinical disease was rare,
that is to say symptomless infections were far more
common than had been thought, several hundred times
more common than clinical cases, and these infections did
not appear to involve the central nervous system. It was
already known that the alimentary tract of certain pri¬
mates could be infected so that attention was directed to
the possibility that it might be essentially an alimentary
infection which only occasionally involved the central ner¬
vous system.
The next big step was the recognition that there was
not one but three types of poliovirus, all capable of caus¬
ing disease but giving little or no cross-protection against
each other. Then came the great discovery that the
viruses could be grown in cultures of non-nervous tissue.
This not only cast further doubt on previous concepts of
the ecology of the infection but also made it possible
to undertake extensive epidemiological studies, impossible
when monkeys had to be used. It also raised the possi¬
bility of producing virus in such quantities that a vaccine
might be made.
Hopes were raised further by the discovery that the
primary site of infection was indeed the alimentary tract
and that the virus appeared to reach the nervous system
through the blood stream. This made it seem likely that
if antibodies or protective substances could be produced
in the blood by means of a vaccine they might act as a
barrier and prevent the virus from reaching the nervous
system and so causing disease. This would have been an
unlikely possibility if the virus travelled along the nerves.
Developments in tissue-culture techniques, particularly
the development of a synthetic medium for the growth
of the cells, accelerated progress which culminated, as is
well known, in the development of a vaccine now shown to
be both safe and effective in preventing paralysis after
infection with poliovirus.
However, quite apart from the problems
which still remained regarding production,
testing and use of the vaccine, it was not
regarded by many scientists as a final
solution to the problem of poliomyelitis.
Cont'd
on
page 13

The Unesco Courier. May 1958
PINHE ADS
MARK POLIO'S
PATH ACROSS
A CAPITAL
WHO photos
In the hospital of Hornbeck on the Danish coast close to Elsinore, a little girl is alive and breathing thanks to a
Swedish apparatus connected directly with the trachea (above). She was one of the 3,000 people who caught
polio when the city of Copenhagen experienced its worst-ever epidemic of this disease in I 952. The outbreak
in Copenhagen was one in a long series of such epidemics which have been growing and spreading all over the
world since the first occurred in Stockholm in 1887. Map of Copenhagen (below, left) is covered with a rash
of pins, each representing a polio case (white ones show cases of paralysis of the respiratory muscles). Denmark had
a polio rate of I 3 I cases per 1 00,000 inhabitants in the I 952 epidemic. Hornbeck hospital is a rehabilitation
centre, and also does virus research. Below, right, test tubes filled with living tissue which have been infect¬
ed with polio virus and liquid allowing the tissues to grow. This is part of the work involved in finding a vaccine.
1 1

HOW ASIAN FLU SWEPT
AROUND THE WO RLD
On May 4, I 957 reports of a 'flu epidemic came to the World Health Organization from Singapore.
Within a few months "Asian 'flu" had girdled the world. (See map below). A WHO network of
57 influenza centres in 46 countries went into action. The micro-organism was found to be a "new"
virus and was given the name Virus A/Singapore/ 1/57. All possible measures were taken to isolate
the virus and produce a vaccine against it. Headquarters of the battle was the World Influenza
Centre in London (entrance shown, far right) where a constant search is made for 'flu viruses and
a universal vaccine against all types of influenza. Viruses are grown in fertile eggs for two to three
days after which the flu'd is removed from the infected eggs (right) in an ultra-violet chamber to
prevent bacteriological infection. This fluid, after several days in a refrigerator, becomes the vaccine.
WHO photos
Probable origin of epidemic
Q First wave
O First cases from May to August
H Second wave
The figures represent the months when the first cases appeared
12

Unesco Courier.
VIRUSES
(Continued from page 10)
The
'Tamed'
1958May
ones
give immunity
The vaccine was effective, but not completely effective;
furthermore, it was shown that although it prevented
paralysis it did not prevent infection, and it was
considered probable that the immunity after vaccination
would be of relatively short duration, thus requiring
reinforcing doses at intervals throughout life. The
vaccine was unable to influence the spread of virulent
viruses in nature so that there could be no prospect of
eliminating the disease. Attention was therefore turned
to the ecology of the natural disease and it was found
that in many parts of the world the balance between
infection, immunity and disease was as favourable as we
have been able to achieve by artificial means in many
other communicable diseases.
This favourable situation seemed to be associated with
the widespread dissemination under conditions of poor
hygiene of viruses, many of which seemed to be of low
virulence, so that few very young children escaped natural
immunizing infections at an age when symptoms were
least likely to develop.
Considerable progress has now been made towards
reproducing and improving on this natural process. In
the laboratory, strains of virus of very low virulence have
been developed and initial trials on humans shown that
they can still produce alimentary infection and stimulate
the formation of protective antibodies without producing
disease, and there are good reasons to believe that this
immunity is long lasting, possibly life-long. Furthermore,
immunity is produced to reinfection of the alimentary
tract, so that control of the circulation of natural viru¬
lent viruses - becomes itheoretically possible. However,
more work is needed before we can be.^ sure that these
attenuated viruses will remain harmless when used on a
large scale in man. This is the crucial question because
these viruses get out and about in the stools and can
infect other persons just as naturally occurring viruses do.
This will not matter if they remain stable but we do not
yet know whether they will.
When antigen meets antibody
In the field of respiratory virus diseases there have been
similar developments. Many new viruses have been
discovered and much progress has been made in the
study of previously recognized viruses. Influenza remains
the most important epidemic respiratory disease and,
during the past ten years, two more influenza viruses,
influenza c and d, have been discovered. However, the
progress in the study of the two most important influenza
viruses, a and b, especially the former, has been even more
striking. World-wide studies of the evolution of the
influenza viruses have been intensified since 1947 and
certain patterns have emerged which increase our hopes
of eventually limiting the effects of this disease.
Here again it is the interaction of the* virus and its envi¬
ronment both inside and outside the host that is impor¬
tant. Protective antibodies are produced in the body in
response to the stimulus of substances known as antigens
which are part of the infecting micro-organism, and anti¬
bodies are one of the most important defences of the
body against disease. They are generally highly specific:
reacting only with the antigen which stimulated their
formation. The influenza virus behaves as if it can
change its dominant antigens so that previously existing
antibodies can no longer interfere with its ability to pro¬
duce infection and disease.
It now appears that one of the influences which brings
about this change is the presence in the population of
the antibody itself. An influenza a virus which has spread
widely begins to find it difficult to infect new hosts
because they already have antibodies, difficult to multiply,
and difficult to get out and about. It is in danger of
failing to survive. Some viruses in special circumstances
do in fact die out in this way; measles in the Pacific
Islands, where after causing a devastating epidemic the
virus dies out from lack of susceptibles, is one example.
But the influenza virus is antigenically
unstable, the dominant antigens which it
presents on its surface and which are
exposed to antibodies can change and,
when this happens, the new virus has a
Cont'd
on
next page
13

VIRUSES
(Continued)
Flu virus has its
'fingerprints' taken
much better chance of survival, finding susceptible hosts,
and getting out and about. This can be compared with
evolution by natural selection. Minor changes of this kind
occur fairly often, every two or three years, and the new
virus causes the epidemics with which we are familiar.
However, at longer intervals, every ten to fifteen years
or so, a much bigger change occurs so that the virus finds
no antibodies to restrict its multiplication and spread,
with the result that a pandemic such as occurred in 1957
may ensue. At first it seemed that the 1957 virus was
entirely new but then it was discovered that some elderly
persons already possessed antibodies which showed that a
similar virus had been prevalent in the world before, some
seventy years or so ago, and possibly had been the cause
of the pandemic which occurred in 1889-1890.
Seeking a universal vaccine
If this is true, it raises the possibility that the changes
which the influenza virus can undergo are limited and
that viruses which have been prevalent in the past but
which have apparently disappeared may reappear in the
future. The process therefore may not be truly evolu¬
tionary but rather revolutionary in the sense that it may
go round in a circle. When we know all the possible
forms the virus can take we may be able by vaccination
to produce antibodies against all of them. The virus will
then be unable to take us by surprise as it did in 1957.
Implicit in these observations is the fact that infection
with a virus leaves permanent traces in the form of the
specific antibodies already mentioned. When we have the
appropriate antigen we can discover whether man has
had previous experience of that antigen during his life¬
time. Such studies have wide applications in the under¬
standing of virus diseases. In influenza it has been shown
that the influenza virus of swine was prevalent in man
about the time of the 1918 pandemic and it seems likely
that it, or a closely related virus, may have been the cause
of that pandemic. The postulated re-emergence of the
1889 virus from some unknown situation and the fact that
the swine virus no longer affects man, but persists in
pigs, has raised the possibility that certain animals may
play a role in the ecology of human influenza. This is at
present speculation but several important studies are in
progress and, if it proves to be correct, it will be a major
advance.
A number of other viruses causing upper respiratory
infections have been discovered, the most important group
being the adenoviruses of which several types have been
identified. Some of them have been incriminated as the
cause of epidemic respiratory disease and some can infect
the eye, causing a form of conjunctivitis. An effective
vaccine has been developed against these viruses. The
common cold, although not serious in itself, remains one
of the major pests of mankind. Several viruses causing
a similar clinical picture have been discovered and it
now appears that it is not an entity but may be due to
a number of different agents. We are still a long way
from a solution of this problem but the application of the
new techniques gives us more hope for the future.
Monkeys spread yellow fever
Smallpox and yellow fever were in the past two of the
most dreaded virus diseases. We can now exercise a
large measure of control over these diseases but,
neverthless, problems still remain. With yellow fever the
problem results from its ecology. In both the Americas
and in Africa the infection persists in monkeys and cer¬
tain other animals and cannot be eradicated. It is indeed
spreading in the jungles of Central America. We can
protect man with a highly effective vaccine and we can
14
prevent occurrence of the disease in , epidemic form in
towns by eradication of the mosquito which transmits the
disease, but the prevention of the spread of the disease
to other parts of the world requires constant vigilance.
In connexion with the studies on Russian Spring Sum¬
mer encephalitis, an interesting concept has been de¬
veloped, that of natural foyers or focal areas of disease in
which, because of the total ecology of ah area, including
animal, insect and plant life and the physical conditions,
a focus of infection can persist apparently indefinitely
unless the ecological situation is disturbed by outside
interference, such as destruction of vegetation, animal or
insect life. Indeed, when the ecology of an area is known
it is possible, within limits, to anticipate which diseases
may be present. Such areas must be defined and steps
taken to prevent human disease and the possible spread of
the infection, by vaccination or other means.
The causes of other more mundane diseases such as
the viruses of measles and chicken pox have also been
isolated in the last ten years and are now being studied
in the laboratory. Others, such as the viruses of infec¬
tious hepatitis, serum hepatitis (two forms of jaundice),
glandular fever and trachoma are still elusive. The eye-
disease, trachoma, is particularly important since it is
widespread over a large part of the world. However, the
so-called virus is probably not a "true" virus for various
reasons including the fact that it responds to antibiotics
which the true viruses do not. Furthermore, coincident
bacterial infections seem to be very important in increas¬
ing the severity of the damage of the eye and these can
also be controlled by antibiotics. We can therefore exercise
a considerable degree of control over the disease even
though we cannot as yet study the virus in the laboratory.
Bats carry the dreaded rabies
A review of progress in virus diseases during the last
ten years would not be complete without mention of
that dreaded disease: rabies. There have been
several important advances. The first is the development
of a live virus vaccine which, when used to immunize dogs,
is most effective in preventing introduction of rabies into
human communities which commonly occurs through in¬
fection of dogs, sometimes by wild animals. The second
advance was the preparation of a hyper-immune serum
which, used in conjunction with vaccine, has been proved
to be much more effective in the treatment of humans,
especially after severe bites, than the vaccine alone as
was formerly practised.
The third advance has been the discovery of rabies in
insectivorous bats in the Caribbean area, in the United
States of America, and in Europe. This is different from
rabies in the vampire bat which has been known for
decades. It seems that, unlike other animal, insectivorous
bats do not always die from the infection; at least not
within a short period. A lengthy period of survival of
the bat in an infectious condition is obviously more favour¬
able for the survival of the virus than the short period
of survival usually seen in other animals. This may
explain a number of features of the ecology of the
disease which have hitherto been little understood.
In the short space available I have only been able to
touch on some of the highlights of recent progress.
However, it is evident that great strides have been made
and just as we have seen more and more bacterial diseases
brought under control in the past, so we may expect to
see an increasing number of virus diseases controlled in
the future. At the same time we must bear in mind that
no living thing exists in isolation. Its behaviour depends
on its environment which is more or less constantly
changing. We must therefore remain on the alert for
the emergence of new diseases or changes in the pattern
of old ones.
