CELEBRATION
IN CUZCO
Old Inca capital restores
its quake-torn monuments
INCA CEREMONY is re-enacted (right) by people of
Cuzco, Peru, wearing costumes of their ancestors.
Most solemn feast of ancient Incas was that dedicated to
the Sun, which was attended by nobles from every corner
of their vast empire. In the Cuzco of today the walls of
Inca palaces and temples (below) serve as foundations of
Hispanic convents, churches and mansions. Magnificent
green and grey blocks of Inca stonework with beautifully
worked surfaces were fitted together without mortar.

The Unesco Courier. June 1958
t f
Shaped like an open hand, the Peruvian city of Cuzco
spreads out at the head of a strategic valley. The
fingers reach up towards steep hillsides, the base of
the hand lies at the confluence of three small rivers.
The city's site has been inhabited since a remote antiquity
from the very earliest urban civilization of the central
Andes. During the 15th century, Cuzco was the capital
of the Incas "'The People of the Sun" whose empire
was the most extensive of any in ancient America.
Cuzco is in reality three cities. One is Inca, the second
is Colonial and the third is modern. Inca Cuzco lies at
ground level and beneath the Colonial city. It consists of
massive, beautifully fashioned walls. Colonial Cuzco
overlies it with religious buildings and courtyard dwellings.
Modern Cuzco, to a great extent, has still to take form
for it lacks many of the buildings required, by a large
regional capital.
Eight years ago, on the afternoon of Sunday, May 21,
1950, Cuzco rocked and trembled in the grip of a major
earthquake. Within six seconds 300 people were killed
or injured, 3,000 dwellings were destroyed and damage
was done to many churches, including the 17th century
Cathedral, to the university, to historic Colonial mansions
and other monuments. All told, damage was estimated
at 500 million soles (33 million U.S. dollars in 1951).
The Peruvian Government took immediate steps to meet
the appalling situation in the city. It instituted a new
tobacco tax to help pay for Cuzco's public and private
housing reconstruction, and the Peruvian Congress made
a special appropriation for the restoration of churches
and historical monuments. The Government also asked
Unesco to send a special mission to study the situation in
Cuzco and to make suggestions for conservation and res¬
toration.
Headed by Professor George Kubier, of Yale University,
U.S.A., and including Luis MacGregor Ceballos, a Mexican
architect-restorer and Oscar Ladron de Guevara, a Peru¬
vian architect-archaeologist, the mission went to Peru in
June 1951. Its report (later published by Unesco: Cuzco:
Reconstruction of the Town and Restoration of its Monu¬
ments (1) included a survey of the earthquake damage
and a plan for preserving and restoring the damaged
buildings.
When, in 1956, Professor Kubier again visited Cuzco on
Unesco's behalf he was able to report that "the achieve¬
ment of rebuilding and restoring nearly three-quarters
of the monumental architecture of the city in five years-
remains impressive."
Today, Peruvian architects and engineers have rebuilt
most of the city's damaged churches and cloisters, consoli¬
dated shaky structures and repaired the stone surfaces.
In addition hundreds of new dwellings have been
constructed for homeless families, a courthouse has been
erected and improved public services, such as electric
power supplies, have been put into operation.
As the people of Cuzco masons, artisans and labour¬
ers rebuild their city it seems as though history is
repeating itself. In 1650, almost exactly three centuries
before the recent catastrophe, another great earthquake
left Cuzco in ruins. But the city recovered from this
disaster and Went on to experience its great Colonial flor¬
escence between 1650 and 1780. Between 1930 and 1950
the population of Cuzco grew from 20,000 to 80,000. The
creation of a Cuzco Development Authority with United
Nations participation, aiming at an intensive programme
of rural and urban improvements, gives hope that this
rate of growth will continue until Cuzco ranks among
the largest cities of Peru, with a population of at
least 150,000.
(1) No. 3 oí Unesco's "Museums and Monuments" series. Price
$1.50; 5/6; 400 frs.

CUZCO (Continued)
. Capa-Magnum Photos Inc
ORNATE DECORATIONS in the churches of Cuzco Include what Is probably the best collection of
mid-seventeenth century wood sculpture In Peru. Above, left, lavishly carved wooden pulpit in Church
of San Bias. It Is said that no country in South America can equal Peru in the number and quality of
wood-carved pulpits and in the variety of types and styles. Above, right, congregation attends Mass In
church of San Sebastian, in the suburbs of Cuzco, which was severely damaged by the I9S0 earth¬
quake. Opposite page, high altar of the same church before damage caused by falling stones was repaired.

The Unesco Courier. June 1958

CUZCO (Continued)
G. de Reparez-Unesco
CITY OF STURDY
BROWN STONE
The fine brown Andean stone, called
Andésite, with its slight, reddish cast
which the Incas and later the Spaniards
used to build Cuzco, gives the city a unifor¬
mity like Florence with Its palaces of the
Renaissance. Cuzco is a city of sturdy
stone which abounds In all of Its churches,
cloisters, arcaded plazas and In the portals
and patios of its houses. Right, roof-top
, view of Cuzco, I 1, 000 feet up in the Andes.
One of the city's architectural gems is the
main cloister of La Merced, a monastery
which was entirely rebuilt after an earth¬
quake destroyed Cuzco In 1650. Above,
cloister pillars shored up after the 1950
earthquake. Left, pillars after restoration.
) C. Capa-Magnum Photos Inc.

The Unesco Courier. June 1958

CUZCO (Continued)
ÇÇ) C,Capa-Magnum Photos Inc.
GREAT MAKERS
OF BRICKS AND
GROWERS OF FOOD
Innumerable sun-dried clay bricks (left) have
been used in Cuzco to rebuild the houses
destroyed by the earthquake. Traditional
building materialthe clays of Cuzco are
inexhaustible these bricks are toughened
by chopped straw and formed by hand in a
simple wooden mould. Below, old wood¬
worker, Juan Estrada, puts finishing touches to
the bases of two carved wooden columns. All
wooden sculptures and carvings In Cuzco's
reconstruction have been executed by local
craftsmen. Right, hustle and bustle of Cuzco
market, little changed since the days of the
Inca Empire, which was based on intensive
agriculture, including cultivation of more than
40 domesticated plants. Markets were there¬
fore an Important feature of Inca life, and it
was decreed that there should be three fairs
every month, when labourers In the field
should come to the market and hear anything
the Inca or his Council might have ordained.
Unesco-Eric Schwab
10

The Unesco Courier. June 1958
Ç; C.Capa-Masnum Photos Inc.
n
