' FIRE & AXE ' FARMING
ON THE WAY OUT
by G. Watterson
Forestry Division, Food and Agriculture Organization
The day of primitive agriculture in the jungle clearing is drawing to an end.
In jungle farming, the trees were felled and the crops were planted. Then
after a few seasons the soil fertility began to fall and by and by, the
jungle cultivator moved on, the forest moved in and the soil slowly recovered its
fertility.
But the impact of modern life is breaking down this traditional pattern of
agriculture which Jias been followed for centuries in the tropical areas of the
world. Once tribal wars and disease laid jungle populations low, so the little
patches of cultivation in the ocean of the trees were small and infrequent.
But modern medicine and suppression of intertribal wars are sending birth
rates up and death rates down. So the jungle areas must support greater popu¬
lations, and the people who live in the jungle are all trying to get more out
of it than they once did. They are not producing only for themselves; they
are producing also for sale in the towns and on world markets. The old
leisurely cycle of cultivation and forest fallow is speeding up. The scars of
cultivations in the jungle are hardly healed up before they are ripped open
again for fresh cultivation. And the people who are cultivating these patches
in the jungle are hanging on to their land a little longer trying to get a little
bit more out of the flagging soil before they move on. Thus coarse grasses are
springing up, stock are coming in and the natural regeneration of the land by
the forest is being stopped altogether.
Deterioration of the soil in the tropical forests has not yet reached a very
serious stage. But, unless early action is taken to counter it, it will be serious
within a very few years. Now is the time for moderately simple action to
avoid the necessity for very drastic measures in, say, ten or twenty years' time.
There are two or three very promising countermeasures being practised
already against this type of forest deterioration. There is the "corridor system"
of cultivation of the Belgian Congo, for instance. In the Congo, the Belgian
Government, as an experiment, is requiring the jungle cultivators to clear their
land in long corridors rather than haphazard patches. This ensures more rapid
natural seeding of forest when the corridor is abandoned and a new one is
opened up for the needs of the village. The authorities are also preventing the
cultivators from overtaxing the soil by regulating the rotation of crops and
preventing the one piece of land from being cropped too long.
Then there is the regeneration of teak forests in association with shifting
cultivation which started in the Far East, where the people are encouraged
to cultivate newly felled forest land for a period of 2-3 years as long as they
plant young teak trees at the same time as they start cropping. When they
move on to new land they leave behind them not bare earth but fresh plantations
of young teak.
There is a common belief that jungle lands are brimming over with fertility
but the falsity of this belief has become very apparent in the past few decades.
If they are to continue supporting vegetation, jungle lands must be managed
carefully and intelligently.
17
