ASIAN CLUB
An East-West Forum
on Britain's TV
by Henry Cassirer
The sarongs and sonjkohs worn
by the young men from Singa¬
pore, the longyis draping the
girls from Burma with gay flowers in
their hair and the brilliantly coloured
saris of the Indian women gave the
London TV studio of the B.B.C. an
unaccustomed and exotic air. Sud¬
denly a voice called for silence and,
as the hands of the studio clocks
reached the half hour, technicians
threw their switches and some fifteen
million people throughout Britain
joined "Asian Club."
Asian Club is a half-hour pro¬
gramme which, on sound and televi¬
sion services of the British Broad¬
casting Corporation, has given the
of East ..and West a new
medium for- understanding one an¬
other. It began as a weekly discussion
programme broadcast in the B.B.C. 's
Photos © B.B.C.
NATIONAL COSTUMES worn by most of the members of "Asian Club" make an exotic and
colourful spectacle in London TV studio. A cross-section of Asians in London, the studio audience
confronts and puts impromptu questions to distinguished British guest speakers. (I) Chairman
of programme, Mrs. Anil de Silva, of Ceylon, with guest speaker, Professor A.L. Goodhart, Master
of University College, Oxford. Standing behind them are participants from Ceylon, Korea, India
and Nepal (from left to right). (2) Under chairmanship of Kushwant Singh, Indian author, Miss
Margaret Godden, Matron of London's Hammersmith Hospital, speaks on the work and status of
nurses. (3) Miss Ter-Rao Chang, from Peking, uses microphone to put a question to Miss Godden.
22
"London Calling Asia" radio services.
As a programme involving Asian
listener participation by means of an
Asian audience gathered together in
a B.B.C. studio it proved so fascinating
from a visual viewpoint that a year
after the club was inaugurated it was
decided to televise one of the sessions.
The success of the experiment
startled even the most optimistic of
its sponsors. The British viewing
public, keenly interested in the affairs
of the East, were delighted at this
opportunity .for a more intimate
acquaintance with the many peoples
of Asia. The press was enthusiastic:
"the lid off an oriental jewel box",
said one paper. And ' as . this first
broadcast took place just before
Christmas 1952, hundreds of people
wrote in offering hospitality to Asian
participants for Christmas.
Asian Club is simply a gathering of
Asians in England, from the many
thousands of Asian students, teachers
and visitors to London who, often
dressed in their national costumes,
meet together in the TV studio to
discuss varied topics, including con¬
troversial ones, in science, religion,
philosophy, the arts and many other
fields. It has proved so convincing
that many people believe it to be a
real club and the B.B.C. is kept busy
explaining that this is a radio and TV
programme with no premises or other
activities.
At first the programme had no
chairman and then ran with a
British chairman. But it was soon
realized that an Asian formed the
best bridge between the speaker and
the audience. Thus, under the

The Unesco Courier. July 1958
guidance of an Asian chairman, a
long line of distinguished British
guest-speakers philosophers, scien¬
tists, explorers, churchmen, social
workers, musicians and many more
have since discussed subjects" raised
by the Asian Club guests during the
half hour.
The distinguished English jurist
and educator, Sir Ivor Jennings, for
instance; spoke on "The Effect of
English Education in Asia;" Miss
G.M. Godden, Matron of Hammer¬
smith Hospital in London, answered
questions on the status and work of
nurses; an explorer, Colonel Van der
Post, delighted his audience with
anecdotes about African courting
customs ; and there have been other
provocative programmes on such
subjects as "The Mystery of Clothes"
and "Family Relations."'
Recently, a different form of the
programme was tried out without a
European guest. Only Asian speakers
engaged in a discussion organized on
the lines of famous debating societies
such as the Oxford Union. The first
programme of this type, given on
May 28, 1958, took up the motion:
"In the opinion of this House, any
benefits of British rule to Asia were
more by accident than design." The
motion was proposed by Mrs. Nandini
Iyer, of India, and was supported by
Peter Williams, a Tamil from Singa¬
pore, former Secretary of the Singa¬
pore Labour Party and now a law
student in London. Opposing the
motion were Mr. Kemal Faruki, of
Pakistan, also a law student and
Mr. Ved Mehta, a blind student of
history. During this particular pro
gramme presided over by Mr. Ragha-
van Iyer, the husband of Mrs. Iyer,
speakers from Japan, Burma, Malaya
and other Asian countries took part
in the discussion from the floor.
The impact of the programme
comes not merely from what is being
said, but also from the personalities
of those taking part. As the B.B.C.
Audience Research Department has
put it: "Viewers feel that the Asian
Club is a refreshing and educational
programme which helps them to
understand the outlooks of other
nations. They always feel, too, that
the company assembled makes a
fascinating and decorative picture.
Indeed, to see the audience seems to
be one of . the most interesting
features of the programme."
' I saw you on TV
the other evening '
The real importance of the pro¬
gramme lies in the impression
it makes on ordinary viewers.
Here are some of their reactions:
"This programme brings the Asians
into our lives and makes one think
of the problem more deeply than by
mere reading." an Accountant.
"'This type of programme should,
in my opinion, be seen more often as
by so doing it will help people to
overcome the colour bar which is
largely due to ignorance in this
country." a Housewife.
"A really good out-of-the-ordinary
discussion. We really enjoy the
different viewpoints and sympathize
with the questioners and we learn
plenty about ourselves! We like the
friendly atmosphere too." a Master
Baker.
To ensure this friendly, informal
and relaxed atmosphere, and to
present a spontaneous and unscripted
programme with the necessary im¬
pression of ease and naturalness,
with a cast of some 40 people, calls
for plenty of hard work behind the
scenes.
But the producers say their reward
comes from letters Which viewers
send them; from the high Apprecia¬
tion Indexes that are reported; from
the people in Britain who greet
Asians in the street all over the
country by saying "T saw your club
on TV the other evening", and who
then settle down to continue an
argument with them on whatever
the subject of the meeting happened
to be; and finally from the people
of Asia who write to give their views
and say they have heard their friends
or relations on the radio programme
and that they themselves will pay a
visit to Asian Club when next they
are in London.
The B.B.C. programme is one
example of the way in which tele¬
vision stations can utilize the pre¬
sence of people from other lands in
their country to produce a pro¬
gramme series of wide popularity
which promotes better comprehen¬
sion among nations. In the spirit of
its Major Project on mutual appre¬
ciation between Orient and Occident,
Unesco would welcome the production
of similar programmes by other tele¬
vision stations throughout the world.
23
