PRESERVING THE CREAM
OF THE SCREEN
by David Gunston
Archives Cinematheque Français
VISUAL ILLUSIONS on the screen were first created by Georges Méliès, whose work in France permanently enriched
the technique and scope for film-making by introducing it to fancy and to fantasy and by making it tell a story. In 1900
Méliès made a series of films embodying tricks, fantasies and illusions. Above, illusionist effects in early Méliès film.
It has been said, with no little truth, that one of the
marks of civilized man is his instinctive sense of
history, both past and future, expressing itself in
the desire to preserve for posterity the best that he has
inherited and produced himself. This has certainly been
true of the arts for a very long time. Books, poetry, plays,
music, sculpture, painting and architecture have all been
preserved for succeeding generations, or kept alive for
the future. This was originally done primarily by interest¬
ed wealthy' patrons, but for a long time now states and
governments have lent an increasingly supporting hand,
and now usually supplant the private patron.
Yet as a new medium arriving at a time when preserva¬
tion was a fully accepted practice, the cinema has not
been so fortunate.
The very transience of the screen image has been
against any sense of permanency from the start. In
addition, being ineradicably linked with large-scale
commercial interests, the cinema has sometimes had a
considerable struggle for permanent preservation in any
historical sense. This has always been especially ironi¬
cal, since a popular motion picture still continues to reach
a wider international audience than any other form of
contemporary art, popular or otherwise.
Pious hopes were expressed during the days of the
28
early silent films that some sort of museum might be
made of films of particular interest, especially newsreels
of notable events, but very little was done.
However, the prospects are now brighter and more
encouraging than they have ever been, thanks to the
continuing and remarkable growth of the international
film archive movement. Started in the 1930's by France,
Great Britain and the United States, this has now taken
root in very many countries and in many different forms,
yet always with the basic aim of keeping from oblivion
and the usual limbo of actual physical destruction the
best that the screen offers the world over. In spite of
some irretrievable losses occasioned by such a late start,
the postwar spread of the archive idea may now be said
not only to be vital and thriving wherever it is found
but, largely unheralded and unobserved as it is, "one of
the significant cultural developments of our time."
Some of the archives began as small private collections,
others have always been partly State-aided, whilst others
again are off-shoots of Government .Departments. Some
may be concerned mainly with the physical preservation
of the old films they possess, or with the presentation to
the public or interested students of historical film pro¬
grammes. Many do both. All have to consider the many
problems of the international exchange of films, the safe-

The Unesco Courier. June 1958
guarding of rare or exceptional films from extinction,
and the paramount necessity for maintaining a satisfac¬
tory relationship with the commercial film world.
The film archive movement began more or less simul¬
taneously in the three countries mentioned, thanks to
the enthusiasm and determination of three leading
experts. In 1935, with the aid of a generous grant from
the Rockefeller Foundation, the Museum of Modern Art
Film Library was set up in New York under the dynamic
Miss Iris Barry, who forthwith went to Europe on an
extensive and invaluable "shopping expedition" for dis¬
appearing film classics. In the same year in Britain, the
National Film Library (now re-shaped and re-named the
National Film Archive) was established by the British
Film Institute in London to carry out one of the Govern¬
ment-sponsored Institute's objects on its own foundation
two years earlier, viz. "to establish a national repository
of films of permanent value", and the scholarly Mr. Ernest
Lindgren became its Curator. At about the same time
in France was born the Paris Cinémathèque Française,
presided over by the distinctive figure of M. Henri Lan-
glois with his passionate love for any rare, old or de¬
faced film. Each of these three assiduously built up inde¬
pendent collections for permanent preservation, but the
ultimately international aspect of the matter was never
far from their thoughts.
Similar "cinémathèques" began to appear in other
countries, and in 1938 the three original archives combin¬
ed with the biggest of the newcomers, the Reichsfilm¬
archiv in Berlin, to form the International Federation
of Film Archives, which held its first meeting in New
York. Since the war the former Reichsfilmarchiv has
disappeared, but the Federation itself has advanced
enormously, strengthened by the adhesion of other
archives created in Amsterdam, Belgrade, Bogota, Brus¬
sels, Budapest, Buenos Aires, Copenhagen, Lausanne,
Lisbon, Madrid, Milan, Montevideo, Moscow, Oslo, Prague,
Rabat, Rome, Sao Paulo, Stockholm, Teheran, Tokyo,
Vienna, Warsaw, among other places. In all there are
now some 30 effective and provisional members, not
counting the corresponding members in Australia, China,
Archives Cinematheque Française
NEWSREELS of topical events were the type of films with which the motion picture industry
started on its world career as an entertainment medium. The first real newsreel was made by the
Lumière Brothers in Paris in 1895. They filmed the arrival of delegates to a Congress of French
Photographic Societies and created a sensation by screening film two days later. Early newsreel
photo, showing Kaiser William II (on right facing camera) entering open carriage during a state visit.
Cuba, the Republic of Ireland, Finland, Israel, Peru and
Venezuela.
Many of these archives are national bodies, financed by
their governments, and almost all have some official
status, which of course is a good thing. They are organiz¬
ed by men and women of enthusiasm and integrity who
have as great a sense of their vocation as curators and
librarians in older fields of art and mass communications.
The Federation is now a truly international body that
goes beyond the hopes of its founders twenty years ago.
Under the Presidency, of M. Jerzy Toeplitz, of the Warsaw
Central Film Archives, the germs of interest and endea¬
vour it has been able to sow in recent years are spring¬
ing up and bearing fruit almost everywhere. It has
its headquarters in Paris, where its Executive Committee
meets four times a year, and holds an annual Congress
in the various member countries in turn. Its purposes
are officially defined as the promotion of personal
contacts between all its members to facilitate the
exchange of both films and information about them, and
the maintenance of an agreed code of rules to ensure
that all members exercise that self-discipline in the use
of their films which will entitle them, individually and
collectively, to the confidence and support of the com¬
mercial film industry in every country.
This last factor is highly important, for inevitably the
goodwill of any archivist movement depends for its healthy
continuance on happy relations with the suppliers
themselves. Almost all new acquisitions by archives have
to come from contemporary film-producing countries.
Older films, some of them perhaps originally owned by
companies no longer in existence, may be salvaged from
a variety of sources, but often one archive can obtain
them only by exchange and duplication with archives
fortunate enough to hold copies.
Yet in practice the Federation does much more for its
little-known cause. It organizes International Film Exhi¬
bitions, as held in Paris and Berlin recently, the next
being planned for Prague in 1958. It runs "Weeks" or
"Days" of some national cinema in other countries, like
the Week of Italian Cinema in Poland,
or of the Scandinavian Cinema in
France, already held with such
success. It has further founded the
International Bureau of Historical
Cinema Research, which in November
1957 held its first International
Congress in Paris, and which is
regarded as an important step towards
making available data on film history
to all who seek it. The Federation
feels itself directly responsible for the
serious work done in the field of
cinema history, and gives all possible
help to bona fide students. Indeed,
there now exist in many countries
national film research commissions
closely linked with archive-members
of the Federation.
Apart from the commercial restric¬
tions which may hedge round fairly
recent films, and the often intermin¬
able copyright tangles of earlier films
(some of which, ¿ike the earlier
Chaplin and similar short comedies,
have passed through many hands
since they were made), the greatest
single problem of any film archive,
great or small, official or private, is
the appallingly short exectancy of
life of the average reel of film. Unlike
a book or painting, a film cannot be
effectively preserved
simply by being owned
by a far-sighted person
or organization.
If it is an old nitrate
Cont'd
next page
29

Which films deserve saving from oblivion?
or celluloid film, the base will undergo chemical changes
in a surprisingly short space of time, say 30-50 years.
This celluloid base will give off gases which unite with
the atmosphere to form nitric acid, which immediately
attacks the still stable photographic image, turning base
and emulsion into a sticky mess a process that, once
started, may swiftly eat through priceless reels of film-
If the film to be kept is printed on the newer cellulose
acetate base, generally used in the industry since 1951,
it does have a longer optimum life, but unless given
: certain physical conditions of storage, will readily dry
out, and become brittle, shrunk and quite impossible either
to project or duplicate.
Although it is theoretically possible for the various film-
producing companies to preserve copies of their own
pictures rather after the manner in which book publishers
and newspaper offices keep "'file copies" of all their wares,
in practice very few do so, and hardly any in the sense
of protecting them for 'posterity. This may seem odd,
but is partly because a film-
producing or distributing com¬
pany is a commercial concern
primarily interested in the finan¬
cial exploitation of its products.
Once a film's box-office life is
regarded as over, it may well be
actually destroyed to give up
precious storage space for new
movies. Nevertheless there is an
element of short-sightedness,
even business shortsightedness in
this policy, as many firms have
now realized.
Apart from the whole range of
films that may be sold to tele¬
vision, the popularity of selected
"revivals", first proved by the
postwar re-issues of Chaplin
feature favourites like City Lights,
Modern Times and The Gold
Rush in many European coun¬
tries, is proving to them that
the time is coming when a good
film is no longer to be dismissed
just because it is "'old". Hence
there is a growing interest in and
appreciation of the film archive
movement, since few producing
companies have the time, space
or the technical skill needed to
offer adequate preservation faci¬
lities to earlier pictures. This
trend of offering to archives,
under copyright safeguards, films
that may still be financially
valuable for preservation under
ideal conditions and care is a
growing one. It was advanced
in spectacular fashion recently
when Lord Rank, of the British film industry, presented
to the National Film Archive in London nearly 250 master
fine grain prints of films made by British firms from 1930
to date.
Nitrate films in storage also present a grave added risk
of fire danger, since celluloid is highly inflammable, so
they need to be stored in metal cans on metal shelving
under special safety precautions. Furthermore, the best
storage conditions for such films, which represent the
bulk of the collections of all archives, may involve expen¬
sive air-conditioning: such prints, being physically
unstable, require a steady, cool temperature of about
33°-40" F., with a 50% relative humidity. Underground
vaults provide these conditions most readily, but the ideal
is always costly, awkward to maintain and sometimes
30
U5I5
ENDLESS GAGS were worked into the comic films
of Mack Sennett, undisputed master of early comedy
producers in the U.S.A. His use of slapstick and unexpect¬
ed situations and his extraordinary sense of the ridiculous
were revealed in hundreds of films. Two groups he used
frequently and made famous were the Bathing Beauties
and the Keystone Cops. Above, two cops in trouble.
difficult to attain. In consequence there is a growing
tendency to copy or "'dupe" crumbling old nitrate films
on to new acetate stock. If this is given the necessary
degree of humidity, its chemical stability is assured for
a reasonable life, and it presents little or no fire risk.
Under good conditions, acetate films may survive for as
long as 200 years, and theoretically they can then be
duped again on to fresh stock.
This procedure is the ideal of every archive, but in
practice the expense involved often rules out the extensive
copying of very old films. A compromise that is becom¬
ing increasingly adopted is that now followed as a
matter of regular policy by the British National Film
Archive. All 25 year-old films in its collection are
regularly subjected to a chemical ageing test, in which
a small circle is punched out of a single frame on the
reel and subjected to laboratory testing that artificially
speeds up its chemical disintegration. In this way, the
likely future life span of any reel of any film can be
estimated and the necessary
duping done before it is too late.
This immediately brings in the
question : what films in poor
state shall have duping priority
with the funds available?
This, and similar technical
matters are discussed freely bet¬
ween members of the Federation,
which is responsible for a growing
interchange of opinions and
films. There is always the possi¬
bility of exchange of rarities for
showing or copying, for it would
be futile for one archive to spend
a lot of money duping a
crumbling copy of some screen
classic when a more fortunate
archive can supply a better copy
from its own collection.
There remains the all-impor¬
tant problem of just what to
preserve. No archive wants, or
can hope, to preserve everything.
Only the cream of the world's
vast output of films are worth
keeping anyway. But beneath
this high level of quality, there
are many productions that ought
not to perish, whether for their
intrinsic artistic merit, their
place in cinema history, their
realism or imaginativeness, the
technical innovations or acting
performances they contain, or
with documentaries and news-
reels, the actual events they
portray.
It is the aim of every archive
to strive to protect the best in
every sphere and from all sources wherever possible, which
makes the co-ordination of the Federation invaluable.
And always there is the burning question of to what
extent is an archive to allow its treasures to be shown
publicly. Quite a number of archives already give regular
showings of many of their films, but there are sometimes
copyright and other snags, and the fact is that where
a single copy of a rare film is held, to project it at all will
shorten its life. So unless and until duplicate copies of
everything can be taken, some films cannot be shown to
the public ad lib.
Yet a wide availability of viewing is ultimately the aim
of the whole idea, since unlike a book in a library or a
painting on a gallery wall, a film in a can is quite useless
unless it can be properly projected and shown publicly.
