HOW SPINA
AS DISCOVERED
by Professor Nereo Alfieri
The Pega Valley is a lagoon area some four miles west of
Comacchio in the Province of Ferrara, on the Adriatic
coast of northern Italy. The discovery in this region of the
necropolis and residential quarters of the great city of Spina was
made possible by the use of two distinct excavation techniques.
The unearthing of the cemetery posed a dual problem: first the
actual location of the various tombs, second the adoption of
adequate excavation measures.
From the outset, both a scientific and '"hit-and-miss" method
were applied in locating the tombs. The scientific method
consisted of a methodical study of the historical geography of the
region, that is, a reconstitution of the Po delta as it was at the
time of Spina's glory. This was extremely important for, whereas
the entire plain known as the Pega Valley is now about three feet
below sea level, in ancient pre-Roman times portions of the land
rose above the waters of the lagoon.
In order to determine the precise areas above water at that
remote time, a number of techniques were resorted to: direct
examination of the nature of the soil; a critical analysis of literary
sources of the classical and mediaeval periods, micro-survey

The Unesco Courier. February 1958
MYTHOLOGICAL HERO. This figure is believed to represent
Achilles cutting off a lock of hair to lay on the grave of his friend,
Patroclus, who, according to Homer's Iliad, was slain by Hector.
Khotos © Angelo Frontoni
CLOAKED MAN forms the centrepiece of a
candelabrum, the entire work being cast In
bronze. Etruscans were famed metal workers.
procedures (surveying and analysis of the minutest undulations of
the ground) and air photography. A comparative study of all
these elements combined made it possible to localize the patches
of dry land, or maritime sand dunes, which had existed in the
lagoon area in ancient times. There can be no doubt that only
in these patches was the construction of' tombs possible during
pre-Roman times.
The exact site of the tombs was located by the hit-and-miss
technique of soundings. These soundings were made on the
patches of land, identified as formerly above the water level, by
means of a rod six feet in length thrust into the ground at four-
inch intervals until an obstruction was encountered. In almost
every case this obstruction turned out to be a tomb.
In the search for the city itself the same scientific principles
used to locate the necropolis were employed: identification of the
dry land in' the lagoon during ancient times plus a careful
pinpointing of Roman or mediaeval settlements on these dry
patches. Our investigations were based on what scientists call the
"law of persistent habitation", according to which man tends to
build dwellings where former urban communities existed, even
after these have completely vanished. Thus the lost city of Spina
was likely to be found on a site where Roman or mediaeval
agglomerations had later established themselves. A comparative
analysis of all the archaeological discoveries and of mediaeval
references led me to conclude that the church of Santa Maria in
Pado Vetere (i.e. on the Old Po) built over a pagan temple, was
the most interesting area in our search for Spina. As a matter of
fact, air photographs of the zone, later made by Professor
Valvassori, revealed the outlines of the harbour quarter of Spina
not more than 330 yards from the location of an ancient commu¬
nity named Pieva.
This patient and methodical investigation was perhaps the only
way in which the marshland could have been induced to give up
the secret of the city it had hidden for so many centuries. It may
seem surprising that the most primitive procedures (such as rod
soundings undoubtedly are) were used in combination -with air pho¬
tography, a modern technique. More surprising may appear the
failure to use even more modern techniques evolved in recent
years. New archaeological research methods, for example, have
been successfully applied by professor CM. Lerici, of the Poli¬
técnico of Milan, in locating Etruscan tombs in the Tyrrhenian
region of Central Italy (the area of Tarquinia north of Rome).
Among his methods are: 1) electrical sensitivity prospecting: an
electric current is used to measure the changes in the resistance of
the soil, the charge differing if a tomb or other structure buried
underground is encountered. This method is commonly used by
geologists and other scientists in prospecting for oil, underground
water or minerals and to study sub-soil in dam construction.
2) photographic soundings: the soil is perforated and a special tiny
camera, equipped with an electronic flash, is lowered by cable into
the interior of the tomb. The photographs taken at different levels
reveal the nature of the discovery and the state of conservation of
the objects long before the first pickaxe is used to open up the
tomb.
Lerici's methods, however, were not found applicable in the
case of Spina where the tombs are slab-covered graves almost
flush with the surface of the soil. Electric sensitivity prospecting
was tried in 1954 -without results. A mine detector had some
success since it reacted to the electromagnetic fields in tombs
containing iron objects; but nothing deeper than two feet was
recorded. In Spina we therefore relied on the old hit-and-miss
methods, trusting to the skill and ingenuity of the local labourers
who are unsurpassed when it comes to working in marshland mud.
17
