Science has the answer
DO BATS FIND
THEIR WAY BY RADAR?
by Gerald Wendt
Many insects emit shrill, high-pitched sounds and
some of them are probably too high for the human
ear to hear but it is not known that they use them
as a guide in flying. Bats are not blind but their
sight is so poor that they can do little more than
distinguish a brighter from a fainter light and
locate its general direction. Thus they can
distinguish daybreak and nightfall. But they direct
their flight by their very sensitive sense of hearing.
They emit a very high-pitched sound, hear the
echoes of that sound from nearby objects, and judge
the direction and the distance of the object from
the nature of the echo. The sound has been
recorded by the use of microphones and has been
found to be about two octaves higher than the
highest sound the human ear can detect. Such
short sound-waves can be reflected from objects
that are too small or too thin to echo ordinary
audible sound. If bats are gagged so that they
cannot give out the sound or if- they are deafened
so that they cannot hear it, they are unable, to detect
obstacles and crash into them in the dark.
Radar also makes use of echoes but it is not
correct to say that bats use "'a sort of radar".
Radar waves are not sound waves. They are electro¬
magnetic waves, or short radio waves, which are
30

The Unesco Courier. March 1958
transmitted and reflected as light waves are and at
the speed of light. After they are reflected from an
object, such as a plane in the sky that may be
200 miles away, they are focussed on a fluorescent
screen and there make a visible picture, as on a
television screen.
More remarkable than the ability of bats to fly
safely in the dark is their ability to return to their
home roost or cave at night from distances as great
as 60 miles. They do not use their eyes, for tests
have shown that fully blindfolded bats arrive home
even more successfully than others. Their echo-
sense is also no explanation because they can hardly
detect echoes from objects more than 30 feet away.
Yet they reach home at their normal flying speed
of 10 miles an hour and so must fly there almost
direct. The only explanation seems to be that they
become as familiar with their home area through
their sense of hearing as birds and other animals
do by sight.
Is it true that antibiotics gradually become less effective against bacteria and
some insecticides become less effective against insects ?
Yes, any one antibiotic or insecticide can lose its
effectiveness against any one colony of bacteria or
of insects, respectively. This is because, in the case
of both bacteria and insects, many thousands or
even millions of individual bacteria and insects are
exposed to the drug or the chemical. Most of them
are killed but some of them do not get enough to
kill them. The few that are able to survive learn
to live with the drug or the chemical and, when
they reproduce, the next generation is so accustomed
to the drug that it can withstand a large amount of
it. So they are harder to kill and their resistance
to the drug or chemical makes them immune. For
this reason, it is usually wise to use enough of the
drug or chemical to kill all the bacteria or insects
in a colony. Those that have become immune to
one antibiotic or insecticide, however, are not
immune to another. For this reason, a second
treatment is often given with a different kind in
order to kill those that escaped the original treat¬
ment or became immune to it. A large number of
both antibiotics and of insecticides is now available
for this purpose.
Can plants be acclimatized as men and animals can ? For instance, can
tropical plants be gradually adapted for growth in cold climates ?
Man is the only animal truly adaptable to any
climate, but that is only because he has the
intelligence to protect himself from extremes by
building houses, wearing suitable clothes, lighting
fires for warmth, using fans for cooling and
changing his diet. Many animals can also make
moderate adjustments to a change of climate,
especially those species that make homes by
burrowing underground to protect themselves from
either the heat of the sun or the cold of winter.
But those animals that are best adapted to extreme
or particular conditions do not survive under
adverse conditions. Those that have heavy fur to
protect themselves from the cold such as polar
bears cannot endure hot weather because they
have no way of keeping themselves cool. Others
with bare skins like the elephant and the hippo¬
potamus can keep cool under tropic conditions but
are unable to stay warm in snow and ice. Most
animals are also equipped for hunting and eating a
certain kind of food, such as fish or underwater
plants or rabbits or snakes, and starve when they
cannot find them unless they are fed by man.
But in the course of many thousands of years
animals have wandered over the face of the earth
and have often adapted themselves to a different
environment by natural selection over many
generations. Thus different species of some animal
families, like cats, dogs, bears, deer, mice and even
camels, can live under climatic conditions that are
very different from those of other species of the
same family.
Plants are in general much less adaptable. They
are well fitted for certain conditions of moisture, of
temperature and of sunshine but will seldom survive
a change, or if they do survive, they will not bloom
or produce seeds and so die out. Juicy, thin-skinned
water-plants and swamp plants soon die if they are
deprived of water. On the other hand, the hard-
shelled cactus and other desert plants are unable
to cope with much water. The broad-leaved plants
are fitted for life in the shade of trees and seldom
do well in direct sunlight. But narrow, thin-leaved
plants, like the different grasses, are fitted to grow
in direct sunshine and will not survive under trees
or in the forest, because they do not get enough sun.
All leaves are killed by frost, that is, by a tem¬
perature of less than 32° Fahrenheit. In cold
climates a plant must either have oily needles
instead of leaves like the pines and spruces or it
must shed its leaves and concentrate its sap under¬
ground during the winter, as most plants of the
temperate zones do. One other device of many
temperate-zone plants is to produce hard, dry seeds
which survive the cold while the mother-plant dies,
so that a new generation appears each year. Since
tropical plants cannot do any of these three things,
they never survive a frost.
However, tropical plants can live outside the
tropics if the temperature does not reach freezing
point. But if they do, they grow much more slowly,
do not attain their normal size, and either produce
no flowers or their flowers produce no seeds. The
lowered temperature and especially the short warm
season do not allow them time enough to develop.
But equally important is the presence of insects to
fertilize the flowers. Many are dependent on
certain special varieties of insects to carry the pollen
from one flower to another, and when they are
removed from their natural environment the
necessary insects are usually absent and no seeds
are formed. Nevertheless, without seeds or without
flowers, tropical plants can survive in dwarfed form
in cooler climates but not in cold ones.
31
