GREY-OUT IN PARIS. Like many large cities the French capital has its share of "smog" although what a Parisian calls a "purée de
pois "(pea-souper) fog might not be so regarded by a Londoner. Photos taken at midday show (left) Rue Royale with dim outline of

MUST WE USE THE AIR OF
OUR CITIES AS A SE
by P.J. Lawther
M.R.C. Group for Research on Atmospheric Pollution,
St. Bartholomew's Hospital, London
Today the effects of air pollution on health are
the urgent concern of research workers in many
countries throughout the world. Their intense
activity is partly the result of the stimulation afforded
by recent "smog" disasters which have shown beyond
doubt that air borne filth can kill [when it reaches high
concentrations for a few days.
But this not merely a modern problem: the menace of
air pollution was recognized many centuries ago and the
fouling of the common air by coal smoke has long been
considered to be a social crime in Britain. In 1273 an Act
Of Parliament was passed forbidding the burning of coal
in London and, indeed, a man was executed in 1306 for
this crime.
The problem continued to exercise the minds of those
in authority and in 1661 there was published the most
eloquent plea for clean air which the world is likely to
see: the diarist John Evelyn wrote his pamphlet "Fumi-
fugium" which makes us blush with shame at our 400
years .of indolence in the face of the pernicious nuisance
which he describes so accurately:
"That men whose very Being is Aer, should not breath
it freely when they may: but (as that Tyrant used his
Vassals) condemn themselves to this misery and fumo
praefocari, is strange stupidity: yet thus we see them
walk and converse in London, pursued and haunted by
that infernal Smoake, and the funest accidents which
accompany it wheresoever they retire."

The Unesco Courier. Morch 1959
Photos © Keystone
Madeleine Church in the background and (right) the Place de la Concorde. Damage caused by air pollution in France is calculated to be
240,000 million francs per year. In Paris motor traffic accounts for 30-40 % of total pollution and domestic heat for 50 %
The industrial revolution in the 19th century saw a
vast increase in the amount of air pollution due to the
prodigal use of great quantities of fuel. Wise men saw
the dangers but their warnings went largely unheeded as
we continued irresponsibly to use the air as a sewer.
When iwe in Britain talk of air pollution we mean the
filth which we must breathe in our towns and which is
produced mainly from the burning of 200 million tons of
coal and 20 million tons of oil each year. This confla¬
gration produces many hundreds of pollutants but we'
may concern ourselves mainly with the smoke (2.1 million
tons), sulphur dioxide (5.3 million tons) and carbon
monoxide (24 million tons). The smoke contains many
complex organic chemicals among which are compounds
which are capable of producing cancer in experimental
animals. Sulphur dioxide and sulphuric acid come from
the sulphur in fuels and both these substances can be
very irritant to the lungs when breathed in high enough
concentrations. Carbon monoxide is, of course, a dange¬
rous asphyxiant gas.
Obviously no proper study of the effects of air pollution
is possible without paying very careful attention to the
nature of the filth in the air We breathe and the physician'
and physiologist must work patiently with the physicist
.and chemist in order to gain a clear idea of the'
complexity of the subject. The physicist strives to
describe the minute structure of the tiny particles and
droplets contained in town air because their fate on
inhalation largely depends on their size and shape; we
want to know if they are small enough to get into the
lung and having got there how far they penetrate and
what proportion remains inside. The chemist has a
formidable analytical task trying to unravel the myriads
of compounds which are present in extreme dilutions and
therefore do hot behave at all the way they do in books
and lecture theatres.
The complex, nature of air pollution is often forgotten
and deceptively simple explanations of its effects are all
too common. Great confusion has been caused by the
assumption that pollution differs only in amount whereas
it is clear that it varies widely in composition as well;
ordinary winter pollution is not merely dilute smog. Day-
to-day air pollution in cities is mercifully dispersed by
winds but occasionally this scavenging process fails with
tragic results and we have a famous "smog disaster" in
which many people die. This happens when the air is
abnormally still for some time and, in valleys, cold air
rolls down the hillsides and comes to lie under a layer
of warm air. The refuse from our chimneys cannot rise
but is trapped under a huge lid and accumulates to reach
high concentrations in which it probably brews up and
forms dangerous compounds Which would not be found
in more normal circumstances.
During these temperature inversions it is frequently
cold (people therefore burn more fuel) and fog is common.
A word of warning is necessary to avoid a cause of grave
confusion: Britain's '"smog"'' smoke polluted fog is in no
way like the lachrymatory haze which annoys the
people of Los Angeles where very special
meteorological conditions exist and where
coal smoke and fog are equally rare.
Analytical work indicates the need to re¬
cognize two main types of air pollution the
Cont'd
on
next page-

MUST WE USE CITY
AIR AS A SEWER?
(Continued)
rare, acute variety and the chronic day-to-day urban
filth.
The acute type, the "smog", can kill. Old people with
respiratory difficulties brought about by disease of the
lungs or heart may find themselves unable to tolerate the.
Irrltajtion of long periods of high pollution and the strain
may be mortal. Very many who escape death are yet
made much worse during these episodes and it is likely
that the onset of diseases such as chronic bronchitis is
hastened by this form of pollution.
We must identify with certainty the substances res¬
ponsible for these evil effects and, if it is not yèt possible,
to prohibit their emission, some forms of protection must
be devised for patients known to be susceptible. Simple
masks may stop the coarser particles from entering the
respiratory tract and such masks are being given careful
clinical trials. Small concentrations of ammonia liberated
from wick bottles can neutralise acid particles and gases
and may be of value in preventing their irritant effects.
Orthodox medical treatment must be applied and the
common sense advice to rest indoors is sound.
The long term effects of chronic pollution are less dra¬
matic but recent research shows that dirty town air may
well be one of the most serious scourges which man has
inflicted upon himself. Chronic bronchitis Nis a disease
which produces untold suffering, incapacity to work and
ultimate premature death. The delicate lining of .the
air passages is first irritated and later destroyed giving
rise to cough and expectoration. Frequent infections,
occur and the function and structure of the lungs, are
then impaired. Severe breathlessness follows this damage
and later the heart may be severely affected
It would be strange if such conditions as domestic over¬
crowding, dusty occupations, bad working conditions,
poor diet and smoking had not played some part in
the production of the disease but it seems that air pollution
is likely to be an important factor. Undoubtedly urban
pollution, is the most important single factor affecting the
daily well-being of patients who already have bronchitis.
Lung cancer is a disease which has become alarmingly
common in the last decades. Mention has already been
made of the presence in town air of chemical compounds
which can produce cancer in experimental animals and
common sense leads one to suspects air pollution as a
cause of the disease in man. There is, however, no reason
to believe that the character of the smoke in our towns
has altered significantly as would be required by such an
hypothesis and all the evidence points to some new factor
which began to operate early this century. From all
over the world come fresh indictments of the cigarette
smoking habit as the principle cause of lung cancer and
the association must be considered proved beyond rea¬
sonable doubt. This factor tends to swamp any carcino¬
genic effects of air pollution but it must not lead us to
ignore it.
Air pollution Is a monstrous social evil which can no
longer be tolerated in civilized society. There is ample
evidence that it is harmful and though a vast amount
of detailed work is urgently needed to elucidate its effects,
the abolition of pollution must not await the results of
research. We now have a Clean Air Act in Great Britain,
which bids fair to give us some relief but there must be
no respite in the technological battle to abolish completely
this shocking self-inflicted scourge of urban man.
PITTSBURGH: 'SMOKY
CITY' NO LONGER
Because its industries burned soft coal, there was a
time when Pittsburgh was one of the blackest cities
in the United States and was known as the "Smoky
City." Soot accumulated everywhere on buildings as
well as in the lungs of the inhabitants. Today it is
losing that reputation. More efficient coal burners,
smoke-prevention devices, wider use of natural gas,
fuel oil and electricity, all aided by enforcement of city
laws against smoke, have made Pittsburgh a cleaner
place. Photos above and below, taken several years
apart at the entrance to the city's Liberty Tunnel, vividly
show the progress made in smoke abatement. Since
the passing of new laws in 1957 city's air is 65% cleaner.
PhotosUSIS

The Unesco Courier. March 1959
Photos Air Pollution Control District, Los Angeles
SMOG IS TRAPPED in the Los Angeles Basin by what is known as a temperature inversion layer of "upside down" weather caused
when warm air from the Pacific descends on the basin and meets ocean-cooled air below. In photo above, Los Angeles Civic Centre
and other buildings project above the base of the inversion layer while pollution remains trapped below, surrounding mountains
preventing its dispersal by the weak winds (Diagram, below right). In the Pacific coast area where a ground layer of colder air
is often pronounced, the condition may persist for many weeks. Severity of Los Angeles smog is accentuated by exhaust fumes
from city's dense traffic totalling some two and a half million automobiles. Below left, packed highways during the rush hours.
lililí
........ ¿ ^^.
lüijijil ¡In JmLâ
< IjllUi -I^El >
Im * II 1" EBB » » <v
Bca**t"A .SI Î - &- -i*.m*=." v
EEEE^HW
* ^^^~^ *T
ï?1
9-Ti^Ä''." g
t, 7 ' . %:.** £¿EÍ2 "
WHY WE HAVE SMOG
, \ % % * %
' \ 1. AIR MASS FROM PACIFIC IS HEATED
\ IN DESCENT TOWARD LOS ANGELES BASIN
y www
\ 3. THIS IS THE TEMPERATURE INVERSION LAYER THAT HOLDS SMOG IN OUR BASIN
2. CREATES UPSIDE-DOWN CLIMATE...
WARM AIR ABOVE AND
OCEAN-COOLED AIR BELOW
