Photos Jean Pierre Sudre, French Commissariat of Atomic Energy

THE CAUSES OF WAR: FEAR, PRIDE, POVERTY
FTjNDAMENTALY I think there
are three main causes of
war. Firstly I think that
war is brought about by pride, the
pride either of those who feel they
are minor powers and want to
increase their importance, or of
those who already consider them¬
selves powerful, but who wish to
extend their power.
The second cause of war is fear.
Fear is always a bad counsellor.
G. BERGER Fear sets little dogs barking and
snapping and makes them the most
dangerous. Fear has been the cause of many a war. One
of the best antidotes to fear is knowledge which brings
understanding and a clear view of things.
The third cause is want. I think it takes third place
because poverty sometimes weighs down so heavily on men
that they lose all hope and with it the spirit of revolt.
Here science can help us. With its aid and that of the
techniques it has made possible We can vanquish want.
Science can also help to cast out fear; this task is
largely one of providing proper information and using
common sense.
Pride is perhaps a more difficult nut to crack. The urge
for power is implanted in the hearts of individuals and
of nations alike and it can take a thousand devious,
insidious forms. Here perhaps something more than
science is needed. We must turn to ethics and to the
techniques of the sciences of man. These sciences I take
to include the techniques of social psychology and the
study of man in a form which, though less mathematical,
is no less exacting and precise. The sciences of man can
show up the futility of pride and deflate the ego. We
can never do too much in this direction.
Problems must be taken seriously, but we must never
take ourselves too seriously. Here again there is a great
deal of education to be done on these lines; nations and
individuals alike have to be educated, and science, in the
broadest meaning of the term, can help to banish the risk
of war.
When want has become a thing of the past, when fear
no longer grips men's hearts and when pride has been
shown up as something ridiculous, then science will have
done its work and true peace will be established among
men.
25
