by Hervé Bazin
Académie Goncourt
IAM in no way a specialist in mental health but simply
a writer, one of whose books, Head against the Wall,
recently filmed, tells of the life of a psychopath under
the old asylum system. In 1955 I also carried out an
investigation into the state of psychiatry and psychiatric
hospitals in France for a French magazine. But it would
be idle to pretend that I have not got compelling
reasons for my interest in matters of mental health. For
I was a mental patient myself, and I can remember how
it feels to be swallowed up in a living death even if I
cannot give full expression to the compassion I feel for
those who have not yet awakened from that long night.
It may seem strange that an ex-inmate, even though
now a member of the Goncourt Academy, should under¬
take a tour of Europe for WHO twenty years later. Yet
it is, rather, a guarantee of the seriousness of the man,
whose pride still bears a scar, and who looks on his
brethren and seeks to assess a scourge that strikes at our
very nature, at reason the prime privilege and charac¬
teristic of man and that every day seems more truly to
be the price (we must pay for progress.
Forgive me for this all too personal preamble. Set your
mind at ease; it is not the purpose of this enquiry to
terrify the reader or to exhibit the horrors of the snake-
pit; it is rather to arouse and draw attention to a
problem as serious as that of cancer, of which it is a sort
of image in the mind. Above all, the purpose is to show
Hervé Bazin, 48, is the most recently-elected member of the
Goncourt Academy in France. His books (a million-and-a-half
copies printed in France) are translated in 19 languages.
that the answers to this problem have almost all been
found and that tremendous efforts are being made.
It is true that there are two million mentally sick
persons in Europe, and equally true that some 40 to 50
per cent of hospital beds are occupied by them; but such
impressive overcrowding and enormous cost have one
merit at least: as so often happens when the pressure
becomes too great, the authorities, spurred on by the
medical profession, have now been roused. Psychiatry has
developed and outgrown the pathetic and the custodial
system: new techniques have relegated the madman to
the old wives' tales, and the idea of the lunatic as a
danger to society and therefore best locked up behind
solid walls has gone out of fashion.
Mental illness is still a danger to society, but mainly to
its pocketbook. Frugal authority has come to understand
that curing patients is the cheapest way of having none.
Moreover, with the gradual spread of social equity and
what might be called a policy of happiness, moral pressure
has become too great for society any longer to tolerate
the old asylum, that discreet variation on the leper colony.
A quarter of a century ago it already had been rechristen-
ed the psychiatric hospital, but the change was a change in
name alone, although it was an indication of the uneasy
conscience which gave rise to modern psychiatry.
There is also no doubt that this forward movement has
been hastened by the war and by the horrors of the
concentration camps, of which the asylums were almost
the peacetime reflection.
It is not long since the days when Hitler was organiz¬
ing the massacre of the mentally deranged; yet today
there is not a country in Europe where psychiatry is
considered a luxury, and almost all have gone a great deal
further, realizing that prevention is better than cure and
attacking the causes. The fact that those causes are
largely to be found in society itself may not simplify
matters but it does show clearly which way to move. The
problems of mental ill-health require more than the
treatment and care of the certified; they also require pre¬
ventive measures. It is now realized not only that delin¬
quency, suicide and alcoholism properly belong to the
realm of psychiatry, but also that conjugal and family
misunderstandings, "'emotional under-nourishment", bad
upbringing, difficulties or instability at work, and even a
certain proneness to misfortune are all part of a closely
allied realm, constantly merging into the psychiatric, and
. that the risk of passing from the one into the other can
almost be calculated mathematically.
Mental health, in short, depends on a complicated
CONTINUED ON PAGE 6

The' Unesco Courier. May 1959
MUSIC, DANCING
REPLACE APATHY
WHO photos by Eric Schwab
Between the old "insane" asylum with its locked doors, high walls and custodial role and the modern
mental hospital run as an "open" therapeutic community lie a world of changes. None is more
striking than the transformation of the atmosphere in which each patient, after receiving the special
care he or she requires, can readjust gradually. to life with the aid of group therapy and other
therapeutic activities. Dancing (top, opposite page) is not merely a distraction, but enables
patients to mingle, to laugh together and enjoy themselves. At the Philippines Mental Hospital,
where these photographs were taken, a patients' band plays daily in the different pavilions
and professional bands (bottom, opposite page) play regularly for patients in the big courtyard.

I WAS A MENTAL PATIENT
(Continued)
balance of physical, moral and social factors for which
we are all jointly responsible. Under the aegis of WHO
this joint responsibility has become an international
concern. Through the exchange of information and
methods one country is spared the pains of experimenta¬
tion in one field while making available to others the
fruits of its knowledge in a different one, and the most
effective action can be taken in the shortest possible time.
Mental health in Europe is now a matter of common
endeavour, more or less advanced, more or less successful,
according to local needs and resources. That is what I
travelled in ten countries to see.
The first point to be made is the difference between
the northern and southern countries. The most
pressing problems seemed to be in England and
Holland but, because they were the most pressing, the best
solutions were also found there. The general aging of
the population, which stands to the credit of a country
but burdens it with senile psychoses, and a low infant
mortality rate, which means that the weak and con¬
sequently those predisposed to all forms of deficiency are
saved, are combined there with the well-known effects of
industrial concentration, with technical demands which
increase the number of unstable and maladjusted persons
and with a less tolerant attitude among city-dwellers with
ever-narrowing concepts of what is normal.
Here, too, sufferers from the milder forms of mental
illness, who accept their state more readily, come forward
more willingly and a great deal is done for them. The
people also demand more out of life and think more of
themselves in those countries, such as the Scandinavian,
where they enjoy great social advantages, and where the
natural combati.veness of the individual and his resistance
to stress are lowered.
The Latins, like the Greeks, Turks and Yugoslavs, are
a more agricultural, less urban people, and the
difficult or defective old person is more easily
absorbed within the family structure. It is not surprising,
therefore, that in those countries with the exception of
France the figures for mental illness are lower. At the
same time, it should be noted that the figures for the
industrial complex of Milan are twice those of Sicily, that
the true picture is easily clouded by a lower rejection rate
and poorer casefindlng, that a lack of hospitalized patients
often means no more than a lack of hospitals, and that
the care of the aged is of relatively little importance in
countries where the life expectancy is short in Yugoslavia
it is 40 years. In these countries it is rather a matter of
starting lower on the ladder and catching up with the
northern countries, whose rate of advance is decreasing.
The second point to be made is that in addition to
the variations in the frequency and distribution of
mental illnesses, there are also variations in kind.
These are being actively studied but the data are
manifold and their appraisal difficult. Alcoholism in
France and suicide in Denmark are now, somewhat im¬
properly, part of popular legend; and, despite what lit¬
erature would seem to teach, no man can truly assert that
the Englishman is particularly predisposed to schizo¬
phrenia, the German to paranoia or the Slav to
depressions. For any group the determining factors are
both varied and variable. All we can say at this moment
is that the environment is assuming greater importance
than genetics. Man's ills are determined not by man but
by the human condition and they are much the same
wherever they arise.
Since each country has its own background and its own
current of thought a more sensitive indicator of national
differences is to be found in the various ways in which
the problems of psychiatry have been approached. But
these differences are theoretical rather than practical and
should not be exaggerated; although one tendency may
predominate here and another there, all are to be found
in every country. Since each school has its areas of failure,
and since psychiatry is not an exact science but an art
depending largely on the initiative of the practitioner,
the combination of very different methods has become
almost the general rule. And very effective it is.
Let us briefly consider these combined methods. The
recent introduction of the psychotropic drugs (both
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10

I WAS A MENTAL PATIENT (Continued)
ALL OF US HAVE A BREAKING POINT, and the increasing
tensions to which we are subjected can seriously affect our
mental well-being, according to Dr. W.C. Menninger, (See
article, page 16), President of the Menninger Foundation, a U.S.
non-profit centre for research, treatment and prevention in the
psychiatric field. Photos show patient at the Philippines National
Mental Hospital in the throes of anger and uncontrolled emotions
being calmed by a psychiatrist. Patient was a'young married
stimulating and tranquillizing) was an important event,
which seemed almost to bring final victory within
reach. But, in addition to the fact that in certain
cases these drugs are contra-indicated, their abuse can
lead to addiction and to undesirable personality changes.
They have, however, made it possible to put a stop to
aggressiveness and agitation, to work in a relaxed atmos¬
phere, and to institute faster and deeper treatment on
a better disposed subject. But in the task of rebuilding
no pharmacopoeia can take the place of lucid will power.
The treatment, of course, depends on the case. The
horror films have popularized, often absurdly, the notion
of treatment by electric shock which, in fact, is suitable
for a limited number of conditions only. There is also
a whole range of other shocks (produced, for instance,
by insulin or cardiazol) intended for more or less the same
purpose to plunge the patient into an artificial coma so
that he may recover his sense of reality on awakening.
There is the sleep cure in which the patient's nervous
functions are completely rested, and narcotherapy which
seeks to undo his complexes. There is the much-debated
psychosurgery, which by severing certain links or cutting
off certain areas of the brain may overcome serious trou¬
bles but generally leaves the patient handicapped.
I shall not go into all the other methods, most of which
are used not singly but in combination one with another.
The real innovation, bringing together and capping all
the others, is the complete transformation of the atmos¬
phere of the psychiatric clinic. The locked doors, the high
walls, the measures of coercion are going, and with them
the shackles on the patient's freedom and the attacks on
his personal dignity. These are being replaced by open
therapeutic communities where, in addition to receiving
the special care he requires, each patient can readjust
himself gradually to life in society through group therapy
and to his work through therapeutic activities; this is
followed by trial release, and finally by a probationary
period and follow up.
The results of these policies are beginning to make
themselves felt and in direct proportion to the degree
of improvement achieved. It used to be said that
few mental patients could be cured; it is known now
that very few cannot be cured if action is taken quickly
and the patient is not allowed to entrench himself in his
illness. Not a third of the inmates of the old asylums
returned to the world; nowadays model institutions
discharge 80 per cent, or more of their patients after a
few months or a few weeks instead of keeping them to
rot for years. In spite of the increasing numbers under¬
going mental treatment, these accelerated cures, are
' HEAD AGAINST THE WALL', a film based on the novel
by Hervé Bazin, tells the story of Gérane, a young man who
has commited a crime in his own home but is too abnormal to
be put in prison. He is consequently sent away to a mental
institution. The film shows him at grips with an anachronistic
"asylum world", now being replaced by the modern psychi¬
atric hospitals with their active communal lives. Photos show
(from left to right) the doctor in charge of an old-fashioned
I0

The Unesco Courier. May 1959
man, sent to the hospital by his family and the family doctor
with complaints of violence and excessive irritability. After
treatment it was recommended that he go home for a trial visit,
but the family refused to consider this. Finally after much dis-
WHO photos by Eric Schwab
cussion the family accepted. He is now a responsible man,
managing a big poultry farm in the provinces and living happily
with his wife and children. No treatment for the mentally ill
can be really effective without the family's active participation.
reducing the overcrowding, which used to move in a
vicious circle further to retard final rehabilitation.
Moreover, wherever it has been possible to attack on all
fronts, the result has been a general cleansing of the
public mind, a lowering of tension, and a good start
towards the eradication of the social vectors of mental
diseases; and in such privileged places, the reduction in
these diseases has been parallelled by social progress.
Alas ! few places are so privileged; much has still to be
done. According to one English psychiatrist, even in
England, a leading country, "one-third of the hospitals are
good, one-third passable, and one-third poor."
Elsewhere the ratio is worse, particularly deep in the
provinces, where the hospitals may be a century out of
date; in some places, they are still in the Middle Ages.
But let us not yield too easily to indignation at this
slowness, the economic and historical foundations of
which are beginning to crack and which does at least have
the merit of allowing those who have fallen behind to
catch up without having to learn and unlearn out-dated
methods whose quasi-superiority breeds stubborn pride.
It is unfair to draw a comparison with the best that
exists elsewhere rather than with what one used to
have. The important fact is that all European psychiatry
is on the move, and with it the health of the mind.
Let it not be forgotten, too, that every country has had
its contribution to make. It was at Gheel, in Belgium,
that long, long ago the disciples of St. Dymphna first took
pity on the insane. It was in Spain that St. John of God
built the first asylum. Electric shock therapy was the work
of an Italian, Cerletti; insulin treatment of an Austrian,
Sakel; lobotomy of a Portuguese, Moniz. The work of the
Russians on conditioned reflexes; of the Germans on
genetics; of the French on drugs and the pathology of the
brain; of the English, of the Dutch, of the Danes and of
countless others, constitutes one whole in which the
knowledge of some is matched by the wisdom of others,
often more skilled in the practical application.
In a world ominously divided the common struggle
towards better health is a comforting phenomenon,
and the efforts being made to improve the health of
the mind are not the least part of it. The situation is
still serious, there can be no doubt of that, but a
"controlled optimism" is nevertheless permissible, for
here, above all, man is at grips with himself. There may
never be a vaccine against mental disease, but prevention
may yet give a large measure of immunity to organized
society, which the adage mens sana in corpore sano must
be extended to include.
mental hospital examining Gérane. Gérane finds himself a
prisoner in a strange world full of fear. There is an incident
which could not happen in a properly run hospitalone inmate
gets hold of a saw and tries to kill another man. Another pa-
Photos taken from the film Head Against the Wall
tient (third photo) who is shamming insanity, offers to help
Gérane to escape and (last photo) a young psychiatrist tries to
convince the hospital's director that he should treat the
men not as prisoners, but as patients who can be cured.
II
