When does a child start to "think"? At what age can
he understand such ideas as length and number?
When is he capable of. what is called "scientific
thought"?
Educators and parents the world over would be
extremely interested in knowing the answers to such
questions. Today, they are being sought in Switzerland at
the Institute for the Sciences of Education in Geneva. The
Institute was founded in 1912 iand attached to the
University of Geneva in 1929, but its origins go even further
back. In 1901, at the dawn of the new century, the
Medical Society of Geneva heard a daring proposal by
Edouard Claparède, the future co-founder of the Institute
along with Pierre Bovet. Claparède called for nothing
less than a school "made to measure" for children. Into
his startled audience, he dropped this bombshell: "We
now pay more attention to children's feet than we do to
their minds."
Five years later, Claparède was to state: "It is just
as important for the educator to know the laws of the
mind and its growth as it is for the horticulturist to know
the biology of plants or the doctor to know the physiology
of organs." It Was on this principle that the Institute
started a laboratory in which experimental psychology is
applied to education. For the past thirty years, both at
Geneva and at Neuchatel, this work has been carried on
by Prof. Jean Piaget, a leading figure in psychological
research which has a bearing on education.
Prof. Piaget's studies had previously shown that the
development of a child's thought processes can be compar¬
ed ito a ladder. The child goes from one step or level to
another. At each level, corresponding to a certain age,
there is an equilibrium in his thinking.
Then, two years ago, a special section of the Institute
was created to study how the child passes from one stage
to another. This study, directed by Dr. Bärbel Inhelder,
professor at the Institute of Child Psychology, and Dr.
Gerald Noelting, is based upon a long-term experiment.
Twenty children, divided into four age groups, have been
selected from Geneva schools for study. They come from
all social classes, have average intelligence test ratings and
have experienced no special difficulties in school.
They have ¡t all taped
Some fifty tests based on special observation techniques
developed by Prof. Piaget over the years are used
with these children. In addition, the research
workers have at their disposal an experimental psychology
laboratory set up by the state of Geneva and provided
with ultra-modern equipment through a grant from an
American foundation.
In this laboratory, each conversation between the
scientist and a child is recorded on tape. At key points
in the interview, a motion picture camera comes into play.
The result is that the Institute has been able to "produce"
records and a film on each child, showing the changes in
his social behaviour and the way his mind works at various

The Unesco Courrier. July-August 1959
WHO photoi by Eric Schw»
HOW DO YOU THINK I SEE THIS LANDSCAPE? An educational researcher puts the above question to a
child who must select the drawing corresponding to what she believes the experimenter sees from his position
opposite her (above). Thus she shows her capacity for judging how perspective varies according to the position
of the observer. Below, a close-up of experimental equipment used for this test. Using a variety of similar
experiments, researchers at the Institute for the Sciences of Education in Geneva study the development of
a child's thought processes. Opposite page« the little girl tsmilingly says goodbye to Institute psychologist.
stages of growth over the years. These experiments have
already shown that the child first groups familiar objects
or even geometrical elements into "logical classes" between
the ages of four and seven. By pouring liquids from one
glass to another, for example, he grasps the idea of a quan¬
tity which does not vary even if its appearance changes.
He understands concepts of length and number between
the ages of five and seven. Weight and volume come later
between nine and twelve and now the framework of
his thought processes has been erected. At the age of ten,
he begins to experiment and then, research shows, he is
capable of scientific thinking at twelve when he starts
formulating theories and searching for proofs.
As is often the case in science, the answers to the first
questions have now raised new ones. For example,
scientists now wonder if this development is the result of
mental and nervous "maturing1" or whether it is the fruit
of education and ijust plain practice. Professor Piaget has
already shown that external and internal factors always
inter-act that is, you cannot separate them. How this
"inter-action" takes place is yet to be answered. There is
also an even bigger question: how is the young child's
mind, concentrated on the present and on what he can see
and touch, transformed into the mind of the adolescent
conscious of the world and capable of co-operating with
his fellow men?
This is pure research at present, but Prof. Piaget and
the Swiss scientists working with him believe that its
results may represent a valuable contribution to education.

CHILD'S MIND (Continued)
CUBES AND 'COVERED WAGGONS'
TEST YOUNGSTERS' THINKING
PROFESSOR JEAN PIAGET, Co-Director of
the Institute for the Sciences of Education and
Director of the International Bureau of Education,
Geneva. Prof. Piaget, who is Swiss, was formerly
a member of the Executive Board of Unesco.

We are now paying more attention to children's feet than we do to
their minds, a famous educator remarked some sixty years ago. In
Geneva, the Institute of the Sciences of Education has set its sights on
the child's mind. By direct observation it is trying to find out about
the different stages in children's thinking and how a child passes from
one stage to the other. Some of their techniques are shown here:
(I & 2) covered waggon-like apparatus is used to test girl's ability to
understand the law of falling bodies along an inclined plane; Angle of
chute (shaft of "covered waggon") is altered and child is asked to judge
how far object will fall each time. (3) study of the concept of size.
The object is to measure the height of a tower standing on a stool.
The child is asked to build a tower of the same height on the ground;
(4) the concept of volume. Child must construct houses with iden¬
tical volumes on islands with different surface areas; (5 and 6)
representation in two and three dimensions. Child draws on a plain
sheet the opened-out surfaces of a geometrical solid she is shown.
WHO photos by Eric Schwab

The Unesco Courrier. July-August 1959
