ZAMENHOF
Father of Esperanto
by Françoise Niederhausen
Universala Esperanto-Asocio
Lazarus Ludovic Zamenhof
In the streets of the unhappy town of my birth, savage
men 'with axes and iron bars fell like wild beasts upon
peaceful citizens, whose only crime was that they
spoke another language and held another creed than
those savages."
The man who Wrote these lines was named Lazarus
Ludovic Zamenhof. You may not know his name, but
you certainly know his life's work, for Zamenhof was the
creator of Esperanto, an international language of
communication between peoples.
He was born a hundred years ago on December 15, 1859,
in Bialystok, a frontier city near the borders of Lithuania,
Poland and Byelorussia, where communities speaking
different languages and practising different religions lived
together, although not very happily.
Young Zamenhof was deeply affected by the prejudices
and the antagonisms stirring this minor tower of Babel.
Local officials were of the Orthodox faith and spake
Russian; the nobility were generally Roman Catholics and
spoke Polish; the peasants talked to each other in Lithua¬
nian or Byelorussian, while the Jewish shopkeepers spoke
24

The Unesco Courier. December 1959
Yiddish and lived in a section apart. Hostile prejudices,
diverse languages, customs and religions all pitted the
inhabitants of Bialystok against each other.
To a sensitive boy belonging to a group which could
express itself only in a dead language or in an adopted
one, these conflicts seemed very tragic. At a very early
age, young Ludovic developed the idea that a common
tongue would help to break down at least part of the
barriers separating people from one another.
This idea haunted him throughout his childhood and
adolescence: first in Warsaw where his parents moved in
1873 and where Ludovic attended high school, then in
Moscow where he studied medicine, in Vienna where he
took a course in opthalmology and in Warsaw again where
he set up a practice as an oculist.
Doktoro Esperanto
or 'he who hopes'
From his schoolmaster father, he had inherited a gift
for languages. He spoke three fluently: Russian,
Polish and German, and could read three others
freely: Latin, Hebrew and French (to say nothing of
Yiddish). He had a more cursory and theoretical know¬
ledge of English, Italian and several other tongues.
His knowledge of English and French convinced him
that a language could get along without the complicated
declensions and conjugations of the Slavonic tongues.
A careful study of Russian and German convinced him
that a wise choice of suffixes and prefixes could reduce
the size of the vocabulary considerably, while French and
German proved the usefulness of the definite article which
the Slavonic languages do not have.
His work led to the publication in 1887 of a textbook on
the "Lingvo Internacia" the international language
for which he used the pen-name, Daktoro Esperanto ("he
who hopes"). The book, whose publication was financed
by his future father-in-law as a wedding present,
explained the main characteristics of the "lingvo": a
vocabulary with its roots drawn mainly from the Romance
and Germanic languages; detachable prefixes and suffixes
added to these roots and serving for all grammatical
distinctions; and a very simple grammar consisting of
16 short rules. The language, moreover, was fully inde¬
pendent and had its own individuality.
In the following years, other textbooks were published
as Well as a dictionary and translations into Esperanto.
At the same time, the first supporters came on the scene :
first in Poland, then in Germany, Bulgaria, Russia, etc.
Soon, groups were forming everywhere. In 1894. an
important event occurred the support of Leon Tolstoy
who wrote in "Posrednik" : "After only two hours of study
I was able, if not to write Esperanto, at any rate to read
it freely." He urged everyone to learn this language
"because the sacrifice is so small and the eventual benefits
so great that no one should refuse to try it."
A common ground for
agreement among men
The movement was growing steadily. In Scandinavia,
England, France and elsewhere scholars were becom¬
ing interested in the experiment. In 1905, the first
Esperanto Congress was held at Boulogne-sur-Mer in
France. To attend it, Zamenhof and his wife travelled all
the way from Warsaw in a third-class railway carriage.
Zamenhof was awed and somewhat overwhelmed by his
stay in Paris: he was given an official reception at the
City Hall and decorated with the Legion of Honour, and
he dined on the Eiffel Tower with a group of world
famous scholars.
But even greater satisfactions were awaiting him at
Boulogne. Eight hundred men and women from thirty
countries had assembled there and all of them, whether
in their official statements or their private conversations,
were speaking Esperanto. The "lingvo internacia" had
become a reality and no one was more surprised than
Zamenhof himself.
The Boulogne congress gave him the opportunity of
stressing the moral and social importance of his work:
Esperanto was not an end in itself, but a means of contri¬
buting to a better understanding between peoples. It was
a step towards the unity of mankind.
The following year, he developed this idea at the
Esperanto congress in Geneva, stating his conviction that
the international language was a means of bringing men
together by breaking down the barriers between them.
He exalted the brotherhood of man which seemed to him
the only creed acceptable to all peoples and to all faiths.
Year after year, at Esperanto congresses, he explained his
ideas on tolerance and human rights.
This role of guide seemed so important to him that, in
1912, he renounced all honours and turned the linguistic
problems of Esperanto over to its Language Committee
whose job it was to survey the evolution of the language
and to give official approval to new words introduced
into it.
At the Congress of Races in London, in 1911, he pre¬
sented a report stressing that physical differences were
less important than those of language and customs. "Dis¬
cord among men", he said, "will never cease until they
grow accustomed to giving more importance to the word
'man' than to the words 'people' and 'race'." In his mind,
the peoples of the world were separated mainly by lan¬
guage and religious customs. To bring them together,
he suggested a neutral language and a neutral ethical
basis which would provide a common ground for agree¬
ment between all men of goodwill.
A 'lingvo internacia'
with 80,000 words
He meant to discuss this idea at the tenth Universal
Esperanto Congress in Paris when war broke out in
1914. To Zamenhof, this was a terrible blow, but he
continued to fight for his ideals. Back in Warsaw in 1915
he drafted a "Letter to Diplomats" in which he emphasiz¬
ed that the main duty of any future peace treaty would
be to guarantee to all races and minorities equality and
freedom in the countries in which they lived. This was
his last public act: he died on April 14, 1917.
Zamenhof had foreseen that Esperanto would evolve
and grow like any other living language. From a voca¬
bulary of 904 roots which could be used to form about
10,000 words (1887), it has grown to more than 80,000 words
based upon some 7,800 root words. Zamenhof himself
contributed greatly to enriching the language, not only
by his poems, speeches and articles, but also through his
translations into Esperanto of works by Gogol, Shakes¬
peare, Dickens, Molière, Hans Andersen, Goethe, Schiller,
Heine and Sholem Aleichem. His version of the Old Testa¬
ment which he translated in full was published after his
death in 1926.
Two world wars destroyed many Esperanto libraries and
organizations in Europe, but they were unable to stamp
out the language and the ideal which inspired Zamenhof.
Today, there are several million Esperanto speakers in the
world and its literature, both original or translated,
amounts to more than 50,000 volumes. There are chairs
or. courses in Esperanto in some thirty universities. The
language is taught in schools in twenty-two countries, to
say nothing of countless evening classes. Twenty radio
stations broadcast programmes regularly in the language.
"Esperanto," Zamenhof ones said, "knows neither weak
nor strong nations, privileged nor inferior peoples... All
of us equal on neutral ground, should consider ourselves
members of the same human family." To pay tribute to
this great vision, Esperantists from all over the world
met in Warsaw last August for their Universal Congress.
25
