ENOUGH FOOD FOR EVERYONE:
A PROBLEM OF KILOWATT-HOURS
H.J. BHABHA
We are all used to hearing of
the so-called industrially
advanced and the under¬
developed countries. What is
implied by this nomenclature? If
you look at the countries of the
world today you find that there are certain countries,
and indeed most of the countries of Asia and Africa,
whose national income per head is about $40 to $50 per
annum. In the countries of Western Europe the national
income per head ranges from $300 to some $900 per
annum, while in the United States of America the nation¬
al income per head is a high as ? 1,800 per annum.
This national income per head is a measure of the well-
being of the people of the countries concerned. This, as
can be seen from the figures I have given, shows an
enormous disparity between the low standard of living
of the countries generally speaking, of Asia and Africa
that we call "under-developed", and the countries of the
West, for example, that are called industrially advanced.
On what is this disparity based? The. high standard of
.living of the industrially-advanced countries is due to a
better exploitation of the forces and resources of nature
based upon present science and technology. The energy
consumption per head in the so-called under-developed
countries is the equivalent to the burning of about one-
third of a ton of coal per head per annum, whereas in
the countries of Western Europe it is eight times as much,
and in America it is as much as eight tons per annum
per head. This utilization of energy is the basis of the
higher standard of living and the higher well-being of
these countries.
Now we all owe a great debt and also our cultural values
to the ancient civilizations of Egypt, India, China, Greece
and later Western Europe. It is important to realize,
however, that despite many differences, of habits, culture
and social pattern, all these civilizations were built
essentially on the same foundation. All the energy for
doing mechanical work, for tilling the ground, for drawing
water, for carrying loads and for locomotion was supplied
by muscle, whether human muscle or animal muscle.
Molecular or chemical energy, as, for example, obtained
by the burning of wood, was only used to a limited extent
for cooking and heating and a few technical processes, as
in metallurgy.
It is important to note the severe limitation that the
restricted supply of energy puts on the development of
civilization. A man in the course of a hard day's work
can only produce about half a kilowatt hour of energy,
whereas in the industrially advanced countries as much
as forty-five kilowatt hours of energy are used per day
per head. It follows that a high level of physical comfort
and culture could only be enjoyed by a few in the ancient
civilizations by concentrating the surplus labour of many
for the benefit of a few. In other words, the ancient
civilizations of the world were essentially non-democratic.
It is only today on the basis of modern science and tech¬
nology that for the first time we have the possibility of
building a democratic civilization and culture.
I recall that on one occasion Lord Boyd Orr said that
one man can produce today as much food as ten did
fifty years ago as the result of the application of modern
science and techniques in agriculture. Now, nobody knows
this problem better than he does. In India and in many
countries of Asia the productivity of agriculture per man
remains the same as it has been for centuries. This shows
that a mere application of present knowledge and tech¬
niques in these countries could easily solve the food
problem in these areas.
It should be emphasized that the food problem of which
you hear so much is a marginal one. In years in which
the rainfall is good there is no food shortage. In years
when the climatic conditions are adverse there is a food
shortage. Hence, the manifold increase of the productivity
of the soil on the basis of modern techniques could easily
ensure that even in bad years there is no food shortage.
NoWj one important reason for the greater productivity
of agriculture is the widespread use of fertilizer such as
sulphate or nitrate of ammonia. In India on the average
about five kilogrammes of sulphate of ammonia are used
per hectare. In England this figure is 200, in Japan 550;
in other words, a hundred times as much as in India. It
is this lavish use for fertilizer, made possible and produced
by modern industrial processes, which is responsible for
the greater productivity of the soil. Here we see directly
the impact of the chemical industry namely, the produc¬
tion of fertilizer on the productivity of agriculture.
Now the rate at which the production of food can be
increased is far greater than the rate at which the
population increases, which is 1.3 % per annum in
India. I emphasize this point because many people are
under the misapprehension that the over-population and
the increase of population in the under-developed areas
are the causes of their low standard of living. This is
clearly not so. Even With an increasing population,
modern technology enables one to raise the standards of
living of the people as a whole, because the increase in
production, the rate of increase in production, is much
greater, or can be much greater, than the rate of increase
of population.
For example, the population of the United States
increases at a rate higher than the rate of increase in
India, but nevertheless the standard of living continues
to go up because their productivity rises faster. I need
not mention the rapid rise of the rate of productivity in
the Soviet Union which is phenomenal. It has set a new
standard.
The over-populated countries are not India and China
in the sense of the density of population the density
of population is higher in such countries as England and,
for example, Belgium. So it is important for all of us to
realize that there is a certain responsibility on us to see
that modern techniques are applied everywhere for the
benefit of these areas. It is not the population problem
which is the cause of their low standard of living.
(Here, Professor Gaston Berger asked Professor Bhabha
if he thought that difficulties over the increase of
agricultural production were only technical ones the
need for proper machinery and a chemical industry or
if there were not also difficulties due to psychological and
social conditions.)
There are of course, two sorts of difficulties. It is easy
enough to erect a steel plant because this requires a
certain limited number of highly qualified, technical
personnel. To improve agriculture you have to teach
practically the entire population, or a greater part of the
population, and this is in some ways a much bigger
problem. But the problem is also to some extent a matter
merely of time. We are, in fact, building a number of
fertilizer plants. But there is no doubt that, for the size
of the country, the number of such plants and the rate
of their construction, should be increased. So this is
connected with the general industrial development and
what we are now laying the foundation of is not merely
fertilizer plants, but factories to produce fertilizer plants,
for only in this way can we be independent of outside
assistance.
31
