<*l/SR2
A DESERT IN
THE HEART
OF LONDON
COI London
-Í 1
by Daniel Behrman
UNATIONS
22

C.O.I. London
There may be a "pea-soup" fog or a sharp frost outside, but at the
Anti-Locust Research Centre in the heart of London, a hot desert
exists all year round. Here a million locusts are bred annually and their
behaviour studied to help the world fight against locust invasions.
Left, locusts are bred in the laboratory where they are induced to lay
their eggs in aluminium tubes. Eggs are about the size of a wheat seed,
laid in batches of 40 to 100 in moist sand in a pencil-shaped burrow.
A glue-like substance holds them and the sand grains together (below).
Larger cages at laboratory (above) hold adult locusts, fed on fresh grass
and bran. Large electric light bulb replaces sun; sticks, for climbing
and to fly from, give recreation. Full generation takes three months.
UNATIONS
The Unesco Courrier. July-August 1959
JcrsT the other day, an alert English lady with an interest
in zoology breathlessly brought a schistocerca gregaria
Into a London police station.
"It's a desert locust," she told the sergeant on duty,
"I found it in Hyde Park."
When news of the discovery reached the Anti-Locust
Research Centre in London, the man who is perhaps the
world's leading authority on locusts, Dr. B.P. Uvarov,
merely remarked:
"Why not? We raise a million desert locusts a year
across the road from Hyde Park . . . and some of them are
bound to get away."
Dr. Uvarov is not worried' because he knows they do so at
their own risk. For the desert locust does not stand a
chance of surviving in the English climate. Unfortunately,
in an area covering no less than 11,000,000 square miles of
the earth's surface, it not only survives but flourishes to
the point where it is an epidemic plague and such a
plague is now afflicting much of Africa and Asia.
Desert locusts in swarms have been known to darken
the sky as far west as the Canary Islands in the Atlantic
Ocean and as far east as Assam. They ravage North and
East Africa and even fan out south to Tanganyika and
northward to Spain and Portugal. Every year, the Anti-
Locust Research Centre estimates, they do £30,000,000
worth of damage to cash crops in some 65 countries. No
estimate, however, can be made of the harvest of suffering
and starvation they sow in the arid and semi- arid belts
of Africa and Asia.
The Anti-Locust Research Centre, operated by the
British Government, has been in existence for fifteen
years, but Dr. Uvarov has spent most of his life with
locusts. In his office overlooking Hyde Park, Dr. Uvarov
stated the centre's objective in few and clear words:
"We want to find out what conditions produce the initial
swarms which cause all the trouble and then, if possible,
we want to find out if these conditions can be changed
economically."
Africa freed from two plagues
When Dr. Uvarov first began to study locusts (they
interested him even as a small boy), there were
three main species plaguing Asia and Africa: the
red locust, the migratory locust and the desert locust. In
1929, a locust invasion of the Middle East led to the birth
of the predecessor of the present-day research centre.
Then, it was only Dr. Uvarov and an assistant.
But, even thirty years ago, Dr. Uvarov was already
preaching that "locusts ignore boundaries" and the scope
of his work quickly became international. He and his
collaborators attacked the problem from all sides: bio¬
logical, geographical, physiological and meteorological.
It was the most unglamorous side of the job the
patient collecting of locust reports, and plotting them on
mapswhich led to their first victory. Once records
covering a sufficiently long period had been analyzed
geographically (evidence of the desert locust goes back
more than 2,000 years), they showed that swarms of the
migratory locust started in what is now the Sudan Re¬
public and that the red locust swarms originated in
Tanganyika and Northern Rhodesia.
This methodical spadework in London led to the
establishment of the International African Migratory
Locust Organization and the International Red Locust
Control Service which concentrate on preventing locusts
from swarming in these regions. The result is that Africa
has been free of red and migratory locust plagues for the
past fifteen years, though Dr. Uvarov refuses to claim at
present that this is definitive.
The desert locust is a much harder nut to crack. It is
a nomad, like all the other creatures adapted to survival
in the desert, and it travels in giant leaps. Breeding
places of successive generations may be as much as 1,000
miles apart.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

A DESERT IN THE HEART OF LONDON
(Continued)
An ecological survey of its breeding places is now being
conducted by two scientists, George Popov of England and
Charles Rossetti of Switzerland, financed jointly by FAO
and Unesco (Unesco's contribution is part of its major
project on scientific research to aid arid lands).
The job is an enormous one: last year, the two men
visited Sudan, Chad and Ethiopia and this year are
working in Mauritania, the Sudan Republic (formerly
French Sudan) and Niger. This is a long-term study of
the conditions under ¡which desert locusts breed.
In London, one huge room of the centre is devoted
mainly to keeping track of the desert locust's movements.
In this geographical service as well as in every other
section of the centre, basic and applied research . are
happily married.
Each year the centre's geographers receive thousands of
reports of locust movements which are invaluable to the
basic research task of trying to pin down the insect's
principal breeding areas. At the same time, these reports
form the raw material which goes into the monthly
bulletins of the International Desert Locust Information
Service operated by the centre and sponsored by. FAO.
For example, one morning, a short while ago, a sheaf
of cables and letters was awaiting Miss Zean Waloff, who
is in charge of this service :
"About half dozen swarms entering Pakistan from west.
Locuswar."
"Eritrea no swarms reported hopper infestation Arkiko
Wangabo now controlled. Locust Asmara."
Miss Waloff turned to a huge map covering one end of
the room, but still not large enough to chart all the
wanderings of the desert locust which has even been seen
1,200 miles out in the Atlantic Ocean.
"The situation is serious this year, she explained, there
has been spring breeding in northern and northwest
Africa from Morocco to Libya. We knew about heavy
swarms in Arabia and the Middle East and now some are
reported in Pakistan."
'Your country is being invaded'
On the basis of this information, the anti-locust
centre publishes forecasts in its monthly bulletin.
If the situation is dangerous, special warnings are
issued. The last one, in October 1958, reported heavy
breeding in the Sudan, northern Ethiopia, Niger and
Mauritania and predicted serious breeding early this year.
In emergencies, the centre uses "'signals" by cable or
even telephone. One such "signal" involved ringing up
an ambassador in London to inform him that locusts
were headed for his country from across the border of
another country with which his capital had no diplomatic
relations.
Locusts pay no attention to politics.
The Anti-Locust Research Centre in London is now
directed by Dr. T.H.C. Taylor with Dr. Uvarov, his
predecessor, in retirement, as a highly active consultant.
A few doors away from Dr. Uvarov's office is a locust-
breeding laboratory known to experts the world over. The
locusts are either used for experimental purposes on the
spot or are shipped out to universities and research
institutes.
This is another case of basic and applied research going
hand-in-hand. Locust-raising here is mass production at
the rate of a million eggs and 50,000 adult locusts a year.
In England alone, locusts are shipped (by ordinary post)
to seventy scientists conducting research and they go to
five universities in continental Europe as well.
BABIES BY THE THOUSAND are produced daily in the Anti-Locust
Research Centre and raised to adulthood. Fully-grown insects are then
shipped to scientists in England and to universities in continental Europe. Even
laboratories in Africa order supplies when locusts are "out of season" there.
C.O.I. London
'MERRY-GO-ROUND' for locusts used at London Research Centre. When
the insects find themselves suspended in air, they begin to fly and turn
the wire frame "roundabout". In this way, some estimate of the
speed and duration of the flight of which they are capable can be made.
CONT'D ON PAGE 31

The Unesco Courrier. July-August 1959
From "Climatology and Microclimatology", Unesco, 1958
INVASION ZONE of desert locust, divided into two parts covering
I I million square miles of Africa and Asia, shows size of the problem.
Light shaded area shows total invasion area; central dark zone covers
region where breeding or swarms occur at least one year in two.
HOPPERS ON THE MARCH
Life cycle of the locust consists of three stages: egg, hopper and adult.
Locusts breed in the desert, yet lay their eggs only after rain. To develop,
the eggs must absorb more than their weight in water. If not in contact
with water during the incubation period (two weeks) the eggs die.
During the hopper stage, lasting 5 to 6 weeks, the young locusts are
unable to fly. They come together in bands of thousands, millions or
even hundreds of millions and begin to march in search of green food,
again only to be found in desert areas after rain. Excessive heat or
dryness may kill the hoppers. For a few days after becoming adults the
locust swarms take short daily flights to test their wings, prolonging
these flights until a true migration starts. The hopper stage is the most
vulnerable to attack by ground bait and aircraft spraying. Photo shows
part of a vast army of hoppers on the march in a wheat field near
Baghdad, stopped by an irrigation ditch too broad for them to cross.
FAO-Peter Collins
INT'L AIR SQUADRON
IN ANTI-LOCUST WAR
An international anti-locust aircraft squadron
may soon join scientists on the ground in a
stepped-up attack on desert locust invasions.
The creation of the aircraft unit has been
proposed by the Food and Agriculture Organiza¬
tion of the U.N. following impressive results
achieved by aircraft in the past few years. In
1957, for example, 171 aeroplanes and helicopters
were used in operations against the desert locust
in 23 countries, and proved both far more
economical and more effective than ground
techniques.
FAO reports that aircraft spraying of only 60
gallons of the pesticide dlazinon killed an
estimated 180 million adult locusts during one
invasion. Air operations in Morocco this year
successfully sprayed swarms of locusts at about
half the price of traditional ground methods
using, bran as poisoned bait. Similar results
have been achieved in Pakistan and Iran.
Aircraft have been found to be the only way to
determine the number and size of swarms during
invasions. Aircraft have regularly sighted swarms
at distances of up to 100 kilometres, and have
been effective in searching areas 9,000 square
kilometres in size.
The international anti-locust aircraft squadron
would be made up of specially equipped planes
belonging to individual nations. When an inva¬
sion alert sounded the squadron Would be united
in a concentrated attack on the threatened or
infested area.
One of the latest battles in the war against the
desert locusts is now taking place in Jordan. The
locust invasion has built up over the past few
weeks and has now reached serious proportions.
The swarms have laid eggs across 50,000 hectares
of cultivated land and the breeding area is still
increasing. A shortage of- poisoned bran has
heightened the crisis. Turkey, Lebanon and the
Syrian Region of the United Arab Republic have
responded to an FAO appeal and are coming to
Jordan's aid.

2
6

The Unesco Courrier. July-August 1959
They came
They saw
They conquered
Photos Anti-Locust Research Centre, London
Devastation caused by the desert locust is
vividly illustrated in these three photographs.
Top, healthy orange grove in the Souss Valley
(Morocco) before a locust swarm spotted it.
Centre, locusts form vast cloud blotting out
trees and landscape as they swoop down on
target. Bottom, orange grove stripped clean
and soil nibbled bare after passage of marau¬
ders. A single swarm may range 3,000 miles
and may number as many as 1 ,000 million
locusts. In 1954 remnants of a desert locust
swarm from Africa reached the British Isles
after a flight of more than 1,500 miles over
the open seas. A single locust weighs only a
tenth of an ounce but a swarm can weigh
20,000 tons and must eat its weight in green
food daily. Locust clouds leave not only ruin
and despair in their trail but further poten¬
tial scourges, for if the locust meets favour¬
able weather conditions it breeds and lays eggs
as it moves alongand another swarm is born.
27

The Unesco Courrier. July-August 1959
A DESERT IN THE
HEART OF LONDON
(Continued from page 24)
THE GRASSHOPPER & THE LOCUST:
DR. JEKYLL & MR. HYDE OF INSECTS
"We have a budget of only £70,000 a year," Dr. Uvarov
pointed out. "If we tried to do everything ourselves we
would get nothing done. So we encourage others to help
us by supplying them with research grants and raw
material that is, locusts."
With a ¿twinkle in his eye, he added: "Why we even send
locusts to laboratories in Rhodesia and Ghana it's more
practical to write to us than to try to catch them out-of-
season.
In the laboratory, under the direction of Mr. Philip
Hunter-Jones, desert locusts are raised under conditions
as close to normal environment as possible. They are
bred in constant-temperature rooms where the ther¬
mometer always stands at 29 degrees C, laying their eggs
in small tubes of moist sand. They are fed on succulent
grass which often raises a food supply problem in the
middle of an English winter.
The desert locust needs moist sand to lay its eggs and
this characteristic is worrying scientists as they watch
the spread of irrigation in semi-arid lands. In certain
cases, and at great expense, man seems to be unwittingly
creating new locust breeding grounds.
Locusts' 'rain-sense' myth exploded
With the help of its. laboratory and the world's
biggest library on locusts, the centre has been able
to explode a number of myths concerning the
desert locust and is now exploring certain characteristics
of this insect which may hold the key to its ultimate
control.
Dr. R.C. Rainey, a "biometeorologist" (that is, a biologist
and meteorologist) is one of the men responsible for
shattering some of the myths. His studies both in East
Africa and at the centre have explained much of what
used to be called "the psychology of the locust."
Popular belief once held (and often still does) that
desert locusts move with unvarying intent and purpose,
and that they are even capable of sensing rain from a
distance in the desert, swarming down at the right mo¬
ment to eat the plants it produces.
But studies of swarms tooth from the air and with
cameras on the ground show that locusts consistently
move downwind at a speed equal to or less than the speed
of the wind (their own flying speed is from 10 to 12
m.p.h.).
Actually, Dr. (Rainey stated, the individual locusts fly in
all directions, making it impossible for a man on the
ground to tell in which way the swarm as a whole is
moving. The swarm's course is exactly like that of an
aeroplane pilot who is lost: he flies around in circles but
his position changes because he is drifting with the wind.
This downwind movement often takes the locusts into
what meteorologists call "areas of convergent wind flow"
which can produce rain in arid regions. That, in Dr.
Rainey's opinion, is how desert locusts "find" rain.
According to another old belief, locust swarms fly when
the barometer drops, but the centre's research has shown
that atmospheric pressure has nothing to do with flight.
"The locust can only take off when its muscles are warm,"
Dr. Rainey explained. "At a temperature of about 25
degrees C. (77 degrees F.), its 'engine' is warmed up for
flight. The atmospheric pressure often drops in arid
regions when temperature rises and that is why people
once thought the barometer had something to do with the
flying of swarms."
Meteorology has also provided the answer to the
astonishing heights reached by desert locusts. Aircraft
have sighted them flying at 10,000 feet and some have
been seen on mountain passes 20,000 feet above sea level.
In this case it is the powerful convection currents from
the desert which send them spiralling upward.
As for the biological side of biometeorology, Dr. Rainey
is studying the insecticides used against the desert locust.
These insecticides must be powerful enough to kill tons
and tons of locusts and yet at the same time do no harm
to plant and other animal life.
Insecticides involve the study of the physiology of the
locust one of the most fascinating aspects of the London
centre. It is carried out under Dr. Peter T. Haskell, a
young scientist who works in a room filled with electronic
apparatus capable of measuring such things as the smell,
eyesight and hearing of a locust. There is even a "wind
tunnel" for flight-testing.
Dr. Haskell and Mr. Hunter-Jones are attacking different
aspects of the problem of why desert locusts swarm. This
is one of the most puzzling metamorphoses of nature. If
left alone, the species is an ordinary green grasshopper.
But, in a crowd the relatively inoffensive grasshopper
becomes the gregarious, predatory desert locust. Its
colour turns to yellow and black, its wings lengthen and
its head thickens.
No differences explaining this Jekyll-and-Hyde conduct
can be detected when a locust and a grasshopper are
dissected and examined under a microscope. Dr. Haskell
suspects that there must be some aspects of the desert
locust's central nervous system which causes it to seek the
company of other locusts and to form a havoc-making
swarm.
In his research, he uses some rather amazing devices.
One, for example, which could be called a locust-tickler,
was developed by Dr. Peggy E. Ellis, a member of the
centre Working at Oxford. It consists of a jam-jar with
an electrically driven wheel bearing rope fibres turning
inside it. The fibres stimulate the tactile organs of a
young locust in the hopper stage and, so far, the
experiments show that exciting its sense of touch seems
to make it more willing to seek the company of other
locusts.
Infra-red lamps warm the desert
DR. Haskell also ¡rules the only artificial desert in
London. It is a flat wooden tray about ten feet
square with a sand floor an inch thick. Two infra¬
red lamps beat down through its glass roof while wind is
created by an electric fan. This artificial desert has
already demonstrated that young hoppers are quite
capable of finding grass by their sense of smell. It also
shows that they congregate in still air and disperse in
a wind.
With all these weapons, the centre has hopes of solving
the desert locust problem but not overnight. Basic
research must first give science the explanation of the
dreaded insect's life before control measures can be taken.
Dr. Uvarov is cheered by a precedent. A team from the
Anti-Locust Centre spent five years in Cyprus studying
the ' so-called Moroccan locust. They learned that the
insect flourished on overgrazed patchy terrain because it
needs bare soil to lay its eggs and grass for food and
shelter. On this basis, the centre was able to recommend
a moderate control of grazing to eliminate the locust's
grassless breeding grounds.
"The locust will be there but it will not swarm," said
Dr. Uvarov. "And that is what we are trying to do with
the desert locust as well. We will succeed if we have the
time. Even if we had unlimited money and equipment at
our disposal, we would still need time. There are no
shortcuts in science."
31
