HEAVY WEATHER hits two océanographie research vessels, the
Vema (left) and the Kevin Moron belonging to the Lamont Geological
Observatory of Columbia University, in the U.S.A. Discoveries result
ing from trips made by the Vema, notably of the great sea-bed "rift"
in rr id-Atlantic, formed the basis of some important theories discussed
at the recent International Océanographie Congress at U.N. Head-

THE OCEAN DEPTHS,
TERRA INCOGNITA
by Dr. Gerald Wendf
To man, the seas are a challenge which in magnitude
approaches that of space. He has at least been able to
observe the moon, planets and stars directly with tele¬
scopes and has sent rockets curving out into space as far
as and far past the moon. Yet the ocean depths, shrouded
in darkness, have been obscured from his view.
Man's knowledge of the oceans is meagre indeed when
compared to their importance to him. Yet he has learned
enough to know the major features of the ocean floor
trenches 33,000 feet deep, flat-topped undersea mountains,
2,000 mile long fracture zones and deepest plains as flat
as a calm sea features which are uniquely différent from
anything either on the surface of the moon or on the
earth's land surfaces.
He knows too that the more than 300 million cubic miles
of waters which cover nearly three-quarters of the
earth's surface conceal a myriad of wonders, from a fan¬
tastic variety of living matter to detailed records of earth
and life history which are hidden in the sediment of
the ocean deeps.
Oceanography, the science of the oceans which groups
many sciences and encompasses the study of all aspects
of the oceans, their boundaries and their contents, has
made more rapid progress in recent years as it has come
in for a greater yét still inadéquate; share of the re¬
sources with which man searches for greater under-
stanlding of himself, his origins and the universe in which
he lives.

The Unesco Courier. December 1959
quarters, New York. The rift averages 20 miles in width and 7,500 feet
in depth. It is bordered by mountain ridges that average 6,000 feet
in height and about 75 miles in width. Largest task for oceanograph-
Photos © Lamont Geological Observatory
ers is to map the geography of the entire sea bottom70 per cent
of the earth's surface. The New York Congress marked the start of
an all-out investigation of the earth's last great unexplored frontier.
The demonstration that oceanography has passed from
blind exploration and accidental discovery into
a full-fledged science bent on a systematic investi¬
gation of the last great frontier of this planet, came with
the first International Océanographie Congress, held at
United Nations Headquarters in New York, this year.
The Congress drew over 1,100 scientists from some
45 nations, included more than 500 scientific papers in
its programme, and during its two-week session seven
océanographie research vessels, the Mikhail Lomonosov
of the Soviet Union, the Calypso of France and five
American ships, the Atlantis, Chain, Pathfinder, Maury
and Gibbs, were anchored close by in New York harbour.
The Congress was convened by the American Associa¬
tion for the Advancement of Science, with the United
Nations as host, and was co-sponsored by Unesco for its
International Advisory Committee on Marine Sciences and
by the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU)
through its Special Committee on Oceanic Research. The
President of the Congress was Dr. Roger Revelle, Director
of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography of the Univer¬
sity of California, who is a member of the Unesco
committee and Chairman of the ICSU committee.
At the Congress the marine sciences and oceanic
research were publicly launched as a major world-wide
international scientific endeavour, comparable with ato¬
mic energy, the International Geophysical Year and the
exploration of space, but of direct interest to more nations
and involving more individual sciences. Almost from the
start, the Congress was referred to as the "first" one on
the ocean, in the assurance that others will follow and
that this marks the beginning of a concerted attack on
the problems and resources of the nearly three-fourths
of the earth's surface that is the common property of all
mankind and therefore the .proper province of the United
Nations and its various Agencies.
During the meeting, the Special Committee on Oceanic
Research announced a major international research pro¬
ject for the years 1960 to 1964, somewhat on the model
of the International Geophysical Year, for a thorough,
co-ordinated study of the Indian Ocean by twelve research
vessels that will be provided by Australia, France, India,
Japan, South Africa, the U.S.S.R., the United Kingdom
and the United States and perhaps by the German Federal
Republic and Norway.
The Indian Ocean, reaching from Indonesia to South
Africa, touches many lands whose present need of food
will increase with growing populations and can probably
best be met from the sea. Yet it is the least explored
of all the oceans and its resources are unknown. It is of
special scientific interest because twice each year the
monsoons reverse its ocean currents and thus shift the
locations of the up-swelling waters from below that are
rich in the basic materials for the nutrition of fish.
In addition, the ocean is thought to be crossed by a
submerged mountain ridge that curves from below the
tip of Africa to the Pacific, passing between Australia and
Antarctica but branching to send a ridge northward
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

OCEAN DEPTHS
TERRA INCOGNITA
(Continued)
Continents of Europe & America
are found to be drifting apart
towards the Red Sea. Every oceanic science will benefit
from this study, but the practical hope is that a solution
Will be found for the puzzling fluctuation in the popula¬
tions of food fish like mackerel and tuna.
The U.S. National Academy of Sciences and the Nation¬
al Research Council told the Congress that they consi¬
dered completely feasible a project for boring a four or
five inch hole all the way through the crust of the earth
where is is thinnest at the sea bottom, about 18,000 feet
below sea level, down to a depth of 31,000 feet where the
lighter crustal rocks end and the earth's "mantle" begins.
The deepest oil well yet drilled goes down about 24,300
feet and preliminary studies indicate that a much
deeper hole can be drilled even from the deck of a ship.
Two years will be required for the experimental drilling
of more shallow holes and for the development of special
equipment. Then a new deep-drilling vessel Will be built .
and at least two more years will be needed to reach the
dense hot rock of the mantle that comprises the main mass
of the earth. This project may help to answer questions
on the age of the earth's crust and the original forma¬
tion of the oceans. Adequate funds for it are, however,
not yet assured.
Radioactive 'rulers' measure
the age of the ocean bottom
A third important project was revealed at the Congress
by Dr. Y. Miyake of Tokyo in a report for a working
party of the Special Committee on Oceanic Research
of ICSU with recommendations for a world-wide study of
the radioactivity of the ocean waters in order to determine
the effect of the submarine disposal of radio-waste pro¬
ducts from nuclear reactors and laboratories. The report
recommended that the International Union of Geodesy
and Geophysics develop standard methods for the radio¬
active analysis of sea water and prepare a manual for
uniform and standard procedures by all nations.
The report also asked for the establishment of a world
wide network of testing stations on the shores of maritime
countries and on weather ships and whaling ships at sea
which would make a continuous record of the radio¬
activity and its changes at a large number of points on
all the oceans. A further recommendation was that the
International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna should
make a study of the maximum permissible concentration
of oceanic radioactivity. There is no notable contamina¬
tion of the ocean as yet but the increasing number of
nuclear power plants make these preparations advisable,
in the opinion of the committee.
From the scientific point of view, two aspects of the
Congress were of especial significance. One was the reve¬
lation to many scientific workers of the large amount of
research in progress in other countries that had pre¬
viously been unknown to them even in their own field
of study. Another was a fresh realization of the value,
as cross-fertilization, of work in different fields. The
Congress included geologists, paleontologists, hydrogra¬
phers, geophysicists and geochemists, meteorologists,
nuclear physicists, physical chemists, biochemists, bota¬
nists, zoologists and many others.
Discoveries or new methods in one field repeatedly
proved to be of great value in others. For instance, the
highly specialized methods of determining the age of the
radioactive isotopes of carbon, hydrogen, beryllium, silicon
and ionium have made it possible to develop a reliable
time-scale for determining the age of ocean-bottom sedi¬
ments, fossils and organic materials, the sequence of che¬
mical and biological processes, and flow of ocean currents.
Thus oceanography is not a science but the focus of
many sciences. Indeed, there was informal discussion at
the Congress of referring to it as oceanology instead of
oceanography. The latter term refers primarily to
charting and mapping, as in geography, and is two-
dimensional while oceanic research today is in depth,
both literally and metaphorically, and the third dimen
sion vertically is as important as it is in the exploration
of outer space.
The programme of the Congress was arranged in five
major divisions: the structure of the ocean basins and the
history of the oceans ; the geophysics and geochemistry
of the deep sea, including the currents and sedimenta¬
tion; the relation of the sea to its boundaries on the
bottom, at the land surface, and with the atmosphere;
the populations of the sea, including plants, animals,
plankton, deep-sea fishes, evolution, ethology and ecology;
and the cycles of inorganic and organic substances in
the sea.
Topics that aroused special interest at the Congress, in
addition to those already mentioned, included the
following:
Continents on the move. It is possible that there .is an
increasing separation of the American continent from
the European and African, at the rate of about one yard
per thousand years as a result of the continued bulging
of the crust and a further uplift of the mid-Atlantic
mountain ridge.
Where life began. It is probable that life did not ori¬
ginate in the sea itself but on the under-water clay sur¬
faces in estuaries and shallow bays where "chemical
evolution" took place for hundreds of millions of years at
a time when the atmosphere was poor in oxygen but rich
in hydrocarbons and perhaps ammonia. Increasingly
complex organic molecules were formed by contact in the
concentrated layers absorbed on the clay until amino-
acids resulted which then combined to give proteins
Which were able to duplicate their own molecules. After
that, organization of the proteins into cells became possi¬
ble and biological evolution could begin. The oxygen
in today's atmosphere would prevent such chemical evo¬
lution but the same process may well occur on the astro¬
nomical number of possible planets belonging to stars
other than the sun.
Older than fossils. The earliest fossils found anywhere
show that evolution must already have been going on for
long periods of time without leaving a trace. The expla¬
nation of this is that the earliest animals were plant-
eaters with soft bodies; it was the much later appearance
of carnivorous animals that forced the protective develop¬
ment of shells and skeletons which form fossils.
Equator stays put. It has been discovered that the rela¬
tively rich life in the ocean near the equator, where the
upward currents bring nutrients, has laid down a conti¬
nuous band of sediments around the earth which indicates
that the equator has been where it is now for some
500 million years. Consequently, the poles have not
Wandered about and some other explanation is needed
for glacial periods.
World map of fish foods. The value of a map of the
distribution of plankton, the microscopic plants and ani¬
mals that are the basic food for all higher sea animals,
in locating fishing grounds has been demonstrated. Such'
a map has been prepared for the North Sea by the
Scottish Océanographie Laboratory and has permitted the
transplantation of food fishes to better feeding grounds.
The preparation of a world plankton map to increase the
fish harvest was recommended since there are large areas
in the sea that are virtually "deserts".
Grunt of love. The study of the social habits of codfish
has revealed a grunting noise made by the male during
courtship which can be picked up by hydrophones and
used to locate schools of cod.
Strange forms of life. The evolution of queer and even
fantastic varieties of fish in the deep sea is explained by
the absolute and enduring uniformity of the environment
which permits mutation to proceed for milions of years
with no change in the weather, nutrients, or other condi¬
tions which might serve to eliminate forms that are
unable to adapt.
Giant eels 100 ft. long? The discovery has been made
in the tropics of giant eel larvae, six inches long instead
of the usual fraction of an inch. This may mean that
mature giant eels 100 feet long may actually exist and
CONT'D ON PAGE 8

The Unesco Courier. December 1959
UNESCO photos
CAPT. COUSTEAU'S
'SUBMARINE SAUCER'
Among the océanographie research vessels
which dropped anchor in the port of New
York during the International Océanographie
Congress was the Calypso of France, com¬
manded by Captain Jacques-Yves Cousteau,
Director of the Océanographie Museum at
Monaco. Captain Cousteau, author of "The
Silent World" and famous for his underwater
exploits, brought with him the strange-
looking items of equipment shown here.
Above, his "submarine saucer", a diving device
which can take two persons to a depth of
1,000 feet. Right, twin sleds, (nicknamed
the "halibut") which are lowered to the
bottom and dragged on the ocean floor.
Automatic flash cameras on sleds can take
colour shots at depths of more than a mile.

OCEAN DEPTHS
TERRA INCOGNITA
(Continued)
Blood types in fish distinguish
different groups of same species
account for the legend of "sea serpents". A large number
of species, including "living fossils", may yet be found
because the larger, swifter or more intelligent ones may
escape present methods of bringing them to the surface.
They may even be sensitive to the sound Waves used by
trawlers to locate schools of fish and thus evade capture.
Ocean level rising. Sea level is now at least 300 feet
below where it was before the first glacial age some
400,000 years ago, perhaps because of the accumulation
of ice on the Antarctic continent. But at the peak: of the
last ice age, about 10,000 years ago, the level of the sea
was about 300 feet below its present mark. Then
a sudden warming and rise in the ocean level occurred
and is still going on. If all the ice in the Antarctic
should melt by continued warming the level of the ocean
would rise at least 180 feet more to drown most present
coastal plains. This could happen within the next
10,000 years.
Blood typing of fish. In whales, seals, salmon, herring
and sardines different blood types can be detected that
distinguish various ethnic groups from others of the same
species. They can be tested with rabbit serum just as
human beings are. This permits the identification of
individual "populations", or schools, from others and
could be used to follow their migrations and perhaps to
explain their mysterious disappearance from fishing
grounds.
O Fish chemistry. Sea plants and animals produce a
wide variety of special chemical substances such as vita-
SEA-BOTTOM WORLD
Rocks of a sea-mountain photographed at
a depth of 1 ,094 fathoms (well over a
mile down) are found to be covered with
many minute animals and creatures.
Rocks shown here slope off to a yawning
abyss. Typical underwater "eye" used by
oceanographers to obtain records of life
in the depths is shown in photo right,
slung aboard U.S. research vessel Vema.
mins, antibiotics, growth stimulants and hormones which
may themselves be valuable to man and which, with fur¬
ther study, could explain the occasional explosive growth
of some varieties and also the catastrophic death of
millions of tons of fish, apparently by disease, at some
times and places.
The restless depths. Deep sea waters are not stagnant.
They are in motion with currents that have a speed of
about half a mile per hour in some cases and are accom¬
panied by turbulence. Objects dropped to the bottom
(including radioactive' waste) are certainly not dropped
into a stagnant, unchanging resting place. Academician
L.A. Zenkevitch of the Institute of Oceanology of the
U.S.S.R. confirmed this picture of restless depths of the
sea. His ten-year study of the hundreds of species of
tiny sea animals showed a constant vertical mixing of
ocean waters so that species that normally live at depths
below four miles can be found at all levels, even up to
the surface. Strong currents can be detected even in
the very deep trenches near the Kuriles and Marianna
island chains that sink a mile or two beneath the great
plains of the sea bottom.
Dr. Columbus O'D. Iselin of Harvard University, until
recently Director of the Woods Hole Océanographie Insti¬
tution in Massachusetts, U.S.A., reviewed the large num¬
ber of unsolved problems that the Congress had revealed
and predicted that, with the upsurge of oceanic research
that the Congress had certainly stimulated, vast new food
supplies would become available for the ever-growing
population of the earth. The present "hunting" of fish
will be replaced by "farming" when effective fences can
be devised to retain them, when "'weed" plants and ani¬
mals can be eliminated in favour of valuable varieties,
and when the growth of fish, both in size and in numbers,
can be stimulated by the effective fertilization of sea
water, probably by bringing up nutrients from deep
waters by control of the ocean currents.
He also predicted control of weather and climate
through an understanding and control of the ocean cur¬
rents. The economic, social and political problems raised
by such developments will be a challenge to international
law. The future of the oceans, he said, is a prime concern
to the United Nations and its Agencies, properly sym¬
bolized by the fact that this first international océano¬
graphie congress was also the first scientific meeting
ever to be held in the headquarters of the United Nations.
Photos © Lamont Geological Observatory

The Unesco Courier. December 1959
LABORATORY FOR
UNDERSEA RESEARCH
Since December 1958, the Soviet Union possesses a submarine, the Seven'onko, specially
designed for océanographie and fishery research. Equipped with TV cameras and devices
for studying underwater conditions (sea temperature, salinity, oxygen content and light
penetration at different depths), the submarine-laboratory has made special studies of under¬
water life: fish shoals and their behaviour, plankton, medusa as well as the radioactivity
content of the sea and the composition of the ocean bottom. Above, the Severianka, against
a backdrop of the Aurora Borealis. Below, scientists study results of deep-sea soundings.
Tiss photos by M. Red kin
