-N
Photo André Lestage

IS THE OCEAN IN DANGER?
by Nicolas Gorsky
Member of the U.S.S.R, Geographical Society
The amount of radio-active substances dissolved in the
waters of the oceans and seas is infinitesimal. The
rocks forming the Earth's crust contain a hundred
times as much radio-active potassium as sea water and
thousands of times more uranium. The radio-activity of
the sediment at the bottom of the ocean is somewhat
higher than that of the water above it. The concentration
of radium in the iron-manganese concretions that form
at the bottom of oceans and seas is relatively high, even
higher than in the underlying sediment, but the mysterious
source from which they derive radium has not been
definitely established.
28
Manganese and radium are to a certain degree related
and manganese apparently has the ability to extract
radium from the sediment; it is a fact that there is
always more radium on the bottom side of the concretion.
Radio-active substances in the sediment are probably
fission products of uranium, washed into the sea in solu¬
tion by the rivers.
What must be borne in mind is that the highly
diversified plant and animal life of the seas and oceans
is accustomed to a very low concentration of radio-active
substances. It is precisely from this quarter that a grave
danger has arisen.

It has not yet been established what doses of radio¬
activity are innocuous for marine plants and animals. It
is only known that fishes concentrate phosphorus and
zinc in their bodies, while molluscs and crustaceans
concentrate calcium, strontium and a number of other
elements included in radio-active fission products.
Two days after atomic bomb tests at Bikini atoll, the
radio-activity of the upper layer of water increased a
million times over the normal. Four months later the
radio-activity of the water 1,500 miles away was three
times greater than the normal. In thirteen months the
contaminated water had spread over an area of over one
million square miles. The artificially caused radio-activity
had decreased by this time until it was only one-fifth
higher than the normal but it could easily be detected
2,500 miles away from the source.
How old are the deepest waters ?
It is interesting to note the manner in which this radio¬
activity was dispersed through the ocean. Three long
strips of high radio-activity were discovered: one
stretched westward from the site of the explosion along
the North Equatorial current, a second dipped aWay from
the first to the southwest, while a third extended east¬
ward in a direction opposite to that of the Equatorial
current.
In the first and second strips, equal radio-activity was
found at a distance of 2,000 and 1,000 miles from the
atoll; in the third, the radio-activity at a distance of 750
miles was three times higher. In the case of the first strip
the ocean current played the major role; the second and
third strips are assumed to have been formed by radio¬
active dust borne by air-currents. According to Japanese
scientists, the concentration of radio-active elements in
the water after the explosion was considerably higher than
the safety limit.
The immediate and urgent task confronting science is
to study the dispersion of radio-active fission products,
and their effect on marine life, both plant and animal.
Due to the rapid development of the atomic industry the
problem of safely disposing of radio-active waste-products
has become urgent. In Britain, radio-active wastes are
in some places drained by pipes into the Irish Sea, while
at Oak Ridge in the United States they are drained into
the Tennessee River system. Some wastes in the United
States are buried in the ground or sunk in the deep sea
in special containers.
The sea water, however, will very quickly eat through
the walls of these containers and dissolve their dangerous
The Utiesco Courrier. July-August 1959
contents. Then, too, if scores, or it may be hundreds, of
containers with their sinister contents are being thrown
into the sea today, the number will rise to tens or even
hundreds of thousands in the near future.
There are deep places or trenches in the oceans,
particularly the Pacific. The average depth of the ocean
is about two and a half miles, but in these depressions
it reaches between four and five miles and in places up
to seven miles. Proposals are being made to use these
depressions as dumping-grounds for radio-active wastes.
This confronts oceanographers with the problem of
determining the age of the waters in the ocean depths.
Once purely theoretical, the question has now come to
have great practical significance. How long will it take
radio-active substances dissolved by the water at the
ocean bottom to rise to the surface? Will the process of
radio-active decay which is always at /work render them
innocuous before they reach the surface, or will they still
be sufficiently radio-active to poison the upper, productive
layers? It should be noted that the annual production of
the sea-fisheries (fish, crustaceans and molluscs) comes
to some twenty million tons, and that over half a million
boats are engaged in the industry.
There is not a gulf or sea that is not connected with
the oceans in a general system of water circulation. It is
impossible to localize or isolate the poisoning of sea water.
The map of the ocean currents on this page graphically
illustrates this unity.
Scientists hold widely differing views as to the time
required for the water at the ocean bottom to be renewed.
Wüst (Germany) has calculated that the cold, heavy
Antarctic waters, after descending to the depths of the
Weddell Sea, reach the equator in five years four months,
while Deacon (Britain) puts the figure at eighteen years.
At the same time Worthington (United States) holds that
the waters at the bottom of the Atlantic date back to
1810 when the climate became much colder, and have not
been renewed in the century and a half that has elapsed
since then.
The New Zealand oceanographers, Brodie and Burling,
have put the age of the Antarctic waters 150 miles to the
north of Scott Island at a depth of 8,500 feet at 2,500
years, and of the waters near Campbell Island at a depth
of 2,624 feet at 1,900 years. The New Zealanders used the
Carbon 14 method to determine the age of the water, but
others hold that there are a number of factors besides
time affecting Carbon 14, and accordingly that these
conclusions must be accepted with caution.
Oxygen miles down in the Pacific
THE OCEAN: AN INDIVISIBLE WHOLE. There is not a gulf or
sea that is not connected with the oceans in a general system of water
circulation (as map above shows).. In other words, the oceans and seas
are joined to form an indivisible wholethe World Ocean. It is impos¬
sible to isolate or localize the poisoning of sea water. When
radio-active substances are introduced into the ocean at any spot they
are dispersed for thousands of miles to contaminate an enormous area.
The Danish expedition on the Galatea and Soviet expe¬
ditions on the Vityaz found dissolved oxygen in
water from the very deepest Pacific trenches. It can
be confidently stated that water buried at the bottom of
the ocean for hundreds of years, let alone thousands, could
contain no oxygen. It would be consumed in a much
shorter time in various processes, both physico-chemical
(the oxidation of mineral substances) and biochemical
(the respiration of living organisms and the putrefaction
of dead ones) processes that are constantly at work at
the bottom of the ocean and in the water above.
The Danish and Soviet expeditions discovered various
forms of animal life at the bottom of the ocean trenches,
which had till then been thought to be void of life. These
animals included among others coelenterates, echiurides,
goloturians and bivalve molluscs. All these animals
consume oxygen continually and they would long since
have exhausted the supply in the water round them if
there were no currents.
What, then is the source, of the oxygen at depths of
up to seven miles? Up to now scientists have explained
the aeration of the bottom layers of the ocean as being a
consequence of the general circulation of the ocean
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

IS THE OCEAN
IN DANGER? (Continued)
water. In the Polar regions the cold, heavy water
submerges into the depths and slowly moves toward the
equator, bearing with it the oxygen dissolved at the
surface. But it takes scores of years for it to reach the
equator. The dissolved oxygen could hardly be preserved
for such ia lengthy period that is the weak place in the
hypothesis.
Some oceanographers consider that oxygen is carried to
the bottom of ocean trenches by turbidity currents. This
is the term applied to the avalanches and landslides on
the slopes surrounding the depressions. These are due to
earthquakes or other causes, and as they plunge to the
bottom of the depressions they carry along with them
large volumes of water saturated with oxygen. But
turbidity currents are only chance occurrences. In the
intervals between them life at the bottom of the de¬
pressions should be extinguished for want of oxygen. This,
however, has not happened during the millions of years
that the ocean and its trenches have been in existence.
Evidently the oxygen must penetrate to the depths of the
ocean in some other way.
Professor N.N. Zubov, the Soviet oceanographer, recently
suggested a new and more plausible hypothesis.
It seems that when volumes of sea water of different
temperature are mixed, the density of the mixture is
greater than either of the components. Being heavier
than the surrounding water, it descends to the lower layers
of the ocean carrying dissolved oxygen with it.
Perpetual motion in deep places
The Water in the ocean is not homogeneous; its tempe¬
rature varies both vertically and horizontally. What
is more, the water in the ocean is continually in mo¬
tion, neighbouring layers often moving in different direc¬
tions. In this way Water of different temperatures is being
constantly mixed and is sinking as it becomes heavier.
An equivalent volume of lighter water is displaced and
rises to the surface. This eternal process extends to all
the depth of the ocean, apparently penetrating to the
bottom of the trenches.
We do not know as yet how long it takes surface water
to descend to the ocean bottom, but evidently its movement
is relatively rapid since it retains dissolved oxygen.
Among the many depressions studied by this year's Soviet
expedition on the Vityaz was the Tonga trench, investigat¬
ed six years ago by the Danish expedition on the Galatea.
Measurements made this year igave a difference of 0.2° in
the temperature of the water.
When one takes into consideration the great accuracy
of the deep-water thermometers used by oceanographers,
one realises that this is a significant deviation indicating
the existence of what is probably a very slow but
continuous exchange of water between the bottom, inter¬
mediate, and surface layers of the ocean, even in the
regions of the deepest depressions.
The vertical circulation .Which is a consequence of the
mixing of the sea water and its increase in density, as
described by Professor Zubov, ventilates the deep layers
of the ocean and also raises to the surface a layer rich
in nutrient phosphates and nitrates, forming a basis for
abundant life. But this process will bring death if
pernicious radio-active solutions from the waste-products
of the atomic industry accumulate in the ocean depths.
In this connexion another phenomenon occurring in the
oceans and seas should be mentioned what is known as
upwelling. Due to winds, currents or the relief of the
ocean bed, deep, cold layers of water, rich in nutrient salts,
30
Photos André Lestage
rise to the surface in some regions along the continental
slope or along submerged banks. This phenomenon is
well known along the Atlantic coast of North America, the
California coast and the Western coast of South America
and Africa. The regions where upwelling occurs are
exceptionally rich in plant and animal life, including fish.
If the water rising to the surface should be contaminated
with substances dissolved out of radio-active wastes it iwill
mean the end of the highly productive fisheries in these
regions.
The oceans and seas are joined to form an indivisible
whole the World Ocean. No open part can be considered
isolated and cannot belong to any one country. Radio¬
active substances introduced into the ocean at any spot
will.be dispersed for thousands of miles and will conta¬
minate an area of millions of square miles. For that
reason, all questions concerning the contamination of the
ocean by radio-active substances, irrespective of their
origin or purpose, just as investigations into the effect of
radio-active substances on marine life, acquire in¬
ternational significance and should be solved through
friendly, concerted international scientific co-operation.
The rate at Iwhich the atomic industry is developing
shows that it is necessary to set about the study of this
problem immediately. Uncontrolled contamination of the
oceans and seas can lead to irreparable catastrophe
within ten to twenty years. The Ocean, that great and
inexhaustible source of food for man must be protected.
The Ocean is in danger.
