A LITTLE LESS NOISE, PLEASE
by M. H. Thompson
Louis Joyex-RTF
GIANT 'GOLF BALLS' studding the ceiling of a French broadcasting studio are one of the many kinds
of sound absorbing materials used nowadays in acoustics. Cheap and easy to apply, they range from
stone-like tile with the appearance of travertine marble, to wood fibre tile punched full of holes and blankets
of absorbent mineral wool rolled in long strips. Opposite page, general view of same studio ceiling.
To hear or not to hear... That is the problem.
Haven't you heard people say they couldn't hear
a lecture well because the acoustics were so bad?
These people wanted to hear. On the other hand, haven't
you heard people say they couldn't sleep a wink all night
because some noise kept them awake? (Maybe it Was
only a cat rubbing his whiskers.) At any rate, these
people didn't want to hear. Music from the Hi . Fi is
wanted while, at the same time, traffic noise is not.
Furthermore, loud noises that constantly assault our
hearing organs produce fatigue, while certain other
sounds are pleasant without our realizing just why. Phy¬
siologically the ear is built to take only so much noise.
Nature's sounds are usually muted the ripple of a brook,
the song of a bird, the mooing of a cow. ' Civilization's
are often the opposite the wail of a siren, the din of
traffic, the roar of aeroplanes in the sky. There are other
reasons too why we would preserve one sound and suppress
another. Hi Fi, for example, can be merely high finance
unless the high fidelity sounds are truly heard, which they
cannot be in many noisy rooms. The problem then is to
hear or not to hear, and involves a .knowledge of the
laws of sound or the science of acoustics.
Ancient Greeks studied acoustics
but a Frenchman coined the name
The word acoustics is from the Greek and means :'to
hear"'. Ancient Greeks were aware that sound
somehow arises from the motion of parts of bodies
and is transmitted by the air through some undefined
motion of the air and in this way, striking the eardrums,
produces the sensation of hearing. Aristotle emphasized
that in hearing actual ;hTötion of the air is involved.
28
Pythagoras in the 6th century B.C. studied the origin of
musical sounds and discovered that of two stretched
strings fastened at the ends the higher note is emitted by
the shorter string and that if one has twice the length of
the other the shorter will emit a note an octave above the
other.
Joseph Sauveur, who pioneered in the study of sound
in the early 18th century, first used the name "acoustics"
for the science of sound. Today the word means the
properties of a room which make it conducive to ready
and faithful transmission of sound. Also, as to present-
day nomenclature, acoustic refers to things distinctly
related to the functions of sound, such as acoustic absorp¬
tion, acoustic response, and acoustic spectrum (the range
of frequencies or wave lengths that are audible) . "Acous¬
tical" refers to associated things, such as acoustical tile,
treatment, engineers, instruments.
In the 19th century more work was done in the science
of acoustics. Lord Rayleigh learned something about how
sound is propagated, its speed in various mediums, such
as air and fluids and solids, and the determination of
pitch and its dependence upon frequency of vibration.
But even with his research, and that of Sauveur and a
few other men, acoustics remained a little known science
until after 1895.
Up until then a room with good acoustics was more or
less an accident. When such a room or auditorium was
found, architects copied the design to try to get another
room or auditorium with equally good acoustics. Some¬
times they succeeded and sometimes they didn't. But
about this time there lived a man Who was a member of
the Harvard University physics faculty, and he became
interested in the science of acoustics and began to study
more about sound absorption.
The new Fogg Auditorium of the University of that time

had been copied after the Sanders Theatre in Boston,
which had very good acoustics. But in spite of that the
Fogg Hall was a failure acoustically. So this physics
professor, W. C. Sabine by name, undertook to learn what
had gone wrong. He learned that the Fogg Hall hadn't
supplied seat cushions and when this was done the acous¬
tics were almost perfect. But his search and research
didn't end there.
As he learned more about the laws of sound, he began to
establish standards of measurements and units of acous¬
tic energy. He finally established a unit, later called a
"sabin" after his own name in recognition of his work.
It is the amount of sound energy lost to a room through
one square foot of open space such as an open window.
The energy is minute. It takes the combined power of
about fifteen million voices to equal one horse-power, a
unit of work equal to 550 foot-pounds per second.
In time Sabine found that the easiest way to work
with sound energy was to convert it to electrical energy,
where units and procedures of. measurement were already
well established. This changed acoustics from the realm
of architecture to electrical engineering. But until the
invention of the vacuum tube just before World' War I
minute values of electricity were extremely difficult to
handle or measure, and only the amplification of these
minute energies to measurable amounts made the study
of sound possible in all its phases.
Briefly expressing sound power in the electrical unit
of the watt, and remembering that the average light bulb
takes 100 watts of
energy, we find that the
human voice at con¬
versational levels equals
.002 watts, the clarinet
.05, the trumpet .3, and
the bass drum 25 watts
of sound power. While
the sound power of
energy is minute, yet so
enormous is the range of
the human ear that the
ratio between the intens¬
ity of the least noise
we can hear a baby's
breath, for instance
and the greatest sound
intensity we can stand
without pain or injury,
is one thousand million
to one.
Naturally such ratios
would require long
strings of zeros in any
calculation relating to
sound, so the physicist
and the acoustical
engineer use a sort of
mathematical shorthand, employing the logarithmic unit
of the decibel.
Much of the science of sound cannot be explained
easily to the average person. Information is buried in
technical journals of limited circulation^ or in textbooks
so technical that they serve only the acoustical engineer
or the advanced student of physics.
Confused noises bounced from
the walls, floor and ceiling
But the average person can understand something
about acoustics by comparisons. Most of us know
that we hear best in a quiet location out of doors.
Here voice or music is heard in natural beauty. This is
true because outdoor sound can travel freely in all direc¬
tions, unconfused by echoic repetition of sounds previously
uttered. In an enclosed space, however, the walls, floor
and ceiling do not absorb the sound as do the grass and
shrubbery and open sky of a quiet location outside. Sound
is reflected back to mingle in confused noise.
In fact, at a distance of more than a few feet we hear
not so much by the direct sound from the source as by
the sound reflected from room surfaces. And at the rear
of some auditoriums the reflected sound may be nine-
The Unesco Courler. September 1959
tenths of the total reaching the listener. In its many
reflections eh route the sound is changed in quality by
having more of some tones than of others removed or
absorbed by the reflecting surfaces. Thus sound plays in
our daily lives a part scarcely less important than motion
and light, and rooms present acoustical problems.
And the problems of suppressing unwanted sounds
without altering the quality of the wanted sounds are
scientific problems. For each room of known intended
use there is a correct amount of acoustic absorption at
each pitch of sound, which absorption will suppress
unwanted echoes while at the same time preserving
distortion the maximum of wanted sound. The
difference between this correct amount of absorption at
each frequency and that already existing in the room
itself its boundaries and furniture and occupants is the
amount that must be supplied by the acoustical treatment.
To suppress an unwanted
sound wavemake it work
For each occupied room there is a correct distribution
of the total acoustic absorption in the vertical, trans¬
verse, and longitudinal directions. It is essential
that absorption and reflection shall be so distributed as
to diffuse the sound as well as to absorb some of it. Cal¬
culation of these factors for the room on the drawing
board requires some ma¬
thematics and much re¬
ference to graphs and
tables already in exis¬
tence, and often involves
the construction of a
scale model. Precision
instruments and acqui¬
red skill are also used.
If the room turns out to
provide maximum dis¬
tribution of undistorted
voice or music with a
minimum of unwanted
echo, that room is said
to have good acoustics.
Perhaps more accurately
we would call it a quiet
room, a room free from
unwanted sound.
Not only are new
buildings constructed to
the laws of acoustics but
old buildings are worked
over at the advice of
acoustical engineers to
eliminate noise. For in-
stance, many au¬
ditoriums built twenty-five years or more ago have
echoes so intense that an ordinary voice on the stage
can't be understood more than half way back; and there
are places where the echoes from the back wall cancel
out the voice from the stage and make -music sound quite
unnatural.
Thus buildings, both old and new, are acquiring better
acoustics by both sound proofing and sound conditioning.
True sound proofing is keeping sound out; sound condi¬
tioning is absorbing sound that is already in. The first
requires mass, thickness and weight of the barriers; the
latter requires light porous material such as acoustical
tiles and boards.
In fact, noise control is possible because of the develop¬
ment of cheap and easily applied absorbent materials, and
these are of great variety, ranging from stone-like tile
with the appearance of travertine marble, through wood-
fibre tile punched full of holes, to blankets of absorbent
mineral wool rolled in long strips. The materials are all
indexed as to sound absorption at each of six octaves of
the piano keyboard, flame resistance, light reflection, and
weight per square foot.
Certainly there is plenty of choice but the very plethora
of available materials makes a proper choice more impe¬
rative. Moreover, the cost per square foot may range
from 25 cents to $1.50, which also makes choice the
wrong one expensive. So it is up to the acoustical
engineer to advise about the product too.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

LESS NOISE,
PLEASE
(Continued)
The drum: 500 times more
power than the clarinet
Scientifically, by the use of acoustical absorbent mater¬
ials, the energy in the sound wave is changed into some
form of work done so that the energy is no longer appre-
hended as sound. For instance, in fibrous materials the
filaments making up the tile or board are set in motion
by the sound waves and the energy required to make
them move is- work done. Hence this is energy lost to
the sound wave. Or movement of the fibres may cause
friction which is dissipated as heat and again the energy
has been converted into something else and is no longer
sound.
Because there are so many different types of sound-
absorbing materials, all good, and so many ways of
applying them, and because they vary from type to type
in the amount of sound they absorb at different frequen¬
cies (pitch) of sound, great care is necessary in choosing
the right material and its method of mounting for the
particular room, or occupancy, or expected sound levels
encountered.
Too much proofing leaves
the room hollow & boomy
For example, suppose a room is being designed for
orchestra practice. The instructor must be able to
hear each instrument as a separate sound source if
he is to correct mistakes of each player. Expressing the
sound power in the electrical unit of the watt, the drum
would release 12,600 times as much power into the room
as the human voice, and 80 times the power of the trum¬
pet and 500 times the power of the clarinet. Usually the
notes of the clarinet are several octaves above the drum.
Whatever acoustical material is applied in the room
must of necessity give a lot of absorption at the low fre¬
quencies of the drum if its enormous power is not to
drown out the higher pitches entirely. Since most
acoustical tile of the sort usually applied in stores and
offices is six to ten times as absorbent at high frequencies
as at low ones, they must be ruled out of this particular
job.
And not only is the selection of the kind of material
important but the placing of the material is just as
important. Also, the exact quantity of material is
necessary too. If too much treatment is applied, usually
the echoes are gone, that's true, but the remaining sound
is often badly distorted as to pitch, for most materials
reduce the high pitched sounds far better than the low
ones, so that what is left for us to hear is the low pitched
tones, and the room then sounds hollow and boomy.
one could hear double and triple, beats. Some bands
wouldn't play in the hall, so an acoustical engineer was
called in to solve the problems.
With electrical instruments he made exhaustive mea¬
surements of the sound and echoes, explored the hidden
structure of the walls and ceiling, and contrary to the
procedure followed in 99 % of such problems, specified a
ceiling hung 17 1/2 inches below the original one, in an
aluminium gridWork of channels, and put Into the grid
sheets of Fibreglas 2' x 4' in symetrical patches that
totalled less than one-third of the ceiling. He filled in
the rest of the area with sheets of sheetrocjk the same
size as the fibreglas, then had the whole ceiling painted.
SOUNDING OFF
BEHIND THE MIKE
Few background noises are the real thing on radio. A
crackling fire ma/ be only cellophane being crumpled,
something moving in the bushes merely twisted straw, a
body blow a fist punching a rubber sponge. Sound effects
can imitate almost any noise, but nothing can duplicate
the sound of water except water itself. Photos show (I)
diving and splashing effects; (2) staircase, half stone half
wood, used for effects. Staff is shown how not to fall
down stairs; (3) submarine commander (rear) shouts
instructions while actors lie on floor to give right acous¬
tics for scene taking place In dinghy at sea; (4) effects
men imitate creaking of ship's rigging during storm at
sea and breaking up of the mainmast while woman in
background plays effects records of howling winds and
raging seas; (5) a duel... with electronic firearms! Two
actors fire the "guns" but the shots come from the two .
little grey boxes being adjusted by effects woman; (6)
agile feet and hands are needed to start right sound
effects recordings listed under "train", "cheers", "drums".
All photos © BBC, London.
False ceiling cures the problem
of three orchestras in one
Thus each job has its own special problems for the
acoustical engineer to solve. It may be interesting to
know how one acoustical engineer solved the prob¬
lem of noise in one auditorium. This public auditorium
was built years ago. The room was 110 feet by 70 feet
with a ceiling only 20 feet high, and the stage on the long
side.
The echoes were so intense that an ordinary voice on
the stage couldn't be understood more than half way back,
there were three rows in the middle where the echo from
the back wall cancelled out the voice from the stage, and
the only expedient had been to put so much power behind
a loud speaker that the resultant roar, while annoying in
the extreme, did force enough clear sound out over the
floor that speech was at least partly intelligible. But a
dance band generated so much echo that in the corners
Also on the walls, in several selected areas that were
reflecting the measured echoes, he glued large panels of
fibreglas, 3/4" thick to absorb the sound. Now in the
auditorium, a listener can understand a low voice on the
stage at any place in the room provided the audience is
between 200 and 1,000 people. And dance bands that
have played there before and after treatment call it
"Wonderful."
Sound control does not apply to auditoriums only.
Corrections extend to commercial buildings too. As the
world became noisier the problem of sound control began
to apply in factories, in office rooms, and in busy public
places. Machinery has contributed to much of this noise,
including many typewriters in one room, or address-
ographs, for instance. The human voice has done its share
to make places noisy too. It has been ascertained that
noise made at a restaurant by 250 women having lunch
registered 75 decibels. Sound engineers have looked into
the household too and what they have found in the way
of noise is startling. In the ordinary house, radio, TV
sets, defective refrigerator motors, vacuum cleaners and
the like produce much unwanted sound.
30 CONTINUED ON PAGE 32

The Unesco Courier. September 1959
31

No doubt more and more in the future truly acoustical
architecture will be applied even to homes, especially to
those in the higher cost brackets, so that annoying noises
can be kept to a minimum. And perhaps some acoustical
engineer will devise some inexpensive gadgets that could
be mailed to home owners with instructions for use in
rooms much as the engineer uses equipment on his jobs.
Then a consulting-by-mail business could be built up to
help people with their problems of noise control. . The
home owner could draw a rough plan of the room, its
furnishings, and give the number of people usually
occupying it, etc. He would report the results of the
simple tests taken with the gadgets, and a suitable treat¬
ment could be recommended for a modest fee at probably
far less cost than the usual risky allover-ceillng coverage
so often used.
Acoustics are for 'do
it yourself amateurs
Until then, however, people who can't afford acous¬
tically engineered rooms can learn lessons from the
facts now known about the laws of sound to help
keep down noise.
A basic principle in reducing noise is to attack it at its
source. If the kitchen is the noisiest place, then an entire
ceiling of acoustical tile Will accomplish as much as a
40 per cent reduction of noise, thus vastly reducing the
amount available for transmission to other areas of the
house. The next step is to make a sound trap between
noisy areas such as the kitchen or rumpus room and the
bedrooms or study where quiet is wanted. This can often
be accomplished by covering the ceiling and upper two
feet of the walls of a connecting hallway with acoustical
material.
The range of waves known as
the electromagnetic spectrum
is like a long piano keyboard.
The string struck by each white
key vibrates at half the rate of
the string eight notes higher, so
that for each octave, frequency
doubles and wave length halves.
About 50 octaves, represent
the electromagnetic spectrum.
COI, London
In the living room a complete ceiling of acoustical tile
or other material would kill or distort the quality of music
from the radio and TV. Here acoustical "damping" of
sound must be obtained on two walls that intersect each
othernot on walls opposite each other. In fact, the
main causes of poor hearing conditions in such rooms are
parallel wall surfaces of plaster or plywood. So acoustical
material could be used on adjoining walls, not parallel, to
cut down noise. Or if one can't afford acoustical material,
if one wall' has heavy lined window drapes, one can
experiment with a heavy wool blanket on the adjoining
wall. A tapestry can be hung over the blanket. But
home owners who think a mere ceiling of acoustical tile
will solve their problem are more often disappointed than
pleased, for they usually ruin it so far as hearing phono¬
graph or radio music is concerned.
There are a few more pertinent facts about cutting
down noise in the home. If the telephone bell bothers
you, you might try cutting a little square of sponge rubber
to fit underneath it. The same trick will work for a
radio or TV set or a noisy typewriter. A pad of sponge
rubber under them will keep the sound from traveling
down the table and along the floor. However, it won't
affect the sound that comes out of the speaker. Radios
and phonographs should be set in a corner for best sound.
A sponge rubber rug under a carpet will cut down the
noise of clattering feet. Rugs themselves, as well as pads
under them, are a help in this respect.
In fact, the ancients used rugs, draperies, and pillows
to cut down noise. They didn't know why, but a lot of
the trouble comes when sound bounces about the room.
The noise hits a hard surface and flies off; in a different
direction. . Any type of soft covering that 'will absorb this
extra sound will make a big difference in personal comfort.
Curtains or drapes around the windows help. Weather
stripping on doors and windows help keep out traffic noise.
Shrubbery or a row of trees on the outside will help too.
Windows facing the street should be double weight or
plate glass to cut down noise. Double thick ceiling plaster
will cut out the noise of aeroplanes three times better
than rock wool heat insulation would do.
A little common sense, too, can protect your hearing
from jarring noises. Keep the radio tuned down, also
the TV. Wear ear plugs (made especially for noise) if
construction or other loud continuous noise is going on
near you. Anyone can have some extra pillow around to .
help absorb noise. For noise, according to the dictionary,
is unwanted sound and quiet is freedom from noise. And
nowadays "Quiet Please" can mean a lot more than telling
someone not to make noise. It can include the whole
gamut of acoustical data in all its scientific phases.
32
