EXPLORING THE FRONTIERS BETWEEN
INANIMATE AND ANIMATE MATTER
N. SEMENOV
Most people have not yet fully
realized what extraordinary
possibilities have been opened
up by science since the middle of
the 20th century, or the tremendous
power which it will achieve during
the next twenty to forty years.
Never before in history has such
a situation existed: mankind now
possesses a volume of power so
great that if it is used rapidly and
wisely it will be possible to satisfy
the needs of everyone. The speed
of scientific development outpaces
the rate of population increase, so
that as the major technical and
industrial problems are solved, the number of hours each
individual needs to work for the benefit of the community
will steadily decrease,
Just as machines have already liberated men from hard
physical labour, so electronic computers and, in general,
the devices of automation and telemechanics which are
making prodigious progress, will liberate man from such
mental work as is of an essentially, automatic and not
creative nature.
Computers of the near future will probably also be able
to provide systematized and partially analysed data.
Man's creative possibilities will thus be enriched to an
exceptional degree; his brain will no longer be burdened
with memorizing and pre-analysing a vast collection of
facts. Scientists, engineers and economists will thus be
able to concentrate their intellects to a much greater
extent on purely creative activities. Scientists will no
longer be confined to narrow specialization.
Chemistry, in particular, will be faced with some major
tasks. If existing chemical processes were more fully
applied to agriculture in food-poor countries, this problem
would soon be solved, not only for existing populations but
also for future ones several times greater.
The chemistry of the future will undoubtedly find new
and more effective ways of producing food. It will dis¬
cover the mechanism of the chemical reactions which
take place In an organism under the influence of fermen¬
tation, and will show how these principles can be applied
industrially; industry will then perhaps succeed in
achieving a biosynthesis of food products outside the
living organism, using as raw materials albumins and
carbohydrates of algae as well as the green matter of
plants, and perhaps also ügnine. Chlorella, for instance,
is an alga which is now attracting great attention in this
connexion.
Continuing research in this way, chemistry will perhaps
evolve new types of machines functioning according
to the principle of muscular contraction and, with a
high coefficient of useful work, directly converting
chemical energy into mechanical action. Most remarkable
of all is that chemistry, by studying the mechanism of
chemical reactions, has started creating new kinds of
materials which by now are familiar to most people
synthetic fibres, plastics and rubber, obtained through the
chemical treatment of petroleum and coal-tar. These are
already found in everyday use on a large scale, in building
and in the construction of precision machines.
Thanks to chemistry, the quality of these materials
will be progressively improved and their production costs
lowered so that they will become the basic materials of
the future, suitable for general as well as technical needs.
Let us remember that materials are the most stable
factors in, and mainstays of, technical progress. It is not
surprising that the various eras in the history are named
after the materials then used: Stone Age, Bronze Age,
.28
Iron Age. Some thirty to forty years ago, the develop¬
ment of chemistry opened up a new era that of synthetic
polymeric materials. Thanks to chemistry, -it will be
possible to give these materials any qualities desired, so
that they will have a wide range of uses, from clothing
manufacture to machine construction, in which they will
replace metals.
During the last few decades, chemistry has also scored
remarkable successes in the field of medicine, including
the discovery of cures for once-fatal diseases. A future
task of chemistry, in co-operation with biology, is to
ascertain the precise chemical mechanism of the action
of any particular substance on an organism. This will
give a new and powerful impetus to therapeutical che¬
mistry; one of the first results, in my opinion, will be the
solution of the problem of cancer.
Probably science's most important task is in the field
of chemistry: the interpretation, on a chemical basis, of
the transition from inanimate to animate matter, as well
as the explanation of the nature of heredity. I am
convinced that inanimate matter when it changes into
animate matter, acquires new physico-chemical qualities,
the discovery and explanation of which constitute chem¬
istry's most important undertaking.
The present development of biochemistry and biology
will lead, in the near future, to striking results and will
probably result in a scientific and technical revolution no
less important than that which. came with the discovery
of atomic energy. Everything possible must be done to
ensure that these discoveries are used for the good of
mankind, and not as in the case of atomic energy, for
harmful purposes.
Without entering the field of
science fiction, I should like
to mention some of the
spheres in which research seems to
me likely to yield promising results.
Reference has been made to the
problems affecting changes in our
genetic heritage, nowadays the
distinction between inanimate and
animate matter does not strike us
as such an unfathomable problem.
Although we are not yet at the
stage of creating life in fact we
are very far from doing so we are
beginning to visualise the hypo¬
theses which should reveal to us
just how life first appeared on earth.
Then there are all the problems of nutrition and of the
transformation of inorganic matter into assimilable
organic matter, which are bound up with the problems
of photo-synthesis.
Today we can point without hesitation to a number of
problems that have been solved by chemical therapy.
It has found a cure for once-deadly diseases which
are now practically non-existant or which are rapidly
becoming so. Two such examples are cerebro-spinal
meningitis, once the dread of all children's doctors, and
pneumonia, no longer the danger it once was for old
people. Already a century ago vaccination was used to
prevent smallpox and serotherapy afforded protection
against diphtheria.
The chemical agents now used in medicine, belonging
to very different chemical groups, but often having a
natural origin, include the very large group of antibiotics.
The healing action of these antibiotics is accompanied by
the creation of new problems to which many of us have
had to turn our attention. These problems are caused by
the sudden upsetting of the balance maintained by
microbes in the human body, and by the ensuing
phenomena of vitamin deficiency, particularly after oral
administration of antibiotics. But all these problems
are now under study. It is our business to solve them,
D. BOVET

The Unesco Courier. February 1959
'PUSH BUTTON' TOMATOES. Healthy
tomato plants flourish under artificial light,
are warmed by artificially-controlled tem¬
peratures and cooled by artificial rain at the
plant research laboratory of the California
Institute of Technology. They are rotated
on a revolving platform under bands of
varicoloured light in what is called the
"rainbow" room. A giant electronic panel
enables scientists to regulate temperatures
by simply pushing buttons. The plants have
been found to yield more than those grown
outdoors or In ordinary greenhouses.
USIS
BOY OR GIRL? For many years poultry
farmers have needed an accurate method
of sexing their day-old chicks. A new
instrument, the "Sexascope" claims to give
100% accuracy. The principle of the ins¬
trument consists of a specially designed tube
which is passed into the chick's vent. A
light shone through the tube illuminates the
rudimentary ovaries or testicles of the chick.
CO.I., London
29
