Great forest kingdom
of mediaeval Nigeria
BENIN
by K. Onwonwu Dike
Director, Benin Scheme, Dept. of History
University College, Ibadan, Nigeria
N
1 ^ owadays more and more African schol¬
ars working in African colleges are
helping to lift the veil which has so
long obscured the past history and culture of their continent.
One example is to be found in the Department of History
at University College, Ibadan, in Nigeria where, since 1956,
a team of researchers has been piecing together the story
of the great mediaeval Nigerian kingdom of Benin under the
leadership of a distinguished African, Dr. Onwonwu Dike,
Professor of History at University College. In the absence
I2
MOUNTED WARRIOR
and his steed was made by
a craftsman of the Benin
Kingdom in Nigeria where
remarkable techniques of
bronze casting were deve¬
loped many centuries ago.
More than a dozen of
these figures of warriors and
chiefs mounted on horses or
mules are known and may
be attributed to the 1 7th
or early 1 8th century.
Photo by Eliot Elisfon./rom " The
Sculpture of Africa ", © Thames
and Hudson, Ltd., London, 1 958
of written archives, the Benin researchers are experimenting
in a new historical technique: the abundant use of unwritten
sources such as archaeological evidence, oral traditions,
linguistic findings, ethnographic data and material artefacts.
It is hoped through intensive study of Benin's history and
culture to evolve techniques and general principles which
should guide scholars working on the history of non-literate
African peoples. Here, Dr. Dike tells the story of Benin,
an ancient Nigerian kingdom, its institutions and culture, and
the remarkable flowering of art to which it gave expression.

The Unesco Courier. October 1959
The Kingdom of Benin is undoubtedly one of the most
ancient Nigerian Kingdoms and before the advent
of Europeans perhaps the most powerful state in
Southern Nigeria. It remains the best example of an
African forest kingdom which originated and developed
away from all Arab and European influence.
From Nigerian standards Benin is very rich in oral
tradition and material artefacts. There are, for example,
the works of art in bronze, ivory, wood, iron, pottery and
other materials for which Benin is justly famed
throughout the world; Works which reveal a superb
degree of artistry and technical skills and which were
fully developed before the coming of Europeans. This art
was produced at the command of the Obas (Kings of
Benin) to commemorate outstanding events and persons
of their reigns and the results are, consequently, invalu¬
able historical records provided they can be properly
interpreted.
Finally Benin is one of the few West African kingdoms
that maintained contact with the trading Europeans
from the 15th century. The Portuguese arrived in 1485
and were followed by the Dutch, the French and the
English. Spaniards, Danes and Brandenburgers occa¬
sionally joined in the scramble for Benin pepper, ivory,
slaves and palm oil. But the contact between Benin and
Europe from 1485 to 1897 was largely commercial; and
contact of this kind produced business letters, ships logs,
personal letters, diaries and an occasional official report.
Since the 15th century persistent but intermittent efforts
were made by Roman Catholic Missions to establish
outposts in Benin and because of that contact missionary
archives may yield useful material on Benin history.
The work of the Benin scheme is in the early stages
and much of the history of the Kingdom still lies buried
in legend and oral tradition, illustrated in brass and
ivory, represented in existing customs and ceremonial, or
alluded to in the records of traders and missionaries.
When these sources are fully unearthed new light will
be thrown on the history of Benin. At this stage only a
very brief account of this mediaeval West African king¬
dom can be attempted here.
The ancient Kingdom of Benin, which maintained its
independence until 1897 (when it was overthrown by a
British punitive expedition) was situated in the tropical
rain forest of West Africa, bounded on the east by the
River Niger and the vast swamplands of the Niger delta,
on the south by the sea, to the west by the Yoruba king¬
doms of Oyo and Ijebu, and to the north by the savannah
lands where cavalry came into its own. When and how
the Kingdom ¡was founded can only be conjectured, for
the Bims were a non-literate people, and the first Euro¬
pean who visited them in 1486 found the Kingdom at the
height of its power with traditions reaching far into the
past.
Reigning king 35th of his line
Those traditions which the Binis still remember do not
refer to any general migration, but they agree that a
first dynasty of kings came to them from Ife (pro¬
nounced "eefay"). the spiritual capital of the Yoruba
peoples. Most of the stories concerning the twelve kings
of this first dynasty nave a mythical and magical cha¬
racter which throws little light on the history of Benin.
Their rule is said to have been ended by a revolt that es¬
tablished a short-lived republican form a government.
Before long a new ruler from Ife established himself
in Benin either by force or, as tradition maintains, by
invitation. He founded the dynasty of kings (or Obas,
as they are known in Benin) which has ruled until the
present day, the reigning Oba being the 35th of his line.
The names of all these rulers is still recited, with minor
variations, and the arrival in 1386 of the first European,
the Portuguese Joao Afonso d'Aveiro, is usually placed
in the reign of the 15th Oba, Ozolua. So that the most
probable date for the founding of the new dynasty would
seem to be sometime in the 12th century.
The greatest Obas united in their persons the spiritual,
political and military leadership of their people. They
enjoyed absolute religious and political authority over
their subjects, to whom their person was sacred and
endowed with magical powers. An elaborate ritual which
surrounded every act of the Oba, even his eating and
sleeping, kept him withdrawn in his palace save on great
ceremonial occasions, and thereby heightened the awe
of his people. As high priest of the nation, on his per
formance of numerous ceremonies in honour of the goäa,
the royal ancestors and his Own divine attributes hung the
fate of the harvest and the well-being of the nation.
Certain groups of priests participated in these ceremonies,
many of which involved human sacrifice, but there was
no priestly caste able to wield divine sanctions against
an Oba.
To his mystical powers the Oba joined a political abso¬
lutism limited only by his ability to impose his will
through force and religious sanctions. Justice, legislation
and the conduct of all political business within and
without the Kingdom lay in his hands. In practice, even
the ablest or most ruthless of rulers was compelled to
seek advice from important men in the kingdom and
palace and eventually a royal council emerged composed
of three groups of title holders.
A royal agent in every village
One group traced its origin to the first dynasty and its
seven titles were hereditary. The other two "town
chiefs" and "palace chiefs" owed their origin to the
reigning dynasty, were hardly ever hereditary, but were
bestowed by the Oba on whom he pleased and added to
or altered whenever political expediency dictated.
Besides advising the Oba, the members of these title
groups individually or in groups performed all ritual and
administrative duties.
The oldest order, the Uzama, installed the Oba and its
members were responsible for the conduct of wars, the
watch on a city gateway and the welfare of the heir to
the throne. Among the "town chiefs" were the second-
in-command of the army and the priest of the people.
The principal duties of the "palace chiefs" were to super¬
vise the royal wardrobe and act as personal servants to
the Oba. All title groups included warrior chiefs among
their members.
To make his power effective in the numerous small
towns and villages scattered in the dense forest, the Oba
appointed a title holder in Benin to be responsible for a
town, a group of villages, a single village or an even
smaller unit. It was the duty of this man to act as
intermediary between the Oba and his subjects in the
collection and delivery to the palace of the tribute of
foodstuffs for which the village or group was assessed.
He also acted as spokesman for his group whenever they
wished to communicate directly with the Oba.
The tribute of foodstuffs was not the sole economic
support of the elaborate court in Benin: large numbers
of slaves laboured for the Oba in Benin and in villages
and farm settlements throughout the Kingdom. He
gathered, too, a large revenue from his monopoly of the
most important articles of external trade, notably slaves,
ivory and palm ¡kernels.
Religion as well as the law guarded these privileges for
him. The advent of European traders made the mono¬
polies still more profitable, and usually they ensured that
the Oba was the richest man in his kingdom. Even so
an enterprising man could amass great wealth, and there
are stories of such men who lost their riches and their
lives at the hands of a jealous monarch.
Benin City, the capital of the Kingdom, lay within a
high earthen wall and deep ditch roughly rectangular
in shape and enclosing an area some three miles across.
Broad, straight avenues crossed the city from gate to
gate at right angles, lined neatly by houses built of the
local red earth in a distinctive style. An outer and inner
rectangular wall roofed with a thatch of leaves provided
living quarters and left in the middle of the house an open
sunken courtyard from which the torrential rain could
be drained, and around which the overhang of the roof
afforded the use of an open verandah.
Altars for the worship of one or more of an elaborate
pantheon of gods were incorporated in the house, the
choice of deity depending upon the predilection or duty
of the owner. Most important of the deities were a high
god, the god of the sea, the god of iron, the god of medi¬
cine, the god of death, the god of fertility and the god
of divination. But the most personal aspect of Bini reli¬
gion was represented in each house by an altar for the
worship of the spirits of the owner's ancestors, who were
daily propitiated, consulted and honoured.
The more important the man, the more elaborate would
be his house, so that the greater title-holders might own
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

BENIN
(Continued)
An advanced civilization
deep in the tropical forest
many buildings grouped together within a wall, but still
adhering to the general pattern. The palace of the Oba
which stood entirely apart from the rest of the city, was
the largest and most complex of all. In general plan it
consisted of a number of very large courtyards surrounded
by high Iwalls and Verandahs. Each courtyard [was
entered by a gateway surmounted by a high pitched
roof covered with wooden shingles and crowned |with
a large brass snake.
In the apartments around the courtyards lived the
palace officials, servants and the Oba's guard. Stables
for the royal horses were ranged around another court¬
yard, while in the inmost parts of the palace and
inaccessible to most visitors, were the quarters of the Oba
and his harem. Shrines and altars for the worship of
the deities and the royal ancestors were prominent
everywhere, and most were magnificently decorated with
carved ivory tusks and brass heads and figures of superb
workmanship. Brasswork illustrating the deeds of heroes
and kings also adorned many Wooden roof supports and
carved beams within the palace.
Tribute sustained a costly state
Brasswork, ivory carving, iron work, wood carving
leather work, weaving, drum making, etc. all neces¬
sary to the ceremonial of the palace was the specia¬
lized work of distinct and highly-organised guilds, each of
which occupied a particular street in the city. Each had
its own hierarchy of titles, a system of apprenticeship and
its own communal shrine. Some, especially the brass-
workers and ivory carvers, worked almost exclusively for
the Oba and a few important title-holders. Thus a high
proportion of the population of Benin City was engaged
in the service of the palace.
In order to sustain the economy of this highly cen¬
tralised and elaborate government, the Obas had to exact
heavy tribute from their subjects and ensure a steady
inflow of slaves. The latter need and the struggle to
extend the frontiers kept the Kingdom constantly at
war with its neighbours. As late as the sixteenth century
the Oba himself accompanied his warriors and directed
campaigns, and in this way carried Benin to the height
of its power. Later Obas were confined more strictly
to the palace and the conduct of war passed into the
hands of title-holders.
Benin warriors depicted by the brassworkers are
equipped with sword, spear and shield. At the beginning
of the sixteenth century the lure of firearms brought a
hard-pressed Oba to send ambassadors to Portugal, but
since the Papacy had forbidden the export of arms to
infidels, he had first to receive Christian missionaries.
For brief periods different Catholic missions seemed to
make headway in converting the princes and sons of
noblemen, they may even have begun to build a church,
then either the Oba ceased to need Portuguese arms, or
else he felt his supernatural power undermined, for the
priests Were compelled to leave.
It is noteworthy that the great period of Benin expan¬
sion coincided With the introduction of firearms by the
Portuguese in the reigns of Ozolua, Esigie and Orhogba.
Ozolua conquered- large areas in the Agbor, Kukuruku, Ora
and Ekiti districts. The Benin army occupied and spread
Benin influence in places as far apart as Idah, Lagos,
Akotogbo, Ikale and Agenebode. Portuguese missionaries
reported that they accompanied the Oba to the Idah war
in 1515-1516. Groups of Benin migrants fleeing from
oppression at home settled in various parts of Southern
Nigeria. Thus the Kingdom of Warri was founded by
Prince Ginuwa from Benin, in the reign of Oba Olua
and parts of the Niger Delta and the Urhobo country
were according to Benin tradition, settled by Benin
emigrants.
Within a century Portuguese traders were joined by
French, English and Dutch who bought thousands of
slaves for the American plantations as well as ivory and
pepper. It became necessary for the Obas of Benin to
increase the supply of slaves in order to feed this market,
and the fact they Were less successful in doing so than
many other West African states may indicate that the
power of Benin declined from the end of the sixteenth
century. Certainly artistic skill, as manifested in brass-
casting, deteriorated and the city itself was more than
once devastated by civil war.
Although the power of Benin evidently declined in the
last century of independence, the Kingdom did preserve
its ancient institutions and culture essentially unchanged
up to the time of its fall. In themselves these institu¬
tions and culture are Well Worthy of study, for they
present" us with a detailed picture of a tropical-forest
civilization which, despite the difficulties of environment,
evolved a complex political and social structure based on
a divine kingship whose sway extended over a great area.
Intrinsically too the culture merits our attention, for in
their best Work the craftsmen of Benin gave inspired
expression to the values which underlay their civilization.
THE FIRST EUROPEAN
to/Visit the Benin Kingdom
of West Africa in I486
found this realm at the
height of its power with
traditions reaching far back
into the past. Benin City,
capital of the Kingdom,
enclosed behind its high
earthen wall an area some
three miles across on which
straight avenues crossed from
gate to gate, lined by houses
built of the local red earth.
Right, a European impres¬
sion of Benin City depicted
in an engraving published
in Dapper's "Description of
Africa" in Amsterdam in
1686. It shows the "Oba"
or King of Benin leaving the
city in ceremonial proces¬
sion. (The present Oba is
the 3 5th of this same
dynasty). On the left are
buildings of the royal palace.
Musée de l'Homme, Paris
14
