HELMET MASK made by the Bobo Finga tribe of the
Sudan in West Africa is a single-piece wooden carving with
a surmounting female figure. The most important examples
of sculpture in the Sudan the vast belt of subdesert and
savannah country south of the Sahara, stretching" across
Africa from the coast of Senegal to the Red Seaare found in
the western part, in and to the west of the Niger River bend.

Ancient chroniclers
of West Africa's past
by Thomas Hodgkin
Photo Eliot Elisofon, taken from "The Sculpture of Africa"
& Hudson Ltd., London 1958
26
Thames
When people talk, as they still sometimes do, about
Africa south of the Sahara as "a continent without
a history", what they really mean is that Africa
is a continent about whose history we Europeans are still
deplorably ignorant. The reasons for this are complex.
Partly, whether we like it or not, we remain absurdly
ethnocentric: "history" for most of us means national,
or at best "European" or "Western", history; if any African
history creeps into our curricula, it is usually under the
oldfashioned rubric "the Expansion of Europe."
Partly, so far as West African history is concerned, the
documentary evidence for the mediaeval period say, up
to 1500 a.d. comes almost entirely from Arabic sources:
few Arabists have taken much interest in Africa south of
the Sahara; few Africanists most of them Frenchmen, or
Africans trained in the French tradition have been
equipped to handle the Arabic material. Finally, one
must admit, we are all to some extent still victims of a
colonial mentality: we find it hard to realize that Africans
possessed their own indigenous civilizations for many
centuries before we Europeans, beginning with the Portu¬
guese at the end of the 15th-century, conceived the idea
of trying to sell them ours.
Yet in fact extremely interesting civilizations existed,
from at least the 8th century, and probably much earlier,
in the region known to the Arabs as bilad al-sudan
meaning literally "the country of the black people", but
used conventionally to refer to the great belt of savannah
to the south of the Sahara, from the Atlantic to the Red
Sea. The major States of the western Sudan Ghana,
and later Mali, in the area of the upper Niger; Gao,
dominating the Niger bend; Kanem-Bornu, in the region
of Lake Chad had certain common characteristics. Their
wealth depended above all on the fact that they controlled
the southern end of the trans-Saharan trade-routes, by
which they exported to North Africa, and thence to
Europe, their main supplies of gold, as well as slaves, ivory,
and kola nuts, receiving exchange copper, cowries, cloth,
horses, cattle and beads.
These States developed relatively centralized forms of
government under dynasties of divine kings which,
^ in most cases, showed a remarkable continuity (the
Sefawa dynasty in Kanem-Bornu survived for a
millennium from approximately the middle of 9th to the
middle of the 19th century). They possessed a complicat¬
ed hierarchy of officials, closely associated with the palace;
an elaborate court ritual; considerable military forces;
and an administrative system capable in normal times, of
preserving public order and raising taxes in the outlying
provinces.
From the 11th century on, the royal families and ruling
classes of these States were converted to Islam either by
Almoravid pressure, or by the peaceful penetration of
Moslem missionaries from North Africa. As a consequence
of the spread of Islam, and the developing relations be¬
tween the States of the western Sudan and the wider
Moslem world through such focal points as Fez, Tlemcen,
Tunis, Cairo and Mecca West African centres of learning
grew up, above all at Timbuktu and Jenne.
Until the journeys of Mungo Park and his successors
Horneman, Denham and Clapperton, Laing and Caillé
at the end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century,
Europe was almost totally cut off from direct contact with
the civilizations of the western Sudan. Hence our depend-

OF DISCOVERY THROUGH
'COUNTRY OF THE BLACK PEOPLE'
ence upon Arabic sources for an understanding of the
histories of these States. These sources include not only
the works of Arab geographers and historians, from the
9th century on, . but also the writings of local West
African historians and chroniclers trained in such
centres as Timbuktu and also (though these are rare)
Arabic inscriptions.
How, for example, do we know that the ruling dynasties
of Ghana, Mali (or Kangaba, as it was called at this time),
Gao, and Kanem, were converted to Islam in the 11th
century? Partly from literary sources: Ibn-Khaldun, the
great 14th century Tunisian historian, sociologist, and
philosopher, gives a brief account of the Almoravid
conquest of Ghana, in 1076. But, in the case of Gao, the
evidence of the historians is supplemented by a remark¬
able series of dated tombstones of members of the Gao
royal house bearing Arabic inscriptions, discovered in 1939
a few kilometres from modern Gao.
The earliest of these bears the Hijra date 494, i.e. 1100
a.d.; the latest is dated 663 a.h. (1264/5 a.d.). The
earlier tombstones are beautifully carved in Qufic
characters, whose style has led Professor Sauvaget to
suggest that they were the work of craftsmen from
Almeria in southern Spain, the craftsmen, or more
probably the finished stones, being transported by camel
across the Sahara for the purpose. Others are clearly of
local workmanship. Here is a translation of one of the
inscriptions:
"Everything on earth is destined for annihilation.
This is the tomb of a very powerful king, of noble station,
who protected the religion of God, who trusted in God,
who carried out the commandments of God, .who fought
for the cause of God, Mama, son of Kma, the son of
Ai, known by the name of Omar ibn al-Khattab. May
God have mercy on him. He was called to God on Sunday,
17 Muharram, 514 a.h. (18 April, 1120)."
The Koranic text with which the epitaph opens, the
use of indigenous Songhai names (the Songhai are the
people of Gao) side by side with Moslem names, the
evidence of cultural and commercial ties between the
western Sudan and southern Spain during this period of
Almoravid rule all these bear out the historians' view,
that the 11th century was essentially the period When
Islam began to be diffused throughout the region.
From the 9th century on, the Arab geographers and
historians begin to provide valuable information about
the States of the western Sudan. For example, Yaqubi,
writing in about 872, knew of the kingdoms of Ghana and
Kanem, and described the gold trade of Ghana and
Kanem's trade in slaves with North Africa, by way of the
Fezzan. Ibn Hlawqual of Baghdad, in the first half of the
10th Century, travelled as far as the Saharan town of
Audoghast, on the outskirts of the Ghana Empire. Al-
Bakri, who wrote his Masalik wa Mamali, an account
of "Routes and Kingdoms", in about 1067, just aftsr the
Norman conquest of England, though he lived most of
his life in the Moslem State of Cordoba, in southern Spain,
was clearly well informed about the western Sudan.
He has given us the classic account of the Empire of
Ghana at the height of its power, before the Almoravid
conquest: The capital, consisting of two towns, about six
miles apart, one Pagan, where the King lived, the other
Moslem, containing twelve mosques; the court, where the
King held audience, surrounded by his horses in gold
trappings, his hounds, pages holding gold-hilted swords,
the sons of vassal princes, his viziers, who were mainly
Moslems, and the governor of the city; the army, consist
ing of 200,000 men, of whom 40,000 were archers; the royal
monopoly of gold nuggets, and the use of gold-dust for
currency.
Here again, the evidence of the Arab historians has
been supplemented by the archaeologists. We know, from
a 16th century Timbuktu historian, Hahmud Kati, that
the name of the capital of the Kingdom of Ghana was
"Kumbi". Recent excavations, carried out by MM. Mauny
and Thomassey at Kumbi Saleh in French West Africa,
about 250 miles north of Bamaka, have uncovered what
is almost certainly part of the Moslem town referred to
by Al-Barki well-constructed stone houses, a mosque,
and tombs outside the town. (See page 24.)
In some ways the most valuable of all the Arab sources
are the first-hand reports of the two as far as I' know,
the only two Arab traveller-authors who made extensive
journeys through the western Sudan: Ibn-Battuta and
Leo Africanus. Both were remarkable men. Muhammed
ibn-Abdullah ibn-Battuta was born at Tangier in 1304,
and spent the greater part of his life travelling through
the Moslem world of his day, visiting Arabia, Asia Minor,
Khurasan, India, China, and Indonesia, as well as West
Africa, which he reached in 1352. At this time the Empire
of Mali still dominated the western Sudan, and Ibn-
Battuta gives an extremely interesting and human account
of some of its institutions:
"The Negroes possess some admirable qualities. They
are seldom unjust, and have a greater abhorrence of
injustice than any other people. Their Sultan shows no
mercy to anyone who is guilty of the least act of it. There
is complete security in their country. Neither traveller
nor inhabitant in it has anything to fear from robbers of
men of violence... They are careful to observe the hours
of prayer... On Fridays, if a man does not go early to
the mosque, he cannot find a corner to pray in, on account
of the crowd... Another of their good qualities is their
habit of wearing clean white garments on. Fridays. Even
if a man has nothing but an old shirt, he washes it and
cleans it and wears it to the Friday service. Yet another
is their zeal for learning the Koran by heart..."
Leo Africanus, originally known as El-Hasan ibn-
Muhammad el-Wazzan el-Zayyati, was born at
Granada in Spain in about the year 1490. At the
age of about 17 he accompanied his uncle on a diplomatic
mission from the Sultan of Morocco to the court of
Muhammad Askia, ruler of the Gao Empire, which had by
that time taken Mali's place as the dominant power in the
western Sudan. He later followed this by a second
journey through Africa south of the Sahara. In about
the year 1518 he was captured by a Sicilian corsair, and
handed over to Pope Leo X, who baptised him with his
own names, Johannes Leo de Medecis, in 1520.
Thereupon Leo Africanus settled down to write his
famous Description of Africa, which was first published in
Italian in 1550, and provided Europe with its main, though
increasingly out-of-date, information regarding the States
and peoples of the western Sudan for the next two
centuries. His account of the flourishing commercial and
intellectual life of Timbuktu and other centres of the
Gao Empire at the height of its power remains of the
greatest value: -
"There are at Timbuktu numerous judges, doctors, and
clerics, all appointed by the King. He greatly honours
men of learning. Many books in manuscript, imported
from Barbary, are also on sale here. More profit is made
from the book trade than from all other branches of
commerce."
27
