CAN WE SOLVE OUR
TRAFFIC BOTTLENECKS?
by Henri Walter
The rapid and continuous growth of motor traffic
during the first half of this century has created a
major social problem in the second half. There are
now more than 100 million motor vehicles in the world,
operating most of the time in and around the large towns
and cities. Millions more are added to the total every
year, even allowing for replacements. Because of the
great concentration of urban activity, and the preponder¬
ance of the motor vehicle over other forms of transport,
traffic stagnation has for some years threatened the
world's larger cities.
Living standards everywhere depend more and more
on the increasing use of motor vehicles, and in many
countries two-thirds of all goods are now distributed by
them. So it is not at all surprising that streets designed
in and for an entirely different age of transport should
have produced a traffic situation that is already intoler¬
able and that unless bold remedies are undertaken, may
become rapidly worse.
Congested streets are responsible for an enormous
Waste of time and effort and, above all, incalculable human
suffering and misery through daily traffic accidents. In
the centre of London, where conditions are among the
worst in the world, the cost of traffic jams is estimated
at more than £200 million a year. Traffic studies made
in many countries have shown that by far the greatest
number of road accidents involving motor vehicles 75
per cent or more occur in built-up areas where all types
of traffic move in all directions. Ninety per cent of the
casualties among pedestrians also occur in built-up
areas.
Quite apart from the toll of accidents, present-day traffic
conditions in and about cities slow down production,
hinder ordinary commerce and, by creating high transport
charges, add materially to the general cost of living.
Already in the early 1920's the road traffic problem was
beginning to make itself felt in Europe and North America,
although the number of vehicles on the roads at that time
was but a fraction of what it is now. In the United
States, Italy and Germany the idea of designing roads
specially fitted to the needs of motor vehicles was develop¬
ed. The first of these special motor roads were the
American "parkways," built to provide safe, open routes
for fast traffic and attract drivers from the ordinary
overcrowded highways.
The U.S.A. uses the express way
Roads for the exclusive use of motor vehicles Were intro¬
duced into Europe by the Italians, but their early au-
tostrade made no provision for dividing opposite traf¬
fic streams. It was in Germany and Holland, and also in
the United States, that special motorways with separate
carriageways and controlled access Were built on a large
scale. The ¡German autobahn system, particularly,
became a model of efficient highway engineering.
By barring pedestrians, cyclists, horses and all slow-
moving traffic the motorway eliminates one of the principal
causes of accidents, namely, the mixing together of all
forms of road users travelling in different directions at
different speeds. Drivers get on or off the highway only
at specially designed safety junctions. There are no
crossings on the same level, all other roads passing over
or under it.
The controlled access highway is universally accepted
as a contributory factor to traffic safety, and in the past
20 years or so such roads have been built in many parts
of the world. While traffic speeds are much higher on
motorways than on ordinary roads, accidents are usually
.much lower. Comparison of accident rates on motorways
14
and ordinary general-purpose roads in Holland, for
example, has shown the motorways are up to 75 per cent
safer to use.
In North American cities, the building of controlled
urban motorways, or expressways, has had a remarkable
effect on the death rate in built-up areas. The U.S.
Bureau of Public Roads has estimated that the fatal
accident rate on highways built to expressway standards
is 2.8 per cent for each 100 million vehicle-miles travelled,
compared with 10.1 per cent for other roads in the same
areas carrying similar traffic.
For a time motorways were built primarily to speed up
traffic between important towns and cities. But it was
realised such "traffic pipelines" were needed most of all
in the cities themselves where congestion was far more
serious. American highway engineers who pioneered
urban motorways borrowed ideas, from the railways.
Trains proceed at fair speed without obstruction through
the most densely built-up areas because the tracks are set
apart, above or below street level. Why, then, argued the
expressway planners, should through motor traffic not
be similarly segregated ?
Brussels builds an aerial highway
So in large cities all over the United States, in Europe
Latin-America and elsewhere, spectacular motor
roads carry large volumes of motor traffic swiftly and
safely across crowded city centres. Elevated highways
stride on steel and concrete viaducts high above shopping
streets, market places, rivers, canals and railway yards.
Depressed motor roads run in cuttings, or underpasses, be¬
low bridges taJking the ordinary local street traffic. In
some cities the double-deck highway has been evolved as a
means of carrying the maximum flow of traffic through
an area where the land space is very restricted. Opposite
traffic streams run one above the other, while the covered
space under the decks is used as a car park.
In Brussels, where extensive street improvements were
made in time for the 1958 World Fair, cars now drive at
a steady 30 or 40 miles per hour from the outskirts of the
city into the centre. On the main road round the centre,
seven tunnels were dug at cross-roads to eliminate traffic
hold-ups. At one end of the road traffic suddenly "takes
off on to a 1 1/2-mile long viaduct built on stilts to
carry cars going in and out of the city above the "local"
traffic below.
The most spectacular tunnelling feat is a series of fly-
unders built at the Porte Louise junction. There, one
tunnel was ¡built at right-angles underneath another
tunnel. A third tunnel links up the other two, while the
existing road at street level is reserved for trams and
local traffic. Through traffic in any direction uses the
tunnels which have rid Brussels of what was once a
notorious blackspot for hold-ups.
At Rotterdam, too, one can drive through the city on a
fast sunken motor road giving through traffic direct
access to and from the fine modern highway tunnel under
the River Maas. And in Warsaw the new east-west traffic
route passes in a series of tunnels under the old city
centre. These are just examples from a large number of
cities in Europe which are tackling their traffic problems
in a constructive way by building new roads to fit present
and future needs.
Every road userthe pedestrian, cyclist, motorist or
commercial driverbenefits by the segregation of through
traffic from the local, stopping traffic. Street accidents
are materially reduced by the easing of congestion in busy
shopping centres, while such essential local traffic as

- _, unmit, ¿¿¿i tmsffjy - -a a r .', *s-jr
- W« wHHm*llllft ^
The Unesco Courier
ffl 	
June 1959
&** ^
USIS
KEEPING OUT OF TOWN. There are now more than 100 million motor-vehicles in the world and most of the time they are using
the streets of large cities. In Los Angelesone of America's fastest growing citiesthe authorities have found one answer to
the problem of keeping as many vehicles as possible away from the central areas. They have built a new business centre (above)
about six miles away from the overcrowded streets in the heart of the city and have provided it with parking space covering 14 acres.
passenger vehicles and tradesmen's delivery vans can
operate more efficiently and economically.
While traffic segregation goes a long way towards re¬
moving congestion in cities, the problem of the parked
vehicle still remains. In every large city or market
town more and more cars converge oh the centre each
working day. Available parking space is outgrown and
vehicles parked at the kerbside greatly reduce a street's
traffic capacity and indirectly cause accidents.
The problem that municipal authorities face is how to
provide sufficient off-street parking in or near to built-up
city centres. One solution is the multi-storey parking
garage which accommodates the maximum number of
vehicles on a minimum of ground space and affords drivers
quick and easy parking. Such garages have been develop¬
ed with success in a number of European and American
cities.
Managements of large city stores are finding it
worthwhile to ¡provide convenient parking accommodation
for customers who drive in from the surrounding suburbs
or outlying districts, and in America the tiered parking
terrace is becoming something like a standard annexe to
the leading departmental stores. One such store in Salt
Lake City, for example, has reported an increase of
nearly 20 per cent in sales since it built on a parking
terrace for 500-600 cars five years ago. According to the
management, each car space is Worth an extra 3,000
dollars worth of trade a year.
One of the world's largest store parking garages was
recently opened in the central shopping area of London.
Attached to a famous departmental store, the garage
accommodates 1,000. cars on seven floors, reached from
street level by a continuous ramp. There is direct access
for shoppers from each parking floor into the store and
the basement of the new building serves as an under¬
ground marshalling yard for the store's own fleet of goods
delivery vehicles.
Coventry centre of the British motor manufacturing
industry like Rotterdam, suffered wholesale destruc¬
tion through bombing raids in the last war. In both
these cities, which have been extensively replanned and
rebuilt, "traffic-free" shopping streets have been develop¬
ed. In this new conception of city planning, store pre¬
mises are served by rear-access roads and the usual street
carriageway in front of them is replaced by spacious paved
areas, laid out with gardens and ornamental features.
Arcaded footpaths and pedestrian subways are provided
to allow families to shop in safe and pleasant conditions.
The traffic-free shopping centre is another and very
important contribution towards the reduction of street
accidents in busy, congested cities and is likely to be
developed on a world-wide scale in the future.
15
