ILO LAUNCHES WORLD SURVEY
OF FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
On December 10th Human Rights Day the world
Will celebrate the 11th anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations in 1948. This
year the special theme chosen by the U.N. for Human
Rights will be the Right to Freedom of Association and the
work of the International Labour Organization.
The promotion of human rights is indeed basic to all
the Work of the ILO. Freedom of opinion and expression,
freedom of peaceful assembly and association, freedom
from arbitrary arrest, detention or exile, the right of both
sexes to equal treatment in professions, the right of young
people to be protected from exploitation, the right of
migrant workers and the physically handicapped to social
justice and security all these- are of fundamental im¬
portance for the fulfilment of the objectives of the ILO.
In the past few years, the ILO has given particular
attention to three major fields of direct interest to labour:
1) trade union rights and freedom of association, 2) forced
labour, 3) discrimination in employment and equal pay
for equal work.
Since the adoption by the International Labour Confe¬
rence of the two basic international instruments defining
the standards relating to freedom of association: the
Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to
Organize Convention, 1948, and the Right to Organize and
Collective Bargaining Convention, 1949, the ILO has sought
to secure universal acceptance and application of these
standards. The response has been encouraging. The 1948
convention has now received 36 ratifications and the 1949
convention 40, and these ratifications have come from
countries in all parts of the world, with different eco¬
nomic systems and in all stages of industrial development.
The most significant new development, however, is the
launching this year of a world-wide fact-finding survey
into conditions relating to freedom of association including
on-the-spot studies in different countries.
The first country to invite the ILO to carry out its
freedom of association survey was the United States. The
invitation was announced last year by James P. Mitchell,
Secretary of Labour, when he spoke in support of a reso¬
lution on human rights adopted by the ILO conference.
The survey was launched in March 1959 when an ILO
mission visited the United States on a four-month study
ending in June.
The second country to invite the ILO survey mission is
the Soviet Union. The survey team, which left Geneva for
Moscow on August 24, is headed by Mr. John Price, chief of
ILO's Division of enquiry into trade union freedom. The
mission is now visiting the chief industrial, agricultural
and commercial centres of the Soviet Union including
Leningrad, Kiev, Odessa, and Minsk, and will also study
trade union activities in the Caucusus, the Urals, as well
as those in the Soviet Republics of Asia and Siberia.
The ILO survey is designed solely to elicit the facts in
an objective manner and not to relate those facts to spe¬
cific allegations or to pass judgment upon them in general
terms. Referring recently to other governments indicating
their willingness to co-operate in the world survey, ILO's
Director-General David A. Morse said: "This, I feel, is a
significant advance in international action to promote
universal respect for human rights."
FROM THE UNIVERSAL
DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS
Article 22
Everyone as a member of society, has the right to
social security and is entitled to realization, through
national effort and international co-operation and in
accordance with the organization and resource of each
State, of the economic, social and cultural rights indis¬
pensable for his dignity and the free development of his
personality.
Article 23
Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of
employment, to just and favourable conditions of work
and to protection against unemployment.
Everyone, without any discrimination, has the right to
equal pay for equal work.
Everyone who works has the right to just and favour¬
able remuneration insuring for himself and his family
an existence worthy of human dignity, and supplemented,
if necessary, by other means of social protection.
Everyone has the right to form and join trade unions
for the protection of his interests.
Article 24
Everyone has the right to rest and leisure, including
reasonable limitation of working hours and periodic holi¬
days with pay.
