DRIVERLESS TRACTORS: THE LATEST
THING IN MECHANIZED FARMING
£S2s*^
by B. W. Golding
Today new methods of mechanization and automation are giving a tremen¬
dous boost to agricultural efficiency, making the farmer's job easier
and more profitable. Better still, they point the way to a solution of food short¬
ages brought on by a massive and ever-accelerating increase in the world's
population.
The whole world depends upon the farmer whether he grows wheat in Kansas,
coffee in Brazil or cotton in Egypt. Since the start of this century, thanks to
the invention of new kinds of farm machinery and the willingness of farmers
to adopt them, agricultural methods have changed out of all recognition.
In the U.S.A., for example, between 1938 and 1958, farmers more than trebled
their ownership of tractors to a total of 4,700,000. Since 1945 they have increased
the number of newer work-saving machinery by 1,200%, investing over 17,000
million dollars in combines, cornpickers, pickup hay balers, field forage har¬
vesters and other machinery. Now, taking another big step from mechaniza¬
tion to automation in the raising of animals and fowl they are copying the
assembly line techniques of industry.
One of the most striking examples is the giant "production line" for eggs
of a U.S. layer-breeder. whose hens are kept in individual cages, feed from a
continuously filled feed trough on one side and drink from a fountain on the
other. They drop their eggs on an inclined wire floor and these roll out through
an automatic counter onto a conveyor belt that takes them to a human sorter
who boxes them. One man can easily take care of 7,000 birds with an output
of 4,000 eggs a day.
Farming, the greatest industry in the world, is now adopting techniques which
have proved their worth in other industries. More and more ways are being
found to use electricity in farming, and research in this field has made pos¬
sible the development of such remarkable devices as the British experimental
automatic farm tractor described in the following article.
24
A farm tractor without a driver,
which sets out from the farm¬
yard, makes its way round the
field where it performs tasks automa¬
tically, and finally comes to a halt
back at its starting point, was seen
recently at Sonning Farm, near Read¬
ing in the South of England.
The demonstration was staged
jointly by the Farm Mechanization
department of the University of
Reading and the British Electrical
Research Association, which has its
rural electrification field station at
Shinfleld, near Reading. The two
groups are collaborating in this and
other research involving the use of
electricity in agriculture and horti¬
culture.
The tractor is a standard model but
it is fitted with special coils of wire
"search" coils which are mounted
at the front of the machine a few
inches above the ground. These coils
pick up signals from a current-
carrying wire which can be laid on
the ground or buried just below the
surface. The current is alternating
and is supplied from a small genera¬
tor, at a low voltage so that there is
no danger of electric shocks being
received by the field workers.
The search coils receive signals
from this directing wire and, through
a controlling circuit, operate the
steering of the tractor by means of

The Unesco Courier. April 1959
The time when a farm tractor
¿m\ m&' * will continue to work unattended
^A * ^ at night while the farmer sleeps
^íár\ is perhaps not so far off as one
might imagine. In Great Britain
the Farm Mechanization Depart
1 P^^^^B^^^fc ment of Reading University has
already developed a system of
WUfl WËTÈSiF' automatic control which enables
f^9[ fl^ JwvKr^l K^J ^B """"^^H mm\. a tractor to carry out pre-selected
mtym PS^*^saÉ A tasks without any human super
vision. At a recent demonstra¬
tion the machine set out from
the farmyard, crossed a road,
: obeying red and green traffic
control lights, passed through
B ' LLflK - ^sS* a gate, then made a circuit of
a field, distributing fertilizer or
I * WT 1 dropping off bales of hay at
ür 1 HI l1
kflr ^B BfA ^B Bfv/ Yl
selected places. Photo left, shows
the driverless tractor being fitted
with auto-controls; far left, a
trial run during research into
^H ^ft wTW1. * ^tt^il the use of automatic controls.
^ fr'n ~Jm*
W* Am m\ Photos Central Office
of Information, London
solenoid-operated hydraulic valves
and a double-acting hydraulic ram.
Movement away from the wire pro¬
duces a stronger signal in one search
coil .than in the other; an out-of-
balance is created and the effect is
to correct the steering to bring the
machine back "on course". In this
way the tractor is made to follow,
closely, the path traced out for it,
while signals passed along the wire
can stop it, or can make it do a num¬
ber of simple jobs. All this is achiev¬
ed without any human supervision;
there is no radio control and no press¬
ing of buttons.
There is a telescoping bumper
mounted in front so that, if the trac¬
tor collides with something, the
engine is shut off by the movement
of the bumper closing contacts in the
electrical control circuit. At the
demonstration, the machine started
out from the farmyard, passed
through a gate, across the roadway
obeying red and green traffic control
lights passed through the field gate
and then made a circuit round the
field distributing fertilizer or drop¬
ping bales of hay at selected places.
It also sounded its horn automatically.
The University and the E.R.A. have
worked out this device as the first
step towards a much fuller system of
automatic operation of machines in
the field. It is only a beginning: a
good deal more research will be need¬
ed to follow out the succeeding steps
which may lead one day to automa¬
tic ploughing, cultivating, harvesting,
seeding, hoeing and other jobs.
At present, the performance is
confined to a very simple routine in
which the machine moves along a par¬
ticular route and performs a number
of pre-selected tasks. Even so, a
considerable saving in labour could
be achieved by dispensing with a
tractor driver when carting silage or
collecting grain from a combine har¬
vester and taking it back to the
farmyard for unloading. Of course,
the tractor has to be fitted With the
search coils and hydraulic controls,
and the directing wire has to be laid
out. But these adjuncts, with the
generator for the controlling signals,
are not very expensive items and the
power needed for the control is so
small that costs are negligible.
Another obvious advantage of a
driver-less tractor is that it can be
used for carrying out noxious or
dangerous operations, such as spread¬
ing toxic weed killers or carting the
radio-active materials which may be
employed if certain techniques now
proposed are adopted.
One can also foresee the develop¬
ment of a self-navigating device
allowing the tractor to move away
from the wire, with perhaps a
magnetic tape record which the
tractor will "play" to itself to guide
its more complicated motions and
conduct it back to its shed for the
night. But need it stop at night?
Could it not go on with its work while
its owner slept?
These may seem fanciful ideas but
there is no reason why automation,
which is becoming so much fashion
in industrial processes, should not be
adopted on the farm. Indeed, there
are very good reasons why it should.
Labour saving in agriculture is
becoming increasingly important in
the more industrialized countries
where farm workers are continually
drifting away to other industries.
And there is a need to allow standards
of living to rise in the countries which
are less developed industrially, by
releasing agricultural workers for in¬
dustrial work. Increased productivity
is the key to advances in this direc¬
tion.
Automatic operation in poultry
keeping by the use of a travelling
"canteen" bringing food to hens in
laying batteries and in pig rearing,
by the use of automatic feeding, air
conditioning and cleaning, have
already been introduced. Automation
in the field is certainly more difficult
to accomplish than in fixed indoor
installations, but its potentialities are
perhaps even greater.
25
