SMOG
A WORLD PROBLEM
WITH MANY ANSWERS
by A.J. Haagen-Smit
Professor of Biochemistry, California Institute of Technology
From time to time we hear that soon tnere will no
longer be room for our crops, no fuels to burn, no
water for irrigation, and last, but not least, no air fit
to breathe. Such statements are usually countered by a
blind confidence in the accomplishment of the engineer or
inventive genius. Fortunately, each time something has
been done which postpones the evil day. Nevertheless,
this warning cry is needed. It is essential that we start
working before it is too late, and great harm is done to
our existence.
There is no doubt that our fossil fuels will be exhausted
at some time, perhaps only two or four generations from
now. Already there is a much larger supply of fuel in
sight in the form of atomic energy, but this energy has
not been made available without considerable effort by
scientists and engineers. The same is true for our water
shortage. Tremendous engineering projects have been
constructed, and research is going on to prepare fresh
water from sea water. In the field of food technology
efforts are continuing to obtain the most efficient use of
land, and production of synthetic food draws nearer.
The air we breathe is a part of our diet, and there is
every reason to be as particular about quality of the air as
we are about our food. The amount of air we inhale per
day is in the order of 30 cubic feet, weighing about three
pounds. An air pollutant at a concentration of only one
part in a million adds one milligram to our daily diet, and
such additions, when toxic, might have serious conse¬
quences. Usually we are not too concerned about the
possible toxic properties of the air, and only when acute
symptoms are noticed do we demand some action.
Such circumstances have arisen in Donora, Pennsyl¬
vania, in' the Meuse Valley in Belgium, in Poza Rica,
Mexico, in London, and, since the war years, in Los
Angeles. In Donora, as in Belgium, the causes of the
discomfort were the release of sulphur oxides, metal dusts,
and perhaps fluorides. In Mexico it was a wave of
hydrogen sulphide which killed some twenty people.
No poisoning but torrents of tears
With the rapid growth of cities and the increased
density of population, air pollution problems have
become quite general all over the U.S.A. There was
a time when Pittsburgh was one of the blackest cities in
the United States. Due. to the burning of soft coal, soot
accumulated everywhere on buildings, as well as in the
lungs of the people. Today the black colour of Pittsburgh's
famous landmark, the Cathedral of Learning, slowly
begins. to wash down.
Los Angeles has its own brand of pollution, and although
no sign of acute poisoning has yet been observed, living
conditions are nevertheless highly disagreeable at times
because of lachrym'atory effects and irritating chemical
odours. The same circumstances which made the Los
Angeles basin an ideal place, to live also made it vulnerable
to the development of a first-rate air pollution problem.
It is surrounded by high mountains and most of the time
the pollutants drift slowly back and forth over the basin
impelled by alternating sea and land winds.
The situation is aggravated by an inversion condition
which holds the pollutants close to' the ground. Almost
everyone has seen such conditions when he has looked
at the early morning haze covering the meadows. Usually
such an inversion disappears when the air near the ground
warms up. In the Pacific Coast area, where the ground
layer of colder air is often quite pronounced, the
condition may persist for many weeks. In this way the
pollutants become trapped, and reach concentrations
which cause concern to the Public Health officials.
The nature of the pollution problem in Los Angeles is
now well established. Formation of the typical smog
symptoms, such as eye irritation, plant damage, severe
rubber cracking and brownish haze is no longer a
mystery. It has been shown that the major culprit is
the emission of large quantities of organic material and
of oxides of nitrogen. When the sun shines on this
mixture, ozone and eye irritating substances are formed.
A muffler for every automobile
As soon as these facts were established, a thorough
checkup was made on the sources contributing to
this smog reaction. It was found that the petroleum
industry, through evaporation losses, contributed a
substantial part of the hydrocarbons to the atmosphere.
The major part of these sources are, at present, controlled.
There is, however, a much larger source the automobile.
In the Los Angeles basin, two and one-half million
automobiles are polluting the air daily with about
1,000 tons of hydrocarbons. This large emission is
caused by the incomplete combustion of the fuel in the
engine cylinders, and amounts to seven to eight per cent
of the petrol consumed in the Los Angeles area. The
oxides of nitrogen are formed from nitrogen and oxygen
in the air in all high temperature combustions in the
burning of natural gas and oil, as well as of petrol. The
consumption of all these fuels has increased in proportion
to the phenomenal population growth of the area, and so
has the amount of oxides of nitrogen formed. At present,
it is estimated that six hundred tons are produced daily,
of which two-thirds have to be credited against the
automobile and one-third against oil and gas burning.
Efforts are therefore being made to produce exhaust
mufflers which burn the residual gases completely to
carbon dioxide and water. Although promising ex¬
perimental units have been produced, there is still a long
way to go before the exhaust burner becomes a standard
item on the car, just as the windshield wiper is today.
Research and development towards control of emission of
the other partner in the smog reaction, the oxides of
nitrogen, is still in its infancy, but it is hoped that' their
concentration in exhaust gases may be reduced through
catalytic devices or by prevention of their formation.
While most of the typical Los Angeles smog symptoms
will be reduced by the control of hydrocarbons and
nitrogen oxides, there are still large quantities of materials
to be controlled, which, in other areas, have given rise to
objectionable conditions. Among those we should mention
dust and smoke particles. A concentration of six million
people, through their daily activities, produces large
amounts of ordinary smoke in a densely populated area.
Old-fashioned methods of trash disposal have to be
abandoned and modern methods of
complete incineration substituted. Even
more desirable are cut-and-fill dumps,
which not only dispose of trash most
efficiently, but assist in land reclamation

The Unesco Courier. March 1959
PACIFIC
OCEAN
EYE IRRITATION % of days with eye irritation
less than 5% of the days
IJTl 5% - 10% of the days
10% -20% of the days
20%-30% of the days
5§§§ 30% -40% of the days
more than 40% of the days
Air Pollution Control District, Los Angeles
SMOG-INFESTED BASIN of Los Angeles has its own brand of air pollution which causes eye irritation, crop damage and disturbing
chemical odours. The city is surrounded by high mountains and most of the time the pollutants drift back and forth across the basin
pushed by alternating sea and land winds. Some six million people are concentrated here. Diagrams show how much eye irritation and
plant damage was caused in the Los Angeles area during 1956 and 1957. Since 1953 crop damage has been $3 million a year.
PACIFIC
OCEAN
*"aj
PLANT DAMAGE % of days with plant damage
Sensitive test plants damaged on.
I I less than 20% of the days
[llllll 20% -40% of the days
40% -50% of the days
I 50% -60% of the days
jJv^ more than 60% of the days

Olinp A WORLD PROBLEM
OlVlUb WITH MANY ANSWERS
(Continued from page 8)
as well. Smoke is pouring out of a number of automobiles,
and many citizens will be thankful when persistent
violators of this kind are forced to have a piston ring
job done on their old automobiles. Diesel engines, foun¬
dries, steel mills and many others contribute dust and
smoke particles to the air. Means for the control of these
sources are known, and it is only a question of how badly
clean air is wanted, and whether the people are willing
to pay the price.
Acute problems, such as that in Los Angeles, - have
focussed attention on cleanliness of the air, and have
stimulated a great deal of interest all over the U.S.A.
Symptoms of Los Angeles type smog, such as typical crop
damage, have appeared in other metropolitan areas in
the United States, as well as in Europe. Unusually high
ozone concentrations have been measured in the San
Francisco and San Diego (California) areas, and this type
of air pollution is bound to increase, making its entry
when some of the more common types of pollution with
soot and sulphur dioxide begin to disappear.
Inversion conditions, while prevalent on thé Pacific
Coast, may appear elsewhere at less frequent intervals
and since no one is prepared for such attacks, disasters
develop, as in Belgium and Donora. To avoid such
happenings it is necessary to guard against unnecessary
pollution of the air at all times. The efforts spent in
cleaning the air are by no means to be considered as
waste. On the contrary, the materials which used to go
into the air are often valuable. In addition, corrosion
problems are solved, maintenance costs become less, and
fire hazards diminish.
No wonder that at the present time U.S. Government
agencies, Public Health officials, as well as private
organizations and universities have large program¬
mes under way to investigate air pollution. These
students of air pollution are faced with an overwhelming
number of problems.
Every reduction in the harmful emissions from the
industrial plants is but a partial one, and a small
percentage of the pollutants still escapes to the air. The
reduction in the pollution from automobiles through
exhaust devices or improvements in engine performance
will probably be, in practice, not much better than
seventy-five per cent. With the present increase in the
number of automobiles, ten or twenty years qf increasing
automobile population would practically wipe out all our
gains. At that time, however, a further reduction in
.emission will be considerably more difficult and expensive.
Air pollution control measures for industry and the
automobile have to be refined to keep up with the
increasing population. The study of means of controlling
the emission of pollutants, and the development of' equip¬
ment and instrumentation, will be a steady diet at our
universities and technological institutes. At these
institutions courses will be given on how to plan a city in
order to ensure clean air to its inhabitants. Discussions
will be held on the size of breathing areas in the form of
spacious parks, the needs and forms of rapid public
transportation, and revolutionary proposals such as the
relocation of industries and the establishment of
community air purification plants and other similar
projects which may seem fantastic at this time.
We should not forget that the need for control has only
one tendency, and that is to become more urgent. It is
only through vigilance, through planning and positive
action that we can keep abreast of this more difficult
problem and keep the air fit to breathe in. the atomic age.

