Sei ë nee, Technology & Man
NOBEL PRIZE WINNERS
ROUND TABLE
Today, science and the tremendous technical advances it has made possible are reshaping our lives at an over¬
whelming speed, bringing both benefits and hazards, constantly posing moral, economic and social problems.-
In Paris recently, eight world-famous scientists, five of them Nobel Prize winners set outto explore the ever-advancing
frontiers of today's science and technology and to examine some of the problems created by the increasing pace
of scientific conquests, at an International Round Table debate on "Man and Scientific and Technical Progress".
Seated ata "Round Table" set up under the immense shell of reinforced concrete housing Unesco's new Con¬
ference Hall, these top-ranking scientists were taking part in what was probably the most important event of
"Unesco Month", a succession of scientific and cultural events organized on the occasion of the inauguration of
Unesco's new Headquarters and Unesco's Tenth General Conference.
During three remarkable evening meetings vital questions arising from the impact of science and technology on
human life were discussed by members of the Round Table whose debates were also followed on the third evening
by radio and T.V. audiences In many European countries.
In this issue we present significant passages from the debates of the international Round Table, beginning with
the introductory remarks of Lord John Boyd Orr, Great Britain, who presided at the meetings (see opposite page).
.*/-.-<
I
Uiu

The Unesco Courier. February 1959
EThe men of science who are here
do not represent their govern¬
ments. They come here as scien¬
tists and the only master that a
scientist knows is the truth. What
will they speak about? They are
going to discuss the advance of
science and the effect of science
on human society.
It is the advance of science,
leading to technology and to the
birth of new ideas, which has
guided the full evolution of our
civilization. Every advance of
LORD BOYD orr science demands and brings about
some change in the structure of
human society. Thus civilization has advanced in the
last 10,000 years, adjusting itself to these changes,
sometimes with difficulty, but managing to survive.
The problem of the present day, however, is that in
our generation science has advanced at an accelerating
rate. In the last 50 years science has advanced more than
in the 2,000 previous years and in this advance has given
man enormous new powers. Physicists tell us they have
produced the hydrogen bomb, which makes war
impossible. No great power can now declare war on
another great power with these instruments of death and
destruction without committing suicide.
The advance of modern technology has also enabled us
to produce in abundance everything that mankind needs.
Let me give you an illustration. In my day we have had
two world wars when science and technology were geared
for destruction. And since the last world war a third of
national incomes has been devoted to armaments. In
spite of that destruction, in spite of that diversion of
wealth to armaments which gives no rise in the standard
of living, the standard of living today in the industrialized
countries is very much higher than in 1914.
In biological science it is the same and in agriculture
the greatly increased yields per acre, and per annum
enable us to produce food in abundance. The problem of
today is totally different from the problems of the 19th
century and earlier. Today we can produce goods in such
abundance that the problem is how to get them distribut¬
ed and consumed so to prevent an accumulation of
surpluses and resulting unemployment.
In medicine there has been the great conquest of
disease. Medicine has enabled us to control the great
killing diseases, with the exception of one or two, like
cancer, to cure them and in most cases to prevent them.
What has been the result? Great expansion in the length
of human life. Twenty to thirty years of increased life
to every child born today is a greater gift of modern
science than the gift of the hydrogen bomb.
In the past, hunger and disease limited the growth of
population. Today hunger can be abolished, disease is
rapidly being defeated and we are having an explosive
rise in population. This is one of the problems we shall
need to deal with. Thus, you see, the advance of science
has driven us into an entirely new age an age where war
is impossible. That is the biggest revolution which has
ever taken place since the beginning of civilization.
Can we adjust ourselves to that? It has changed the
age of inevitable scarcity, with poverty for the majority
of mankind, into a new age of potential abundance for
everybody. Can we adjust society to these great new
changes? It is not so easy. Jet planes have made the
world so small and they have made the affairs of all
countries so deeply, intimately interlocked that the whole
world has to change before any single country can survive
and adopt these changes. Can we adjust human society
to these great changes? Some people think we cannot.
I believe we can. But it depends upon whether the
people of the world realize what it is we have to face up
to, and to make it possible for our governments to lead
us to a wonderful new age.
