i
E B E R C
1 E A D !
by David Gunston
K h
;\
s
BERG PATROL IN ACTION. The International Ice Patrol
which operates in the region of the Newfoundland Grand Banks
is constantly seeking new ways to combat the menace of icebergs
to shipping. Air photos here were taken during tests made
at the height of the 1959 heavy ice season to determine whether
intense heat of bombs can hasten breaking and melting of bergs.
Top photos show a 1,000-pound thermite bomb enclosing a
cluster of small bomblets, each capable of burning at a tempe¬
rature of 4,300 degrees F., riding under wing of amphibian air¬
craft to iceberg target, right. (Temperature of one bomblet
equals half the sun's surface temperature.) For easy air visi¬
bility aircraft is painted in glowing fluorescent coloursorange
U.S. Coast Guard official photos
nose, wing tips, tail and body strip, edged with black, and main
body in brilliant white. Bottom photos show bomb attack on
iceberg in Newfoundland Grand Banks. Left, petroleum incen¬
diary bomb crater in 450 ft. long iceberg ; right, bomb pocketed
in iceberg leaves smoke trail as it burns a crater in the ice. Tests
showed that though bombs caused no spectacular destruction
some interesting effects were observed. One large berg shifted
15 to 20 degrees on its axis and another "calved" off the section
hit by two thermite bombs two days later. The International
Ice Patrol which came into being in 1914, is administered on
behalf of other nations by the United States and carried out by
the U.S. Coast Guard from an H.Q. in Argentia, Newfoundland.
10

The Unesco Courier. December 1959
Icebergs are no longer the menace to the shipping of
the world that they once were, although they still form
a very real and difficult-to-overcome danger to safe sea
voyages in the North Atlantic. A floating iceberg is a
natural climatic hazard which man, with all his ingenuity and
resourcefulness, cannot control or entirely avoid. Progress
in the war against the iceberg threat to safety at sea has been
made possible only by using many of the resources of modern
science.
Whilst it is true that the peril of earlier days when icebergs
might inflict a sudden and terrible toll on ships of all kinds,
epitomized by the ghastly Titanic disaster of 1912, is much
reduced, these great seaborne mountains of polar ice are just
as numerous and as threatening as ever.
The vastly improved methods of marine radar and other
techniques of iceberg detection, now fortunately carried out
on an international basis, make the chances of collision very
much smaller than they were even twenty years ago. But
the price of this safety continues to be constant vigilance
backed by up-to-date scientific skill.
The North Atlantic and the sub-polar regions produce a
regular crop of icebergs that eventually move southwards.
They break off from the massive Greenland glaciers in large
numbers, some as long as several blocks of buildings and half
as high above the surface of the water. Some may break away
with the action of slightly warmer water from the vast
floating polar ice-cap, but most are really the tail-ends of
glaciers that have slowly but inexorably worked their way
down to the sea.
Three years adrift,
ranging 1800 miles
ON reaching the water, the glacier ends disintegrate into
many fragments, each of which is a potential iceberg
with a travelling range of several hundred miles. Every
year some 7,500 sizable bergs break off in this fashion, of
which roughly between 400 and 500 find their way south of
latitude 48° N. (Newfoundland). These are nearly all plotted
on their wayward courses, even though from the time of their
initial "calving" to their appearance in the steamer lanes three
years may elapse. In fact, many of the bigger bergs plotted
by the ice patrols are three-year-old specimens.
There are approximately 100 tidewater glaciers along the
west coast of Greenland, yet most of the annual iceberg crop
emanates from only 20 concentrated together. Few survive
further south than the Grand Banks, but those that do form
the greatest danger, carried along fairly swiftly by the Labrador
current. Whatever their origin, these fragments of Arctic ice
cannot be melted, held back, diverted or in any way destroyed
by man.
Many of the smaller specimens, camparative fragments
perhaps under 20 yards in length, are rarely seen by man at
all, for they melt before they drift down into the shipping
channels. But the bigger, true bergs contain such an
enormous volume of hard- ice that they can survive for up
to three years before succumbing to the warmer currents into
which they move all the time, covering distances as great as
1,800 miles. The enormous annual crop of bergs is thus
considerably reduced by about June of each year, but in a
bad season, such as 1939, they may remain a menace to
shipping as late as August.
The largest berg on record was seen by a grain ship in
U.S. Coast Guard official photos
BIRTH OF AN ICEBERG
Coastguard cameraman flying up Sondrestrom Fjord, Green¬
land, finds a glacier inching its tortuous way through the moun¬
tains. Forced along by the pressure of the tremendous Green¬
land icecap, glaciers move as much as 50 feet a day. During
the 1949 Iceberg Census Operation when this photo was taken,
40,232 icebergs were counted. Below, Ice air patrol catches
Jacobshavn Glacier (Greenland) in the act of depositing a giant
iceberg (arrow) into Baffin Bay fjord. This glacier is five miles
wide at its mouth and the iceberg which has broken off is judged
to be a mile across at the "break-off" point. Some of the other
bergs in the water are as large as several blocks of city buildings.
ç.. -^r^
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE II

ICEBERG
(Continued)
Six-sevenths of the 'mountains
of ice' are hidden under water
I860, and was really a vast chunk of the polar ice-cap. It
was 53 miles long in one direction of its marked L-shape, and
30 miles along its other arm. Another one spotted in 1893
was over 50 miles long. Such monsters are literally ice-
islands and do not usually remain so large for long, breaking
up swiftly into numerous small pieces.
It is well-known that the visible portion of any iceberg is
only a small fraction of its total bulk, most of which lies
submerged, and various proportions for the amount of visible
ice are often given. Only recently has any scientific
experiment been made to ascertain the exact proportion of
visible to hidden ice, and for that the credit must go to the
Russian geomorphologist Andrei Kapitsa, working at Mirny,
in Antarctica.
Kapitsa had long been interested in the measuring of
icebergs and their underwater displacement, for he was not
entirely satisfied with the theoretical proportions generally
quoted. He was finally able to make a practical test in 1957,
when an air pilot discovered a large triangular berg with a
flat top instead of the usual rugged, fissure-covered surface.
It looked like a vast truncated triangle, about three-quarters
of a mile long and about 200 yards wide at its centre.
Water-level 'growlers'
most dangerous of all
Kapitsa's idea was to land on the surface ot the berg by
helicopter, and then make measurements by seismic
soundings. With several assistants he was able to
achieve this, after a narrow escape from a deep, snow-covered
fissure, on top of which the aircraft almost came to rest.
One member of the team, Boris Vtyurin, was lowered over
the precipice edge of the berg, and with a measuring-tape
established its height above the sea as 86 feet 3* inches.
HOW BIG IS AN ICEBERG? The visible portion of any iceberg is only a small fraction (one seventh) of its total bulk, most of
which lies submerged. Only recently have scientific experiments been made to confirm the exact proportion of visible to hidden ice.
The Russian scientist, Andrei Kapitsa, working from the research station set up at Mirny, in Antarctica,,during the International
Geophysical Year (1957-1958), solved the problem conclusively by taking seismic soundings from the giant iceberg shown below.
Soviet Committee for I.G.Y.

The Unesco Courier. December 1959
Seven holes were then made in the surface of the ice ana
filled with small charges of TNT, while other cavities were
made to house the seismic receivers. All the party except
Kapitsa then returned to the helicopter which took off before
he detonated the charges. An oscillograph film record of the
resultant explosion was made from the helicopter, and on it
a clear curve showed the boundaries at which the waves were
reflected from the bottom of the ice and also from the sea-bed.
From these it was a simple matter to ascertain the exact
measurements of the berg, which proved to be 636 feet 6
inches from top to toe. Therefore, approximately six-
sevenths of it were submerged, and from this experiment this
proportion may be taken as a fair guide to the volume of
invisible ice in any berg. This strange construction, by the
way, explains why no iceberg shows any signs of a sea roll,
even in the worst gale.
Most bergs continually split and break up, losing great
fragments from their ends, cracking and thundering ominously
A.P. Kapitsa
SOVIET SCIENTISTS landed on flat-topped
berg by helicopter, then placed explosive charges
and seismic measuring instruments. They had a
narrow escape from a deep, snow-covered fissure
on which their aircraft almost came to rest.
in the process. Sometimes parts capsize and float
independently at varying angles in the water. Frequently
large areas of the sea may be filled with vast packs of small
bergs, known as "brash." These may subsequently be frozen
together again into a large floe.
As they weather away ordinary icebergs adopt the most
fantastic shapes, ebbing and veering, travelling now swiftly,
now slowly. At this stage, when about the size of a small
house, they are known as "bergy bits," and when further
melted away so as to be almost awash, as "growlers" the
greatest menace of all. These still have the large underwater
portion, usually in the form, at least in part, of a protruding
arm of ice hidden beneath the waves and extending beyond the
small area visible above the surface. This is known as the
"foot," and collisions with this invisible portion are the cause
of most disasters when ships encounter icebergs.
Photos A.P. Kapitsa
HEIGHT OF ICEBERG above seajust over 86 feetwas established
by a scientist who was lowered over its sheer edge (top photo). Holes
were made in the ice to house explosive charges and measuring instru
ments. All the party except Kapitsa (bottom photo) then returned
to the helicopter which took off before he detonated the charges.
A film record of the resultant explosion showed the boundaries at
which the sound waves were reflected from the bottom of the ice and
from the sea bed. Calculations from recordings showed berg to be
636 feet 6 inches from top to toe. Thus, about 6/7 were submerged.
CONTINUED ON PAGE I S

THESE TINY 'SPECKS' ARE
HUGE MOUNTAINS OF ICE
Multitude of white specks seen above are icebergs,
some of them as big as blocks of houses, photo¬
graphed in the Arctic during the 1949 iceberg
census, when over 40,000 were counted. These
thousands of icebergs had recently "calved" from
mother glaciers and were assembling for the big
drift towards the North Atlantic. Hundreds disin¬
tegrated during the three-year-long "march" of
almost 2,000 miles, but hundreds more reached
the steamer lanes, fog-bound from April to July,
through which the world's heaviest sea-borne
traffic passes. Ice-chart in photo on left gives an
overall picture of the 1959 iceberg situation in.
the Grand Banks region of Newfoundland. Opera¬
tions officer at Ice Patrol H.Q. receives reports
from patrol planes and cutters and from other
aircraft and ships plying the North Atlantic and
pinpoints location of bergs with small triangles.
Mariners are warned of ice locations by radio
twice daily from the Newfoundland Ice Patrol H.Q.
U.S. Coast Guard official photos
14

ICEBERG
(Continued)
World's heaviest sea traffic
crosses an ice-ridden zone
Almost all bergs are objects of great beauty and of no
little scientific interest. The largest may. project 300 feet or
more out of the water, and almost all rise to some kind of
a peak. Their ice is often age-old, dense and amazingly hard,
not translucent and clear like manufactured ice, but full of
minute air-bubbles which impart a shiny, intense whiteness,
not unlike glistening porcelain enamel. The amount of this
imprisoned air may reduce the total unit weight of ice, but
hundreds of moderately-sized bergs contain at least 30 million
tons of ice.
Parry and Ross, the famous Arctic explorers, once calculat¬
ed that a long berg they encountered 24 miles by 150 feet
high, contained some 1,500 million tons of ice. With some
realization of this bulk and solidity, it is easy to see why even
the largest steel ship stands little chance in a head-on collision.
Furthermore, a berg's large underwater portion renders it
more liable to drift with the current than with the prevailing
wind. Hence the uncanny and frightening way a great berg
may bear down on an approaching ship even when the wind
is against it.
'Titanic' disaster leads
to international action
For centuries North Atlantic look-outs have been trained
to spot bergs under all conditions. At a look-out height
of say 70 feet a man can see a berg on a clear day at
a distance of 18 miles. A low-lying haze on a clear day
reduces this to 8 or 9 miles. In light fog or drizzle 1 to 3 miles
visibility is a good average. At night, a look-out can see a
berg up to 3 miles away with a full moon, and only 400 yards
away with no moon. In dense fog, of course, a ship relying
upon visual spotting only may be within yards of a big berg
without seeing it.
Fortunately, much of the responsibility of iceberg spotting
and plotting is now in the hands of the International Ice
Patrol, which came into being in 1914 after the Titanic
disaster as a result of universal demand. By various inter¬
national agreements since then the Patrol is administered for
the universal good by the United States Government and
carried out by the U.S. Coast Guard (founded in 1790). Many
marine nations contribute towards its upkeep on a "pay-as-
you-benefit" basis, among them Canada, France, Italy, Greece,
Belgium, Norway, Denmark, Sweden and the Netherlands, as
well as the United States and Great Britain.
Fast cutters keep
a vigilant patrol
The Coast Guard commences its ice observation and
patrol service immediately the presence of bergs
threatens shipping safety, usually in February, and
covers an area roughly the size of Pennsylvania and in the
general region of the Newfoundland Grand Banks. During
much of the ice season, from April to luly, this region is
blanketed by dense fog caused by the confluence of the warm
Gulf Stream and the cold Labrador current. Yet through it
passes the world's heaviest seaborne traffic.
Aircraft, radar and loran (Long Range Radio Aid to
Navigation) are now all used for the most efficient detection
of these icebergs, but the two latter, excellent aids though
they are, remain supplemental and do not replace the need
for visual ice surveys. A vigilant and constant patrol by
aeroplanes and fast cutters is essential, and these are based
at Argentia, Newfoundland, where the International Ice Patrol
Commander has his H.Q. The aerial surveys are mostly
undertaken by Coast Guard-manned converted Douglas DC-
4s (4-engined land planes).
The specially-equipped cutters, like the USCGC Acushnet,
keep up a constant surface patrol. Information about ice,
growlers and bergs is collected by these patrol vessels, by the
aircraft and from sightings reported by civil ships and planes
operating in or crossing the danger area. All ships au¬
tomatically report every four hours their position, course,
speed, visibility, weather conditions and the sea temperature
to the IIP office, and so, from a mass of assorted data, a clear,
hour-by-hour picture of iceberg movement is built up.
Aerial reconnaissance augments poor surface visibility, and
vice versa, the Ice Patrol constructs isotherm charts to estimate
the melting rates of all known bergs, and wind and sea current
data is used to forecast probable drifts of dangerous ice.
Summarized data is broadcast by the IIP twice daily to all
shipping, which is then expected to plot its course well clear
of known bergs, to allow for possible inaccuracies and shifts
of wind or current. . Although 10 miles per day is the average
speed of drift, bergs have been known to shift 30-40 miles per
day for a week or more, so no chances can be taken.
A 20-foot cube of ice
sinks a fair-sized ship
Radar assists in locating large icebergs in poor visibility,
but smaller bergy bits and growlers may escape radar
detection if a heavy sea is running, and even a 20-foot
cube of ice can sink a fair-sized ship. Actually, the growler
menace today is not a great one, but is still exists. The use of
loran now offers the best way of checking the exact location
of all bergs and ice after they have been visually spotted, also
their daily movements. With the development of loran, fog
can no longer interfere with the work of the patrol vessels, as
was formerly the case.
In addition to its direct locating and reporting work, the Ice
Patrol Service constantly studies the overall ice and sea current
situation, the physical properties of sea ice, its drift, erosion
and melting, temperature and atmospheric conditions in ice-
ridden areas, the habits of seals and birds in relation to ice,
and so onall information designed to help the navigator and
bring him to terms of familiarity with every possible danger
from icebergs.
New ideas and discoveries for combating the sea ice menace
are constantly being employed. To safeguard shipping the
International Ice Patrol couples its unrelenting vigilance with
a desire to keep abreast of the latest scientific developments
and to use the latest equipment after it has been checked and
found suitable for this vital and humane work.
15
