FORGOTTEN CITIES
OF THE EAST AFRICAN COAST
by Gervase Mathew
Lecturer, Oxford University
Official photograph: Public Relations Office, Tanganyika Territory
MARITIME TRADING CITIES of African origin grew up and flourished on the East coast of
the continent in pre-European times. Greatest of them was Kilwa which was built on an island
off the coast of Tanganyika and which once stretched for a mile in length and half a mile inland.
Today only the low houses of a small village cluster on and around ruins like those of its old fort
(above). Growing rich on Indian Ocean trade with countries as far off as Siam and China, these
coastal markets knew their greatest prosperity from the 13th to the 15th centuries. Their decline
came with the arrival of the Portuguese who altered the immemorial Indian Ocean trade routes.
The western shore of the Indian Ocean is littered
with fragments of ruined towns. It is now clear
that the largest group among them dates from
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Sometimes
they are completely deserted towns almost as well
preserved as Pompeii, like Au Garvin in Somalia, a little
to the north of Merca and Kua in the Mafia islands off
the coast of Tanganyika. Sometimes there are the reed
huts of a modern fishing voilage among the fallen
masonry. But all are linked by masses of broken shards
of blue and white Chinese porcelain and by similar types
of house and palace, mosque and pillar tomb.
They represent the Swahili culture of the coast between
the fading of the power of Portugal and the rise of the
nineteenth century Arab Empire of Zanzibar. They form¬
ed a group of small city states, oligarchic in social
structure and grown wealthy through trade in ivory and
Assisted by Dr. Freeman-Grenville, Father Gervase Mathew
completed an archaeological survey of the coastline and of the
islands from the British ' Somaliland Protectorate south to
Portuguese East Africa. An archaeological map of the sites that
have been recorded will be published from the Oxford University
Press as part of the first volume of a History of East Africa.
22
slaves. As a culture it was elaborate and in many ways
sophisticated.
The small two storeyed palaces built of coral were ring¬
ed by the houses of nobles, and among the rich the stan¬
dard of luxury seems to have been high. There were
elaborate series of niches in the inner rooms for the dis¬
play of porcelain; in the words of a Swahili proverb, silver
ladders led to ivory beds. It was a culture that was
evolving its own art forms; an intricate style in wood
carving and in many-coloured textiles and in verse.
All this was only possible because of the trade that
came south With the Monsoon. But they remained Afri¬
can towns. It is revealing that alone among the trading
centres of the Indian Ocean in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries they did not use coins except occa¬
sionally as amulets. Their economic system was based on
barter and on currency of beads and rolls of cloth.
Though nominally Islamic, the chief religious forces
seem to have been the fear of spirits, the belief in propi¬
tiatory sacrifice that accompanied it and elaborate witch¬
craft. Women held a position quite different from that
accorded to them elsewhere in the Indian Ocean world.
They were the guardians of the ritual objects of each
little state, they were frequently the nominal rulers; even

the Decorated Ones, the courtesans, seem to have posses¬
sed status.
The deportment expected of a noble was African; the
author of that greatest of Swahili poems, Al Inkishafi,
remembered the nobles of eighteenth century Pate
arching their long necks and swaying their supple-jointed
arms as the common people gazed on them. Most signifi¬
cant of all the strength and spirit of each state was
conceived of as enshrined in a single sacred object, an
Ivory Horn or a Great Drum.
There are also the remains of far larger cities of a much
earlier period. Only two of these sites are occupied or
partly occupied by modern towns Mombasa and Moga¬
dishu. The low houses of a small village cluster among
the tall ruins on Kilwa island in Tanganyika. A little
to the south the palace city of Songo Mnara is over¬
grown by bush. In Kenya the city of Gedi lies deserted in
the forest. At Port Durnford, in Somalia, fragments of
masonry and occasional pillars stretch along the estuary
for nearly a mile and a half above the reed huts of the
Baguin fishermen.
It is the extent of each of these earlier sites that is so
unexpected. It was estimated that there were twenty
thousand inhabitants of Mombasa at the time of the
coming of the Portuguese. Mediaeval Mogadishu was lar¬
ger still, it spread far beyond the modern town across the
modern air field. Mediaeval Kilwa stretched for over a
mile along the coast and for half a mile inland.
All these cities had grown rich through the Indian
Ocean traffic; they had trade contacts as far as Siam
and China. They exported slaves but it is easy to exagge¬
rate the importance of the slave trade for their economy
perhaps the majority of negro slaves in this period were
brought to the South Arabian markets by the short sea
passage from more northerly ports like Aidhab on the Red
Sea, Zeila or Berbera. But Mogadishu and Kilwa had
grown rich as storehouses for the gold trade that had its
source far south in the Rhodesian workings. Both to the
The Unesco Courier. October 1959
east and to the north there was an unsated demand for
African ivory.
It is not yet clear when any of these cities came into
existence; there were trading centres in the Roman
period, though the most important of these, the Metro¬
polis of Raphta, is not yet found, and there are Greek
and Roman coins from Port Durnford and Roman and
Persian coins from Zanzibar. Still, their chief prosperity
was from the thirteenth to the fifteenth century. Already
by the fifteenth century some of them seem to be decli¬
ning. They were doomed when the Portuguese altered
the immemorial trade routes of the Indian Ocean.
Unlike the small Swahili towns that succeeded them
they were an essential part of the structure of Indian
Ocean trade. Mr. Kirkman's excavations at Gedi have
shown that in the Malindi area in Kenya the chief cur¬
rency Was in cowrie shells. But elsewhere there was a
money economy; there were three mediaeval East African
mints. The number and elaboration of the Mosques show
that all the mediaeval cities had become Islamic. But it
is becoming untenable to consider them as Persian or
Arab colonies though some like Kilwa and old Zanzibar
may well have come into existence clustered round a trad¬
ing settlement from the Persian Gulf.
The cities described by mediaeval geographers seem
negro cities more negroid than any present inhabitant of
the coast. In the fourteenth century Ibn Batuta describes
the citizens of Kilwa as jet black with incised faces, and
his account of the royal ceremonial at Mogadishu the
state umbrella and the birds of gold borne high on staves
is reminiscent of West African Kingship. A fifteenth
century Chinese visitor to Mogadishu noted not only the
tall stone houses "four or five storeys high" but the fact
that the women there "'apply yellow varnish to their
shaven crowns, hang several strings of discs from their
ears and Wear silver rings round their necks."
At least in my present judgement the deserted cities
of the East African coast are deserted African cities.

