THE MOST
CURABLE,
THE MOST
HOPELESS
OF ALL
DISEASES
by Dr P. Sivadon
When, as a student, I told my teachers that I wanted
to specialize in psychiatry, one of them, a well-
known clinician with a large private practice,
exclaimed: "You aren't serious? Mental cases are scarce;
I have only come across three in the .whole of my career,
and I could not do anything for them except send them to
an asylum. They are still there."
Some months later I penetrated into the strange world
of the "lunatic asylum" as it was then called, and I soon
realized that thousands and thousands of sick people were
living in those dreary institutions, cut off from the world,
very often abandoned by friends and relations, sometimes
undergoing weird treatments which were needlessly drastic
and painful since they were nearly always useless.
Nor are mental cases so scarce. In Western countries
more than one-third of all hospital beds are occupied by
them. If my former teacher had met so few during his
career, it was because they were then still considered not
as sick people but as "insane" creatures apart from the
normal everyday world, who must first of all be separated
from society before any question of treating them could
Dr Paul Sivadon is a leading French psychiatrist who for 15
years has been in charge of a psychiatric treatment and rehabi¬
litation centre in Ville-Evrard where he pioneered the "open
hospital" movement in his country. He holds important consul¬
tative posts in the French health services.
Dr Sivadon, who is vice-president of the World Federation
of Mental Health, lias published a large number of papers on
psychiatric care, the treatment of mental disease, etc.
12
Photo USIS
be considered. Only the psychiatrist, in close contact
with them in the asylum, could really get to know anything
about them, and then usually it was too late, and their
chances of cure were practically nil.
Yet when the relatives of such patients were questioned,
it often appeared that several doctors had been consulted
before the asylum was resorted to. They had been
treated for their liver, for glands, for sympathetic nervous
system disorders ; no one had noticed that mental trouble
was developing. Families, usually, refused to consider
any such possibility and When it became certain, they
hastened to conceal it. This, then, was why mental
disorders appeared to be so rare : for a long time they
were not recognized and, when they became evident
beyond any doubt, they were hushed up.
Because they are not recognized in time and because
they are concealed, it is often impossible to cure them ;
because it is impossible in these .circumstances to cure
them, they are said to be incurable and for this reason
they inspire fear. And precisely because they inspire fear
people are unwilling to recognize them and try to hide
them. This is the tragic vicious circle in which
psychiatry has been too long enclosed.
It is not difficult to understand the prejudice against
this branch of medicine, and even against the doctors
who specialized in it.
Not very long ago, the psychiatrist was still considered
as a curious individual who spent his time inventing
scientific names for the various types of madness, and
thinking up obscure theories which he could discuss only

The Unesco Courler. May 1959
with a select group of initiates. At present people are
still often inclined to consider him as a slighty sinister
person who sees signs of mental trouble everywhere, even
in quite ordinary, normal people.
Today, however, the psychiatrist has plenty of other
things ' to do. During the past 30 years numerous
accurate techniques have been developed and psychiatry
has become one of the most effective of the healing arts.
As recently as 1922 general paralysis was considered
incurable. A few years later, as a result of the general
use of malariotherapy (treatment by inducing of a high
fever) more than half of the cases were cured. Today,
thanks to early treatment of its cause (syphilis) this
terrible disease has practically disappeared.
Acute delirium of infectious or toxic origin which, when
it did not kill the patient, was often followed by serious
mental trouble, can today be cut short in a few hours.
Melancholia, which caused so many suicide deaths, and
even murders, can now be cured in a few days by shock
methods.
This, unfortunately, does not mean that everything is
known about mental disorders. Far from it : many of
them are still very mysterious indeed, and one of the most
frequent, schizophrenia, still raises innumerable unsolved
problems.
Early treatment is essential. Statistics show that the
great majority of mental cases are curable if properly
treated during the first weeks or months. After six months
the chances of cure are much less, and with the years
they become very small indeed. Either because of the
suspicion with which the psychiatrist is regarded, or for
other reasons, too often he is not called in to examine the
patient until the disease has had time to get a firm hold.
Even if the psychiatrist is called in at the first indica¬
tions of an acute phase, it is often difficult for him to
discover, by questions, what earlier signs there had been
that might have enabled him to detect the disease much
sooner. When the family is asked whether the trouble
started suddenly or gradually, the answers given are
usually contradictory : while insisting that there was
nothing to give any indication of mental trouble, they
will nevertheless admit that the patient "was not himself"
for some time or that he had been undergoing treatment
for "being run down" or "for a liver complaint," etc.
There are always warning signs in the months, or even
years, preceding the onset of mental disease, of something
wrong with the functioning of the higher nervous system,
but because these signs are often not of an alarming
nature, they are usually underestimated by the family and
attributed by the sufferer himself to quite other causes
such as overwork, digestive or heart trouble, etc.
Most of these early symptoms are, in fact, extremely
commonplace : they only become important and significant
when they appear in certain combinations and especially
if they occur at times when the person concerned has
suffered a bereavement, an accident or some similar
shock.
A slight fever, loss of weight, loss of appetite, or a slight
cough may be either without significance or the herald of
some serious organic trouble. In the same way a pain in
the head, inexplicable fatigue, change of character, sleep
and memory difficulties, or a lowering of work output,
require careful judgement on the part of the doctor in
deciding whether they indicate simply a passing indispo¬
sition, or whether they may be first warnings of mental
disease.
If preventive treatment is applied at this stage, there
is every chance of avoiding mental trouble. And if, in
spite of the preventive treatment, it does develop, the
immediate application of curative treatment will make
it less severe.
For treatment to be effective, it is just as important
that it should be given in satisfactory technical conditions
as that it be given early.
Mental patients lose some of their ability to adapt to
their environment. In most cases they must first of all
be placed in an atmosphere where they are artificially
freed from the demands of normal social life. This is the
primary reason for hospitalization and the hospital must,
therefore, provide this atmosphere.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
WHO Photos
A CHECK-UP
ON THE BRAIN
Mental diseases are the most curable and
the most hopeless of all illnesses, says Dr.
Paul Sivadon. The most curable because
if detected early, modern treatment will
in most cases effect a cure. In the U.S.A.,
for example, there has been a dramatic
drop in the total mental hospital popula¬
tion for three successive years (1956-58),
despite sharp increases in population. This
can be credited chiefly to three factors :
I) tranquillizing drugs. Though these do
not cure they make hitherto untreatable
patients more amenable to modern ther¬
apy. 2) the concept of the mental hospi¬
tal as a "therapeutic community". 3) the
"open door" and "open hospital" policies
which give patients freedom of movement.
Photos show "brain waves" being studied
on electro-encephalographs, one of many
methods of diagnosing mental diseases.
13

MOST CURABLE;
MOST HOPELESS
(Continued)
HOSPITALIZATION TIME
REDUCED TO FOUR MONTHS
In other cases, particularly when the disorder has been
detected in time, there may be no need for hospitalization
and treatment can be effectively applied in an out¬
patient clinic.
The atmosphere of the psychiatric hospital must itself
be therapeutic that is to say, it must provide the arti¬
ficial social environment in which those adaptive faculties
which still remain to the patient will be exercised, while
the others which are disturbed are first allowed to rest and
then gradually re-educated.
Group activities should be organized in accordance
with the capacities of the majority, if not all, of the
patients. These activities, whether games, self-expression
in some sort of art craft, sports, courses and lectures,
should preferably be developed on the initiative of the
patients themselves so that they correspond as far as
possible to their needs.
Electric shocks & a long sleep
It is the task of the doctor to encourage patients to
resume their interest in the world around them and
to grow gradually away from their pathological atti¬
tudes and towards useful activities. This process can
often be helped on by tactful handling of opposition,
hostility, and even aggressiveness, on the part of the
patients.
Once the right atmosphere has been created, more pre¬
cise techniques can usefully be applied, including the
various shock treatments, such as :
Insulintherapy, invented by an Austrian physician,
Dr Sakel, in 1933. The method consists in injecting grad¬
ually increasing doses of insulin until the patient enters
a state of coma; the coma is then dissipated by the
administration of sugar. The treatment is repeated each
day for several weeks. The patient's personality, which is
temporarily disintegrated under the coma, tends to return
to normal on reawakening;
Electric shock treatment, introduced by two Italian
physicians, Doctors Cerletti and Bini, in 1937. The aim
is to provoke sudden loss of consciousness accompanied by
convulsions, by passing an electric current through the
brain for a fraction of a second. Here again it is a case
of momentary disintegration of the personality accom¬
panied by important humoral modifications. This is often
followed by recovery of mental balance, particularly in
cases of melancholia.
There are also various forms of narcotherapy. Some,
of short duration (often called "narco-analysis") consist
in intravenous injections of an anaesthetic for the pur¬
pose of removing the inhibitions or even of plunging him
into the realm of the subconscious so that he express
himself, relive certain experiences, and thus liberate him¬
self from painful anxieties and sometimes deeply rooted
complexes.
Another method used is to put the subject to sleep
by means of various narcotics for 16 to 20 hours a
day during 15-20 days, so that the overworked nervous
system may rest, and so that, probably through dreams,
the emotional balance may be restored. This is called
long-sleep treatment.
Recent drugs such as chlorpromazine and reserpine, and
many others which the chemists are discovering all the
time, appear to act in a similar way. They seem able to
relax those functional systems which are most commonly
involved in mental disease. Prolonged treatment, even
14
without resorting to artificial sleep, sometimes brings
about a veritable resurrection. In nearly all cases these
drugs relieve the most painful symptoms of mental
disorders such as agitation, anxiety, aggressiveness, etc.
Then, there is a whole range of surgical techniques
which are given the collective name of psychosurgery.
These consist in cutting those nerve fibres (leukotomy)
or areas of the cerebral cortex (topectomy) which appear
to be the anatomical seat of functional disorders. Such
techniques sometimes bring about spectacular cures but
they are unfortunately, for the present, often only
transitory.
Many other therapeutic methods are effective in certain
cases, but on the whole it can be seen that at present
there is no specific remedy for a specific disorder. The
various techniques are often complementary and must
be combined.
What results can we expect? These will vary according
to the gravity and duration of the symptoms. On the
whole, however, properly coordinated treatment in satis¬
factory technical conditions makes it possible to restore
70 to 80 per cent of mental patients so that they can
resume their place in society.
It often takes time sometimes months and years but
in some cases relatively short treatment will suffice.
Melancholia, for example, can often be cured in a few
weeks, and sometimes days.
The average hospitalization time for patients who are
cured is about four months.
If we remember that only a few years ago the propor¬
tion of cures was 30 per cent, and that on an average
these cures took one year, it will be seen that considerable
progress has been made. There is still much to be done,
but one thing is already quite certain: psychiatry works.
It should be emphasized again that as yet very little is
known of the inside mechanism of mental disease, but we
can already act on the little we do know.
Patient 'gets used' to his malady
In its early stages, mental sickness is no more than a
functional disorder which must be treated before it
has time to develop into a regular behaviour pattern.
If not treated, mental disease becomes a pathological way
of living: the patient "gets used to" his malady and his
life is built around it. Mental diseases are therefore at
once the most curable and the most hopeless of all
illnesses.
The amount of mental disease is increasing year by year
with the ever-growing pressure of rapid social change.
This is already a tremendous burden on the community
and an often unsuspected source of anxiety to individuals.
Nevertheless, as these diseases become more frequent,
science is forging new weapons against them and every
day it is becoming easier to prevent and cure them.
It is not possible today to ignore mental disease as did
my former professor ; we must indeed accept the fact
that it represents one of the burning medical and social
questions of our century.
On the other hand mental diseases need no longer be
dreaded as they were when people believed them incurable.
No one is immune to them, but they no longer carry the
threat of life-long banishment. In most cases the right
treatment, promptly applied and actively persevered with,
will soon set the patient on the road to recovery.
