THE BOY WHO DIDN'T GROW UP
by Dr Tsung-yi Lin
Recently an eighteen-year-old boy came to my
attention; he was getting on badly at the shop
where he worked. Being the only son of a widowed
mother, he had been reluctant to leave his home and go to
work with others in a shop. For the first six months
there, he was too shy to talk to customers or strangers,
and "yes" or "no" were the only words that came out of
his mouth. He was timid and passive, but quite friendly
and warm in relation to people. When asked about his
future plans he always referred to his mother. Active
participation in social activity or recreation outside of
home were quite unthinkable to him. Other boys of his
age teased him and he had developed symptoms of
sleeplessness, palpitation and absent-mindedness.
This boy illustrates some of the difficulties of the
transition from childhood to manhood. Here was an
extreme case of an adolescent who failed to wean psycho¬
logically from being dependent on his mother. The
mother was described as a loving, warm person who did
everything to make her son's life comfortable and easy.
The separation from this sort of life was too painful for
this boy whose dependent personality, nurtured by his
over-protective mother, was not strong enough to meet the
challenge of everyday social life.
To become a full member of a society is an exciting and
important event for most children and also for the society
to which they belong. The observance of "rites de pas¬
sage" (initiation ceremonies) in almost every primitive
society indicates the importance attached to this transi¬
tion from the status of a child dependent upon parents to
that of a man, fully-fledged, and capable of taking his
place as a responsible member of society.
The primary interest of society is to ensure the continua¬
tion of the social system. For this, the adolescents must
be educated to become transmitters of the social heritage.
For the adolescents this transition represents a crucial
period of life, in which they come to physical, sexual, in¬
tellectual, emotional and social maturity.
'Born' rebel was 'home made'
This transition, however, is not always an easy and
smooth process as the example given above shows.
The fact that the rituals of initiation into manhood
or womanhood in many instances take the manifestations
of bodily mutilation, circumcision, symbolic rebirth, etc.
well dramatizes the pains involved in it.
The complete separation of the adolescents from their
close attachment to parents, the forced submission of the
younger generation to the authority of the older genera¬
tion and the acceptance of the tribal lore and expected
patterns of behaviour and attitudes, and the assumption
of legitimate sexual and social responsibility, all these
have deep emotional significance to the adolescents.
Here is another case of an adolescent who failed in one
or another aspect of this process and suffered from the
resultant emotional difficulties.
Occasional running away from home and association
Dr Tsung-yi Lin is Professor of Psychiatry at the National
Taiwan University. He has had a long teaching and practising
career at the Taiwan Medical School and at the National Tai¬
wan University Hospital and has done post-graduate studies in
both the United States of America and Europe. His numerous
scientific publications include a study of mental disorder in
Chinese and other cultures.
with delinquent youngsters were the main reasons why
this nineteen-year-old boy was brought to me for
consultation. He remained silent with an expression of
strong hatred throughout the first interview and made
no response to his father's complaints about his conduct.
His father, a principal of a middle school, went into detail
about how much he had tried to correct his son's
misconduct, and described him as a "born rebel." Frequent
preaching of Confucian ethics, constant watch on his
conduct both at school and home, strict selection of his
reading material, a ban on modern movies, and all the
father's other efforts, had merely driven the boy to the
opposite extreme. The boy felt that his father thought
nothing of him, that he never got any warm consideration
from his father, and that he could not live up to his
father's high expectations.
This is a good example of the failure of an adolescent
boy to accept the expected pattern of behaviour set by
his father. His reaction consisted of revolt mainly in a
group of his own age. This is characteristic of
adolescents.
The need to be needed by others
The failure of grown-ups to recognize and understand
the basic needs of adolescents is usually the main
single factor that prevents their sound development
into adulthood.
These needs are:
the need to be needed by others; the need for increasing
independence; the need to achieve adequate adjustment
to the opposite sex, and the need to re-think the cherished
beliefs of one's elders.
With the gratification of these needs the adolescent
becomes increasingly aware of himself in relation to his
past and future and to. others and attempts to construct
an interpretive view of what life means. The moral habits
and opinions formed in his childhood are re-examined
and put into a coherent scheme to become the basis of
his philosophy.
How are we to help adolescents to achieve a smooth and
successful transition into adulthood? There is still no
universal answer to this critical problem of our times. All
the world over, societies are suffering more and more from
the failure of this transition manifested in the form of
mental ill-health among the young and juvenile
delinquency in particular. This seems to be unavoidable
at a time of continual change which has caused confusion
of the system of values, ethical standards and beliefs even
of the grown-ups.
This does not imply that change itself always results in
confusion. It is change without clear sense of direction
that is responsible for creating anxiety and insecurity,
and which often leads to morbid manifestations of these
psychological difficulties.
The realization by adults of their own limitations in
modern societies may enable them to take a more humble,
sympathetic and tolerant attitude towards young' people,
and thus help the latter to work out their own problem
more constructively.
Just as the complex nature of the human child requires
for its growth such a unique and long period protected by
its parents, so the complex modern man requires a much
longer preparatory adolescent period to enable him to find
his place in a complex modern society.
31
