ILO
I welcome the initiative taken by The Unesco
I Courier in devoting this issue to the 40th anniver¬
sary of the International Labour Organization,
I not only as an unusual opportunity for its readers
I to acquire a better understanding of the wide
I range of activities of the ILO, but also as a
I reflection of the close and friendly contacts exist¬
ing among the organizations of the United Nations family.
Forty years ago, when the ILO began its work, it
devoted its main attention to the formulation of inter¬
national labour standards and the promotion of national
legislation as a means of protecting the worker and his
interests. But the growth of the idea that economic
policies must serve a social purpose an idea which the
very existence of the ILO has helped to promote and a
better understanding of the many inter-related factors
that affect living and working conditions have led the
ILO to adjust its work and methods.
The past ten years, for instance, have seen a vast
increase in direct technical assistance designed to deal
with specific tasks in newly developing countries the
improvement of (workers' skills, the organization of
manpower, the attainment of higher productivity in both
industrial and non-industrial enterprises and the promo¬
tion of better labour-management relations.
The ILO has thus had to focus its attention on the
entire process of social change which accompanies
economic development both in industrially advanced as
well as in the less developed countries. This dynamic
view of social development has led to a gradual shift of
emphasis from the adoption of standards to questions
relating to the application of measures of social policy in
the different countries and in strengthening the institu¬
tions which are responsible for the implementation of
these measures.
This evolution of the ILO over the years has been
marked by three continuing trends: the widening of the
geographical range of its influence, the diversification of
the nature of its activities, and the progressive integra¬
tion of its various activities into a comprehensive
programme of action. The need for flexibility and for
continuous adjustment to changing world conditions has
resulted in a series of changes in the relative emphasis
given to the different methods of action available.
The exchange of information and research, the formula¬
tion and application of international standards, technical
assistance and operations, and educational and promotional
activities must all be regarded as complementary to each
other. In the present phase of the development of the
ILO's work special attention is being given to the
educational and promotional approach. Programmes of
'workers' education, management development and labour-
management relations all of these represent important

The Unesco Courler. November 1959
Almasy, Paris
steps in the more intensive use of this approach.
The workers' education programme, for example, which
is a natural complement to the educational activities of
Unesco, is designed primarily to enable workers and trade
unions to equip themselves to meet their increasingly
heavy economic and social responsibilities. It includes
provision for fellowships, seminars, the exchange of
information, the issue of teaching materials and assistance
and advice in the preparation and implementation of
workers' education programmes.
This type of Work is particularly important in countries
where the trade union movement is relatively new and
not yet firmly established. In the field of management
development, the ILO seeks to promote sound principles
and techniques of management including such aspects as
the raising of productivity and supervisory training, while
the labour-management relations programme is intended
to foster a better understanding of industrial relations and
methods of co-operation between labour and management.
The ILO has become increasingly aware of the need
to strengthen the capacity of individuals to understand
social problems and to find solutions for them. This
need cannot be met from a book of rules or by a set of
rigid formulas but rather by the encouragement of the
creative response of individuals to the challenge before
them. It is primarily the task of education to increase
this capacity not by formal instruction alone but by the
fullest development of latent abilities. In this period of
rapid social and technological change, the need for
leadership at all levels and in all sections of the community
is great, and the ILO is increasingly called upon to help in
meeting the need for workers' education, for management
training and for education in labour administration.
In response to this need, and as a further step forward
in this expanding educational effort, it is hoped to establish
in Geneva an International Institute for Labour Studies
under the auspioes of the ILO and in co-operation with
the United Nations and Unesco. This Institute would give
particular attention to the problems of labour policy in
relation to social and economic change. It would combine
research and comparative study by scholars and would
provide an opportunity for mature individuals, experienced
in government,, trade unions and management, to
exchange views both with the scholars and amongst
themselves, and thus increase an understanding of social
forces in the present-day fworld.
The aims and purposes of the ILO remain today what
they were 40 years ago but the means of action available
to it have increased and widened in scope enormously.
It is through this variety of approaches that the Organiza¬
tion continues to help its Member States in dealing
effectively with their diverse problems and continues to
work for the improvement of the living and working
conditions of people everywhere in a world at peace.
