KUMBI SALEH
ancient capital of
the 'Land of Gold'
by Raymond Mauny
Head of the Archeology-Prehistory Section
Institut Français d'Afrique Noire, Dakar, Sénégal.
On March 6 1957 a new. State Ghana, formerly the
British-administered territory of the Gold Coast
came into existence on the shores of the Gulf of
Guinea.
The choice of Ghana as the name for the new-born
state may have puzzled some students of African history.
No part of the former Gold Coast was ever included in the
Empire of Ghana, which extended over the Western Sudan
and the Southern Sahara from the seventh century untiK
at least the thirteenth century a.D., but whose southern
expansion seems to have stopped at the Niger. Some
writers have suggested that the Akan, one of the principal '
local tribes, may have been connected with the Empire of
Ghana. The selection of this name for the new West
African State was actually probably due to the glamour
surrounding the first great Sudanese Empire.
Nothing definite is known about its origins. The only
documents that touch on the question the Tarikh el-
Fettach and the Tarikh es-Sudan, both written by scholars
from Timbuktu belong to a very late period (sixteenth-
seventeenth centuries) ; these give a long list of kings
said to have reigned before the Hegira. (The date from
which the Mohammedan era is reckoned 622 a.d.
We find the first mention of the Empire of Ghana in
the works of the astronomer Al-Fazari, written just before
800 a.D. He calls it "the land of gold." Certain ninth
and tenth century authors mention it briefly, but the
only good description of the State and its capital is given
by El-Bekri (1067). In his day, the Empire was at the
height of its prosperity and stretched from the Sahara,
the Niger and Central Senegal to the Lake Debo area.
Despite the great tolerance it showed towards Moham¬
medans, this State with its animistic religion, offended
the fanatical Almorávides, who invaded and conquered it
in 1077. An Arab dynasty, possibly of Sheriflan origin,
ousted the Sarakole Negro kings and, until its destruction
by the Mandingos in 1240, the capital continued to play
an important part as a centre of trade between the Arab
and Berber merchants from the Mograb and Egypt, and
the "Dioulas" from West Africa. Sudanese gold was
brought there to be exchanged for salt from the Sahara
and manufactured goods from the Mediterranean
countries.
For at least 500 years the city of Ghana was one of the
best known markets in the Moslem world. Its trade later
passed to Oualata, founded in the thirteenth century,
which in its turn was supplanted, in the fifteenth century,
by Timbuktu.
What traces of the ancient capital have remained?
Strangely enough it Was not until 1914 that its ruins were
discovered by A. Bonnel de Mézières, following up
suggestions made by the historian, Maurice Delafosse.
The site was that known as Kumbi Saleh, 200 miles due
north of Bamako and just north of the Mauritanian
frontier.
The identification of thé town of Ghana or, at least,
of the trading centre described by El-Bekri with the
Kumbi Saleh ruins is, in my opinion, the most plausible
yet advanced. The Tarikh el-Fettach says definitely that
24
the capital of Ghana "was Kumbi, and this Kumbi is a
great city" ; and the tradition that Kumbi and Ghana
were the same still survived at Oualata at the beginning
of the present century. Moreover, this is the largest group
of ruins to have been discovered in the Mauritanian Sahel,
and all the objects found there date from the early Middle
Ages.
Neither the study of aerial photographs nor re-
connoitering at ground level has as yet, however, revealed
any trace of the royal city, which El-Bekri declares to
have been situated at a distance of six miles from the
merchant settlement.
The Kumbi Saleh ruins extend over an area of
approximately one square kilometre, lying between two
pools which are generally dry and flanked on the
north-west and south-east by two burial grounds covering
almost twice that extent. The outskirts of the city are
strewn with pottery shards and must have been built
over with straw huts. The town itself is constructed
entirely of stone a grey shale, found locally, which splits
into symmetrical slabs. This was used everywhere for
walls, floors, ornamental work, the tombstones in the
graveyards, and so on.
Thousands of tombs yet
not a single gravestone
The houses had upper storeys, and when these subsided
they filled in the ground-floor rooms which when
uncovered were found to be magnificently preserved
under >a mass of rubble averaging 12 feet in tickness.
The central part of the town is built round a large
square, from which several streets branch out; the most
important of these, which is very wide, led eastward and
was marked on the plans as the "Main Avenue". It was
lined by quite high buildings, including a mosque of which
the mirhab has been excavated. The streets are clearly
visible at ground level, despite the collapse of the walls,
and also stand out in aerial photographs.
As already mentioned, two very large burial grounds lie
just outside the town. In the one to the north-east, the
section nearest to the city contains simple Moslem graves,
edged with stones. Further away there are collective
burial-places, surrounded by walls; the largest of these,
with at its centre the so-called "pillared tomb", is
surrounded by six square walls, the outermost of which is
over half a mile in circumference.
The south-eastern burial ground stretches from the city
to the pool of Sohobi, beside which stands the tomb of
Bouhahim, reputed by tradition to have been the comrade
of Abu Bakr ibn Omar, the Almoravide. This, too,
contains several collective burial-places surrounded by
concentric walls.
Though these cemeteries contain thousands of tombs,
no ancient gravestones have been found; cattle, wild
animals, forest fires and rain must have destroyed the

The Unesco Courier. October 1959
brittle shale. Unless some new finds are made therefore,
we shall lack the invaluable data provided by inscribed
tombstones, such as was the case at Gao, where the royal
burial ground of Sane was found to contain a whole series
dating from the twelfth century. (See page 26)
We have learned quite a lot about the architecture of
the city through successive excavations conducted by
A. Bonnel de Mézières in 1914, D. Lazartigues in 1939,
P. Thomassey in 1949 and 1950, and G. Szumowski and
myself in the latter part of 1951. Bonnel de Mézières'
work was the most extensive; helped by some 50 workers,
he excavated 22 structures (houses, tombs and various
other buildings). Unfortunately nothing is now known
about the material he collected through his excavations.
Of greater practical value was the work done between
1949-1951, especially by P. Thomassey, who lived on the
site for several months and cleared two groups of
buildings of very fine architectural style. The flagged
floors, the wall-tablets painted with passages from the
Koran, the graceful lines of the niches carved in walls
and pillars, the stone staircases, and the wealth of
skilfully-fashioned objects (iron tools and weapons,
. pottery, beads, grindstones, and some extremely rare glass
weights used for weighing gold) give us a good idea of the
type of civilization that flourished here.
Cradle of a Sudanese
Negro-Islamic culture
These must have been the houses of wealthy Arab or
Arab-influenced merchants, or of Sarakole or other
grandees who had been converted to Islam. For
everything discovered at Kumbi dates from the con¬
cluding period of Ghana's existence, the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, shortly before its destruction by the
Mandingos. No pre-Islamic finds have been made and
it is highly probable that everything suggestive of aotiimism
was destroyed by the Almorávides.
El-Bekri relates how the town of Awdaghost, a
dependency of Ghana, was sacked in 1054, only 23 years
before the capture .of Kumbi, for the simple reason that
it "acknowledged the authority of the Sultan of Ghana".
We may be sure that the Almorávides must have treated
Kumbi itself in the same way, and that the temples of
the "idols" and the royal tumuli were razed to the ground
and pillaged. No trace of the pre-Islamic civilization of
Ghana now survives in the former capital of the Sarakole
kings. Everything brought to . light is Islamic in origin,
the, architecture being particularly reminiscent of that of
the Arab-Berber caravan cities in Southern Mauritania.
But the ancient capital of Ghana has another claim to
distinction: it was the cradle of the Negro-Islamic culture
which flourished in the Sudan from the eighth century
to our own day, bringing fame to centres such as Tim¬
buktu and Djenné.
Arab merchants, and scholars from The Magrab attract¬
ed by the renown of the land of gold, founded families at
Ghana and elsewhere. Their descendants of mixed blood
spread all over the Sudan, more especially in the big
trading settlements, taking with them the Koran, and
Moslem civilization, from the confines of Senegal to
Chad. It is no accident that the foundation of all the
great empires Ghana, Mali, Songai and the Hausa^States
can be traced back to the Sarakoles and their near
relations, the Malinkes, or that people of the same stock
should have carried some semblance of the Islamic
civilization of the Sudan into the very heart of the forests
of the Bondoukou country, Ashanti and elsewhere, to
which they were drawn by the gold trade.
There is a direct, clear and indisputable connexion
between Kumbi, Tichit, Oualata and the other towns of
Southern Mauritania. But there is also an undeniable,
though more distant and less obvious, connexion between
Kumbi and the Sudanese "banco"-built towns Tim¬
buktu and Djenné in times past; Kayes, Bamako and
Mopti today. Their architecture is the same, though
clumsier in appearance, since the building material is
dried earth "banco". And the deeply-rooted Moslem
culture of the inhabitants is also the same.
This is the old and wondrous heritage bequeathed to the
Sudanese by Ghana. Could anything do greater honour
to the ancient city whose remains are gradually being
brought to light by archaeologists? .
25
