THE BURMA ROAD which became a vital communications link for the Allies In the Second World War, is an old caravan route
reconstructed by modern road-building methods to meet the needs of motorized transport. The modernization of Asia's
famous caravan routes of old is the basis of the vast plan to create an Asian highway network running from Vietnam to Turkey.
10

USIS
ASIAN HIGHWAY routes shown on this map are often ancient caravan trails, now destined to become an up-to-date highway
system. Circles Indicate where road is unsuitable for.motor traffic during the rainy season or where link roads are still Inexistent.

CARAVAN ROUTES
TO LIVE AGAIN
Motorists will soon be able to drive all the way across
the continent of Asia from Turkey to the shores of
Indo-China or Malaya on the famous caravan routes
of antiquity which are to be modernized and linked up in a
new Pan-Asian Highway.
Stretching for some 7,000 miles, the Pan-Asian Highway
is part of a bold and imaginative project conceived by the
Highway Subcommittee of the U.N. Economic Commission
for Asia and the Far East (Ecafe) to endow southern Asia
with an up-to-date international highway system. The
backbone of the undertaking will be the great network of
old caravan routes which have survived the ravages of time
although some date back to as much as 1,000 years before
the Christian Era. It is over these caravan routes that Marco
Polo and other travellers like Fa-Hsien and Ibn Batuta explored
the lands of the East, that the armies of Gengis Khan,
Alexander the Great and Tamerlane marched on their road
to conquest, and that the silk, jade and spices of the Orient
were transported by the traders of the past.
Twelve hundred years before Christ extensive trade rouies
were already in existence under the reign of Salmanasar I,
King of Assyria, and the nobles of his court wore precious
ornaments made with lapis lazuli and other jewels which came
from Afghanistan. The famous Silk Road ran from Chung¬
king through Burma and North India on to Delhi, and from
there to Teheran and Samarkand, then west across the Caspian
Sea and through Tiflis to the Black Sea.
It is hard for us today to realize the hardships and hazards
endured during journeys in those far off times: the vast
distances that had to be covered on foot or horse or camel
back often took months, even years; progress was impeded by
the huge stretches of dusty plains and parched deserts to be
crossed, the turbulent rivers to be forded and the high
mountain ranges to be. scaled. Then too, there was always the
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

CARAVAN
R O U TES
(Contliwed)
NEW PAN-ASIAN HIGHWAY WILL LINK
LANDS FROM MALAYA TO IRAN
lurking danger of cut-throat bandits who would hurl themselves
down on the slow-moving caravans, murdering the travellers
and making off with the rich cargo.
The caravans carried an extremely wide range of goods:
tin from England, copper ore from Spain, timber from northern
Europe, iron from central Africa, Iran and India, spices from
the Moluccas, silks from Sian Fu (China) and cottons from
Egypt and Mekran (now in Pakistan);
The development of trade routes was by no means easy.
Asia is made up of vast plains, some fertile others totally
desert, mountain ranges which include some of the highest in
the world, and rivers, mighty and long and often turbulent.
The trade routes naturally sought out the mountain passes
(most of them still in use) and followed the rivers. Where
possible, caravan routes were preferred to the hazards at sea.
The establishment of great kingdoms greatly helped in
stabilizing and providing some security to trade routes and
developing them, though the extent to which security could
be provided was limited by the rulers' ability and power. The
establishment of the Han dynasty in China, the rise of Cyrus
and of Alexander the Great, and the large-scale missionary
efforts of Asoka all helped towards stabilizing the caravan
routes and trade patterns in Asia.
The Romans, in the period 266 B.C-476 A.D., built roads
which extended over three continents. These were built
primarily for military purposes but good communications with
security of travel gave a considerable impetus to the develop¬
ment of trade and commerce. Exchange of commodities was
carried on through Greece and Syria, and merchants travelled
as far as Merv or Samarkand in Turkestan, Kandahar in
Afghanistan and through the Khyber Pass over the road across
north India to the Ganges plain. In the Byzantine Empire,
trade with the East by caravan flourished. Baghdad gave the
Moslem world good roadways with inns (serais) and provision
for relays of mounts for traders, pilgrims and official courtiers.
These roads were linked with those of central Asia and even
of China and constituted the great trade routes between the
East and the West, and the important international land links
between the cultures and civilizations of the Orient and the
Occident.
Today, however, many'of these land routes have fallen into
disuse and cannot possibly meet the needs of the developing
countries of south Asia. The creation of a vast network of
international highways, linking up the existing roads and raising
these to the standards needed for motorized traffic has thus
become an urgent, priority problem.
The highway project was born following a careful study
of this situation in 1955, when the Highway Subcommittee of
Ecafe undertook a study of the possibilities ' of a. highway
development plan to link all the countries between Vietnam
and Iran. This plan was approved by Ecafe early this year.
The region has been divided into three zones. The first will
cover the road network of Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Thailand,
Malaya and Burma. The second will englobe Burma's western
connexions, East Pakistan, India, Ceylon, Nepal and motor
roads to West Pakistan. The third will comprise West
Pakistan, Afghanistan and Iran.
Ecafe's highway experts agree that the first priority task
is to build the highway links needed to connect the existing
road systems. Already work has been started by some coun¬
tries.
As goods which will travel on the Asian highway will often
have to pass through several countries before reaching. their
final destination, it is proposed to simplify customs formalities
and border procedures.
Once the roads have been linked from country to country,
efforts will be turned to the progressive modernization of the
network as a whole. Thus the countries of southern Asia, once
largely isolated from the outside world, will be able to dev¬
elop their trade, will get to known their neighbours better, and
will also share fully in the economic and social progress of a
continent which has now turned resolutely towards the future.
12

The Unesco Courier. June 1959
Deutsche Zentrale für Fremdenverkehr, Frankfort
RIBBONS OF CONCRETE cutting through plain and wood bring economic progress yet rarely spoil the natural scene.
Landscape architects adapted German autobahns to harmonise with scenery. Mare and foal near Munich to Salzburg Autobahn
(above) are as undisturbed by passing of automobiles as is the effigy of a stag beside Kharkov to Rostov motorway In the U.S.S.R.
Official Soviet photo
13
