FILM MAKING
No longer the privilege
of just a few nations
by Georges Sadoul
U'NTiL about ten or fifteen years ago it
looked as if film making was the privi¬
lege of five or six big nations. Since
then it has been gradually recognized
that, in fact film production has become
*a^ world-wide medium of culture and a fast-expanding
industry in more than fifty countries.
Though more and more films from Asia, the Arab
countries and Latin America began to be shown at
important international festivals such as those of Venice
and Cannes, Karlovy Vary (Czechoslovakia), Sao Paulo
and Berlin, audiences continued for a long time to be
limited and either critical or unimpressed. Between 1947
and 1951 Unesco published reports on the film industry
running to several thousand pages, but relatively few
people explored this mine of information closely enough
to be struck by the growing universality of film produc¬
tion.
After 1950, however, awards made at the festivals of
Venice, Cannes, Karlovy Vary, and Berlin, turned the
spotlight on the Japanese film industry which, since 1925,
has produced more feature films than Hollywood, and on
the Indian cinema with its productions in 14 languages.
And while the West was at last discovering the longest-
Georges Sadoul is a leading authority on the history of the cinema.
Professor at the Institute for Advanced Studies on the Cinema in
Paris and Lecturer at the Institute of Filmology at the Sorbonne,
he is the author of a General History of the Cinema (jive volumes
published) on which he has been working for the past 20 years.
Over 100,000 copies of this work have been printed in eight lan¬
guages. A fifth edition, completely revised and covering the evo¬
lution of the cinema in over 70 countries, is now. in press.
Mr. Sadoul is also the author of a Life of Charles Chaplin and
of The Wonders of the Cinema.
10
established of the Eastern film industries, new national
schools were coming into being. Films of strong emo¬
tional appeal such as The Maimed (Si Pitiang, 1952) by
the Indonesian producer Kotot Sukardi, or those of poetic
beauty like Path of Destiny (Rekava, 1947) by the
Ceylonese producer, Leister Peires, showed that certain
countries had acquired the art of film making almost
simultaneously with their indépendance.
To take in the full panorama of the cinema in the
world today we need to look beyond Europe and North
America to the countries of Asia, the Arab world, Latin
America and the continent of Africa.
Yet how well known is Europe's own film production?
There is much more to it than the works of the main
film producing countries Great Britain, Italy, Germany
the U.S.S.R., France and two of the Scandinavian
countries, Denmark and Sweden, which were already
producing remarkable films between 1910 and 1920.
Just after the Second World War came the revelation
of Central Europe's great progress in the art of film
production. What did we know of Hungarian films before
It Happened in Europe (Radvanyi, 1947) and Talpalatnyi
Fold (Frygies Ban, 1948)? about Polish films before Last
Stage (Wanda Jakubowska, 1948) and Border Street
(Alexander Ford, 1948)? or about Swiss films, until
Lindtberg's Last Chance (1945) made such an overwhelm¬
ing impression with its message of human solidarity?
Yet these films were not the Works of suddenly inspir¬
ed producers. They were the end result of some twenty
to thirty years' research, patient experiment and tentative
groping, and of fruitful international contacts which
helped to set the art of film making on its feet in
countries where the national film industry lacked
independence or the means to develop.
Since 1950, Spain has given us the films of Bardem and
CONTINUED PAGE 12

The Unesco Courier.
Nordisk Tonefilm
SWEDEN is by no means a newcomer to the film Industry. As early as I 9 I 5 and for some ten years
after then, the work of Swedish producers and actors carried this country's productions to the supreme
heights of film art. Following a period of eclipse, the Swedish cinema is today again in the forefront of
world film making. Above, Ingrid Thulin in a scene from "Brink of Life", the work of Ingmar Bergman.
II

FILM MAKING (Continued)
Berlengua (Welcome Mr. Marshall, Death of a Cyclist,
Calabuig); Greece, those of Cacoyannis (Stella) and
Kondouros (The Ogre of Athens) ; Yugoslavia, productions
by Pogacic and Striglic; and Bulgaria, the work of Z. Jan-
dov.
How many people know that Finland, with a population
of barely four millions, and having a language that is
practically unknown outside its frontiers, manages to
produce from 25 to 30 feature films a year? Many of these
films, as for example The White Reindeer (Erik Blomberg,
1952) and The Unknown Soldier (Edwin Laine, 1955) set
very high standards. Though the artistic merits of the
Turkish cinema are an unknown quantity, the fact that
in some years the studios at Istambul produce fifty films
or more is not without significance, since quantity is
sometimes the forerunner of quality.
In art there, is never a status quo for very long. A
brilliant school can disappear overnight and just as
easily come to life again.
Between 1915 and 1925 Sweden reached the supreme
heights of film art through the work of producers like
Stiller and Sjöström and actors and actresses like Lars
Hansom and Greta Garbo, and then seemed to flounder
in the doldrums of commercialism. But in 1940, came
a revival and today Sweden is once again in the fore¬
front of world film making, not only thanks to Ingmar
Bergman, but to other equally talented producers, Sjösberg
and Sücksdorf in particular.
Storm over Asian filmdom
If the art of making films can flourish in a country of
seven million inhabitants it can hardly fail to take
root in the ancient civilizations whose populations run
into hundreds of millions. An early masterpiece by the
great Russian producer Pudovkin was given the title
Storm Over Asia. Nowadays Asian countries are sending
their films to the rest of the world, with their own storms,
Idylls and discoveries, their own epics and elegies.
First of the Asian film mäkers was Japan which began
back in 1910 and which was soon followed by China,
Korea and India. Few people know that in 1927 more
feature films (90) Were produced in Shanghai than in
France. Production standards soon reached high levels.
In the film library of Peking, I was able to see several
Chinese films made in the thirties, including The Lost
Horses by Tsai Tsou-sen and The Angels of Mercy by
Yuang Mu tse, which |were every bit as good as the best
Occidental films of that period and which already had
a "neo-realist" flavour.
In China today a score of new film studios are being
built in as many provinces. Though the number of
cinema tickets sold in 1958 2,600,000,000 represents an
average of only four per person, it is still 30 or 40
times higher than' the average for 1945; and the local
number of tickets sold makes China the second or third
cinema-going country in the world, after the United
States of America and the USSR.
As for Japan, both the production figures 1,000 full-
length films in 1928, 443 in 1957, and probably about 520
in 1958 and the audience figures (one thousand million
cinema-goers, an average of twelve cinema tickets per
year per inhabitant) are high; so is the quality. Since
1921, Kinugasa, Nizogushi, Heinosuke Gosho and H.
Shimizu have joined the ranks of the leading film pro¬
ducers of the world. Even today one cannot help being
impressed by the technical perfection, bold approach and
poetic qualities of Jujiro (Kinugasa, 1928), one of the
few Japanese silent films ever to be seen in Europe. This
film is the equal of the finest American, German, French
and Soviet productions of the days of the silent screen.
Since 1950, owing to the well-deserved success of The
Gates of hell (Kinugasa), Rashomon (Kurosawa) and Life
of Oharu, The Gallant Lady (Mizogushi), many people
have gained the impression that most Japanese films,
and certainly the best ones, deal with the Samurai period.
In actual fact, though they are not as well-known in
the West, the majority of Japanese films, including the
best and the most audacious, deal with contemporary the¬
mes. One could almost say jokingly that neo-realism was
born, not in Rome in about 1944, but in Tokyo in 1927,
BRAZILIAN FILMS were on a par with the best European ,
ductions between 1 927 and 1 932. The same qualities they t
showed became evident again in 1950 when Lima Barreto's
striking film "O Cangeceiro" (above) attracted world-interest.
HUNGARY is a leader in Central Europe's post-war production.
"It Happened in Europe" (Radvanyi 1947) came as a revelation
to audiences in many countries, and was followed by other films
like "Professor Hannibal" (above) made by Zoltan Fabu in 1957.
12 CONTINUED PAGE 14

The Unesco Courier. April 1959
lumbia Picture«
FINLAND with a population of four and a half million people
produces something like 30 feature films annually, many high
standard productions such as "Unknown Soldier" (above)
made by Edwin Laine, which won a grand award at Berlin.
Falco Films En
Irawn attention to its film industry since 1950 with
the productions of men like Bardem, Berlengua and Ladislas
Vajda. This children's game of bull-fighting is taken from Vajda's
"My Uncle Jacinto". In 1 957 Spain produced 63 feature films.
13

FILM MAKING (Cont'd)
I
JAPAN'S FILM INDUSTRY, unknown and unhonoured abroad until recently, is the world's
leading producer of feature films (500 in I 958). Those on modern themes, like "Crab Fisher¬
man" (above) are even less known in the West than films on the Samurai period.
IN CONTINENTAL CHINA many new film studios
are now being built and cinema-going has shown a
massive increasein .1956 the number of tickets
with the Pro Kino movement, and that, after 1951, neo-
realism has burned with a brighter flame in the Japanese
archipelago than in the Italian peninsula, thanks to
Tadashl Imal (We Are Alive), S. Yamamoto (The Sunless
Square), Kaneto Shindo (The Children of Hiroshima)
Yamamura (Kanikosen) , Naruse (OJcasan) and H. Gosho
(The Four Chimneys). We must remember too that Akiro
Kurosawa, one of the most outstanding of today's film
producers, made not only Rashomon and the Seven Samu¬
rai but also To live and Doomed, in which he treats the
problems of present-day Japan with a depth and under¬
standing worthy of a great novelist or painter.
Every year two hundred films are made in Hong-Kong,
about one hundred in the Philippines, and some sixty in
North Korea. Though neither they nor the fresh, lively
films of the young Indonesian cinema (seventy-five films
in 1956) are scarcely known outside South-East Asia, we
are at least beginning to see something of the films made
in India.
Hindi, Bengali, Tamil, Telugu, Mahrati/ Gujrati, Mala-
yalam, Kanarese... India's films are made in fourteen lan¬
guages. There are three main centres of production. The
newest is inthe South. The one in the West (centred on
Bombay) is the oldest; and it is here that the father of
the Indian cinema Phalké, made his first films back in
1913. The Bombay studios' production includes many high
budget films, the demand for which is now gradually
growing in the Orient and also as far away as Morocco.
On the east coast, Calcutta studios have been a centre
of sparkling, brilliant productions for the past twenty
years. Here, in the country of Rabindranath Tagore,
important films, inspired by masterpieces of contemporary
Bengali literature, have been produced by the New
Theatre led by Devaki Bose and Barua. Their merit was
recognized by a Venice Festival jury as early as 1935.
Nor has the standard of this output dropped since then;
on the contrary it has risen. Two of the greatest of the
modern Indian producers are, in fact, from Bengal: Bimal
Roy (Two acres of land) who started with the New Thea¬
tre movement; and Sajatajit Ray (Father Panchali and
The Unconquered) who won a prize at Venice.
Sajatajit Ray learned a great deal from watching Claude
and Jean Renoir making The River in India; and Phalké,
before making his first Indian film, spent some time train¬
ing with the French firm of Pathé at Vincennes. Inter¬
national exchanges yield valuable fruits, and "old" film
industries can help new ones to find their feet; though
there is no doubt that India, with her wealth of talent,
would inevitably have succeeded in building up an out¬
standing film industry on her own, without knowing
anything about the art of film making in the West.
New cinema industries are springing up in other parts
of Asia as well. The cinema industry in the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics is multi-national, and all the
main Republics have their own studios at Baku, Tbilisi,
(Georgia), Erivan (Armenia), Stalinabad (Tadjikistan),
Tashkent (Uzbekistan), Alma-Ata (Kazakhstan) among
others all producing films in the languages of their
countries. The film production of the Asiatic Republics
14

The Unesco Courier. April 1959
»NC^
sold was between ten and twenty times more than
the average for 1 945. Scene above is from the Chinese
film "The White-haired Girl" made nine years ago.
Georges Sadoul Collection
INDONESIAN FILMS typify the work of the young cinema industries which have been
springing up across Asia in recent years, but whose fresh and spirited productions are
hardly known at all outside that part of thé world. "The Return" (above) was made in 1954.
of the U.S.S.R. has been expanding rapidly in recent years
(10 to 20 films per year).
Over a period of eight years (1950-1958) Iran made
ninety films, or five to six times more fhan its entire pro¬
duction during the previous fifty years. There is a curious
reason for this boom. After 1945, two foreign films were
dubbed in Persian a French one First Rendez-vous, with
Danielle Darrieux, and an Azerbaijan comic opera film,
Arshin mal alan, made in Baku. The cinemas showing
First Rendez-vous and Arshin mal alan, between 1946 and
1948, were besieged, simply because these films were
dubbed in a language people understood. Since Persian-
speaking films were obviously a good business proposition,
the production of commercial films began to increase.
This in turn enabled studios to be built, and before long,
as audiences became more demanding, the standard of the
films improved. Among the best of these since 1957 are
The Knightly Vagrant by Mahed Mohseni. The Happy
Urchin by Rafi and, above all, South of the Town by Gaf-
fary. These films bear the imprint of certain French and
Italian techniques... "neo-realism" may soon be making its
appearance in Iran.
The vast film world of Latin America, which begins not
at the Panama Canal but at the Rio Grande, is
practically unknown.
The Mexican film industry, the best 'known and rightly
so, produces an average of one hundred films a year.
These are screened throughout the Spanish-speaking
world and actually have a wider diffusion than Hollywood
productions. Since Portrait of Mary, The Pearl and
Lovesick, producer Emilio Fernandez and cameraman
Gabriel Figueroa, have become world famous, though
there are many other famous names in the Mexican school,
including Galindo, Bracho, Gavaldon, the great Luis
Bunuel, Carlos Velo, and Benito Alazraki.
It is worth remembering that Emilio Fernandez likes to
call himself "El Indio"the Indian. A large part of the
Mexican cinema, including Portrait of Mary and Alaz-
raki's Roots, is permeated with the ancient culture of the
pre-Columbian era. If Eisenstein with Que viva Mexico
(1930) and Paul Strand and Zinnermann with The Wave
and The Alvarado Rebels (1936) gave much to the Mexican
cinema, it was because they, in turn found great riches
in Mexico, with its Indians, its peons, its historic battles,
its ancient monuments and modern murals, and the
wealth of its folklore and traditions.
Between 1927 and 1932 the technique and bold approach
of Brazilian films made them a match for the best Euro¬
pean productions, thanks mainly to Umberto Mauro and
Mario Peixoto. After this the Brazilian film industry
appeared to do little more than produce commercial films
designed to popularize the songs and dances of the Brazil¬
ian Carnival. Then about 1950 it revived again partly
due to the fact that the famous Alberto Cavalcanti went
back, to work in his country for a time.
The success of Lima Baretto's magnificent O Cangaceiro
has since drawn the world's attention again to the exis¬
tence of the Brazilian cinema industry although this was
only one among many other good films it had produced.
CONTINUED PAGE 17

POLAND'S FILM INDUS¬
TRY was little known before
1948 when two Important
films, "Last Stage" and "Bor¬
der Street" were produced.
Yet each year Poland releases
eighteen to twenty films, many
of which like "The Five Boys
of Barska Street" (above) de¬
serve to be better known.
Photo Film Polski
THE TUNISIAN CINEMA
made a promising start in the
field of production with
"Goha" (above) on which
Tunisian film-makers collabo¬
rated closely with the French
producer, Jacques Baratier.
Georges Sadoul Collection
EGYPT Is the major film-
producing country of the Afri¬
can Continent and its films are
shown throughout the vast
Moslem world, from Dakar to
Jakarta. Scene above is from
"The Leech" by Abou Seif.
Georges Sadoul Collection
16

The Unesco Courier. April 1959
FILM MAKING (Continued)
Georges Sadoul Collection
NEGRO AFRICA remains a "white blank" on the map of
world film production. The short-length film "Mouramanl"
(above) is one of the few films entirely produced by Africans.
No major film has yet been made by Negroes in Africa.
Ceylonese Legation, Paris
CEYLON is one of the countries which entered the ranks
of the world's film makers almost simultaneously with their
accession to Independence. Above is a scene from "Path of
Destiny" made In 1947 and produced by Leister Pelres.
In Argentina, the cinema has already celebrated the fif¬
tieth anniversary of its first productions. During the
1930's, Argentinian films held first place on the markets
of the Spanish-speaking peoples, and though Argentina
has now been supplanted by Mexico, Buenos Aires still
continues to turn out between thirty and forty full-length
films a year. The work of Sazlavsky, Lucas Demare, Hugo
Del Carril and Torre Nilson amongst others, is well up to
international standard.
The production of films in Chile and Venezuela has been
uneven; but The Forgotten Creek, produced by Bruno Ge-
bel near Santiago, and The Sloop Isabel, made by Hugo
Christensen near Caracas, have won favourable comment
at international festivals. Cuba has been producing full-
length films since 1910; and before long Colombia, Pana¬
ma, Bolivia, Uruguay and even Puerto Ricowhere the
film industry has been developing spasmodicallymay
come into the field.
The vast, rapidly developing territory of Latin America
with its teeming millions, will, no doubt add new eye
openers to the film world before the century is out. So
may Australia, which has been producing films for fifty
years; or New Zealand, which, since 1950, already has
several full-length films to its credit.
In the continent of Africa, the only major film-
producing country is Egypt, whose films are shown
throughout the vast Moslem world wherever the language
of the Koran is understood and modern Arabic is used by
press and radio. Thus Egypt's films reach audiences in
two continents, from Dakar to Jakarta, from the Congo to
China. And there are also cinemas showing Arabic-
speaking films in several French towns, in North and
South America and in Africa South of the Sahara.
The Moslem Hollywood
The emergence of Cairo as the Hollywood of the Moslem
world coincided with the second "World War; and
wireless and gramophone records playing in cafés and
squares helped to increase the distribution of Arabic-
speaking films, in which singing and dancing play an
important part. Even fifteen years ago there were towns
in the Middle East where people paid twice as much to
see an Arabic film as to see an American or European one.
Perhaps not all the hundreds of films made in Cairo since
1940 are of a high standard, but no list of the world's best
film producers would be complete without the names of
the late Kamal Selim, Salah Abu Seif and Youssef
Chahine.
Between 1945 and 1950, a few Moroccan films were made
at Rabat; and the Tunisian cinema made a promising
start with Goha on which Tunisians collaborated with a
Frenchman, Jacques Baratier.
Africa South of the Sahara however remains a blank
on the map of film production. Sixty years after the
invention of the cinema, no major film, as far as I know,
had yet been produced, photographed, written and scripted
in their language by African Negroes. Their participation,
in general, has been limited to acting. In other words,
there are 200 million coloured people who have still not
been able to make full use of the cinema to express
themselves; and since statistics show that there are still
regions where, on an average, an African buys a cinema
;ticket only once or twice in twenty years (1), the cultural
influence of the cinema here is limited.
Figures for cinema attendance usually coincide with
illiteracy areasand "hunger areas". Since the end of
the Second World War, however, the geography of the
cinema and the film industry has been changing radically
from year to year. Film making will soon cease to be one
of the most unevenly distributed things in the world. For
fifty countries today perhaps a hundred tomorrow the
cinema represents an important cultural medium and a
rich vehicle of expression.
(1) See Unesco's "Film and Cinema Statistics" (Report N° 1);
"World Communications" (1956); and "Facts and Figures" (1957).
17

FILM MAKING (Confd) The Unesco Courier. April 1959
George«
INDIA: THIRD LARGEST
FILM PRODUCER
IRAN has produced fwe or six times more films (90) in the
past eight years than in the previous 50. Some of them
like "South of the To Jl n" (I) produced last year by Gaffary
recall the neo-realisrh of French and Italian productions
TURKEY has an active film industry and its studios In Istan
bul sometimes reach an annual production of more thai
fifty films. "The Empty Cradle" (2) is the work of the Tur
kish producer Baha Gelenbevi. MEXICO'S studios turi
out an average of 100 films each year and these are mor«
widely diffused in theSpanish-speaking world than Hollywood
productions. "The Countrywoman" (3) was made by s
famous team, producer Emilio Fernandez and cameraman
Gabriel Figueroa. INDIA occupies third place in the list
of the world's feature film producers in 1957 with 295 films,
compared with 443 for japan and 378 for the U.S.A. Hong
Kong (217 films) and France (142) came next. India's
multilingual situation is reflected in its films made in 14 lan¬
guages. Scene shown in photo 4 is from "Moral Heritage".
George« Sadoul Collection Basant Film Distributor«, Bomba
18 19

