TRAFFIC JAM
ON THE BROADCASTING BANDS
by Julian Behrstock
The African villager who joins his
neighbours to hear local broad¬
casts on the community set and
the uptown New Yorker who twirls
the dial of his high-powered short- .
wave receiver in a skyscraper apart¬
ment alike have a stake in a world
radio conference which opened in
Geneva, Switzerland, in August.
This conference, sponsored by the
International Telecommunication
Union (ITU), will gather together
government officials and radio broad¬
casters from 100 countries. During
four months in Geneva, they will
seek to hammer out agreement on
pressing problems affecting the role
of radio in the world today.
The problems concern both trans¬
mission and reception of broadcasts.
Competition between countries in
expanding their overseas broadcasting
services in recent years has hindered
agreement on an orderly system for
the international allocation of fre¬
quencies. Meanwhile, new stations
are being built, more powerful trans¬
mitters are coming into operation and
rival transmissions increase. Pirating
of frequencies and jamming add to
the difficulties of the listener.
Wanted ! 400 million sets
Aproblem of a different kind is
experienced by nearly 60 per cent
of the world's people, most of
them in Asia and Africa, who lack
efficient, low-cost receivers to pick up
even local broadcasts. Community
sets, inconvenient for many listeners
and often costly because of high
taxes, are the only means of reception
in many areas. Nearly 400 million
receivers would have to be mass-pro¬
duced to assure an individual set for
each family in the under-developed
countries (For one example see
"Saucepan Radio", page 260.
These will be among the questions
preoccupying delegates to the ITU's
Administrative Radio Conference, the
first such conference to be convened
in eight years. They are also a major
concern of Unesco, dedicated as it is
to promoting the use of broadcasting,
and all the other means of mass com¬
munication, for the free flow of
information and ideas.
Unesco has sent its Member States
a series of four proposals for possible
submission to the Radio Conference.
The principal proposal urges that
agreement be reached on a sound plan
for distribution of high frequencies
the frequencies used for long-distance
broadcasting. It suggests that proce¬
dures should be established by which
the ITU could assist radio services in
making more effective use of frequen¬
cies. Consultation with each other
through the ITU would enable them,
for example, to minimize the occur¬
rence of broadcasts at the same time
and on the same frequencies, which
results in little more than noise for
the listener.
The Geneva conference will mark
a further and perhaps decisive step
in an effort dating back more than
SO years to reach world agreement on
frequencies. Since 1928, when a first
international frequency list was drawn
up, a series of conferences has sought
to put a plan into effect. It became
progressively more difficult to cut up
the pie as governments made mount¬
ing requests based on expanding radio
services. Demands for high frequen¬
cies have been three times in excess
of available resources.
Today the. great majority of States
maintain international broadcasting
services beaming numerous program¬
mes daily on high 'frequencies to all
parts of the world. Despite the vast
expenditure of time, money and ef¬
fort, the audience remains small and
in some areas is numbered only in
thousands or even hundreds of listen¬
ers. Broadcasters themselves will be
the first to acknowledge the crying
need for agreement on frequencies,
schedules and programme exchanges.
Unesco has drawn these points to
the attention of its Member States in
urging remedial action at the Geneva
Conference. Such action, says Unesco,
would help broadcasting achieve "its
great potentialities as a vehicle for
the exchange of information and ideas
throughout the world".
A second Unesco proposal deals
with the interference hindering even
local reception of broadcasts in some
areas as a result of overcrowding of
the low and medium frequency bands^
The experience of a number of coun¬
tries, particularly in Europe and North
America, has shown that frequency
modulation (FM) broadcasting in the
very high frequency band may be
expanded for use in local broadcast¬
ing, relieving much of the burden in
other bands. It provides the listener,
moreover, with a high quality signal
relatively free from interference.
Unesco recommends that FM be in¬
troduced more widely.
Remove crushing taxes
The widespread need for radio
receivers in the under-developed
countries is the object of a third
proposal. It suggests that the ITU
and Unesco explore the possibility of
designing a robust, wideband, inex¬
pensive receiver, with standardized
parts. A study would be made of the
feasibility of pooling markets to en¬
courage mass production of receivers
of this kind.
Even in some of the more advanced
countries, radio receivers are still a
luxury, due to their high original
price, cost of upkeep and the imposi¬
tion of import duties and sales taxes.
A Unesco survey shows that some
85 countries levy import duties on
radio receivers; these charges often
represent 50 per cent or more of the
value. Reduction of duties and sales
taxes is accordingly suggested in
Unesco's fourth proposal.
Indications are that all four pro¬
posals suggested by Unesco will be
sponsored by governments and sub¬
mitted to the Administrative Radio
Conference. Their adoption would
help to improve conditions for both
transmission and reception of radio
broadcasts, making ' this a ' better
medium to entertain, enlighten and
lirik people all over the world.
