CENTRAL AFRICA'S
'SAUCEPAN SP
THE challenge to the Central Afri¬
can Broadcasting Station was
immense and exciting: to bring
education by radio to 7 million Afri¬
cans. We were the first in Africa to
try this and there were no precedents
we could follow.
The station had had its beginnings
in 1941, first at Kitwe, then at
Lusaka, the capital of Northern
Rhodesia. It then broadcast mainly
war-news to the Africans of the,
territory. After the war its range
was extended to Southern Rhodesia
and Nyasaland and its broadcasts
became primarily educational. It
remained a government-run station
until 1957 When it became part of the
Federal Broadcasting Corporation of
Rhodesia and Nyasaland.
The problems were many: for one,
we had to use nine of the languages
of the Rhodesias and Nyasaland and
even that left out large minorities.
But even more difficult was a prob¬
lem that broadcasting stations in
most other countries do not even
have to think of: radio receivers.
At the end of the last war there
were two or three hundred community
receivers in welfare halls and mission-
stations and at administrative cen¬
tres, but hardly any Africans had sets
of their own. These community
receivers had not proved a success.
Our pioneer staff set out to try and
have a set made that Africans could
afford to have in their homes. The
requirements were unusual: it had to
be a short-wave set because only
short waves can cover economically
the immense area of the Rhodesias
and Nyasaland an area larger than
that of the British Isles, France, all
of Germany and Holland together
(485,000 square miles). It had to be
a battery set because few African
houses have electricity. But above all
it had to be cheap.
26
Such a set did not exist and it took
the first director, Harry Franklin,
three years to find a firm which
could be persuaded to make one.
In the end a company specializing
in batteries agreed to produce one
for him. It turned out to be a sturdy,
round little set which looked like a
saucepan on its side, and that is why
they called it the "Saucepan Special".
(The original "Saucepan Special" has
now been replaced by another model
of different shape.)
In 1948 twenty sample sets were
flown out to Northern Rhodesia and
within a few days they had been
snapped up by Africans who paid
£ 5 ($ 14) for the set and 25/- ($ 3.50)
for the battery. The manufacturers
sent their manager to investigate
further and when he visited the new
owners unexpectedly, he was met with
such overwhelming enthusiasm that
the company decided to go into mass
production.
'I have the whole
world in my hut'
The sets were bought up faster
than they could be manu¬
factured and over the thatched
huts of neglected villages and over
the concrete-box houses of urban
"compounds" aerials started to rise,
dozens, hundreds, thousands and
within a few years, tens of thousands.
Letters started to arrive at our
broadcasting station in Lusaka in
ever increasing numbers some typed
neatly, others scrawled painfully in
one of the many vernaculars of the
land.
"I have pleasure in telling you
that ever since my life I have
never had anything which could
please my life better than the
wireless I have got."
"Broadcasting is to Africans as
the great invention of printing
was to European countries in the
Renaissance era... We are no lon¬
ger isolated." '
"Nowadays I will be enjoying a
lot if I don't die quickly. I do en¬
joy very much listening to my set
although I don't get satisfied (sa¬
tiated) as I do when eating
"nsima" (Maize meal porridge)."
"I feel proud when I switch on
my Saucepan Special and have
the whole world in my hut."
Before long the languages of Cen¬
tral Africa had been enriched by a
new word "wayaleshi" the local way
of pronouncing (the English word)
"wireless".
We experimented with many types
of programmes: There were discussion
programmes in which the participants
were a dozen or two "men in the
street" recorded in remote villages
and urban beer-halls, on farms and
in mines some of them educated and
sophisticated, others illiterate and
traditionalist. There was a serial
about a Copperbelt family, designed
to let our audience identify itself
with the hero who suffers the common
experiences of recent migrants to the
towns and solves his problems in an
intelligent, modern way. There were
radio refresher courses for rural
teachers who are normally cut off
from all mental stimulation.
Blind historians found a great new
audience for the oral- traditions of
their tribes through our station. We
persuaded shy, timid African women
to discuss marriages and what could
and did go wrong with them. Soon
we were surprised to receive letters
of comment from women, some from
illiterates dictated to better-educated
husbands. There was something
stirring when the voiceless women of
Central Africa came to write their
opinions to broadcasters who were

The Unesco Courier. September 1959
not members of their family or clan,
but total strangers.
We had many spectacular successes.
But far more, we learnt from our
failures. One of these we had with
slogans.
Originally we had imagined that as
broadcasting became less of a novelty
our listeners would become more
sophisticated. What we had left out
of account was the increase in the
number of listeners. As radio-owner¬
ship spread down the social pyramid
the average standard of sophisti¬
cation became lower. It all coincided
with the increasing industrialization
of the Rhodesias and the rapid in¬
crease in African incomes. Radio was
becoming a "must" a coveted symbol
of status. We had to simplify and
simplify still more.
That was when we 'decided to try
slogans hammering home a few sim¬
ple lessons with repetitive little ver¬
ses, not unlike advertising in com¬
mercial radio. Since ours was a
public service station and carried no
advertising, our audience had no
experience of this approachnor had
we broadcasters.
For our first campaign we selected
the advantages of education for girls
and the dangers of the common
house-fly.
I got together a team of helpers,
among them an African author who
was then working on a collection of
proverbs in the Bemba language. I
suggested that these might be useful.
We might hook the new teaching-
matter on to the known, traditional
wisdom.
The others suggested we should use
the traditional form, too. The chief
or elder who uses a proverb never
says the entire saying. He says one
half, the other is added by the man
he is speaking to. One says: "A
garden does not grow by itself..."
the other adds: "Unlike teeth in the
mouth." (In other words, it needs
effort.)
Theme and variations
on a proverb-slogan
This was the pattern We decided
to follow, having the second
half chanted by a small
chorus. Before many minutes had
elapsed the five or six of us Were
scribbling away enthusiastically at
possible proverb-slogan combinations.
In the end we recorded a number,
including the following. (The words
in italics were spoken by a chorus of
three.)
"Young trees: they make the future
forest.
Let us educate little girls: tomorrow
they are th,e young mothers."
Northern Rhodesia Information Service
A STURDY LITTLE SET, the "Saucepan Special", helps to bring education by radio to seven
million people in Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Since the first of these low-priced battery sets was
put on the market in 1948, tens of thousands of aerials have risen above thatched hut villages
and concrete houses of urban compounds. For the people of the two territories radio has become
a "must". "Broadcasting is to Africans as the great invention of printing was to European countries...
we are no longer isolated", wrote one listener to the Central African Broadcasting Station in
Lusaka. Broadcasts go out in nine languages and listeners themselves take part in discussion program¬
mes. The original "Saucepan" model shown here has been improved and has a different shape.
Another:
"Though it's small: yet it's a heavy
load.
The fly: though small, is dangerous.
It gives us disease: You, kill that
fiyi"
We broadcast these and similar
slogans for several weeks, then tried
to assess their effect by interviewing
listeners. Our interviewers chanted
the first half and then wherever
they went the remaining words were
supplied word-perfect. But only very
lew listeners understood what we
were trying to get at.
The better - educated townsfolk
knew all about the need for female
education and about the dangers of
the common housefly.
"You are quite right", said one,
"there are many reasons why women
should be educated. They are like
the front wheel of a bicycle and the
one behind are the men. As a bicycle
cannot run with one wheel, so we
men cannot raise the country lonely."
However, these new townsmen in
most cases only a decade or two out
of their villages were completely
bewildered by the proverbs. First
they ignored them, but when the
interviewers pressed them they tried
to interpret them literally.
In remote villages we found the
opposite reaction. The proverbs were
known and commented on at length,
but these villagers saw no connexion
between them and our new lessons.
Yet all those interviewed had been
regular listeners. Since these slogans
were designed largely for the illiterate
townsmen who might become listeners
if incomes continued to rise; we
decided to extend the enquiry.
We brought groups of such potential
listeners into our studios, played
them recordings of the slogans and
tried to get their reactions. It took
a long time to overcome their
suspicions, but when at long last their
reactions came, they were even more
startling. There were many different
reactions, but they all had one thing
in common: they were deeply alle¬
gorical. Nothing was ever inter¬
preted literally:
"You speak wisely," said one,
"though small, yet it's a heavy load.
The fly is small, but it brings disease.
It's like this: One man can spoil the
happiness of an entire village. He
may be a witch. He brings fear and
hatred and suspicion among the
people. He may even give the chief
an illness by his witchcraft. "Kill
that fly" means we should send such
a man out of the village. One such
man can spoil an entire village.
Though it's small, yet it's a heavy
load."
There was much that we had to
learn the hard way... by trial and
error!
Peter Fraenkel, who has long been associat¬
ed with the Central African Broadcasting
Station, is the author of "Wayaleshi," a
newly-published book devoted to the work
of this radio station at Lusaka. (Publisher:
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London; price: 21/-.)
27
