IX-UP OF THE SEASONS: WARMER
INTERS AND COLDER SUMMERS
by Lucien Néret
Speaking before the American Chemical Society in
December 1957, the famous physicist Edward Teller
gave a solemn warning about the Increase in the
rate of carbon dioxide gas in the air. According to
Dr. Teller, the carbon dioxide content of the air has gone
up by 2% since the beginning of the Industrial Revolu¬
tion. He said that if the rate of increase reached 10%
the melting of Arctic ice would be speeded, causing the
level of the oceans to rise quite considerably.
The same view had been expressed some three months
earlier by delegates at the International Congress of
Geodesy and Geophysics, meeting in Toronto, Canada.
They stated that by the end of the century the level of
the oceans would have risen by nearly five feet, enough
to threaten many ports and seaside towns.
Adding to these observations, two well-known American
scientists, Professors Maurice Ewing and William L. Donn,
have stated that the gradual melting of the Polar ice¬
caps would lead to condensation of the water vapour which
in turn would produce continuous snow-storms. Such
phenomena, the two specialists believe, might well mark
the beginning of a new ice-age in a hundred years' time.
Both Western Europe and the Eastern part of the United
States would feel the effects of this cataclysm, and a
layer of ice more than a mile thick might form in some
parts of the world.
Such warnings, especially when they are voiced by such
well-known authorities, deserve to be taken seriously and
that is why special attention has been paid during the
International Geophysical Year to glaciological and
oceanographical research.
Over the last ten years specialists have noted a marked
change in meteorological phenomena. Generally speak¬
ing, the average temperature is rising both in the northern
and southern hemispheres a fact which fits in well with
the observed melting of the Polar ice-caps.
But while the winters are getting warmer, the summers
are now cooler. One result is that some of the fast-
flowing glaciers are extending their surface; but there
are other consequences. In England, cricket clubs
complain that their season grows shorter every year;
fisheries experts have noted that the shoals of cod are
tending to move northwards; and in the last few years
the Great Salt Lake in Utah has dried up by half.
H-bomb tests not to blame
Ever since the present series of bad summers began,
public opinion has put the blame on nuclear and
thermonuclear explosions. Most meteorologists,
however, state that, this accusation is completely ground¬
less. They stress that it would take tremendous energy,
exceeding anything man is capable of producing, to exert
an influence on the air circulation and the formation of
anti-cyclones which lead to widespread weather distur¬
bances.
Even a small local thunderstorm would require almost
as much energy as that liberated by about fifteen
hydrogen bombs. Scientists state that the average storm
at sea is equal to the energy of hundreds or thousands
of atomic explosions. To create a full-scale storm artifi¬
cially you would have to let off atomic bombs almost
every second!
Such is the opinion of most meteorologists. There are
exceptions, however, and among them authorities such as
Dr. Horace R. Byers, head of the Meteorological Depart¬
ment of the University of Chicago, and Professor William
H. Parker of the University of Manitoba.
Dr. Byers maintains that each atomic explosion in¬
creases the ionization of the atmosphere and compromises
the electrical balance between the atmosphere's positive
charge and the earth's negative charge,
As for Professor Parker, he has noted "an abnormal
sensitization of the ionosphere." Recalling that the
eruption of the Krakatoa volcano in 1883 was followed by
several disastrous summers, he asks: "Why should not
artificially-produced atmospheric disturbances have
similar effects?"
During the fifth meeting of the special committee for
the International Geophysical Year in Moscow last
summer, I asked several meteorologists for their views on
these theories. All of them expressed a negative opinion.
Weather 'eyes' in the stratosphere
On the other hand, both Russian and American
scientists stressed that the data transmitted by the
artificial satellites has revealed a considerable den¬
sity of meteoritic dust in the vicinity of our planet. They
believe that this dust may play the role of ice-forming
nuclei promoting the condensation of water droplets and
thereby producing the abnormal rainfall which has been
noted recently in various parts of the world.
Observations carried out during the I.G.Y. also seem
to prove a relationship between the appearance of
sunspots and solar protuberances and variations in the
climate. During periods of intense solar activity, special-
its have noted an increased circulation of the air and
temperature variations. It is cooler in the tropics and
warmer in the polar regions. A mass of data on these
phenomena has been collected all over the world during
the I.G.Y.
Once it is sifted we shall know a lot more about the
influence that solar activity exerts on the earth's
atmosphere.
Already artificial satellites have proved to be excellent
instruments of observation, and scientists are now
contemplating sending aloft satellites equipped like real
meteorological stations. Launched in an orbit 3,700 miles
above the Earth, such stations would take about four
hours to travel from one Pole to the other. They would
provide scientists with invaluable information on the
evolution of hurricanes and the formation of cloud
masses.
At this stage, man will have advanced a long way
towards his dream of mastering the climate. Weather-
making has become a necessity of modern living. As the
world population grows and men strive to produce more
and more food, it is important that agriculture should not
be dependent on the whims of the weather.
Up to now man's "weather-making" activities have been
on a very minor scale, such as inducing hail or thun¬
derstorms over a limited area. Now two scientists
Harry Wechsler, in the United States, and Grigory
Avsiuk, in the Soviet Union speak of nothing less than
changing the climate in the Arctic by melting the floating
ice which has formed there over thousands of years.
Technically, the plan could be successful. Its direct
consequence Would be to make the climate warmer and
more humid over an area covering more than 7,500,000
square miles. Since only the ice floating on the sea is
involved, there would be no danger of flooding such as
that mentioned at the beginning of this article. Vegeta¬
tion would appear again in the coldest parts of Siberia
and Alaska, though glaciers might form in the
mountainous areas.
All this, however, is still only a dream.
