THE U.S.S.R. FIGHT
TO FREE ITS CITIES
FROM AIR POLLUTION
In the Soviet Union the battle against air pollution in
towns and' industrial centres has been given high
priority since 1949 when the U.S.S.R. Council of
Ministers approved a "Clean Air" Act for populated areas.
Headquarters of the nation-wide anti-pollution campaign
is the Chief Sanitary Inspection Office whose special
committee for the protection of the air, with its large
staff of chemists, doctors and other specialists, is in fact
a scientific centre for consultation and research.
One of its chief tasks, says Professor V. Ryazanov (1), a
Soviet scientist, in a special report to The Unesco Courier,
is to study the harmful effects of atmospheric pollution
on human beings and to determine the permissible limits
for the concentrations found in the air. It has been
found, for example, that the concentration of sulphur gas
in city air normally varies around one or two milligrammes
per cubic metre and that workers in industrial plants can
tolerate up to 20 milligrammes per cubic metre without
any noticeable harm.
However, the concentration of impurities in the air of
populated areas must be kept much lower than that found
in industry: a worker spends only six to eight hours a
day in a factory; the town dweller breathes the same air
all day long, and air inside homes contains only slightly
less harmful admixtures than the outside air.
Furthermore, factory workers are usually of an age
when organisms have a high resistance to such harmful
impurities; city dwellers include old people and young
children whose level of resistance is much lower. Measures
for health protection in industry aim primarily to prevent
harmful action of toxic substances; those designed for
urban populations must also make a special effort to guard
against unpleasant physical effects, such as tears, sneez¬
ing, coughing and changes in the depth and frequency of
breathing.
Soviet experiments have shown that various reflex
reactions result from breathing very small, sometimes
imperceptible concentrations of atmospheric pollutants.
The odour of sulphur gas, for instance, can be detected
only in a concentration of at least 1.6 milligrammes per
cubic metre, yet even a concentration as small as 0.6 milli¬
grammes per cubic metre can provoke reflexes in the
brain. Bottom photo on this page shows studies being
made of the effect of very weak concentrations of sulphur
gas on electric currents in the human brain. This is one
form of research which helps Soviet scientists to deter¬
mine the permissible concentration limits of pollutants.
Attacking industrial air pollution at its source, a special
committee for cleaning industrial waste in the atmosphere
stimulates research in many institutes on ways and
devices for cleaning industrial gas and smoke released
into the air. Thousands of such devices are used in Soviet
power stations and factories.
Today the Soviet Union is also seeking more radical
and economical methods, primarily the rationalization of
technological processes through which the pelease of
harmful gases and dust into the atmosphere will be
decreased or completely stopped. In the fight against
pollution of the air by automobiles, buses will gradually
be replaced by trolleybuses and the numbers of electro-
mobiles and cars running on liquid gas will be increased.
Top photo shows traffic density in Gorki Street, Moscow.
(1) Professor Ryazanov is head of the Chair of Social Hygiene
at the Central Institute of Advanced Medical Studies, Moscow.
His services as a specialist on questions of air pollution have
been used by the World Health Organization.
10
