Longest road built:
THE ROYAL
HIGHWAY OF
THE INCAS
by Jorge Carrera Andrade
HANGING BRIDGES, "little brothers of the roads", were ever impor¬
tant links in the Inca road system. They were constructed of bamboo and
fibre cordssome of this type still exist in South Americaand their upkeep
was entrusted to a "Commissioner of Roads and Bridges" a sketch of whom
(left) was made by Guarnan Poma de Ayala, the chronicler of Indian descent
in his 17th century Codex, "Nueva Crónica y Buen Gobierno". With its
drawings of bridges and royal halting stations, this work constituted a kind
of illustrated guide to the Inca roads as they existed in the 1 7th century.
There are many paradoxes in history, and one of the
strangest is surely that the Incas, who had never
heard of the wheel, should have built the greatest
road system the world has ¡known. Their network of
highways covered some 10,000 miles, stretching from Col¬
ombia all the way to Chile and from the shores of the
Pacific to the jungle forests of the Amazon, crisscrossing
almost all the territory now included in the Republics
of Ecuador and Peru, as well as portions of Bolivia, Chile,
northern Argentina and southern Colombia.
The Inca Empire began as a tiny kingdom on the shores
of Lake Titicaca about the year 1,000 A.D. For five
hundred years it grew and expanded until, after conquer¬
ing the Kingdom of Quito, it was the most powerful
civilization of South America and adopted the name "Land
of the Four Quarters of the World" (Tahuantinsuyu) to
signify its control of the four cardinal points of the com¬
pass.
The Inca road system was built to preserve the unity
and safeguard the economic life of the Empire. Its
construction is one of the wonders of human history,
defying all natural obstacles in one of the most rugged
terrains existing anywhere in the world. Though far less
known than the celebrated roads of Rome and other
ancient empires, the Inca highways are in many ways
even more remarkable.
The backbone of the network was a broad highway the
"Great Royal Road of the Incas"running the entire
Jorge Carrera Andrade of Quito, Ecuador, has done considerable
research into the ancient civilizations of South America. He is
the author of two books on the Incas and the Kingdom of Quito,
"La Tierra Sempre Verde" (The Evergreen Land) and "'El Camino
del Sol" \(Road of the Sun). A leading poet of Latin America,
his literary *works have been published in several languages. Since
1954 Carrera Andrade has been in 'charge of the Spanish edition
of The Unesco Courier.
22

The Unesco Courier. June 1959
length of the Inca Empire from north to south, between
the two branches of the formidable Andean mountain
range. In certain places the road rose sharply to as much
as 15,000 feet; in others it. dropped steeply in mountain
valleys and gorges, traversed broad fertile plains and
bleak stretches of desert wasteland.
From the main highway branch roads cut through the
mountain in all directions, especially to the west, where
they linked up with another mighty highway known as
the "Coastal Road", which ran parallel to the Great Royal
Road along the sandy coastal plains and forests from
Tumbez to the north of Chile where it joined up with it.
It should not be imagined that the Inca roads were
mere mountain tracks or desert trails. The Great Royal
Highway was 25 feet in width and ran straight as an
arrow, without curves or detours of any kind, for 3,000
miles more than the distance between Gibraltar and
Moscow! Paved with stones along almost its entire
length, it traversed only the principal cities of the empire,
like Cuzco and Quito, the other towns being linked up
with the Royal Highway by secondary roads. On both
sides of the highway the Incas built walls of stone and
packed earth on top of which they planted agave cactuses
at regular intervals. In addition rows of trees. lined the
road to provide shade for travellers. Living in a bleak
landscape the Incas attached great importance to their
trees and the empire enacted stringent laws for their pre¬
servation. The penalty for cutting them down was death.
Along the side of the Great Royal Road ran a rivulet of
fresh water to quench the thirst of both wayfarers and
draft animals. At intervals of about twelve miles along
the entire stretch of 3,000 miles there were wayside
houses known as tampus where travellers could rest or
spend the night. . There were also chains of granaries and
royal depots stocked with food and all kinds of supplies
for the army, including clothing and leather footwear.
Grain and manufactured products were stored in huge
earthen jars. Strangers were accommodated with the ut¬
most hospitality in hostelrles called corpahuasis and were
provided with food and drink free or charge.
Every mile or so along the Royal Route the Incas bullt
edifices for a special category of imperial functionaries,
the chasquis or relay couriers, who raced on foot from
one end of the kingdom to the other bearing royal mes¬
sages by word of mouth. Sometimes messages were con¬
veyed by specially painted sticks or beans painted in
various colour combinations which had specific meanings.
The Incas resorted to these devices since they had no
written language.
This postal service was so efficient that it covered the
3,000 odd miles of the Great Royal Highway in a matter
of 20 days or so four times faster than the "pony express"
service Introduced by the Spaniards after the Conquest.
In the best season of the year, the chasquis covered the
distance between Cuzco and Quito in five days a feat
they continued to perform clandestinely during ,the
Colonial era to the amazement of the Spaniards who
dubbed this fleet-footed news-transmission system "post
office of the sorcerers."
The stone that wept blood
The astounding network of Andean roads and highways
was the achievement of three Inca emperors: Pacha¬
cútec, Túpac Yupanqui and Huayna Cápac, the man¬
power for the construction work coming from the tribes of
peoples they subdued. Pachacútec, known as the "Re¬
former", was particularly fond of stone and for the Royal
Highway he had enormous blocks of stone transported
hundreds of miles, particularly from the Kingdom of
Quito, using the Indians of that region and a tribe called
the Chancas. The treatment meeted out by the Imperial
guards (they were called Big-Ears) was such that the
Indians finally revolted and almost overthrew the Inca
kingdom. The earliest chroniclers relate how the huge
stones (some weighing 10 tons) Were carried such great
distances and tell a story of how one such block fell and
crushed a thousand Indians to death. It passed Into
legend as "the stone that wept blood."
Fifty years after the Conquest, a Spanish missionary,
José de Acosta, visited the New World and noted that the
Indians who worked on the roads "used no mortar, had
neither iron nor steel for cutting and working the stones,
no machines or instruments for transporting them, yet so
skilful was their work that- the Joints between the stones
were barely noticeable."
Tupac Yupanqui was the son of Pachacútec and carried
on his father's work. He extended the Royal Highway as
far as Chile in the south and beyond Quito in the north,
thus opening up new territories for trade and develop¬
ment. To consolidate the empire he built a chain of
fortresses near the Great Highway, and instituted a
system of "population transfers", shifting newly conquered
tribes to Peru and replacing them by loyal subjects.
Huayna Cápac, his successor, surpassed his father in the
field of public works. He built Temples of the Sun and
Inca Watchtowers along the Royal Highway. He repaired
the old roads and built new ones, and had platforms and
terraces made to prevent erosion of the soil.
But above all, Huayna Cápac was responsible for the
repair, strengthening and consolidation of the suspension
bridges. These bridges are one of the greatest feats of
the Inca road network. They appear frail and delicate
but proved astonishingly resistant. Flung across raging
torrents and formidable mountain chasms, they were
made of six-inch fibre and bamboo cables anchored into
stone piers, and were covered with a floor of wooden laths
solidly lashed together to resist the wind and other rava¬
ges of the elements.
Alexander von Humboldt was one of the many explorers
who gazed in awe and amazement at the Inca suspension
bridges. His description of one of them the Bridge of
From "Highway of the Sun" © Victor W. von Hagen-Duell, Sloan £ Pearce, N. Y.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

, ,...,.. Anu, 	XmAjm I wtmm^mà I miim\ miJmMmi
K ,,f.,Vn..J*- ^nliwtnMâmMitMdk .«/»-i*»»
\sar.imt, fi Ç.** O Sfym/rr* ¿a!., lAnig.« H~i
WmmmH*kmmm\ m*** tmmvCtfW mwmmmmmmmtC -£«
Au.iirptcl* ¡tkAan f"-' M»«*« ,«*«TrAf '*"''
J. |Éj_fj»nW« ?"< A« »n JLu**r,tjH4>-*iftk4t
Ymjimtirtrr rtliéV»«"r**!~*^" ' | mmmm
INCA HIGHWAY
(Continued)
San Luis Reywas the source of inspiration for novels by
Thornton Wilder and Prosper Mérimée. Humboldt consi¬
dered the whole Inca road system far superior to that
built by the Romans in Italy, France and Spain, and pro¬
nounced them "the most stupendous and useful works
ever executed by man."
But the Incas' passion for roads went much further
than building and engineering. They also set up a smooth
running system of road maintenance. A "Royal Commis¬
sioner of Inca Roads and Bridges" supervised a staff of
road inspectors whose duty it Was to tour the realm and
check on road conditions and on the toll-gate keepers
controlling the heavy traffic of llama trains laden With
produce. Large crews of yanakonas were always on hand
to sweep and clean the paved highways with brooms
made of vegetable fibre. Yvar Lissner did not exaggerate
when he said (in his book How Our Ancestors Lived) that
at the time when the roads of Europe were no more than
muddy, pot-holed ditches, the Incas had the finest high¬
ways anywhere in the world.
Surpassing Hannibal's Alpine road
The 16th century saw the Great Royal Highway con¬
verted into a major artery for violence and blood¬
shed. The Spaniards who landed in Ecuador bent on
conquering South America, found the vast Inca commu¬
nication network ideally suited for the quick seizure of
the great empire. Captain Pedro Cieza de Leon, writing
between 1533 and 1545, was the first European to give a
detailed description of the Inca roads "which surpass
24
those of the Romans as well as the road Hannibal built
over the Alps."
As they penetrated the land of the Incas,, the Conquis¬
tadores stared at the scene they saw with incredulous
amazement: down the wide, spacious highway came
groups of Indians carrying hammocks or litters contain¬
ing personages, of note. Other Indians drove trains of
llamas laden with sacks of coca leaves or ears of corn.
The very sight of these animals half ewe, half ass left
the Spaniards open-mouthed.
It soon became clear to them why the roads were in
such excellent condition: the only traffic on its paved
surface consisted of sandal-shod pedestrians and gentle-
footed llamas; Later, when the Conquistadores, landed
horses in the country (the Incas had never seen any be¬
fore) their iron-shod hooves and the wheels of the heavy
oxcarts were to cause havoc to the Llama Road and irre¬
parably damage the Great Royal Highway of the Incas.
Their conquest completed, however, the Spaniards
realized the advantages of the Inca road system and tried
to preserve it by following the Indian example, at least
in part. They adopted the llama caravans for carting
off the gold they collected either as booty or tribute or
which they extracted from the mines. Soon, long
caravans of Indians, columns of Spanish soldiers and
llamas could be seen heading for the coast where the
precious metal was stored aboard the Fleet of the Indies
for shipment to Spain.
The Inca road system was thus not only an artery of
blood but also of the gold of South America which went
to raise the standard of life of Europe and to add splen¬
dour to the Renaissance. An official chronicler of the
time, Leon Pinelo, estimated that 3,420 million gold doub¬
loons flowed into the coffers of Spain from the land of
the Incas.
The Royal Highway of the Incas, which cannot be
dissociated from the llama, the postal network, the gra¬
naries and roadside inns, was In fact the direct instru-

The Unesco Courier. June 1959
THE MIGHTY ROAD through the Inca
Empire, running straight as an arrow for more
than 3,000 miles from Colombia to Chile,
was one of the greatest achievements of road
engineering in history. Monuments, fortresses,
resting places for travellers temples and other
buildings were erected along the great
highway. Drawing (opposite page) showing a
section of the road and buildings, was made
about 1740 by Antonio de Ulloa, a Spanish
geographer near to the village of Cayambe In
what is now Ecuador. Photo (left), taken
recently In Bolivia, and engraving (below)
illustrate the contrast between road travel
then and now in this part of the world to
which the wheel was introduced many years
after the arrival of the Spaniards, who at first
made use the llama caravans for carting off the
gold they collected for shipment to Spain.
Engravings Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris.
) Almasy, Paris
ment in the economic expansion of the Inca State (Inca
society vested the entire wealth of the soil and sub-soil
in the State and there was no private ownership of land) .
As a result of the later neglect of .the Spaniards, the
inefficiency of Colonial, organization, the ravages of time
and above all, the excesses of the encomenderos (settlers)
who used the Inca roads as a quarry for the stone they
sought for their building, the whole highway network
finally disintegrated.
Nevertheless, traces of this unparalleled feat of engi¬
neering still remain today. In the course of numerous
journeys through Ecuador, I have personally come across
vestiges of the Inca Highway on several occasions in the
provinces of Imbabura and Pichincha. A Spanish geogra¬
pher, Antonio de Ulloa, visited this region in the 18th
century and has left us a detailed description of the
Highway, the watchtowers and the fortresses built by the
Incas (See drawing opposite page).
Little reed horses to cross the lakes
In the picturesque Imbabura Lake region, the Incas sup¬
plemented their road network by a fleet of small reed
boats and these are still to be seen in use today (the
Indians refer to them as "little reed horses"). The Azuay
region of Ecuador provides proof of the amazing solidity
of the Inca Highway and of the skill with which the
stones were fitted together. Despite the passing of cen¬
turies, and notwithstanding the continual, torrential rains
prevalent in the area, water has not succeeded in filter¬
ing through the joints between the stones. Instead, the
water has hollowed out a channel beneath the blocks of
stone and flows away like a river under the arches of
a bridge.
Further evidence of the Incas' skill, foresight and prac¬
tical turn of mind is seen in their secondary roads which
served as supply lines for the products vital to the king
dom. Thus Huayna Cápac built a road from Quito to
the Coca valley in the eastern slopes of the Andes for
the transport of the prized coca leaves; another road
knifed through the mountains to the coast and became
the supply route for shrimp and other sea food. This
coastal road also supplied platinum, mined in the region,
and salt extracted from the nearby island of Amortajada
close to the coast of Ecuador. Another road, running
laterally from Cuzco to the coast, made it possible to have
fresh fish (considered one of the greatest delicacies) in
the Inca capital within two days.
A striking example of the ingenuity and foresight of
the Inca engineers is visible today near Macu'sani in the
Carabaya gold country northwest of Lake Titicaca. In
his book' on the Inca roads, Highway of the Sun, Victor
von Hagen describes how the Royal Road climbs to a
CONTD ON NEXT PAGE

INCA HIGHWAY (Continued)
gM-_M-M-----MM-MM--MM-MMM---M----M-| - 	' -
\
THE PAN-AMERICAN HIGHWAYthreading its way among peoples, scenery and climate as diverse as any on earth a
¡ng some 15,000 milessometimes follows the course of the ancient Inca roads. Above, a newly reconstructed stretch
Almasy, Paris
nd extend-
in Bolivia.
dizzying height of 14,800 feet and then passes under a
glacier. "Here," he writes, "the engineers, anticipating
the glacier's movement, had raised a retaining wall to
catch the cascading rocks and to divert the snows high
above the road. Here and there the eternal sweep and
retreat of the glacier had sent rock crashing into and
destroying a part of the road, but generally speaking it
was in a good state of preservation."
For centuries the Inca roads have aroused the interest,
curiosity and admiration of scholars and travellers alike.
But despite the fact that new information has been
collected on the subject since the 16th century, many
mysteries still remained unsolved. For example, we still
do not know the meaning of the apachetas, the little
mounds or pyramids found at intervals along the sides
of the roads. The mounds are made up of stones which
the Indians dropped there as they passed along the road.
This custom has been attributed to some strange, inexpli¬
cable superstition. It may, however, simply have been a
form of toll system by which travellers helped to trans¬
port the stone material needed for road maintenance.
But whether the apachetas were an offering to some deity
or the Inca people's contribution to the public works
system no one really knows.
Recent explorations have brought to light the existence
of a formerly unsuspected civilization on the Peruvian
26
coast the Land of the Chimus or "Kingdom of the Moon"
(the Chimus, who included the Nazcas and the Mochicas
with their fabulous pottery figurines, were worshippers
of the moon in contrast to the Incas who worshipped the
sun). The Inca's coastal Llano Road passed through the
land of the Chimus and it was over this highway that
the "Civilization of the Sun" of the Inca Empire came to
the "Kingdom of the Moon."
The road started at Tumbez, the legendary City of
Gold which the Conquistador Pedro de.Candia was the
first to visit and the riches of which he reported to
Pizarro. The latter raised an expedition to seize Tumbez
and the huge quantities of gold it harboured, but before
the Spaniards could get to the city the Indians had
emptied it of its riches in a spot which has yet to be
discovered. The Spaniards entered a ghost town. Today
it is nothing but a large rice field lying on the route of
the Pan-American Highway, which incidentally, follows
much the same itinerary as the old Inca Highway.
Despite the passing of centuries and the inclemencies
of nature, the general lines of the Royal Inca Highway
can still be discerned and stretches of it are still intact.
The suspension bridges in particular have withstood the
assault of time and are to be seen in Ecuador, Peru and
Bolivia where they are in use in districts where the wheel
is still unknown even today when the first man-made
rockets are being shot toward the moon.
