Photos© William Fage
IVORY MASKS (above right) are probably the most valuable works of West African Benin art in existence. The nearer of the
two was sold last year for £20,000 to the Museum of Primitive Art, New York, the other being in the British Museum, where this
photo was taken. Nine inches in height, the masks were probably made in the 16th century to be worn at the king's waist in the
annual ceremony of banishing evil spirits. Above left, three carved posts before the throne of the Ogoga of Ikere in eastern Yoru-
baland (neighbour to Benin). They were carved about 40 years ago by Olowe of Ise, one of the great Yoruba masters of modern times.

Ife & Benin
TWO PINNACLES OF AFRICAN ART
by William Fagg
Deputy Keeper, Dept. of Ethnography, British Museum
The extraordinary growth of museums and still more,
in Malraux's phrase, of "museums without walls" or
reproductions of art in book form has put at our
disposal not only the fine arts of the high civilizations of
Europe and Asia, but also the far more varied arts of the
tribal cultures all over the world.
These have been discovered and appreciated by
travellers and ethnologists during the past three centuries,
and especially in the last seventy years, but it is chiefly
thanks to the modern movement in art that we are now
able to think of them on the same plane as the high arts
of Eurasia. The term "primitive art" (though still often
used for want of a better) no longer refers to the bottom
rungs of a ladder at whose top stand Praxiteles and
Qonatello.
But the chief centres for this new appreciation of the
tribal arts (as I prefer to call them) were in France and
Germany, and later in Belgium, and thus, by historical
accident, it was ¡works from the colonies of these powers
which chiefly caught the eye of the modern artists, and
also occupied most of the plates in the picture books which
appeared in ever-increasing numbers from 1915 onwards.
The arts of the western Sudan, the Ivory Coast, the
Cameroons and the Congo received full recognition, but
those of the most prolific and populous of all the African
territories Nigeria remained, with one notable excep¬
tion, hidden under a veil of ignorance, simply because they
were not well enough represented at the centres where
modern art was in ferment.
The exception was the art of Benin, which had burst
upon the civilized world with such disconcerting force
after the discoveries of the 1897 British Expedition that
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

Musée de l'Homme, Paris
HEADS FROM A HOLY CITY. These terracotta heads fashioned between seven and eight centuries ago, were discovered

recently by British archaeologists on the site of Ife, the holy city of the Yoruba people in Nigeria. Used to decorate sacrificial altars,
they illustrate the Yoruba taste for naturalistic representation with a scrupulous respect for anatomical proportions. Loaned by
the Oni (king and religious leader) of Ife they were photographed here during a special exhibition at the Musée de l'Homme, Pans.
IFE & BENIN
(Continued)
BRONZE-CASTING WORTHY OF CELLINI
it could not be ignored. Yet although it included some
of the very finest works of African art, the greater part
of its enormous output was unworthy of much of the
praise which was lavished upon it, and was moreover
unrepresentative, as we shall see, of the essential nature
of African art in general. Nevertheless, the realization,
with general amazement, that Africans could perform
such complicated feats of bronze-casting (worthy, as one
authority put it, of Cellini) did much to prepare the way
for the acceptance of tribal art in the art world'of Europe
a few years later.
Research has been proceeding apace on the antiquities
of Nigeria, especially since the Second World War. Only
a part of these recent researches, by many fieldworkers,
is as yet published, but enough is known for us to present
a summary picture of Nigerian art which is remarkable
for its chronological depth and suggests that Nigeria
was the scene of some of the most striking developments
in all African art history.
Nigeria is known to have been inhabited in Lower
Palaeolithic times, perhaps a quarter of a million years
ago, but the first known appearance of art there and
the earliest art in all Negro Africa to which we can assign
a datewas in the first millennium b.c. This was the
extraordinary terra-cotta sculpture of the Ndk Culture
(discovered in the tin mines near Jos on the plateau of
Central Africa in 1943 by Bernard Fagg, now Director of
Antiquities in Nigeria), which was recently shown by the
Carbon-14 testthat happy by-product of the atomic
bomb to have flourished during the period 900 B.c. to
A.D. 200.
Sculptures in this style have now been identified oyer
a very large area of central Nigeria, at least 300 miles
wide, and We have no reason to think that the limits of
its distribution have yet been reached. Though there is a
certain superficial similarity to some Etruscan Work, any
historical connexion between the two is in the last degree
improbable; and a study of the hundreds of fragmentary
heads and 'figures in the Jos Museum reveals an
astonishing degree of artistic invention, especially in the
imaginative treatment of the human ¡head in terms of
cones, cylinders, spheres and many other conceptual,
forms, which idoes not suggest that this art can be
attached to any other known tradition. In particular, no
connexion has been found With ancient Egyptian art, and
it is not inconceivable that its antecedents go even farther
back than the Pre-dynastic Period, when Itribal art was
expiring in Egypt.
It seems that the Nok Culture may not have died
without issue, but may rather have formed a kind of
artistic substratum from which later sculptural traditions
in the Nigerian area drew some of their sustenance. The
16
Sao Culture, which was excavated by J.P. Lebeuf in French
territory to the east and south of Lake Chad and which
seems to have flourished during the Middle Ages of
Europe, does not appear to owe anything to Nok, although
excavations projected by the Department of Antiquities
in Nigerian Bornu might possibly establish a link.
There is, however, a strong possibility that the World-
famous art of Ife derived in part from Nok. The Yoruba
tribes, who made Ife their holy city and to (whom we
almost certainly owe the marvellous bronzes and terra¬
cottas which are found there, seem to be latecomers to
the Nigerian scene, most of them probably having arrived,
no doubt from an easterly direction, during the first
millenium after Christ.
. It may be that the aboriginal people with Whom the
Yoruba warriors intermarried after conquering them had
inherited from the Nok people the skill of making large
pottery figures for their shrines; the more sophisticated
and materialistic Yoruba hierarchy of Ife may then have
developed a taste for naturalistic representation. Such
at least is the impression gained
from a close study of the
fragments from Nok and Ife.
These alone among the past or
present cultures of Negro Africa
have attempted life-size statues
in terra-cotta; and although
they treated the human head
in very different ways, the
bodies and their copious orn¬
aments are very much alike.
But such speculations can
hardly be confirmed in the
present state of our knowledge.
Ife art is dated to about the
twelfth to fourteenth centuries
chiefly on the basis of the trad¬
ition accepted at Benin that
the Oni of Ife sent a master
bronze-founder to his fellow
ruler, the Oba Oguola of Benin,
perhaps about a.D. 1350-1400,
to teach his people the craft.
This tradition squares plausibly
enough with a comparison of
the styles; the earliest extant
heads from Benin seem hardly
less naturalistic than those of
Ife, although they show a
diminishing interest in prob¬
lems of representing bony struc¬
ture and fleshy contours, besides
some technical differences.
I Musée de l'Homme, Paris
PENDANT MASK from
Benin, Nigeria. Head wears
a band of coral beads and
is crowned by a carved
"halo" of stylized catfish.

The Unesco Courier. Octobe 1959
With Benin art wé leave prehistory behind and reach
the realm of proto-history and later, when the Portuguese
arrive there in 1486, of history itself (although the tribal
history still has a large content of legend).
A series of great warrior kings had established at Benin
by the late fifteenth century an absolutist regime Which
subsisted, with minor fluctuations, until 1897, and, in its
forms, to the present time. At that time, the apogee of
Benin power, there took place, I surmise, a subtle but vital
deviation from the classical or "pure" form of divine
kingship in which king and people are the interdependent
parts of an indissoluble unity of tribal life force.
At Benin, as in early Dynastic Egypt, I think that this
balance was upset and the king became an end in himself,
even though the outward forms of the divine kingship
were in both cases, and at Benin still are, maintained;
the people continued to depend on the ¡king for their
wellbeing, but the king's Will was no longer subordinate
to that end. And this was to have profound effects on
Bini art during the next four centuries.
Benin art as it is generally known is not really tribal
art at all; it is the art of the royal court, an alien art
transplanted from the more sophisticated urban culture
of Ife. Dynamism is absent, or virtually
so, from this style, as it was also from
the art of Ife that strange florescence
of idealized naturalism, indigenous or
imported. Rather it inherited from Ife
art its essentially static quality, and for
perhaps one or two centuries the court
artists (whether Yoruba or Bini) kept
alive this humanistic mode of art, pro¬
ducing many works technically and
artistically worthy of Ife, and a few,
such as the priceless ivory masks, which
are the truly distinctive contribution of
Benin to the world's masterpieces.
But as the Benin kingdom begins,
about the late sixteenth century, to
decline from its apogee, we see a corres¬
ponding change in the court style :
uniformity supplants the individualized
variety of the Ife style; the bronzes
grow heavier and more massive and a
kind of defensive stolidity seems to
express a need to make up with outward
pomp for the loss of real power.
In this middle period, with inexhaus¬
tible supplies of European bronze, the
Oba's bronze-founders produced, within
perhaps 150 years, not only a great
many bronze heads and figures in the
"round, but the great series of rectangu¬
lar plaques, numbering many hundreds,
which seem to have commemorat¬
ed noteworthy events and personages.
These works are consistently impressive,
in a manner somewhat reminiscent of Assyrian sculpture,
and similarly lacking in any really free exercise of the
artist's imagination. In short, this period, on which the
fame of Benin chiefly rests, is one of high competence
rather than of brilliance.
Throughout the middle period, the aesthetic canons of
Ife seem still to have exerted enough influence in the
bronze-workers' guild to maintain strict standards of
pleasing proportion; but suddenly, perhaps towards the
middle eighteenth century, these standards seem to
collapse, giving (way to increasing flamboyance and
exaggeration, and above all to an undisciplined variability
of design, technique and quality. In this, the late period,
which lasted to the end of the nineteenth century and
the birth of the tourist trade, there are rare works which
show the hand of a master, but the great majority are
ugly and badly executed, by mediocre or inferior artists
With no safely classical uniformity to fall back upon.
From all that We know of Benin political history in this
period, it appears that the court style in its decadence
faithfully represented the increasing deterioration of the
state. We find examples of this dating from the time of
Oba Osemwenede (1816-1848), whose reign coincided with
the contraction of the slave trade from an international
to a much less lucrative local commerce. (Contrary to a
widespread belief, the arts of Africa seem to have suffered
more from the abolition of the trade than from its earlier
excesses.)
At about the same time the beautiful wooden ram and
© Musée de l'Homme, Paris
DANCE HEADDRESS of the Ekoi
of Southern Nigeria. Masks like this
are used at festivals and funerals.
From the National Museum, Stockholm.
antelope heads in the tribal style, which Edo chiefs place
on the altars of their ancestors, began to be supplanted in
Benin City itself, with the Oba's permission, by wooden
imitations of the bronze heads used in the royal cult; and
thus after some four centuries the alien tradition which
began at Ife at last penetrated and leavened not to its
advantage the tribal style in the capital and its environs,
though fine examples of the old style may still be seen in
many outlying areas of the kingdom.
Yet the immense artistic output of the Bini tribe is only
a small part of that of Nigeria, and the least representative
part because of the dual character already described.
Far more numerous and more varied are the Works in
bronze, iron, ivory and above all wood of the five millions
of the Yoruba tribe, the most prolific in art in all Africa.
Yoruba wood sculpture is among the more naturalistic
styles of African a,rt, but it is impossible to say whether its
naturalism is derived from the style of Ife or whether that
style was a specialization which developed there within an
already existing Yoruba tradition.
Of the hundreds of thousands of carvings still extant
in Yorubaland, all but a few are immediately recognizable
as Yoruba work by the use of certain conventions, as in
the form of the mouth; yet the variety
of sculptural forms employed by the
artists is immense and it is possible by
careful fieldwork to distinguish the
styles and substyles of different areas,
towns, families and individual carvers
in the same way and by much the same
methods as is done by the art his¬
torians of Europe.
The richness of Yoruba art must be
closely connected with the great
complexity of Yoruba religion, which is
perhaps the most "advanced" to be
found in Africa and is rather like the
Hindu and Ancient Greek religions in
the way in which ancient and imper¬
sonal nature deities have been humaniz¬
ed and have even come to be regarded
as deified kings or heroes.
Only in recent years have we become
aware that there flourished in the lower
Niger Valley a group of bronze-found¬
ing industries whose works are quite
independent of the Benin court style
and show a far greater artistic imagi¬
nation. Perhaps the finest example is
the figure of a huntsman, collected at
Benin in 1897 and now in the British
Museum. Many of the pieces seem
related to the work of the Ijebu Yoruba
to the west of Benin, but others seem
to lead us east to places on the Niger
itself such as Idah. Here lies scope
for great advances in the study of Ni¬
gerian art history. In the Delta itself are the Ijo, who
are thought on linguistic and other grounds to be one of
the earliest of Nigerian populations; their wood sculpture,
concerned mostly With water spirits and snakes, is a pre¬
eminent example of something very like Cubism in tribal
art. The Ibo, who form most of the population of Eastern
Nigeria, are probably almost as numerous as the Yoruba,
but rather less prolific in art.
Of all the African territories Nigeria is the richest not
only in the extant products of traditional art but also in
its practice, although the number of carvers in the tribal
styles continues to diminish, and their work too seldom
equals that of their fathers. Fortunately, the devoted
work during the past 20 years of a few British servants of
Nigeria, and the increasing appreciation of Nigerians in
authority, have given the country the best-equipped
museums service and the finest museum collections in
Africa between the Sahara and the Zambezi. Research
schemes under the direction of scholarly Nigerians, with
valuable financial help from abroad, are making
important contributions to our knowledge of Bini and
Yoruba history, including art history.
There is urgent need to encourage all such efforts, for
the field still to be covered before it is too late remains
immense. Any people in the world can as Nigeria also
does produce contemporary artists working in the inter¬
national styles; only Nigeria can make the unique
contribution to the sum of beauty in the world which
derives from her millennia of tribal art.
17
