IT ?
Road travel is the most dangerous form of transportation
in Europe today. This is clear from a report of the
Economic Commission for Europe dealing with the
prevention of road accidents, which suggests that even greater
casualty figures can be expected unless prompt action is taken.
The report reviews the main causes of fatal accidents and
injuries on the roads and gives a breakdown of the factors
responsible. It reveals the striking fact that the risk of death
on the roads of Europe for a given distance is ten times that
involved in travel either by aircraft or train.
Figures quoted for every 100 millions of kilometres
travelled by road vehicles Were: 18 people killed in Western
Europe, 10 people in Great Britain and less than five in the
U.S.A.
What are the causes of these road accidents? Are faulty
vehicles the chief culprits?... or faulty roads?... faults in the
traffic control?... or just plain, faulty human beings? There
are many contradictions and discrepancies in the reasons given.
Figures from one country incriminate the bad state of highway
surfaces; these from another blame faulty automobile brakes.
One reason for this is that different reports may record dif¬
ferent opinions as to the cause of similar types of accidents.
This is often true of a typical accident the collision of
two vehicles at a cross-roads where visibility is poor. The
driver coming from the left (the example here applies in
France, where drivers coming from the right have priority)
would in all likelihood be blamed by the police for entering
the cross-roads at an excessive speed.
A traffic specialist might object that the speed in question
(say 20 m.p.h.) was not excessive in view of the fact that the
automobile was designed to travel at speeds between 30 and
55 m.p.h., in normal conditions. The accident, he would say,
was due to the limited visibility at the cross-roads. Suitable for
the age of ox or horse-drawn transport, the cross-roads is
quite inadequate for the modern vehicles now using it. His
conclusion would be that the State was to blame for not
making the necessary changes. Which view is correct? In
reality the views expressed in both cases are subjective ones.
It is, however, possible to get an idea of the share borne in
accidents by faulty roads. German studies of the country's
autoroute system, for example, have led to the conclusion that
road improvements could halve accidents on these highways.
Faulty vehicles are on the average only alloted a low
percentage (5%) of responsibility for accidents.
16
WHO
What about the faulty human being? In Italy, the
"Ispettorato della Motorizzazione Civile" examined 2,000 road
accident cases in which there were almost always fatal results.
The study showed that accidents due to human error amounted
to over 52%; to faulty vehicles, 7% and to faulty roads, 40%.
The point has been made, regarding the comparison between
autoroute accident rates and those on ordinary roads in Europe
that the large number of accidents involving cyclists and ped¬
estrians on these roads is due to the very fact that they are
allowed to carry traffic of such a mixed nature. In other
words the fault is not with the pedestrian or the cyclist as
much as the inadequacy of the road itself.
It has been estimated that proper road development would
bring down the (roughly) 30% of accidents attributed to
cyclists and walkers to as low as 5%.
In round figures, accident responsibility on the roads of
Europe could be defined, on the basis of available figures, as
follows: faults of motor vehicles drivers, 20%; faults of
cyclists and pedestrians, 5%; faulty vehicles, 5%; faulty roads,
70%.

The Unesco Courier. June 1959
17-

ROAD
SAFETY
IS THEIR
BUSINESS
1 , 2, 4, 5, 6, 7.© Almasy, Paris.
3. © Deutsche Zentrale für
Fremdenverkehr, Frankfort.
i
A familiar figure on the world's roadsin city street or on national highway highway code, directing traffic, and, when needed, lending a hand to the
traffic policeman does a vital job: seeing that road users obey the motorist in distress'. On these pages we present some traffic policemen
18

The Unesco Courier. June 1959
from widely separated parts of the world. On duty at a busy city
intersection in India or on horseback patrol in the Argentine, the traffic
policeman -is doing a vital job of work.
German Federal Republic. 4. Greece. -
I. Pakistan. 2. Argentina. 3.
5. India. 6. France. 7. Sweden.
19
