IS RADIO-ACTIVITY IN THE AIR
A NEW THREAT TO OUR HEALTH?
by Dr. N.G. Stewart
Head of Health and Safety, U.K. Atomic Energy Authority,
Dounreay Experimental Reactor Establishment, Scotland
Measurements of the natural radio-activity in the
atmosphere were first made more than fifty years
ago and several scientific papers were published
between 1903 and 1908. The subject then lay dormant
for some time but with the development of nuclear power
and the testing of nuclear weapons, interest has revived
in recent years and a world-wide programme of
measurement of atmospheric radio-activity both natural
and man-made was undertaken during the Interna¬
tional Geophysical Year.
One . very important feature of radio-activity in the
atmosphere is that, in contrast with some other forms
of atmospheric pollution, maximum permissible concen¬
trations (M.P.C.) have been laid down for all the
important radio-active isotopes by the International
Commission on Radiological Protection (I.C.R.P.) which
keeps these figures under constant review. A maximum
permissible concentration is defined as that which, in
the light of present knowledge, is not expected to cause
appreciable bodily injury to a person continuously exposed
to that concentration throughout his lifetime.
At the present time there are three principal sources
of radio-activity in the atmosphere:
naturally occuring radio-activity,
radio-activity from atomic energy installations,
radio-activity from atomic test explosions.
The radio-active elements naturally present in air fall
into two main groups light elements and heavy
elements and each has its own distinctive origin.
The lighter elements such as tritium, much publicized
as a component of the H-bomb, and carbon 14, used in
radio-carbon dating, are formed continuously by the
action of fast cosmic rays from outer space on air
molecules. The total amount of each present in the
universe is very nearly constant, having built up to an
"equilibrium" value where the number of new atoms
created per unit time is balanced by the number which
disappear by radio-active decay. The concentrations in
ground-level air are small and the highest standards of
radio-chemical analysis and measuring techniques are
required for their evaluation.
Miners' deaths from 'mountain sickness'
caused by deadly underground air
The bulk of the natural radio-active content of the
lower atmosphere is due to the heavy gas radon and
its daughter products. Radon is one of the elements
formed by the radio-active decay of uranium which is
present in greater or lesser degree in rocks and soils all
over the world. Being a gas, radon can escape from the
earth's crust into the atmosphere where it disintegrates
radio-actively to form a chain of seven daughter products
each of which is produced by the disintegration of the
preceding one, the final element being lead which is stable.
These daughter products, being solids, are ultimately
Washed out of atmosphere by rain after an average
residence time of about ten days.
In average meteorological conditions, the radon escaping
from the earth's surface rapidly diffuses upwards due to
the natural turbulence of the atmosphere. When the air
is relatively still, as on clear evenings, the rate of upward
diffusion can be very low so that the radon accumulates
and high concentrations build up in ground level air.
Thus near Harwell, England (site of the main U.K. Ato¬
mic Research Centre) although the mean concentration
of radon in air was less than .06 per cent of the M.P.C.
for occupational workers as defined by the International
Commission on Radiological Protection, peaks of up to
15 times this mean level have been observed in stable
atmospheres. Similar concentrations have been observed
in other parts of the United Kingdom but on the average
it appears that the natural radon content of the air in
the United Kingdom is at a very safe level.
Higher values are to be expected in countries where the
uranium content of rocks and soils are high. Thus in
Sweden, where building bricks contain more natural
uranium than those used in the United Kingdom, high
concentrations of radon have been observed in badly
ventilated rooms in some houses. The biggest problem
of all is, naturally, in uranium mines where very efficient
ventilating systems are now used to maintain the radon
in air at a low level. Years ago, before adequate venti¬
lation was introduced, many uranium miners died in
middle-age from a respiratory disease which they called
"mountain-sickness" but which is now known to have
been cancer of the lung almost certainly due to the high
radon content of the air in the mines where they worked.
Hazards from radio-active grass,
eaten by cows & passed into milk
Most industries have to dispose of some waste products
by discharging them into the atmosphere through
chimney stacks. In the United Kingdom, the
Atomic Energy Authority has had to face the same problem
but, under the terms of the Atomic' Energy Act, 1954, the
amounts discharged have to be authorized jointly by
appointed Government Ministries who maintain an
inspection system to ensure that the permitted levels are
not exceeded.
Similar controlling arrangements exist in most coun¬
tries. In fixing a permissible discharge rate, the
controlling authorities will have in mind the appropriate
recommendations of the I.C.R.P. which will specify the
maximum permissible concentration at ground level. To
translate this into a maximum permissible discharge rate
presents a complex problem which is best solved
experimentally. Thus at Harwell an intensive programme
of observation was carried out on the spread of the radio¬
active gas (argon 41) which is discharged from the
chimney of the Bepo reactor. These experiments not
only confirmed that the mean concentration of A-41 at
ground level was less than 1% of the Maximum
Permissible Concentration but provided systematic data
which have been applied to specifying the maximum
permissible discharge rates from similar stacks elsewhere.
In many cases, however, the limiting hazard is not due
to the radio-activity suspended in the air but to that
fraction of it which is deposited on grass, eaten by cows
and passed into milk which is subsequently consumed by
human beings. This is the case with the
biologically important radio-active isotopes
iodine 131 and strontium 90. Typical
questions which must be answered before
permissible discharge rates can be defined
for such isotopes are, for example,
Cont'd
next page
13

IS RADIO-ACTIVITY
IN THE AIR A NEW
THREAT TO HEALTH?
(Continued)
(i) how much of the iodine 131 in air is deposited on
grass in dry and wet, calm and windy Weather.
(il) what concentration of 1-131 appears in milk as a
result of a given level on grass.
In past years the answers to these questions were not
known and discharge rates were estimated on an
extremely conservative basis. Now, as a result of
systematically surveying the biological environment of
nuclear Installations and of exploiting all events in
which radio-activity has been released into the atmo¬
sphere, information is being gathered which allows more
realistic estimates to be made.
Examples of such work are the surveys made in the
United States in the environment of the chemical
processing plant at Hanford and the extensive surveys
carried out in the United Kingdom after the reactor
accident at Windscale which caused a large amount of
iodine 131 to be released into the atmosphere. The
Windscale accident illustrates a point made earlier in
that the airborne iodine 131 gave rise to no significant
direct hazard in the cities over which the radio-active
cloud passed but the agricultural hazard led to restrictions
in milk consumption over an area of 200 square miles.
The dust particles from nuclear test explosions contain
fission products which consist of a large number of
different radio-active isotopes. In the air above the
United Kingdom the average airborne activity from tests
since 1952 has been less than 1% of the natural activity
of the radon daughter products Which indicates that this
is not a significant problem in Western Europe at least.
The main hazard from the dust arises from the strontium
90 component after it has been deposited on grass and
transmitted into milk.
The amount of strontium 90 deposited in the successive
years since 1954 has been fairly constant and the current
level in children's bones is about 1 strontium unit (S.U.).
On this scale the maximum permissible level for
occupational workers is 1,000 S.U. and for members of the
general public 100 S.U. The Medical Research Council
of the United Kingdom in their 1956 report on radiation
hazards accepted these figures but added that immediate
consideration would be required if the concentration in
human bones showed signs of rising greatly above 10 S.U.
It will be seen that the present amount in children's
bones is considerably below these levels.
Atomic dust clouds float to earth
for years after weapons' tests
World-wide surveys of strontium 90 have revealed
some interesting features of the diffusion and
deposition of the dust clouds from weapon tests. It
has been shown that most of the strontium 90 deposited is
derived from the large scale thermonuclear explosion
whose clouds enter the stratosphere and return to earth
slowly over a number of years. Thus strontium 90 will
continue to be deposited for some years after the cessation
of all nuclear tests. The rate at which the dust re-enters
the lower atmosphere is not constant but varies seasonally,
with peaks in the late spring and troughs in the late
autumn of each year. The deposition rate varies markedly
with latitude; the highest rate occurs in the middle
latitudes of the northern hemisphere and relatively little
is deposited in equatorial regions. These data are of great
meteorological interest and contribute to an under¬
standing of the general circulation of the atmosphere.
The need for controlling radio-active contamination of
the atmosphere is widely recognized and was one of the
concerns of the United Nations Scientific Committee on
the Effects of Atomic Radiation whose report was
published in 1958. If nuclear power is to be developed in
the interests of a developing civilization, a balance must
.be struck between the hazard to populations of discharging
low-activity wastes into the atmosphere (or ocean) and
the high costs of processing and storing them. In
striking this balance and in planning to protect popu¬
lations from the effects of reactor accidents, however
unlikely these may be, there is a continuing need for
experimental study of the relationship between man and
the .radio-activity in his environment.
Photos Courtesy A.J. Haagen-Smit
How modern smoke prevention methods can reduce air pollution. Photo left shows an old type of flare for the disposal of waste
gases from a refinery. Note the dense black smoke. Right, smoke has been almost entirely eliminated by adoption of a new type
of flare. In addition to causing pollution, industrial smoke spells wasted money for it denotes incomplete combustion of fuel.
14
