THESALT
LIFE
by Arthur Nettleton
Fellow of the Royal Geographical
Society, London
Most people think of salt as being used
mostly to season food in the kitchen,
but this is one of the least important uses
of salt. The largest users of salt are
meat and fish packers, chemical industries,
hide, textile and leather processors and
soap manufacturers. Photo right, shows
salt being used for skin curing; below,
salt being mined deep underground.
Photos © Imperial Chemical Industries
Of all the substances found in the earth, few are more
essential than common salt. . If we were to be
denied this natural compound the human race
would die and much animal life would vanish. Without
salt many modern industries would come to a halt.
Centuries ago it was recognized that to deprive a man
of his salt was a sure way of causing his lingering death.
Few could survive more than a month if subjected to
complete salt starvation, and the sentence was a
dreadful punishment.
Today medical science is making the reverse approach
by investigating the uses of salt in fighting and curing ill
health. Doctors are aWare that the amount of salt
introduced into the human body affects the adrenal
glands, and controlling or omitting salt from the diet is
a well-known treatment for kidney ailments.
The importance of salt to health has certainly long been
known to peoples who dwell in hot climates. Extra salt
is needed to replace that lost from the body by profuse
perspiration. Heat exhaustion and sunstroke are less
likely if this precaution is taken.
Workers in heavy industries such as steel-making who
perspire greatly, similarly require to replace their lost salt.
Failure to do this is believed to be a cause of muscular
8
cramp, and to avoid that crippling complaint specially
flavoured salt tablets were issued to American steel
workers during the War. The practice proved so bene¬
ficial that it is still continued.
Many animals, too, know instinctively that salt is
essential to their well-being. Experiments have shown
that dogs deprived of it can live only about three weeks,
and cattle and sheep must have their "salt licks" if they
are to remain healthy. Carnivorous animals also need
salt, though they get it from the raw meat they eat.
The story of salt in modern industry is no less absorbing,
and its uses in these fields are being continually expanded.
It is used in glass-making, in the production of alumi¬
nium, in smelting, and in meat packing. It is the
prime raw material of the modern chemical industries,
and is used in soap-making, in refining fats and oils, and
in the manufacture of bleaching powders, insecticides,
fungicides, and fertilizers. The list of processes using salt
is legion, and it can truly be called the most versatile of
common compounds.
It is needed for water purification, for the manufacture
of paper, for bacon curing, and for butter making. World
consumption of salt is rapidly increasing, and production
is being stepped up to meet the growing demand. Canada

opened a new rock salt mine near Windsor, Ontario, three
years ago, and it has been equipped to produce 500 tons a
day from a 27ft. seam 700ft. down. Another new salt
seam of exceptionally pure quality has been tapped near
Goderich, Ontario.
Salt production in Canada alone has trebled during the
last 20 years. Altogether we need 20,000,000 tons a year
for consumption and industries throughout the world.
Salt was so valuable in early times that it gave us our
word salary, from the Latin solarium, meaning "salt
money" the allowance given Roman soldiers to buy salt.
One of the oldest roads of Italy was called the Via Salaria
(salt road) because it (was the route by which salt was
transported. Among the ancients, to "eat salt" with a
man was to create a sacred bond of friendship, ancfc this
is still so with some Oriental peoples today. In the
Middle Ages one's social rank was shown by whether one
sat above or below (the salt at table. In some parts of
the world today salt is regarded as more to be coveted
than money. Six pounds of salt was the only reward
three Naga hillmen asked .for building a church in Burma.
The value placed on this commodity may be gauged
from the lengthy treks which take place regularly to the
main salt markets. Tibetans descend from the "'Roof of
The Unesco Courrier. July-August 1959
the World" to bring back a few pounds of salt, and one of
the sights of the Sahara is the annual progression of
camel caravans to the salt centre of Timbuktu, the
fabulous city which founded its wealth on the salt trade
centuries ago.
Salt has promoted learning, too. In its greatest days
as a salt mart Timbuktu boasted large libraries, and was
a major centre of education.
Agricultural scientists have experimented with salt as
a soil dressing during the last 15 years, and much has
been learned about its value as a crop improver. Tests
have shown that if 3-5 hundredweights of salt are added
to an acre of land, sugar beet grown there will yield that
much extra sugar. American research has revealed that
salt dressings make the beet stronger and more suitable
for machine harvesting an important point in these days
of mechanized farming.
Salt refiners have also introduced a variety of salt
specially suited to mechanical spreading. It is of uniform
cubical structure, so that it passes freely through the
spreader, and it does not readily blow from the surface of
the soil.
Washing out the soil
to make arid arable
On the other hand, salt is far from being a complete
boon to agriculture. An excess of this substance in
the ground destroys the fertility of the soil, and
some of the largest areas of arid land owe their sterility
to an overabundance of salt.
Whereas the human body does not demur at one part
of salt in each 1,000 parts of water, animals will normally
drink a stronger saline solution than this. Most plants
do not require much salt. If the soil becomes too salty,
it is unsuitable for cultivation.
Lands once fertile have changed into deserts as the
rivers irrigating them have impregnated the soil with
salt. The water has evaporated and the salt it contained
has been left behind, so that in course of time the region
has been rendered unsuitable for crops. Research has
shown that as much as four tons of salt per acre may
accumulate in this way during a single year.
This negative aspect of salt and its uses is now being
investigated by agriculturalists, soil scientists, chemists,
and botanists. One of their aims is to determine whether
projected sources of irrigation water, in areas it is hoped
to reclaim for cultivation, are suitable for given crops on
the type of soil concerned. Matching the crop to the
salinity of the soil will be a vital factor In solving the
problems of the world's arid regions, and the successful
restoration of agriculture there over a period of time will
depend largely on methods of draining off the iwater used
for irrigation and washing soils impregnated with salt.
At the same time efforts are being made to produce
varieties of useful plants which will thrive even if the soil
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

THE SALT OF LIFE
(Continued)
is unusually salty. Botanists can help by providing
plants which do not suffer under such conditions.
As to the sources for industrial salt and agricultural
salt, it may be mined in rock form or obtained by
evaporating brine from salt lakes or the sea. A third
method is to dissolve the deposits of rock salt under¬
ground by introducing water through a bore-hole and
then pumping this brine to the surface.
In the last-named case it was customary until recently
to drill by percussion methods or by rotary shot, but the
job has been speeded up by adopting the American oil
well technique. Boring is done by high speed rotary bits
in conjunction With a high pressure stream of liquid mud,
which flushes the debris to the surface as it is produced.
Salt is being obtained through a bore-hole made in that
way near the mouth of the River Tees, England, and the
brine is being refined into table salt. By this method of
drilling, a well 1,000ft. deep can be drilled in days instead
of weeks.
The most extensive salt mines in the world, at
Wieliczka, Poland, have been (worked for centuries and
still show no signs of becoming exhausted. The salt here
is not high grade, being mixed with clay, but the deposits
are more than 400 yards thick and the galleries have a
total length of more than 500 miles.
Deposits in Britain supply about one-tenth of the
world's needs. Utah, America, has the largest salt lake
in the world, 75 miles long and 20-50 miles Wide, with
brine one-sixth salt. The harvesting ponds to which the
brine flows are the biggest salt pans in the world. Here
the salt is obtained by evaporation.
Salt produced in Britain is similarly obtained mainly
Photos © Imperial Chemical Industries
UNDERGROUND LAKES & WELLS provide much of the salt for
many countries. Those in Cheshire, England, have the strongest
natural brine in the world, most of the salt produced in Britain being
obtained from underground lakes. Above, this dryer with its battery
of curved pipes removes the last traces of moisture from the salt.
10
COMMON SALT is found in the oceans, salt lakes, salt wells and
salt mines. In almost every part of the world salt can be found in
underground mines. Most lie far beneath the surface and the salt is
mined like coal. Photo above shows rock salt being mined in Great
Britain where deposits supply about one-tenth of the world's needs.
from brine, though the lakes are underground. Cheshire,
England, has the strongest natural brine in the world.
The liquid is evaporated in artificially heated pans, and
the size of the crystals depends upon the speed of
evaporation, fine salt being produced rapidly and coarse
salt slowly.
Some facts about salt are startling to the layman.
Thus, if an active cell in a mild saline solution has its
medium changed to one of pure water it swells and bursts.
Saltless water kills a higher animal partly by causing the
blood corpuscles to rupture and discharge potassium salts
into the blood stream, and partly by stopping the kidneys
from functioning they cannot do so Iwithout salt. The
burst blood cells also paralyze the heart, not only directly
by the potassium, but also indirectly because they are no
longer able to carry oxygen from the lungs.
A quarter ounce a day
keeps the doctor away
It has been computed that the human body needs about
ioz. of salt a day to keep it healthy. Among the
functions of the salt we eat is the protection of the
body against microbes; it has been found that serums
which can kill bacteria are unable to do iso if the salt is
extracted.
Perhaps the strangest use for salt is in road building.
America has a highway made of solid blocks of salt
connecting Ithaca (New York) with the nearby airport,
and this extraordinary highway has lasted 20 years
without signs of serious deterioration.
London owes its situation indirectly to salt. Over
1,000 years ago Britain's salt mines supplied Western
European countries, and on their (way to the south coast
of England the pack pony trains crossed the River Thames
at a convenient ford near the present Westminster
Bridge. Around the site of the ford a settlement grew
up the nucleus of the present city.
Today, despite the continually increasing demand for
salt, the world is never likely to experience a shortage.
Even in the inconceivable event of the salt mines and
brine lakes becoming exhausted, the oceans contain
enough of this vital commodity to meet our needs for
thousands of years.
You do not have to take this .statement with the
proverbial "'grain of salt." SeaWater contains an average
of three per cent of salt, and there are about
500,000,000 cubic miles of brine in the oceans of the world.
Clearly the name common salt is no misnomer, and its
expanding uses today are not likely to be handicapped by
any lack of the raw substance.
