ALL OF
HAVE A 'BREAKING
POINT1
Facing the strains and
stresses of modern life
by Dr W.C. Mem
.
Few people, if any, in the modern world escape psycho¬
logical stress and strain of major proportions.
Everyone is aware of varying degrees of tension
within himself and if he is alert to the world about him,
he is certainly aware of the many tensions that surround
all of us. This stress and strain can seriously affect
mental well-being.
We know that under enough pressure, continued over a
long enough period of time, anyone can be overwhelmed,
and bend. All of us have a "breaking point."
Dr W. C. Menninger is President of the Menninger Foun¬
dation, a non-profit centre for research, training, treatment
and prevention in the psychiatric field. He was' in charge of
psychiatry in the American Army during the last war and
received the Distinguished Service Medal and the French Legion
of Honour. He has been President of the American Psychiatric
Association and other scientific bodies, and has written a
number of books on psychiatric subjects several of which are
intended for the general reader.
16
The tensions to which we are subjected certainly appear
to be increasing. This may explain the evident increase
in the incidence of mental ill-health and frank mental
illness. What can we do about this situation?
The physician in psychological medicine or psychiatry
does not have answers to political and social problems,
yet he knows that they seriously affect people's health.
This he discovers anew as he endeavours to understand
the illness of each new patient; as he studies the factors
that have led to breakdown under stress. On the basis
of what he learns he can advise a particular individual
how to remove, reduce or live with pressures to which he
is subject.
Becoming mentally ill is the response many people
make to problems too big for them to handle. Therefore,
the psychiatrist has the responsibility as well as the
opportunity to turn a microscope on the personality of
his patient. It is necessary for him to gain some
understanding of the forces which are creating, or have
created the tensions that have produced the illness.
There are two different types of such tensions.

First, there are those that originate within one's self
and are quite specific to each one of us. These internal
tensions are not shared with other people because they
are related to problems and conflicts of our own, conflicts
which often have arisen from experiences of childhood
and still continue, in varying degrees, to make us feel
uneasy under certain circumstances or with certain kinds
of people. These are always related to unconscious factors
in the personality and usually manifest themselves as
"anxiety."
Internal tensions show up in different ways in different
people. Some try to remain blind to them ; some project
the cause of them to someone else; some develop physical
symptoms. These and other psychological devices are
used by all of us in an effort to maintain our equilibrium.
Constructive action would be to discover sometimes
requiring professional help to do so how to modify
tension by understanding the situations or factors which
seem to precipitate it.
Resolving tensions
in one of 3 ways
In addition to internal tensions there are external ones.
These we do often share with others, at least to
some extent. Usually they are the result of our
environment ; experiences and events affecting our
family and friends as well as ourselves ; even affecting
our job, our communities, our country. Too often these
give rise to feelings of uncertainty, apprehension, or
outright fear.
We try to resolve the tensions thus created in one of
three ways : we can refuse to face their causes, which is
a kind of flight ; we too often fight back, thereby hurting
or destroying people or things, and in the process usually
hurting ourselves ; or we can compromise. Most of the
time we find ways to modify our attitudes and behaviour,
and also to modify the environment sufficiently to make a
constructive compromise with a net gain for the situation
as well as ourselves.
In planning treatment for a patient, the psychiatrist
must first figure out how to help the individual understand
himself and his problems better. Secondly, he must
consider the environment and its factors and how these
might be changed for the benefit of the patient.
Approaching from both directions as may be indicated,
his assignment is to help his patient face up to the stress
and strain that has produced his symptoms.
The individual who is filled with anxiety is rarely able
to look at himself objectively. It is difficult, if not
impossible, for him to see the causes of his own conflicts
or the various unreasonable or even irrational ways by
which he is trying to resolve them. A person can often,
if he will, gain some understanding about himself from
his familiy, or from friends or from reading. However, he
may need professional help.
Learning to handle
emotions of hostility
Very many problems, whether personal or universal,
revolve around the central theme of hate in its many
manifestations of selfishness, jealousy, prejudice,
dishonesty, yes, even mental illness and worst of all, war.
Hence, perhaps the most important thing for an individual
to do is to try to understand how he handles his own
hostility and to see What are the manifestations of that
energy drive in his behaviour and thinking.
It can be helpful, for instance, to see "running out on
responsibility" as a disguise of hostility towards one's
loved ones, towards one's boss, towards one's community.
Too often we are unaware of the thoughtlessness and
The Unesco Courier. May 1959
neglect, discrimination and selfishness that we display
frequently towards those whom we claim to love.
Uncontrolled emotion contributes to the production of
tension in ourselves and those around us. Therefore, it
behooves us to direct energy constructively. When angry,
instead of breaking a dish we can take a brisk walk; when-
frightened we can consider how best to meet the danger
instead of running away ; when we love we can either tie
our loved one to us, or preferably free him to choose
whether or not to stay.
Good insurance against getting overwhelmed by tension
is to develop ways of living with other people, and
activities either alone or shared, which give satisfaction
by being constructive and creative. Engaging in a sport,
creating a work of art, learning a craft, playing a game, '
singing a song, reading a book, helping someone else
working to Improve the community these and many
other activities can contribute to one's sense of well-being,
let one recoup from strain.
For many people a philosophy of life and a firm
religious faith provide extra strength to resist the wear
of tension and stress. They also can be the source of
motivation towards goals to which they aspire.
Loyal friends and associates can be a bulwark against
that "alone" feeling which comes when difficulties seem
about to overwhelm one. But we must take the initiative
to call upon those who would gladly help if they are
allowed to know we need them. And, of course, it is
important that this relationship be a two-way one and
that we be willing to go to the aid of our loved ones and
co-workers when they need us.
A bulwark against
that 'alone' feeling
T
o modify the environment, just as to modify our
own selves, takes action; it means doing specific
things:
Examine and evaluate and talk about the possible
causes of tensions. In essence, this is what the
psychiatrist tries to encourage his patient to do in order
that both may understand just what problems are at"the
root of anxiety and fear. It has often been said that a
clear understanding of a problem is 90 per cent, of its
solution. This is a proven fact in resolving conflicts
within the individual personality, and this can apply also
in a family. Conceivably it can apply equally in larger
units such as a company, a neighbourhood, a city, state or
nation ;
Assume full responsibility as a person, as a member
of a family; as a worker on the job, as a participating
citizen. This means acquiring basic education, training
and experience ; continually working for better solutions
of the problems of the groups in which we find ourselves ;
Thoughtfully plan for the future. This has economic,
social, educational and vocational aspects. Important in
this is to find the job best suited to one's abilities and
opportunities ; then relieve its routine and responsibility
with an avocation or a hobby. Often recreation, can serve
for re-creation.
Any plan for protection against and handling of stress
and strain requires action. One can find a cause or a
mission and take it seriously. What the world needs most
is people who will give of themselves to the needs of the
family, the community, the state, the nation and the
world. What a person needs most is to be wanted and
necessary.
There are so many opportunities in every country and
in every culture to help our fellow men by improving
education, social ' welfare, health ; by strengthening
religious faith. To do this implies that adults must grow
up emotionally to the point that they find more satisfac¬
tion in giving than in receiving.
17
