Just four short decades ago, the voice of broadcasting
was little more than a whisper coming from half a
dozen experimental stations in Europe and America
operated by men inspired by an idea and a hope. A
small but equally devoted band of amateurs, who had
painstakingly created their own primitive receivers, were
the only ones to hear that whisper. Good music and
up-to-date news were not the objective for which these
individuals searched, but simply a few spoken words or a
snatch of unidentifiable music being hurled miraculously
across space.
Today broadcasting is one of our most important means
of mass communication. Over 9,000 transmitters and
more than 300 million receivers are available to bring the
voice of broadcasting into the lives of mankind. Radio is
an instantaneous and efficient method of keeping people
informed of important events no matter where they occur.
The listener in Japan can have reports of a top-level
conference over his local station in the time it takes for
interpretation and translation of the proceedings directly
by short wave from the United Nations building in
Geneva. The sports fan in Argentina can follow the
progress of his soccer team just as easily whether it is
playing in Buenos Aires or at the Olympic games in
Melbourne. It is also- an inexpensive way of bringing the
world's greatest music and drama directly into the homes
of a widely scattered and heterogeneous audience.
Above all, radio is the ideal instrument for promoting
the free exchange of ideas and attitudes between nations
and their peoples. European listeners, for example, can
pick up broadcasts from several neighboring , countries
with a normal type of medium-Wave set. With a slightly
modified receiver, they also can receive short-wave
broadcasts of talks and commentary directly from the
far corners of the globe. So important has broadcasting
become' that the nations of the world have affirmed
through the United Nations and Unesco that freedom to
listen is an essential corollary to man's right to freedom
of opinion and expression.
Different countries have adopted different methods of
bringing the advantages of broadcasting to their peoples.
In the United States and most of South America the free
enterprise system is in common application for domestic
needs. Government interference is kept to a minimum
and the competitive spirit is relied upon to provide a
varied programme fare. Radio is financed by the sale of
time to advertisers.
In most of the rest of the world broadcasting is
regarded as a public service. The authorities seek to
enable everyone to listen to one, two, or three national
programmes of varied content. In order to bring some
broadcasting to every citizen, there is a tendency to
establish a fairly comprehensive coverage throughout
their territory, even if some of the stations would be
"uneconomic" by commercial standards. The cost of the
service is met by license fees on receivers, reinforced
Where necessary by government appropriations.
Bigoted propaganda machine
or source of unbiased news
Some countries, like Canada, use a combination of the
two systems in order to ensure that there will be
both adequate coverage and certain cultural stan¬
dards in a variety of programmes. Broadcasting for
foreign consumption, on the other hand, is almost exclu¬
sively a state function, whether only a few hours of pro¬
grammes are transmitted per day, as in the case of Ice¬
land and Thailand, or Whether the external services
operate "around the clock" as. in the case of several of
the larger countries. Responsibility is usually shared
between the foreign affairs branch of the government and
a governmental operating agency, and the expenses are
met by state grants.
No matter what system is used, the pervasiveness,
immediacy and intimacy of radio place a heavy burden
on those Who control its use. By design or accident
broadcasting can be turned into a wearisome, bigoted
governmental propaganda machine, or it can be used to
present unbiased news and to help the listener to under¬
stand his neighbour's problems. It can also be transformed
into a mere outlet for "popular" music and singing
commercials, at best just another background noise of
modern civilization, or it can be used to widen cultural
horizons and to aid in educational advancement.
Constant vigilance is necessary to keep broadcasting from
sliding into either of these undesirable extremes.
There are several serious obstacles economic, technical
and political that impede the most effective use of
broadcasting and thus deny far too many the freedom to
listen. Probably the most important is the lack of success
in making broadcasting facilities, especially receivers,
available to all parts of the world. While Europe and

The Unesco Courier. September 1959
North America have a fairly adequate distribution' of
receivers half of the world's total being in the United
States alone and South America is in a relatively good
position, the condition is still shocking in many parts of
Asia and in most of Africa.
In Asia, with the exception of certain countries
bordering on the Mediterranean in the west, and Japan
and the Philippines in the east, the average number of
receivers per 100 persons rarely exceeds six, and in some
areas there are less than one per 100 inhabitants. In
Africa, with the exception of Algeria, Egypt, Morocco,
Tunisia, and the Union of South Africa, few countries
have as many as one receiver per 100 inhabitants.
It is important to note that the areas which do not
have adequate broadcasting facilities are those where the
need is the greatest. While lack of adequate trans¬
portation may make it difficult or even impossible to
distribute newsprint, books or film, radio can com¬
municate over long distances despite mountains, rivers,
and jungles. Broadcasting can also overcome economic
barriers that exist in most underdeveloped countries.
After the costs of installation have been met, the
maintenance of a broadcasting service is relatively in¬
expensive in relation to the area that it can cover and
considerable use may be made of local resources. Film
and newsprint, on the other hand, are expensive and must
be purchased from abroad in the currencies of the major
producers. The third and most important advantage of
radio is that it can inform and educate whether or not
the listener is literate. As Unesco has pointed out, the
countries which are poor in information media are also
those where the level of illiteracy is the highest.
The expansion of broadcasting to meet the needs of
underdeveloped areas, and perhaps even its continuation
on the same level in more fortunate areas, depends upon
the solution of another basic problem. The radio
spectrum is used by many services in addition to broad¬
casting ships, aircraft, telegraph and telephone, and
amateurs, to mention but a few and new ones are being
introduced. Since the radio spectrum is limited, and the
appetites of the radio services are not, over the years it
has become more and more crowded especially in some
of the more desirable frequency bands. The interference
between stations that has resulted is so serious in certain
bands that the future of broadcasting as well as other
radio services is actually in serious danger.
One possible remedy has been explored by the Inter¬
national Telecommunication Union (ITU), the world's
guardian of the radio spectrum. At its first post-World
War II conference in 1947, it decided to draw on the
experience of the European broadcasters and establish
a world international frequency list in which all available
frequencies would be assigned to countries on the basis
of their individual needs. In addition, an International
Frequency Registration Board was to be created with the
duty of assuring that any future operating changes
would cause no interference to the stations operating
according to the new list.
After eleven years of exhaustive labour in which the
technical representatives of almost every country met
time and time ^again, the ITU still has not reached the
objectives set for itself. Limited success was obtained
in assigning frequencies in the low and medium bands
where most domestic broadcasting is carried out, but there
was almost complete failure in the bands with long-range
propagation characteristics, especially those used for
broadcasting directly from one nation to another. The
reason lay in the fact that the total requirements sub¬
mitted greatly exceeded the spectrum space available.
Some requirements were most- certainly legitimate but
others were exaggerated in the hope that a minimum
would remain after bargaining; still others were inflated
to provide for any possible expansion in the future.
The position of high frequency broadcasting was further
complicated by the division of responsibility in most
international services between the telecommunication or
broadcasting authorities responsible for programming
and operating and the non-technical and political
government departments Which oftimes decide the areas'
to be covered, the languages to be used, and the times
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
w^&êl yjA 	 m
in
>»
I
i
/
'Il
4.
7 jÊÊP Mu II
Mil
1
1*
BE¿*^|r.r^/í \
¿wt £ illl
\/ÉÊ *ßZZ\J]WMF *mñ\u
© BBC, London
INSIDE VIEW of a soaring radio mast at the British Broadcasting
Corporation's Very High Frequency transmitting station, near Norwich,
England. The Very High Frequency Band has only come into large-scale
use for broadcasting within the last ten years. All frequency modulation
stations, and most television stations operate within this band.

FREEDOM
TO LISTEN
(Continued)
STUDIO DEADLINE. Announcer gives last
minute look at news script while producer
and scriptwriter check production readi¬
ness in control room seen in background.
© BBC, London
of transmission. Whatever the reason, the countries
of the World have so far failed in this endeavour.
Fortunately, another opportunity to reach agreement
will present itself when the nations of the world meet this
fall in Geneva for the second post-World War II ITU
Administrative Radio Conference. (See page 8.)
There is another approach to the technical problem of
radio which can perhaps aid in the quest for a political
solution: frequency spectrum conservation. If the limits
of the desired frequency bands cannot be enlarged, the
frequencies available should be used in the most effective
manner. Many radio services have found the means of
reducing the frequency space used by their transmissions
to permit a greater volume of traffic Iwithin their
allocated bands through time sharing, geographical
sharing and the introduction of new technical methods
such as single side band emissions.
An excellent example is the short-range mobile services
employed by fire prevention, police, public utilities, taxis
and other similar organizations. In the past few years
the spectrum requirement for one channel of the mobile
service has been reduced by a quarter and equipment has
been developed that may permit a further reduction of
one half, or even one sixteenth of what was previously
considered necessary.
Of all the radio services, broadcasting has perhaps done
the least in this respect. Even if it is conceded that the
special nature of broadcasting has prevented such action
in the past, the perfection of frequency modulation (FM)
broadcasting in the very high frequencies opens the door
to an effective contribution. In 1947 the ITU assigned
an additional band to broadcasting in the newly
developed very high frequency area of the spectrum.
Later it was found that the use of the FM technique on
PROPHET OF THE
'ELECTRIC AGE
In the 1 880's Albert Robida, French artist-
writer, amused his readers with imagi¬
native pictures of the "Electric Age"
which in reality bears strong resemblance,
to the 20th century's "Electronic Age".
In his drawings, Robida depicted such
modern developments as television enter¬
tainment, television advertising, radio
news broadcasts and music recordings.
A far-seeing drawing by Robida (right)
showed a news correspondent broad¬
casting an eyewitness report to a distant
audience from the back of a camel via
radio. Today Robida's dream is an every¬
day event with the camel replaced simply
by the mobile broadcasting units and staffs
of roving radio reporters (far right).
USIS photos

these frequencies provided the man at the receiver with
clearer and better listening and there was a decided
reduction in the possibility of interference from other
transmitters operating on or near the same frequency.
If very high frequency FM broadcasting could be
introduced wherever practicable throughout the world for
local broadcasting needs, as it is being done in some
countries in Europe, the medium waves could be made
available for national coverage and even intermediate
range international broadcasting. This in turn could free
many of the high frequencies, which are now being used
for national or medium range international broadcasting,
for their proper use as long-range services. The savings
that could result from such a procedure could relieve
much of the present pressure in the medium and high
frequency bands, thus contributing materially to solving
the frequency problem as a whole.
If broadcasting does not find a method of giving the
listener the service that he desires and deserves he may
turn to a competitor such as (wired broadcasting.
Basically, this service consists of picking up broadcast
programmes from a . central point or exchange, and
distributing them by wire to those subscribing to' the
system. The principal advantages claimed by the wire
broadcasters cover most of the situations where regular
The Unesco Courier. September 1959
broadcasters are falling in their duty to the listener.
There is little or no interference from other stations and
electrical apparatus, and the general cost to the subscriber
is low.
The great disadvantage of wired broadcasting is, of
course, that the listener has no say in the selection of
programmes and must take what the organization chooses
to give him. The man with the regular radio set, on the
other hand, has a much greater choice of local programmes
and if equipped with a high frequency band can roam
the ether to pick up broadcasts directly from other
countries. If broadcasters do not adopt the necessary
innovations to assure that radio remains an effective
means for the exchange of ideas, wired broadcasting may
become a serious competitor.
At this point a word is due about radio's new challenger,
television. Obviously if television is destined to replace
broadcasting in the near future there is less need to
spend the time and effort necessary to give the broad¬
casting a new lease on life. Although the experience
available to date is fragmentary, it is definitely reassuring
to radio. In the first place it has been found that in the
few countries where television coverage now is close to
equalling that of radio the purchase of radio sets has
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
RADIO CITY IN PARIS. A huge circular structure nearly 500 feet in diameter which is now rising on the right bank of the Seine
in West Paris will be the new headquarters of French radio. When completed it will have 15 special studios for musical, theatrical
and variety performances, five large halls for shows with live audiences (one hall will seat 900 people) ; a vast collection of books,
scores, recordings and other background and documentary material ; a central recording section ; two special halls fortelevised variety
programmes ; a special section for the production of cultural and artistic programmes intended for listeners outside France.
7

The world total of receiving-sets Is estimat¬
ed at over 350 million. These sets are
unevenly distributed, however. One half of
them are located on the North American
continent alone. Another third are distribut¬
ed throughout Europe, ' with the greatest
concentration In the West, and the remain¬
ing sixth are scattered over Asia, Africa and
Pictograph from
the Near East. The United States is In first
place both from the point of view of total
receivers (160 mllUon) and density (88 per
100 Inhabitants). Second place In total
number of receivers belongs to the U.S.S.B.
(33 million), although second place In density
goes to Canada with 56 receivers ' per 100
population. In contrast Ethiopia and Eritrea
Unesco's "Broadcasting Without Barriers," 1959.
have only 16,000 receivers for a population of
some 20 million or an average of 0.1 per 100
people. Even India with over a million recei¬
vers has an average of only 0.3 per 100 people.
Map above shows distribution of world's radio
receivers, each symbol representing one recei¬
ver per 100 Inhabitants. Boxed symbols
Indicate Increases between 1949 and 1956.

FREEDOM TO LISTEN
(Continued)
not declined but to the contrary has continued to increase
at a steady rate.
The obvious reason is that television's extra attraction,
the appeal to the visual, is also its greatest drawback.
Those people whose vocations demand visual con¬
centration cannot take advantage of television as they
can of broadcasting. Further, there seems to be a great
number of individuals who continue to prefer radio
because they believe it can do a better job in such fields
as news and music, or find that television is not
compatible with leisure pursuits such as reading.
There is also an economic factor that must not
be overlooked. Television is extremely expensive in
relation to broadcasting, as concerns both upkeep and
programming. In addition it is a voracious consumer of
talent. Underdeveloped countries and those areas where
the economy is weak will have to wait a very long time
indeed for the introduction of television, and the
possibility of achieving saturation on a level with broad¬
casting is exceedingly remote. There are also more
advanced countries, for example Norway, Australia, and
New Zealand, where geographical difficulties and
scattered populations will delay television expansion and
where' the final achievement of television coverage will be
measured not in years, but in decades.
Even where adequate coverage is achieved, it seems
unlikely that 24-hour programming, as is the case in
8
c
several large cities in the United States, or even
continuous 12-hour programming, will be practicable.
Where commercial television is not adopted, the European
plan of restricting television to the evening leisure hours,
with perhaps a few minutes of "telecasting" in the
morning or at noon, will probably toe continued.
Consequently, it seems clear that even where the-
authorities can provide for television coverage as
extensive as that of radio, and where the same number
of families have television sets, there still will remain an
audience sufficiently large to justify a continuing and
extensive radio service.
Although such a situation will most probably demand
some adjustment in programming and changes in
emphasis, radio will continue to be an essential medium
of information and entertainment. In the larger portion
of the World, on the other hand, where such an ideal
situation is still only in the dim future, radio will
continue to be the most important all-around medium of
mass communication.
If any conclusion can be drawn from an examination
of the situation of broadcasting today it is that broad¬
casting is one of the most important means of mass
communication at mankind's disposal and if it is to have
a future worthy of its potentialities positive action must
be taken by all concerned. It is everyone's responsibility
to see that broadcasting facilities, both transmitting and
receiving, are available to all. It is everyone's responsi¬
bility to see that the programmes that are offered contain
all that is necessary to provide the listener with means
of enriching his life. It does not follow, of course, that
the listener will always take advantage of the best in
broadcasting, but if he does not have access to radio, and
to a choice of good programmes, he is being denied the
basic right to listen. -<
