SCIENCE. CAN CLOSE
THE GAP BETWEEN
RICH & POOR NATIONS
P. M. S. BLACKETT
If we look at the future of science, it is quite useful
to distinguish what I may call the three faces or the
three aspects of science.
The first is science as a creative scientific research
worker sees it and feels it. It is an activity of intense
value and attractiveness in its own right, and, necessar¬
ily, only a few people at any one time in the world can
be right in the forefront of advancing fundamental
knowledge, just as very few people can be the first to
climb Mount Everest, the first to cross the Antarctic or
the first to go under the Arctic ice. But this is an acti¬
vity of the practising of pure science, whether experi¬
mental or theoretical, which taxes all the skill of mind
and skill of hand and is invaluable as an experience.
The second aspect is science as a body of knowledge.
This body of knowledge created up to date by centuries
of patient work by thousands of scientists of all coun¬
tries of the (world must rank as one of the greatest
achievements of the human mind and ability, comparable
to the greatest achievements in art and literature. Now
this body of scientific knowledge which has great beauty in
Itself can be appreciated by anyone of any nation who
takes the trouble to learn its language.
The third aspect with which we are mostly concerned
here, I think, is science as power over nature. Science is
the force which has changed the world ; the whole struc¬
ture of society has been changed and in a relatively short
time in fact, in the last 200 years or so. Now in this
process, the changing of the world by science, there are
various distinct steps which it is extremely important
to keep in mind.
Firstly, there is the fundamental discovery which is
often part of the structure of pure science. Then this
work has to be applied to some definite, practical objec¬
tive. The pure scientific discovery is very often made
by someone with no interest in applications at all very
often the best pure scientists have no interest but to
be useful it has to be applied. Then We get the era of
applied science leading on to development work, and,
finally, to exploitation in the practical making of the
goods of life ; either making much cheaper the old goods
of civilized life (clothes, houses, baths, foods and so on),
making them available to a very much larger number of
people than in the past, or by producing entirely new
things such as motor-cars, aeroplanes, television, which
had never existed before.
Europe's wealth increased tenfold
Now, that is the last stage in the process and we must
keep these stages distinct the fundamental science,
the applied work and the final exploitation because
it is In this distinction I think that important conse¬
quences lie.
I think that if one does accept this distinction, we
should make this point. What the governments of coun¬
tries spend this immense amount of money on, the 1 per
cent of the national income, is applied science for its
material benefits for mankind. That is the object of the
expenditure, and it is a vast activity nowadays. It is an
enormously profitable investment for any country, and
8
the high standards of life of the rich countries depend
on this investment in science, the cheap part being the
pure science ana the most expensive part being the actual
application to real human needs.
An astonishing achievement of this scientific revolution
has been to increase by a factor of ten in 150 years the
wealth of Western European countries. But, looking
round the world today, we see that these great material
benefits of science are very unevenly distributed over the
world as a whole. Although the ¡knowledge of science is
widespread, the material benefits are extremely unevenly
distributed, and I think it is this uneven distribution of
the applications of science which today provides man's
greatest challenge.
(Here, Professor Gaston Berger of France, describing
Professor Blackett as the "father" of "operational
research", asked him to describe how this technique could
make a scientific contribution to the world of tomorrow.)
I am glad that this question of "operational research"
has been raised as I am intensely interested by this tech¬
nique which was brought into being to assist the efficient
prosecution of the war, and which has been aptly defined
as the technique for providing executives with the numer¬
ical basis for practical decisions.
Rich & getting richer all the time
We all, as citizens of our various countries, are indi¬
rectly executives by controlling government actions
in the long run, and so it is very apt at this point to
know what is the numerical basis for the statements that,
for instance, I have been making, and other people have
been making, and what are the figures we ought to know
if we are going to do something about it.
I think that the essential figures (which one has to
appreciate to understand the magnitude of the problem
are quite simple. Something like one quarter of the
world's population of 2,500 million or so live in what can
be called rich countries. These people have an income
per head of about $1,000 a year. They comprise, of
course, most of Europe, the United States, Canada, Aus¬
tralasia and so on. Then on the other extreme, there
are between one half and three-quarters of the peoples
of the world who are definitely excessively poor and who
have an income per head of about a tenth as much as
the rich countries: $100 a year, compared with $1,000 a
year of the rich countries. Thus there are at least three
people with the law income for every one with the high
income.
This is the famous gap between the "have" and the
"have not" countries. Moreover, the rich countries are
getting richer at an average rate of about 2 per cent, per
year, averaging over booms and slumps. And it is this
rate of increase since 1800 or so which has led to the
very high standard of life in Western Europe.
Each year the Western countries, the
rich countries, get richer by 2 per cent.,
so in five years they get richer by 10 per
cent., 10 per cent of $1,000 is $800, so in
five years a rich country will add to its

The Unesco Courier. Februory 1959

THE GAP BETWEEN
RICH AND POOR ^'«;
r
wealth $100, which is as much as anybody in the poorer
countries has to live on. No wonder that the rich countries
are getting richer very much faster than the poor
countries are getting less poor.
Now, this widening gap is statistically true for a large
part of the peoples of the world. Why is it true? Why
isn't something done about it? This comes down to the
question of the cost of development work and manufac¬
ture. Many of the poor countries know how to make
things, but they cannot do so because they lack the skill
in enough of their people, or the capital to put into the
machines and the factories to make the goods. It is the
extreme expense of starting off an industrialization pro¬
cess which is holding up the application of known science
throughout the world.
It is very important to réalise that science, although it
has achieved these marvellous things, is not a magic
wand to wave over a poor country and make it into a
rich one. Science text-books are cheap ; it is reasonably
cheap to train scientists ; but it is extremely expensive
to embody the science in the factories, the steel works,
the transport systems, the power station, the mines and
the chemical plants. They all cost an enormous amount
of capital, and the poor countries are very hard put to
find capital. And that simple economic reason is why
science is so very unevenly applied over the world today.
I agree that the most important thing for mankind is
not to blow itself up. But I am curiously an optimist
about this matter. Some of my friends I call rational
pessimists, and I call myself an irrational optimist. But
I am an optimist. And assuming ' that we won't blow
ourselves up, what is the next main problem?
I think the next main problem is to do something about
the widening gap between the rich and the poor parts of
the world, the rich countries which have successfully used
science and obtained all the benefits, and the poor ones
which have not. Now, if we don't do something about this
widening gap, in a few decades, if the standard of life in
the West goes up at the present rate, we may end up with
a large part of the world poverty-stricken, as for cen¬
turies past, while the advanced countries of the West
are enjoying (if "enjoying" is the right term) what has
been called a "five-day week-end."
So great is the productive possibility of mankind that
that is not an impossibility. Let me say quite definitely
that all the evidence is that Western Europe has been the
source of science for accidental social reasons and not
because of any Innate superiority whatever, and there is
no reason why all the other nations of the World shall
not be as good scientists and engineers as ourselves.
Professor 'Blackett was asked if he thought that aid
for science in other countries should be given through-
the United Nations and its Specialized Agencies, or by
existing national programmes of technical assistance.
I think all methods have to be used. I think that as
much aid as possible should be fed through the United
Nations but, of course, there will be bilateral arrange¬
ments going on, and every sort of aid is needed. The
total amount of aid is about one to two per cent of the
national income of the West. That is only a fraction of
what we are spending on armaments. If that was canal¬
ized into the under-developed countries, not as a charity
but as a long period investment without political strings,
it would enormously help them to get over the extremely
difficult problem of the first years of industrialization.
