THE REDISCOVERY OF AFRICA
by Basil Davidson
ROYAL CONGO STATUE: This head is a detail of
the effigy of the I I 9th monarch of the Bushongo King¬
dom in the Belgian Congo. The practice of making royal
portrait statues during the lifetime of the kings appar¬
ently began with Shamba Bolongongo, the 93rd and
greatest of the Bushóngo kings (c. A.D. 1600). The
kings are usually shown sitting cross-legged with some
object (like a drum, an anvil etc.) symbolizing the special
achievements for which they are still remenbered.
Van de Straete Collection

The Unesco Courier. October 1959
) Almasy, Paris
SAND-BLURRED RUIN of Musawarat es Safa, to the north of Khartoum, in the Sudan, was once a palace or temple, built at
the beginning of the Christian era as the residence of a god-king or goddess-queen. Today there remain only the solitary ruins

of palaces and temples lying amid the sands surrounded by the undisturbed city mounds of the Kush civilization which [built them.
s the negro a man without a past? Not many years have passed since the outside
world took an affirmative answer more or less for. granted: to what point, indeed,
will be easily remembered by those many Africanists who watched the stubborn
efforts of Melville Herskovits and notably in his book, The Myth of the Negro Past
arguing that the answer should be no.
But now of recent years, in the wake of the colonial hurricane, there emerges a
new approach to the whole question. It is increasingly realized that the cultural con¬
tributions of African peoples to the general history and progress of mankind were not
limited to interesting works of art, whether in wood or ivory or in bronze or gold,
but comprehended a wide range of political and social achievements that were none the
less important or remarkable because they were ignored or little known. It is seen,
indeed, that these works of art that so many Asians and Americans and Europeans
have now admired were not the more or less mysterious products of a social vacuum,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

REDISCOVERY
1
MABRUK
OF AFRICA w TICHIT | u r>
^m MAURETANIA t5t	.-\ GAO
I
(Continued) r^x
1
TIMBUKTU a\ ^a
<l^¿>^ 1
1
/
W V<!. >v
" Vc KUMBI SALEH 1 \( \
C. VERDE ^ \*<r /// 1
SENEGAL *Sf *'''
L v^Ä'	 ~ _/_/ DJENNE /
A . I -r ~l% y ^»*r~z.*'Z>-» *, RERX SUDÁN .'" v\ i'"~" ****
\* /^<~~^ ''X--'
0 V
il / »'"*"»-.
es." rx - -v¿---^ X //)UPPER VOLTA
K /^ J1
1 A
^^^ r^ \ (^ DAHOMEY i \
>
Î GHANA
I* n/i g e R 1
v .-	-í
The Unesco Courier. October 1959
I« MEROE
~ MUSAWARAT /
I
NAQA I
V,
^*VH>/M/
\!.\ BIQO
ETHIOPIA
;.. vierOria
BUSHONGO
L. TANGANYIKA
C-"-*"*--_
TANGANYIKA
NORTHERN RHODESIA MOZAMBIQUE
SOUTHERN
RHODESIA
INVANGA
(old Terracing)
SOUTH WEST
AFRICA
BECHUANALAND \
ZIMBABWE çfoFALA

A FACTUAL REAPPRAISAL
OF THE AFRICAN PAST
the pre-mediaeval and mediaeval centuries that came
immediately before European contact and penetration.
It is this that is really new this assertion that Africans
went through successive, distinctive, and knowable phases
of growth and development in the fifteen or twenty
centuries before the European records of Africa become
frequent and various. Reassessment of the African past,
in the sense that I have spoken of, is essentially the
unravelling and writing of the history of the African
Metal Age in the lands that lie to the south of the Sahara
desert.
Let us try and summarize the core and heart of this
great matter. Late Stone Age peoples on the lower
reaches of the Nile, and in nearby regions that were much
more fertile then, thrust their way into history in about
3,000 b.c., when the "first dynasty" of the Pharoahs took
power iñ the delta of the Nile. This great forward step
in northernmost Africa, interwoven with the comparable
achievements of peoples in the Near East and the Medi¬
terranean, acted and reacted as the centuries went by on
lands to the South and West. Its influence spread south¬
ward up the Nile and there, reacting on the peoples that
it found, stimulated and helped to create the civilization
of Kush of that renowned kingdom of Napate and Meroe
whose kings and queens would rule in more or less conti¬
nuous succession for a thousand years after about 800 b.c.
With a mastery of metals
came victory over Nature
Its influence also spread westward along the southern
shores of the Mediterranean: Phoenician Carthage,
founded in the ninth century b.c., helped to stimulate
and create the Libyco-Berber civilizations of northern
Africa. And, thirdly, these ancient civilizations of the
Near East and of Egypt produced in the southernmost tip
of Arabia that Arabia of the Queen of Sheba whom
Solomon knew and loved another region of high
civilization; and from southern Arabia this civilization of
antiquity despatched its settlers and traders and warriors
across the Red Sea into the Horn of Africa, and its
mariners and colonists down the long east coast of what
is now Somaliland, Kenya, Tanganyika, and Mozambique.
These pioneers and their mastery of metal-working and
of other material techniques did not move into a void.
They moved into a land that was peopled then, if thinly,
by several branches of the human family to which anthro¬
pologists have awarded the names of bushman, negrillo,
hottentot, negro, a.nd hamite. Now the origins of these
peoples of continental Africa are obscure and confused.
They too, apparently, had moved southward across the
continent, coming perhaps from outside it, in centuries
beyond calculation.
Probably the bushmen and the negrillos the pygmies
were the first of all the surviving peoples of Africa to
inhabit the land. Some of them survive today in a more
or less Stone Age simplicity: there are groups of pygmies
in the central forests of the Congo, and bushmen in the
wastes of the Kalahari, who live only by hunting and
fishing and collecting food.
Perhaps the Hottentots the natives whom the first
Dutch settlers would find at the Cape of Good Hope in
1652 were the next to arrive. At some time after about
5,000 b.c. but nothing of this is clearly known the peoples
whom we know as negro and hamite began to emerge,
multiply, and follow the earlier migrants in a generally
southward direction. As they wandered across the con¬
tinent these later peoples, often mingling with earlier
peoples whom they found, worked out new ways of living.
They invented tropical agriculture. They began to settle
and raise new crops. They learned how to smelt natural
copper and make primitive tools and weapons of this
metal.
8
At a time that was shortly before or after the beginning
of the Christian era these peoples of the southern conti¬
nent began to mine and smelt iron, and to make more
efficient tools and weapons; and with this they acquired
a new and, as it would prove, revolutionary control over
the material environment in which they lived. It is from
about this time from about 2,000 years ago that the
peoples of the continental heart of Africa begin to mul¬
tiply and form their present major groupings.
It is from then, as it seems, that the largest of all of
Africa's existing human groups begins to spread into and
populate the empty or near-empty forests and savannahs.
This group is called the Bantu; but the term has little
or no racial significance, being a linguistic term for all
these many peoples who speak a closely related language.
Racially the Bantu are the product of intermingling over
long periods of time between negro and hamite and
bushman and hottentot. Physically, therefore, they vary
greatly among themselves; but all their languages go
back, more or less obviously, to a common root. We do
not know the origins of this root.
Thus it is the last 2,000 years, more or less, that emerge
as the formative period of most of the peoples of conti¬
nental Africa. This is the period of their Iron Age.
Some authorities prefer to call this their Metal or
Palaeometallic Age, because, although knowledge of
ferrous metallurgy was the decisive influence, African
peoples also knew the working of several other minerals,
including gold and copper and tin. In time, too, some
of them worked extensively in brass and bronze; but they
knew, as ancient Asia and Europe had known, a Bronze
Age that made a long distinctive period of development
before their Iron Age.
© Herman J. Hahndiek,
Bilthoven, Netherlands

The Unesco Courier. October 1959
Now it is in studying this Metal Ageor, more narrowly,
the fifteen or sixteen centuries before European contact
along the coast that present research is principally and
dramatically engaged. Advancing along three different
but related lines, history and archaeology and anthropo¬
logy now begin to bring their findings together and to
offer a coherent picture that Was invisible only a handful
of years ago.
Anthropology in its wide sense comprehending the
study of language and institutions has embarked on a
systematic recording of the oral history of a significant
number of African peoples. Archaeology has at last turn¬
ed its attention to some of the major site-regions of
the continent. And history, working against the back¬
ground of this growing knowledge has renewed its study
of written sources, which, for the mediaeval period, are
mainly in Arabic, Portuguese, English and Chinese.
New translations edited with the new and fuller
knowledge of the past twenty years are now being pro¬
jected or prepared of several classic works, such as the
first century a.d. Periplus of the Erythraean Sea (in Bri¬
tain) and the 16th century writing's on the Western Sudan
of Leo Africanus (in France). The Central African Ar¬
chives (of the Federation of Central Africa) is collabora¬
ting with Arquivo Histórico de Mozambique in the editing
and publication of some 15,000 hitherto unpublished docu¬
ments from the libraries of Goa, Lisbon, and the Vatican;
and these, when they finally appear, should throw much
new light on early European contacts. Joseph Needham,
in his monumental study of the history of science in
China, has meanwhile devoted part of his sixth volume
due for publication in the not distant future to Chinese
maritime technology, and, in so doing, has shown how
great was the Chinese contribution to that Indian Ocean
trade which had its western terminals on the East African .
coast.
HIGH COLLARS of copper or beadwork rings tradi¬
tionally a major item of adornment among Africans are
still widely favoured. Left, woman of the N'dbele, a
Bantu people living in the Transvaal. Right, 12-inch
high Benin bronze from Nigeria (c. 17th century). It is
an example of numerous "choker" bronze heads, so called
on account of the high coral collars of Benin court dress.
African archaeology has had important successes in the
past few years. Mauny and Thomassey have gone far
towards completing the excavation of the ancient city of
Kumbi Saleh, probable site of the capital of mediaeval
Ghana. Lebeuf and Masson-Detourbet have uncovered
the remarkable bronze-using civilization of the Sao people
of early mediaeval Chad. Vercoutter, in the Sudan, has
completed a preliminary list of sites of the imposing civi¬
lisation of Kush. Other French specialists have continued
the investigation of early Ethiopia.
In British Africa Mathew and Freeman-Grenville have
listed ancient and mediaeval sites on the coast of Kenya
and Tanganyika, while Kirkman has excavated the late
mediaeval ruins of Gedi, near the Kenyan port of Malindi.
Further to the north, in Italian Somaliland, Cerulli and
Grottanelli have thrown important light on early settle¬
ments and migrations on the coast and coastal islands.
Throughout this large region there is good hope of pro¬
gress, if funds are forthcoming, not only of writing the
history of the coastal cities and trading stations which
flourished in pre-European times, but also of discovering
much more about the nature of their suppliers and mar¬
kets in the hinterland.
Coins and durable imports such as china offer hopeful
means of dating these many stone ruins of the coast and
interior. "I have never in my life," remarked Sir Morti¬
mer Wheeler after a fortnight's visit to Tanganyika in
1955, "seen so much broken china as I have seen in the past
fortnight along the coast here and the Kilwa Islands:
literally, fragments of Chinese porcelain by the shovelful...
In fact, I think it is fair to say that as far as the Middle
Ages are concerned, from the tenth century onwards, the
buried history of Tanganyika is written in Chinese por¬
celain."
To the southward there is fresh effort at uncovering
the story of another great complex of stone ruins forts
and huts and vast hillside terrace systems that stretch
© British Museum.
over several thousands of square miles in Southern Rho¬
desia and neighbouring lands. Summers has lately com¬
pleted an initial survey of the stone ruins of Inyanga on
the Rhodesian-Mozambique border; and now, with Robin¬
son, is working on the foundations of the great walls at
Zimbabwe in the hope of finding out whether those tall
ruins were built on the site of a previous and more humble
culture, or whether the first settlers were also those who
built so well in stone. A full list of all the sites that
archaeologists have looked at in the past twenty years
or so, and are looking at now, would fill many pages.
Even so, we are only at the beginning of this search
for the history of pre-mediaeval and mediaeval Africa.
Beyond the barriers of ignorance we may glimpse an his¬
torical landscape that is thick with cities or strong stone
settlements and loud with the din of ports and ocean¬
going shipping, that glitters with old armies and the pomp
of states and empires and is restless with the rise and fall
of dynasties and powers. But at present we can do little
more than glimpse at this.
What is now required can be stated bluntly in a few
words: it is more money and a closer co-ordination of
effort. As to money, resources even in favoured territories
are almost always slender; and many potentially fruitful
territories are still a void on the archaeological map.
Next to nothing, for example, is known of the archaeology
of Portuguese West and East Africa; yet both may have
much to contribute, the first to a study of the origins of
the stone-building civilizations of southern Africa, and
the second to a study of the links between these and the
trading cities of the Indian Ocean seaboard.
Yet this great taäk of unravelling the African past re¬
mains, and must remain, an international endeavour.
Occasional conferences on African pre-history and history
have proved, over the past few years, how much can be
gained from the pooling of knowledge and the wide dis¬
cussion of problems. They have stimulated public interest,
and helped to create an atmosphere that is favourable to
more intensive research. It is to be hoped that they are
only the forerunners of many others of their kind. To
this end, indeed, Unesco can powerfully contribute.
