Facts and Figures
Test your mental health
To aid you in taking your own mental
health pulse, try this list of questions
drawn up by Dr William C. Menninger,
President of the Menninger Foundation,
Topeka, Kansas:
Are you always worrying?
Are you unable to concentrate because
of unrecognized reasons?
Are you continually unhappy without
justified cause?
Do you lose your temper easily and
often?
Are you troubled by regular insomnia?
Do you have wide fluctuations in your
moods, from depression to elation, back
to depression, which incapacitate you?
Do you continually dislike to be with
people?
Are you upset if the routine of your life
is disturbed?
Do your children consistently "get on
your nerves"?
Are you "browned off" and constantly
bitter?
Are you afraid without real cause?
Are you always right and the other
person always wrong?
Do you have numerous aches and pains
for which no doctor can find a physical
cause?
The conditions charted in these questions
are the major warning signals of poor
mental health in one degree or another.
According to Dr Menninger, help is
necessary if your answer to any of these
questions is definitely "yes".
How many mentally ill ?
The total amount of mental disorder in
the world cannot at present be estimated
because of the lack of reliable statistics.
The following facts may however be
assumed to give a fairly good indication
of the situation in countries at different
stages of economic and social development:
Insanity rates
In the more culturally and economic¬
ally developed countries, it is recognized
that there is an insanity rate of about
1 per cent, amongst the people of these
countries, and a rate of neurosis defined
at the level of partially disabling illness
of approximately 10 per cent.
Two per thousand
India: "About 2 per thousand of our
population is likely to be afflicted with a
mental disorder which sooner or later
requires hospitalization. We have also to
take into account the mental defectives
who average at least 8 to 10 per thousand
of our population, and epileptics who
perhaps number 0.5 per cent, of the
population. Further we must include in
this category various types of physical
illnesses like high blood pressure, skin
disorders of various types, cardiovascular
conditions and others in which chronic
emotional stresses do contribute a major
20
share. Added to this formidable list we
have problems of social pathology. In our
country, about 1,750,000 crimes are
committed every year; between 15,000 and
17,000 people commit suicide in a year;
and, at the lowest estimate, about 15 to
20 per cent, of our teenagers are juvenile
delinquents."
One in Sixteen
United States of America: It is estimated
that there are about 9 million people in
the United States of America suffering
from mental illness (1.5 million) and other
personality disturbances (7.5 million) all
in all, about 1 in every 16 people. In
addition, there are about 1.5 million
mentally deficient people conservatively
about 1 per cent, of the population.
One out of every 12 children born in
the United States of America each year
will sometime during his life suffer a mental
illness severe enough to require hospital¬
ization. The number who will develop
less severe mental illness is much greater.
The patients in mental hospitals make
up on any day almost half of all the
patients in all the hospitals in the United
States of America. Taken together, the
patients in mental hospitals and in insti¬
tutions for the mentally deficient and
epileptic make up about 55 per cent, of
all the patients in all hospitals.
In addition to the people who go to
mental hospitals, clinics or private psy¬
chiatrist for treatment of mental illness or
other personality disturbances, it is estim¬
ated that about 30 per cent, of all the
patients who go to general hospitals, and
about 50 per cent, of all the patients
who go to general practitioners are suffering
from mental illness and other personality
disturbances or physical illness associated
with mental illness.
One in ten
Among French . children: It is estim¬
ated that in France 4.3 per cent, of all
children between 4 and 17 years old have
some degree of mental deficiency and need
special schooling and attention; but the
proportion of children or adolescents who
will need some psychological care and
guidance at one time during their school
or post-school years is at least 5 to 10 per
cent.
In the armed forces: Other evidence of
the extent of mental illness in the United
States of America comes from the armed
forces. During World War II, about
900,000 men between the ages of 18 and
37, or about 5 per cent, of the 18 million
examined, were rejected for military service
because of mental disorder.
The cost of mental disease
In terms of money, the cost of mental
disease is fantastic. Maintenance and
treatment in mental hospitals in the
United States of America require about
$750,000,000 a year. The strain on the
individual taxpayer is illustrated by the fact
that 28 per cent, of every tax dollar in
the operating budget of New York State
goes for the care of the mentally ill. If
the cost of veterans' compensation is
included, the total amounts to about
$3,000,000 a day for the country as a
whole. The loss to society is completely
immeasurable.
The roots of mental health
Among the most significant developments
in psychiatry during the past quarter of a
century has been the steady growth of
evidence that the quality of the parental
care which a child receives in his earliest
years is of vital importance for his future
mental health.
The infant and young child should expe¬
rience a warm, intimate and continuous
relationship with his mother (or permanent
mother-substitute) in which both find satis¬
faction and enjoyment. It is this rela¬
tionship with the mother, varied in
countless ways by relations with the
father and siblings, that child psychiatrists
and many others believe underlies the
development of character and mental health.
It follows that broken homes are likely
to produce behaviour disorders in children,
and this has been confirmed by several
studies.
Child assault victims
In Israel, no child under fourteen who
has been the victim of sexual assault may
appear in court. Instead, the child's
testimony is taken by a social worker who
then gives the child's evidence. The
purpose of this law, passed several years
ago, is to protect children from the ordeal
of testifying and undergoing cross-
examination which often harms them as
much as the actual crime itself. As a
result, many of the after-effects of such
assaults have been alleviated.
Broken homes, twisted lives
In the United Kingdom, for example, of
418 delinquent children no less than 45 per
cent, came from broken homes. Of the
remainder nearly one half (about 25 per
cent, of the whole) came from homes
where, although the parents were living
together, conditions were very bad, includ¬
ing cruelty, immorality, mental instability,
neglect, harsh treatment and rejection.
Only 30 per cent, came from homes which
were complete and reasonably happy.
In Paris, 839 children suffering from
behaviour disorders were compared with
nearly 70,000 "normal" children. Of the
problem children 66 per cent, came from
broken homes while only 12 per cent, of
the "normal" children did so.
Lonely old people
The rise in the admission rate of old
people to mental hospitals in many coun¬
tries is much steeper than could be ex¬
pected from the increase in the number of
old people.
Many surveys have referred to the fre¬
quency among the aged of loneliness,

The Unesco Courier. May 1959
apathy, dejection and melancholy, often
associated with bereavement, isolation, and
growing physical infirmity. One study
found that states of depression and anxiety
are present in 50 per cent, of the aged
surveyed, and many of the cases of grave
mental illness may be drawn from this large
pool of lonely and unhappy people. Yet
hardly anywhere have they, so far, received
any specific attention as psychiatric cases
from the health and welfare services con¬
cerned with the aged in the community.
Suicide and mental health
People who commit suicide suffer from
mental or physical illness or a combination
of the two. The highest death-rates from
suicide in both sexes are found in lapan,
Denmark, Austria and Switzerland. The
lowest rates are reported in Ireland, North¬
ern Ireland, Chile, Scotland and Spain.
Almost everywhere in the world men are
much more prone to suicide than women.
The ratio is in general 3 to 1, but it
varies from more than 4 to 1 in Norway
to less than 2 to 1 in Japan.
Highest rates for male suicide are re¬
corded in Switzerland, Denmark, Austria
and Finland. For women, they are to be
found in Japan, Denmark and Austria.
Mentally abnormal criminals
Crime will yield only to an attack on
many fronts including an attack on poor
mental health in the community. Various
studies of criminal populations have shown
that a third to three quarters, depending
on the seriousness of the offence, suffer
from some degree of mental abnormality.
Irrational fears and hopes
In the minds of people everywhere,
atomic energy remains a threatening and
mysterious force, interpreted very often in
magical rather than rational terms, and
fraught with irrational fears and irrational
hopes, the fears being expressed far more
often than the hopes. The anxiety-pro¬
ducing character of atomic energy may be
ascribed to the peculiar nature of radiations
unseen, unheard, unfelt and, as far as the
individual is concerned, uncontrollable.
The most terrifying aspect is perhaps that
of a tremendous power that may get out
of control.
Evidence about people's emotional reac¬
tions to atomic matters is found in their
day-to-day conversations. Disagreeable
weather, the failure of the harvest and
other natural phenomena are frequently
blamed on atom bomb tests. Fears of
the fall-out, of the disposal of atomic waste,
of the pollution of water, milk and food
supplies, or of harmful genetic effects are
direct expressions of anxiety. With the
advent of the atomic age humanity is thus
facing added mental-health problems.
The doctor's daily rounds
Medical students should be trained for
their role as "pillars of mental health".
According to a study carried out in France,
at least 50 per cent, of the medical work
of the general practitioner is directly con¬
cerned with mental health, yet the general
practitioner is less conscious of his key role
in the prevention, diagnosis and treatment
of mental ills than with respect to diseases
like tuberculosis or venereal disease. There
are innumerable opportunities for mental-
health work in the physician's daily round,
in work with out-patients, in school medical
services, in prenatal and premarital con¬
sultations, in industrial hygiene, and wher¬
ever the doctor is in contact with social
workers, nurses, employers etc.
Modern man's mental health
"Psychotropic agents! The "tranquilli¬
zer" in one pocket; the "pep" pill in the
other. Drugs to dispel nightmares; drugs
to invoke dreams; drugs to escape from
reality into fantasy or from fantasy into
reality. Even Alice-in-Wonderland drugs
by means of which adults can shrink back
into childhood."
That is the caricature of one type of
modern man, harassed by headlines; tortur¬
ed by the ticker-tape; tormented by the
telephone; as "manic-depressive" as his
sales-charts; wakeful when he should be
asleep and drowsy when he should be
awake; worrying about his blood pressure
and nursing his duodenal ulcer; driving
himself like a highspeed car through dense
traffic, braking or accelerating in turn,
running away from himself and taking
himself with him. He has 2,500 million
neighbours in the wider world; he is alone
in that private world himself.
There are still other types those whose
tensions become intolerable through being
chained to piece-work machines, white-
collar workers dogged by economic worries
and "wife trouble", hungry and miserable
peasants driven to take hashish for solace.
Attitude to mental disease
What is your attitude toward a mental
patient, or a former mental patient? Do
you know that his recovery and return to
normal life depends largely on what people
think and feel about him? Open-door
hospitals, out-patient care, domiciliary
services for mental patients, which are the
methods of social psychiatry today, can
be successful only if community attitudes
toward mental disorders do not present an
obstacle to mental-health work.
Fear and a sense of estrangement of the
mentally disordered are often found in-
countries where there, are vast mental hos¬
pitals, originally erected for the incarcera¬
tion, rather than the treatment and reha¬
bilitation of patients. In countries just
starting to organize mental-health care,
these attitudes do not appear as common.
Possessed by devils
Among primitive peoples, mental disease
has generally been looked upon either as a
punishment by a good spirit, or, more often,
as the result of malevolent action by the
devil, or even as demoniacal possession.
This conception, which still survives among
certain African and East Indian peoples,
was very prevalent throughout the Middle
Ages and even later.
During the Middle Ages a few monaste¬
ries harboured lunatics, but it appears that
the first asylums for their care were built
by the Moslems, whose ideas on the treat¬
ment of mental patients were derived from
the Eastern physicians. In Europe, the
Bethlem hospital in London was first used
as an asylum in 1403; the second was
opened in 1408 at Valencia in Spain.
During the following century further asy¬
lums were established in Europe. The
insane were received into the first general
hospital established in North America in
Pennsylvania in 1756 (but were first
detained in the cellars!). The first Ameri¬
can hospital for the insane was opened in
Virginia in 1773.
Asylums like prisons
The purpose of these early asylums was
not the care and treatment of the mentally
ill, but the incarceration and, if possible,
subjugation of the violently insane. Most
of these asylums resembled prisons, and the
inmates were regarded as criminals. Very
gradually a more humane attitude towards
the mentally affected began to develop. In
1792 more than 50 insane inmates of the
Bicetre hospital in Paris were liberated
from their chains, which had been worn
for over 30 years. Even pessimists had
to agree that these patients became less
rather than more violent. In Italy, Via-
cenzo Chiarugi struck off chains from the
insane at about the same time.
Reform in England was initiated by the
Quakers who founded the York Retreat in
1813, purposely avoiding the name "asylum"
or "madhouse". The use of chains was
abolished, and therapy was introduced,
consisting in work and exercise and the
cultivation of a moral atmosphere. The
fame of the English Quaker reforms spread
to America, and in 1817 the Friends Asy¬
lum was opened in Pennsylvania, where
the mentally ill were treated as human
beings instead of beasts.
More cures in mental hospitals
Ten years ago in Ville-Evrard, France,
the average stay of patients before dis¬
charge was over one year; now it is four
months. This hospital, which in 1948 had
550 beds and admitted 100 new patients
a year, now has only 270 beds but gives
care to 600 new patients a year, and the
percentage of patients that must be kept
indefinitely has gone down from 50 per
cent, to 7 per cent.
In New York State, despite a 10 per
cent, rise in admissions to mental hospitals
during the past three years, there has been
an increase of 23 per cent, in releases.
As a result, the mental hospital population
has decreased first by 450 patients in
1955-1956 and in 1956-1957 and by 1,200
patients in 1957-1958.
Don't keep up with the
Joneses !
In America social climbing is a national
exercise, and many athletes in this kind of
competition for respect pay heavily in
mental health. In a society like ours, in
which money income is distributed in
shares of graduated size, the demand for
respect takes many forms; striving to obtain
all the respect that a new wealth position
makes possible; seeking to save enough
respect to compensate for economic limita¬
tion; trying to discover means of scoring
prestige points in order to get ahead of
competitors having about the same income
. . . Those who keep up with the Joneses
must often go all the way to the mental
hospital.
Mental health and world
peace
"The psychiatrist knows that individuals
who have emotional disabilities of their
own guilt, fears, inferiorities are certain
to project their hates on others, on groups,
communities, or nations, and thus jeopar¬
dize seriously the external relations of
those who are associated with them, in the
view of their "enemy". They are the
people who must believe the worst of all
foreigners and who then react emotionally
and irrationally to these beliefs 	 "
21
