DRIVERS WATCH YOUR SPEED
The assessment, of the various degrees of responsibility for
accidents involving injury or death on the roads of Europe
gives first place (70 per cent) to faulty roads and allots
less than a third of this percentage (20 per cent) to the drivers
of vehicles themselves. A 20 per cent responsibility, however, is
still a responsibility for one case in every five.
What, can be done to improve standards of driving ?
An expert makes the following point: "The results of road
safety teaching to schoolchildren are striking. Countries which
have made the greatest efforts in this direction have declared that the
number of road deaths among children has become stationary
or has even fallen... while the number of adult victims of road
accidents has continued to increase at a rate roughly equal to
the increase in circulation."
His suggestion is that what is good for children should be
equally good for adults, that "preaching" at people will get us
nowhere and that what is needed is simple instruction and
information.
In this connexion readers who are drivers of motor vehicles
may be interested in some figures published by a French car
manufacturing firm and circulated to users of their cars.
The first comment made is that the average driver might drive
more carefully if he iwould learn to think of his speed not in terms
of miles an hour but in feet per second.
Consider the figures:
Miles per hour... equals .. feet per second
87 127
37 55
15 23
12 18
Emergencies on the road call for action in terms of seconds
and split seconds. It is therefore realistic to consider speed
which reduces time available for action in terms of seconds.
Second comment: Road safety might improve if drivers would
think less of the time taken to get from A to B and more about
the time taken to stop a car in motion.
A motorcar moving at 62 miles an hour is covering 92 feet
every second. An obstacle appears. It is estimated that normally
about half a second passes between a driver seeing the obstacle
and applying the brake. In the half second the car has already
covered 46 feet.
If the road is good and dry, IF the car's brakes are efficient
and the tyres in new condition, four more seconds are required
before the car stops. In those four seconds it will have travelled
a further 188 feet.
To sum up: 62 miles an hour to a stop takes five seconds in
all, during which time the car cannot be prevented unless it
hits an obstacle from travelling a distance of more than 230
feet. On a wet road, and with worn brakes, this distance may
be increased to as much as 650 feet.
Note for those who like even an occasional drink while "out
for a run": alcohol, even in small quantities, has two effects on a
car driver. The first is that he tends to drive faster, the second
that his "reaction time" the time betweeen his becoming aware
of an obstacle and his taking action to stop or avoid it is
increased. Read the above paragraphs once more.
Third comment: instead of thinking about how powerful the
car engine is, drivers would be wise to think instead how powerful
their brakes are.
Consider the following facts:
Suppose that a car of 55-60 BHP weighing 1,000 kg, is moving
at a speed of 30 miles an hour. The driver can double its speed
within 17 seconds. Suddenly, a lorry swings across the path from
a side-road. Down goes the brake pedal. IF the road surface is
good, IF the brakes are efficient, the car can be brought to a
standstill within 4 seconds. This means that a retarding force of
190 HP has had to be applied equal to three times the engine
power of the car.
Yet despite all the mechanical strains and stress on motor
vehicle mechanisms, the share of faulty vehicles in the toll of
injury and death on European roads is put at only 5 per cent-
four times less than that attributed to faulty driving.
ROAD SAFETY CAMPAIGNS Inspired by the urgent need to reduce the heavy toll of accidentsespecially In towns, where
75% of those involving motor-vehicles occurare being given ever greater prominence. Public authorities and accident prevention
societies remind the public to "take care", with posters like those shown here, from, left, Great Britain and right, the Netherlands.
Let op voetgangers !
