THE EL DORADO RULED
BY THE ASHANTI KINGS
by Jacqueline Delange
Département d'Afrique Noire, Musée de l'Homme, Paris
To the martial din of drums, bells, gongs, horns and
rattles, amid puffs of smoke from muskets fired in
salute and under German, Danish and British flags
gaily fluttering in the breeze, the British emissaries to the
monarch of the Ashanti peoples made their way to the
Kumasi Palace through a host of over 5,000 soldiers and
war chiefs in full dress array. Their slow progress
through this amazing assembly had taken them no less
than one-and-a-half hours.
The head of the mission wrote an account, of this
occasion, which is a veritable panegyric on gold and
silver and the dazzling use made of them by this royal
court at a time the early nineteenth century when it
was barely known to the outside world. The Europeans
were astounded by the wealth of Ashanti, but the things
in all this glowing pageantry which struck them most
were what they took to be barbaric elements; they did
not discover therein the history of a culture.
"...A hundred or so great parasols or canopies, large
enough to shelter at least thirty persons, were being con¬
tinually waved to and fro by their bearers ; they were
made of silk, in scarlet, yellow and other bright colours,
and surmounted by crescents, pelicans, elephants, swords
and other weapons, all of solid gold... The king's messen¬
gers wore great gold breast-plates, captains and persons
of consequence wore solid gold necklaces skilfully wrought,
the chief executioner bore on his breast a solid gold axe,
maidens carried golden bowls and the interpreters stood
behind clusters of gold-knobbed sticks...".
Gold was everywhere, glaring more intensely than the
sun itself; it was more heavily concentrated in the palace,
where it was worn by the officers responsible for the royal
household, the chamberlain, the hornblower, the captain
of the messengers, the king's executioner, the controller
of markets and the priest in charge of the land where
members of the royal family were buried. But, above all,
it cast a glow of light and prestige on the great sovereign
descended from Osai Tutu, the founder of the Ashanti
nation, whose reign had presaged the future glory of the
kingdom, a golden stool, symbol of the royal authority,
having been sent to him from the skies.
Fire-bearing smiths led
emigrants to new lands
Even today we cannot help being astounded by this
elaborate metalwork, through we know of only a frac¬
tion of its countless treasures. The techniques them¬
selves casting by the loss wax process, hammering and
repoussé work, and the application of metal to a wooden
core show a peerless mastery of the materials used. In
all probability this exquisite workmanship as early as
1700 a traveller considered some (of these works "quite
pleasing"' must be regarded as the fruit of ancient craft
traditions which had been the monopoly of- the smiths'
caste.
In the old Alkan communities of which the Ashanti are
a branch, the smiths, bearing their fires with them, used
to set out" at the head of groups of emigrants, leading
them to new lands. But as Ashanti power grew and the
royal court increased in importance, the various craftsmen
all turned their steps to Kumasi and the arts were used
for the service of the king. All the African monarchies,
such as the kingdoms of Ife, Benin and Abomey in the
West, and of the Loango and Bakuba in the Congo and
the great sultanates or chiefdoms of the Cameroons,
greatly increased the demand for art objects as the out¬
ward signs of power were built up.
Corporations of craftsmen serving the royal families,
ritual institutions on a more or less national scale, and a
victorious nation, took the place of the castes and the
initiated artists of the little peasant communities in which
wood-carving, either as a stylized or a realistic art, had
been linked directly Iwith ancestor and divinity worship.
Uproar and torchlight marked
the Spring festival of the yam
The "Odwirä" or yam ceremony of the Ashanti, a Spring
festival and also the feast of the dead, still has the
feudal pomp and splendour of a great day including
sacrificial rites and entertainments, uproar and torch¬
light by night, dancing, the Waving of feathers and ele¬
phant tails by young people, endless processions of
dignitaries Weighed down with gold and supported by
slaves, other slaves bearing golden pipes, ostrich-feather
fans, golden swords, silver vases and the king's ivory and
gold chair.
Among the pendant masks, breast-plates, rings, brace¬
lets and other jewelry, ornaments on ceremonial weapons,
vases and weights for weighing gold dust, all are so richly
decorated that one is at a loss to single out any object
as more remarkable than the rest. The pendant masks
depicting human features, are well known. All the
Akan kingdoms made heads finely cast by the lost wax
process, some of which are genuine likenesses.
An amazing variety of weights were used for weighing
gold dust, some having geometrical designs, others repre¬
senting proverbs. The imagination displayed in the
former type of weight knew no bounds and the goldsmith's
genius for decoration is matched by the accuracy of his
observation. The geometric designs are by no means
unlimited in number but it is difficult for us to grasp
their meaning, which would provide the clue to the weight
system used.
The lids of Kuduo or ritual vases, the shapes and orna¬
mentation of which bear a certain resemblance to antique
cists or to Chinese bronzes, are also surmounted by sym¬
bolic decorative motifs; an orchestra conductor surrounded
by his musicians represents the undisputed pre-eminence
of the chief. The elaboration and lavish decoration found
in these vases are also a feature of the splendid ornamen¬
tation of the great inlaid-copper hexagonal chests, covered
with black velvet and golden rosettes, in which members
of the royal family were laid to rest in the funeral cham¬
bers set aside for each of the kings in the Royal Mau¬
soleum.
Legends, proverbs and popular sayings reflecting not
only aristocratic institutions but also everyday activities
are likewise represented in the Ashanti textiles.
Besides goldsmiths and weavers the royal institutions
also required potters. Women were not permitted to make
anthropomorphic ceramics, vases or pipes for ritual use;
they had to confine themselves to commercial or everyday
pottery. But in their terra-cotta works, the women, too,
show the flair lor decoration, instinct for beauty of form
and technical skill so characteristic of the Ashanti.
The Ashanti genius for expressing beauty in form is
perhaps yet more strikingly revealed in the so-called
"Akua Ba" figurines, finely carved in wood with a reddish-
33

GOLDEN DEATH MASK
of King Kofi of Ashanti
is now stored in the Wal¬
lace Collection in London.
It demonstrates the peerless
skill displayed by Ashanti
metal craftsmen, for whom
gold was a working material
par excellence. Nineteenth-
century Western envoys to
an Ashanti king found gold
decorations widely used in
his palace and worn by his
chief officers of state. The
king himself wore necklaces
of golden shells and a breast¬
plate in the form of a full¬
blown rose and he carried
gold castanets which he
clicked to attract attention.
© Wallace Collection, London.
brown or black patina and representing the stylized image
of beauty. It is believed that pregnant women possessing
one are bound to have a child as handsome as these well-
proportioned Wooden figurines.
Once diverted from the religious uses of ancestor
worship and from aiding small groups, struggling to
survive, in placating supernatural powers, the Ashanti arts
were used exclusively in the service of the royal insti¬
tutions. The availability of gold, favourable economic
relations, power and prestige, and extensive contacts with
the outside world account for the luxury, refinement and
beauty of the art that grew out of the traditional qualities
of the old castes of craftsmen.
The rich arts ,of the Ashanti kingdom thus take their
place among all the other African arts, and the cultures
behind them, as the embodiment of an impressive civiliza¬
tion. For was this not a civilization whose exceptional
destiny was miraculously revealed to the people? The
story is told that in the presence of a great multitude,
under lowering clouds and amid resounding claps of
thunder, the air grew thick with white smoke and a
threelegged golden stool with its gold and silver bells
dropped gently from the skies into the lap of the Ashanti
king. In later days, neither the Ashanti nation nor its
artists were ever likely to forget this supernatural wonder
of their kingship's origin.
34
