THE CHINA SEA
IN BOTTLES
Years and years of patient work
went into the assembling of this
impressive océanographie collec¬
tion in the Nathrang Institute,
Viet Nam. Tens of thousands of
animals and plants from the China
Sea are preserved in these bottles.
Pierre Pittet

EXPEDITION TO THE INDIAN OCEAN
a HE first systematic attempt by
science to survey an entire ocean
will get under way later this year
when ships in ports around the globe
weigh anchor and head out to sea en route
for the Indian Ocean. They will be the
advance guard of a fleet of vessels from
some 15 countries which will sail to join
the International Indian Ocean Expedition
a 4-year venture virtually unparalleled
in the history of oceanology, sponsored by
the Special Committee on Oceanic
Research (SCOR) of the International
Council of Scientific Unions.
With its 28 million square miles, the
Indian Ocean covers 14% of the earth's
surface reaching from Antarctica to India
and from E. Africa to Australia and
Tasmania. Surrounding it are some of
the world's most densely-populated
countries which represent over a quarter
of the globe's people. It is unique among
the world's seas for several reasons.
It is one of our last unexplored frontiers.
Only the most general features of its
topography and marine life distribution are
known. Nowhere else are the winds and
currents completely reversed with the
seasons. For 6 months of the year the
monsoons blow from the northeast while
the rest of the year they blow in the
opposite direction, southwest. This has
far-reaching effects on both currents and
sea life but how and why are still a
mystery.
Then too, the vast northern part of the
ocean, including the Bay of Bengal and
the Arabian Sea, is practically sealed off
from exchange with other oceans. Great
rivers ' like the Indus, Ganges, Tigris-
Euphrates and Zambesi pour millions of
tons of soil-rich water into the Indian
Ocean which makes it ideal for studying
the effects of this runoff on the composition
of sea water, particularly its metal and
mineral concentrations.
It is estimated that the expedition will
cost roughly about $13.5 million and will
reach the full peak of its activity in 1962
and . 19T53. Research vessels will be
provided by marine laboratories from
Australia, France, Great Britain, India,
Japan, Union of South Africa, U.S.A. and
U.S.S.R. Ship time may also be provided
by the Federal Republic of Germany,
Netherlands, the Scandinavian and other
countries.
Already, a cruise pattern, splitting the
entire Indian Ocean into sections of a grid
has been agreed on by SCOR. Completing
the grid may require 15 ship-years of
operation over a total of 225,000 miles.
Ships will cruise twice along the same track
in particularly important areas.
The expedition will not only provide
basic scientific knowledge about the Indian
Ocean and oceans generally, but is also
expected to have immediate economic
consequences by identifying likely fishing
areas, indicating what to fish for and when,
and suggesting the magnitude of the fishery
resources of the Indian Ocean. Meteoro¬
logical studies may lead to better long-
range weather forecasting and in the
monsoon flood areas this could well be
a major achievement. Knowing how ocean
currents vary in intensity and location may
lead to more economic routing of ships as
was the case in the North Atlantic where
it resulted in savings as high as 10% in
fuel consumption. Charting the ocean
floor will also be useful for navigation,
while sampling the continental shelves and
the sea bottom may reveal rich untapped
resources.
19
