
Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
CHEKHOV-AN UNSURPASSED
MASTER OF THE SHORT STORY
as an unsurpassed master of the short story,
had to overcome innumerable difficulties in
his early years and to struggle against many
moribund traditions before he gained the
recognition of both readers and critics and
took his place in the world of great literature.
In his letters, Chekhov often alluded to these
difficulties and to his own genre that nobody would recog¬
nize. He had to wage a prolonged struggle to obtain
acceptance of this style. Nobody wanted to print his story
than a Sparrow's Beak", for example, and it
was returned to him contemptuously, but still he was not
discouraged.
Though Chekhov himself believed that everything he
had written would be forgotten in a few years, he never¬
theless realized that he was .breaking new paths in lit¬
erature: "Everything I have written will have been for¬
gotten in five or ten years; but the paths I have broken
will remain, whole and undamaged, and that is my contri¬
bution to literature."
Chekhov made innovations both in ideology and style.
"An author's originality is not only in his style but also
in his mode of thinking, in his convictions, etc.," he wrote
in 1887.
The artist, he believed, must have a new word to say, he
must find a new angle from which to look at the world,
at the life that surrounds him and the people he depicts,
and this means that he must also find a new way of
revealing these phenomena in his art, he must find a new
form for his works.
The Russian literature of the period immediatly pre-'
ceding Chekhov (the sixties and seventies of the last cen¬
tury) showed a great tendency to follow the lines of the
by Professor Maria Yelizarova
magazine essay; Chekhov endeavoured to re-establish the
short story in its own right. His short story is frequently
a "snapshot" photographed by a master; a sketch or draft
that has, nevertheless, crystallized into an integral,
finished product with its own specific rules of style.
Some of Chekhov's sketches, studies or portraits which
at first sight claim to do nothing more than play up some
curious incident in everyday life, depict some accidental
meeting or conversation, photograph some moment in the
lives of very ordinary people, suddenly and quite unexpec¬
tedly reveal a broad picture of Russian life to the reader.
Writers of world renown have spoken admiringly of
Chekhov's. ability to create an unforgettable story out of
simple, everyday material. The British writer, John
Galsworthy, said in 1918: "Chekhov's great success is in
his ability to make tranquillity exciting in the same way
as prairies or deserts excite those who see them for the
first time."
As early as the eighties, the formative period of
Chekhov's short story genre, he had already evolved a
clear-cut system of aesthetic views that enabled him to
give frequent advice and act as guide to other writers. In
1883, writing to his brother he said that it was not the
personal, the subjective that was important in literature,
but "Stress... that which is vital, that which is eternal,
which stimulates genuinely human and not petty feelings."
"To the people you must offer people and not yourself,"
said Chekhov in another letter.
He also spoke of his ideas on short story writing. "The
short story consists of a beginning and an end," he assert¬
ed, "and understatement is better than overstatement."
A writer should try to be clever, but should not be afraid
to write nonsense. "Only he who is not afraid to write
nonsense," he assures us, "'is a freethinker."
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

CHEKHOV (Continued)
'Brevity is the sister of talent'
At the time when he wrote his short stories Chekhov's
aesthetic ideal was brevity. "Brevity is the sister of
talent; talented writing is terse writing/" Chekhov said.
Chekhov's own writing in the 1880-1886 period Was a
brilliant realization of this ideal. He had no rivals in his
own sphere. Even such great masters of the short story
as Mérimée, Mark Twain, Turgènev and Maupassant could
not conceive of a story no more than one and a half pages,
a single page or even three-quarters of a page in length.
At times Chekhov's stories really did consist solely of a
"beginning and an end."
The civil servant Chervyakov, an official of the type
produced in countless numbers by the bureaucratic ma¬
chine of old Russia, one day sneezes on the bald head of
a general sitting in front of him in the theatre C'Death
of an Official"). He is seized with mortal terror. He must
apologize, he must explain to the general that it was not
his fault. The general's wrath will have terrible conse¬
quences for him, a petty clerk of no importance. He goes
again and again to apologize until the general, losing his
temper with him, drives him away. Chervyakov is beside
himself with horror, goes home... and dies.
Everything is there in this tragi-comic story of a civil
servant; it is brief, compressed to the limit, but nothing
can be added to it Chervyakov is a real-life type, a tre¬
mendous generalized character drawn full scale, life size.
Chekhov deliberately avoids giving an extensive, all-
round description of a character. He does not draw a por¬
trait, does not relate intimate details of his life and does
not give the reader his biography, his previous history.
One moment only out of a mass of vital facts and events
is seized upon and that moment is reproduced as a story.
The artist is not interested in anything that does not
bear on the episode the sneeze and the pseudoconflict
with the general everything else is outside the frame¬
work of his creative thought.
The image possesses a certain schematism, for it is sim¬
plified to the extreme. But this simplification is the deli¬
cate method of an artist, it is the principle underlying his
creation of a type. The figure of Chervyakov retains only
that which determines the very nature of the soul of offi¬
cialdom, a soul that has for ages been trained in unac¬
countable fear for its own fate, in submission to authority
and in absolute humility.
By exaggeration, amounting at times to hypertrophy of
the humility, fear and crushed spirit of the civil servant,
in places even by a caricature of it, Chekhov reveals in
him that which he himself so aptly defined in a single
phrase: "Russia is a land of officialdom."
A new outlook on the surrounding world compelled the
artist to make new demands of the short story and to
revalue many such concepts as "subject", '"character",
"event", etc.
Chekhov wittily ridiculed the old, generally accepted
principles of structure in story and descriptive writing
that had become established in literature. "The subject
must be new but there need not be any plot," he said.
Chekhov's parodies broke down old stereotyped methods
INCOMPARABLE STORYTELLER. It was only after 1886 that
Chekhov found the necessary leisure and independence to give full
expression to his imaginative experience and ideas in his stories. In
14
the. next few years he attained perfection in his style and produced a
series of masterpieces. Above, illustrations from current Russian
editions of Chekhov's stories. From left, "The House with the

courageously and purged literature of outmoded traditions.
In many respects Chekhov had learned from Turgenev,
had inherited much from him, but nevertheless he realized
that Turgenev's school of writing was a thing of the past.
"Descriptions of nature are good, but... I feel that we have
already outgrown that sort of description and need
something else."
And all Chekhov's creative writing showed what that
"something else" ¡was. His descriptions of nature are
devoid of floweriness, ornament and excesses; they are
severe, simple, artless and sometimes deliberately terse.
"The sun came up," "A drizzle of rain began," "The frogs
in the pond called to each other angrily, exerting them¬
selves, and you could even make out the words: 'And so
are you... And so are you' " "A rumble of thunder as though
someone were walking barefoot over an iron roof" and
these unbelievably simple, everyday words build up pic¬
tures that no reader is likely to forget.
Such stories as "Happiness," "Dreams," "Huntsmen," "In
the Shed," "Dead Body," "Sorrow," and others are amazing
in their simplicity and their powerful lyricism.
In "Happiness" there is no subject; action, as usually
understood, does not develop; nevertheless there is a
clearly discernible overgrowth of lyricism. Three people,
lost in the great open spaces of the steppe, ponder over
and speak of happiness can it be reached and how is
it to be ¡found?
"Happiness" is a popular local term for buried treasure
supposed to be hidden somewhere in the steppes. It is
quite obvious, however, that the story is not about buried
treasure but about human happiness in the fullest mean¬
ing of that word; it is elusive and fantastic, it is beyond
the reach of man, but he will never stop seeking it and
yearning for it...
Drawings by Kukryniksy
Maisonette", "Lady with the Dog", and "Grief". Drawings are joint
works of three artists who sign themselves "Kukryniksy", from the
first syllables of their names: Kuprianov, Krylov and Nikolai Sokolov.
The Unesco Courier. January 1960
While the characters are talking, the darkness of night is
gradually dispelled, the sky grows pale, the stars are ex¬
tinguished and suddenly, over the horizon, "the blood-red
sun makes its appearance surrounded by a light haze."
All nature smiles and flaunts her gay colours to welcome
the sun, and this picture of sunrise conquering the dark¬
ness of night seems to give the story an enthusiastic note,
confirming the legitimacy and reality of man's dream of
happiness...
Chekhov employs an endless variety of methods. His
ability to reveal the simplest and most ordinary things in
a new way is a great art and one that he mastered to
perfection. He compels us to see the world through the
eyes of Semushka the Fool, who was, in reality,.possessed
of the wisdom of a simple artless soul ("Dead Body"), or
through the eyes of a child who sees his environment
more perfectly and profoundly than adults who are bur¬
dened with petty cares and greedy calculations and are
strangers to real poetry C'Vanka," "Event," "The Run¬
away," "The Cook Gets Married," "Grisha", "Worldly Tri¬
fles," "Steppe," and other stories about children); or,
lastly, through the eyes of animals with their own specific
"philosophy" ("Kashtanka," "Whitebrow," "Boarders").
Outstanding in Chekhov's artistic method is his ability
to incorporate a grand picture of human life, intricate,
full of contradictions and drama, with all its manifold
entanglements, in a subject that is often extremely simple.
That is why his longer stories are accepted by readers in
all countries as a great genre that deals 'with life's most
complicated problems; you feel in them the movement
of the "human ocean" behind the life-stories of individual
characters.
In his longer stories Chekhov introduces us to charac¬
ters who are tormented by their search for truth, cha¬
racters filled with vague alarm and anticipation ('"The
Teacher of Literature," "The Duel," "My Life," "On Busi¬
ness," "Three Years," "The Bride" and others).
The uneasiness felt by the characters is passed on to
the reader. Chekhov accomplishes this by his original
manner of telling a tale that is outwardly calm but in¬
wardly always tense and disturbed. The reader is con¬
fronted with questions that cannot be avoided. Gorky
once called Chekhov's stories "a book that worries", preci¬
sely because of the way they trouble the conscience of the
reader by asking him, "Why have you lived your life?"
In an article entitled "Chekhov", Thomas Mann shows
with typical insight what it is in the Russian writer's
work that makes him kin to the best writers abroad.
He says that even today Chekhov has "brothers of the tor¬
mented soul" because the conditions of life "under which
there exists an impassable gulf between truth and reality
have still not been eradicated from society. These writers
are tormented by the knowledge of their inability to
answer the question, "What is to be done?' They are
unable to say what meaning their work has, but despite
this they go on working and they work to the very end."
Readers throughout the world are amazed at the power
and lyricism of Chekhov's writing, his ability to pose pre¬
cisely and sharply those questions that trouble people
everywhere, whatever their nationality or language.
They are equally astounded at the striking simplicity of
Chekhov's words and the meaningfulness that can be
understood by all. The decadents of Chekhov's time, both
in Russia and abroad, declared that the words available
to a writer were all worn out, they no longer expressed
anything and did not, therefore, possess the power to
create the tensest dramatic situations.
John Galsworthy spoke of the kinship of Chekhov's
manner of writing to that of authors in other lands:
"Throughout the past twenty years Chekhov has been the
strongest magnet for young writers in many countries."
The Danish writer Bang dedicated the Russian transla¬
tion of his novel "Without a Country", published in 1911,
to Chekhov. "I want this book to be dedicated to Anton
Chekhov," he wrote. "I dedicate it to the memory of one
for whom I feel a stronger love than for any other Russian
writer... He was connected with the deepest roots of the
people, he shared the sufferings of the people... He offered
the people the creature of his genius in which the heart of
the people themselves was beating... The grandeur of his
creative work was in its humanity... His soft voice was
heard far beyond the bounds of the Russian land."
15
