FINE ARTS ON
POSTAGE STAMPS
by David J. Jacobs
EPAYiNG the tax on the delivery of a
letter with a stamp wasn't even
dreamed of when Raphael brushed
into life his lovely Madonnas or when Goya etched his
angry nightmares into seething commentaries on the
ugliness of man. And yet, there, on tiny, gummed and
perforated rectangles, are "The Sistine Madonna" in her
magnificent calm and "Volaverunt", Plate 61 in the Capri¬
chos, showing three crouching witches carrying the
Duchess of Alba through the clouds in three different
directions at once.
These are just two of the more than 1,100 paintings,
prints and drawings that more than 125 governments
have had translated into stamp designs. But why stop
at painting? Sculpture, architecture, music, ceramics,
printing, tribal carvings, weaving, the dance, theatre, lite¬
rature almost every form of art from antiquity to yester¬
day- has been represented on postage stamps from Aitu-
taki to the Virgin Islands.
More than 85 governments have issued about 500 stamps
featuring ceramics. Thousands more have been based on
sculpture a Polynesian club, the "Charioteer From Del¬
phi", an exquisite Ife bronze from Nigeria's Yorubaland,
a head of Nefertiti or a detail from the work of the con¬
temporary Yugoslav, Ivan Mestrovic. A history of archi¬
tecture could be illustrated with postage stamps, from the
cave (Lebanon issued a good example) to the skyscraper
(the new York City skyline appears on a Monaco stamp).
The designers of the first postage stamps never dreamed
of such subjects as an etching of Diirer's mother or a
carving of the great Congo king, Shamba Bolongongo.
But they did turn to the arts from the very beginning
for their motifs. The portrait on Great Britain's Penny
Black of 1840, the world's first adhesive postage stamp,
was based on a carving of Queen Victoria's head designed
by William Wyon for a medal struck in 1837. Another
portrait of Victoria, by Alfred Edward Chalón, became the
basis for many beautiful stamps among the early issues
of Grenada, Queensland and New Zealand.
Some nations based the designs of their first stamps on
the seals and stamps used on deeds, tax documents and
other papers. These were simple ciphers, crests and other
symbols. But most nations, following Britain's example,
used portraits of the rulers. This was an outgrowth of
the ancient practice of using the ruler's head on coins.
From the beginning, stamps have been manufactured
by the makers of money. Early designs of the United
States, for instance, were produced by engravers employed
by banknote printers. They used portraits of Franklin
and Washington which had appeared on notes printed by
the same firm. It was not long before the designers went
beyond the portrait. In 1869, the United States issued
stamps based on historical paintings such as Vanderlyn's
"Landing of Columbus" and Trumbull's "Declaration of
Independence".
And so it is with other nations. As the 19th Century
ended and the 20th began, they were drawing more and
more on their artistic riches. In 1896, Greece issued a set
which included Praxiteles' "Hermes", Paeonius' "Victory",
Myron's "Discobolus'", and a view of the Acropolis and
Parthenon. In 1905, Spain commemorated the 300th
20 CONT'D ON PAGE 23

The Unesco Courier. September 1960
REMBRANDT MAGNIFIED
The remarkable delicacy and detail of a postage stamp version of Rem¬
brandt's "Persian Wearing Fur Cap "is revealed by the enlargement,
above. Stamp itself, (right) is one of a set showing details of some of
this artist's etchings, issued in 1956 on his 350th birthday anniversary.
P3SÏAILVÂH!
"
v» -jrffit
'S ^&fr WS i
-ât. g i
» ^R^^^HBme 2 !
: 25 JÈÊ*''^^ ¡
\^MÊM& Si
i "[i^mW^^&/Wm\ Èb''»' '
'HttÜ^vy #«
; ; y. yyyy
2I

FINE ARTS ON STAMPS (Continued;
HOMAGE TO DA VINCI. "Lady with
the Ermine" was engraved by a Polish artist
from Leonardo da Vinci's painting. It is one of
a number of stamps issued in 1956 to pub¬
licise Unesco's International Museum Week.
ETCHINGS BY DURER. These works by the great German, painter, engraver and
designer, Albrecht Darer praying hands and his motherwere issued by the Saar
in 1955. The remarkable precision of the originals has been carefully preserved.
* -- -~'^r^ -y-y*- - s-S\-y
c
ff^W |P
" y
c;
r
r W^jàJFm <y
<
, [ *
p <
[y
> BLE^% ,'.
f* '
> WW
It
r^r^f
j
J tt*ac*:60**
WV'< '
t.*. H
A GOYA SELECTION. In 1958 a set of
Spanish stamps was issued depicting the works
of Goya. Shown here are "El Pelele" and
"The Drinker", two of the genre works now
in the Prado Museum collection, Madrid.
THREE FACES OF VAN GOGH. Two Dutch engravers and one from France used differing styles to interpret a Van Gogh self-port
Yet in transposing the painting, all three have faithfully reproduced the haunted look which Vincent Van Gogh gave to his own features.
\y '- , ,f\ ., ^y°\yr\r%S-X,'".. *\
VINCENT VGOGH-li
¿OMlRZtGtL-BtJSlAG 11 C
PUBLIQUE HpCAlSE
30F
22

OWM^gPHH
CRAFTSMEN. The Tunisian postal service chose crafts
as the theme for a series of stamps representing embroiderers,
weavers and potters. This one shows the weavers at work.
AN IMPRESSIONIST
Ogata Korin, one of
Japan's most famous ar¬
tists, is honoured by this
Soviet stamp issued in
1959, 'showing a detail
of one of his paintings.
This 17th century artist
broke with tradition and
developed a style dis¬
tinctive by its bold im¬
pressionism, both in
painting and in the
decoration of lacquer.
WORK AND DETAIL. Czechoslovakia has honoured through
its stamps the painter Josef Manes, celebrated for his historical
and genre works. In 1936 a stamp for aid to children reproduced
Manes' "Infancy," showing a midwife presenting a newborn
baby to its father. Left, the complete work; right, a detail.
The Unesco Courier. September 1960
anniversary of the publication of "Don Quixote" by issu¬
ing ten stamps, each based on an illustration by Gustave
Doré of a different episode of the story.
The first stamps of Egypt in 1866, then under Turkish
suzerainty, showed Turkish inscriptions, but the paper
was watermarked with a pyramid. The next year the
Sphinx and pyramids appeared as the central motif. By
1914, Egypt was displaying the Colossi of Thebes, the Pylon
of Karnak and the Rock Temples of Abu Simbel.
Over the years, the postage stamp has assumed addi¬
tional functions, quite apart from the prepayment of a
tax. It commemorates national events, it raises funds for
charity and it disseminates propaganda. The designers
have found the arts a naturaland richreservoir of
ideas. And many governments have found this tapping
of the national heritage a thrifty way of broadcasting to
the world a desirable cultural image.
The hobby of stamp collecting, as old as stamps, has
also tended to influence stamp design. Few products of
the graphic arts are scrutinized so carefully by so many
critical eyes. Advertisements, book and magazine formats,
money, tax forms and thousands of other familiar pieces
of printed paper from menus to market bags are, in a
sense, invisible. We are influenced by them, we read them,
we spend them, we carry home the fish in them, but few
of us are conscious of how they are constructed and
decorated.
Well designed printing does not wish to call attention
to itself. The message is paramount, the messenger un¬
seen. Of course this is true, too, of stamps. To many,
they are just colored blurs on the corners of envelopes.
But millions of collectors the world over study them in
great detail, often preferring stamps that haven't even
performed their function because the cancellations
obscure some of these details.
A
^^ -^^ the catalogues are full of blown-up
illustrations of minute changes in
line, shade or design. Many collectors are concerned pri¬
marily with studying perforations, watermarks, paper,
gum, ink and printing varieties and pay little heed to
design. Some are interested only in cancellations. But
over the years there has been a growing sensitivity to the
elements of design.
It is common practice for many nations to hold annual
contests among artists to determine stamp designs.
Some stamp journals run regular columns on the subject
and one conducts an annual "'Design Derby" in which
thousands of readers vote for the most beautiful and the
most ugly stamps produced each year.
This intense interest in what appears on the face of
a stamp has been even further stimulated by the increas¬
ing popularity of "'topical" or "thematic" collecting in
which stamps are collected by subject, rather than by
country or some other conventional discipline. The topi-
calist chases after butterflies, maps, railroads, ships, water¬
falls, flowers, doctors, dogs, fish, poets, mathematicians,
nudes or whatever else strikes his fancy and also appears
on a sizeable number of postage stamps. About 300 of
these topicalists from more than 20 countries have formed
an organization known as the Fine Arts Unit of the Ame¬
rican Topical Association. The unit publishes a journal
containing detailed and highly informed articles about
works of art depicted on stamps.
Along with this widespread and critical awareness of
stamps has evolved the peculiar art of stamp designing.
Among the handful of steel engravers and the highly
skilled photographers, retouchers, etchers and other tech¬
nicians are the men who have established stamp design
as the rebirth, on a mass level, of the art of the minia¬
turist. They work from designs created for the stamp or
from motifs that were created for other purposes but are
now being used as the theme or a stamp.
The objective is not to reproduce the original, but to
translate it not just into another language, but into
another medium. It is like rendering Dante's "Inferno"
into a comic strip in a Chicago newspaper while still
retaining a suggestion of the spirit of the original. The
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

FINE ARTS ON STAMPS (Continued)
LA LETTRE f" EtïHe:
TRIBUTE TO FRAGONARD. The celebrated French
painter Jean-Honoré Fragonard has been honoured on
stamps issued in Poland and France. In this reproduc¬
tion of "The Letter," French engraver, J. Piel, has captu¬
red the grace with which Fragonard imbued his subjects.
original may have been a fresco from the Cinquecento, a
triptych for an altar, a window on a mosque or a mask
for a tribal chieftan. But the stamp design must be a
vignette, usually in one or two colours, occasionally more,
and it must share its tiny home with the country's name,
the denomination and often, a descriptive legend. It is
sometimes quite remarkable to see how these limitations
are overcome sometimes, even exploited to produce not
only a translation, but a nugget of graphic art with vir¬
tues of it own.
But to many the appeal of the design must remain
secondary to the subject. To see the way the increasing
number of issues based on works of art are grabbed up
is to realize the everdeepening interest in the arts. As
one collector, writing in the journal of the American
Topical Association, put it :
"I never possessed either the means or the wall
space to form a picture gallery in the proper sense.
That is why my choice... fell upon "Pictures and
Painters." Now I have an art gallery in miniature,
embracing... a selection of the outstanding master^
pieces enshrined in the world-famous collections of
London, Paris, New York, Berlin, Vienna, Florence,
Madrid and the like, all reduced to postage stamp
size and displayed upon a hundred or so ordinary
stamp album sheets... I have amassed, in about four
years, rather more than a thousand different stamp
pictures and the cry is 'still they come!'..."
Sculpture and Architecture, he wrote, will come next.
24
