Christiane Desroches-Noblecourt
ike a landscape before a terrible storm,
when the horizon lights up in a translucent
glow and an unearthly hush envelops all
nature, Nubia has never been more beau¬
tiful.
The danger hanging over Nubia, it is
true, has never been so great for it is now
doomed to total obliteration. Despite the
countless tragedies it has known up until the present,
it has managed, for several weeks of the hot summer
months each year, to preserve the general aspect that
thousands of years of succeeding civilizations have given
it. During these summer weeks, all the temples strung
out along the banks of the Nile are visible and emerge
from the waters which, since the beginning of the century,
submerge many of them most of the year.
It may be difficult for those who have never set eyes
on the extraordinary shores of the Nubian Nile to imagine
the majesty of the sites, the fascination of the sanctua¬
ries, and the charm of the villages difficult, in fact, to
grasp the immensity of the tragedy. Many persons are
undoubtedly familiar with Pierre Loti's poetic description
of the "Death of Philae", and have heard about the
building of the Aswan Dam and the raising of its level on
two occasions.
8
At the beginning of the century it was found necessary
to raise the Aswan Dam in order to provide a more
systematic irrigation system for Egypt and to prevent the
river from draining away into the sea. The iron sluice¬
gates in the huge dam wall (made out of the same pink
granite and taken from the same quarries nearby which
the ancient Egyptians used for their giant obelisks) are
closed almost all year long. They are opened only at the
end of July when the river has turned red from the thick
alluvion collected upstream, and the fields are then
flooded and only the causeways and a few villages perched
on arid hillocks emerge from the waters.
In Nubia meanwhile, the level of the water now drops
and the narrow strip of land along the river turns green
again. The inhabitants attend to their farming, and the
fields are soon thick with millet and water-melons. When,
during this brief three-month respite, the river keeps to
its bed, the harvest can be gathered. In mid-October,
when the dam is closed, the waters again invade the
stubble-fields, now parched and cracked by the drought
and the extreme heat. The palm-trees are engulfed up
to their tousled heads, and from the far-off banks seem to
be floating on the surface. Beneath these waters the great
sanctuaries lie buried.
It is not easy to visualize this extraordinary open-air

THE LEGACY OF NÜBIÄ
JOURNEY
TO A LAND
CONDEMNED
by Christiane
Desroches-Noblecourt
Curator, Department of Egyptian Antiquities,
Musée du Louvre, Paris
Documentation Centre on Ancient Egypt, Cairo
THE TEMPLE OF THOT, Egyptian god of wisdom and writing, at Dakka (left). Photo was taken
just before the start of the temple's annual inundation in October. By the end of November all that
can be seen above the water are the cornices of the temple pylon. To save the temple of Dakka it is
proposed to dismantle it stone by stone and rebuild it in the safety of a nearby oasis. Above, in
the Temple of Nefertari at Abu Simbel, a bas-relief depicts the Queen receiving the protection of
the two goddesses Isis and Hathor. The work has conserved the full tones of its original colouring.
museum nearly 300 miles long, containing monuments
often surpassing Gothic cathedrals in size, submerged
most of the year round. Under the waters lie not only
temples but tombs by the hundred, quarries and nume¬
rous fortresses. The fortresses were built as trading posts
and strongholds to defend vitally strategic points along
the caravan routes, such as the centres fed by the gold¬
mines, the relay stations to distant deposits, the settle¬
ments specializing in artifacts, and the administrative
centres of the country.
But in this land of eternity, even the inundation of the
monuments is not permanent, for like the cycle of rebirth
in Nature itself, they reappear regularly every summer,
if only fleetingly.
At the time of the first Aswan dam at the beginning of
the century, excavations and "soundings" Were made to
test the vulnerability of the menaced fortresses and
necropolis centres built out of unbaked clay. For the
temples, hurried missions were sent to make copies and
descriptions of them before they were engulfed. The con¬
solidation work, feverishly yet carefully executed under
Gaston Maspero and continued subsequently, proved to
be truly effective.
Not only did the temples remain intact when submerged,
but the water even helped to remove their corroding salts
and incrustations. Only the ancient paintings were
washed away, sometimes actually enhancing the beauty
of the carvings underneath. The monuments built of
unbalked clay, however, could not resist the waters and
were washed away by the floods for the most part.
The temples erected in this region had been built of
blocks of sandstone hewn from the finest quarries of
Nubia, and this stone is most resistant. The situation is
quite different for the sanctuaries located further to the
south outside of the present flood zone. The temples here
were built into the sides of the cliffs of the Libyan and
Arabian mountain chains bordering the Nile. They were
cut out of stone so friable that they cannot possibly hope
to resist the action of water.
It is these temples that the waters of the Sadd el Aali
high dam will engulf if nothing is done to save them.
Since the new water level, once reached, is not expected
to drop again appreciably, everything that is submerged
will be covered up for all eternity.
Thus all of Nubia will become a vast lake and an
entire country will shortly vanish definitely and irrevo¬
cably. The inhabitants will be able to move into the lands
freshly reclaimed from the desert, and into the oases
especially created near the largest wadis (valleys) of
western Nubia. But the ribbon of land 300 miles long,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE LEGACY
OF NUBIA
(Continued)
THE EPIC OF KADESH.
Carved on the northern wall
inside the Great Temple of
Abu Simbel are scenes from
an epic of Egyptian history
battle of Kadesh (1285
B.C.) where the courage of
Rameses II saved Egypt's army
from defeat at the hands of the
Hittites. Central panel shows
Rameses on his throne before
battle Is joined holding a
council of war with his vizier
and officers. Lower panel
shows the Egyptian camp with
the soldiers' shields arranged
around It In a kind of stockade ;
in centre two spies are forced
to yield their secret. In upper
section we witness the charge
of the Hittite cavalry-, curved
line represents Orontes River
in Syria which flowed round the
citadel of Kadesh. On far right
are mounted archers of Rame¬
ses. (See also pages 31-33.)
Documentation Centre on
Ancient Egypt, Charles Nims
with its remains of the creative genius of ancient Egypt
which have withstood the elements for thousands of
years, will be lost.
Egypt is the cradle of Mediterranean civilization and
the archaeologist's living book of history. Its scattered
pages, discovered one by one, were pieced together and
read with patience and devotion and now constitute the
most prodigious and profound chapter on remote anti¬
quity. But despite the wealth of material found, many
pages are still missing. Some of the most valuable are
now lost, like the famous library at Alexandria, destroyed
by fire, or, what is less known, the ancient papyrus scrolls
which until the last century peasants Were wont to burn
when scouring the ancient ruins for fertilizer.
No effort should therefore be spared to find and preserve
all the vestiges which may throw light on the history of
our forbears, for was this not the crucible in which the
basic elements of Western civilization were forged?
Not all the treasures of Nubia have yet been discovered.
Those that do remain are of such vital significance that
it is our duty, regardless of nationality, to help in preserv¬
ing them. For they are the links in a great chain which
is significant and meaningful only by their cohesion.
What does Nubia have to offer? The imprint of more
than four thousand years on a narrow, semi-desert land
10
bordering the Nile, left by men who gradually absorbed
a coherent civilization through their growing contacts
with the Egyptians of the north. Nor is this all. It also
brought a foreign contribution to Egypt proper, enriching
the land of the Pharaohs by acting as the intermediary
for trade with the more southerly regions. It was a
reservoir of skilful craftsmen, of brave soldiers and
officers, of diligent and honest civil servants; even brilliant
statesmen who came to be so influential that with the
rise of the New Empire in the 14th century B.C. their
power steadily rose until they could help new dynasties
to mount the throne of the Pharaohs.
If we sail up the Nile in summer, when the flood-waters
have receded, we can see all the remaining monuments and
in the end have a vivid, impressive image of the past. Our
journey will not be in strict geographical order, but does
this really matter? Perhaps it will be all the more
attractive since our pilgrimage into the realm of antiquity
will be made not with some futuristic "time machine" but
through the magic of hieroglyphics, that ingenious
mechanism which Champollion revealed to us.
No sooner have we passed the First Cataract than Philae
looms up out of the water, iridescent amidst the blue-
pink reflections of the Nile. It looks almost like a bird
which is perched on an island pointing straight south.

Here is a group of sanctuaries We must always see
preserved in its religious and geographical context,
inseparable from the sacred site on which it was built to
proclaim its message to the world.
Sailing around the island, the great colonnade moves
past us with its individualized capitals which announce
the Hellenistic period of Egypt's Pharaohs. We pause a
moment to admire the romantic Kiosk of Trajan and
then spy the first gigantic pylon of the temple itself,
pierced on the west by the "mammis" gate where the
Great Isis gave birth to the young god Horus. What an
amazing itinerary the goddess Isis has followed down the
centuries. She was the presiding deity of Philae, the
supreme Mother-Goddess, and -her cult extended all the
way to the shores of the Western world, penetrating into
the sanctuaries of the boatmen of Lutetia (the arms of
modern Paris still bear an image of the boat which can
be traced back indirectly to her).
It is in this region that Lower Nubia is at its most arid,
a phantom river flowing between rock banks, bare of all
but the scantiest vegetation, like a landscape in hell.
Now we drive deeper into Africa and soon come upon the
little kiosk of Kertassi near the famous quarries which
yielded the stones for the temples of Philae. The removal
of this kiosk should present no very serious difficulties.
The rear wall is covered with old Greek inscriptions, and
The Unesco Courier. February 1960
busts in niches are cut directly out of the rock. The
earliest ones date from the time of the quarrying of the
stone for Philae.
Here now is the Graeco-Roman temple of Debod. It is
completely under water in winter as are the small chapels
built in the region where the Nile narrows sharply before
reaching a point where the rocks, purple-hued on the
eastern side and sand-yellow on the western, form a gorge
which the Egyptians call the Gate of Handcuffs (Bab
Kalabsha). Beyond this gorge, Nubia becomes more
fertile: a thin ribbon of cultivable soil on the edge of the
desert. Here, Augustus had the temple of Kalabsha
rebuilt in the style of those of the Pharaohs. The largest
of the Roman temples in Nubia after Philae it is almost
intact, as are the chapels surrounding it. Its inner walls
are covered with religious representations dominated by
figures of the young god Mandulis, the Nubian form of
Horus, and numerous versions of the bountiful Isis
(Wadjet) in all her radiance.
It is often a tiny detail In this wealth of monuments
that discloses invaluable information. Thus, for instance,
a pilgrim's votive offering (a simple image clumsily
engraved at the foot of a column) showed us the popular
form in which the local deity was worshipped, and
enabled us recently to identify a figure found on an object
amidst the treasure of a tribal chief (the Blemmyes of
Kustul) who had terrorized the Nubians when the region
was under Christian influence. This picture, in Its turn,
showed that the Blemmyes continued to venerate certain
debased forms of the ancient Egyptian gods long after
the religion of the Pharaohs had officially disappeared.
Kalabsha is a temple that must not be permitted to
perish. It could be dismantled and transported elsewhere
stone by stone. The little nearby sanctuary of Beit el
Wali, founded by Rameses II, must also be rescued at all
costs. But it presents an entirely different problem, for
it stands at the top of a cliff and Is almost entirely hewn
in the rock. The stone will have to be cut into, and blocks
of the cliff-face removed an operation the experts assure
us is perfectly feasible.
Elephants' tusks, ostrich
feathers & sacks of gold
The monument is Well worth the trouble. If the colours
on the two side walls of the entrance hall have
disappeared, the reliefs themselves are admirably
preserved. They depict Rameses' army in action In the
northern regions as well as scenes extraordinarily rich in
detail on life in ancient Nubia. One panel shows a village
with Pharaoh's chariots approaching to restore law and
order. Another shows tribute paid by Nubia to the lord of
the whole Nile down almost to the Fourth Cataract.
Alongside sacks of gold, ostrich feathers, elephants'
tusks, leopard skins, tame animals led on a leash, and
ebony Woods, are depicted various articles produced by
Nubian craftsmen. Famed for their skill, they worked
for Pharaoh's court fashioning pieces of furniture and
other objects in pure Egyptian style. They produced
inlaid gold ornaments of bold design which depicted
whole scenes from the everyday life of Nubia as well as
the fauna and flora of "The Land of Gold." The walls
inside the temple of Beit el Wall are adorned with
religious paintings, their colouring as fresh today as when
the artist applied them several thousand years ago.
Continuing southwards we cross the Tropic of Cancer
and stop at the little temple of Dendur, leaving behind a
number of important monuments. Standing high above
the Nile it is entered by a monumental stone doorway
preceded by a broad terrace. The temple is dedicated to
two heroes who drowned and were later deified. Augustus
himself worshipped them.
Like nearly all the monuments of Nubia, Dendur was
"Christianized" by the Copts. One inscription tells us
that a certain Presbyter Abraham erected a cross here at
the command of the Nubian king. Dendur is one of the
temples the United Arab Republic proposes to offer as a
grant, in return for foreign aid.
We are approaching an important religious centre
where Rameses II had no less than six temples hewn out
of the Nubian mountainside. At the top of a cliff,
between two Wadis a sanctuary with terrifying colossi juts
out over the river at Gerf Husein which ^must have
commanded the trembling respect of the local inhabitants.
The Nile valley now broadens and the cliffs give way
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

Will the palace of Heka Nefer
be found before Nubia is engulfed?
to a spacious plain covered with desert sand. A hundred
yards from the water stands an elegant temple with its
main axis parallel to the Nile (the only one in Nubia
with Philae, oriented north-south). This is Dakka,
dedicated to Thot, god of writing (hieroglyphics) and
wisdom. It belongs to the late Egyptian period and Was
the last edifice reconstructed by the Nubian king Erga-
menes in the reign of Ptolemy IV on the ruins of a much
earlier sanctuary. It contains charming reliefs which
have added many new details to our knowledge of
Egypt's past. Dakka stands at the border of the empire
established by the Greeks in Lower Nubia. It could be
dismantled and removed.
This will probably not be possible for the temple of
Wadí es Sebua, partly hewn in the rock by Rameses II.
Lying on a bend of the Nile and silhouetted against a
background of bluish hills reminiscent of an Alpine lake
scene, it is the only sanctuary in Nubia which still
possesses its "dromos" (sacred avenue flanked by
sphinxes). It was later transformed into a church the
remains of which are of major importance. There are
several Christian paintings done in Byzantium-inspired
style which could be removed along with the sphinxes.
In the Holy of Holies recess of the temple, Rameses can
be seen offering large bouquets of flowers to the gods of
the sanctuary, but in the bottom central part the god
Amon is now covered over by a painting of Saint Peter
holding an enormous key in his hand.
A few miles to the north, excavations have laid bare
one of the many towns of mediaeval Nubia the fortress
of Ikhmindi preserved on the top of a cliff. It is
surrounded by a thick stone wall, except on the river face
where the steepness of the cliff was considered protection
enough. The inner streets have vaulted roofs and a
church stands in the heart of the town.
In a small Christian chapel just south of Ikhmindi's
walls, a foundation stone was discovered last year
inscribed with the name of the governor of the fortress-
town and explaining that it had been built to protect the
people and their cattle from the attacks by the Blemmyes.
We should have to stop every mile if we were to indicate
all the ancient necropolises in this region, all the remains
of settlements and chapels, all the rock inscriptions
telling of local gods, of the passage of Egyptian armies
since the Old Kingdom four thousand years ago, of the
Greek mercenaries who crossed Nubia since the 7th
century B.C. Here, at Kuban, is a stela indicating the
waterpoints and wells dug for Pharaoh's soldiers; there
the ruins of a large brick fortress of the Middle Kingdom
(2000 B.C.); further on the remains of a temple; and
then the entrance to the Allaki valley leading to ancient
gold mines, their rocky walls covered with inscriptions.
In a fertile plain bounded by a semi-circle of mountains,
we spy Korosko, starting-point of the great caravan route
to Abu Hamed in the Sudan. Here the Nile describes a
great curve to the northwest and we come upon the little
temple of Amada, dating back over 3,000 years to the
beginning of the New Empire under Tuthmosis III and
Amenophis II. Amada has exquisite reliefs and two
monumental stelae of major historical significance. They
relate the feats of the Athlete King Amenophis (the
Egyptian version of Hercules) in Syria and Nubia. Amada
is sure to be given high priority by the architects charged
with "removing" the sanctuaries of Nubia.
The great temple of Derr stands a short distance away,
almost entirely cut out of the rock on the east bank of
the river. Built by Rameses II and dedicated to the sun-
god Re, the third god of the Empire, it is one of the
temples which the United Arab Republic has agreed to
offer, wall by wall, to foreign museums as a grant for
helping to save the monuments of Nubia.
Beyond Derr the Nile valley again trends to the
southwest and We emerge onto a broad expanse of plain
at Aniba (ancient Miam), the present and former capital
of Lower Nubia. But nothing now recalls the splendours
of the palaces of the Nubian viceroys which must once
have been built here. Perhaps they are buried in the
sand waiting to be discovered.
A NEW THREAT TO PHILAE. The danger to which the
island of Philae is exposed is quite unlike that of any of the
other temples of Nubia which threaten to be engulfed by the
Aswan High Dam. At present the island is tragically under
water all year long except for a brief three-month period.
12
Unesco-Raccah
When the new dam is built, Philae will find itself in a "sandwich"
position between the two dams and a major portion of Its
monuments will be permanently out of water all year long.
But the danger to Philae will be even greater than before since
the base of the temples up to a height of 15 feet will be attacked

The Unesco Courier. February 1960
We know though that these viceroys were important
noblemen who were virtually independent, and that their
principal tombs are found at Thebes, the great capital of
the Egyptian Empire. One of these, the Tomb of Huy,
Viceroy of Nubia in the reign of Tutankhamon, contains
a series of remarkable paintings in multiple register.
They show this high official receiving his appointment as
"overseer of the southern lands," accepting the royal
signet-ring of gold investing him with full powers, and a
procession of Nubian princesses arrayed in the habit of
court ladies. One of them is represented riding in a
chariot drawn by oxen and with a parasol of ostrich
feathers growing out of her diadem.
Finally the viceroy Huy is seen receiving the homage
of the princes of Aniba, foremost among whom is a
certain Heka Nefer, "the prince of Miam," richly clad in
the dress of a Nubian chief: a leopard skin on his back
and girded around his waist like an apron, ostrich
feathers in his hair, and large rings in his ears. He is
shown prostrating himself before the viceroy.
From inscriptions in Nubia and Egypt and other
sources, we have now been able to piece together part
of Heka Nefer's life story and thus get a better idea
of his station and origins. The son of a rebel chief of
Nubia, he had been brought north to the royal palace at
the time of a revolt suppressed by Pharaoh's officers. His
standing as a Nubian prince and as the son of a local
chief was recognized, and he was sent to the college of
royal princes at Thebes where he became an intimate
friend of the king's children, sharing their up-bringing,
their games and sports and their military training.
Thereafter, thoroughly steeped in the sophisticated
culture of the capital and an enthusiast of Pharaonic
civilization, he returned to his warmer native land to
fulfil his role of prince. Nevertheless, he donned native
dress again and garbed thus he greeted the viceroy.
Perhaps one day before Nubia disappears, excavations
in the region may uncover the remains of his palace as
well as his tomb hidden in some valley of the Libyan
range. Who knows, it may be in an even more isolated
and distant spot than the tomb of Pennut, another
high official who served under Rameses VI thirty-two
centuries ago, and whose burial chapel, located on the
slope of a solitary hill two miles from Aniba, is covered
with well-preserved paintings (it is hoped to remove it to
a neighbouring oasis).
Looming up almost across the river from Aniba, stands
the rock of Ibrim dominating the whole vast plain that
stretches south from the capital of Nubia. Since remote
times it has been the site of the largest fortress in the
region. At the foot, facing the Nile are rock chapels
whose paintings should be removed to a safe place.
Let us leave the chapels that dot the banks, the
prehistoric cave paintings rivalling in beauty those in the
"rock shelter" at Wadi es Sebua, with their galloping herds
of oryxes, ibexes, giraffes, elephants and ostriches, and
let us push deeper south to where the Nile grows wider
as it winds towards its source.
About 200 miles upstream from the First Cataract, a
long way from Thebes, the official city of the god Amon
and even more distant from Tanis, the capital chosen by
Rameses on the Eastern Delta, stands the grandiose site
of Abu Simbel. It is virtually on the same latitude as the
diorite quarries in the western desert to which Egyptian
working parties of the Old Kingdom swarmed in search
of the ornately-grained green stone favoured by King
Khephren's sculptors for his statues in the Valley Temple
of the Second Pyramid.
Here, at the scene of one of man's supreme achieve¬
ments, we have reached the climax of our journey in
Lower Nubia. The monumental majesty of Abu Simbel
completely dwarfs other sanctuaries nearby, although
these are by no means lacking in treasures. Two of them
the rock chapels of Abu Oda and Jebel Shams were
heWn out of the living rock at the command of the last
kings of the 18th dynasty (about 1340 B.C.) one of which,
later transformed into a church, still enshrines the oldest
Nubian inscriptions of Christian Egypt.
The two rock temples of Abu Simbel (the Great Temple
of Rameses and the Small Temple of Nefertari), rise on
either side of a river of golden sand running down from
a natural amphitheatre of pink sandstone. The most
important sanctuaries built by Rameses in Lower Nubia,
they are also the most remote, the most harmonious and
the most colossal. Rameses built temples all over Nubia,
each dedicated to one of the gods of the Empire. At Abu
Simbel he brought the three great gods together and
added his own image, raised to divine rank.
Here, therefore, he reigns, a god among gods,
surrounded by his entire family. Rameses imposed the
cult of the Sun-King, born of the sun, the spouse of a
goddess transformed into a woman, the ravishing Ne¬
fertari. The queen is depicted in the flower of her beauty
in the temple dedicated to her by Rameses to the north
of his own sanctuary, identifying her with Hathor, the
presiding goddess.
Unesco-Laurenza Documentation Centre on Ancient Egypt, Cairo
Dy the waters several times a day. Under this treatment the
monuments will eventually disintegrate and crumble to the
ground. To save the sacred island it is envisaged to raise a
protective wall around Philae, thus creating an artificial lake
amidst which the island with its monuments will be perma
nently above water and hence out of danger. Left, photo
taken in January when only the tip of the Temple of Isis is
above ; centre, as waters subside, the temple and the "kiosk"
of Trajan (on right) appear once more; right, the island as
it appears when completely freed from the invading Nile.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE LEGACY OF NUBIA (Continued)
Born aloft like a Venus
emerging from the waves
The four colossi, adorning the façade of the Great
Temple and standing over 65 feet high are an un¬
forgettable sight. The extraordinary harmony and
delicacy of the heads completely counterbalances the
deliberate heaviness of the bodies and the huge mass of
this fantastic pylon cut from the very face of the rock.
From the wall of her small temple, Nefertari seems to
become alive and to step forward, radiant in her feminine
beauty, towards her eternal destiny. It is impossible, in
a few words, to attempt to describe the magnificence of
this temple of temples, the purity of the carvings in the
queen's sanctuary, the images of Nefertari as a young ,
girl, surrounded by wondrously slender, graceful
goddesses, who seem to bear her aloft like a nascent Venus
emerging from the waves..
On the walls of the Great Temple, historic scenes of
the utmost importance, royal inscriptions, and murals
heralding a new trend in art, precede eloquent religious
scenes which lead to the sanctuary where four statues
again show the king in the company of his fellow gods.
Politics and diplomacy often take precedence over prayer
in this temple of Rameses with its dual message.
The scenes, the inscriptions, the Osirian pillars in the
first hall all recall the innovations of the great king. They
mark a major turning point in the history of Egypt and
find a small echo to this day in other parts of the globe.
Thus the chronicle which Rameses caused to be carved on
the south side of the terrace the Marriage stela with its
surface now scarred and pitted with the wind-blown sand
of centuries commemorates the conclusion of an age¬
long struggle between two peoples.
The Stela recounts the marriage of a Hittite princess
whose epic story (see article page 31) unforgotten up
to recent times, inspired one of Leconte de Lisle's Poèmes
Barbares. The frail princess Nefru Re is depicted on the
arched top of the Stela which then tells how Rameses
ventured forth in mid-winter, crossing his northern
frontiers to meet her in his fortified castle. With the
appearance of the Sun-King a miracle occurred; the mists,
enveloping the earth were dispelled and the sun shone
forth from a clear sky, spreading warmth over all things.
A St. Martin's summer had been brought about by the son
of Re, and the princess immediately received the name
occasioned by this phenomenon. Henceforth she was
Maat Hor Nefru Re "She who sees Horus, the life force of
the Sun God."
Protected where they stand in their hallowed bay,
preserved in the rock so frail that no water can touch
them without disintegrating their stones, the two temples
of Abu Simbel cannot be allowed to perish. They must
remain facing the rising sun whose brilliant rays each
day awaken the colossal statues of the Great Rameses.
14
v r. ' x* f 4¿. -r-.-». . -r w - _^" *¿. « _
*st_1J
-:-""v* ~^:SL'
GODDESS WITH VULTURE HEAD¬
DRESS. One of the six huge figures
carved in pure Graeco-Roman style on
the outer wall at the rear of the temple
of Kalabsha. Goddess (above) wears a
vulture headdress, symbol of the god¬
dess-mothers. These were often worn by
Egypt's queens including the famous
Cleopatra. The headdress is surmounted
by the sun nestled between the horns
of the cow of heaventhe hieroglyphic
for Isis. Temple of Kalabsha (left) built
in the reign of the Roman emperor
Augustus on the site of a sanctuary
dating from the 15th century B.C., is the
most important monument in Nubia after
Abu Simbel and Philae. Like the other
flooded Nubian temples, Kalabsha re¬
mains under the waters nine months of
the year. To save it, it must be taken
down and rebuilt on another site in Nubia.
Photos Documentation Centre on Egypt, Cairo

The
thirsty
lands
These two photos symbolize the dilemma of
Nubia: how to bring water to its thirsty
lands and people and yet safeguard the treasures
placed in jeopardy. Right, site of the future
High Dam at Aswan in the dry season. The
blazing sun has cracked the river-bed of the
Nile creating a pattern resembling a vast
crazy paving; below, colonnade of the " birth
house " in the forecourt of the Temple of
Isis on Philae, the sacred isle, which is one of
a group close to the site of the new Aswan Dam.
The Unesco Courier. February 1960
.
HL
,<*¥
Photos © Albert Raccah.
The essential part of Egypt is a
green gash of teeming life
cutting across brown desert
wastes. The line of demarcation
between life and nonlife is start-
lingly clear: one may stand at the
edge of the cultivation with one
foot on the irrigated black soil and
one foot on the desert sands. The
country is essentially rainless; only
the waters of the Nile make life
possible where otherwise there
would be endless wastes of sand
and rock.
But what a life the Nile makes
possible! The little agricultural
villages contract themselves within
the smallest compass, so as not to
encroach upon the fertile fields of
rice, cotton, wheat, or sugar cane.
When properly cared for, the land
can yield two crops a year...
The richness is confined to the
green Nile Valley. Only 3.5 per
cent of the modern state of Egypt
is cultivable and habitable. The
remaining 96.5 per cent is barren
and uninhabitable desert. Today
perhaps 99.5 per cent of the popu¬
lation lives on the 3.5 per cent of
the land which will support popu¬
lation. That means an even
greater contrast between the
desert and the sown, and it means
that on the cultivable land there
is a concentration of people close
to the saturation point.
John A. Wilson
quoted from "The Intellectual
Adventure of Ancient Man."
Published by University of Chicago
Press © 1946.
15
