BATTERY OF NEW DRUGS
JOINS BATTLE WITH WORLD'S
OST COSTLY DISEASE
WHO photo by Paul Almasy
In a village in Liberia, the doctor has dis¬
covered many malaria cases and is distribut¬
ing anti-malaria pills which children and
grown-ups obediently swallow on the spot.
There is a whole battery of drugs
against malaria. Some are preventive
drugs, taken as a protective measure
by visitors to malarious regions, and some
are effective in treating malaria sufferers.
One might then ask whether the present
campaign for the eradication of malaria is
on the right lines with its complicated
insecticide spraying operations, its delicate
laboratory work, the enormous transport
problem involved, and the costly army of
workers needed.
Would it not be simpler to distribute
drugs to everyone living in malarious areas?
In this way malaria sufferers would be
cured and others protected. "No", say the
experts.
In the first place, the experts say that
the antimalarial drugs only keep the blood
parasite at bay for a short time; scarcely
one week, in fact. This means that an
immense and very efficient organization
would be needed for the regular distribution
of drugs over vast territories with widely-
scattered, and often nomadic, inhabitants.
Then the population would soon tire of
coming, so often for treatment.
Nevertheless, the antimalarial drugs play
an extremely important and indeed essential
role in the eradication campaign, particu¬
larly in the final phases when the last
foci of infection must be mopped up.
Here again a problem arises that only
the laboratories can solve. They
must try to produce a drug which
maintains its efficacy for a long enough
period and which can be given in a single
dose at long intervals.
The scientists are therefore directing their
efforts to finding a drug that can be
injected. One advantage is that some peo¬
ple may feel more confidence in a treat¬
ment that hurts than in tablets which are
merely swallowed without discomfort.
Another is that an injection is more diffi¬
cult to evade during mass campaigns which
systematically treat the whole population.
For centuries, powdered cinchona bark
(which became quinine) was used to cure
malaria.
The discovery of modern antimalarial
drugs was an indirect consequence of the
two world wars. The first synthetic
22
products were obtained in the laboratory
between 1924 and 1927 by the Germans
who had been working on the problem since
their quinine supplies were cut off by the
war. From 1939 to 1945 it was the Allies
who manufactured products to replace the
cinchona bark which no longer arrived
from Japanese-occupied Java.
Through a strange series of coincidences
in the inter-war period, research work on
synthetic antimalarials opened the way
to further progress in two apparently unre¬
lated fields: the behaviour of the malaria
parasite in the human organism, and the
treatment of syphilitic nervous disorders.
In order to test the effectiveness of the
new drugs, European research workers
needed malaria patients. These were rare
in Europe and understandably the few
attending a hospital preferred to be given
treatment rather than be used as guinea-
pigs. The solution was to find people
willing to be inoculated with malaria. The
neuro-syphilitic cases provided the answer.
This story goes back to the time of
Hippocrates who, five centuries before
Christ, recognized that violent fevers
sometimes had a beneficial effect on
sufferers from certain diseases. Galen,
seven centuries later, described the cure
of an epileptic after an attack of quartan
fever. In the nineteenth century, some
observers found that certain mental patients
were returned to sanity after an access of
fever (malaria, typhoid fever). In 1917, an
Austrian psychiatrist for the first time ino¬
culated malaria into nine patients suffering
from general paralysis, and cured three.
It was in England that an Indian sailor
from Madagascar disembarked in 1925,
shivering with malaria, and went for treat¬
ment to the Horton Hospital, Epsom. He
was treated, but a little of his blood
infected with the malaria parasite, Plasmo¬
dium vivax, was carefully preserved. This
strain of the parasite was maintained in the
laboratory, and over a period of thirty
years it has been used to infect sixty-eight
thousand mosquitos, which in turn have
infected ten thousand neurosyphilitic
patients suffering from general paralysis.
Many of these patients have left the Horton
Hospital, cured. The others, by consenting
to be first infected with and then cured of
malaria, have made it possible to determine
the limitations of quinine, to test certain
modern drugs and, finally, to establish the
fact the liver plays an important rôle in the
development of the malaria parasite.
With the discovery of penicillin, the
queen of all drugs against syphilis, cases of
general paralysis have almost disappeared
and consequently there is no further need
for malaria therapy of neurosyphilitic cases,
and the antimalarial drugs can no longer
be tested in this way.
Nevertheless, some experiments with
these drugs are still continuing with the
help of human volunteers, particularly in
Italy, Rumania and the United States.
Although control of malaria with drugs
alone has not been found practicable in
most of the territories in which eradication
campaigns are being conducted, quite a
new method is being employed in Brazil.
The Brazilian eradication campaign was
making slow progress in the vast,
impenetrable forests of the Amazon
basin. Three million people live there un¬
der the menace of malaria. Most of their
houses have no walls and consist only of
a roof over four supports. The mosquitos,
after biting, go outside in the open to rest.
Many nomads move about the country
according to season and availability of agri¬
cultural work. Spraying offers therefore
little chance of interrupting transmission of
the disease.
A Brazilian specialist, Dr. Mario Pinotti,
conceived the idea of adding an anti¬
malarial drug to the cooking salt used at
every meal by the people of the Amazon
zone in the same way as iodine is added
to the salt in regions where goitre is present
in endemic fortm.
The first experiment was made in the
State of Para. Two zones were created:
an experimental zone containing nine
hundred inhabitants, and a control zone
with four hundred inhabitants. After forty
days' use of the antimalarial salt there were
only two cases among the nine hundred
inhabitants of the experimental zone. One
was a newly-born, breast-fed baby, and the
other a stranger who had only been in the
zone for the last three days.
In view of these results, the World Health
Organization has asked scientists in the
U.S.A. to do further research. WHO is also
proposing to help several countries to
try out this new method, which seems to
promise good results in areas where classic
spraying operations meet special difficulties.
