DANGER!
500 mph tidal
wave arriving
On May 21, Chile began to shake and shudder in
the grip of major earthquake shocks which con¬
tinued for weeks afterwards accompanied by volca¬
nic eruptions and tidal waves. Chile's catastrophe
soon reverbrated across the Pacific. Seismic loaves
created by the upthrusting of the sea bed went
racing across the ocean at more than 500 m.p.h In
mid-ocean the movement was slight, but as the
waves reached other Pacific coasts, they came
crashing in with a force that varied according to
the form of a coastline and the shape of a shore. In
some placesAlaska, Fiji, Tahitithey merely
caused tide fluctuations. In Japan the onrush of sea
caused a major disaster and overall tidal wave
damage in the Pacific ran into many millions of
dollars. In this article, Bernard Saint-Guily, of the
Paris Museum of Natural History, describes different
kinds of tidal waves and how they are caused.
T
iDAL waves are among the most terrifying of
-^^- the natural phenomena that occur on our
planet. An abnormal expansion of the surface of the sea
in the form of a single wave or several successive ones,
they are produced either by earthquakes or volcanic erup¬
tions or again by storms, cyclones or typhoons. They
are in no way related to the normal tides caused by the
attraction of the moon and sun; their effects simply super¬
impose themselves on those of the tidal movements.
Thus, the name they have been given in English for
example, is hardly apposite. Nowadays scientists tend
to use the Japanese word tsunami; its advantage lies in its
precise etymological meaning which describes specifically
the effect rather than the cause of the phenomenon;
tsunami comes from tsu (port or bay) and nami (wave).
The frequency and violence of tidal waves in Japan have
given the word used to describe them very real meaning
in everyday language; one reflecting actual experience for
it is in the ports and bays that tidal waves produce their
most terrible effects.
It is easy to conceive how mechanical causes move¬
ments or vibrations in a part of the ocean bed or in a
coastal zone create waves on the surface of the sea.
These waves, like the movements which create them, pro¬
duce only a feeble effect in the open sea and are hardly
felt by ships sailing there. Propagated far away, they cross
oceans quite rapidly. Their speed, proportional to the
square root of the ocean depth, actually reaches nearly
500 m.p.h. when they are travelling above depths of
around 13,000 feet. The increase in their amplitude and
form when they reach the shallower coastal waters depend
on the outline of the coast and relief of the seabed.
As it reaches the coast a tidal wave causes either a
sudden withdrawal of the sea (negative wave) or an inva¬
sion of the land by the sea (positive wave). The first
positive wave, however, is generally of medium size; it is
followed by a withdrawel of the sea and then by a second
invading wave which does the most damage.
Ships swept over city walls
On October 28, 1746, the earthquake which utterly des¬
troyed the Peruvian city of Lima was accompanied
by a tidal wave which struck the port of Callao.
Survivors described it as follows:
"'After the earthquake, which destroyed all the houses
in the port, the sea receded, although no one could see
how far it went. Soon it came in again, making a terri¬
fying noise and forming an enormous wave which rose
high into the air and came crashing down on the ram¬
parts, carrying all before it. There were 23 ships in the
port and most of them were smashed and sunk; the larg¬
est, four in number, were lifted by the wave, swept over
the city walls and carried into the countryside behind.
36
by Bernard Saint-Guily
The sea receded and came in again several times; out
of 4,900 inhabitants, only 200 managed to escape".
The collapse of cliffs, the fall of great masses of
rock into the sea, landslides and submarine eruptions
can all cause tidal waves. During the mighty eruption
of Krakatoa, in the Sunda Strait, on August 27, 1883, the
destruction of most of this volcanic island and the explo¬
sions that occurred when the molten lava and the volca¬
nic gases came into contact with the sea created a terrible
tidal wave which drowned 36,000 persons at Merak and
Telok-Betang. The disastrous effects of this tidal wave
were limited to the Sunda Strait but the sea movements
it caused were recorded on tide gauges around the world.
In both cause and effect, tidal waves of meteorological
origin, or "storm surges" as they are called, differ greatly
from those of seismic origin. They are unusually high
rises in the level of the sea due to violent winds which
accompany storms, cyclones and areas of low atmospheric
pressure as they move close to coastlines. These storm
surges behave in a much more complicated way than the
seismic tidal waves. They do not necessarily cause the
sea to recede and, generally speaking, take the form of
positive waves whose irregular movements are superim¬
posed on the normal rise and fall of the tides.
Bengal wave killed 215,000
Storm waves of this kind are frequent on the coasts of
Bengal. On these low-lying, flat coasts with their
dense populations the storm surges sometimes cause
veritable cataclysms. The death roll from the 1876 storm
wave was estimated at 215,000.
The storm surges which occur in the North Sea seem
almost tame by comparison. But recent flooding in the
Netherlands and in Great Britain has shown that Euro¬
pean coastlines can still be threatened by such calamities.
The tidal waves which hit these countries on January 31,
1953, were caused by an atmospheric depression which
came from the south of Iceland with 100 mph winds.
Thanks to the large number of permanent observation
stations in this area it was possible to carry out a great
deal of study and research, much of it through the Inter¬
national Union of Geodesy and Geophysics.
Will it be possible to predict -tidal waves in the near
future? Probably so in the case of storm surges. But
tsunami of seismic origin are more difficult. Yet all that
is required is the ability to recognize from among the many
seismic disturbances, those which are capable of causing
tidal waves. Earthquakes are recorded in advance of tidal
waves since seismic shocks travel through the earth with
a speed of at least ten times that of the liquid waves which
make up the tsunami. In any case, the forecasting of
tidal waves will only become possible through patient
research and regular observation all around the world.
