The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
This tripod fish hops across the
sea floor on built-in stilts. It was
photographed from the bathyscaph
Trieste off Guam , in the Marianas
islands, seven thousand metres
under the surface. Previously,
scientists believed that it trailed its
two long pelvic fins and caudal
appendage as feelers. But the
bathyscaph's observations snowed
that the fish uses its extremities
as a kind of landing gear, springing
across the bottom like a cricket.
The creature on the right is » Halb-
porphyrus, casting the shadow of
its characteristic " double tail n,
¡g. Capt. Georges S. Houot, French Navy
.,<*


IN THE REÁ1M OF
THE TRIPOD FISH
u
v4 ow can living creatures exist in the
I I great depths of the sea? How must
-^^» -^^- they adapt themselves physiologically
to survive in an environment characterized mainly by
enormous pressure, eternal night and virtually never
changing conditions? These questions fascinate the
human mind, for this universe on our own planet may
be more different from our land universe than that found
in many a planet in outer space. How has life evolved
below that sparkling veil which hid it from our eyes for
so long?
First of all, one very serious misconception must be
cleared up, namely that great pressure makes life impos¬
sible. We still live in the grip of such beliefs. Many of
us, for example, continue to cling to the same erroneous
ideas which long hindered the development of a true
diving suit. After all, how many inventors tried to
"protect" the diver's face or abdomen from water pres¬
sure while leaving the other parts of his body exposed?
It meant nothing less than condemning him to death.
Let's imagine that a man's head remains at normal
pressure while the rest of his body is receiving water
pressure 40 metres down at five kilogrammes per square
centimetre. In this case, the helmet "protecting" his head
is nothing less than a suction cup drawing up the
unfortunate diver's blood and emptying it through his
nose, eyes and ears. If, on the other hand, pressure is
by Pierre de Latil
uniformly distributed over his body and the air he
breathes is at the same pressure as that of the water
around him, then the diver has absolutely no feeling of
being crushed. His skin and his internal organs are at
the same pressure, and everything functions in perfect
balance. Thus physics sets no limit on the depth which
a human being, or any other living creature, can reach.
But there is chemistry, too... and this complicates things.
Chemical reactions are not the same when the
substances involved are under pressure. When our blood
is at normal atmospheric pressure, oxygen combines with
it very easily, and nitrogen hardly at all. But if the
pressure is increased, our blood becomes charged with
nitrogen. This gas is a poison although actually it
creates a feeling of intoxication which is quite pleasant.
The diver who' goes too far down (around 40 or 50 metres
for the untrained man) runs the risk of coming under
the influence of "depth rapture" which can put him to
sleep... and put him to sleep forever because as he loses
consciousness he lets go of the mouthpiece of his breath¬
ing apparatus.
There is another danger, too, when he returns to the
surface. Once the pressure returns to normal, the blood
no longer takes up nitrogen. The nitrogen then starts
to escape and the diver's blood becomes like soda, water
filled with gaseous bubbles which can cause blood clots.
These facts about what happens to the human diver
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

enable us to understand more clearly the physiology of
deep-sea animals. There is no physical limitation to the
depth at which life can exist. In fact, an animal will
always be in equilibrium with its environment. Its blood,
body fluids and all its cells will be under equal internal
and external pressures, and these opposite pressures will
always cancel themselves out. We can now realize how
wary we must be of those statements, we often read (even
in some scientific books) which tell us that fish "burst"
when they have been brought to the surface from the
depths of the sea.
The Danish oceanographer, Anton Bruun, leader of the
celebrated Galathea expedition, has fished 10,000 metres
down, as he tells us in another article in this issue. He
is quite definite on this point: fish from the great depths
of the sea cannot explode. And there you have another
sea legend to be thrown overboard! If these fish usually
reach the surface in poor condition, it is merely because
they have been roughly handled during the long journey
of the net up from the bottom of the sea.
The basic difference between a deep-water animal and
a surface animal is found in the chemical exchanges in
its organism (perhaps better referred to as its meta¬
bolism).
The main problem in the biology of the ocean depths,
however, is one of food, and its characteristics change
considerably the deeper you go. First of all, we must
remember that, whether on land or on the sea bottom,
all organic matter comes from plants which synthesize it
from mineral matter through the action of sun on chloro¬
phyll. Algae are therefore the starting point of the food
chain in the sea. Since they need light, they live only
in shallow waters for example down to 200 or 300 metres.
However, there is nothing absolute about this limit. Most
of the time, these algae are floating freely in the depths
and they can rise or descend according to the movements
of the currents.
Banquets on the surface
leftovers in the depths
Microscopic algae are eaten by tiny animals which, in
turn, are the food supply for bigger animals which
are devoured by even bigger ones... and so on. This
perpetual hunt and this gigantic feast are not limited to
the zone of the sea where the sun penetrates. A school of
small shellfish, for example, which has eaten algae on the
surface may then go 200 metres down to be eaten by
small fish; while bigger fish from the depths may rise
to hunt the little fellows. Algae from the surface can
fall to the bottom as well. The most intense zone of
marine life appears to go down to 1,500 or 2,000 metres,
depending upon the ocean.
Then what do creatures eat further down? The answer
is: the leftovers from that sunlit banquet on the surface,
and the corpses of plankton animals which literally rain
down like a continuous supply of manna.
But this manna becomes rare near the bottom after
everyone has had a chance at it on the upper floors.
At the same time, animal life becomes rare as well.
Nevertheless, . this rain accumulates on the bottom and
there life again becomes more intense. If the bottom is
extremely deep, then the food supply may be exhausted
before it reaches it. That is why animals are rare and
small in size at depths of 8,000 or 10,000 metres, or even
further down. They are simply "undernourished" because
the cycle of life can be begun only by the sun on the
surface.
Despite this gradual waning of life as depth increases,
life on the bottom is not homogenous. In this very special
environment, adaptation has not taken place along any
clearcut lines. Down there, as on land, the only law seems
to be diversity, manifold forms and the inexhaustible
"ingenuity" of nature's solutions. In other words, the law
is that there is no law. Only the colours of these
creatures, which become more pale, represent any common
evolution.
24
REALM OF THE TRIPOD FISH
(Continued)
INTO THE WORLD
OF LIQUID NIGHT
Official Soviet photo
Above, with its searchlight probing the darkness, this Russian
diving chamber can go down to depths of 2,000 feet for obser¬
vation of underwater life. Right, a beak-nosed skate on the
desertlike sea floor 7,200 feet down. . Photo was taken from a
French Navy bathyscaph. The 2 1/2 foot skate, a relative of
the ray, ignored the bathyscaph and glided by the gondola.

The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
LAMP
ANTENNAE
THAT SPELL
DEATH
The voracious angler fish of the ocean
depths carry on their heads "fishing
antennae" bearing lights. They wave these
in front of their mouths and their victims
seem to be attracted and drawn inside.
Official Soviet photos
For example, let us look at their feeding organs. For
certain fish, the apparently logical solution is an enormous
mouth capable of catching prey "blindly" by gulping
anything that comes within reach. But others have
normal mouths and some animals on the bottom have
nothing but a tiny suction apparatus.
Let us look more closely at these wide-mouthed fish,
especially the ones in the Stomiad family. Their lower
jaw is articulated in an amazing manner at the back of
their skulls. It is designed to be thrust forward and then
pulled back as if it were a steam shovel. Everything
identifies this fish as a hunter which can thrust its lower
jaw forward, seize its prey in its pointed fangs (which are
made for gripping, not grinding) and then literally throw
its victims into the back of its gullet.
Creatures with 'parking lights'
& mouths like steam shovels
Proof of this interpretation is the fact that the
lower jaw of a certain Stomiad, the Malocosteus indi-
cus, is reduced to a bone no more floor of the mouth,
no more skin covering the bony structure. Here, there is
really nothing more than a steam shovel in front of the
true mouth of the fish. With a "net" as open as this one,
it is hard to imagine how this animal can fish blindly.
For that matter, how can we visualize the kind of
hunting which involves seeing in a totally obscure world?
There you have the first illogical aspect of life on the
bottom. While it is easy to" understand how animals
feeding on microscopic prey can hunt by merely filtering
water or digging in the mud, the secret of fish living on
larger prey is impenetrable.
Phosphorescence in these creatures is even more
Illogical. Many of them display lights of different colours.
The oceanographers of the second half of the 19th
Century have all described their astonishment at the sight
of a net being opened on the deck of a ship at night.
We also know that some animals, which have never been
observed alive, shed light because the tissues of their
light-producing organs have been identified.
How can we interpret these facts these bright lights,
soft glows, varied colours with our human logic? We
can imagine a fish lighting its way just as a motor car
does at night, but it cannot light the sea brightly
enough to hunt. And why do some of these animals have
lights around their bodies like the illuminated portholes
of a ship? Why do they have "parking lights" in the
rear or else glowing tips at the end of long appendices?
And, most of all, what is the use of light to beings which
quite often are blind?
But how blind are these animals? Every stage of atrophy
of the eyes has been observed, to the point of their
complete disappearance. On the other hand, perfectly
formed eyes have been observed in fish living at depths
where, we know, they never can be used because of total
darkness. Then why have certain eyes degenerated while
others have remained "functional"? This puzzle has
become even more complicated since scientists have
learned that none of the creatures of the greatest depths
react to the searchlights of bathyscaphs. The deeper you
go, the more "whys" you seem to find.
But the biggest mystery of all is probably that of the
male parasites of certain Cerates. We can understand
that the male of a species may be a great deal smaller
than the female. But, here, the male is minute. It lives
as a parasite on the skin of its "mate", just an appendix
on the female's body. Linked to the female's blood system,
it has no organs of its own and it is nothing more than
a male sexual gland.
An entire biological universe awaits discovery. More
surprises are certainly In store for us in this liquid night
which has been barely opened to our exploration and
which still remains closed to our logic.
Courtesy Capt. Georges S. Houot, French Navy, and National Geographic Magazine
