MOVING DAY
FOR AN
ARCTIC CITY
by John Drummond
Canadian Embassy, Pans
26

The Unesco Courier. May 1960
CONFUSED PATTERN of lakes and
rivers interspersed by patches of spruce
forest seen in aerial view (left) of the
Mackenzie River delta in North West
Canada explains why Aklavik, Canada's
largest Arctic town, has been called
the "Venice of the far North." Built
on a bank of frozen silt and ice (above)
jutting into the west channel of the
2,500-miles-long Mackenzie, Aklavik
is literally resting on water. Its frozen
foundations melt in summer and the
river is "chewing" at the site. The
entire city is now being rebuilt on a
new site 70 miles away on the east
channel of the Mackenzie. Buildings
of the new city, Inuvik, seen in air
view (below) are constructed on stilts.
Northern Affairs and National
Resources, Ottawa, Canada
y-- "WS-:
y
This is the story of a small commu¬
nity in the frozen lands of the
Canadian Arctic which had to choose between a removal
"lock, stock and barrel" to a new site or staying put and
seeking by devious and expensive means to stop the "city"
from sinking below the level of the river upon whose
"floating" banks it had been built.
Aklavik began its life in 1912 as a trading post. It lies
on a bank of frozen silt and ice jutting into the west
channel of the Mackenzie River. "From the air", writes
a Canadian government official, "one looks down on a
vast confusion of lakes stretching over the horizon and
laced together by dark green patches of spruce forest.
Below, the brown waters of the Mackenzie wind down to
the sea. Far in the distance is the ocean on the north,
and the peaks of the Richardson Mountains form a back¬
drop in the west.1"
Established as a trading post to deal in the furs of the
muskrat, Aklavik also became a natural centre for the
people of those parts of the Northern Territories; indeed,
its growth had a special significance because it was one
of the few places in Canada where whites, Eskimos and
Indians lived and worked happily side by side.
With the passage of time Aklavik grew in importance.
By the mid-twenties a Royal Canadian Mounted Police
post, Anglican and Roman Catholic Missions, and a sta¬
tion of the Royal Canadian Corps of Signals had been
established there. Its medical and educational facilities
likewise increased, until Aklavik was the principal admi¬
nistrative centre and the most important community within
the Arctic Circle.
Surprisingly, the climate of the Aklavik region is rela¬
tively pleasant considering it lies about 100 miles north
of the Arctic Circle. Although the winters are long, last¬
ing at least seven months, annual snowfall is but moderate
and the low temperatures are bearable. Summers are short
and warm.
O ne thing, however, spoils Aklavik.
The city (having a cathedral it can
claim to be a city) is built on permafrost, a mixture of
frozen silt and ice more ice than silt. The top or
"active layer" of two or three feet thaws in summer and
freezes again in winter. Below that the ground is
permanently frozen to a depth of about 1,000 feet. When
the sun and heat from buildings melts the ice in the soil,
the water is unable to drain away and so great pools form
surrounded by thick mud. Hence, Aklavik has been
derisively called "The Mudtropolis of the Arctic"!
Mud apart, Aklavik is literally resting on water! More¬
over, the Mackenzie river is "'chewing" at the site and
threatens to sweep it into the Beaufort Sea. With its
foundations melting away and river erosion constantly at
work, Aklavik by the early 1950's was a community
without a future. Even if, at enormous expense, these
two great obstacles to development could be overcome,
the construction of sewers, water mains and roads, the
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

ARCTIC CITY (Continued)
laying down of an airfield and other vital, aspects of
reconstruction in a growing community, all combined to
pose colossal problems and to create prospects of enormous
expenditure.
In what way, tihen, could Aklavik expand? Neither
vertical nor horizontal growth was possible on such uns¬
table foundations. It became obvious as time passed that
new construction and reconstruction some government,
some private, some missionary would have to be under¬
taken.
T;he position became so untenable
that the Canadian Government
decided to move Aklavik, and in 1954 a survey team was
organized to find a suitable site. Eleven criteria were set
up by which potential sites were to be judged by the team.
The official report records: "The new site was to be a
place conducive to orderly, efficient and economical town
planning. The ground would have to be suitable for perm¬
anent sewer and water systems, foundations and roads,
and there would have to be a good site for an airfield."
This was especially vital because Aklavik is cut off
from the rest of the world for some six weeks or more
each year, during break-up and freeze-up; planes are
unable to land, ships are blocked by ice, and dog teams
are not able to cross the inhospitable terrain. Nobody
can get in or out during that time, which may easily last
for three months of each year.
The site would have to allow for adequate sewage
disposal and sand and gravel for building purposes would
have to be accessible. It would need to be located where it
could act as a transhipment point from river to sea-going
vessels. It was hoped that wood, coal and hydro-electric
power would be reasonably accessible also.
The survey team set out in March 1954, and establish¬
ed their first base on the Husky Channel. Preliminary
aerial surveys had located nine possible sites for the new
Aklavik, but ultimately all but one known as East 3
were discarded.
This elimination process itself posed much work and
strain on the team, since it meant moving base four times.
We glimpse some of the difficulties and hardships from
the fact that their camp needed tractor trains, snow¬
mobiles, dog-teams, scows, barges and light river craft
to move it, depending on the season.
s iTE East 3 was found to fill all the
essential and desirable require¬
ments. It lies on the east bank of the east channel of
the Mackenzie River, 70 miles by water from the old
Aklavik but only 35 by air. The site cannot be endangered
by flooding or erosion, though it lies on a navigable river
channel, hence the new Aklavik (or Inuvik as it has now
been named) will be able to expand as Canada's thriving
economy so demands.
Yet the problems facing the builders of this new town
still appeared insurmountable. Almost every aspect of
28
construction roads, buildings, sewers and waters mains
presented a challenge to ingenuity.
For instance, how could new roads be constructed
without destroying the all-important insulating cover of
moss, often a foot or more thick. If the moss were
removed the permafrost beneath would inevitably melt to
a depth of several feet each summer, the soil would then
become unstable and the road itself, subject to periodic
thawing and freezing, would be virtually ruined. Roads
also need to be drained, but the removal of the moss made
the digging of ditches impossible.
The solution, proved under trial, was found by laying
gravel on top of the moss, in some parts supplemented
by a protective layer of brush from cleared land. The
roads were planned also to follow the natural contours
of the land, so that draining could be achieved by "run¬
off".
The engineers then turned their attention to the
construction of buildings. They had to find a method of
construction which would not cause the permafrost under
the foundations to melt from the heat of the buildings.
The answer was to build the larger buildings on wooden
piles, driven some 20 feet into the ground. Smaller build¬
ings, including dwellings, could be built on top of a two-
foot gravel pad laid on the moss. Each method permits
air circulation to disperse the heat from the buildings,
thus protecting the foundations from the threat of melt¬
ing permafrost.
So Inuvik will ultimately be a town on stilts.
VENTUALLY, the problem of how to
build water and sewer mains which
wouldn't freeze remembering the permafrost extends
about one thousand feet downwards was ingeniously
solved by using "Utilidors". These are large, insulated,
box-like enclosures on stilts, through which the water
and sewer pipes run above the ground. To prevent the
water from freezing, however, a pipe to carry hot water
throughout the town from a central heating plant was
added, thereby providing for every home and building not
only adequate sanitary and fresh water facilities, but central
heating as well!
Yet even this clever solution in turn posed a new problem
each time a road and a Utilidor have to cross one another
a bridge is needed. And bridges are expensive. The
answer lay in planning the system of roads and Utilidors
to have as few crossings as possible.
The new town, then, will be one comprising buildings
on stilts, and houses without furnaces and without chim¬
neys. All will enjoy the luxury of central heating, hot
and cold running water, and modern sanitation all of
which were lacking in the old town.
Already much of this work has been completed, includ¬
ing the construction of a 25-classroom school with board¬
ing accommodation for 500 children, offering secondary
education to Eskimo, Indian and white children working
and playing together. In 1960 construction will include
accommodation for. the Royal Canadian Mounted Police
and the Department of Transport, the Northern Affairs
CONTINUED ON PAGE 30

The Unesco Courier. May 1960
National Film Board
A DOOMED COMMUNITY only a few years ago, Aklavik is today building a firm future. Its people are
helping to put up new homes at Inuvik and at the same time learning new trades and skills to replace fur
trading, no longer a stable occupation. For the children (above) a 25-classroom school offering secondary
education to Eskimo, Indian and white youngsters has already been built. Below, All Saints Cathedral at the
old townsite of Aklavik. In progressive stages worth-while buildings are being moved to the new town
some of them being towed in one piece by tractor down the frozen surface of the Mackenzie River.
Northern Affairs & National Resources, Ottowa, Canada
29

ARCTIC CITY (Continued)
Administration Buildings and staff houses, and an 80-bed
hospital.
But Inuvik will also enjoy the facilities of an airport
costing more than $5 million, with a regular passenger
and air mail service. Telegraph and telephone services as
well as a radio station will also be available, while modern
methods of garbage-disposal will replace the crude
"methods" of the old Aklavik.
Having been planned with long-range growth in view,
Inuvik will have a potential of about 5,000 residents, com¬
pared to the far smaller population of the old town.
Possibly one of the most useful and significant aspects
of this project is that it is being used as a training pro¬
gramme to provide vocational skills to Eskimos, Indians
and others living in that region. This is especially im¬
portant since the fur trade, which originally forged Aklavik
as a trading post, is no longer a stable occupation, and
new trades and skills must be learned. So these people,
many of whom had ¡their homes in old Aklavik, are build¬
ing their own "replacement" town while simultaneously
learning to be carpenters, bulldozer operators, truck drivers,
electricians, engineers, and skilled workers of other kinds.
BECAUSE the new town is in itself an
education and employment plan, it
is taking longer to build than was strictly necessary. Yet
this is seen to be a good thing, in the long-term view.
In progressive stages, worth-while buildings are being
moved from the old site to the new one, some simply
being towed in one piece by tractor down the frozen Mac¬
kenzie river.
And what of the rest of doomed Aklavik?
It is thought that some Eskimos and Indians will con¬
tinue to Uve there because they don't want to move so far
from their muskrat trapping line. One day ,of course,
they will be forced to leave the sinking city. . .
Ultimately, Inuvik will be the most modern and most
progressive town north of the Arctic Circle. As such,
it will be an important transportation and trading centre.
Federal government officials will administer a vast area of
the Northern Territories from this town. It will automa¬
tically become the centre of the trapping industry of the
Mackenzie Delta.
Inuvik will also be Canada's first modern Arctic town,
its first attempt to establish an Arctic community of such
a character and design wherein all the benefits of techno¬
logy and modern science are harnessed to meet the ageless
problems of living in a cold region. The Canadian people
look upon Inuvik as a symbol of their success in adapt¬
ing an urban community to the peculiar demands of Arctic
living.
In a world so short of living-space, this is indeed a
worth-while and a highly significant project, for it pointed¬
ly suggests that all kinds of people can carve a new and
satisfying life for themselves in regions hitherto regarded
as inhospitable and unworthy of settlement and develop¬
ment.

