LARGEST CENSUS
OF WORLD'S FARMING
STARTS THIS YEAR
FAO photo by V. Bianchl
Special training for staff who are carrying out the World Census
of Agriculture in Latin America was given at a centre set up in
Lima, capital of Peru. Here, investigators prepared for the real
thing by making an experimental census of population, housing
and farming in mountain villages near to Lima. During practice
census trainee uses llama as a table while noting down facts.
A World Census of Agriculture the biggest inquiry of
its kind ever to be carried out is being taken this
year under the sponsorship of the Food and Agri¬
culture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
. in Rome. In scores of countries, thousands 01
investigators are collecting the individual facts and figures
which, once assembled, should give a clear and accurate
statistical picture of farming the world's biggest industry.
On mountain-side farms in Peru, rice fields in the Far
East, coffee plantations in Brazil and orange groves in the
Near East, census takers are noting down facts about every
basic factor concerned with farming, from the land itself
down to the number of bees and silkworms and other forms
of life and possessions which appear in the farm inventory.
Investigators have hundreds of questions to put to farmers.
There are, for instance, 252 different crops to be dealt
with, ranging from corn to cabbages and from bamboos to
bananas, and the crop group forms only one of the ten
main sections into which agriculture has been divided for
the purposes of the Census. In addition it is hoped to
compile an accurate record of the number of farmers, the
size of farms, their tenure, acreage under crops, to note
whether they are watered by rain, canal or pumps and to
count heads of livestock of all kinds.
What is the point of this enormously complex undertaking?
Why should all these figures be required? And what use
can be made of this information when it has been gathered,
analyzed and published?
The answers, according to Dr. P.V. Sukhatme, Director
of Statistics Division, FAO, are these:
In the first place the Census will be of great benefit both
to countries and farmers as it will give them a proper idea
of where they stand regarding agricultural conditions.
Secondly it will give FAO a much-needed clear picture of
world agriculture, revealing the pattern of progress and
enabling it to see those sections of the industry to which
it should pay special attention, either on a world basis or by
regions and countries. Such a picture can only be gained
by collecting comparable statistics which can show each
nation's level of prosperity in relation to its neighbour's and
to the world generally.
Lack of reliable statistics is one of the main obstacles
facing FAO and its member countries in planning and
implementing the development of food and agricultural
resources by the use of more fertilizers, farm machinery
and irrigation, for example. Without the full basic facts
planning may go awry and result in wasteful expenditure as
well as the failure to improve food production.
'Tailor-made* for every region
This was why FAO took over the job of collecting, com¬
piling and publishing basic data on the food and agri¬
cultural situation of the world from the International
Institute of Agriculture when this organization merged with
the FAO.
The First World Agricultural Census to be sponsored by
FAO was in 1950, but at that time only five countries in
Asia and the Far East took part. Since then there has
been a growing recognition of the importance of the inquiry
and this year many more countries in that part of the
world plan to participate.
The programme for the 1960 World Census is the
outcome of many years of work, research and consultation
in all parts of the world. Regional programmes prepared
in collaboration with statisticians, agricultural organizations
and governments have ensured that the Census is adapted
to the needs of different areas.
Dr. Sukhatme points out that an agricultural Census is
a difficult operation even in economically developed nations
which possess established statistical and allied services.
Allocating areas to individual crops is complicated by the
cultivation of more than one crop in the same field. The
number of people working on farms varies from season to
season. Finally, uniform definitions must be agreed upon
if statistics are to be of value internationally.
To add to the complexity of carrying out this world
Census there exists a human element the farmer and the
Census taker. Farmers are often reluctant to give full and
frank answers because they do not understand the purpose
of the Census or because they fear that such information
may be used to their disadvantage, such as in assessing
taxes, although Census law guarantees that all replies to
questions will be treated as confidential.
There is also the problem of finding qualified staff. This,
FAO is helping to overcome by carrying through a training
programme for the Census planners and staff. It has
organized three regional training centres at Lima, for
Latin America, in Tokyo for Asia and the Far East and
at Damascus for the Near East countries. In these centres
emphasis has been placed on planning and conducting
experimental censuses in the field.
Seminars have also been held, at Accra for countries irj
Africa south of the Sahara and in Warsaw for European
countries. At both training centres and seminars, FAO has
dealt with such problems as adapting the Census to meel
national and regional needs and training personnel how tc
plan and conduct the Census in their country and region.
33
