EXPLORING
o


THE WORLDS
DEEPEST
TRENCHES
by
c
Anton F. Bruun
Dr. Anton F. Bruun of the Zoologiske Museum,
Copenhagen, is considered by many as the world's
leading authority on life in the deep sea. In
1950-52 he headed the famed Galathea Ex¬
pedition, and has just won the coveted Agassiz
medal awarded by the National Research Council
of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences for
his work in oceanology. Dr. Bruun's article opens
on July 21, 1951, with the Galathea at Oceano-
logical Station 41' above the 34,500-foot Philippine
Trench, hauling the deepest dredge yet lowered.
Uly 21, 1951, was a tense day aboard
the frigate Galathea, carrying the
Danish Round-the-World Deep-Sea
Expedition of 1950-52. The 10,000-metre depth of the
Philippine Trench was showing on the recording paper
of our echo sounder. We had found a suitable even bottom
for towing a trawl. Since We had left Copenhagen in
October, 1950, we had made many successful hauls four
or five kilometres down in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans,
but it is one thing to climb the Alps and quite another to
try to climb Mount Everest. And so it is in the ocean
except that Mount Everest would have about 2,000 metres
of water above its peak if this giant mountain were placed
in the bottom of the Philippine Trench.
Depths of more than 7,000 metres are found in deep
ocean trenches. Only 18 of these trenches are known:
one in the Indian Ocean, two in the Atlantic, and no less
than 15 in the Pacific, including the only ones five in
number which are more than 10,000 metres deep. The
record depth of 10,863 metres found by the British Chal¬
lenger expedition in 1951 in the Mariana Trench may
still be considered the world's deepest until more recent
observations, claiming a few hundred more metres in the
same area, have been published in detail.
But why should a scientific expedition use its time and
precious equipment for trawling in these tricky trenches?
20
They certainly are tricky: at depths of ten thousand
metres, the flat bottom of a trench is only about one kilo¬
metre wide. Letting out a trawl with 12,000 metres of
steel line and trying to follow this narrow strip is not
nearly as easy as fishing at depths of 2,000 to 6,000 metres
where wide stretches of flat bottom are found. Trench
fishing at such depths is comparable to flying an airplane
at 10,000 metres and trying to tow an instrument along
the surface of the earth with only an echo sounder to
keep it on a strip no more than one kilometre wide.
If we touched the rugged slopes of the trench, we might
tangle our wire in the rocks, losing it along with the
trawl. But, if we succeeded, then we would have accom¬
plished something more important than merely fishing
deeper than anyone else. But We wanted to find out if
life could exist 10,000 metres down where hydrostatic
pressure is one thousand atmospheres or one ton per
square centimetre.
At the beginning of this century, Prince Albert of
Monaco fished at 6,000 metres, tout it was only in 1948
that a Swedish deep-sea expedition brought up a few
animals from depths of 7,625 to 7,800 metres in the Puerto
Rico Trench. Then, in 1949, the Soviet Vityaz Expedition
brought up life from 8,100 metres in the Kuriles-Kam¬
chatka Trench. Experiments on shallow-Water animals
had shown, however, that they could not live at a pres¬
sure of 1,000 atmospheres. This meant one of two things:
either the deepest of the ocean depths were lifeless or the
organisms living in them had to be different from any
others known to science, especially in their biochemical
and physiological aspects. We already knew of organisms
adapted to the low pressure of lofty mountains, but could
there be life in a world of extremely high pressures?
That afternoon, we began to pay out our steel line. At
its end was fitted a 3-metre sledge trawl; if the net of
this trawl were torn, a small dredge" could still bring up
something from the bottom. It took us several hours to
get out all our 12,163 metres of line, tout finally there were
only a few turns left on the big drum of our winch. We

The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
LIFE UNDER SIX
MILES OF WATER
One of the most significant achievements of the
Danish Galathea expedition was the trawling of the
Philippine Trench, over 10,000 metres (six and a
half miles) deep. Two tiny sea-anemones clinging to
a stone from the bottom of the trench, proved that
higher animals could live at depths of 1 0,000 metres.
Below Dr Bruun, on right, and bacteriologist Claude
Zobell, study small whitish anemones on a stone
with rounded edges from the trench bottom. Fingers
point to anemones, smaller than a finger nail. Left,
two sea-cucumbers, less than two inches long,
dredged up from 22,000 feet in the Kermadec
Trench, near New Caledonia. On an earlier expe¬
dition, Dr. Bruun caught a six-foot larval eel whjch
has raised conjectures on the existence of sea
monsters. Previously, the largest larvel eel for
which adults were known only measured one foot.
Theoretically, a six-foot larval eel could produce a 45-
foot adult, but no giant adult has ever been caught.
stared at the line anxiously wondering if we had given
our engineers sufficient data in calculating the dimensions
of the cable. Had they made any errors?
Yet everything depended upon that steel line. Besides
bearing its own weight, it had to resist water friction
along a length of twelve kilometres, the weight of the
trawl and the friction of the trawl on the bottom. And
not least, we wondered if we had been correct in calculat¬
ing the length of the cable in relation to the depth of
the trench and the speed of the ship. If we let out too
little line, then the trawl might not touch bottom; if we
let out too much, then the line itself might create friction
on the bottom. Despite all this, things went as smoothly
as if we had been fishing at our usual 5,000-metre depth.
The sun set and the night was almost gone when our
trawl came up again.
There, deep down in the clear water, was the faint out¬
line of the large triangular bag of the trawl. The night
was still pitch-black, but the quarterdeck lay bathed in
the beams of our spotlights. Then the results came in
rapid succession. "There's clay on the frame," someone
yelled. "It's been on the bottom." And then... "There
are stones in the bag!"
There, on a rather large stone, were some small whitish
growths: sea anemones! Even if no other animals had
been found, this would have been the biggest haul of
our expedition. It was proof that higher animals could
live at depths below 10,000 metres. Is it surprising that
we were overjoyed? And our joy turned into real excite¬
ment when, out of the grayish clay bearing gravel and
stones, we picked a total of 25 sea-anemones, about 75
sea-cucumbers, five bivalves, one amphipod crustacean and
one bristle-worm. It was an unexpectedly rich variety of
bottom-dwelling animals.
It was obvious that this haul had been made on the
bottom and, fortunately, we had proof that it lay between
10,150 and 10,190 metres. We toad navigated carefully
according to the profile of the bottom which we had labor¬
iously pieced together from echo soundings carried out
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 21

WORLD'S DEEPEST TRENCHES (Continued)
for days previously. Wind and sea had been very slight
from the north, almost dead ahead and as favourable as
they could possibly be. Our long night vigil was forgotten.
Our first success had to toe followed up and repeated.
And it was repeated here and later on in the Sunda,
Banda, New Britain and Kermadec Trenches, all over
7,000 metres deep.
In the Philippine Trench we had found a whole little
animal community of eight different species, representing
all the large groups of invertebrates: polyps, worms,
molluscs and crustaceans. Our bacteriologist also suc¬
ceeded in cultivating bacteria isolated from the sediments.
He has now studied them for years, keeping them alive
under the same temperature (about 2.5 °C) and the same
pressure (about 1,000 atmospheres) as at the bottom. And,
most important of all they only grow at such a high
pressure. Thus, organisms adapted to a very special world
of life under high pressure had been discovered. .
Technically we have named these trench depths the
hadal zone, those which correspond to the current terms
for the oceanic continental slopes, (bathyal) and the ocea¬
nic depths between about 2,000 and 6,000 metres (abyssal) .
Naturally, pressure must also be at work at depths less
than about 6,000 metres and several examples of distribu¬
tion indicate that the abyssal zone may be subdivided into
an upper and a lower zone.
The hadal animals also have a very important bearing
on the evolution of species. They all stem from abyssal
species which have become adapted to the extreme
pressure. But once a species during the elapse of from
a hundred thousand to millions of years has descended
into the trench, it cannot freely move into another trench.
This means its fate is very closely connected with that of
the trench itself. Therefore a comparative study of the
hadal zone and its organisms may yield important facts
about the history of the trenches, which really means the
history of the earth.
The study of the lower abyssal and the hadal zones is
a much-needed one; all the more so if the ocean in the
coming years should be used for dumping atomic waste
from atomic power plants. So far, this work has only
been followed up and with remarkable success by the
Soviet Vityaz Expeditions. The combined efforts of the
Galathea and the Vityaz may be summarized as follows:
out of 85 different species found deeper than 7,000 metres,
no less than 62 species or 74 per cent were discovered
exclusively in the true hadal zone. Such a high per cent
of endemism is very rarely found in nature and may well
match such well-known examples on land as the Gala¬
pagos Islands or New Zealand.
To-day we finally know that a varied world of organisms
can live almost anywhere on the earth Life has con¬
quered high mountains and the deepest oceans, dry hot
deserts and cold polar regions. It is from comparative
studies of these worlds that much of our understanding of
life comes. But the fields of physiology, biochemistry, etc.
have barely been applied to the hadal creatures.
The hadal environment was called a new world, but the
Galathea also added a fragment to our knowledge about
a very old world more than 300 million years old. This
was done towards the very end of the expedition when,
on May 6, 1952, the trawl brought up from 3,570 metres ten
inconspicuous-looking limpet-like molluscs and three
empty shells of the same species. It took our specialist
some years of careful study at home before he could
state convincingly that ' the creature, which he named
Neopilina galathea, was not a snail or a bivalve, nor
related to any known class of the recent molluscs, but a
representative of a class supposed to have become extinct
since the palaeozoic era, more than 300 million years ago.
Thus it is a case parallel to the famous Coelacanth fish
from the Comoro Islands, first found in 1938. The Coela¬
canth is also a living fossil, a survivor from the Cretaceous
time which dates back only some 70 million years.
The Neopilina is of extreme zoological interest, since it
is the most primitive mollusc known and in many ways its
importance might be compared to that of the primitive
egg-laying mammals of Australia in our understanding of
the evolution of all other mammals. With the Neopilina
we have in the flesh what was formerly only known as
some very characteristic fossils from Cambro-Devonian
times. But apart from its zoological interest, Neopilina
has also something to tell us about the living conditions
in the deep sea of past times. The reason why no traces
of it have been found in sediments is that, ever since the
Palaeozoic era, it has lived at such a depth that no sedi¬
ments have been elevated to the level of present land.
Nowadays, it lives at temperatures of less than about 4°C
which are typical of the abyssal zone. It must have taken
a very long time for these animals to have become adapted
to the high pressure and low temperature, so different
from that of the shallow Palaeozoic coastal seas. There¬
fore we can safely conclude that for millions of years
there must have been sufficient oxygen in ocean depths!
This requires a .circulation of the water masses.
But should we conclude that the Neopilina, and a second
species recently found by the United States "Vema" expe¬
dition, are the last interesting creatures that will be
discovered in the deep sea? Certainly not! We probably
only know half of the species living in the ocean. Past
expeditions have barely opened the oceanic world; the
time has come when we must start a co-ordinated study
of its organisms on a big scale. This will result in a deeper
insight into the world we live in,, but at the same time it
will also bring us badly-needed knowledge which is Indis¬
pensable for the utilization of the organisms of the grand
ocean.
C.E. Zobell, Scripps Institution, California Galathea Expeditions
LIVING FOSSIL. Most dramatic of the Galathea's discoveries was a " living fossil ", the mollusc Neopilina (right) believed to
have been extinct for 300 million years. Before it was found 12,000 feet down near the Costa Rica coast, zoologists recognized
five classes of molluscs (including clams, snails and squids). The Neopilina is so biologically distinct that a sixth and separate
class has been added. Left, electron micrograph greatly magnifies clump of rapidly reproducing bacteria, isolated from mud
found six and a half miles down in Philippine Trench. It was kept alive at sea bottom pressure of about 1,000 atmospheres.
22
