UNESCO'S NUBIAN
CAMPAIGN IS LAUNCHED
March 8, I960. In the
Great Conference Hall
at Unesco House, Vitto-
rino Veronese, Director-
General of Unesco,
launches the world
appeal inaugurating the
International Campaign
for the Preservation of
the Monuments of Nubia.
UNESCO-Berretty
U
I invite governments, institutions, public or pri-
. vate foundations and men of goodwill everywhere
to contribute to the success of a task without parallel in
history." With this appeal to world-wide solidarity, Vitto-
rino Veronese, Director-General of Unesco, opened the
International Campaign for the Preservation of the Monu¬
ments of Nubia, during an impressive ceremony in
Unesco's Headquarters on March 8.
Presided over by André Malraux, French Minister of
State in charge of Cultural Affairs (see page 8), the cere¬
mony took place in the presence of heads of diplomatic
missions in Paris, of Unesco's permanent delegates and
its chief officials and of leading figures in international offi¬
cial and cultural Ufe.
After making his appeal (page 6) Unesco's Director-
General announced the names of members of the Commit¬
tee of Patrons, of which King Gustav VI Adolph of Sweden
has agreed to be Chairman, ,and the membership of the
International Action Committee which will assist in orga¬
nizing the campaign. He also named the members of the
Advisory Committee of Experts which has been set up by
the United Arab Republic. (For membership of the first
two committees see pages 14-15)
4
During the ceremony, messages from three heads of
state King Gustav VI Adolph of Sweden, President
Gamal Abdel Nasser of the United Arab Republic and
Ferik Ibrahim Abboud, President of the Supreme Council
of the Armed Forces and Prime Minister of the Republic
of Sudan were read by their special representatives.
The vastness and urgency of the operations which must
be undertaken to save the monuments of Nubia from inun¬
dation by the waters of the new Aswan High Dam were
evoked by King Gustav VI Adolph: "'The task is so big
and the time at our disposal so limited that we can scarcely
hope to accomplish everything that might be desirable.
But nevertheless if we are all determined to make a great
common effort, very considerable results will be obtained."
The vast number and importance of the threatened sites
and monuments in Sudanese Nubia were referred to by
the Prime Minister of the Republic of Sudan, who said
that since 1955 his country's Antiquities Service had been
working in the endangered area. Excavations had been
undertaken at Debeira, Serra, Faras and Semma. In addi¬
tion a preliminary survey had been carried out from the air
and on the ground to ascertain the number and impor¬
tance of the sites and monuments that would disappear
under the new reservoir.

The Unesco Courier. May 1960
"Over one hundred sites have so far been recorded,"
said his message. "Among them are four temples, many
rock graves and rock chapels, fourteen fortresses four thou¬
sand years old, twenty Christian churches, seven ancient
towns, numerous cemeteries, rock drawings and rock
inscriptions. Of these hundred sites, forty-seven will disap¬
pear as early as 1963.
"With less than three years to do the work, the Sudan
Antiquities Service cannot alone carry out such an enor¬
mous task and that is why I am appealing to the world at
large to come and help us. We shall be most grateful to
any country or scientific institution which is able to come
and assist us to explore 800 square kilometres, to excavate
the 47 known sites and those which have not yet been
discovered, to dismantle and re-erect two temples and to
save the paintings from three churches. Assistance could
be given either by sending archaeological missions to the
Sudan, or lending the services of technicians, or by giving
financial help. We are prepared to give at least fifty per
cent of the finds to contributors and, since Nubia is a little-
known country, finds are likely to be of great importance."
Help is already forthcoming, and President Abboud's
message went on to list a number of offers already accepted
by the Sudanese Government which have come from
several countries and scientific institutions. (See page 12).
President Nasser defined the im¬
perative reasons for the construc¬
tion of the new Aswan Dam in these words:
"The High Dam Project corresponds to the necessities
of life; it meets the demands of demographic, social and
economic development and should bring prosperity to the
populations of the Nile Valley. But these demands should
not make us forget that it is indispensable to assure the
safeguarding of an essential part of our heritage..."
President Nasser's message ended with a tribute to inter¬
national co-operation: "This action will constitute, we have
no doubt, a happy precedent for the generation of the
United Nations, that generation which is trying to make
the Charter a living reality, a belief and a faith and which
affirms its confidence in the value of human co-operation
and seeks a better knowledge of civilizations and cultures
despite differences of time and place."
United Nations support for Unesco's campaign was
announced in a message sent by Dag Hammarskjold, Sec¬
retary-General of the U.N., who has agreed to become a
member of the Committee of Patrons. Mr. Hammarskjold
declared:
"All who recognize the imperative human needs which
necessitate the flooding of the Nubian Valley must also
welcome and wish to further the efforts to safeguard the
threatened archaeological treasures that fo'rm so significant
a part of man's cultural heritage... I cannot but believe that
a full and generous response will be forthcoming. The
United Nations stands ready to lend Unesco and the
Governments concerned any support it can in the great
task to which they have set their hand."
ASWAN
NEAR
MOSCOW
Near to Moscow, in the laboratory of the
Ministry of Hydraulic Power Station Cons¬
truction, a model has been built of the new
Aswan High Dam. Engineers are seen here
carrying out tests on this scale model of the
mighty dam, the Sadd El Aali, which will
make possible a tremendous Increase in
the area of cultivable land and the supply
of electrical energy. Thus it holds incal¬
culable promise for the agricultural and
industrial development of the United
Arab Republic and the welfare of its people.
Official Soviet photos
