ONE THOUSAND
NEW SCHOOLS
FOR POLAND'S
1.000TH BIRTHDAY
by Tadeusz Barucki
M..,.,.-
problem of school construction:
everywhere the school-age population is increasing enorm¬
ously, and nearly everywhere there are too few schools to
meet present needs.
In Poland this problem is especially acute, not only
because of population increases but also due to the mass
destruction that occurred during the war. Its solution calls
for the co-operation of the entire nation.
With this in view, a construction campaign, "1,000
Schools for the 1,000th anniversary of the Polish State"
(which is to be celebrated this year), was launched in the
second half of 1958. The idea received wide acclaim.
One of the best ways of celebrating the millenary, it was
agreed, would be to create as many new schools as pos¬
sible; schools of avant-garde design which would introduce
modern building concepts into little towns and into the
most remote villages; schools that would provide a pleasant
setting, helpful to teaching and to the development of
culture.
A great campaign was quickly prepared: all over the
country, committees were set up and contributions pledged
PLAYTIME at Czeladz (above right), in one of many
schools that have been built recently to comme¬
morate the 1,000th anniversary of the Polish State.
Right, scale model of one of the new schools which have
been constructed thanks to a nation-wide campaign.
Unesco
30

gifts of money, of building materials, of hours of work.
In November 1958, a national committee for the school
building fund had been organized, and this group had the
task of co-ordinating the various activities of the campaign.
The Association of Polish Architects responded imme¬
diately to the appeal. Its members collaborated with
the official agencies in selecting "prototypes" for future
buildings from among plans already drawn up.
This first phase of the work was followed, in the middle
of 1959, by a competition for the design of a school for
country districts or small towns. Besides classrooms, this
school would have social and cultural facilities, such as
a library, reading room, lounge, etc. In small communities,
these premises could form a cultural centre often the
first available for those who had already finished school
or had not had time to complete their studies.
Eight prizes and several commendations were awarded
in this competition for the ten projects exemplifying the
most modern architectural concepts. These will provide
a new background for daily Ufe, a modern one certain
to have an educational influence on the children and affect
their tastes and their interests. The school will acquaint
them with new ways of life which will encourage them
to improve their surroundings.
Modernism in architecture, however, is not always
immediately accepted, and there must be a carefully
thought out effort to popularize it among those interested
in the schools among teachers, helpers, parents' associa¬
tions, and even among .those drawing up the projects.
So the Association of Polish Architects has organized
in Warsaw and in several provincial centres exhibitions
and discussions on the development of modern architec¬
ture, comparing old and new methods of building and
equipping schools. The Warsaw press, giving much space
to' the campaign, has helped to develop popular interest
in the problems.
The organizers endeavoured to offer the most abundant
and diverse information on the subject, for the sake of
useful comparison. They staged an exhibition of school
design executed in the United States, which, despite
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
THEY HAD THE RIGHT
IDEA IN 1775
One of the first actions of the Polish National Education
Committee after its foundation in 1775the Poles
regard it as the world's first Ministry of General
Educationwas to lay down certain standards for the
construction of school buildings:
"Classrooms should be spacious, well lighted and equip¬
ped with a chimney and good stove; they should have a
pleasant appearance, the walls being decorated with pictures,
plans of cities, etc; they should always be kept clean so
that children think of them not as a prison, but as an
agréable second home."
It is interesting to compare these standards laid down
nearly 200 years ago with the stipulations given In the
report on school buildings which Unesco received a few
years ago from the International Union of Architects:
"The majority of current ideas in education should be
allowed to carry their full weight in the determination of
crchitectural practicesteaching should be adapted to the
mentality of the child and therefore architecture, adapted
to the measure of a child who Is simultaneously developing
his body, his intelligence and his personality, should be
pleasant and varied. School should be an extension of the
home. Education should respect the creative ideas of the
child and architecture in Its turn should be simple and
real, eschewing all artifice."
31

1,000 SCHOOLS (Continued)
PLENTY OF AIR
LIGHT & WIDE
OPEN
SPACES
Every type of building is included in
Poland's present school construction pro¬
gramme seven-class village schools
to secondary and technical training es¬
tablishments. Model of I 5-classroom pri¬
mary school for Kielce-Szydlowek (right)
embodies design of individual rooms linked
by passages. Below, a 22-classroom school
designed for the town of Zielona Gora.
In country districts schools also serve as
social and cultural centres. Modern de¬
signs offer a new background for daily life.
Photos I. Jarosenka
differences in administrative principles, syllabus, geogra¬
phic, social and economic conditions, aroused lively interest
and led to a useful exchange of ideas.
Useful exhibits and information were also provided by
the Union of the Federations of Yugoslav Architects, which
devotes much attention to school building programmes.
Polish architects living abroad co-operated in the
campaign, either by taking part in the competition or, as
did those in London, by sending in their name and that
of English colleagues, 14 designs together with complete
technical details.
Architects in Poland have accepted to draw plans for
schools free of charge. Their association is in constant
touch with organizations engaged in school construction,
and is participating in the work of the school building
commission of the International Union of Architects. Thus
it has available the latest information on new construction
throughout the world. The International Union of Archi¬
tects, of which the Polish Architects' Association is a
member, was able to offer useful recommendations
embodying the latest ideas in school design and construc¬
tion. The scope of this contribution, of which the Polish
architects made good use, was especially broad as the
International Union's activities and contacts are world¬
wide.
The Association is also consulting Unesco to obtain
full documentation on school construction in countries
where the problem has already been solved.
The "'1,000 Schools" campaign is now in full swing.
On September 1 1959, anniversary of the outbreak of
the second world war, which arouses in us such painful
memories, already the doors of many new schools were
opened for the first time to a generation of children who
are now just beginning their studies, and who will have
the task of building the world of tomorrow.
32
