A CENTURY OF 'BLACK GOLD'
The gigantic oil industry which today
keeps billions of wheels turning through¬
out the world and which, within a
century, has changed the pattern of
life and work for much of mankind,
opening up many new fields of ende¬
avour, sprang from very small begin¬
nings in 1859. Yet, since then, some¬
thing in the region of two million oil
wells have been drilled, occasionally
to as great a depth as four miles.
by W. H. Owens
USIS
The modern oil industry was born just one hundred years
ago at Titusvllle, in Pennsylvania, U.S.A., where Edwin
L. Drake sank the first well ever to be drilled for the purpose of
finding oil. A strike was made at a depth of about 69 feet and
oil gushed forth at the initial rate of eight to ten barrels a day.
LTHOUGH the large-scale exploitation of
crude oil is a fairly recent industrial de¬
velopment, the Earth's "black gold" has
nevertheless been used by peoples in many
different parts of the world for thousands of years. The
Bible tells how pitch, or bitumen, was used for the
waterproofing of Noah's Ark and the basket of the infant
Moses. This pitch came from surface seepages of crude
oil which were bitumenized by the weathering action of
the sun and Iwind. The "eternal fires" around the shores
of the Caspian Sea, which were the object ,of worship in
ancient times, were simply oil and natural gas seepages
which ignited as they reached the air.
Bitumen was an article of commerce in the Tigris and
Euphrates river basin, which is now Iraq, in the days
before Babylon Was built. The Babylonians and
Sumerians, like the Inca rulers of Peru, valued it as a
building mortar. The Chinese used the same sticky, black
substance in their shipbuilding trade to make vessels
seaworthy, and as fuel in their salt works. Among the
many purposes to which crude oil exudations were put
by the Indian tribes of North America and Patagonia was
for medicine and embrocations.
It is interesting to recall that only eleven years before
Edwin Drake drilled his well, oil had been struck
accidentally while borings for brine were being made
along the Allegheny River ih Pennsylvania. This "rock-
ôil" which contaminated the water was skimmed off and
sold in chemists' shops as an embrocation for the relief
of rheumatism, gout and similar ailments.
' The rapid and continuous growth of the modern oil
industry, and the dominant role it has assumed in world
affairs in so comparatively short a time, is without any
parallel in history. This growth has been most striking
since the ¡First World War. In 1914 world production of
crude oil was 55 million tons. In 1938 it was 280 million
tons. Last year's world output exceeded 900 million tons,
and the demand is still growing.
That the present demand for oil is likely to be doubled
within the next twenty years is hardly surprising.
Besides the daily increase in the millions of motor vehicles
(which now consume more than one-third of the world's
supply of petroleum products) and the enormous growth
of aviation, there is the rapid spread of industrialization
and the change to mechanized agriculture throughout the
world. And now the young, but potentially vast,
petroleum chemical industry is producing the raw
materials from which synthetic fibres, synthetic rubber,
plastics, resins, carbon black and fertilizers are made
materials, in turn, of a wide range of consumer goods.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

BLACK GOLD (Continued)
This is why, in spite of the huge output of the world's
producing oil wells, the search for new sources of crude
oil is being steadily intensified. Geological teams are
scattered far and wide hunting for oil in Arctic Canada
and Alaska, in the steaming jungles of Latin-America and
the Far East, in the Australian Bush and on the burning
sands of the Sahara Desert. Exploration for more under¬
water oil is in progress too. There are incalculable
quantities of this sub-ocean oil to be won under the
relatively shallow waters of the Continental Shelf, large
areas of which adjoin some of the richest producing
oilfields, notably in the Gulf of Mexico.
" While oil is produced on a commercial scale in a large
number of countries, there are five main regions in which
the chief proven oil reserves of the world are contained.
These are North America, the Caribbean, the Middle East,
the U.S.S.R. and the far East. The bulk of world
production comes from what have been aptly termed the
two "Petroleum Poles." One is situated around the
Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico; the other about the
Black Sea, the Caspian and the Persian Gulf.
T
he United States, which is the most highly
developed country so far as oil is concern¬
ed, is still the world's chief producer. In
the past hundred years, the U.S. alone has
provided some sixty per cent of the world's total
cumulative production, and except for a brief period
around the beginning of this century when the Baku
oilfields of Russia had the largest output, she has always
remained in the lead. Today, in spite of the growing
production of other countries, the TJ.S. produces more
than two-fifths of world's total supply. More than half
the forty-eight States are oil producers, and in 1957 just
two of them, Texas and California, together supplied more
oil than the combined output of the Middle East and Far
East.
Venezuela is the world's second largest oil producer and
by far the largest oil-exporting country today. She still
accounts for about ninety per cent of South America's oil
production, although the other countries of that
potentially rich continent and also some in Central
America have recently become the scene of widespread
exploration for the mineral.
Lake Maracaibo, the great sea inlet of Western
Venezuela, Is one of the most successful areas of under¬
water drilling. Very prolific oilfields are worked around
the Lake shores, and in places these extend beneath its
bed where the oil is recovered by means of under-water
drilling from special platforms mounted on concrete piles.
Some of the drilling rigs are several miles out from the
shore and stand in water up to 100 feet deep. Offshore
drilling has also been carried on for many years in the
Gulf of Mexico, where the rich oil-bearing formations of
the States of Texas and Louisiana stretch beyond the
coast swamps far under the sea.
Third place among Jthe world's oil-producing countries
is held by the U.S.S.R.*whose output of crude oil has been
rising rapidly and continuously ever since 1945. A year
ago Mr. Khrushchev announced long-term plans for a
huge production increase from the record 98.3 million tons
in 1957 to around 400 million tons ,by 1972. This would be
achieved mainly, though by no means exclusively, through
the further development of the rich reserves of the Volga-
Ural region.
Russia's oldest oilfield is centred on Baku, on the
Caspian Sea, which is perhaps the earliest ¡known oil area
in the world. But since the Second World War the
Caucasian production has been steadily supplanted by
that of the immensely rich region between the River Volga
and the Ural Mountains, which, it is believed, may contain
as much as eighty per cent of the total Soviet reserves.
Little attempt was made to develop this so-
called "'Second Baku" field until the 1930's,
owing to the remoteness of the region from
the main oil-consuming districts of the
western part of the Soviet Union. But development was
stimulated by the wartime movement of many industrial
plants into the area from the more vulnerable west. It
will be the main centre of Soviet oil expansion in the
future.
When it comes to proved oil reserves, the countries of
the Middle East are in a dominant position with no less
than two-thirds of the world's total. For this reason the
Middle East will become more and more important as the
years pass. Although its total output of crude oil is now
more than ten times the pre-war level, the contribution
of the Middle East to total world production (20 per cent
in 1957) is still disproportionate to its enormous reserves.
But this is expected to be doubled in the next decade.
It is in this fast-changing part of the world that some
of the most remarkable oil developments of thé" present
century have taken place. The first important oil
discovery of modern times in the Middle East was made
in 1908 at Masjid-i-Sulaiman, in Persia a most prolific
oilfield which has since produced over 100 million tons.
That discovery stimulated the oil search in other parts,
and in the years between the world wars new oilfields
were found in Iraq, Bahrein, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and
Egypt, as well as in Iran itself.
Many of them are exceptionally prolific; for example,
the Burgan oilfield in Kuwait now produces more than
any other single oilfield in the world, and in Saudi Arabia
the average production per well is several hundred times
as great as, for example, in the U.SA. where there are
many large producing wells.
One of the great factors in oil production,
especially in such a region as the Middle
East, is the economic transportation of
crude oil from the wells to the refineries
and ports. The land pipeline systems, linked with the
tanker fleets on the high seas, are the arteries through
which this life-blood of our civilization is distributed.
Pipelines carry crude oil, and also refined petroleum
products, over long distances and across rivers, mountains
and deserts, and pipeline engineering is today a major
activity of the oil industry. In the United States the
pipeline transportation of liquid fuels and natural gas has
reached the highest development, for in that country the
entire oil movement from well to marketing terminal is
often made wholly through linking pipelines.
Until about ten years ago the only direct outlet for
Middle East oil to the Mediterranean was by means of the
26 CONT'D ON PAGE 28

The Unesco Courier. September 1960
OLDEST OIL 'DISTILLERY'
Photos © Paul Almasy
Iraq, one of the largest oil-producing countries in the world is
also the home of what might properly be called the world's
oldest oil "distillery". Its owner he is also its one-man
staff digs holes about six feet deep in the ground and taking
from them the oil-soaked earth, he heats it in his home-made
oven, and thus obtains a crude oil which he sells locally as lamp
fuel. Petroleum, once called "rock oil", is not a new discovery.
Two thousand five hundred years ago, Alexander the Great
was greatly intrigued, when in this same region of Iraq, by the
"eternal fires" which flared up day and night in the desert.
27

BLACK GOLD (Continued;
long, forked pipeline from the Kirkuk wells in Iraq to
Haifa and Tripoli. The construction of this pioneer
desert oil routeacross desert, rock, mountain and four
great rivers of Arabia was a considerable feat. At one
time more than 14,000 men were working on the project.
Since the war a number of other large pipelines have
been built across the desert lands, including a second
route from Kirkuk to Tripoli and one from Kirkuk to
Banias, on the Syrian coast. The 1,000-mile pipeline from
the Saudi Arabian oilfields to the Mediterranean port of
Sidon, which cost about £80 million, plays a major part
in supplying oil to Western Europe refineries.
Just how important these desert pipelines are can be
seen by a comparison with the alternative of sea transport.
To carry Middle East oil all the way to Europe by sea
means a round trip of some 7,000 miles between the head
of the Persian Gulf and the Mediterranean end of the
Suez Canal, in addition to the voyage onward from there.
The world-wide movement of oil supplies involves the
operation of large, modern tanker fleets. Today oil is
the most valuable of all seaborne cargoes, and oil-tankers
account for approximately one-quarter of the world's
entire merchant fleet. On any average day of the year
some 15 million tons of petroleum and its products,
valued at well over £100 million, are afloat on the seas.
At the beginning of this century there were only
109 tankers, representing a world tonnage of a little over
half a million, in service. Today the number is more
than 3,000 twice as many as before the Second World
War with a total tonnage approaching 50 millions.
S AFETY is naturally the most important
factor in the operation of oil-tankers.
In the earliest days of the oil indus¬
try, crude oil was shipped in wooden
barrels, and this was a highly inflammable cargo for the
wooden ships of the time. Oil is still a dangerous cargo
to handle, but it is now carried in bulk and the risk of
fire or explosion has been minimized both by the special
design and the safety precautions taken in construction,
and by a rigid system of rules which have to be observed
by the crews. (The crew accommodation, incidentally, is
among the best found in any merchant ship.) In case
of any emergency the cargo compartments of the modern
tanker are equipped with a steam-smothering system
which operates effectively in a matter of seconds.
Everybody knows that petrol, gas oil, diesel- oil,
lubricating oils, kerosine (or paraffin), bitumen and so on
are the products from refined petroleum. But today there
are, in addition, more than a thousand products from the
same raw material which have become part of everyday
life, very often in unsuspected ways.
Among the most important of them are white oils which
are highly purified grades of lubricating oils. These are
used, for example, in the manufacture of popularly-priced
cosmetics, perfumes, hair oil, sun-tan lotions, embrocations
and ointments. Fruit such as oranges are thinly coated
with white oil to prevent them drying up, and eggs are
dipped in it to preserve them.
White oils are similarly used for the preservation of
other foods, for example, cheese, meat and dried fruits.
They also play a part in the manufacture of coloured inks,
flaked soaps, polishes, and in the lubrication of bakery
machinery to prevent bread from sticking to the rolling
slabs.
28
Another group of petroleum products is the petroleum
waxes, which are now used in a great number of
industries. Candle-making is a well-known example.
Cartons for milk and soft drinks, cake boxes and
wrappings for bread and confectionery, are treated with
paraffin wax, which is tasteless and odourless, to keep the
contents fresh. Wax is also used in the manufacture
of polishes of all kinds.
Other petroleum products include white spirit, which is
used in paints and for dry cleaning, and special types of
spirits used for extracting perfumes from flowers, natural
oils from plants and seeds, and glue from bones. Carbon
black a fine powder manufactured from petroleum is
an ingredient of rubber tyres, typewriter ribbons and
carbon papers, and printing and Indian inks. And in the
field of medicine, apart from products already mentioned,

The Unesco Courier. September 1960
petroleum supplies the solvents used in preparing such
life-saving drugs as penicillin and insulin, and in
anaesthetics.
It is in the past few years that the growing range of
synthetic materials produced by the wonders of petroleum
chemistry have begun to play an important part in our
lives. A few substances like artificial silk, synthetic dyes
and artificial fertilizers, of course, have been established
for quite a time now. But the profusion of plastics,
synthetic rubbers, detergents and so on, in the consumer
market is a post-war development.
Today we know of such extremely versatile substances
as polymerized ethylene, or polythene, and polyvinyl
chloride which appear in so many everyday guises in
homes, shops, offices and factories. Detergents, or soap
substitutes, have revolutionized domestic washing and
cleaning. A number of widely used synthetic fibres are
also produced partly or wholly from petroleum, and also
a variety of drugs and certain artificial flavourings.
Indeed, the list is endless.
Yet this is really only the beginning. With one of the
most fascinating and versatile raw materials in its hands,
the oil industry is spending more time and more and more
money on research. More and better plant, involving
heavy capital investment, is being built to implement the
new discoveries of the research teams in many lands.
Although it has achieved so much and bestowed such
benefits on mankind in its first 100 years of existence, the
modern oil industry^embarks now on its second century in
a youthful, pioneering spirit, confident of a future that
promises still greater rewards.
29
