VICIOUS CIRCLE
OF INFECTION
1. A female anopheles mosquito
sucks a sick person's blood that
contains sexual forms of malaria
parasites. 2. Cysts, produced by the
sexual malaria parasites, develop in
the stomach of the mosquito. 3. Mal¬
aria parasites, fully developed and
multiplied, are present in the salivary
glands of the mosquito. The healthy
person bitten by the mosquito be¬
comes infected. 4. The parasites first
develop in the liver of the infected
person. 5. Then the parasites deve¬
lop and multiply in the red blood cells
of the infected person. This phase
coincides with attacks of malaria,
with fever, anaemia and other symp¬
toms often leading to death. 6. Sexual
forms of the parasite develop in the
blood stream of the infected person.
WHO drawing.

SPECTRE OF DEATH OR SLAVERY
The eradication of malaria will free humanity from a
ruinous disease that is a disgrace to our time.
Other diseases may decimate a population; malaria
can depopulate a whole region. Those it does not kill it
enslaves. Throughout history it has driven men off vast
tracts of fertile land. And those that stay on, drag out
a miserable existence.
These are facts that no one questions. Yet conclusive
proofs of the economic benefits resulting from malaria
eradication are difficult to obtain.
Nevertheless, the reports that WHO receives from all
over the world provide some valuable indications about
the economic, social and human significance of the
present antimalaria drive.
IN Afghanistan, about one million peasants lived under
the constant shadow of malaria, and some of the most
fertile land could not be
cultivated because of the rava¬
ges of the disease. The total
cost of antimalaria operations
between 1949 and 1959 did not
exceed $750,000, whereas mala¬
ria was the cause of a yearly
loss of earnings amounting to
about $20,000,000.
In Ceylon, the disappear¬
ance of malaria has resulted
in a saving of about $30,000,000
per year, that is, six times
the total expenditure on
the ten-year antimalaria cam¬
paign.
In India, the figures supplied
by Dr. K. Viswanathan, mal¬
aria adviser at the WHO
Regional Office in New Delhi,
are really astronomic. He
estimates that the annual
economic losses caused by
malaria in that country are
in the neighbourhood of
$ 500,000,000 corresponding to loss of wages, loss of output,
etc. affecting the fifty million Indians who fall victims to
the disease every year. On the other hand, he has cal¬
culated that the total cost of a malaria eradication pro¬
gramme of several years' duration in India would not
exceed $ 190,000,000, i. e. much less than the amount of the
present yearly losses.
In Mexico, where 175,000,000 dollars' worth of economic
damage is caused every year by malaria, the total cost of
the five-year eradication programme is expected to be
about $20,000,000.
In the Philippines, the uprooting of malaria has made
possible many projects which previously were out of the
question: construction of roads, opening of mines, building
of houses and industrial premises.
In Thailand, it has been estimated that fifty million
agricultural-worker/days were lost each year on account
of malaria. This is equivalent to a rice harvest worth
$15,000,000, whereas the cost of the malaria eradication
programme from 1954 to 1958 was $500,000 per year.
In French Guiana, infant mortality decreased by more
than 50 per cent, since the large-scale antimalaria op¬
erations carried out in 1949-1951.
According to a survey made in Nigeria, babies born of
malaria-infected mothers weighed on an average about
150 grammes (5 oz.) less than ordinary babies.
Laporte
According to Dr. Belios, Director of the Malaria Depart¬
ment in Greece, the average height of army recruits has
increased by 4-5 cm. since malaria has practically
disappeared from that country.
Behind these dry facts and figures, and ignored in the
economists' calculations, is an ocean of human misery and
despairgeneration following hopeless generation in half-
alive villages amid half cultivated fields.
Through the centuries entire peoples have physically
and mentally deteriorated under the repeated attacks of
the shivering fever. Physical Weakness has undermined
their spirit, and brought mental apathy and listlessness.
Malaria has destroyed any sense of initiative, any interest
in what lies outside the daily. round.
It is exhausting to be always exhausted, depressing to be
always depressed: people become resigned and regard their
misfortunes as an inescapable heritage.
"But," says Dr. Emilio Pam¬
pana, who was WHO's first
Director of Malaria Eradic¬
ation, "'as soon as malaria has
disappeared, new settlers ap¬
pear and begin to work the
fertile land that was formerly
uninhabitable. Their arrival
acts like an injection of ener¬
gy, a transfusion of new blood,
on the unhappy populations
who had clung to the malaria-
infested land that no one ever
thought of claiming from
them.
"Freed from malaria, the
people begin to rediscover
their strength, and regain
their energy: they realise how
much they have been depriv¬
ed of, and demand something
better. In short, they return
again to life."
This was what happened in
Sardinia, according to Dr. Paul
F\Rvfesk\a World Health Organization consultant who re-
viSftea tnVt island after an interval of 20 years. "When I
first vlsite\ the island in 1929,"' he says, I was distressed
by the pitiaWe condition of many of the children in ma¬
larious village«. In a typical street there would almost
alwaykbe sad lütle creatures with large bellies and pale
faces sitting listlessly in the doorways of their homes.
When l\ast visited Sardinia in 1950, after malaria had
been eradicated, the village children everywhere seemed
to be playing vigorously, kicking balls and romping about
in a normal healthy manner, with rosy cheeks and with¬
out swollen bellies, a vivid and striking contrast that left
no doubt in me about the beneficial effects of malaria
eradication.
"In the same year I visited Oristano, in Western Sar¬
dinia. This marshy area had been so malarious that It
gave rise to a local proverb: 'Chi va al Oristano resta al
Oristano (Who goes to Oristano stays in Oristano)'. Here
Mussolini carried out a huge 'bonification' that failed
because the drainage did not stop malaria transmission;
the land could not be profitably farmed because local and
imported labourers rapidly «became incapacitated by mala¬
ria. But in 1950, malaria had been eradicated and pros¬
perous farmers were the rule in this area. In fact, later
in the year I was told that the successful harvest had creat¬
ed several 'lire millionaires'. There was no room for
doubt about the economic benefits of malaria eradication."
