BUDDHIST ART
OF JAPAN
.new album Japan: Ancient Buddhist Paintings
has now been published in the Unesco World Art Series.
Devoted to paintings inspired by Buddhism in Japan from
the 8th to the 12th Centuries, this album contains an im¬
pressive overall view of this Japanese art, both refined and
vigorous, which runs from mystical images to realistic por¬
traits. They are basically religious paintings preserved in
Japan's oldest monasteries; but despite this (or perhaps even
because of their nature) they speak a very human language
which can be understood today by the connoisseur and the
layman alike.
The history, the interpretation and the technique of the
paintings are described in a preface by Serge Elisséeff, director
at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes in Paris and honorary
professor at Harvard University, and in an introduction by
Takaaki Matsushita, a research officer with the Japanese
Commission for the Protection of Cultural Property.
This album, which costs $18.00; ,£6. 7s or 88.50 NF,
contains 32 full-page colour reproductions and is published
as are all the Unesco World Arts Series albums by the New
York Graphic Society by arrangement with Unesco. These
albums offer high-quality colour reproductions of works of
art previously not well-known outside their countries of origin.
They can be obtained from agents of the New York Graphic
Society whose addresses, in the following countries, are:
Australia: Melbourne University Press, Mr. Roger Page,
369 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne C.i.; Canada; Burns &
McEachern, 12 Grenville Street, Toronto; England: Studio
Books, 161-166 Fleet Street, London E. C. 4.; France: Ed.
Braun & Cie, 18 rue Louis le Grand, Paris (2e). Special terms
are offered by these agents to educational and cultural
institutions.
A list of agents throughout the world can be obtained from
the New York Graphic Society, 95 East Putnam Avenue,
Greenwich, Connecticut, U.S.A. In countries where there
are no agents, Unesco World Art Series albums can be order¬
ed from Unesco's National Distributors whose names are
listed on page 33, or from leading booksellers.
18

The Unesco Courier. May 1960
19

fS ** *
if 4?* -r*> $
4 a. n if
The Unesco Courier. May 1960
21


The Unesco Courier. May 1960
Unesco
RICE BALES TAKE WING
Above, part of a 12th century scroll illustrating miraculous stories concerning the
monk Myoren, a mountain-dwelling hermit. Scene reproduced here is from the
Legend of the Flying Granary. It shows rice bales flying out of a granary which Myoren
has brought by air to his mountain home. (See also page 24). Figure, opposite page,
is a mourner at the death-bed of Buddhaa detail taken from the Nirvana scroll.
23

MONK
WITH MAGIC
POWERS
An alms bowl sent through the air
by the magic power of Myoren the
monk (see previous pages) carries
back to his cottage the granary of
a rich landlord before the eyes of
the astonished villagers (above).
Left, a detail from same scene.
CHINESE
MODEL,
JAPANESE
STYLE
Painting of landscape with figures
(right) was executed in the I Ith
century on a silk screen which
served as a background for Initia¬
tion to esoteric Buddhism. It was
painted after a Chinese model, but
shows development of a tendency
towards an Intrinsic Japanese taste.
© UNESCO
24

The Unesco Courier May 1960
25
