THE 'MARK TWAIN'
UT I I U U I U M by Joseph Leftwich
LITERATURE
An exhibition marking the 100th anniversary of the birth of Sholem Aleichem and devoted
to his life and writings , was inaugurated recently at Unesco House, by Mr. René Maheu,
Deputy Director-General of Unesco. It was sponsored by the French National Commis¬
sion for Unesco. Gifted with a comic outlook, Sholem Aleichem wrote stories in which
he depicted the "little people with small hopes" whom he had known since childhood and
whom he had always loved. He wrote in Yiddish which had been scorned until then by
scholars and writers. Inaugurating the exhibition, Mr. Maheu said: "Sholem Aleichem, so
appropriately named, wanted to be a witness above all. It was in order to be as faith¬
ful as possible to his purpose that he chose to write in Yiddish, the living language of
the people. And yet, his work has universal value... It is because of this universality that
Unesco has included Sholem Aleichem among the eminent men whose anniversaries it
is commemorating: Schiller, Humboldt, Pierre Janet, Bergson, Haydn, Albeniz, Velasquez
and Chekhov. In the present circumstances, I hope that this commemoration in this setting
will be understood by all. Unesco, whose very reason for existence is the vigilance and
the awakening of man's conscience, also intends to bear witness." Below, The Unesco
Courier publishes an article by Joseph Leftwich, English author of Dutch origin, and
a leading authority on Yiddish literature.
Sholem Aleichem" is the Jewish form of greeting, like "How
d'you do?" or "'Glad to meet you," only the literal translation
is "Peace to you," and the words are Hebrew, which is one of
the two main components of the Yiddish language, as Anglo-Saxon
and Norman-French are of English. The Arabs whose language is
akin to Hebrew have the similar "'Salaam Aleikhem," with the same
meaning. Jerusalem derives from the same word, "'Sholem": "'City
of Peace." It is the age-old Jewish salutation after a pogrom, after
expulsion, after whatever tribulation, just as on a quiet, undisturbed
stroll or in visiting a friend, a Jew meeting another greets him,
"'Sholem Aleichem," and receives the answer "Aleichem Sholem":
"To you peace!"
Sholem Aleichem, the great writer, the centenary of whose birth
is being widely observed this year, explained that he adopted the
name out of respect for his father, a solid scholar and businessman,
so as not to embarrass him by his light-hearted stories. Instead of
writing as Sholem Rabinovitch he added Aleichem to his first name.
It was a stroke of genius. The name opened all doors to him;
in every Yiddish-speaking home he was a welcome guest ¡"Come in,
Sholem Aleichem!" He came in, he spoke to the people, and they
spoke to him. They told him about their life, and he wrote it down,
in their own folk-tongue, in their folk-idiom. He caught the folk-
spirit and the folk-humour of the Jewish masses, the millions of
Yiddish-speaking Jews who were living in the Pale of Jewish Settle¬
ment in Czarist Russia.
He pictures his characters speaking to him, telling him their
stories, "'Now I ask you, Panie (Mr.) Sholem Aleichem, isn't it a story
worth writing down?" "'Before Sholem Aleichem those Jews of the
folk hadn't spoken in literature," Dr. Bickel, the President of the
Yiddish PEN Centre, has written. "'They were spoken about. Not
CONT'D ON PAGE 28

The Unesco Courier. March 1960
The centenary of Sholem Alei¬
chem is being marked in many
countries. The whole of the
world's Yiddish press (there
are 168 Yiddish publications,
including 12 daily papers) is
publishing articles devoted to
Sholem Aleichem and stories
by him. In some countries new
editions of his works have
appeared. His plays are being
presented in all the Yiddish
language theatres and in parti¬
cular, during the present thea¬
trical season, by the Jewish
Theatres of the State in Poland
and Rumania. For the first
time, the celebration of a Jewish
literary anniversary is taking
place outside the Jewish com¬
munities. Innumerable meet¬
ings, recitals, concerts and thea¬
trical performances have been
arranged for the occasion.
Nationally organized celebra¬
tions have taken place in Israel,
Poland, Rumania and the Soviet
Union and in Belgium under
the sponsorship of the Ministry
of Education. Streets have been
named after him in the Argen¬
tine, Brazil, Bulgaria, Israel,
Poland and the Soviet Union.
Right, Sholem Aleichem a pho¬
tographic study taken shortly
before his death. Below left,
model reproduction of a scene
from "Tevya the Dairyman"
presented by the Yiddish State
theatre in Bucharest; right,
model of a scene from, " The
First Prize ", produced by the
Jewish Academic Theatre of Mos¬
cow. Opposite page, how one
artist has depicted two of his
best-known characters : top,
Menachem Mendel, the business¬
man ; below Tevya the Dairyman.
Unesco photos
27

On May 15, 1916, some 120,000 persons followed the hearse bearing Sholem Aleichem to his grave. This "was the greatest spon¬
taneous gathering of the people in the history of the City of New York" according to a United States Congressman of that time.
till Sholem Aleichem did they speak themselves, their
Own words, the endless flow of words that lay so heavy on
their hearts."
There have been and there are other great Yiddish
writers: Mendele, Peretz, Sholem Asch. Yiddish is not a
one-man literature, but no other Yiddish writer made the
Jewish people articulate as did Sholem Aleichem.
Sholem Aleichem lived and wrote in Russia before the
First World War, when Poland and the Baltic States were
part of the Czar's domains, and a mass of six million
Jews lived in compact settlements in a comparatively
small concentrated area, with an almost completely auto¬
nomous Jewish life. He died in 1916, before the Revolu¬
tion which changed the entire face of Jewish life in those
parts.
He could not have foreseen the Second World War in
which nearly six million Jews, almost the entire Jewish
population of Eastern Europe Was massacred in the death
camps and the gas ovens. It is understandable therefore
that many Jews in England and France and above all
in America and in Israel who are themselves immigrants
from Europe or the children of immigrants, look back
nostalgically on the world of Sholem Aleichem as the
world of their childhood or that of their parents and
grand-parents. And often in the tone of a valedictory,
as a world that has vanished from the earth.
But Sholem Aleichem is too great a writer to have
created people in his books who would so soon have
vanished from the earth. His figures are too full of Jewish
and universal humanity to die. They still live among the
survivors in Eastern Europe, and among the immigrants
and their children and grandchildren in America and
Israel and England and France and other places, not only
among those who still use Yiddish as one of their lan-
28

The Unesco Courler. March 1960
I want to be buried among simple people
O
n Monday, May 15, 1916, a man whose very
name is unfamiliar, went to his grave. His
coffin was of plain pine boards, unadorned.
Yet, 120,000 people followed the hearse
through the city streets. There were only
a mere handful of police but no disorder, for those
who thronged the streets mourned. It was the
greatest spontaneous gathering of thé people in the
history of our city. Factories and workshops found
it difficult to proceed, and toilers, men and women
alike, who could ill afford the loss, sacrificed the
day's wage to join in the tribute.
"And the dead man was neither rich nor powerful.
Sholem Ben Menachem Rabinowitz was just a
writer...
"Of the home, of husbands, of wives, and of little
children he wrote, and the Jewish people, a home
and family loving people, thronged our streets to
honor his memory...
"When he died, they passed by the tens of thous¬
ands beside his dead body in his humble home in
the Bronx, and followed by scores of thousands his
plain coffln to its last resting place..."
This was the homage paid by Congressman
Bennett in a speech made to the United States
Congress, the day after Sholem Aleikhem's funeral
in New York.
The great Jewish author died at the age of 57,
leaving a will drafted six months earlier which in
itself is a masterpiece of humility and simplicity.
Here are a few paragraphs from this will:
'Wherever I die I want to be placed not among
aristocrats, or among the powerful, but among plain
Jewish labourers, among the people itself, so that
the gravestone that is to be placed upon my grave
should illumine the simple graves about me: and
these simple graves should adorn my gravestone,
even as the plain, good people during my lifetime
illumined their Folkeschrieber.
. "There should be no kind of debate or discussion
among my colleagues as to making my name eternal,
as to a monument to be erected in New York, etc.
I shall not be able to rest quietly in my grave if
my colleagues make themselves foolish.
"The best monument for me will be if my works
are read and if there be found among the better-
to-do classes of our people Maecenases Who will
publish and distribute my works in Yiddish or in
other languages, and thus give the people the possi¬
bility of reading and my family an honourable
existence.
"If I have not been worthy or have not earned
Maecenases during my lifetime, perhaps I shall be
worthy of them after my death. I go away from
the world in the full belief that the people will not
forsake my orphans."
guages, but even among those who no longer know the
Yiddish language in which Sholem Aleichem wrote, and
can read him only in translation. They communicate
themselves as characters in great literature do, to others
who do not themselves belong to that stock and derive
from that milieu.
His works exist in Russian translations, just as they do
in Hebrew, in English and even in Chinese. He has
millions of Russian and Ukrainian readers otherwise
there Would have been no point in the Soviet authorities
issuing a Sholem Aleichem postage stamp for his cente¬
nary. The Israeli Government also issued a centenary
stamp for a great Jewish writer, Who was an early Zionist,
and whose works exist in a complete and very popular
Hebrew translation by his son-in-law, I.D. Berkovitch.
A volume of Sholem Aleichem stories was issued for his
centenary in Yiddish by the State Publishing House in
Moscow, and the introduction emphasizes that "Russia
was his homeland. It was here that he wrote; his people
lived on this soil. There is no corner of this land where
his work is not known, translated in millions of copies in
many of the languages of the Soviet Union." His work
was known to the great Russian writers of his time;
Maxim Gorki, who had a great admiration for Sholem
Aleichem, said after reading one of his books: "A won¬
derful book. I laughed and wept. It sparkles with a good,
healthy and wise love for the people."
As a great humorist Sholem Aleichem compares in many
ways to Mark Twain, who is said to have introduced him¬
self once to Sholem Aleichem as the "American Sholem
Aleichem"; he recalls Mark Twain particularly in his
great book of the adventures of a young boy, Mottel the
orphan, who, in the different environment and with the
different speech, is a true brother to Huckleberry Finn.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

** <:^.: '
One of Sholem Aleichem's finest books, "Adventures of Mottel, the
Cantor's Son" is such an enjoyable book for children and grown-ups
that many persons have compared it with Mark Twain's "Tom Sawyer"
and "Huckieberry Finn". Here Mottel is seen filching an apple from a
neighbour's tree. "There's nothing as tasty as ripe apples plucked from
the tree in Menashe's garden," Mottel says. Woodcut by llya Schor.
Like Mark Twain too, he makes it difficult for some
readers to realize that the prolific joker who keeps them
chuckling and laughing is, under the cap and bells, a very
significant delineator of character and social conditions.
His humour has an immense social awareness, irony and
pity; he has fresh, bubbling humour, but also a bitter wit.
Sholem Aleichem wrote proliflcally. At home, on his
travels, ill in bed, he was always writing, and in his
57 years of life his output of short stories, novels, sketches
and plays Was enormous.
But the three figures around whom he wrote much of
his work are Mottel the orphan boy, Menachem Mendel,
the businessman, and Tevya, the dairy farmer. Menachem
Mendel is constantly chasing dreams of a financial success
that always eludes him; a restless, impatient seeker, he is
here, there and everywhere, full of madcap schemes, the
eternal optimist, a Micawber type. Tevya is a poor, hard
working village Jew, rooted to the soil, patient and plodd¬
ing, weighed down by poverty and troubles, yet steadfast
and unshakeable, with a deep faith in God and His ways,
that he is sure will in the end put everything right.
And Sholem Aleichem was all three himself. He was
Mottel the orphan boy. His mother died when he was 13,
and he was brought up by his grandfather. He spent-
several years in his teens and also, after a short interval,
in his twenties on a big landed estate owned by his father-
in-law, on whose death he became the administrator of
the estate; he observed the life of the Jewish and non-
Jewish farmers and village people, and felt much of their
attachment to the soil. He spoke of his years on the land
as the happiest years of his life. And he was in many
ways himself Menachem Mendel. He was on the Stock
Exchange in Kiev and in Odessa. He undertook all sorts
of business ventures, always unsuccessfully. "I tried all
trades, but failed in all", he said of himself. In all except
literature, where he became a great figure.
He projected something of himself into Menachem Men¬
del, into Tevya, into Mottel, and also into some of their
accompanying figures family and friends and acquain¬
tances. He observed and absorbed and recreated. Mena¬
chem Mendel and Tevya and Mottel are all drawn
bigger than life-size, more real than just one person.
They are a synthesis of the human boy, of the soil-
bound stolid farmer, of the restless dreamer-speculator.
Sholem Aleichem took his people as he saw them, as they
spake to him, and added himself as an ingredient; the
yeast which made them rise to the height of the univer¬
sal; he made them poetry.
And because he made more of them than the common
man, because he gave them universality, imagination,
poetry, immortality, the world of Sholem Aleichem has not
passed. People still recognize themselves in his characters.
So many orphan boys everywhere are Mottel. So many
Jewish farmers in Israel and America are Tevyas. So
many businessmen engaged in big speculations are Mena¬
chem Mendel. Dr. Emmanuel Pat in New York has
written an essay in Which he traces the development of
Mottel and his circle in American life to-day. He has
found them all still there, with Americanized names, with
different economic and social conditions, yet in character
unchanged.
Sholem Aleichem would have recognized them, as
others do. When he Was in London in 1906 he himself
recognized them in London streets and homes then. They
are still recognizably alive to-day, because they were
never only real people but are timeless and enduring.
And his voice and his writings are not only for Jews but
for all people.
Making the rounds, Methu-
saleh the ancient horse
wearily drags his master
Kastiel the Water-Carrier
from house to house. Illus¬
tration drawn by B.I. Inger.
30
