USX...
The blind
in the U.S.S.R.
OUT OF
THE
DARKNESS
by A. Kondratov
Deputy Chairman, All-Russian Society
of the Blind
il
he 1897 census in Russia recorded 250,000 blind
I persons. They lived mostly in regions inhabit¬
ed by national minorities with low living and cultural
standards and where infectious diseases (trachoma,
smallpox, blennorrhoea) were prevalent.
The majority of the blind then lived on a miserable
pittance granted them by charities or on alms from the
public. In the whole of Russia there was only one crafts
centre for the blind (in St. Petersburg) where a few dozen
persons were employed making brushes and weaving
baskets, though small groups of blind persons were also
employed in the workshops of the Moscow, Smolensk,
Samara and Kostroma Schools for the Blind.
In 1925 the All-Russian Society of the Blind was
founded as a voluntary association of blind citizens in
order to integrate the blind into society. Somewhat later,
similar societies Were founded in each of the Soviet
Republics.
To obtain funds the Society opened shops and dining-
rooms, barbers' shops and shooting galleries, organized
collections in offices and factories and arranged lotteries
and concerts. Work was found for individuals and for
small groups of blind persons in co-operatives for invalids
and in factories and offices. It soon became apparent that
it would be more useful to open special workshop schools
for the blind. The earliest of these were simple' little
workshops of the cottage industry type where brushes,
baskets and felt boots were made.
Today, all workshop schools are under the management
of the Society of the Blind which runs 268 such institu¬
tions. In 1960 these will produce a variety of articles
valued at approximately 1,700 million roubles.
The past seven years have seen the transition from the
traditional types of manual labour for the blind to work
in highly mechanized factories Where complicated
techniques are used. The Society's Moscow factories fill
20
government orders for a wide range of articles, including
luminescent lamp regulators, electric motors, spare parts
for seed drills, and electrical equipment; Leningrad
factories turn out low-voltage transformers and conveyor
belts for reaping machines; a Chelyabinsk factory makes
cushioned seats for tractors, and a Gorky factory produces
air filters for motor vehicles (nylon and metal). Other
items produced by the blind are coarse and fine filters for
oil and diesel engine fuel, signalling apparatus for mines,
cardboard boxes of all types, electronic apparatus, '
mechanics' tools, spare parts for motor vehicles, tractors
and combine harvesters and plastic articles.
The workshop schools accept people who have lost their
sight at a mature age and have to change their occupation,
as well as young people who have graduated from the
state secondary schools for the bünd.
The type of school workshop, is selected with a view to
employing, as far as possible, only blind persons; the
equipment, its arrangement, safety precautions, etc., are
all adapted to the work of blind persons. Only those
operations beyond the scope of the blind are performed
by sighted workers; as a rule their number (including
clerks and specialists) does not exceed 33% of the total
number of employees.
The usual shields and guards over moving parts of
machines that are considered adequate for sighted Workers
are quite inadequate when the machines are operated by
blind persons. Die presses operated by the blind must
be fully enclosed though this is not necessary for sighted
workers. Factories, and even many co-operative
workshops employing invalids, do not find it necessary to
break up production processes into a number of single
operations, but where the blind are employed this
is absolutely essential. Blind workers also need automatic
stopping devices, sound signalling systems and magnetic
switches in place of knife switches.
In the Soviet Union, factories employing blind persons
are run at a profit. In 1959 total profits amounted to 306
million Toubles all of which was used to improve the

The Unesco Courier. June 1960
BLIND CHILDREN
LEARN TO DRAW
Drawing lessons for blind children sound just
as strange as music lessons for the deaf. Yet
various methods which make this possible
have been devised in different countries. A
graphic system of teaching known as "typhlo-
graphy" is employed in Russian schools for
blind children, for example, and enables them
to think in terms of space, to develop their
spatial imagination and to draw objects on
paper as they "see" them. The process
includes the use of easily-made and easy-to-
understand outlines of objects such as the
icebreaker (far left). Different sides of the
object are shown so . that when these are
combined (details of the icebreaker's deck
are shown below side view) the child has a
good idea of the complete object, even when
it has a complicated form. Typhlography goes
much further than simple drawings and iden¬
tification. It can teach sightless students
such skills as geometrical diagrams and pro¬
jections and industrial design. As in all
modern schools for blind children, the methods
used here follow as closely as possible those
of equivalent grade schools for the sighted.
The result is a development of character and
behaviour patterns that include the fun and
satisfaction of teasing a schoolmate by giving
a tug at her plait as she climbs the stairs, (left).
Photos E. Don
working and living conditions of blind persons and to
provide for holidays and medical treatment. This income
enables the society to carry out all its activities and to
expand its operations without government subsidies.
The law on universal compulsory seven-year education
applies equally to the blind and the state provides special
schools in which the blind are given a normal education.
Children receive a general education and new methods,
employing relief models, make up for the lack of visual
aids to teaching; the syllabus is fully comparable to that
of the ordinary schools.
In the Russian Federation of the U.S.S.R. there are 62
boarding schools for bünd children, 11 evening schools for
young workers and three inter-regional, correspondence
schools providing a full secondary education without loss
of working time. School graduates may continue their
education or engage in some productive work.
D n recent years particular attention has been
paid to the technical side of education.
Workshops are being opened at schools where pupils work
at cardboard-box making and at die presses, do mecha¬
nics' jobs and woodworking and make brushes. In addi¬
tion to technical training and production practice in the
school workshops the pupils of some schools get extra
practical training in factories belonging to the Society of
the Blind. When a blind person is graduated from a
secondary school he has, in addition to his general edu¬
cation, learned some trade.
There are several hundred blind persons among the
students of Soviet schools of higher learning. Their state
scholarship grants are 50% higher than those of sighted
students which enables them to hire readers. There are
blind barristers, blind schoolteachers and blind lecturers
in colleges. At Moscow University alone there are nine
blind professors and lecturers.
There are 1,500 various kinds of libraries for blind
people with 824,000 books printed in Braille. From 275
to 350 titles of books are printed annually. The Societies
publish several periodicals in Braille. The monthly "Life
of the Blind" has a circulation of 12,000.
Persons invalided by blindness enjoy considerable
privileges. They do not pay income tax. They work only
six hours a day and have longer annual holidays than
sighted workers. They do not pay fares on city transport.
The blind are also granted pensions on favourable terms.
A youth of 21 (blind from childhood) would be granted a
pension of 85% of his month's wages up to 500 roubles
and 10% on all over 500 roubles, plus 15% for nursing;
the pension is payable in addition to wages. Old age
pensions are also higher. A blind woman is entitled to
an old-age pension at the age of 40 provided she has
worked for ten years; a blind man who has worked for
15 years is entitled to an old-age pension at the age of 50.
The public health bodies carry out a periodical examina¬
tion of all blind persons to check up on the possibility
of treatment or for the provision of artificial eyes; they
also render therapeutic or other medical assistance. In
Pyatigorsk there is a special sanatorium for the blind.
Year by year the working and living conditions of the
blind improve. This year the All-Russian Society of the
Blind plans to spend some 142 million roubles on building.
As a general rule factories, houses, clubs, schools,
kindergartens and nurseries are built on a single lot, as
one big complex. This allows for the concentration of
the blind and provides better conditions for the organiza¬
tion of their leisure.
Pre-revolutionary statistics registered only those persons
who were totally blind but the present system of record¬
ing regards as blind those whose better eye has a visual
acuity of 8 % or less (with correction) or with a diminished
field of vision up to 10 degrees.
In the Russian Federation there are 97,900 persons who
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

OUT OF THE DARKNESS (Cont'd)
are classified as first category invalids (i. e., helpless
invalids) on account of loss of sight; they include the
totally blind, those with a visual acuity of less than 4 %
with correction and aged persons whose weak vision is
due to senility.
The All-Russian Society of the Blind also has on its
books about 68,000 persons with imperfect sight. They
have a visual acuity of more than 4 % but are granted
the same privileges as the totally blind and are given
employment in the Society's factories or in invalid co¬
operatives; some of them are also found employment in
ordinary factories.
TATisTTcs for the past forty years show that
I the number of totally blind adults has been
reduced to one third of the former figure and the number
of totally blind children to one fifth. In view of this the
question of reducing the number of schools for the blind
has been raised. Greater attention is being paid to the
establishment of interregional boarding schools. It is
planned to set up separate schools for blind children and
for those With impaired vision; the latter will employ
special visual teaching aids and suitable optical devices
and lighting. In this field there is still much to be done.
The initiative of The Unesco Courier in devoting a
special issue to the problems confronting the blind
throughout the world will draw the attention of the gen¬
eral public to those problems and result in greater contact
between Societies of the Blind in different countries, a
pooling of their experience and an extension of their
work.
22
Official Soviet photos
WORLD AT THEIR FINGERTIPS. Boys and girls in a Soviet school
for the blind follow a geography lesson with the aid of special globes on
which the features stand out in relief. Top photo, members of the
sports club do special exercises which help to develop poise and balance.
