WANTED : BETTER OCEAN¬
GOING RESEARCH SHIPS
Photo courtesy Offshore Exploration Group Inc.
FLOATING LABORATORIES. Research vessel has just detonated an
explosive charge." The sound waves reflected from submarine rock
layers are recorded by hydrophones trailed behind the boat, giving
scientists a picture of ocean bed relief. For the oceanographer, the
ship in which he works is his major toollaboratory and mobile observa¬
tion platform. Widening demands in his field and increased specializa¬
tion nowadays call for large ocean-going vessels with ample space for
staff and for handling a mass of complicated and delicate apparatus.
by H.F.P. Herdman
National Institute of Oceanography, Great Britain
Does an oceanographer really need a
ship? This is a question often asked
by those who have to provide the
money to build and maintain oceanographical research
ships, but the oceanographer himself is quite certain that
no matter how much he needs shore facilities at a later
stage for processing data, it is on the original observations
made at sea that his work mainly depends.
One cannot, for instance, measure deep oceanic or
even surface currents in a shore laboratory, nor can one
determine the shape of the sea-bed or its composition.
The study of sea and wave motion, and the inter-relation¬
ship of these with the atmosphere requires in the first
instance a complexity of observations at sea. Most of the
problems associated with fish detection by acoustic means
cannot be solved in a laboratory tank; and such know¬
ledge as we have of life in the sea has only been gained
by routine sampling of the oceans at all depths.
These are only a few of the problems now being studied
by oceanographers at sea, and for which specially designed
research ships are necessary. The bathyscaph, and the
deep-diving aluminium submarine now being designed in
the United States of America, are new methods being
developed for exploring the deep oceans. Their use, how¬
ever, is likely to remain purely complementary to that of
surface ships for many years to come. Nevertheless,
the fact that these "vehicles" carry a crew is perhaps
a major step towards overcoming one of the greatest
difficulties which confront the oceanographer that of
knowing what his apparatus is doing when it sinks below
the surface.
Much progress has been made in the use of deep sea
cine cameras, and, in a more limited way, of television
cameras, but these are a poor substitute for direct
observation by the human eye. Ideally, each research ship
should be large enough to act as a parent ship to a
deep-diving submarine. Many of the teething troubles
now experienced with experimental apparatus for use in
the sea could then be detected by direct observation
below the surface. Much could be done from conventional
submarines but their depth range is limited and it is at
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WANTED ! RESEARCH SHIPS (Continued)
the greater depths that information on the behaviour of
instruments is really needed.
The oceans cover an area of the earth's surface more
than twice that occupied by land but away from the
beaten track they are virtually unexplored. Only research
vessels, whalers, survey and cable ships visit the out-of-
the-way parts of the oceans and then rarely. There are
few research ships capable of extended operations in
distant waters and few trained oceanographers to sail in
them. Knowledge of outer space is, no doubt, necessary
but, for many years to come, man's livelihood will be
bound up with the sea, and the cost of oceanic research,
even on a world-wide scale, would be but a very small
fraction of the money spent on attempts to survey outer
space or provide long-range rockets. Sailors, fishermen,
harbour engineers and meteorologists are among those
who benefit from oceanic research but, without adequate
ships, oceanography is deprived of its major tool.
The ever increasing use of electronic equipment has
made it possible to tackle many oceanographical problems
previously not attempted, except to a limited extent. The
height of waves can now be measured accurately from
a ship and observations of the effect of wind on wave
form have been made in mid-ocean by a specially designed
free-floating buoy launched from a research ship. Deep
ocean currents and the general movement of the water-
masses are today measured by tracking a neutrally-
buoyant float, precision depth recording by modern echo-
sounding equipment, to study the outline of the sea
bed, reaches a degree of accuracy unthought of ten years
ago and photographs of the sea bed at all depths can
now be obtained as a routine.
Cores of deep sea sediments up to 70 feet in length are
now obtained by research ships; these are of immense
value to the geologist in tracing the history of the earth
back for some millions of years. Seismic soundings from
ships in mid-ocean reach much deeper into the sediment
than coring devices and are one of the major experiments
made by geophysicists in their study of the structure of
the earth's crust.
From the biological angle, to mention one use alone,
present-day electronic instrumentation makes it possible
to use the carbon-14 method to measure the rate of
photosynthesis and the underwater camera has been used
with striking effect to photograph deep sea squid. These
examples are but a few of the aspects of oceanic research
and it cannot be too strongly stressed that comprehensive
and up-to-date research ships of a reasonably large size
are essential if the study of oceanography is to be worth¬
while.
The small research ship may be of considerable value
in coastal or inshore waters, where it is probably used
mainly as a collecting agent for a laboratory near at
hand ashore. Being within easy reach of its base such a
ship can however easily change over from one branch
of oceanography to another and so be fully employed. On
the other hand the obvious place to study oceanography
is in the deep oceans, far from land, and any ship thus
employed must be large enough to carry not only the
various teams of scientists needed to get a comprehensive
picture of oceanic conditions but be large enough also to
house a considerable bulk of varied apparatus.
Many factors determine the best size for a research
ship. These include the ability to keep the seas in all
weathers, the number of scientists available to man her,
the type of work she is to do and where she is to do it,
the availability of funds for upkeep and, not the least
consideration in many countries, compliance with govern¬
ment requirements for the standard of accommodation, etc.
Able to operate in all weathers
In a comprehensive research ship, that is to say one in
which there are adequate though not perhaps full facili¬
ties for research in all branches of oceanography, the
internal space allocated to laboratories and the deck space
necessary for handling awkward overside gear, has
Increased immeasurably in the last decade; this factor
alone will determine largely the size of the ship.
Opinions differ widely on the ideal size. The Soviet
Union already has three long range research ships of
about 6,000 tons displacement, and is building at least
two more, whereas in the United States of America
possibly because of higher building costs a smaller ship,
of approximately 1,000 tons displacement, is thought
suitable, though plans have been prepared for ships
approaching 3,000 tons. In Great Britain, the R.R.S.
"Discovery II" of 2,100 tons displacement, has been in
service for over 30 years and is an excellent example of
a ship which can keep the seas in all weathers.
Nevertheless, it is now difficult, in cramped laboratories,
Photos © National Institute of Oceanography, Gt. Britain
HARDWORKING BUOYS figure largely among ever-growing mass of equipment and instruments used by oceanographers.
Buoy on left is launched from ship as an independent recording unit to measure relations between air pressures and wave profiles.
Instruments it carries include a small scale barograph (for measuring air pressures) and a roll gyro (for maintaining instruments
in equilibrium). Right, fish-shaped float houses part of precision echosounding equipment used for making records of the profile
of the ocean bed. This is towed alongside the ship connected to the depth recorder in the ship's laboratory by the towing cable.
52

The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
Courtesy U.S. Navy
A MILLION MILES on voyages of research have been sailed by the
Atlantis. Built in 1931 for the Woods Hole Océanographie Institution,
Massachusetts, this 142-foot ketch has made some 160 cruises.
to fit in her all the electronic equipment now associated
with even simple oceanic observations; accommodation
too, is neither sufficient for the large scientific teams now
necessary to man the highly-specialized equipment
carried, nor does it meet present-day standards either
for crew or for officers.
To meet all requirements for housing modern scientific
equipment, provide adequate living accomodation for
scientists and crew, allow sufficient space for future
scientific needs, be able to generate enough electricity
for a small town and have a ship economical to run and
maintain are some of the prime considerations in the
design of a research vessel. Others, as already mentioned,
include the ability to keep to the seas in all weathers, and
for a long time, possibly for periods of four to six weeks;
fuel for a range of at least 15,000 miles is thus necessary.
Perhaps the most important point which the designer
has to bear in mind is the hull form of a research vessel.
In the past, less attention has perhaps been paid to the
sea-keeping qualities of a research vessel in relation to
the needs of science than the oceanographer deserves,
and so considerable attention must be paid not only to
the "seà-kindliness" of the ship, that is to say, her
ability to ride the seas not only easily but safely and not
take much water on board, but to ensure at the same
time that her stability is such that a reasonably steady
working "platform" for the scientist, and his apparatus,
is provided in all but the worst weather.
This need for a stable "platform" arises mainly when
the ship is stopped to lower apparatus and collect data,
and it is suggested that stabilisation by means of tanks
would suffice. It is also desirable, but not entirely
necessary, to keep the ship reasonably stable when pro¬
ceeding to the next observation point.
Taking everything into consideration it seems that the
needs of the oceanographer for some years to come can,
to a very large extent, be met by a ship of some 2,800-3,000
tons displacement, with a high ratio of beam to length.
A beam of 43 feet to a length of about 260 feet, with a
draught of 18 feet, seems adequate to meet the need for
stability. With these dimensions speed would suffer, unless
engine space and running costs are increased but the
oceanographer does not need a fast ship; a service or
economical speed of 10-11 knots is adequate since it
leaves a reasonable time between observation points or
"stations" as the scientist calls them, for servicing equip¬
ment and for the preliminary plotting of results.
Space for crew, scientists, equipment
Designs for research ships about this size are now being
prepared by various countries and proposals for an in¬
ternational ship, sponsored by Unesco, have been
under consideration for some time. Naturally, there is
some divergence of opinion on design but most countries
are agreed that the ratio of laboratory space and
accommodation for scientists to that required for purely
ship purposes must greatly be increased in favour of the
scientist. This, however, can be met in modern ships,
without greatly increasing the size of the ship, by the
reduction in space now required for engines. Diesel-
electric propulsion, or diesel engines driving a controllable-
pitch propeller, not only satisfy the oceanographer by
providing the very slow speeds sometimes needed; they
also provide a considerable reduction in machinery space
and fuel tanks over that required by a conventional steam
engine, boilers and a large fuel capacity.
Some difference of opinion exists also on a desirable
ratio of scientists to crew, especially in the smaller vessel,
where space is at a premium. The increase in the use
of electronics in oceanography has created quite a
different situation to that of twenty years ago. Then a
small team of scientists and one or two scientific
assistants (in the "Discovery II" between 1929 and 1939,
the average scientific team on five two-year commissions
was seven, of whom two were assistants) could manage
all routine sampling and analysis. Now, specialist teams
of scientists, technicians and assistants are required in
each branch of oceanography and to find space for them
in a small ship is not easy. The ratio of 50:50 for
scientists and crew, as advocated in the U.S.A., envisages
much handling of overside apparatus by the scientific
staff. Other countries prefer to use professional seamen
for this work and leave the scientist, and technician,
more time to work on the results and the apparatus.
Little has been said about the difficulties under which
the deep-sea oceanographer must work. Long periods at
sea carrying out routine experiments in all weathers,
maintenance of complicated apparatus far from shore
facilities and a restricted life are his part. To do it well
he needs ships and good ships at that for the successful
addition to our knowledge of the seas.
53
