The Unesco Courier. July-August 1960
Atlas Photo
0
by Peter B. Collins
Science Correspondent of "The Sunday Times"
OME Mediterranean beaches, where conditions
seem ideal for seaside holidays, are practically
deserted. There are few people bathing, no
big hotels. One thing, in fact, is wrong: the sea is too
cold, and the reason is: the weather !
What happens is surprisingly simple: the steady off¬
shore wind keeps pushing the warm upper layers of water
out to sea, and their place is taken by the upwelling of
cooler water from below. Even in summer this sort of
circulation takes place, when the warm air from the land
might be expected to warm the sea.
From the scientists' point of view there is a ceaseless
interplay between the atmosphere and the sea. Yet in
spite of the thousands of years of man's experience of the
sea and the weather, we know very little about what
actually happens at the critical boundary, the surface of
the sea where water and atmosphere meet.
All the same, we do know that the atmosphere does not,
as one might imagine, get its heat from the sun directly,
for short-wave solar radiation passes right through it.
What the atmosphere does is to pick up its energy from
the surface beneath it... over the oceans, in fact, from
the surface of the sea. How much, and in what ways
this happens, is part of the problem of "'energy-budgets''
as they are called, the profit-and-loss accounts of the
energy transfers that go on at the air-sea surface.
Our knowledge of these things is at best empirical.
Although it is not particularly difficult in principle to
find a formula to cover reactions between two such, sys¬
tems, the fact is that atmosphere and ocean are so vast
and variable that as yet we simply have not got enough
data to provide more than a few general answers.
Thus, it is evident that the upper layers of the sea are
a sort of vast reservoir of heat. When the Wind blows
the surface waters about, causing currents, huge quanti¬
ties of heat are moved to and fro. How much, depends,
on how far down the heat of the sun has penetrated, and
how strong the wind is, and how much of the heat is
already being lost to the air. These are the sort of things
that cause great storms, and similar phenomena... the
ways, in fact, in which the seas affect the weather, instead
of the weather affecting the seas. Thus, we do know
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE WEATHER AND THE SEAS
(Continued)
that some of the regions where great storms form, espe¬
cially in the tropics, are those where the atmosphere gets
large quantities of heat and moisture from the sea. But
what we would like to know more clearly is how much
energy is transferred in this way.
Obviously, we need much more data about both sides
of this endless equation the sea, and the weather. We
need data on the force of the wind, the variation of its
effects on the sea, and simultaneous data on the tempe¬
rature of sea and air, the atmospheric pressure and other
factors. But here, we run into another big group of diffi¬
culties. For one thing, these measurements, to be of any
real use, need to be taken at the same time and place,
and the number of such observations required is obviously
such that they have to be made by people who are not
scientists; there simply are not enough of the latter to
go round, even if places could be found for them on ships
all over the seas.
Old Salt's watery wrndspeed gauge
The ship itself, from which such measurements have
to be made, is a far from ideal place for accurate
scientific investigations. It has, for example, its own
"microclimate." Being made of metal, and being warm,
Inside at least, even in the worst weather, it will affect air
temperature readings made from its decks. As it moves, it
creates its own draught, and thus affects measurements
of the speed of the wind. Then again, the fact that it .
is a moving platform makes it difficult to keep a compa¬
ratively sensitive instrument like a barometer, steady; it
affects, too, the accuracy of rainfall measurements.
Yet to find out what really is happening between sea
and sky, these things must be observed... and not just
now and then, at a few places, but again and again and
again, in as many spots over the world's oceans as can
be managed.
As an example of the difficulties, consider the business
of measuring the temperature of the sea, at or near its
surface. This is normally done either by dipping a
specially designed bucket into the sea, and taking the
temperature of the collected water, or by taking the tem¬
perature of the cold sea water intake leading to the ship's
condensers. The first problem is that whereas the bucket
will test a sample of water from the surface, the condenser
intake is several feet down and the results, therefore,
will not be strictly comparable.
There are bound to be delays in reading the thermo¬
meters in either case. It may not always be possible to
take such readings at special times, as is normally the
case for meteorological observations.
Thus errors may creep in, and what seems simple
enough, becomes a complicated and unreliable affair
especially since the time at which an observation is made
is as important as the observation itself.
Some of the phenomena of weather at sea have, of
course, been studied since long before meteorology became
a science, and none more so than the wind. A German
sea captain named Petersen developed a system for telling
the strength of the wind, based not only on what the sea
looked like but also on what sort of sound it made! (This
was in the days of sail, when sailors were, so to speak,
much closer to the sea itself, and could hear the great
waves all too well.)
The trouble was that he recorded his ideas in German
and used some rather unusual phrases, which were hard
to translate into another language when it was desired
to internationalize his scale. A critical point, for example,
. was that at which the sea began to "roar". However,
some experts who had talked with the old man maintained
that what he meant was translated better by the word
"tumble", which would seem to refer more to what was
happening to the waves than to their noise.
Modern ways of measuring wind and sea have shown
that even with all their experience, the old sea-captains
could be wrong. For the appearance of the sea's surface,
it seems, depends not only on the force of the wind, but
also on sea and air temperatures. The greater the
difference in temperature, the less the surface of the sea
is likely to give a true guide to the force of the wind.
One weather man has described how he was crossing
the Atlantic, when a fairly strong '"Force 5" wind was
blowing. The ship's officer judged this correctly, as
checked by the instruments on board. A little later, the
sea appeared much less rough, and the officer made a
new, lower estimate; later again, it became rough once
more and he considered it had returned to force 5, until
the meteorologist pointed out that in fact, the wind had
never changed. What had changed was the temperature
of the sea... when they passed a cold patch of water, the
sea had seemed calmer because of the big difference in
temperature between it and the air.
Nonetheless, despite all the problems of getting to know
the weather at sea, a great mass of data is gradually
accumulating. This is largely thanks to the work now
centred on the World Meteorological Organization, which
through its Commission for Maritime Meteorology runs
what is called the "'selected ship scheme."
Regular, official weather ships are too few and far bet¬
ween for anything like an adequate reporting system on
the weather over the oceans. So WMO has enlisted the
help of some 3,500 merchant ships, whose captains agree
to run a voluntary observing service. The officers who
do this are not trained meteorologists, nor have they
time for lengthy observations, nor for handling complex
scientific equipment among all their official duties.
Sailor & Met man help each other
But in spite of what must at times be a scarcely
welcome additional duty (though at others, it may
equally be a relief from the boredom of many a long
voyage) the co-operation is there. One of the minor
triumphs of international meteorology, in fact, is that
among the ships working on this scheme are a number of
antarctic whalers. These ships, engaged in one of the
most highly competitive of all maritime activities, keep
their positions as secret as possible; when transmitting
the data they collect, they give their position in a special
code, known only to the> ship itself and to the meteorolo¬
gical station receiving it. But the fact that they will do
this shows that seamen, like scientists, know how much
can be gained by an ever more complete network of ship-
stations to tell us more about the weather at sea.
As the sailor and meteorologist help each other, so they
both too help the other group of scientists whose main
interest is the sea: the oceanographers. Together, all
three combine to build up a picture of the sea as it really
is. It helps the sailor, and incidentally, it may help you,
too, the passenger, by sea or air.
Certainly, there Will always be storms, and hurricanes,
just as there will always be places where the beach looks
tempting and the sea is disappointingly cold! But as
the scientists and the sailors get together, the effects
of the weather on the sea, and the sea on the weather
will matter less. It is common to hear people say that
"'science is one"; certainly, Oceanography the science of
the sea, moves ever closer to Meteorology, the science
of the weather... and as they do so, every one of us will
be the better off for it.
50
