A New International Family:
THE SOUND HUNTERS
ÏT-
r
«^p*?*^
V»*«^
M
by Jean Thévenot
Honorary President, International Federation of Sound Hunters
TAPE-RECORDERS are nowadays becoming almost as common as cameras,
and recordings of children's voices made by their parents now provide a version
in sound of the "family album" with its record of events down the years.
Photo Unesco
OUND hunter... chasseur de son...
tonjäger. This new expression so
new that it would have drawn a blank look not so long
ago has now entered English, French, German and quite
a few other languages to describe a new species, the ama¬
teur sound recorder. Armed with a tape recorder instead
of a camera, he is the equivalent of the amateur photo¬
grapher in the World of sound. And yet, paradoxically,
sound recording by amateurs is as old as the phonograph.
At first, there were nothing but amateurs.
As early as 1878, the year when he had the first talking
machine constructed by his assistant, John Kruesi, Tho¬
mas Edison, foresaw a "'10-point programme" for the
phonograph. This is the way he jotted it down:
1. Letters and dictation of all sorts without a steno¬
grapher.
2. Talking books for the blind.
3. Teaching by oral methods.
4. Musical reproduction.
5. Family albums (various events and the last words
of dying persons).
6. Musical snuff-boxes and toys.
7. "Talking clocks" indicating in a clear voice the right
time to go home, to prepare meals, etc.
8. The preservation of correct accents in various
languages.
9. Educational uses.
10. Permanent recording of telephone conversations.
In short, Edison's fertile imagination had predicted
every possible use of his "talking-machine" except its
most important one. At that time, of course, not even
as prophetic a genius as Edison could imagine the mass
production of records and tapes (though envisaged by

The Unesco Courier. March 1960
Charles Cros in 1877) or the use of recordings in radio
and television broadcasting. The first phonograph
recorded sound on a cylinder covered with tinfoil or silver
paper (later, [with wax) and it was both a recorder and a
record-player. This was do-it-yourself sound recording at
home.
In 1880, Chancellor Bismarck recorded the student song
"Gaudeamus Igitur". In 1889, at the Paris Académie des
Beaux-Arts, composer Charles Gounod recorded a French
children's song, "'Il pleut, bergère..."
That same year, the builder of the Eiffel Tower, Gus¬
tave Eiffel, received a "new model" phonograph from
Edison as a gift. For many years it was to remain the
favourite parlour game of the great French engineer.
Every time he had friends in his home, he asked them to
speak a few words to be engraved on its wax cylinder for
posterity. As a result of this pastime, it is now possible
for modern Frenchmen to hear kiddies who later became
leading political figures talk of how they rolled then-
hoops in the Tuileries Gardens one day in 1891 or the
warning of learned members of
parliament in 1898 that a catas¬
trophe would result from the use
of balloons in the impending
Spanish-American War.
In 1896, a French pioneer of
sound recording, Horace Hurm,
decided to learn how to play the
oboe "phonographically" that is,
by recording himself and then
listening to the results on his
machine. By listening, he reason¬
ed, he would be able to correct
himself. At any rate, he won
first prize in 1901 at the National
Conservatory of Music in Paris...
for playing the oboe. He then
had the idea of teaching music
by sonic correspondence courses
in which recordings could be
used both for pupils' "home¬
work" and their teacher's cor¬
rections.
At the turn of the century, the
Pathé Brothers created the
"Pathêpost," an apparatus using
small disks instead of cylinders
and enabling its owner to record
and to "read" at home "phono¬
graphic letters." This created
a sensation: anyone could carry
on a correspondence without
bothering to learn to read and
write provided that he was
neither deaf nor dumb.
The ranks of these private
disk jockeys swelled considerably
until the day the mass-produced
disks appeared. That changed
everything. The old wax-cylin¬
der models (or the "Pathéposts")
were relegated to gathering no¬
thing more than dust in attics.
Professional sound recording took shape. Amateur
recording was eclipsed. Before it could reappear again,
a huge amount of ingenious and varied work had to be
done. The strangest part about this work Was that it
only began to achieve decisive results when it went back
to the old pioneer methods which had been abandoned.
Around 1930, the so-called "'flexible" record, which
permitted direct recording, was developed. Once again,
as in the days of the first cylinders, an individual
record could be engraved and heard immediately
afterward. The result was excellent, but this new process
was rather tricky to handle. In addition to near-pro¬
fessional skill, it required a minimum amount of technical
knowledge. "'Home recorders" were not very numerous.
Thomson-Houston
TRANSISTORS have helped to give sound hunters
complete freedom of movement. With battery-powered
tape-recorders run on transistors and therefore both
small and light, the amateur sound recorder no longer
has to keep his instrument within plugging-in distance
of mains electricity. He can record anywhere and at any
time. Above, a phase in the manufacture of germanium
crystal, the principal element in transistor production.
Amateur sound recording was really reborn only with
the appearance on the .market of magnetic recording,
first using wire, then tape, and this was relatively recent.
Yet a period slightly longer than a decade has seen
progress which cannot even be compared to what had
been achieved during seventy preceding years. Today,
private sound recording is taken for granted. While it
may be more widespread in some countries than in others,
the tape recorder can be seen everywhere and tends to be
as commonplace a sight as the camera. Nor is this progress
showing any signs of waning. Portable tape recorders
now run on transistors. This means that they are small
and light and it also means that the sound hunter has
been freed of his worst enemy, the restricting wire which
forced him to limit his prowling to the immediate vicinity
of electric points. Now he can record anything anywhere.
Stereophonic sound recording by amateurs has begun.
Soon, images on tape will begin to make their
appearance in the home.
Not all users of tape recorders are "amateurs". After
all, the man who relies upon a
dictating machine in his office
has not necessarily taken an in¬
terest in the art and technique of
sound reproduction any more
than the man who uses a type¬
writer or a mechanical pencil
sharpener shows a bent for litera¬
ture. Nor are all amateur re¬
corders "'sound hunters" in the
strict sense of the word that is,
they don't spend their time
roaming the landscape, tape rec¬
orders under their arms, like
the professional cameramen of
the newsreels or documentary
films. But, compared to profes¬
sional sound men, they deserve
the name of amateurs because
they don't have to go to the same
place every day to spend eight
hours manoeuvring microphones
and magnetic tapes. These
amateurs are under no obliga¬
tion. They make recordings only
in their leisure time for their
own pleasure and whenever they
feel like it or whenever an oppor¬
tunity comes up. If they are
really bitten by the bug, then
they patiently await the right
opportunity, just like the man
who hunts rabbits, tigers... or
butterflies. It is a state of mind
which makes them "sound hun¬
ters," even if they never take
their mikes outside their front
doors.
Exactly what do they do?
What does the amateur sound
hunter try to achieve? What
results has he obtained? What
can be expected of him (or her)
in the future?
These questions may seem simple, but their answeis are
quite complex. The answers vary from one country to
another, and also from one social group to anothei, for
there are sound hunters in all walks of life.
Let us take the case of France which I believe is typical.
Assuming that amateurs surveyed represent French sound
hunters as a group, we can say that nearly all of them
go through the same evolution, determined by three
distinct factors.
Aside from the fact that the laws governing passing
fads apply to tape recorders as well as to anything else,
the age of the sound hunter is of considerable importance.
For example, I have seen countless youngsters under
twenty become enthusiastic about recording. They team
CONT'D ON PAGE 8

LISTENING IN TO THE
BIRTH OF A BABY CHICK
A remarkable recording made by an amateur sound
hunter has captured on tape the birth process o'f a
baby chick both before and during the actual
hatching. It has been made by a Frenchman,
Joseph-Maurice Bourot, a scientist on the staff of
the National Centre for Scientific Research, in
Poitiers. First the heart of the still-unborn chick Is
heard beating inside the egg. The chick is still too
weak to do more than crack the shell. Soon it can
be heard breathing and, finally, it succeeds in
pecking its way out. With the tape-recorder tuned
up to full volume, the breaking open of the shell
sounds like a tremendous explosion. Photos
on these pagesa perfect pictorial version of
this unusual sound recordwere taken by R.H.
Noailles and appear in a children's book, "Un
oiseau est né " (A Bird is Born) published by
Atelier du Père Castor (Flammarion.) Paris".
» it- I
Top, a look inside the egg on 16th
and 18th day after incubation. Left,
on 21st day the chick has used its
tiny beak to break a series of hole
in the shell until, little by little,
one end of the egg is almost
ready to break away. Then, with all
the strength it can muster, the chick
puts its head against the broken end
and forces its way out into the world.
Photos © R.H. Noailles

The Unesco Courier. Morch 1960
SljlStS ï2«ï3* «.?"-"
THE EGG IS OPEN AND THE CHICK FIGHTS ITS WAY OUT. THEN, COMPLETELY EXHAUSTED, IT FLOPS DOWN BESIDE THE SHELL.
AFTER 1 5 MINUTES THE CHICK" HAS RECOVERED SUFFICIENTLY TO BE ABLE TO RAISE ITS HEAD AND SURVEY THE WORLD.
WITHIN AN HOUR THE YELLOW BALL OF FLUFF WITH BRIGHT BEADY EYES IS UPRIGHT AND NOW QUITE FIRM ON ITS FEET.

SOUND HUNTERS (Cont'd from page 5)
The three stages of the amateur
1° Baby's gurglings
2° A spree of Bach & choirs
3° Ambushing the unknown
up to buy equipment which they could not have afforded
alone... then they drop everything when they get married
and return to sound hunting only a few years later. On
the contrary, the person who takes up recording at a later
'age has less early enthusiasm but is usually less fickle.
In this respect, surveys are rather comforting. They
show that, in several countries and over the past few
years, the average age of the sound hunter is 35.
In addition, the state of technical progress at the time
the sound hunter starts his career is also important. It's
quite obvious that the delicate recording equipment of
twenty-five years ago or the temperamental wire recorder
of fifteen years ago was less tempting than today's simple,
easy-to-handle tape recorder with its high fidelity.
Finally, no matter what the influence of these first two
factors may have been, the use to which the amateur puts
his recorder follows a nearly constant curve down through
the years, aside from the specific case of correspondence
by sound (especiaUy International correspondence).
The first stage is the family album: baby's gurglings
and first words, the dog's barking, Mary's prize-winning
recitation, Jack's wedding. Since these recordings revive
common memories, members of the family listen to them
over and over again with delight and hilarity, to the
despair of nine out of ten of their friends who see in them
nothing but hopeless platitudes.
The second (and most dangerous) stage: now the ama¬
teur can handle his recorder, he knows how to balance
P. Guérin, St.-Savine, France
World Tape Pals. Inc., Dallas
Seven years ago a U.S. printer set up World Tape Pals for the
exchange of tape recordings between peoples. It now links
tape fans the world over. Here, Steve Veenker, director of the
junior section, "Teen Pals", displays some of his equipment.
Sound hunting ¡s a hobby into which young people plunge
with all the enthusiasm of their age. Above, youngsters in a
French village school question some of their classmates on
topical subjects and record the interview on a tape recorder.
sounds, he can create effects, he can edit tape. He feels
he is becoming a professional. He goes on a recording
spree of choirs, guitar players, and great organ music,
particularly Bach. He writes, acts and puts sound
effects Into theatrical, literary or musical works. He
dabbles in re-recording and concrete music. Then, he
suddenly realizes that he is not a professional after all
and that, unless he is an exceptional case, he does not
have the same equipment. It becomes clear to him that
this imitation of the professional can bring him nothing
but disappointments and that it is a blind alley for him.
Unless he decides to become a professional himself... in
which case, of course, he is no longer an amateur.
Third stage. Having learned through experience that
his true path leads in directions which professionals never
take because they cannot, the amateur begins to explore
his own territory: candid recordings, documentaries,
sound experiments. If you have to get up at three o'clock
in the morning to a certain nightingale, if you
have to lie in ambush two hours awaiting the joyous
homecoming of the neighbourhood souse, if you have to
wait a year for a "beautiful" thunderstorm, or if you
have to devote three or four years to research on an
unexplored problem, then only the amateur has a chance.
He's got time, he's in no hurry, he need not report to any
employer, his recordings do not have to be sold, he is a
free man.
O Sole Mio on a bicycle pump
FORTUNATELY, a large number of amateurs have al¬
ready reached this third stage, and we owe a lot to
them.
In the first place, many have shown a gift for the rare
or the picturesque in the choice of their subjects. This
takes imagination and a knack for being in the right place
at the right time.
Here, at random, are a few recordings which belong to
this category:
"Tiger Rag" played by a Swiss peasant band; a Nor¬
mandy blackbird whistling a French song; grackles, or
mandarin blackbirds, from Tonkin, speaking French with
a Nice accent; 1,200 trombone players all at once at a
trombone players' congress in Basle; the sound that a

The Unesco Courier. March 1960
Swiss lake makes when it freezes; a wedding party at the
Paris Ecole des Beaux Arts to the accompaniment of the
art students' band; the religious festivals of gypsies (as
joyous as a country fair); the old French song "Cadet
Rousselle" sung in flawless French by children at a
Moscow School; Molière's "L'Avare" (The Miser), played
in colourful French by the students of the Minneapolis
High School;
The constantly-astounding speeches recited by guides
at historical monuments; descriptions of the first flight
across the English Channel spoken by Madame Blériot,
the pilot's widow, and pioneer airmen; the tale of Eric de
Bisshop's shipwrecks by one of his companions; prison
guards' recollections of celebrated inmates; an argument
with a traffic policeman as he writes a summons; children
talking about artificial satellites; the initiation ceremonies
in French wine-drinking brotherhoods; the impressions of
a novice after his first flight in a glider; a wedding pro¬
posal (in cowboy style) sent by disk to the future bride's
father; all the different ways of saying "yes" recorded in
a church or at a city hall during marriages;
A profession of faith by a hermit bishop who had
re-established the Celtic rites of the 1st Century in a
forest in Britanny; all the interviews of centenarians
recorded during the "Tape Recorder Rally" organized in
France in 1958; "stolen phrases" and other hoaxes (in
which the amateur usually admits things to his victims
afterwards); counting-songs recorded by schoolteachers;
all kinds of strange or precious musical instruments
discovered in cellars, attics of obscure museums; a little
three-year-old Spanish girl bellowing a song in the midst
of a raving crowd in front of a Basque jai-lai court; a
joyous cooper singing the praises of wine and accom¬
panying himself by banging his wine barrels with a
mallet; "O sole mio" played on a bicycle pump; the music-
loving nightingales of Kent, recorded by a gardener who
is both a poet and a master sound recorder, and judged
"the recording of the year" in Great Britain in 1959.
To this varied list, too long and yet too short, should
be added a few recordings of unknown music discovered
by sound hunters with a penchant for cultural detective
work, and those countless recordings of folk music which
either capture traditions on the way out or else revive
them.
It might also toe noted that many of today's stage, fllm
Photos P. Guénn, St-Savine, France
Tape-recorders are becoming standard school equipment in
many countries, and are proving valuable aids in promoting
self-expression in children. Here, a class on Reunion island
in the Indian Ocean records a message for far-off friends.
Recording "director" in a French school classroom gives the
signal for a session to begin. This particular recording was
later included In one of the regular French radio program¬
mes which are devoted to sound hunters and their work.
and singing stars were recorded for the first time when
they were completely unknown, by amateurs. Many of
them have their own tape recorders and use them either
to test their work (Francis Lemarque, a leading French
songwriter, sketched his "Mon Copain de Pekin"My
Pal from Peking on his portable tape recorder in a train
back from Peking), to rehearse or else to relax among
friends by getting away from their own usual roles. At
last, you might say, a clown can play Hamlet. All this
adds up to a great deal of material for historians at all
levels.
Nor should we forget that the first recording of a
childbirth ever broadcast by radio (over the French na¬
tional radio network in 1951) was made by an amateur...
who happened to be the husband and the father of the
two "actors".
The pants of the ants at mealtime
THE great wealth of private sound recordings is
seldom appreciated at its true value because it has
never been assembled. But it can be safely said
that this value is quite high from ethnographical, socio¬
logical, political, artistic, scientific and cultural view¬
points, in addition to representing a considerable hoard
of anecdotes. This is only normal, after all, because the
great mass of amateurs have far more opportunities than
various professional organizations for recording anything
and everything.
The amateur's contribution Is also important when the
sound hunter turns to the laboratory. Several amateurs,
for example, have done some intensive research on ampli¬
fication with remarkable results. I will just mention
three of them.
After four months of preparation and 100 hours of
experimenting, Roger-Paul Besançon, a salesman of watch
gears and jewels (he's Swiss, of course), managed to isolate
the various elements of a watch and recorded the noise
of each of them amplified to machine shop volume!
A young girl from Brittany Miss Yann Evenou, whose
father also happens to be a tape-recorder fanatic, suc¬
ceeded in making an ant's mealtime audible.
Finally, a scientist, Joseph-Maurice Bourot, revealed the
noises inside an apparently soundless pile of dead Wood
and also the sounds of life within a hen's egg just before
hatching.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SOUND HUNTERS (Continued)
THE FAMOUS RECORDING
OF THE 'SINGING DOGS'
This last recording is certainly one of the most amazing
ever made. First, you hear the beating of the chick's
heart inside the egg. Then the chick pecks at the shell
with Its beak, but it Is still too weak to break out. It only
manages to crack the shell; now we can hear its breath¬
ing. Finally, the chick starts drilling again. This time it
succeeds. And, with the recorder turned up to its top
amplification position, the breaking of that eggshell
sounds like the explosion at Bikini! (See page 6 and back
cover for photo story showing how a baby chick is born.)
In addition to '"sound documentaries", there are also
"sound experiments." Mr. Bourot has quite a few of
them to his credit. One of them consisted of running
the same loop of tape half a million times over the same
playback head thus proving that tape virtually never
wears out... at least not by playing it back.
This experiment also proves the amazing patience
displayed by amateurs. It is not rare, by any means. As
an example, there is that famous recording of the "singing
dogs" it was so perfect that many listeners believed, and
insist on believing despite what has been said, that a
skilled trainer managed to make dogs sing. Actually, it
is nothing less than a note-by-note editing of recordings
of various barks by several dogs.
Fake editing can make a man say sentences which he
never uttered. I know what I am talking about in this
case, because, as a professional radio and TV man, I've
been the victim on several occasions. But since I happen
to be an amateur as well, I should also like to mention an
example of a personal experiment Which could only be
done with a home recorder. Every year for the past six
years and at just about the same date, I have recorded
each of my two daughters reading successive pages from
a book. I plan to continue this for about ten years.
Then I'll put my sections of tape together and I shall
have a sound record, in a continuous story, of the evolution
of these two voices and of their personalities since child¬
hood.
A large part of our rich heritage of amateur recordings
is known because sound hunters have been able to appear
on radio programmes. It is this opportunity, no doubt,
which has certainly been the most important factor in
guiding them to that third stage of maturity which I
mentioned earlier. Going on the air is a form of glory
but it is also a severe and fruitful test. Once you have
heard yourself and the impression of others who have
heard you, then you know whether or not you are wasting
your time. Listening to others tells you what to avoid
and what you might attempt yourself.
In France, the starting gun for these programmes was
fired by the French national radio on February 9, 1948.
That day I thought I was just indulging in a harmless
form of amusement by playing for the public a few disks
made at home for internal consumption. I turned out
to be a sorcerer's apprentice. That one-day broadcast
snowballed into a series of programmes which has been
on the air for the past twelve years. Similar programmes
have gone out on other stations. In many countries ama¬
teurs have formed associations and the associations have
formed the International Sound Recording Federation.
They publish their own magazines, some of Which have
acquired considerable authority, such as the "Revue du
Son" in France and the "Tape-Recording and Hi-Fi
Magazine" in Britain. An International Amateur Recording
Contest has been organized and, at its last session in
London, a jury heard recordings from 18 different countries
and five continents. It awarded substantial prizes to
winners who no longer need envy the best of professionals.
One of them was a village priest in Burgundy whose
technical mastery in stereophonic recording Was dazzling.
Quite a few of the recordings which I've mentioned
earlier were awarded prizes by these international
contests. Some of them have even been issued as com¬
mercial recordings. Sound hunting is no longer just a
hobby. Certain associations help the Red Cross or other
welfare organizations, making recordings for the blind, for
example. The International Federation maintains rela¬
tions with Unesco as a recognized international non¬
governmental organization and it has started to carry out
a policy of co-operation which will probably aim first
at supplying the beginnings of a "recorded sound Bank."
One of the Federation's founding members, the Interna¬
tional Educational Centre for Sound Correspondence,
organizes regular exchanges among the schools and the
children of some twenty-five countries. Bringing the
world together is far less of an abstract idea when it is
expressed on such a plane.
Finally, just as soldiers are recruited from civilian life,
more and more professionals in the radio, recording,
radio-electric and electronic industries are rising from the
ranks of the amateurs. One of them was Stephan Kudel-
ski, the brilliant designer of one of the world's first (both
in quality and in date) self-contained tape recorders.
There is no need for me to add that this certainly does
not mean that amateurism is perishing under the Weight
of its own progress. Quite the contrary. It is continuing,
developing and prospering.
And, less than a century later, we have already gone
much further than anyone could have dared to predict
in the days when the phonograph was considered a scien¬
tific oddity or just a parlour toy.
