THE MODERN PYRAMID
OF ASWAN: SADD EL AALI
by Albert Raccah
Albert Raccah
COAL.' Electric power production in Egypt will be given a tremendous boost when the Aswan High Dam (The Sadd El
Aali) is completed. Water from the dam will be used to operate 16 turbine units buried more than 300 feet underground which to¬
gether with the existing power station at Aswan will give Egypt a total annual electricity production of 15,000 million kilowatt-hours,
reducing its cost to consumers by two-thirds. Photo was taken during the construction of the present Aswan power station. Map on
opposite page shows the relative positions of the sites of the two dams. Between them lies group of islands including Philae.
44

The Unesco Courier. February 1960
fanning out in
GYPT is a gift of the Nile." Thus wrote
Herodotus, the Greek historian and tra¬
veller of the fifth century B.C. Indeed,
all of this land of nearly 400,000 square
miles would be nothing but a vast desert
from the Libyan frontier to the Red Sea
and from the Mediterranean to the
Sudanese frontier if the Nile did not
cross it from south to north before
a vast delta 100 miles from the coast.
This is a rain-starved country. On an average there
are six rainy days in Cairo per year and only one at
Aswan. It is easy to understand why the ancient Egyp¬
tians considered the Nile of divine essence: it was the
very source of all life in Egypt.
One also understands Why all agricultural development
is at the mercy of the amount of water taken from the
Nile. During the flood season, an immense volume of
water is lost to the sea. The present Aswan dam was
built to harness a part of it for irrigation in spring and
summer.
Called in Arabic "El Khazzan"
(the reservoir), it was built at As¬
wan between 1899 and 1902 on the
granite rock of the river bed in the
middle of the First Cataract. The
dam, 100 feet high, was to make it
possible to store 980 million cubic
metres of water in an artificial lake
extending upstream for 140 miles,
thus inundating the island of Philae
and its sanctuaries, as well as part
of the cultivated land.
Between 1907 and 1912, the height
of the dam was raised another 16
feet, giving a total capacity of 2,400
million cubic metres to the artificial
reservoir which then backed the
waters of the Nile upstream to a total
of 185 miles.
Finally, between 1929 and 1934, the
dam was further raised, by 30 feet
bringing the reservoir's total capacity
to five thousand million cubic metres.
The artificial lake reached back as
far as Wadi-Halfa, 225 miles up the
Nile from Aswan.
The present dam contains one and
half million cubic metres of masonry
(the Great Pyramid of Cheops had
two and half million originally).
The dam wall is over a mile long and has 180 sluice
gates operating on two levels. The iron control gates are
all opened in July, during the high water season, so that
the Nile's muddy waters may flood and fertilize the
country. Early in October the sluices are closed and the
river is kept back. In early spring when Egypt begins to
lack water, the Aswan dam acts as the reservoir which
irrigates the country.
A vast inland sea
covering 1,150 sq. miles
But the Aswan reservoir is inadequate for Egypt's pre¬
sent-day needs. For the past half-century, agri¬
culture and industry have been unable to keep pace
with the problem of food for its rapidly rising population.
Egypt urgently needs more land for cultivation, better and
higher crop yields, hydro-electric energy for its expanding
Industry.
This "living space" can be won thanks to the Nile, the
real wealth of Egypt, and by the construction of a new
dam, the Sadd El Aali. The purpose of the High Dam,
the preliminary engineering work on which has already
been done, is the total utilization of the Nile's waters.
Not a drop of the river will be lost in the sea.
The dam wall, to be erected on a site four miles
upstream from the present Aswan dam, will rise 225 feet
and have a crest three miles in length. It will create an
artificial lake 300 miles long with a capacity of nearly
130,000 million cubic metres and a surface area of 1,150
square miles. Several localities, including the city of
Wadi Haifa will be submerged. Since the rapids of the
Second Cataract will disappear under 30 feet of water,
regular navigation between Egypt and the Sudan will
become possible for the first time.
Two and a half million acres
of desert land will bloom
In a climate as hot as that of Nubia, it is to be expected
that such a vast expanse of water will give rise to
evaporation. It is estimated that the atmosphere will
annually absorb 10,000 million cubic metres of the 130,000
million stored. The resulting rise in the humidity ratio
of the Egyptian and Sudanese regions neighbouring on
the artificial lake is certain to have
an important effect on vegetation
growth.
80 "
; m. \
Some of the water reserve is also
sure to be lost through fissures under
the lake-bed. The Nile already pays
a heavy tribute to the desert as it
crosses Nubia and Upper Egypt. In
these regions, it flows over a veritable
sieve. During the flood season in
August and September, 5,000 million
cubic metres are estimated to be lost
between Aswan and Asiut, and 100
cubic metres a second between Asiut
and Cairo. The volume seems in¬
significant compared with the Nile's
flow at that season: nearly 9,000 cubic
metres a second.
However, the average flow of the
river is only 2,510 cubic metres a sec¬
ond, much less than that of the Rio
de la Plata (25,000 cubic metres a
second) or the Mississippi (18,000 a
second).
Map: Documentation Centre on Ancient Egypt, Cairo
With the great reservoir which the
Sadd El Aali will create, Egypt will
be able to increase its arable land
surface by nearly half. In reality it
is expected that as much as two and
a half million acres of desert land will be brought under
cultivation and that 750,000 acres now flooded will be
reclaimed.
Although the greatest advantage of the Sadd El Aali
lies in the possibility of opening up new areas for farming
and ensuring their regular water supply, the energy out¬
put foreseen for the dam would in itself foe enough to
justify its construction. Four tunnels for water evacuat¬
ion during flood periods and four chute tunnels will service
16 turbine units buried more than '300 feet under the
granite rock. They will operate all year round with a
'"head" (height from which the water drops) ave¬
raging 200 feet. The turbines will have an estimated
total capacity of 2 million H.P. and an annual production
of 10-12,000 million kilowatt-hours a year, nearly ten
times present total consumption in Egypt. The Boulder
Dam in the United States produces only half as much
power. The combination of the hydro-electric potentials of
both the Sadd El Aali and Aswan dam will raise Egypt's
capacity to more than 15,000 million kilowatt-hours a year.
When the High Dam of Aswan is completed, four years
will be needed to fill its basin capacity. In that period,
the population of Egypt will probably continue to increase
at the same rate as in previous years and this increase
(8,000,000 persons within the next ten years) makes the
building of the Sadd El Aali a vital necessity.
45
