WHO Photo by Philip Boucas
At first sight, it seems like a
straightforward fight between
man and mosquito.
The female of the Anopheles
, mosquito bites a malaria suf¬
ferer and sucks up the malaria
parasite together with his blood. Two
weeks later she is able to pass on the infec¬
tion by biting a healthy person.
To break the chain of infection, therefore,
all that is needed is to kill the mosquito
before the malaria parasite has had time to
develop within its body and become a
danger for the next person bitten.
The whole theory of malaria eradication
is based on the mosquito's habit of resting
on interior walls after it has fed on
someone's blood, and on the possibility
of spraying those walls with "residual"
insecticides that will kill all the mosquitos
settling on them over a period of several
months. Yet in actual practice, unbeliev¬
ably intricate problems arise.
The world-wide campaign to stamp out
malaria is aimed at protecting twelve
hundred million human beings,
widely different in their way of life and
habits. The majority live in villages diffi¬
cult to reach and far from any main roads.
Such people regard as intruders those who
come to spray the walls of their homes. In
some places the houses have no walls, only
a primitive roof. In others, the mosquito
does not settle on the walls, but prefers
to go and digest the blood of its victims
in some outdoor retreat away from the
houses. Elsewhere the mosquito bites only
outside. It may happen that the mosquito
is irritated by the presence of the insecticide
and learns to avoid it, or else does not
settle long enough for the poison to take
effect.
A still more serious problem is that of
resistance to the insecticide. It was this
that prompted the decision of the WHO
Member Governments at the Eighth World
Health Assembly in Mexico City in 1955
to declare all-out war on malaria. It had
become imperative to stamp out the disease
from the world before all the species of
12

OUTWITTING
THE WILY
ANOPHELES
malaria-carrying mosquitos would develop
resistance to the insecticides used.
Almost everywhere until then, the fight
against malaria had been carried on in a
spirit of optimism. The spraying of the
inside walls of houses with insecticides went
on without undue haste; when one village
had been done, the workers moved on to
the next. More and more districts were
gradually being protected against the
disease. The work went on, slowly but
steadily, the idea being that with per¬
severance and plenty of time it would
sooner or later be possible to treat all the
malarial regions of the earth.
It was in 1951 that the cry of alarm
first went up: "The insecticide we are using
is no longer active!" This was the first
counter-attack; the mosquito was putting up
resistance. At first resistance was assumed
to be the result of the mosquito becoming
accustomed to the insecticide as is the case
with alcoholics or drug-addicts whose
intake of alcohol or drugs is constantly
increasing and yet produces less and less
effect. The mosquitos too, seemed to
become inured to bigger doses of insec¬
ticide, which at last failed to kill them.
They appeared to have "acquired" im¬
munity.
Out of this situation was born the idea
of world-wide malaria eradication. It was
decided to replace piecemeal campaigns by
total war. The operation, it was realized,
must be completed while the insecticide
continued to kill and before the hitherto
sporadic resistance became general.
This resistance was believed to be due
to spraying at insufficient strength, thus
giving the mosquitos a chance to grow
accustomed to the insecticide. The essence
of the eradication policy was therefore to
make an all-out effort to engage in mass
slaughter of the malaria-carrying mosquitos
for the length of time required to cure the
existing malaria victims and eliminate the
infection. After that, even if the mosquitos
came back, there would no longer be any
infection for them to spread.
If the idea had ever been entertained
that it might be possible to eliminate once
and for all the malaria-carrying species of
mosquitos, it was now abandoned. The
mosquito had given its answer.
Then it was the turn of the entomologists,
the geneticists, and the biochemists to
launch their counter-attack, and this time
the battle was engaged in the calm
atmosphere of the laboratories.
Mosquitos take very kindly to life in
confinement. From all over the world,
mosquito eggs, tiny grey specks, are sent
by post in boxes or in ordinary envelopes,
to the famous Ross Institute of Tropical
Medicine in London. Twenty-four hours
later the eggs hatch out, and the wriggling
larvae that emerge are fed, one item of
their diet being baby-food in powder form,
the same that builds bonny British babies.
In a week's time the aduUs begin to fly,
in cages of very fine netting. The males
are fed on sugar, the females on blood
which is sometimes taken from an ento¬
mologist's forearm but more frequently
from the shaved belly of a guinea-pig.
The mosquitos are then exposed to
insecticides, and those that resist are
separated from those that do not. The
next step is mating: "resisters" are mated
with "resisters", "non-resisters" with "non-
resisters", and then "resisters" with "non-
resisters". Some species of mosquitos
refuse to mate in captivity, and for them
a few entomologists have succeeded in
carrying out artificial insemination.
rom these couples come new families,
I which may be resisters, non-resisters
or hybrids, each reacting in their own
way to the' various insecticides to which
they are exposed. Scores of generations
are studied in this way, and their behaviour
is carefully noted.
This patient, meticulous research work
has made it possible for entomologists and
geneticists to determine with some accuracy
the nature of this phenomenon of
resistance.
Mosquitos do not acquire resistance, they
are born with it; in fact it can now be
affirmed that even before the residual
insecticides were invented, some individual
mosquitos were already "resisters". They
had in them the genes of resistance, and
were protected even against insecticides that
were still in the future.

In the all-out war to kill off malaria-bearing
mosquitos, entomologists, geneticists and
biochemists are helping to launch a counter¬
attack to the resistance which mosquitos ¡tit
showing to insecticides. Far left, in the Rosa
Institute of Tropical Medicine, London, mos¬
quitos are exposed to insecticides, their
resistance is studied and new generations are
bred for further research. Left, in Communi¬
cable Disease Centre of U.S. Public Health
Service, insects are exposed to radiation beams
from Cobalt 60 Chamber during similar
studies. Such patient, meticulous research
work helps to determine the nature of the
mosquitos' resistance. Below, in a Philippines
village, health team prepares to spray walls
of houses where mosquitos settle after feeding.
WHO Photo by Homer Page
It has now been established beyond
doubt that at first the insecticide killed off
the susceptible mosquitos. The remainder,
the resisters, all survived and multiplied,
producing a whole new population of
mosquitos gradually less and less affected
by the lethal properties of the insecticide.

The scientists then set about finding out
something more about the mechanism
of resistance. In the case of a parti¬
cular insecticide they discovered that, for¬
tunately for the mosquito and unfortuna¬
tely for us, its organism contains an enzyme
which sets about altering the chemical com¬
position of the insecticide by dissociating
the atoms which make the substance toxic.
The insecticide manufacturers were inform¬
ed of this discovery, and their chemists
are now trying to develop an insecticide
which will become more effective when
acted upon by the enzyme in the mosqui¬
to's organism.
There are unfortunately other insecticide
troubles besides mosquito resistance. For
instance the walls to be sprayed may inter¬
fere with the action of the insecticide.
There are walls which soak up the
insecticide and prevent it from doing its
lethal work, and there are walls which
decompose it and render it harmless. Then
there is the good housewife, anxious to
keep her house clean, who whitewashes or
papers her walls, thus covering up the
insecticide.
All these factors have to be taken
carefully into account in organizing a world
antimalaria campaign. Every detail must
be watched and every eventuality guarded
against. This calls for a thorough know¬
ledge of the mosquito and its reactions to
the various insecticides, a careful choice
of the insecticide to be used, the precise
determination of the dosage required, and
so on.
The results of laboratory research should
make it possible to get round most of
these difficulties. By careful preliminary
studies costly mistakes can be avoided and
the road can be smoothed towards final
eradication.
WHO
13
