UNESCO COLOUR ART SLIDE SERIES
BRINGS RARE ART INTO THE E
Unesco
"The Shepherds receiving the news". This detail from "The Nativity" is taken from
the Unesco Art Slides series on Yugoslav mediaeval frescoes. The painting, dating
from about 1265, is found in the richly-decorated church of the Trinity at Sopocani.
Little-known art treasures are
now being brought to the
general public at a price it can
reasonably afford thanks to a
new series of Unesco Art Slides.
These collections of slides veritable
miniature "museums" in plastic boxes
illustrate the latest use made by
Unesco of colour photography to
bring the Iworld's great Works of art
to a |wider public. Unesco believes
that, with the great number of pro¬
jectors now is use, high-quality, inex¬
pensive colour slides will bring within
the reach of many, particularly in
schools and study groups, a know¬
ledge of the great masterpieces of art
of different nations which are as yet
insufficiently known.
Since the first sets of slides have
been placed on sale, anyone possessing
a slide projector and screen can sit
back and admire scores of works of
art in the comfort of his own living
room. The first six sets offer a
choice of paintings from the tombs
and temples of ancient Egypt, Yugo¬
slav mediaeval frescoes, the Ajanta
cave paintings of India, the Persian
miniatures of the Imperial Library of
Teheran, Spanish Romanesque paint¬
ings and paintings from the Nor¬
wegian "stave churches". Three more
sets are due to be published later this
year; Masaccio the Frescoes of Flo¬
rence ; Australia Aboriginal Paint¬
ings from Arnhem Land; and Ceylon
Paintings from Temple Shrine and
Rock.
Of undoubted value to students,
teachers and lecturers, the Unesco
Art Slides collection has, however,
been specially designed for use by
non-specialists. Each set comprises
30 framed slides (5x5cms.) in a plas¬
tic box with an explanatory booklet
containing texts and captions in
English, French and Spanish. They
have been prepared by Publications
Filmées d'Art et d'Histoire, Paris.
Two further sets of slides have been
prepared by the French National Com¬
mission for Unesco to commemorate
the i two exhibitions held in Paris
during the tenth session of the
Unesco General Conference. These
are : "Orient-Occident-Encounters
and Influences in Fifty Centuries of
Art" and "The Art of Gandhara and
Central Asia". The set covering the
first exhibition is made up of 41 slides
in two boxes; the second comprises a
box of 21 slides.
The great periods of art which
come to life again in Unesco's colour
slides are also covered in the albums
of Unesco's World Art Series. These
albums of full page colour reproduc¬
tions have now been published over
several years by the New York Gra¬
phic Society by arrangement with
Unesco. They are devoted to the
great periods of art of all civilizations.
CONT'D ON PAGE 2 5

The miniatures in the "Iran" series of
Unesco colour slides are reproduced
from six manuscripts In the Imperial
Library in Teheran. Photo shows a
scene in the forecourt of a garden.
Work dates from end of XVth century.
© Unesco
Paintings in the "Spain" slide
series comprise frescoes and
panels from Romanesque sanc¬
tuaries in northern and eastern
Spain, particularly Catalonia
and Aragon. Above, detail of
a 12th-century church frontal
now in the Art Museum of Cata¬
lonia, Barcelona. It depicts
the Mass of St. Martin of Tours.
© Unesco
i*£&Êti£*:T*J
Opposite page, maid-servants
attending ladies at a banquet.
Fresco from an 18th Dynasty
Egyptian tomb. It is one of 30
reproductions in the new Unes¬
co colour slide series devoted
to "Egypt-PaintingsfromTombs
and Temples". The colours
are as fresh and vivid as when
the Egyptian artists applied
their paint 35 centuries ago.
© Unesco
24

COLOUR ART SLIDES (Continued) The Unesco Courier. March 1960
-4-J5
In each album, there are 32 colour
plates and texts written by scholars
of international standing. Selected
works are photographed by a Unesco
mission aided by the Unesco National
Commission in the country concerned.
While Unesco art albums have been
well received (some of them have
appeared in second or third editions)
their price is relatively high because
of their format and quality. This is
why Unesco is now issuing its art
slides so as to reach a larger audience,
especially i in schools and cultural
institutions. Unesco's catalogues of
colour reproductions and its travell¬
ing art exhibitions also aim at this.
The ideal situation of bringing peo¬
ple into direct contact with works of
art is hard to achieve because of
financial difficulties and material
obstacles which limit the movement
of such works. Leaving the organiza¬
tion of such exhibitions to the initia¬
tive of museums and public and pri¬
vate collections, Unesco has chosen
the solution of the "imaginary
museum".
The "imaginary museum" is based
on mass-produced colour reproduc¬
tions, which play the same role in
painting as do recordings in music.
Today, as can be seen in the catalo¬
gues of colour reproductions published
regularly by Unesco since 1949, hun¬
dreds of them are issued every year
in the world. Some two thousand have
already been selected by an interna¬
tional committee of experts for men¬
tion in Unesco's catalogues, where
they are shown in black and White
for identification purposes.
By taking this periodic inventory of
colour reproductions, Unesco tells the
public which worthy reproductions of
the inaccessible original works are
available and, at the same time, offers
publishers a panorama of world pro¬
duction, enabling them to see the
gaps which have to be filled.
One of the Unesco catalogues is
devoted to paintings prior to 1860;
the other to paintings from 1860 to
the present. In some countries they
have helped in the setting up of ar¬
chives of reproductions similar to
those maintained by Unesco and also
in the organization of museums of
reproductions.
By using its own archives, Unesco
has organized seven travelling exhibi¬
tions during the past ten years. Each
has been prepared in numerous copies
so that it can be circulated simul¬
taneously in many countries and for
long periods. Whatever the subject
"Paintings Prior to 1860", "From Im¬
pressionism Till Today", "Drawings
by Leonardo da Vinci", "Japanese
Woodcuts'", "Two Thousand Years of
Chinese Painting", "Persian Miniatu¬
res" and "Water Colours" each exhi¬
bition has been designed to appeal to
highly diversified audiences. .The or¬
ganization and aims of each exhibi
tion are explained in a catalogue by
an internationally-known specialist.
Seventy-seven countries have now
shown these exhibitions, either in
museums and art galleries or in
schools and cultural centres.
All orders for Unesco Art Slides should
be placed directly with the distributors,
Publications Filmées d'Art et d'Histoire,
11, Rue Carvès, Montrouge (Seine) France.
The price varies according to transport and
other costs, but each series of 30 slides will
not exceed $10.00 U.S. or the equivalent
in national currencies. Educational and
cultural institutions are entitled to special
terms on application.
Orders for the two sets of slides prepared
by the French National Commission for
Unesco should also be sent directly to
Publications Filmées d'Art et d'Histoire.
Prices are as follows: For the two boxes
'" Orient-Occident", $13.00 U.S.; for the box
"The Art of Gandhara", $6.50 U.S. or the
equivalent in national currencies (trans¬
portation included). Educational and cul¬
tural institutions are entitled to special
terms on application.
For information on volumes in the
Unesco World Art Series apply to leading
booksellers or to the Division of Arts and
Letters, Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Pa¬
ris 7e.
For catalogues of reproductions write to
Unesco Sales Agents (see page 35).
