A UNESCO VESSEL
TO SAIL THE SEAS
by Augusto Pérez-Vitoria
Dept. of Natural Sciences, Unesco
A Unesco ship may soon be sailing the high seas. An
international vessel designed for oceanological
research and weighing between 1,000 and 1,200 tons,
it will be both a floating laboratory with equipment
for an international group of scientists to work
on board and a training school for young oceanographers
chemists, physicists, geologists and biologists. The blue
and white flag of the United Nations flying from its mast
may become a familiar sight in the ports of the Indian
Ocean.
Why has the Indian Ocean been chosen for its opera¬
tions? Because this is the least known of all the oceans
one of our last unexplored frontiers. Since 1873 less than
two dozen vessels have carried out océanographie inves¬
tigations there. The international ship will be of service
to all nations wishing to do research in these still unknown
waters. It will also be an outstanding demonstration of
practical international co-operation between the scientists
of many nations.
The idea of putting an océanographie vessel at Unesco's
disposal was born several years ago. It was first considered
by the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations
in 1946 and approved in 1952 by the Indo-Pacific Fisheries
Council, in 1955 it was discussed by a Unesco body, the
international Advisory Committee on Marine Sciences;
finally, Unesco's General Conference decided in 1958 to
submit the project to an international conference meeting
in Copenhagen, from July 11 to 16 this year.
The cost of adapting the ship (about $300,000) and the
annual operating expenses (approximately the same
amount) would be covered by Unesco's ordinary budget. It
is hoped that Unesco will receive the ship as a gift or at
a symbolic price. So as to develop the work more rapidly,
it is also proposed to set up a special fund made up of
voluntary contributions from individual States and
organizations.
Vast programme
of marine research
If the first stage of this international océanographie
venture gives the results that are hoped for, it can be
followed by another more ambitious plan: the
construction of a large, up-to-date océanographie vessel
filled with the last word in equipment which, because of
its cost or complexity, has never yet been installed in any
nationally owned ship. This would provide ideal condi¬
tions for leading specialists in the marine sciences to
undertake a series of top-level research projects, without
entirely giving up the training of a group of young ocea¬
nographers. But the cost of this ambitious and worth¬
while project runs into several million dollars so that the
first international action will have to be on a more modest
scale.
But the plan to build and operate an océanographie
vessel is not an isolated project. It will be accompanied
in Unesco's programme for 1961-62 and subsequent years
by a large-scale plan of océanographie study and
research.
Already for some years past Unesco has been carrying
out work in the various branches of the marine sciences.
It has granted fellowships, met the requests of Member
States for specialist advice and material aid, and has
provided other assistance for scientific publications and
meetings. It has helped to organize regional seminars
and round tables and has taken part in international,
congresses such as the first International Océanographie
Congress convened by the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, which was attended by over
1,200 scientists from fifty countries, at U.N. Headquarters,
New York, last September. Two months later, Unesco
convened in Monaco, in collaboration with the Interna¬
tional Atomic Energy Agency, the International Confe¬
rence on the Disposal of Radioactive Wastes, whose work
both from the social and scientific viewpoints,, aroused
the greatest interest.
Deep sea venture
for 14 Nations
These long-established activities will be greatly expanded
if a proposed 500% increase in the budget is accord¬
ed them. Attention is first to be given to the Indian
Ocean: here Unesco will contribute to the international
programme drawn up under the supervision of the
Special Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR) of
the International Council of Scientific Unions. Ships
and scientists from 14 countries will share in this pro¬
gramme, carrying out intensive studies in the area for
the next four years. Fellowships will be granted to
young oceanographers from the region so that they can
do practical work on the ships taking part in SCOR'S
international campaign; other students will receive
grants for studies in research establishments of other
countries. Several international specialists will join the
staffs of regional centres of physio-chemical oceanography
and marine biology. These centres will receive new
equipment to enable them to study and classify a portion
of the samples and specimens collected.
Experts sent out by Unesco will also take part in region¬
al in-service training courses and round-table discussions
at which the progress of' the expeditions will be reviewed
as well as the value and scope of the results obtained;
scientists from the SCOR expedition will also attend
meetings when their research vessels make calls in these
regional centres.
The neighbouring coastal regions of South-East Asia
will also benefit to a certain extent from Unesco's assis¬
tance, which will gradually, be increased and extended to
other parts of the world. -Unesco's océanographie vessel
will also make its contributions in all regions where it
can be made available.
A widespread effort to improve the teaching of the
marine sciences and to increase the number of university
chairs and océanographie institutes is also planned. More
students and research workers must be attracted to' the
marine sciences for without them any large-scale pro¬
gramme of study and research will run into serious
obstacles.
Finally, Unesco's Océanographie Section will prepare
and supervise that part of the international study and
research plan with which the Organization is directly
concerned and will assist in all the joint projects of
Governments represented on the Intergovernmental Océa¬
nographie Commission to be set up within Unesco. The
same group will ensure the co-ordination of related
projects launched by other Specialized Agencies of the
United Nations and by the different Océanographie Asso¬
ciations and Councils already at work on an interna¬
tional level.
18
