THE PAINTER
WITH THE
HUMAN TOUCH
by Enrique Lafuente Ferrari
Director, Museum of Modern Art, Madrid
T̂
M his year, the wonlid celebrates the three
^^B^ hundredth anniversary of the death of one of
the greatest artists Europe has known: the
Spanish painter Diego de Suva y Velazquez.
Velazquez was a precocious child whose interest in art
showed itself early and he began his apprenticeship when
only ten. But even during ¡his formative years,
Velazquez revealed that he had rejected the artistic
conventionalism of his times. The ideal of tihe Renais¬
sance, conceived by Italian genius, had ushered in a
period during which art had as its aim the representation
of Beauty, the creation of a world peopled by lovely and
perfect creatures not to be met with in this life.
But for Velazquez only life was of any interest, the life
14
of reality, hum/ble and prosaic, the visual world before
our eyes. And he set about to perpetuate this world in
his works of art. His was a radical departure in the
very conception of painting.
Velazquez was no lover of rhetoric. or the mere anec¬
dote: he preferred the modest and serious prose of every¬
day life. It was for this reason that even as a young man
he devoted himself to the painting of stall life and por¬
traits. And when subjects from the Christian iconography
such, as Christ in the House of Mary and Martha were pro¬
posed ¡to him, he departed from tradition and painted
a kitchen in the foreground, putting the main theme
itself into the distant background, reducing it to its most
human dimensions.
CONT'D ON PAGE 18

The Unesco Courier. December 1960
Photos Anderson © Editions du Dimanche, from the album "Velazquez"
COURT
DWARFS
AND JESTERS
Within the grandeur and pomp of the court of
Philip IV lived a strange little world of deformed
people who wandered about the palace and often
found their way into the studio of the King's painter.
To Velazquez they offered ideal models for experi¬
menting freely with his views on the techniques of
painting. Ortega y Gasset has even declared that
these portraits of dwarfs and jesters are among the
painter's best works. Velazquez did not believe that
the values most often praised, such as beauty,
strength and wealth, were the most worthy. Above
these and more intensely deep and moving he felt
was the value of ordinary life which he saw as far
more sad and dramatic. That is why the negative
aspects of these misshapen creatures emerge in his
paintings here with positive values. Portrait on oppo¬
site page is that of Menippus, the Greek cynic and
satirist, for which Velazquez used an unknown model
of seedy appearance. This often-reproduced work
was a companion piece for his portrait of Aesop.
15

Photos Anderson © Editions du Dimanche, album "Velazquez

The Unesco Courier. December 1960
Prado Museum, Madrid
Las Meninas. "What realism! What a magnificent achievement!" Picasso exclaimed years before
he began his series of paintings directly inspired by this great masterpiece. When Théophile Gautier
first saw the work in the Prado he cried out: "This is no painting; it is life perpetuated." Velazquez's
picture of the royal princess and her entourage is in fact one of the most remarkable paintings of all
times. And like many of the artist's great works it is a paradox of art. When we gaze at it from a
distance it appears as an extremely precise, realistic work which gives an extraordinary feeling of depth;
but if we approach closely the realism evaporates and we behold an ethereal fantasy. Here the central
figure of the Infanta Margarita is merely suggested with rare touches of pigment that gives an impres¬
sionistic atmosphere to the flesh and clothes. Amazingly enough, Velazquez achieved this magic with
surprisingly few brushstrokes "No one has painted a subject with fewer," Ortega y Gasset once remarked.
17

THE HUMAN TOUCH (Cont'd from page 1 4)
'Avant-garde' in audacity
What attracted him most in portrait painting was the
opportunity to penetrate the mystery of life and to
capture the human personality of the individual. He
found no pleasure in constructing his compositions
analytically but strove rather for the total impression
conveyed by colour and atmosphere.
In 1621 Spain had a young king on the throne,
Philip IV, who had inherited from his father the greatest
empire in the world. But Spain was exhausted by the
frequent wars it had waged in Europe and its far-flung
Empire was already showing signs of weakness. In Velaz¬
quez's time, during the seventeenth century, this had
ibecome accentuated and Spanish political superiority was
being replaced by that off France amd England. And yet
it was in this century .that Spain produced her greatest
writers, poets and artists; happily genius does not depend
on political power.
Thanks to the help of the Duke of Olivares, Minister
of Pbiilip IV, the descendant of a family of Seville,
Velazquez was given an opportunity to paint a portrait of
the King in 1623. Charmed by Velazquez's talent, the
King appointed him to (be his official painter. From then
on he was to paint not kitchens but princes, yet he made
no concessions in his aesthetic principles. He remained
faithful to his purpose to immortalize the individual and
life around him.
As a painter, Velazquez, never allowed himself
to be dazzaled by social rank and devoted his
art to what Unamuno called "the man of
flesh and bone." He refused to flatter his royal models,
and portrays them, as ordinary humian beings no different
from the rest of us. In his extraordinary series off por¬
traits the models appear both miraculously alive and sim¬
ple, their personalities strikingly individualized and each
portrait endowed with .that mysterious "'presence" and
reality which he managed to bring to alll his works of art.
He painted not only the great nobility but also the
unfortunate and the lowQy, the rogues and buffoons, the
half-witted and demented, whom the kings accepted in
their palaces in surprising contrast to the life of luxury
of the Court. For these humble and monstrous people
Velazquez set about his canvasses with the same grave
respect for their human dignity as he did for his noble
subjects: in his approach to the mystery of the social and
physical inequality of man he maintained the profound
feeling that all men are intrinsically equal in the face of
Ufe itself. That is why men of all races and of all condi¬
tions understand and appreciate him so easily.
Velazquez is the most human of painters because he
neither embellishes nor beautifies what he sees; he
captures the essentials with a technique all his own; his
sober, unassuming compositions reveal not only the
physical appearance of his models, but their attitude and
bearing and the atmosphere surrounding them, in which
each figure lives.
Velazquez spent thirty-seven years with Philip IV, not
only as his Court painter but as his friend, and thus
received palace appointments rarely accorded to persons
who did not belong to the upper classes of society. He
was a calm man, taking no vanity from his success as an
artist and his situation at the Count.
The only events off his life were two journeys to Italy,
the country of art, in 1629 and 1649. During his second
visit he was called upon to paint the portrait off Pope
Innocent X, a painting which the English artist Reynolds
esteemed as the "finest picture in Roane." But before
painting the Pope he went into training by doing the
portrait of his servant and pupil, the half-Moorish painter
Juan de Pareja. This too is a masterpiece.
With an audacity that would mark him today as
"avant-garde," Velazquez dared to declare in Italy that
he saw nothing in Raphael, the great artist of the Ren¬
aissance, the painter off superhuman beauty admired by
academic painters. Velazquez preferred Titian and the
masters otf the Venetian School, more akin to his own
human art.
18
The portraits of Velazquez form . an . impressive gallery
in which all levels of humanity are represented: King
Philip IV and his two wives, Isabella of Bourbon and
Mariana of Austria, the princes and princesses born of
the two royal marriages, the two brothers of Philip IV,
artists, poets 'and palace officials and, cheek by jowl, men
and women otf the people, cooks, street water vendors,
women at their work, clowns, dwarfs and the insane . . .
His palette became gradually richer in tone, finally
attaining a sober and exquisite harmony, as in the rose
and silver of the portrait of Philip IV in the Frick Col¬
lection or in the children's portraits in the Vienna Museum.
Nevertheless, his most ambitious works were the large
composition pictures in which he perieoted his vision-syn¬
thesis technique with its "atmosphere", capturing the
fleeting moment. One of the most remarkable is the
Surrender of Breda. In the war of the Low Countries
the Spanish army had succeeded in capturing the fort
of Breda. Velazquez has chosen the moment when the
conqueror receives the symbolic key from the vanquished
general, both surrounded by their soldiers. Once again he
gives us a lesson in humanity. Spinoia, the victor, receives
the defeated leader with courteous grace and, placing a
friendly hand on the loser's shoulder, prevents him from
kneeling, thus eliminating humiliation from the defeat.
This interpretation is a lesson in "fair play" and
elegance off spirit.
In the Palacio del Buen Retiro in Madrid The
Surrender of Breda stood next to a group of equestrian
portraits in which Velazquez is seen as the forerunner
otf modern landscape painting, with its distant views,
coloured skies, the view upon the woods at Pardo and the
snow-covered mountains around Madrid. His two views
otf the Villa Medici in Rome are landscapes even more
modern in approach: here, using rapid brush strokes, the
artist suggests the noonday sun on the distant cypress
trees or the melancholy of an afternoon in the silent
garden.
Towards 1656 he painted Las Meninas, an interior
scene in which the intimate life of the Royal Palace is
caught with the painter's habitual noble serenity. The
picture shows the artist himself painting the Royal couple
who can be seen in the background reflected in a mirror.
But the real subject otf the painting is the appearance
in the room off a blond-haired child, the Infanta
Margarita, accompanied toy her maids of honour, her
dwarfs and her dog.
Velazquez has here achieved a painting in which the
lines vanish, leaving only a pure impression of light and
colour. He succeeds in recreating for us, across the
centuries, a passing instant off time, as if we had half-
closed our eyes and found ourselves immersed within the
confined space which gives the picture its unity.
T
he painting called Las Hilanderas, or the
^B Spinners, in which the real protagonists are
-^^ light and its gradations, produces a similar
effect. A mythological subject had been proposed to
Velazquez the legend of Minerva and Arachne, rivals in
the art of weaving tout he relegates the allusion, briefly,
to the background and, taking his inspiration as ever
from life, offers us what Ortega y Gasset calls his "loga¬
rithm of reality:" working women who are weaving and
winding their thread in the foreground. Once again, as
when he painted the kitchens of his youth, this painting,
without precedent in the history otf European art, immor¬
talizes the work of women.
Velazquez abides by the world around him, the
circumstances of mere existence, and he knows how to
convert into a lofty art subjects considered until then
unworthy of being painted on account of a false idea of
artistic nobility and hierarchy which he refutes with his
human painting that extracts poetry from the experience
of pure visuality. That which man sees is what Velazquez
judges worthy .to receive artistic treatment in his works.
This was his great feat, his modernity.
