Anderson© Editions du Dimanche, from the album "Velazquez"
Surrender of Breda. Detail of the great composition painting (1635) published in our centre page
which is widely regarded as one of the greatest historical works in European painting. From the
heads of the Spanish and Dutch leaders to the vast landscape with the fires of Breda smoking on
the horizon, the work is one of striking originality. It reveals a gayer and richer use of colours than
Velazquez had hitherto employed. Velazquez was inspired to paint the surrender scene after he
had travelled to Italy with General Spinola, the Spanish commander, in 1629. Prado Museum.

THE MAN IN THE TREASURE
TOWER OF THE ALCAZAR
by F.J. Sanchez Canton
Director, Prado Museum, Madrid
W7
^^f^Lf e are indebted to Ortega y Gasset for a
^m ^F number of apt, though at times extreme com-
» » ments on Velazquez which, by virtue of the
philosopher's authority and the magic of his style, have
helped to establish the currently accepted view of the man
and the artist.
The chief points Ortega y Gasset makes are these :
The life of Velazquez was one of the simplest that
a human being has ever lived ;
As far as can be ascertained, only one important
event marked his life : his appointment as the King's
painter... when he was only twenty-four ;
It is not clear whether (his life) was that of a
painter or of a gentleman of the Court ;
Deep down in his heart, he was driven by one per¬
vading thought to become a nobleman... but this
road was closed to him ;
At the very threshhold of his youth he discovered
the most extraordinary gift for art... Nevertheless, he
did not want and never wanted to be a painter ;
34 CONT'D ON PAGE 3 6

The Unesco Courier. December 1960
Anderson© Editions du Dimanche, from the album "Velazquez"
Pope Innocent X. Few paintings have aroused such instantaneous enthusiam as the seated portrait of
Innocent X which Velazquez did in Rome in 1650. The Pontiff was 76 at the time. Velazquez made

no attempt to flatter his features, but revealed him to us with implacable objectivity, yet with dignity and
grandeur. Schopenhauer saw in the painting the "majesty of the earth" and Reynolds pronounced it "the
finest picture in Rome" and condescended to copy it. The painting is remarkable not only for the vivid¬
ness and vigour of the face and eyes, but also for the masterly harmonizing of crimson, white and gold.
Illustration shows detail of the head. The painting now hangs in the Doria Pamphili Gallery, Rome.
35

MAN OF THE ALCAZAR (Cont'd from page 34)
He is a painter who distinguishes himself by the
smallness of his output... I maintain that no painter
had more time to paint.
In addition, Ortega asserts that Velazquez dM not finish
his canvasses.
These isolated quotations from the philosopher's
conclusions raise many problems. Without wishing to
cross swords with him, I should like to set forth very
briefly facts and considerations concerning them so that
the reader can judge for himself as to the nature of this
extraordinary artist.
It may seem unnecessary to go into the question of
Velazquez's physical appearance and personality, since
we know what he looked like firom portraits of him and
have some insight into his personality not only from his
works of art but also from what ¡his contemporaries wrote
about him.
"He did portraits of himself on various occasions",
wrote the Spanish art critic and painter Palomino in
1724, basing his statement on the biography of Alfaro,
a disciple of Velazquez. Yet a careful study of the suppos¬
ed self-portraits of the artist reveals that they do not
portray the same person.
In point of fact there is only one self-portrait
which can be regarded as authentic, the one
in Las Meninas. He is also shown with his
back to us in a painting, entitled The Mazo Family, which
is the work of another artist. Velazquez is here seen
painting the portrait of the Infanta Dona Margarita.
And what, one may ask, of the portrait of Velazquez
in The Surrender of Breda, and the heads and ¡half-length
portraits also said to represent ¡him ?
The light-skinned, fair-haired young man who is seen
between the horse and the right-hand edge of the canvas
in the Surrender of Breda (see centre pages) cannot be
Velazquez who .twenty years later depicted ¡himself as
swarthy, with jet-black (hair in Las Meninas. Nor do
the two figures (have (the same nose.
The slight resemblance may be explained by the simi¬
larity to be found between people who dress in the same
fashion and by the fact that Juan Velazquez, the artist's
brother, wiith whom he perhaps shared some physical
likenesses, may have been the model for the portrait.
As for ithe other portraits referred to, including the one
in .the Valencia Museum, these are accepted by scholars
only with great reservation.
If we take as our guide the two undisputed pictures
of Velazquez, we note that he appears as a slightly-built
man, not more than five feet three inches tall and well-
proportioned. His large head seems even more massive
because of the crop of thick, long hair. His eyes, neither
deep-set nor prominent, look out beneath a rounded
forehead and well-spaced, arched eyebrows. Beneath his
fleshy nose is a broad mouth with protruding lower lip,
a thick moustache and a strong chin.
At the age of fifty-seven, he had neither the grey hair
nor wrinkles of advancing age, and three years later, if
we are to judge from the painting in Vienna, he was
still a fine figure of a man and of such bearing that the
Venetian poet Boschini wrote of him :
Cavalier che spirava un gran decoro
Quanto ogn'altra autorevole persona
36
Prado Museum, Madrid
King Philip IV, painted in 1656. Prado Museum.
Domingeuz-Garcia, Madrid
The Infanta Margarita, in blue. 1659. Vienna Museum.

Hermitage Museum, Moscow
The Duke of Olivares. About 1638-40. Hermitage Museum.
Dominguez-Garcia, Madrid
Prince Balthasar Carlos. About 1640-42. Vienna Museum.
The Unesco Courier. December 1960
(A gentleman with an air of great dignity
. like all persons of high degree).
The personal distinction of Velazquez was heightened
by the care with which he dressed. Six suits of clothes,
various accessories and eleven hats are mentioned in
the inventory of his possessions drawn up after his death.
The only woman in Velazquez's life about which
anything is known is his wife Juana de Miranda, the
daughter of his art 'teacher, who was not yet seventeen
when he married her just before his nineteenth birthday.
Their marriage lasted throughout their lives and both
died within a week of each other.
Did Velazquez ever paint his devoted and self-effacing
wife ?
In all likelihood, she posed before their marriage for
the Virgin in The Immaculate Conception and, as a young
bride, for two religious works, The Adoration of the Magi
and Saint Ildefonso Donning the Chasuble. She is also
thought to have been the model for Head in Profile
which is in the Lázaro Museum, Madrid, and The Sybil
or The Painter's Wife, now in .the Prado. In the back¬
ground of the Vienna canvas, she is seen walking towards
Velazquez accompanied by a grandchild. She is a
silhouette, a mere shadow in this work, but was she, in
fact, anything more than a shadow in the painter's
household, more than a quiet island in the stormy sea
of the Court ?
\7
^Ä# ELAZQUEZ appears to have led a sober and re-
Wr served life. Nevertheless, there were three
» women who interested and perhaps fascinated
him,' the models for his Venus and Cupid, The Spin¬
ners and The Lady with a Fan all of them unknown.
In examining the list of books in Velazquez's personal
library we are surprised by the absence of certain authors
and the presence of others. Certain works are exactly
what one would expect to find there, and all in all
they enable us to break through the artist's reserve. The
list contains 156 titles, only one of which Is religious.
But the fact is that his library included very few literary
works either : one novel, not a particularly good one at
that, an anthology of poetry, Spanish translations of
Horace, and Ovid's MefcamorpTioses, a volume in Italian
of Petrarch and Ariosto's Orlando Furioso.
Philosophy was represented by Aristotle's Politics and
Ethics. The only volumes of history in 'the collection were
classical works by ¡Livy and Quintus Curcius Rufus, a
book on the Flemish wars and two or three other un¬
identified titles.
This dearth is compensated for by the abundance of
treatises on painting and sculpture (including Leonardo
da Vinci's Art of Painting published in Paris in 1651) and
an equal number of volumes on architecture. In addition
there were many works on arithmetic, geometry and
perspective, a knowledge of which is basic to the art of
drawing. The professional side of his library also contain¬
ed at least four treatises on anatomy as well as Albrecht
Durer's Symmetry of the Human Body and works on
archaeology, mythology and iconology.
It was to be expected that such books would be found
on his shelves when on August 29, 1660 the executors of
Velazquez's will drew up their inventory of his vault-
ceiling appartment in the Treasure Tower of the Alcazar
Palace at Madrid. The library was one befitting a
cultivated artist.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

MAN OF THE ALCAZAR (Cont'd)
Anderson © Editions du Dimanche, from the album "Velazquez"
Joseph's Coat. Detail of a work painted in Rome in 1630
together with "The Forge of Vulcan", both pictures marking
the end of the first period in Velazquez's art. The painter
was at this time influenced by the Italian masters whose
works he had studied in Venice. Escorial Palace, Madrid.
Prado Museum, Madrid
The Fountain of the Tritons. Another detail full of grace
and elegance of this composition one of Velazquez's last
works (see page 23). The gallant and his lady who is seated
close to the fountain, might easily be taken for figures from
some of the gay scenes painted by Watteau. Prado Museum.
But the executors also found on the shelves other books
which give us a glimpse of Velazquez's more intimate
tastes and interests. Concern with questions of health
may account for the presence of several books on medi¬
cine and health administration and another entitled
Treasure of the Poor.
Surprising in so clear-minded a man as Velazquez,
however, is his apparent interest in "the arts that should
not be studied" (las artes non cumplidores) and hence the
presence in his library of almanacs, calendars and books
on the movement of the planets. It is even stranger to
come upon Giovanni Battista idella Porta's On Physio¬
gnomy and Jean Taisnier's Art of Divination and Intro¬
duction to Astrology.
T1
H-^w rom the time he entered 'the king's service as
I court artist and portrait painter, Velazquez's
-^^- relations with Philip IV developed rapidly into
a friendship which was not to end until the artist's death.
Although remuneration in the royal household was
always insufficient and overdue, Velazquez's situation was
improved by successive royal favours.
It is commonly, though incorrectly, asserted that the
non-artistic activities involved in Velazquez's various
functions took up too much of his time. Inasmuch as
there exist many documents pertaining to this "sphere
of his activity, there can be no doubt that the time
employed in such prosaic, bureaucratic tasks was not to
38
the detriment of his painting. If he was not a prolific
artist it was because of his phlegmatic temperament, his
studiousness, his meditative nature and the great pains
he took in the practise of his art.
His relations with the court and the king's protection
must have rekindled 'the pretension to nobility of the
ancient da Silva family of Oporto and have aroused envy
among painters and courtiers.
His association with noblemen and dignitaries height¬
ened the artist's desire to rise in the social scale, and he
never lacked royal favour. The decree "I appoint Velaz¬
quez" which Phillip IV wrote in the margin of the report
submitted by the Palace Council for the appointment of
a gentleman usher (the decree ran counter to the recom¬
mendation of all its members) ; and his order: "Set
down that his quality is evident to me" with which the
monarch put an end to 'the doubts of the authorities
who had investigated Velazquez's qualifications for
admission to the Military Order of Saint James, were
energetic, perhaps arbitrary acts which revealed the
king's singular admiration and affection.
Velazquez responded to such marked favour with loyal
service and took great, care that his conduct and style
of life be in keeping with that of the perfect courtier,
a man worthy of attaining the "'highest honours", as
Palomino' put it. This explains why his library contained
works on courtiers, knighthood, the art of archery and
hunting, and why in keeping with his wish to become an
accomplished courtier he wished to Uve like a gentleman
and be surrounded by fine 'furniture, jewels, tapestries
and books.
o
z
<
