A LOOK AT MODERN
ANTI-SEMITISM
Anti-Semitism is a highly complex phenomenon.
The term itself contains a double ambiguity.
Firstly the majority of Jews do not belong to
the "race" so defined (few writers still speak of a "Semi¬
tic race" anyway; if one does exist, its representatives par
excellence would be the Arabs). Secondly it reduces to
terms of racial conflict, a hostility whose roots are to be
found quite elsewhere.
That this animosity exists cannot be denied, and down
the centuries it has even been marked by an intensity,
and above all, a constancy, never attained by any of the
other conflicts between confessional, ethnic or national
groups. The age of the wars of religion gave way to the
age of tolerance; the great "hereditary enmities" were
succeeded by cordial alliances; anti-Semitism alone
remained faithful to itself, seemingly as durable as the
Jewish people themselves.
So strange and so intense a phenomenon had necessa¬
rily to be rooted in a doctrinal system and buttressed by a
by Léon Poliakov
Author of "Breviary of Hatred" & "A History of anti-Semitism"
strong belief, nourished on the teaching of leading think¬
ers. Accordingly, for centuries anti-Semitism was "the¬
ological" conceived to be (the expression of the divine
will, whose commands the persecutors of the Jews
believed themselves to be obeying by word or act until in
the 19th century, it became "scientifically" justified in
the eyes of its protagonists, thanks to some current
anthropological theories firmly believed both by well-
educated individuals and by the general mass of the
people.
Today, however, we are faced with a new situation
since the Churches of the various denominations are
almost unanimous in condemning any manifestation of
anti-Semitism, even expressed verbally, and since racial
theories, after a triumphant heyday from the time of the
Count de Gobineau down to the Nazi anthropologists, are
now universally rejected by scientists and are doomed to
share the oblivion of such once popular theories as inter¬
stellar ether or spontaneous generation. Before examining
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

MODERN ANTI-SEMITISM (Cont'd)
FNDIRP
ROUNDED UP LIKE CATTLE In 1942, Jewish people In Nazi-occupied Paris were herded into the Velodrome d'Hiver, a vast sport
arena, to await deportation in sealed trains "to the east". Parisians managed to warn and hide a small number but In two days alone,
July 16 and 17, nearly 13,000 children and adults were arrested in Paris. Similar round-ups were made in all the countries of Europe.
any conclusions to be drawn from this, we should look
more closely at the nature of both theological and scien¬
tific anti-Semitism and see how they fell into disrepute
and disuse.
Theological anti-Semitism dates back to early Christian
times, when the first Christian Churches seemed to be
nothing more than a dissidence from the Judaism to
which they were opposed. The story of the Crucifixion
as told in the Gospels, and the cry attributed to the
Jews: "May his blood be visited upon us and upon our
children" led to the conclusion that the Jews, by causing
Jesus to be crucified, had judged and condemned them¬
selves!
And indeed, from that time on, the Fathers of the
Church, powerless to convert the Jews, elaborated a
doctrine which laid down that, having committed the
crime of deicide, the Jews were condemned to eternal
punishment and, like Cain, must wander over the world
bearing witness by their abasement and servitude to the
truth of the dogmas and the triumph, of Christianity.
This is what Professor Jules Isaac has called "the teach¬
ing of contempt".
Consequently, the status of the Jews, which was on
the whole good in Roman and barbarian Europe, deterior¬
ated as that same Europe became Christianized and
learned to read. The great turning point was the period
of the earliest Crusades, when first great massacres of
Jews took place, against a background of religious exal¬
tation of the masses, it was then that the tales of ritual
14
murders committed by the Jews, profanations of the
Host, poisoning of wells, and other similar legends, were
spread. From then onwards, when an epidemic, famine
or other calamity occurred, the Jews served as scapegoats:
from time to time the people rose up and massacred them,
whilst the princes alternatively extorted wealth from
them to fill their own treasuries or sent them into exile.
In these circumstances, the Jews in the end became the
chief pariahs of Europe.
The situation at the time of the Renaissance may be
summed up in the wry witticism of Erasmus: "If it
is the role of a good Christian to detest the Jews, then
we are all good Christians", which is borne out by the
ferocious anti-Semitism tirades of a Luther or the im¬
placables decrees of the Popes of the Counter-Reforma¬
tion. The Jews remained in this miserable state until
the XVIIIth century; a strikingly expressive trace of it
is still to be found in the usage of all European languages,
in which the very word Jew, in addition to its intrinsic
meaning, has a second derived meaning which is always
perjorative.
It required the effort of reflection accomplished by the
philosophers of the Age of Enlightenment to understand
that these conditions were not due to some divine male¬
diction but to the status to which Christian society had
relegated the Jews. These ideas finally led to decisions
and actions: between 1789 and 1848, in all the countries
of Western Europe, the Jews were emancipated and
became "full citizens", attaining equality of rights with

The Unesco Courier. October 1960
Auschwitz museum
MOUNTAIN OF BOOTS AND SHOES at Auschwitz bears silent witness to the extermination of some 6,000,000 Jews in S.S.
death camps. Nazism made birth a crime punishable by death. Jews, half-Jews, quarter-Jews died for no other reason than their
descendency, and innocent men, women and children were put to death, after enduring indescribable mental and physical torture.
Catholics and Protestants. Their emancipation was not
accomplished without struggles; it raised constant po¬
lemics and objections from those nostalgic for mediaeval
Christian times, and it shocked certain Jews themselves;
but in a society which had become secularized, it was
impossible to re-establish the ghettos and a discrimina¬
tion based on the old theological anti-Semitism.
Needless to say, the age-old prejudice against the Jews
did not on that account disappear as if by magic. It
even found new stimulus as a result of the social ascen¬
dency of the Jews, who themselves were impatient to
"compensate" for their former abasement. Thus, new
jealousies and grievances were added to the old Christian
prejudices; and yet, what justification could be found
for holding anti-Semitism to be according to the will of
God, in a society in which the Jews were no longer
socially degraded and in which the new tendency was to
explain the course of events no longer as decrees of
Providence but as the laws of nature?
Science had become a new goddess, all of whose mys¬
teries men sought to discover too hastily; as far as the
species homo sapiens was concerned, since the time when
Linné had divided men into "Europeans, white and.hard¬
working", "Asiatics, yellow and long-suffering", "Afri¬
cans, black and weak-willed", and "Americans, red and
hot-tempered", systems of classification in which physical
characteristics were paired with mental ones and the
latter with virtues and vices, became too numerous to
count.
Therein lay the origins of "scientific anti-Semitism":
in the vast amount of literature that the XlXth century
devoted to these questions, it was taken for granted that
the Jews were a "race" and discussion turned upon the
question whether it was a "good" or "bad" race; that '
was also the approach adopted by many Jewish writers
themselves.
The political exploitation of "scientific anti-Semitism"
by the Nazis, the teaching of hatred succeeding the
teaching of contempt, and the massacre of six million
innocent human beings which followed, are facts still
fresh in the memory of all. It is also important to stress
the fact that the persecution of a defenceless minority,
especially if prolonged, does not remain merely a series
of unilateral actions; it provokes a whole chain of reac¬
tions and attitudes that transform it into a vicious circle,
the dialectics of which consist In fostering and poisoning
the conflict.
From this point of view (to quote but one example),
the very natural adherence of Jews to ideologies and
parties that were not anti-Semitic, which meant, gene¬
rally, to those that were "leftist" or "progressive", pro¬
duced accusations such as "all Jews are revolutionaries",
"Communism is a Jewish doctrine", and to their defa¬
mation as "destructive elements" attacks which could
not fail to increase their solidarity both with the camps
in question and among themselves. Hence the original
solution of the "Jewish problem", proposed by dreamers
in the XlXth century and put into practice by realists
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

MODERN ANTI-SEMITISM (Cont'd;
in the XXth: the Jews should turn their backs upon an
uncompromisingly inhospitable Europe and create a
Jewish State on the very site that was formerly the legen¬
dary Jewish fatherland.
If neither theological nor scientific anti-Semitism are
no longer accorded the status of coherent doctrines, it is
because Christian thought on the subject has profoundly
changed, and developments in anthropology prevent the
arguments of the racialists .from being taken seriously.
But the change has been accelerated to a remarkable
extent by a sort of grandiose experiment in vivo.
The crimes committed under Hitler showed the extent
to which all anti-Semitism was anti-Christian leading as
it did to the negation of all ethical values. As for the
"racial characteristics" attributed to the Jews, the State
of Israel, itself ethnically a miniature Tower of Babel,
and a country in which the Jews have shown themselves
to be both sturdy labourers and good soldiers, was from
that point of view an excellent practical lesson. In those
conditions, it is difficult to imagine from what pulpit a
doctrinal anti-Semitism could be preached and what
authorities it could find to support it. The general
outcry which followed the recent "epidemic of swastikas"
has shown the sensibility of public opinion to the danger,
and the intensity of international reactions.
Nevertheless, as a prejudice one which rarely dares to
call itself by its real name anti-Semitism is still very
widespread in all the countries of Western . civilization.
Even those tragic events which revealed its odious and
wanton cruelty, have also helped to stimulate its persis¬
tence here and there.
Hitler's "teaching of hatred", practised on a mass
scale for twenty years in Germany and for four years
throughout all occupied Europe from France to the Cau¬
casus, has left traces in innumerable minds. The massa¬
cre of millions of innocent martyrs, even though it
aroused so much indignant compassion and made the fate
which befell the Jews the very symbol of injustice, also
succeeded precisely for that reason in arousing mixed
feelings among certain people. It is rather like the
Athenian who hated Aristides because in the eyes of his
fellow-citizens Aristides was a just man^and above
reproach.
We have here an example of a process similar to that
well-known to psychiatrists: the revolt against the laws
of social life is very liable to choose as a target men or
groups who are the incarnation of justice, as well as
being inoffensive, and who therefore can be attacked
without risk.
In a sense, Jews stimulate aggressiveness of that kind
by the mere fact of their existence, or to the extent that
they remember better than anyone the horrors of Hitler's
racialism, the sufferings they endured, the relatives who
disappeared and the homes that were devastated. There
are some whose peace of mind is disturbed by the Jews
on this account.
M
I ^m ATERiALLY, there still exist throughout the
A -^L.world numerous hotbeds of anti-Semitism.
Most of tnose who less than twenty years ago, close at
hand or from afar compromised with Hitler or were in
sympathy with him, and especially those who were puni¬
shed after the war as a result, are still impregnated with
the virus of hatred. More or less clandestine centres of
anti-Semitic propaganda still exist in all the five contin¬
ents. A crank called Einar Aberg, a citizen of tolerant
Sweden, for example, floods the whole world with crude
pamphlets in which he accuses the Jews of hatching a
world-Wide conspiracy to subjugate the "Aryan" nations
(where he gets his funds remains a mystery) ; and there
are similar centres in Cairo, Buenos Aires and elsewhere.
So even the Jewish tragedy of the last war has raised
a shower of counter-reactions on which anti-Semitic
prejudices continue to feed. It is worth noting in this
connexion that Jewish attitudes, which formerly played
their part in the vicious circle of anti-Semitism, are of
very limited importance, and as regards present-day
Germany it has become possible to speak, justifiably, of
"anti-Semitism without Jews." In most other countries
the Jewish "emancipation problem" has long since been
solved.
In addition, the former anti-Jewish theological teaching,
16
although in principle abolished in the present day, is still
perpetuated in many old manuals or catechisms, many
local traditions and festivals, or in family recollections.
So we find that the famous "Mystery of the Passion" at
Oberammergau in Bavaria, which is performed every ten
years, is to keep to its traditional text in 1960, a text
which is largely concerned with the role of the Jews, who
are depicted as a treacherous and odious people, justly
incurring divine punishment.
T
t is probably far from the intention of the organi-
J^-zers of Oberammergau to spread anti-Semitism,
but a spectacle of that kind, lasting several days and
drawing hundreds of thousands of spectators, cannot
fail to leave traces of it here and there. (Psychologically,
it is interesting to note in this connexion that of the
ten principal actors in the 1940 production, only the one
who played the part of Judas was not a member of the
Nazi Party (1).
Here is another example of the persistence of out-of-
date conceptions: in a third-grade class in a Paris lycée,
the teacher asked the girls to explain the text of the
first scene of Racine's.."Athalie", in which the action takes
place several centuries before Christ. In this scene,
Racine puts into the mouth of Abner, leader of the Jews,
the following lamentation: "Even God has abandoned
us; Formerly so jealous of the honour of the Hebrews
He looks down unmoved upon their fallen grandeur
His mercy in the end grown weary..." One girl in the
class commented on the passage as follows: "The Jews
had been punished", said Abner, "because they had
crucified Jesus". Behind this "howler" made by a pupil
whose background was in no way anti-Semitic, can be
seen the persistence of the notion of deicide, and in a
more general sense, the idea of a merited punishment of
the Jews.
So we see the number and variety of the factors of all
kinds that contribute to the persistence of an anti-
Semitism which more often than not, lacks the courage
to name itself aloud: like a certain French journalist, for
instance, who begins an article with anti-Semitic impli¬
cations, by stating "I am not anti-Jewish, but...".
Can a prejudice which has been thrown overboard and
condemned ex cathedra by all the philosophies and poli¬
tical doctrines of our time, still be full of evil conse¬
quences? The inquisitors who burned Jews in former
times, and even the fanatical Nazis who exterminated
them, would themselves have been ready to die for their
ideas; inasmuch as men endowed with reason do not risk
their lives for their prejudices, it looks as though the
massacres and pogroms of Jews belong to the past, even
if there still subsist throughout the world many tensions
and injustices due to anti-Semitism.
Moreover, it is considerably easier to fight against a
superstition than against a system of faith, and that
important task is primarily the duty of teachers and edu¬
cators, who, after revising their textbooks, must then
uproot the superstitions and myths which continue to be
handed down from father to son; it is a worthwhile task
of international co-operation that will take two or three
generations, but it is no longer the superhuman one it
would have been in the past.
In all that I have said here, I have spoken only of the
territory of so-called Western Christian civilization. The
fact is that elsewhere, in India, China and Africa south
of the Sahara, anti-Semitism was and still is unknown.
As regards the countries of Islam, where formerly the
majority of the Jews lived, to speak of anti-Semitism
there would be, both an error of meaning and of fact,
since in -an anti-Semitic system the Jewish minority
serves the dominating majority as its chosen scapegoat,
whereas in Islamic territory the fate of the Jews was
never worse than that of the "law abiding" Christians,
who were more numerous. Generally speaking, contrary
to the idea spread of Islamic fanaticism, Moslem tradition
implied a fairly extensive v respect for the beliefs of
others. As for the present Israel-Arab conflict, with its
political and economic aspects, it must be regarded from
quite a different angle, which does not come within the
scope of this article.
(1) Cf. A. Graham Davis, "Passion at Oberammergau", Commentary,
March 1960.

The Unesco Courier. October 1960
R. Caloz
i Keystone ,
ARBEIT
MACHT
FREI...
Labour brings freedom (Arbeit Macht
Frei) which the Nazis, with mons¬
trous cynicism, had inscribed in
letters of iron above the gate to the
Auschwitz Concentration Camp
(above) found an echo early this year
in the swastika crudely scrawled with
chalk on the wall of the Dachau
Concentration Camp (left). This
was one of a series of anti-Semitic
incidents which aroused indignation
In Germany and around the world.
17
