
LIGHT & SHADOWS IN THE RACIAL
LANDSCAPE OF LATIN AMERICA
by Alfred Metraux
Nowhere in Spanish-speaking America do race
relations display the rigidity and harshness we
have come to associate with the term '"ra¬
cialist". However, it is not true to say as one often
does that no form of racial prejudice and discrimination
is to be found in the countries of Latin America which
have large non-white populations.
In this article I shall speak only of relations between
whites, Indians and mestizos, particularly in the Andean
region, where despite rapid change, inter-group relations
have remained stationary and outdated.
Racial intermingling began with the Spanish conquest
and colonization, and persists to this day. Except for
one or two countries where the population is chiefly of
European stock, the Indian constitutes a substantial
ethnic component of the population. In Central America,
Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia, racial mixture is so widespread
and of such long-standing that it is impossible to use
anthropological criteria to distinguish one ethnic group
from another.
Physical traits are the only criteria used and accepted
by scientists in classifying races. But in the Andean
countries different physical traits are distributed in such
a way throughout the whole population that to use them
would only lead to the most absurd conclusions.
Can one justifiably classify as Indians persons who
indignantly deny even the remotest connexion with any
Indian group? For, even if the texture of their hair, the
form of their nose or the colour of their skin is indeed
Indian, they have nothing in common, either socially or
culturally, with this group. Conversely, there are people
among the Indian population whose features are those
of the white race.
When physical traits are in total contradiction with a
person's social status, and are not accepted as valid either
by him, or by his social group, then by what outward signs
can we recognize an Indian? His language, perhaps?
Certainly, a man who speaks only an indigenous language
is very probably an Indian, though there are exceptions.
In Peru, some non-Indian groups speak Quechua in pre¬
ference to Spanish, while certain Indians such as those
of the Cajamarca region no longer speak any language
Copacabana is not only the name of a famous beach in Rio-
de-Janeiro. It is also a pilgrimage town In the Bolivian High¬
lands, near Lake Titicaca and the Peruvian frontier toward
which Indians from the Andean countries converge twice a
year to the music of Pan-Pipes, drums and tambourines.
Photos show Indian women at a mountain-top sanctuary.
Photos © Yvan Dalain
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

RACIAL LANDSCAPE OF LATIN AMERICA (Cont'd)
but Spanish. There remain the cultural peculiarities
type of clothes worn, social organization, economic
activities, etc. But here the distinctions between Indians
and mestizos are by no means clear-cut.
Consequently, one finally has to use a kind of tautology:
"An Indian is a man who recognizes himself as such and
who belongs to a community which prefers to speak a
native language, whose material and spiritual culture are
largely^ composed of indigenous elements and who feels
that his community is isolated from those of mestizos or
white men" (Alfonso Caso).
In most countries, with large Indian populations, the
Indian occupies the lowest levels of the social pyramid.
Not only is he poor and illiterate, but his language,
traditions and customs continue to Isolate him from the
rest of the nation. Thus, the Indians represent a group
culturally apart within the larger community.
Despite the misguided efforts of past colonial
administrators, the Indians of Spanish Amer¬
ica have not been imprisoned behind the social barriers
of caste, although cultural 'differences, ignorance of Span¬
ish and geographical isolation can give the impression
that they live in a closed! world from which there is no
escape. But even in countries where movement up the
social ladder is weakest, there is a constant '"passing"
from the Indian to the mestizo group, and from the latter
to that of the '"whites." There are no constitutional or
legal obstacles to social advancement and since public
opinion attaches more value to social symbols, racial fea¬
tures are in no Way insuperable barriers for those who
seek to improve their status.
An Indian has only to speak Spanish, to change his
clothing and to leave his community in order to pass as
a mestizo. In exceptional circumstances, he can become
a member of the bourgoisie by entering one of the liberal
professions, and, with the help of politics, even rise to
power. The history of Latin America offers many examples
of such ascensions perhaps the best proof that racialism
in the strict sense of the term, is superficial and in no
way deeply-rooted.
Recent economic progress, road development, the begin¬
nings of industrialization, education and many additional
factors, have had a decisive influence on race relations.
Thousands of Indians have settled in the towns where
they form a miserable proletarian group which neverthe¬
less is losing its Indian characteristics by adopting the
appearance and behaviour of the mestizo. Thus, by this
process of absorption we find that although the Indian
population is increasing numerically it is paradoxically
diminishing in general in comparison with other ethnic
groups.
The Indian is not dying out, but he is slowly merging
with the nation. For example, there are villages in Chile
which a century and a half ago were referred to in
documents as "native" communities; today, though
they remain free of any inter-mixture, they are consi¬
dered pure Chilean and "white".
From this very brief outline it might be assumed that
the countries conquered and colonized by Spain are free
of any form of racialism. Nevertheless, many common
attitudes and casual remarks frequently overheard show
that this is not so. Many intellectuals and politicians
suffer from what, for want of a better phrase, I might
call "'racial pessimism". I have noticed that many other¬
wise intelligent and perceptive individuals have a ten-
22
dency to lay the blame for everything that is criticized
in their countries on "the heavy burden of Indian blood".
For some, the country's future depends on the elimina¬
tion of the Indians and their replacement by European
immigrants.
Even in countries where the Indian has disappeared,
the name is still used as an insult, and "Indian blood"
is invoked to explain the reason for a person's dis-
agreable character. Vulgarity is also easily interpreted
as "Indian blood" coming to the fore.
"Racial pessimism" is also revealed by the shame cer¬
tain leading circles feel over the existence of Indians in
their country. When their presence cannot be denied, an
attempt is made to minimize their importance. Official
statistics often reflect this.
But scorn for the Indian is not limited to the upper
classes. It appears with even more virulence among the
mestizos who are closest to the Indians and it is not
infrequent to find it even among the Indians themselves.
Nothing is more ludicrous than to hear an Indian cook
call her kitchen attendant an "ignorant Indian".
But let us beware of appearances. Latin-American
"racialism" differs from that found in other parts of the
world. It is the expression of scorn for the customs and
manners of classes considered to be ignorant and uncouth
rather than a systematic isolation of groups having dif¬
ferent physical appearances. Very often, opinions which
can easily be interpreted as evidence of intolerance or
racialism are mere expressions of scorn for rural or urban
populations whose continuing way of Ufe has little in
common with the standards set by the nation. However,
since social hierarchy and racial origin follow an almost
identical pattern, it is easy and tempting to draw racia¬
list conclusions.
Finally, the racialist theories of the 19th century helped
to confirm the ruling classes in old prejudices inherited
from the colonial era.
An intellectual counter-current dating from the Mexi¬
can Revolution (1910-1917) has done much to reduce the
more or less conscious racialism of the élite groups. This
movement, which finds as much expression in art as in
politics, has been called indigenismo, and opposes opti¬
mism to the traditional racial pessimism.

r;
H* AR from being a national burden, the Indians
JL. are seen as a rich source of vitality and talent.
People of the soil, they have inherited its spirit, and are
the custodians of its most authentic values. For the ind¬
igenistas, the most urgent task is integration of the Ind¬
ians into the rest of the population. Inspired by the
example of Father Bartolomé de Las Casas, the great
16th-century pioneer, the indigenistas urge the study of
Indian cultures and the preservation of their artistic and
even social traditions. Such has been their enthusiasm
that it has almost led to an inverted form of racialism.
In matters of race relations, Latin America thus offers
us a blurred picture, full of shadows and light. There
can be no doubt that the solution of the problem lies in
the integration of the Indian into the rest of the nation.
This is happening spontaneously and it is what the Indian
himself wants. Education could speed up the process.
However, the steps governments take on behalf of the
Indians will ultimately depend on the abandonment of
certain prejudices which often serve economic and poli¬
tical interests and are hardly reconcilable with the rapid
development of these ancient lands of the Indians.

The Unesco Courier. October 1960
NEGRO JEWS are found in various parts of the world. In the U.S.A. they maintain synagogues in New York,
Brooklyn, Chicago, Philadelphia and Cincinnati. The largest community lives in Harlem, N.Y. and numbers
nearly 5,000. Photo shows Chief Rabbi Wentworth Matthew (left) preaching a Sabbath sermon in Harlem syna¬
gogue. The more observing adherents follow modified Orthodox ritual including Kosher food preparation.
The children are taught Hebrew. Most American Negro Jews are believed to be the descendents of converted
slaves born in the homes of Jewish planters. In the West Indies, Spanish and Portuguese Jews often intermarried
with Negroes and congregations of Negro Jews still exist in Jamaica and the Virgin Islands. Another community
of Negro Jews lives on the Loango coast of West Africa, not far from the Portuguese island of Sao Thome where
2,000 Jewish children were shipped in 1493 during the Inquisition. Negro Jews are also found in Madagascar,
and North Africa. The Falashas or Abyssinian Jews, though not considered originally African, claim descent
from Menelik, son of King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba. Not to be confused with Negro Jews are the Black
Jews of India, so-called to distinguish them from the White Jews living In the same towns. The colour of their
skin, however, is dark brown, not black. (For Chinese Jews, see The Unesco Courier, February Issue 1957).
23
