
the
ORK has begun on the great Aswan dam. Within five years,
the Middle Valley of the Nile will be turned into a vast lake.
Wondrous structures, ranking among the most magnificent on earth, are in danger of disap¬
pearing beneath the ivaters. The dam will bring fertility to huge stretches of desert ; but
the opening up of new fields to the tractors, the provision of new sources of power to
future factories threatens to exact a terrible price.
True, ivhen the welfare of suffering human beings is at stake, then, if need be, images of
granite and porphyry must be sacrificed unhesitatingly. But no one forced to make such
a choice could contemplate without anguish the necessity for making it.
It is not easy to choose between u heritage of the past and the present well-being of a
people, living in need in the shadow of one history's most splendid legacies, it is not easy
to ichoose between temples and crops. I would he sorry for any man called on to make
that choice who could do bo without a feeling of despair; I would be sorry for any man who,
whatever decision he might reach, could bear the responsibility for that decision without
a feeling of remorse.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the governments of the United Arab Republic and
Sudan have called on an international body, on Unesco, to try to save the threatened monu¬
ments. These monuments, whose loss may be tragically near, do not belong solely to the
countries ivho hold them in trust. The whole world has the right to see them endure.
They are part of a common heritage ivhich comprises Socrates' message and the Ajanta
frescoes, the walls of Uxmal and Beethoven s symphonies. Treasures of universal value
are entitled to universal protection. When a thing of beauty, whose loveliness increases
rather than diminishes by being shared, is lost, then all men alike are the losers.
Moreover, it is not merely a question of preserving something which may otherwise be
lost; it is a question of bringing to light an as yet undiscovered tvealth for the benefit of all.
In return for the help the world gives them, the governments of Cairo and Khartoum tvill
open the whole of their countries to archaeological excavation and will alloiv half of what¬
ever tvorks of art may be unearthed by science or by hazard to go to foreign museums. They
will even agree to the transport, stone by stone, of certain monuments of Nubia.
A neiv era of magnificent enrichment is thus opened in the field of Egyptology. Instead
of a world deprived of a part of its wonders, mankind may hope for the revelation of
hitherto unknotvn marvels.
So noble a cause deserves a no less generous response. It is, therefore, with every confi¬
dence that I invite governments, institutions, public or private foundations and men of
goodwill everywhere to contribute to the success! of a task without parallel in history. Ser¬
vices, equipment and money are all needed. There are innumerable ways in which all can
help. It is fitting that from a land which throughout the centuries has been the scene of
or the stake in so many covetous disputes should spring a convincing proof of interna¬
tional solidarity.
"Egypt is « gift of the Nile" ; for countless students this was the first Greek phrase which
they learnt to translate. May the peoples of the world unite to ensure that the Nile, in
becoming a greater source of fertility and power does not bury beneath its waters marvels
which we of today have inherited from generations long since vanished.
