THE WORLD
CAMPAIGN GETS
UNDER WAY
Ç̂
Ä INCE Unesco's campaign to save the monuments
\^r of Nubia was launched on March 8, there has
been a growing international response to the appeal by the
Director-General. Reports of action taken by governments,
institutions and individuals, of measures envisaged or being
put into operation in support of the Nubia campaign reach
Unesco daily. Here are a few examples of the kind of
help that was being offered to Unesco as this edition of
The Unesco Courier went to press at the end of March.
* The International Union of Architects, among whose
membership forty countries are represented, has declared
its wholehearted support for the campaign.
* Many offers of voluntary help have been received
from individual specialists in pre-history and archaeology.
Unesco is considering how their services can best be fitted
into the framework of each nation's share in the campaign.
* Many young people students, photographers, artists
and archaeologists have volunteered to form a special
group to carry out excavation and protection work. Many
of these offers have come from Spain, the United Kingdom
and France. So far, however, no plans have been made to
set up such a volunteer group for excavation work.
* The Government of India has offered to send an
archaeological mission to Nubia.
The Documentation Centre on Ancient Egypt in
Cairo reports that it needs the services of many specialists
to record and copy inscriptions and bas-reliefs and to make
photographic and colour-slide records. The Centre is
trying to amass as much information as possible about the
threatened monuments.
' The Belgian Government has set aside one milUon
francs in its 1960 budget as a contribution to the campaign.
This sum will be transferred to the special account opened
by Unesco as soon as parliamentary approval has been
given.
The Bruce Museum of Greenwich, Connecticut,
U.S.A. is planning a large scale campaign to raise money
in local museums throughout the country and is discussing
this project with the American Association of Museums.
* To raise funds for the Nubian Campaign specialists in
several countries are to give lectures on the work involved
in the "rescue"' operations.
Money donated by institutions and private individuals
is already reaching Unesco and is also being sent to the
banks in different countries where Unesco has opened a
special Nubia Account. (A list of these banks is published
on page 35 )
12
SEARCHES IN THE SAND have recently been carried out in the
Aniba region of Egyptian Nubia. A few weeks ago, important disco-
Acting on behalf of the Swedish National Commis¬
sion for Unesco, a Swedish Egyptologist has undertaken
a reconnaissance mission in Egyptian and Sudanese Nubia.
A similar survey, initiated by the Belgian National Com¬
mission for Unesco, has been made in the Sudan by the
Secretary-General of Belgium's Queen Elizabeth Egyptolo¬
gical Foundation, and in Egyptian Nubia by the Director
of the same Foundation.
The University Museum (Pennsylvania University)
in the U.S.A. is sending a Egyptologist to make preparatory
studies for an excavation mission in Egypt.
The Egypt Exploration Society of London is now
excavating the important site of Buhen in the Sudan and
will explore Meinarti when the work at Buhen is finished.
It has also asked for permission to excavate at Qasr Ibrim
in Egyptian Nubia. The French Government Committee
for Archaeological Excavations has asked for permission
to excavate the site at Aksha in the Sudan, and an expert
from Ghana is now in the Sudan studying the excavation
of the site at Serra.
An exhibition of Egyptology opened at the end of
March in the Brussels Palais des Beaux-Arts, the proceeds
of which will be given to the Save the Nubian Monuments
Fund. It includes many works from museums in Cairo

The Unesco Courier. May 1960
veries were made, including an ancient necropolis with well-preserved
mummies dating back 5,000 years. Under the direction of Dr Abdel
v* y*'"'" ,y .
© Almasy, Paris
Abu Bakr, a Cairo University Expedition is pressing on with excavation
work near Aniba, the former capital of the viceroys of the Pharaohs.
and Alexandria which are being loaned for exhibition
abroad for the first time. The same works will later be
on view in other countries.
In response to the appeal of the Director-General of
Unesco, national committees of action are being set up in
several countries:
In Belgium an action committee is being established
under the presidency of Baroness Lambert, and in Spain
under Alberto Martin Artajo, Secretary-General of the
Council of State. The Federal Republic of Germany has
announced the setting up of a similar action committee.
In the United States, the Cultural Activities Commit¬
tee of the U.S. National Commission for Unesco is pre¬
paring to set up a national committee of action.
' A short film, made by Unesco, has been sent to nine
major distribution agencies and another, specially prepared
for television, has been sent to stations in 28 countries.
Production has begun on two filmstrips one in colour and
the other composed of drawings which illustrate the solu¬
tions which are to be adopted to save the monuments of
Nubia.
Radio Geneva has sent a reporter to Nubia to colla¬
borate with Unesco, in the production of a documentary
programme which will 'be entered for the "Italia" com¬
petition. Other documentary programmes are being prepar¬
ed by missions which the French radio and television orga¬
nization and the Cologne television station have sent to
Nubia. The French TV programme will be offered to
stations around the world.
Later this year Unesco will bring out a series of
colour art slides on the Nubia monuments as an additional
item in its collection of colour slides illustrating the world's
art.
An advisory committee of experts has been set up to
examine offers of participation and to advise on the allo¬
cation of work for safeguarding monuments as well as on
the use of financial aid and the distribution of material
offered in return for aid.
A mission, composed of a physicist, a chemist, an
architect and a geologist is being set up to study problems
posed by the removal of temples (dismantling, transport,
reconstruction). From May 15 to September 5 it will
study these problems as they apply to three monuments:
the temple of Kalabsha, the tomb of Pennut and the Kiosk
of Kertassi.
13

PATRONS OF
THE INTERNATIONAL
CAMPAIGN TO SAVE
NUBIA'S MONUMENTS King Gustaf VI Adolf of Queen Frederika of Greece
Sweden
Crown Prince Merid Az- The Prince of the Nether- Princess Chams Pahlavi of Prince Mikasa of Japan The Duke of Devonshire
match Asfa Wosen Hai le lands Iran
Selassie of Ethiopia
Theodor Heuss, former
President of the Federal
Republic of Germany
Eduardo Santos, former-
President of Colombia
Cardinal Eugène Tisserant,
Librarian and Archivist of
the Vatican Library
Oscar Lange, Deputy Chair¬
man of the Council of State,
Poland
Sir Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan,
Vice-President of India
Victor-Andrès Bel aun de,
Peru, former President of
the General Assembly of the
United Nations
14
Vincent Massey, former Gov¬
ernor-General of Canada
Ramon Menendez Pida I,
Spain, Chairman of the " Real
Academia Española de la
Lengua"
Dag Hammarskjold, Sec¬
retary-General of the Uni¬
ted Nations
Jaime Torres-Bodet, Minister
of Education, Mexico ; former
Director-General of Unesco

Queen Elizabeth of Belgium Princess Grace of Monaco
Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt Senator Luigi Einaudi,
former President of Italy
INTERNATIONAL COMMITEE OF ACTION
Hermann Abs, Director-General, Deutsche Bank, Frankfurt-am-Main
F. de Assis Chateaubriand Bandeira de Mello, Brazilian Ambas¬
sador to the United Kingdom
Carl Burckhardt, former Minister of Switzerland to France, ex-Pre¬
sident, International Committee of the Red Cross
Emir Maurice Chehab, Director-General of Antiquities, Lebanon.
T. Kotarbinski, President of the Academy of Sciences of Poland
Ignacio Marquina, Secretary-General of the Pan-American Institute
of Geography and History
Alberto Martin Artajo, former Minister of Foreign Affairs, Spain
The Nawab Mir-Khan, Ambassador of Pakistan to Portugal
B. Patnaik, founder of the Kalinga Prize for Popularization of Science
Jacques Rueff, Member of the Institut de France
Serge P. Tolstov, Corresponding Member, U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences
Count Leonardo Vitetti, Italian Ambassador to France
Sir Mortimer Wheeler, Former director, Society of Antiquities;
Professor of Archaeology, London University
All Chairmen of the National Committees.
o if) <
a"
£
Iff
rV\
1959 M01 S
Serge Kaftanov, Chairman
of the State Committee for
Broadcasting and Television
of the U.S.S.R.
André Malraux, Minister of
State in charge of Cultural
Affairs, France
STAMP HONOURS UNESCO'S NUBIAN CAMPAIGN
- Egypt has issued a large 10-mills stamp to commemorate
the launching of Unesco's campaign to save the
monuments of Nubia. The stamp depicts the rockhewn
facade of the Great Temple of Abu Simbel, with its
massive sandstone statues of Rameses II. This stamp
is on sale at the Unesco Philatelic Service, Unesco
House, Place de Fontenoy, Paris. (See also page 34)
Two other new Egyptian stamps (below) celebrate the
inauguration of the Aswan High Dam. One shows a
view of the Dam while the other is in the form of a
miniature poster giving, in Arabic and English, brief
facts to highlight the importance the Dam will
have for the future economy of the Nile Valley.
I960
(JAR i'xi^l^y.^l^/,^1
m
Sir Julian Huxley, former
Director-General of Unesco
Luther H. Evans, former
Director-General of Unesco
10 m
^^ ¿¿/tot - ift/Av** i¿* ****J
JUNTAN H ICH DAM Miami.
¡.tut» «an w**u o* Ci/iTn.iii t*«»*
ft lutu iM««ftTt0a intia
OMMMI »Hi»»"«»
»»orrcrto» HMH nmM
M «IU*»«*i.
Ía *JJ I I_>J*¿JL ¿St
áf$ c**sr~-^-.:
m
ASWAN HIGH OHM I960 HI-- Jl
15
