World Health Day this year is devoted to the world's most costly disease, malaria, and the world
campaign for its eradication.
Never before in history have the nations concerted their efforts on such a scale against a
single disease. Without a dissenting voice the ninety Members of the World Health Organization
have resolved to pool their knowledge and resources to achieve nothing less than the complete
elimination of this disease from our globe. This year's World Health Day will, I hope, serve to recall
to all peoples the urgency of this great undertaking.
Malaria remains in 1960 a constant threat to more than 1,000 million human- beings. For the most
part these are people who already have more than their share of sickness and poverty, and can least
afford to be further weakened in their struggle against misfortune.
Malaria strikes first at a country's most precious resource, its young children. The disease is held
responsible for 10% to 15% of infant mortality. It can also depopulate large territories.
The man who carries the malaria parasite in his blood is a man of blunted initiative. To him few
things seem worth the trouble, he becomes fatalistic, and the physical deterioration that he suffers makes
him an easy prey to other dangerous diseases.
Today we know how malaria is transmitted, and by what mosquitos. We know how the malaria para¬
site behaves within the human body, and how it causes a fever that may lead to death. We have
found effective ways of destroying the mosquitos and we possess drugs that successfully attack the parasites
within the human body. Techniques for fighting malaria are becoming more powerful and precise.
But we know also that the deadly mosquitos have found ways of fighting back ; that is why speed is

The Unesco Courier. April 1960
essential. The campaign against malaria must be carried through while the weapons still remain effec¬
tive. There must be no slackening of effort until the disease has been entirely stamped out, and the
last remaining case in the remotest corner of the earth has been tracked down and cured.
WHO's member countries have given the Organization a heavy responsibility ; that of guiding a global
campaign for the complete and unconditional liberation from malaria of twelve hundred million human
beings in 148 countries and territories throughout the world.
The antimalaria operations that are at present proceeding, at one stage or another, in 92 countries
and territories constitute the greatest co-ordinated public health programme ever undertaken in the
world's history. In 13 of these countries, malaria cases have been reduced to a handful occurring
sporadically or introduced from outside. However, there are still 56 countries where no effort has yet
been made to subdue the malaria monster.
The (world antimalaria campaign evidently calls for large numbers of trained workers of many kinds,
quantities of equipment and supplies, considerable financial investment and efficient administrative
machinery. It is even more important, however, that the governments engaged in the campaign should
pursue it with conviction and with the determination to succeed.
The eradication of malaria is a challenge to all the world. In an era when man thinks he is about
to set foot on the moon, he should on his own planet be capable of stamping out one of his oldest and most
destructive enemies.
There is no doubt in my mind that the countries of the world are today in a position to accept this
challenge. To do so is indeed a question of honour. What is needed more than anything else is the will
to eradicate malaria, for today the way is there.
