I
- . _ !
© Almasy, Pans
Part of a bas relief decorating the temple dedicated to Knoum, god of the First Cataract
of the Nile and to Sesostris III and founded by King Tuthmosis 111 (1504-1450 B.C.)
at Semneh in the Sudan on the left bank of the Nile, about 250 miles up river from
Aswan. Today, this temple is threatened with inundation by the Aswan Dam.
30
n the area of the
northern Sudan
which will be
submerged by the waters of the new
Aswan Dam, undoubtedly the most
important sites which will be
destroyed are the series of ancient
fortresses built by the Egyptians
about B.C. 2000 and situated at
strategic points on both banks of the
Nile between Wadi Haifa and Semneh.
The Pharaohs of the 12th Dynasty
built these strongholds to protect the
southern borders of Egypt and to
hold down the subject populations of
their newly conquered dominions in
Nubia.
Some of them were also trading
settlements and dispatch posts to
Egypt of the products of the south,
such as gold, ivory, etc. They are
thus treasure houses of information,
not only on ancient military architec¬
ture, but on the manners, customs
and general conditions of life in colo¬
nial Nubia over a period of nearly a
thousand years.
The exploration of these important
remains of ancient civilization has
been largely neglected because of
their immense size and inaccessibility;
consequently our knowledge of Egyp¬
tian military architecture is extremely
limited. Egyptology is now faced
with the necessity of immediate
research in a subject which, unless
undertaken at once, will be beyond
the reach of a student in less than
four years' time. Once the rising
waters of the new reservoir reach
their specified level of 133 metres,
nothing can save these ancient monu¬
ments, and, built as they are of mud
brick, within a few months not a
vestige of them will remain.
w
W W iTH this know-
7 7 ledge, the Egypt
Exploration So¬
ciety in 1958 undertook, with the
approval of the Sudan Government,
the complete excavation of Buhen,
situated on the west bank of the Nile
opposite the modern town of Wadi
Haifa. Buhen was the largest of the
chain of trading stations and for¬
tresses built by the Pharaohs of
Dynasty 12 (2000 B.C.) to block the
difficult passages by land and river
through the Second Cataract.
It was the G.H.Q. for the admi¬
nistration of the military garrisons
of all the strongholds in the area,
and at the time of its foundation it
was probably the seat of the Egyptian
Viceroy who ruled Nubia in the name
of the Pharaoh of Egypt. At that
time the fortress consisted of an
elaborate series of fortifications built
on a rectangular plan 172 metres
by 160 metres, which enclosed a
town containing domestic habitations,
barrack buildings, workshops, a tem¬
ple and the Governor's palace.
As far as the Egypt Exploration
Society's excavations have gone, they
have revealed a carefully laid out
example of rectangular town planning
with paved arterial roads, each with
its own independent drainage system.
On the river side of the fortress, two

N THESE DREAR WASTES
WHAT VISIONARY PASTS REVIVE...
by Professor W. B. Emery
Department of Egyptology
University College, London J. Vercoutter
Aerial photo of the great fortress of Buhen, near Wadi Haifa in the Sudan. The
fortress was built in the early Middle Kingdom, as one of a series of trading posts
and strongholds erected nearly 4,000 years ago to defend the strategic area of the
Second Cataract of the Nile, dividing Upper and Lower Nubia. It has been excavated
and explored by expeditions led by Professor Walter B. Emery of the University of
London. Among details seen in this photo are traces of streets running at right
angles to each other, the earliest ramparts with their circular bastions, the temple
(top centre, closest to the river) and the great gate in the centre of the west wall
facing the desert. Faintly visible too are the outlines of the larger defence system
dating from the reconstruction of the fortress, after its sacking about 1650 B.C.
great gates in the wans lead directly
to stone built quays from which ships
were loaded with the tribute and
products of trade from conquered
Nubia. The contents of tombs
discovered outside the town and the
condition of houses within it give
ample evidence of a rich and even
luxurious standard of living in this
outpost of colonial Egypt.
The elaborate defence system which
enclosed this small town consisted of
a massive brick wall, 4.8 m. thick and
11 m. high, relieved at intervals on
its outer face with projecting rectan¬
gular towers. At the foot of tne
wall was a brick paved rampart with
a fire-step, protected by a loopholed
parapet overhanging the scarp of dry
ditch, about 9 m. wide and 7 m. deep.
The counterscarp on the other side of
the ditch was surmounted by a
narrow covered way of brickwork,
beyond which was a glacis rising from
the natural ground level. Projecting
into the ditch from the scarp were
round bastions with a system of triple
loopholes with single embrasures,
through which archers could direct
a deadly cross-fire which would
completely cover the ditch.
The most strongly fortified part of
the structure was the great gate built
in the centre of the west wall facing
the desert from which came the long
trade roads leading to the mines and
quarries. The gate was closed by
great double doors, beyond which was
a wooden drawbridge which could be
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

pulled back on rollers. The gate and
bridge were flanked by two spur walls
which extended over the dry ditch,
forming a narrow corridor, through
which an attacking force would have
to battle its way exposed to a rain of
missiles from the battlements on
three sides. Even when the storming
party had broken through the gate,
their difficulties would not be at an
end, for they would find themselves
in an enclosed square with exits
giving access to the town only
through narrow roads immediately
under the inner walls of the fortifi¬
cations; thus coming under fire once
again from the defenders.
¡¿OSA* n*s^-ÍO«fc^B*ií*»í>:
T he discovery of
these complex
and elaborate
fortifications at Buhen shows that
the Egyptians of that time were hold¬
ing their newly won territory against
a well organized enemy whose mili¬
tary prowess was by no means
negligible. Strong as they were,
these great defences were not suffi¬
cient to preserve the town, and with
the weakening of Egyptian power
following the Asiatic invasions of
their homeland, the people of the
South stormed and sacked the
fortress about 1650 B.C.
Thereafter it remained a gigantic
and partly burnt ruin for many
years, until the advent of the warrior
Pharaohs of the 18th Dynasty (1555-
1350 B.C.), who after the expulsion
of the Asiatic usurpers in Egypt,
turned their attention once more to
their last possessions in the south.
Buhen was reoccupied and its original
fortifications were rebuilt and streng¬
thened to form a citadel in the centre
of a much larger town with a new
defence system of over a mile in
extent surrounding it. A fine temple
was built by Queen Hatshepsut (B.C.
1495), the town expanded and
apparently remained secure, occupied
by a thriving community, until the
final eclipse of Egyptian power at the
close of the 20th Dynasty (B.C. 1090).
A large part of this great outpost
of Egyptian civilization has already
been excavated by the Egypt Explo¬
ration Society's expeditions, and
valuable new material and knowledge
has been made available for the
historian's research. Two more sea¬
sons of exploration will be necessary
before the whole area is revealed;
but sufficient is now visible to show
that here at Buhen we have a unique
example of Egyptian military archi¬
tecture splendidly preserved.
Remains of bas reliefs covering walls of one
of two temples built inside twin fortresses of
Semneh and Kumma, dating from 1500-1400
B.C. An air survey carried out in the Sudan
has revealed the existence of more than I 00
ancient historical sites which still need to be
at least partly explored, excavated and recorded.
© Paul Almasy, Pans
Elaborate defence system enclosing the
ancient Nubian town of Buhen included
a massive brick wall 36 feet high with
projecting rectangular towers. At the
foot of the wall was a brick paved ram¬
part with a fire-step (inset, right),
protected by a loopholed parapet,
overhanging a dry ditch 30 feet wide.
W B Emery-London Universit/
32
