Pierre ßaudin
JOBS OF EVERY KIND are now open to the blind thanks to modern appliances. Blind shorthand typists, for example, now
have an almost noiseless machine for shorthand dictation at a speed of 140 words and more a minute. The French typist shown
here is working from a tape-recorded text. On his right is a special pad on which he can make notes by perforating the paper with
a stylet, guided by a slotted mobile ruler. Some of the world's early typewriters were devised primarily for the use of the blind.

Despite host
of gadgets
SCIENCE STILL SEEKING TRUE
ELECTRONIC SUBSTITUTE FOR SIGHT
by M. Robert Barnett
W
f HETHER it be a simple device for the writing
of Braille, or the exciting promise of vision
through electronics, the problem of persons deprived of
eyesight has long attracted the interest and energy of
scores of technical scientists. Throughout the 130
years since Louis Braille came up with his system
of embossed printing the variety and number of mechanical
or electronic appliances designed to offset the handicap of
blindness has been extensive and yet, modern science still
has brought no major breakthrough that would constitute
real news for the world's blind persons.
The student of the problem must first attempt to under¬
stand just what is the handicap of blindness; that is, if he
himself is not blind. The world-famous Helen Keller has
often said that the greatest problem facing the blind is the
attitude of society toward them and while she was
referring primarily to the handicap of social segregation
and to barriers to employment, her statement does have a
direct significance here.
Basically, most people believe that the loss of sight
reduces the human being into a vegetable-like organism
that lives and breathes but which has lost all power to
function normally. Upon closer inspection, experience or
study, this exaggerated concept is found to be quite un¬
reasoning. Notwithstanding loss of sight, the average
human being of normal intelligence and stable tempera¬
ment has an amazing array of personal capacities. Blind¬
ness, per se, does not change this fundamental fact. The
blind person can be assisted greatly by special tools and
devices but only too often the proposed tangible devices
upon examination do not prove useful in a working situa¬
tion. Even the otherwise skilled and well-meaning inven¬
tor is not free of misconceptions and is often startled at
not meeting with enthusiastic acceptance of his ideas by
agencies serving blind persons or by the blind themselves.
An examination of the many reports of experiments
and existing catalogues of practical appliances shows a
consistent adherence, however, to a recognition of the real
problem which blindness imposes. This problem breaks
down, generally speaking, into two large challenges to
scientific imagination communication and mobility. The
first, more simply stated, means the obvious barrier of
blindness to reading and writing, while the second refers
to the more subtle and complex question of how to get
about efficiently and safely from place to place.
Past accomplishment and future lines of design and
production depart from these two major challenges into a
variety of less dramatic types of appliances that assist the
blind person to meet various tasks in the household or on
M. Robert Barnett is Executive Director of the American Founda¬
tion for the Blind, Inc., and the American Foundation for Overseas
Blind, Inc., New York. He is also Chairman of the Committee on
Technical Research, World Council tor the Welfare of the Blind.
the job. The essential and most significant fact at the
moment nevertheless is that none of the dreams of blind
persons themselves or of their imaginative scientific friends
about an outright electronic substitute for sight in reading
and in travel have even begun to be realized.
Throughout the world at this very moment there is a
growing awareness of the need for an intensive objective
re-analysis of the basic theories that most technologists
have accepted in the pursuit of a particular experiment.
In the English language there is a growing usage of the
words "'human engineering," an expression designed to
convey the need to fit the machine to the man rather than
fitting the man to the machine.
-W1
URTHER, most of the recent advances in either
the field printing or of personal mobility
devices overlook the cold facts of economics. Those
intended for the acceleration of the printing of Braille
books, for instance, may actually involve an increase in
cost of production over what already is an expensive
matter. Those intended for the use of individuals even
if found to be of practical valuewould be units whose
cost would be far beyond the ability of average people to
purchase or for social agencies to supply at public expense.
Finally, a general lack of exchange of information
among the small but noteworthy army of thinkers and
designers often causes the expenditure of time and funds
upon fines of research or the actual construction of
prototypes that earlier and similar experimentation already
has shown to be unproductive of practical results.
An informal appraisal of the total picture, however, has
a brighter side. Within recent months, there has been a
refreshing new attempt to bring some of America's best
minds to bear upon basic problems. It is generally
believed of late that much of the lack of success in this
field is due. to failure to examine the real impact of sensory
deprivation upon the human being. Similar lines of
thinking recently have been expressed openly in
Scandinavian and United Kingdom circles concerned with
service to blind people. Such utterances and conferences,
however, must at some point be brought to recognizable
stages of crystallization of thought.
During the past five years, there has been an acceleration
and diversification of efforts to examine the potential for
this field which arises through the use of electronic
computers. While the imagination of many persons has
been stimulated to believe that machines such as the IBM
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

NO ELECTRONIC EYE (Cont'd)
FROM SELF-THREADING NEEDLES
TO LIBRARIES OF TALKING BOOKS
704 may somehow produce in the form of Braille type
books and periodicals for blind persons in a matter of
minutes, these interpretations have not been kept in proper
perspective. Nevertheless, remarkable progress has been
made in programming such machines to produce advanced
forms of Braille in an economically short time, provided
that some new light can be shed upon the most practical
types of input and output. At the moment, there is
intense interest throughout the world in the present status
of such experimentation as well as a desire to examine the
long-range implications.
The application of modern techniques in the field of
sound recording, relatively well-known in English-speaking
countries for a quarter of a century, has only recently
been introduced in others. The first "'international"
recorded library service has been under way for European
countries for about three years, and is enjoying gratifyingly
rapid expansion.
ADiCALLY new designs are being suggested
* thanks to new impetus among private concerns
who are showing a tendency to believe that there is a
general market for longplaying recording machines.
Within recent months, the library programme of the blind
in the United Kingdom has partially introduced the use
of cassette-type tape playbacks. The United States with
more than 50,000 disc-type record players in use is reluc¬
tant to convert, but is carefully studying local and foreign
experience with tape.
There are in existence a number of highly useful
"gadgets" available in various countries which do help
blind persons in everyday tasks of daily living, study, work,
and recreation.
Changes in daily living as a whole have had a
kaleidoscopic effect on blind people. Radios, telephones
and electricity have done a great deal for them, as well
as central heating, insecticides, antibiotics, typewriters and
recorders. There are, however, a great many special aids
of various kinds which make life easier, for a blind person.
These include Braille watches, dials for cooking stoves,
measures for food, self-threading needles, bread cutting
boxes, signature guides and many others. For the blind
woman there are aids for personal grooming, for the blind
man safety and electric razors have been a boon.
Nowhere is the blind person better off today than in
the home, for here gadgetry has come to its fullest bloom.
To an astonishingly large extent, the devices to simplify
life for people with sight have also simplified life for those
who are blind.
There are sufficient tools in existence to enable the blind
student to pass courses in physics, mathematics, chemistry,
biology or geology. A vacuum forming process is produc¬
ing relief maps at low cost and can be used for designs
and diagrams and in other ways to assist the study of the
sciences. Special mathematical devices are available that
can work out calculations of the most intricate kinds.
There are special appliances that enable a blind person
to do a job, and persuade an employer that the job is
possible. For instance, there are measuring devices for
length, weight, temperature, time, relative humidity,
barometric pressure, blood pressure, voltage, current,
resistance and capacity. The blind shorthand typist today
has an almost noiseless machine on which he can take
shorthand dictation at a speed of 140 words and more a
minute. Other tools are produced for the use of blind
workers, such as piano tuners, shoe repairmen and
carpenters. Blind telephone operators are enabled to
function with the aid of special adaptations to standard
switchboards.
A constant search for new games and other recreational
aids is going on. Among standard games especially
adapted for the blind are chess, draughts, dominoes,
puzzles and playing cards. Bingo boards can be had, as
can a game of fairly recent origin called scrabble which
can also double as an anagram game when extra tiles are
secured. For the active blind adults there are many
activities such as rowing, riding, skiing, wrestling that can
be carried on with little or no assistance. A portable

The Unesco Courier. June 1960
'You just must watch
what you are doing'
As blind Joyce Rominger handles the tele¬
phone calls that come through her switchboard
at an industrial plant in Chattanooga, Tennes¬
see, she manipulates the keys and controls as
deftly and swiftly as her sighted colleagues.
She can do so thanks to a special Braille dial
switchboardone of many now in use in various
countries. Joyce graduated from the Alabama
School for the Blind in 1956 and afterwards
took Braille switchboard training. She over¬
came her next big hurdle when she found an
employer who believed she could handle a
dial switchboard and was ready to go to the
trouble and expense of installing one. The
Braille attachment to the switchboard is a
square box containing rows of plungers under
each of which is a station number in Braille.
When a call comes in, the corresponding
plunger pops up with a buzz. Joyce locates
the plunger, reads the Braille below it (left,
below), runs her fingers across a strip of
Braille on the switchboard to locate the station
number (left, above), inserts the jack, reads the
Braille strip under the switches and flips the
correct one. "How in the world do you keep
from getting all those lines tangled up?"
someone once asked her. " Well, you just
have to watch what you're doing," she replied.
Photos © Camera Press Ltd., London.
bowling rail is the only special piece of equipment which
comes to mind.
When blindness is the sole disability there is probably
no great need for research into medical aid. Often,
however, blindness is one aspect of a systemic disease as
in diabetes or Hansen's disease (leprosy) or multiple
sclerosis. For the blind diabetic, special syringes with
devices for locating the centre of the rubber cap on the
insulin vial and with automatic injections are available.
For other purposes there are clinical thermometers and drop
measures.
Helen Keller's example has helped bring into focus* not
only the needs of the deaf-blind but their potentialities as
well. A growing number of deaf-blind persons are finding
employment and the need has been met for a suitable alarm
clock which would shake the bed at the proper time for
rising. A device, such as the American Tellatouch, has
been developed which activates the appropriate Braille
symbols from a keyboard similar to the typewriter
keyboard.
The increasing concern about past failures and future
promises currently is the basis for a proposed international
congress on technology in blindness. With the formal
endorsement of the World Council for the Welfare of the
Blind and the active co-operation of national agencies in
a number of countries, interested bodies in the United
States are now attempting to arrange for the financial
support that would be needed to prepare and carry out
such a conference. While the proposed meeting, probably
to be held in late 1961, will of course provide an
opportunity for exchange of information and views on
every appropriate item, its principal objective will be to
establish if possible just what lines of investigation and
construction hold the most promise for eventual success.
A profoundly honest re-searching of concepts is hoped
for. At its conclusion, and with the expected co¬
operation of all organized research centres and agencies
for the blind, there should be the establishment of a
continuing system for the reporting of research in progress
and results obtained such information to then be available
to others who wish to enter their ideas into what is
undoubtedly an exciting challenge.

B rai
trans
11
la t ion
by computer
Today much attention is being given to the
automation of Braille publishing so as to give
blind readers greater access to specialized
books and articles. Needs of the blind far exceed the
Braille books available despite the efforts of Braille
publishing houses and volunteer transcribers.
Now a new programme has been developed by
IBM using its famous 704 electronic computer, in co¬
operation With the American Printing House for the
Blind. Together they have developed a process of
using the computer to translate the printed text
into Braille. The machine can convert a 300-page
book into Braille in one hour a job that would take
skilled translators more than six days. Writing
Braille is a complicated process where symbols often
change their meaning in a different context and
many special contractions and abbreviations, much
like shorthand, are used.
Texts to be translated by the electronic computer
are first transcribed on punched cards. These are
then fed directly into the computer, which has had
stored in its memory a programme or set of rules
for conversion of English into Braille. The IBM 704
executes as many as 600 instructions per word in
less than a fortieth of a second. Contractions and
abbreviations are determined by matching the letters
against an alphabetical table of Braille equivalents.
How does the process compare with that made by
a human translator? For example, suppose that the
word "changeable" is to be transcribed. A skilled
human transcriber would write this as seven
Braille characters, Ch-a-n-g-e-a-ble, where ch and
ble are contractions each represented by a single
Braille character. Though there is also an "ea"
contraction in Braille, the transcriber does not use
it because here "e" belongs to a root .Word, "change,"
while the "a" belongs to a suffix, "able."
To accomplish the same result, the IBM 704 goes
through about 600 separate steps for the average
word, but converts 4,000 words per minute into
Braille roughly 100 times faster than the human
transcriber. This is made possible because electrons
travelling at thé speed of light, enable the machine
to handle 40,000 instructions per second.
The translated text emerges from the computer in
coded symbols on a punched cards and these, in
turn, are fed to the 704's printer unit which re¬
produces Braille symbols above the English text for
editing purposes. After editing, the corrected
punched cards are fed into an embossing machine
which produces metal plates for a rotary press.
In some respects the programme of machine
conversion to Braille resembles mechanical transla¬
tion from one language to another a much more
difficult problem on which many research organiza¬
tions are working. Diagram beJow shows how Braille
translations are made by the IBM computer.
10
