LABORATORY FOR
DESERT LIVING
by
Daniel Behrman
SAHARA OIL TOWN. A city
of several thousand people has
grown up around the oil wells at
Hassl Messaoud In the heart of
the Sahara. Problems of desert
living, ranging from family life and
housing to diet and working hours
are under constant study here.
Photos CFP.
i %
1^ ms is a world where science shatters a myth
a day ... and the latest one to go by the board
is the old illusion of the Sahara Desert as a
trackless inhuman waste producing only
sandstorms and tales of adventure.
"Man can work' in the Sahara without any visible harm
to his health, and his productivity there can be as high
as it is in Europe . . . provided certain conditions of diet
and housing are met."
This statement came from Dr. Georges Lambert, a young
French medical man who is assistant director of
"Prohtjza" a word made up of the French initials for
"Study and Information Centre for Human Problems in
the Arid Zones."
Prohuza, financed by the French African Industrial
Bureau and companies developing the Sahara, is attacking
many aspects of the problems raised by transplanting
modern industrial civilization into the heart of the desert.
Its studies on the adaptation of European workers to
the Sahara were carried out at Hassi Messaoud, some 500
miles inland from the Mediterranean and sixty miles from
the nearest oasis, where oil was discovered in 1957.
Experiments were carried out with three five-man
teams of oil drillers, Dr. Lambert explained. He believes
that these were the first scientific experiments on the
adaptation of man to a desert climate actually carried out
in the field and not under simulated laboratory conditions.
"Unlike what most of us have always thought, the
climate in the Sahara is not too harmful for skilled
workers," Dr. Lambert said. During the experiments,
careful measurements were made of food intake and
losses of men in the oil fields working around the clock in
three eight-hour shifts.'
In the heat of a
desert summer, it was
found that the 3,500-
calorie diet offered in
the ultra-modern din¬
ing room at Hassi Mes¬
saoud camp was quite
adequate for skilled
workers on a difficult
job. Protein consump¬
tion rose slightly above
what it would have
been in Europe.
"The main food prob¬
lem at Hassi Messaoud
is psychologica 1,"
Dr. Lambert admitted
somewhat ruefully.
"You see, when the oil
company started hiring
men for the Sahara,
candidates were pro¬
mised good jobs and good food. Fate should be avoided
in the desert they're hard to digest but the men want
to eat well. You find some oil prospectors eating pâté de
foie gras and sardines when it's 122°F. (50°C.) in the
shade!"
As for the dining-room, it offers the same menu as a
good Paris restaurant. "'Look what they had for lunch
one day last August," said Dr. Lambert, flipping open a
notebook, "Charcuterie (that is, sausages and pâté) and
lettuce for an appetizer, followed by escalope à la crème
(veal steak with a cream sauce), vegetables, Camembert
cheese and fruit. We'd like to change this menu, but it's
hard to go back on our promises."
The ideal meal for desert workers, he explained, would
consist of a mixed salad, an appetizer, grilled meat, then
cheese and fruit, with a heavy accent on fresh vegetables.
Actually, such a menu would be very expensive since the
fresh fruit and vegetables on which it is largely based,
cost 110 francs ($0.20) a pound just to fly in.
The Unesco Courier. January 1960
European oil drillers in the Sahara are heavy drinkers . . .
of water. They lose 14 litres (more than 3 gallons) a day
in perspiration and they drink an equivalent amount of
Evian or Vittel water brought into Hassi Messaoud in
special cardboard or aluminium containers.
There is water at Hassi Messaoud, but it contains too
many ¡minerals to be drunk safely in large quantities. So,
paradoxically, the salty water on the spot goes unused
while salt must be added to the diet in the dining-room.
Scientific research has shown that the traditional food
of the Saharan nomads is an excellent desert diet. It is
rich in spices salt and pepper and contains very little
fat (the meat is usually roasted on a spit).
Diet is only half the story in providing suitable working
conditions in an arid zone. The other half is housing and,
of course, all quarters must be air-conditioned. The
system, however, is different from that used in most
towns.
The usual method of air conditioning, Dr. Lambert
explained, consists of a compressor producing very cold
and very dry air. In the Sahara, this would dry out the
skin immediately. Instead, an evaporation system is used.
Based upon the principle that water absorbs heat when it
is evaporated, it consists simply of a powerful turbine
blowing water through air. It cools a house bringing the
inside temperature down to 86°F. (30°C.) when it is 122°F.
(50°C.) outside and, at the same time, it humidifies it.
This air-conditioning costs much less to run and install
than a conventional system. There's just one hitch: it
can only be used in the Sahara or in a similar climate
where the humidity of the air is less than 10 per cent.
In New York or Bombay, for example, it wouldn't work.
Each Sahara day is like another
Q ç t-jrohuza" has studied certain other factors affecting
r^ the adaptation of man to desert conditions. At
present, employees have a choice of three different
schedules: three weeks at Hassi Messaoud, then one week
in Algiers ; nine weeks in the desert and three weeks in
France; or six weeks on the job and two weeks in Algiers
or in France. In each case, they work seven days a.week
without any time off on Sundays or holidays.
Studies show, Dr. Lambert stated, that the three to one
system is the least advisable. "Three weeks are just
enough time for a man to adapt himself to the desert;
he's hardly settled in and it's already time to go on leave,"
he explained. "In the end, he adapts himself neither to
the job nor to the leave."
This raises a series of psychological problems which are
just as important as food or housing. Scientists at Hassi
Messaoud have observed a rapid increase in the rate of
labour turnover in recent months.
But according to L\r. Lambert that is only normal. The
first oil workers in the desert were young men with an
itch for adventure. They were excellent during the
prospecting stage but now that' a city of 2,000 has grown
up around the oil wells, they have become restless.
This has led to the hiring of older men to handle the
job of extracting and shipping oil and the appearance of
a new set of problems revolving around family life and
housing.
"Everyone has his own opinion on the matter," Dr. Lam¬
bert said. "The basic problem is that men are too far
from their normal environment of friends and families."
Three possible solutions are now being studied: leaves
of absence long enough to enable the oilmen to return to
Europe; bringing the families to Algiers; or bringing them
to Hassi Messaoud.
No decision has yet been taken, but Dr. Lambert believes
that all three will be used, varying from one individual
case to another.
33
