, Photo © Pierre Baudin - Association Valentin Haiiy, Psris
THE ANATOMY LESSON is an important element in the training of a masseur. Here, at the training centre of the Valentin Haüy
Association in Paris, two blind students (on left) study the formation of the human skeleton while a blind instructor gives other
students a lesson in the technique of massage. Blind people have increasingly shown themselves to be adept at this work.

LET'S STOP PLAYING
BLIND MANS REBUFF
by Léon Bataille
ST"he blind?" "Useless members of the community."
"Unless a blind person has a streaik of genius, he
should steer clear of intellectual pursuits." These
two opinions were recorded during a recent inquiry in
France where a cross section of all classes and ages was
asked for its views on the place of the blind in society.
Such negative views were by no means isolated ones,
even in the country of Louis Braille and of Valentin Haiiy,
the great pioneer in the field of social rehabilitation for
the blind. The enquiry showed too that even people With
good educational backgrounds viewed blindness as an
affliction which condemns its victims to a life of apathy.
Most people seemed to think that work could never be
anything more than a pastime for the blind, a kind of con¬
solation or simply something to distract them from their
infirmity.
But there are others in the world who think differently.
Henry Ford, the American automobile magnate, renowned
for his practical common sense, wrote in his auto¬
biography:
"The subdivision of industry opens places that can be
filled by practically anyone. There are more places in
subdivision industry that can be filled by blind men than
there are blind men. And in each of these places the man
who shortsightedly might toe considered ah object of
charity can earn just as adequate a living as the keenest
and most able-bodied. Industry organized for service
removes the need for philanthropy."
What about the blind themselves? What do they think?
In their minds there are no doubts whatever. To them
work is something far more important than a means of
gaining a livelihood. It is no mere chance that Article 2
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights "everyone
has the right to work, to free choice of employment"is
so often quoted by speakers at the international con¬
ferences of the blind.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

LETS STOP PLAYING
BLIND MAN'S REBUFF
(CONT'D)
As Pierre Henri, professor at the
National Institution for the Young
Blind, in Paris, has expressed it:
"The desire to be useful, to lose the
feeling of being a burden on others,
to earn their living 'like other people'
is, in the case of the blind, no mere
wish; it is an aspiration, an
obsession."
History may well be studded with
the names of blind men who achieved
fame through their talent or genius,
but the right of all blind men to
work is a comparatively new concep¬
tion.
Since 1945 most of the European
countries and those of North America
have taken steps to assist the social
and occupational rehabilitation of
their blind citizens though the
resources brought to this task are
widely divergent as also are the
methods used and results achieved.
Some countries consider they have
solved the problem by granting pen¬
sions to the blind. Others feel it is
enough to provide educational and
entertainment facilities. Most,
however, have tried to help the
blind to equip themselves for a gain¬
ful occupation, and to find jobs.
Higher productivity &
lower accident rates
For far too long the only possibility
open to the blind was to enter
some restricted, overcrowded
profession such as piano- tuning or
playing in an orchestra; more
recently they have been able to take
up massage. All that most of them
have been taught, however, are jobs
like making brushes or re-seating
cane chairs despite the fact that
there are more and more jobs in in¬
dustry and business which could be
adequately filled by blind people.
The experience of business and
industrial concerns in, among other
countries, France, Great Britain,
Canada, the Soviet Union, Denmark
and the United States, shows beyond
doubt that the blind are capable of
performing a wide variety of jobs,
including complicated ones, provided
production methods are suitably
adapted and simplified. They are
conscientious workers and their pro¬
ductivity is equal to or even higher
than that of equivalent sighted
workers, especially when they have
been given a thorough training.
Moreover, man for man, they have
fewer accidents at work since their
blindness makes them take special
care. Finally, employers have been
amazed by the psychological effects of
JUST LIKE ANY
OTHER FACTORY
At the Saurma factory in the Paris suburb of Suresnes there is
the hustle and bustle typical of any busy factory. Here men
are unloading raw materials from a truck; there a Woman fills
cartons with tins of floor polish while across from her a man packs
soap tablets into boxes. At bench and machine, men and women
work swiftly and deftly. Yet most of these Workers are blind and the
rest are deaf and dumb. There is only one unhandicapped person
the foreman.
In this factory which turns out soap and household cleaning pro¬
ducts, the skills and capabilities of blind and other handicapped
people are used to the full. The enterprise has four aims: to turn
people into qualified workers after only a few weeks' training; to
provide gainful employment for the physically handicapped; to earn
profits which can be used to help blind and other disabled persons;
to demonstrate convincingly ' to employers that they need have no
hesitation in taking blind workers on their, staffs.
This last goal is certainly the most important. One of the chief
obstacles with which blind people have to contend in their struggle
to make their way in Ufe is the reluctance of many firms to put them
to work.
Thus a factory like the Saurma a private undertaking and en¬
tirely self-supporting-^has many useful lessons to offer. AU its
workers were trained on the spot and their working conditions, salaries
and social benefits are, in general, equal or superior to those prevailing
for equivalent workers in other factories.
Not only is the factory run at a profit, but the individual produc¬
tivity of its workers is comparable to that of sighted ones. This was
shown when studies were made of such operations as the riveting of
openers on tins of floor polish, the moulding of bars of soap and the
folding, filling and sealing of their paper packaging.
The day when employers realize that blind people, once properly
trained, can efficiently carry out jobs in factory, workshop and office,
a great step will have been taiken towards the full integration of the
handicapped into society.
IEven ¡n the factory laboratory the work is carried out by blind people.
Here a workerfills a mixer with the ingredients for making soap. Certain
jobs, in the factorythe filling of tins with hot, liquid floor wax, for example
however, given to sighted persons (the deaf and dumb).
2 Filling up cans with liquid floor polish from a pump is a job which blind
people manage easily after a short period of training.
3 Another kind of work which the blind have no trouble in learning to
execute swiftly and efficiently is packaging. Here, a woman worker
folds cardboard into the form of a box and packs it with bars of soap.
4 For reasons of security all the machines used by the blind workers
are worked by individual hand or foot controls. Thus the operator
chooses the moment to work the machine, and at the same time is able
to maintain a steady rhythm of production.
28 CONT'D ON PAGE 3 0

The Unesco Courier. June 1960
PHOTOS © ALMASY, PARIS
29

LETS STOP PLAYING
BLIND MAN'S REBUFF
(From page 28)
taking blind persons on their staffs
and the spirit of solidarity that grows
up between those who can see and
those who cannot.
In Great Britain today there are
more blind people working in industry
than in special workshops or at home.
In the United States, which has
98,000 blind people between the ages
of 15 and 54, 20,000 are working in
industry amongst sighted people. Of
the 6,000 blind in Denmarik, 10% are
in paid employment, either full or
part-time. A thousand of the 3,500
blind people in Norway (out of a total
population of three and a half
million) are employable.
Of the nine and a half million blind
people in the world today over seven
million live in rural areas and the
majority of these in countries now
in the throes of economic develop¬
ment. Thus, though the ever increas¬
ingly widespread application in the
economically developed countries of
the right of the blind to work
represents a great step forward, this
does not mean that the problem in
the world as a whole is anywhere
near being solved.
Millions could train
for work on the land
The problems of giving effect to
this right are obviously not the
same in the industrialized coun¬
tries as in the agrarian ones. In the
latter Where three-quarters of the
world's blind people live, they must
be trained for agricultural work,
except where industrial development
provides some openings.
Today a vast effort is being made
in this direction in Africa, Asia and
Latin America, with the help both of
the United Nations and several of its
Specialized Agencies, and of non¬
governmental organizations such as
the World Council for the Welfare of
the Blind, the World Veterans Federa¬
tion and the British Commonwealth
Society for the Blind.
Special centres where the blind are
trained in agricultural work have
been set up with the help of inter¬
national specialists, and the ex¬
periences of the countries which
have done a great deal of social
and occupational rehabilitation are
being adapted and put to use in less
advanced regions.
Results naturally vary from one
country to another, but in general
there is no doubt that for blind
people the World over a new era has
opened since the end of the Second
World War.
TO EARN THEIR LIVING like everyone else is an ardent desire of the blind. For
long they were restricted to a few overcrowded professions, but growing experience
in business and industrial concerns of many countries has shown that the blind are capable
of doing a wide range of jobs provided production methods are suitably adapted and
simplified. Above, students learn to use a sewing machine at a special course organized
in Paris by the Association Valentin Haiiy, which takes it name from the great French
pioneer of the rehabilitation of the blind. The women turn out work for hospitals and
public institutions in the French capital. Below, in the printing shop run by the same
association. The worker on the left is preparing zinc plates for printing Braille books.
His left hand reads the Braille text and his right controls the stamping of the characters.
Photos © Pierre Baudin-Association Valentin Haüy, Paris
30
