THE YELLOW STAR. "Stars" is a memorable anti-racist film made by a combined German-Bulgarian production team. Its
story concerns a German soldier in Bulgaria during the last war, who is ordered to round up the Jewish inhabitants for depor¬
tation. He falls in love with one of thema young Jewish schoolteacherand his eyes are opened to the injustice of racial hatred.

THE CINEMA SAYS NO!
TO RACISM
by Louis Marcorelles
B"^ iLM makers have long realized that the cinema
B is more than mere entertainment and that
JtL*. it can be a powerful weapon to influence
public opinion. In the 1940-1941 period there is no space
here to discuss pre-war films a number of deeply sig¬
nificant films appeared, such as "Grapes of Wrath" and
"Citizen Kane." But it was not until 1945 that a syste¬
matic study was made of some of today's key problems
anti-Semitism and the status of the Negro, for example.
Then, in rapid succession, films like "Crossfire," "Gentle¬
man's Agreement," "Home of the Bravé" and "Pinky"
' showed that Hollywood had begun to face the serious
problems of our time in earnest.
Another ten years went by before really significant films
on these subjects began to be made and before producers
emerged who were capable of exploting to the full the
themes they had chosen. Among these producers two
stand out: a Frenchman, Alain Renais and an American,
George Stevens.
Before winning international recognition and an award
at the Cannes Film Festival with his first full length
feature, "Hiroshima mon amour", which has since receiv¬
ed world-wide attention, Alain Renais had produced two
shorter films which creajted quite a sensation. In "Les
Statues meurent aussi" (Statues also die), a strongly pol¬
emical film, he showed the deterioration of Negro culture
after contact with the white civilization. At one parti¬
cularly dramatic moment he showed Negro musicians
playing the drums and immediately following this came a
scene of white policemen clubbing other Negroes.
Renais' "Nuit et Brouillard" is certainly the starkest,
most uncompromising film ever made on the Nazi death
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE CINEMA SAYS NO ! (Continued)
Cahiers du Cinéma Collection
DRAMA, PSYCHOLOGY AND RIDICULE are three ways in which the cinema has attacked racial prejudice. Left, "Pyra¬
mide Humaine", a new film by French anthropologist-producer Jean Rouch which tells how a young Parisian girl tries to improve
race relations between Negroes and whites in an African secondary school. In an American film, "The Defiant One", two convicts,
camps. And he undescored its message in the closing
moments by calling on all of us to see that such atrocities
never occur again.
"Hiroshima mon amour" tells a pathetic love story, but
over and above this it describes the encounter of two
civilizations against the backdrop of the Bomb. The story
of the two lovers would have been less moving, or rather,
their love would not have had the same significance had
the girl not been French and white and the man Japa¬
nese. After the film's release, the producer was agreably
surprised to find that the public accepted as perfectly
natural a situation that no other film had hitherto dared
to describe. We can perhaps go a step further and say
that the film's message strikes home harder because the
bomb was first dropped on a non-white nation. Since
the fllm is concerned with the drama of man's incommu-
nicability, the racial problem naturally received the chief
emphasis.
In "Giant" and "The Diary of Anne Frank", George
Stevens approached racism and anti-Semitism in the
Hollywood mannerthat is, a tendency to overembellish-
ment but no lack of courage. Richard Brookes, a younger
American producer, known for his liberal outlook, sought
to show the relationships between people of different races
and backgrounds, in "Blackboard Jungle", "The Last
Hunt" and "Something of Value".
A recent film dealing with this question is "The Defiant
One" made two years ago by director-producer Stanley
Kramer. It tells the story of an escaped convict, a white
man, who sacrifices his chance of freedom to save a
fellow escapee, a Negro, whom he had previously hated.
There is perhaps a weakness in these films in that they
concede too much to sentimentality and fail to trace back
problems to the basic causes.
30
Inasmuch as the films which deal with racial problems
demand absolute honesty from their producers and to the
extent that producers refuse to compromise with the
subject, such films run the risk of a cold reception from
public authorities and certain cinemagoers. Two films of
this kind which immediately come to mind are the Ger¬
man-Bulgarian co-production "Satrs-Sterne" (Stars),
made by Konrad Wolf from a remarkable scenario by the
Bulgarian, Angel Wagenstein, and "Come Back Africa",
produced by the American Lionel Rogosin. Despite their
frankness, and passionate conviction, and the Gha festival
awards they gained, neither of these films was successful,
at least in Europe.
Their styles are as different as the techniques used by
each producer. Whereas "Satrs-Sterne" was based on an
elaborate scenario, "Come Back Africa", because of the
almost clandestine conditions in which it was shot, is
almost entirely a work of improvisation. Each, in its own
way, is a noteworthy testimonial the first on anti-Semi¬
tism in Nazi Germany and the second on anti-Negro
racism in the Union of South Africa in 1958.
Rogosin has used a kind of journalistic approach, striv¬
ing to give us a maximum of hard-hitting facts and
images. In his anxiety to impress the spectator and to
win his sympathies, the producer has sometimes been
driven to extremes in simplification. The limited means
he had at his disposal are also reflected in the awkward¬
ness of certain sequences. Here we are not dealing with
a technically perfect film (nearly all Hollywood films are
"technically perfect" but this does not prevent them from
sometimes being boring). No, this is a sort of cry from
the heart which says: "This cannot and must not be
allowed to go on".
"Satrs-Sterne" is obviously a much more subtle produc-

The Unesco Courier. October I960
a Negro and a white man, break out of prison while chained together. Their initial feelings of hatred and distrust are even¬
tually replaced by understanding and real friendship. In "The Great Dictator", Charlie Chaplin stigmatized hatred and brutality
by ridicule. Right, Chaplin and Paulette Goddard, as two Jewish citizens, are pursued by stormtroopers of a racist dictator
tion and owes a great deal to the scenario "a la Brecht"
written by Wagenstein. We see a typical German soldier,
on occupation duty in a small Bulgarian town, gra¬
dually becoming conscious of the true meaning of the
Nazi system. The film is doubly successful in that it not
only shows the step-by-step awakening of a man's
conscience, but also the suffering of a whole people arbi¬
trarily oppressed, as seen through the eyes of a young
Jewish girl.
In Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia, several films
equally sincere, but perhaps less skillful have dealt with
the subject of racial persecution, thus bringing these
problems before a wide public. In France, Claude Ber-
nard-Aubert brought to the screen an indictment of the
destructive effects of strife between whites and Negroes
in an imaginary country. More significant was anthropo¬
logist Jean Rouch's, "Moi, un Noir," a half-fictional, half-
documentary film. Rouch filmed a plot improvised by
Negroes from the Ivory Coast and then recorded as a
sound-track commentary the freely expressed views of
one of the actors. One of Rouch's achievements was to
reveal some of the feelings which grip the often uprooted
peoples who have suddenly been brought into contact
with the white civilization and whose ways and ideas they
try clumsily to imitate.
Rouch was bitterly attacked by the Negro elites of these
same lands and accused of making a caricature of the
less fortunate of their countrymen. The proper answer
to these criticisms was that the rather eccentric
characters depicted in '"Moi, un Noir" were not present¬
ed as Negroes, but as the handiwork of a white civilization
which until recently tried to impose its standards nearly
everywhere. These same critics would probably have been
less severe had the fllm made by a Negro. And here we
come up against one of the important problems of world
film-making in the next decade. Until now, as far as
we know, no fllm on Negro problems and with a cast of
Negro actors, has yet been made by a Negro producer.
Looking beyond the problem of film production and the
growing attention that must be given, not only to the
Negro film industry of the future, tout also to the fllm
industries in embryo of Asia and Latin America, we have
also to consider the equally important question of dis¬
tribution. Film distributors display just as much inertia
as the general public. Western fllmgoers, in particular,
still reject things that are outside the ordinary run of
their way of life and traditions. They often spurn films
which do not feature their favourite stars or in which
civilizations, often thousands of years old, confront them
with (for them) unfamiliar problems.
Naturally, we should not go to the other extreme and
automatically agree to run films simply because they have
been made by a small country and with a minimum of
technical equipment. Even a recognized masterpiece like
the Indian film, "Pather Panchali" ran into difficulties in
Paris and New York.
Today the cinema is no longer the harmless distraction
that certain unimaginative business men still persist in
considering it to be. It demands on all levels from its
creators to the viewing public an increased sense of res¬
ponsibility. Its development on truly international lines
implies the removal of the last traces of racism from our
world. In any case, I do not believe that today's young
generation, whatever the difficulties facing them, will res¬
pond as was once the case to a call to hatred from
unscrupulous leaders. The world is changing and the
cinema must undoubtedly follow this evolution. In the
words of the French critic, Léon Moussinac, "It was born
to speak the message of human unity".
31
