14

DECLARATION OF THE RIGHTS
OF THE CHILD
The United Nations General Assembly, on November 20, 1959, unanimously
adopted and proclaimed a Declaration of the Rights of the Child, setting forth
those rights and freedoms which the international community has agreed
every child, without any exception whatsoever, should enjoy.
Many of the rights and freedoms proclaimed were already mentioned in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights adopted by the General Assembly in
1948. It was, however, thought that the special needs of the child justified a
separate declaration.
Like the Universal Declaration, the Declaration of the Rights of the Child sets
a standard which all should seek to achieve. Parents, individuals, voluntary
organizations, local authorities and governments are all called upon to recognize
the rights and freedoms set forth and to strive for their observance.
This year, Human Rights Day on December 10 has been set aside by the
United Nations and its agencies to mark the first anniversary of the adoption
of the Declaration of the Rights of the Child.
The full text of the United Nations Declaration of November 20, 1959, is repro¬
duced on the following pages together with a special photo-reportage by Paul
Almasy. All photos copyright.
PREAMBLE
Whereas the peoples of the United Nations have,
in the Charter, reaffirmed their faith in fundamen¬
tal human rights and in the dignity and worth of
the human person, and have determined to promote
social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom,
Whereas the United Nations has, in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, proclaimed that
everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms
set forth therein, without distinction of any kind,
such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, politi¬
cal or other opinion, national or social origin, prop¬
erty, birth or other status,
Whereas the child, by reason of his physical and
mental immaturity, needs special safeguards and
care, including appropriate legal protection, before
as well as after birth,
Whereas the need for such special safeguards has
been stated in the Geneva Declaration of the Rights
of the Child of 1924, and recognized in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and in the statutes of
specialized agencies and international organizations
concerned with the welfare of children,
Whereas mankind owes to the child the best it has
to give,
Now therefore,
The General Assembly
Proclaims this Declaration of the Rights of the
Child to the end that he may have a happy child¬
hood and enjoy for his own good and for the good
of society the rights and freedoms herein set forth,
and calls upon parents, upon men and women as
individuals, and upon voluntary organizations, local
authorities and national Governments to recognize
these rights and strive for their observance by legis¬
lative and other measures progressively taken in
accordance with the following principles:
PRINCIPLE 1
The child shall enjoy all the rights set forth
in this Declaration. Every child, without any
exception whatsoever, shall be entitled to
these rights, without distinction or discrimina¬
tion on account of race, colour, sex, language,
religion, political or other opinion, national or
social origin, property, birth or other status,
whether of himself or of his family.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD (Continued;
PRINCIPLE 2
The child shall enjoy special pro¬
tection, and shall be given opportuni¬
ties and facilities, by law and by other
means, to enable him to develop phy¬
sically, mentally, morally, spiritually
and socially in a healthy and normal
manner and in conditions of freedom
and dignity. In the enactment of
laws for this purpose, the best inte¬
rests of the child shall be the para¬
mount consideration.
PRINCIPLE 3
The child shall be entitled from his
birth to a name and a nationality.
16

The Unesco Courier. November 1960
PRINCIPLE 4
The child shall enjoy the
benefits of social security. He
shall be entitled to grow and
develop in health; to this end,
special care and protection shall
be provided both to him and to
his mother, including adequate
pre-natal and post-natal care.
The child shall have the right to
adequate nutrition, housing,
recreation and medical services.
PRINCIPLE 5
The child who is physically, mental¬
ly or socially handicapped shall be
given the special treatment, education
and care required by his particular
condition.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD (Continued;
PRINCIPLE 6
The child, for the full and
harmonious development of his
personality, needs love and
understanding. He shall, wher¬
ever possible, grow up in the
care and under the responsibility
of his parents, and, in any case,
in an atmosphere of affection
and of moral and material secu¬
rity ; a child of tender years
shall not, save in exceptional cir¬
cumstances, be separated from
his mother. Society and the pub¬
lic authorities shall have the
duty to extend particular care to
children without a family and to
those without adequate means
of support. Payment of State
and other assistance towards the
maintenance of children of large
families is desirable.
PRINCIPLE 7
The child is entitled to receive
education, which shall be free
and compulsory, at least in the
elementary stages. He shall be
given an education which will
promote his general culture, and
enable him, on a basis of equal
opportunity, to develop his abili¬
ties, his individual judgement,
and his sense of moral and so¬
cial responsibility, and to be¬
come a useful member of
society.
The best interests of the child
shall be the guiding principle of
those responsible for his educa¬
tion and guidance; that respon¬
sibility lies in the first place with
his parents.
The child shall have full
opportunity for play and recrea¬
tion, which should be directed
to the same purposes as educa¬
tion; society and the public
authorities shall endeavour to
promote the enjoyment of this
right.
18
"3

The Unesco Courier. November 1960
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD (Continued)
, 0.-"
Í1 .
« Ik
PRINCIPLE 8
The child shall in all circumstances be among the first to receive protection and
relief.
PRINCIPLE 9
The child shall be protected against all forms of neglect, cruelty and exploitation.
He shall not be the subject of traffic, in any form.
The child shall not be admitted to employment before an appropriate minimum
age ; he shall in no case be caused or permitted to engage in any occupation or
employment which would prejudice his health or education, or interfere with his
physical, mental or moral development.
20

The Unesco Courier. November 1960
PRINCIPLE 10
The child shall be protected from practices which may foster racial, religious and
any other form of discrimination. He shall be brought up in a spirit of understanding,
tolerance, friendship among peoples, peace and universal brotherhood, and in full
consciousness that his energy and talents should be devoted to the service of his
fellow men.
21
