ACCIDENTS
WORLD'S THIRD
WORST KILLER
by Dr. M. G. CANDAU
WORLD HEALTH DAY APRIL 7
Director-General,
World Health Organization
In the world today, accidents cause more deaths than
any single illness except cancer and cardiovascular
disease. (See graphs below.) In many countries accidents
kill more children from 5 to 19 than all other causes
combined. They take a greater toll in young lives than
any war the world has yet known. Yet accidents have
been less studied than has any fatal disease of equal gra¬
vity. It is only recently that scientific research on this
subject has been undertaken.
Too many people still unthinkingly accept accidents as
misfortunes over which the individual has no control.
"Accidents will happen", they say, as if that excused
everything. Yet whenever studies are made of accidents
in home or school, on the road, in factory or farm, or
of any other sort of accident, ways can always be found
to reduce their number and seriousness. Accidents are
not chance events, they do not just "happen". Every
one of them is the outcome of a chain of causes and most
of them can be prevented.
There is evidence that the majority of accidents happen
in situations which are generally thought to be "safe".
About half of all accidents happen in the home, and
children are the principal victims. Two-fifths of all fatal
accidents to children between one and four years of age
take place in or around the home. Prominent causes are
burns and poisoning which, even if not fatal, are generally
serious. Yet almost all these accidents could be avoided
by a little extra vigilance and a few simple precautions.
A thousand people a day die on the world's roads half
of all accident deaths. Road accidents are the most
talked-about and most written-about of all, yet little Is
really known of the multiple factors which interact to
produce them.
Occupational accidents have been more thoroughly
studied than any others, and in many industries strict
safety regulations are enforced. Notwithstanding this, in
the United States of America alone it is estimated that
in 1959, the working time lost because of accidents was
220 million man-days.
Here then is one of mankind's greatest scourges. Yet
in our era of scientific progress, we have scarcely begun
to think about combating it.
Accidents have more in common with diseases than the
simple fact that both can be deadly. The epidemiological
methods used to study the distribution of disease can use¬
fully be applied to them, but uniform methods of accident
reporting must first be adopted. It will then become
possible to define the situations in which they are likely
to occur, in the same way as for the etiology of diseases.
It is not suggested that such research is easy, but it can
and must be carried much further than at present.
In the meantime there is still much that can be done.
Most countries already have a safety code for road users;
they have legislation intended to reduce occupational
accidents and also, in some cases, regulations concerning
the safety of home appliances, electric fittings, and so on
The best present hope of accident prevention Is cer¬
tainly through safety education. Innumerable accidents
are due, at least in part, to some action or omission of the
victim himself- -the pedestrian who crosses the road
without looking; the boy who tries to change a fuse
without turning off the current; the workman who falls
to observe the factory's safety rules. Safety should, of
course, be taught in schools, but also in factories, on the
farm, and, perhaps most important of all, in the home
In economically developed countries some progress has
now been made. But what of those countries in the
process of rapid industrialization, which do not yet have
any statistics to guide them, where legislation is insuffi¬
cient or not enforced, and where the idea that anything
at all can be done to prevent accidents Is accepted only
by the few? To them I would say: Face up to this situa¬
tion and act quickly, avoid the bitter mistakes made In
those countries where industrialization began over a cen¬
tury ago, and profit from their experience.
On World Health Day 1961, I would urge all peoples,
whatever their stage of economic progress, to open their
eyes to the plain fact that accidents have now become
a leading cause of death, disablement and economic loss,
and to realize, once and for all, accidents need not happen

