ANDRÉ MAUROIS SPEAKS
AND OF LIBRARI
h
c
o
>
Ol
55

BY
ANDRÉ
MAUROIS
of the French
Academy
Our civilization is the sum of the knowledge and
memories accumulated by the generations that
have gone before us. Wc can only partake of
it if we are able to make contact with ideas of
these past generations. The only way to do
this and so become a "cultured" personis by reading.
Nothing can take the place of readingno lecture or
image on a screen has the same power to enlighten.
Pictures are a most valuable means of illustrating a
written text, but they hardly enable us to form general
ideas. Films, like the spoken word, flow by and arc lost
to us. Books abide, as life-long companions.
Montaigne confessed to needing three kinds of
communionlove, friendship and books. All three are
much the same. One can love books they are always
faithful friends. I would even say that I have often
found them wittier and wiser than those who wrote them.
A writer puts the best that is in him into his books. Ills
conversation may sparkle, yet it does not endure. But
one has never finished wrestling with the mysteries of a
book.
can be shared, without
all over the world. Writers
Cervantes, Goethe, Dante
bond between people who
Japanese, a Russian or an
to me, but he and I have
War and Peace, Fabrice in
Mlcawber in David Coppcr-
Moreover, this friendship
jealousy, by millions of people
like Balzac, Dickens, Tolstoy
or Melville are a wonderful
appear to be poles apart. A
American may be a stranger
mutual friends Natasha in
La Chartreuse de Parme and
field.
Books can take us out of ourselves. None of us has
had enough personal experience to know other people
or, indeed, himselfthoroughly. Wc all feel lonely In this
vast, irresponsive world. We suffer because of it; we are
shocked by the injustice of the world and the hardships
of life. But from books we learn that others greater
men than we have suffered and have sought as wc have.
Books are our gateways into other minds and other
peoples. Through them we can escape from the narrow
little world we live in and from fruitless brooding over
our own selves. An evening spent reading great books
does for our mind what a holiday in the mountains does
for our bodies. We come down from those lofty heights
stronger, our lungs and our mind cleansed of all im¬
purities, and we are better equipped to face with courage
the battles on the plains of daily life.
Books are the only way in which we can learn about
past ages, and are the best key to an understanding of
social groups that we never frequent. The plays of
Federico Garcia Lorca can teach me more about the soul
of Spain than twenty trips to the country as a tourist.
Chekhov and Tolstoy have revealed to me some aspects
of the Russian soul which are still true today. Saint-
Simon's Mémoires have made a France long dead live-
again for me, just as Hawthorne's or Mark Twain's novels
have helped me to visualize an America that has vanished.
And my delight is all the greater because of the amazing
likeness between these worlds, so remote from us in time
and space, and the world we live in.
Human beings all have a great deal in common. The
passions that move Homer's kings are not unlike those
felt by generals in a modern alliance. When I was lectur¬
ing on Marcel Proust to students at Kansas City, those
Middle West farmers' sons saw their own likeness in the
French characters. "There is, after all, but one race
the human race." Even the great differ from us not in
essence but In degree, and that is why the lives of great
men are of such interest to us all.
Thus, one reason why we read is to get beyond our own
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SWEDEN'S GARDEN-GIRDED MODERN LIBRARIES
Stt
.t-**» m
A few years ago the people of Vasteras, Sweden,
built a modern library in the heart of their small
city. Plans were drawn up to construct the building
near the town's school with gardens surrounding
it and a view of the city's historic cathedral. The
	 very modern building and interior shown here are«g
like many constructed throughout the Scandinavian* "<r
countries. Sweden, for example, with a pcjfí
of less than eight million, has 3 000 public frl
housing more than 13 and one-half million^
4> ,' i
ANDRE' MAUROIS
SPEAKS OF
BOOKS
AND LIBRARIES «~*
lives and understand those of others. But this is not the
only reason for the pleasure we derive from books. In
everyday life we are too involved in what is happening to
see events clearly, too much under the sway of our emo¬
tions to savour them properly. The lives of many of us
would make a novel worthy of Dickens or Balzac, but we
get no pleasure from the experience quite the contrary.
The writer's task is to give us a faithful picture of life,
but to keep it far enough away for us to be able to
appreciate it without fear or entanglement.
A person reading a great novel or biography lives a
great adventure without disturbance to his peace of mind.
In the words of Santayana, art brings before our eyes
what we cannot find in action the union of life and
peace. To read history is good for our health of mind; it
teaches us moderation and tolerance, and shows us that
the terrible disputes over which civil wars or world wars
were once fought are now mere wrangles, dead and
buried. And that is a lesson in wisdom and in the
relativity of values. A great book never leaves the reader
the same as he was before he Is always a better man for
having read it.
Nothing, then, is more important for mankind than to
bring within the reach of all, these means of broadening
our horizons, escaping from ourselves and making
discoveries which literally transform Ufe and make the
individual a more valuable member of society. And the
only way to do this is through pubUc libraries.
We are living in an age in which, in an increasing
number of countries, all people have equal rights, share
in the work of government and shape pubUc opinion,
which, by its influence on governments, determines in the
last resort the choice of peace or war, justice or injustice
in short, the life of the nation and the world as a whole.
This power of the people, which is democracy, demands
that .the masses, who have become the source of authority,
should be well informed on aU important problems. I
agree that, ever more and more, they are receiving this
instruction in the schools, but the work of the schools
cannot be complete without libraries to back it.
Listening even to the best of teachers will not of itself
produce a trained mind the pupil must think and reflect.
The teacher's task is to provide a sound framework which
must then be filled in by the pupil himself essentially,
by reading. No pupil, no student, however brilliant, can
hope to do all over again by himself what mankind has
taken thousands of years to evolve. All worth-while
ref.ection is, above all, reflection on the ideas of great
writers. History would be of little value if it were
reduced to facts and ideas which can be explained in a
few hours by a school-teacher. But if the student, under
the teacher's guidance, searches among memoirs,
witnesses' accounts and statistics to find the fabric of
history itself, then he will learn a great deal about Ufe.
Reading is more than invigorating mental exercise; it
makes young people realize that truth lies hidden, that it
never yields itself ready-made to those who search for
it but must be pieced together by them by dint of labour,
methodical work and sincerity. The library is an
essential companion to school and universiy. / would go
so far as to say that education is but a key to open the
doors of libraries.

Plan and photos from the book "Landsbiblioteket Vasteras."
This is even more true of adult education. The citizen
of a democracy who wishes to fulfil his duties conscien¬
tiously must go on learning all his life. The world does
not stand still the day we leave our class-room.
History marches steadily on, posing problems in which
the fate of the human race is at stake. How are we to
make up our minds, how are we to uphold what is
reasonable and oppose what is criminal folly, if we do not
know what it is all about?
What is true of history is also true of political economy
and of all branches of science and technology. In fifty
years, man's knowledge has been revolutionized. Who will
explain these changes to the men and women whose
lives and happiness depend on them? Who will help
them to keep abreast of the latest discoveries, and yet
perform their daily task? Books, and books alone.
The public library must give children, young people,
men and women the opportunity to keep in touch with
their, times, in every sphere. By offering them, im¬
partially, works representing conflicting points of view, it
enables them to. form their own opinions and preserve
that attitude of constructive criticism towards public
affairs without which there is no freedom. The library,
too, may reveal to them their true vocation. Through
reading the works of the masters, gifted minds still un¬
certain of the path they should take will find themselves
drawn towards science, Uterature or the arts and in turn
will make their contribution to the common heritage of
mankind.
Finally, and above all, a well-chosen library open to
all will enrich the inner lives of its readers. Now that the
machine, partly replacing man, has given him more
leisure, this leisure must be used to the best advantage
both of individuals and of society. Games, sport and
travel will help, no doubt, but nothing will do as much
as reading to produce well-furnished minds with a broad
human outlook.
Just as scientific and historical works train men's minds,
so, too, will novels and plays develop their sympathies.
A reader who knows the great writers of a country well
is no longer a stranger there, even if he has never visited
the country and does not speak its language. Every
library is a centre for international understanding. By
its very existence, free from propaganda and prejudice
and with no axe of its own to grind, the public library
serves peace as well as democracy.
A modern public library is therefore an active, dynamic
institution. It goes half-way to meet the reader, anxious
to know his needs and meet them, and to attract him by
offering various ways and means of obtaining informa¬
tion, cultivating his mind and finding relaxation. The
library's collections must be suited to this purpose. Re¬
ference works dictionaries, encyclopaedias, bibliographies,
atlases and chronologies must be there for all to consult.
The historical section should contain both general works
(world history, history of the principal countries, par¬
ticularly that of the library's home country, the history
of the arts, literature and science) and also monographs
on local history. The biography shelves will always
attract readers. Books on geography, travel and science
and technical works are also essential.
As for the classics, only those should be chosen which
still have their faithful band of readers. Great poets
are few and it is quite easy to make a coUectlon of their
works. Novels and plays are the biggest problem. The
abundance ls such that some omissions, however unfair,
are unavoidable. The main thing ls that the library
should possess the works of the great writers of all
countries.
But the collections must also include technical and
professional works and textbooks on various trades and
crafts, especially those practised in the district where the
library is situated. The library must cater for the needs
of its readers and reflect the local economic structure.
There should be free access to the shelves. Card cata¬
logues must be available to guide the reader to the book
he wants and to show him, by the classification system,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ANDRÉ MAUROIS (Cont'd)
THE INALIENABLE RIGHT TO READ
what publications the library has on the subject in which
he ls interested.
A modern public library's programme also includes
various cultural and educational activities talks, debates
on literary, artistic or social questions, exhibitions,
theatrical or cinematographic performances and concerts.
In various ways these activities lead people towards books
and stimulate the craving to read.
Thus a public library is a real centre of culture, pro¬
pagating human knowledge and dispensing delight. It is
a channel for the spread of Ideas and provides the
members of the community with a means of making
Intelligent use of their leisure. Its influence is not con¬
fined to its Immediate neighbourhood but reaches the
people in country districts, who have long been very
poorly served. Some villages may have a school library,
but it does not always lend books to adults. Besides, its
stock of books is very small, and an inquiring mind soon
exhausts its resources. Some countries have an excellent
public library network. In other places, similar schemes of
great interest and promise for the future have been tried.
Regional libraries have been established in the chief
town of a province or district and these supply mobile
libraries which take books to rural communities.
In each of these communities, some centre the mu¬
nicipal library, a school Ubrary, or the town hall is
chosen to serve as a deposit station and someone
(usually the teacher) is put in charge, to give readers
advice and, if possible, encourage people to read. The
director of the central library trains these local librarians
and they in their turn train the readers. In country
districts the public library is a co-operative venture.
This is one system; there are others, but wherever there
is a public scheme for reading in country districts this
system has met with immense success among the inhabi¬
tants. It is of the utmost importance that it should be
organized throughout the world. It is not a luxury not
just a way for country people to spend their leisure
although that in itself is valuable enough; it Is essential,
because it is only through books and reading that civiliza¬
tion can be spread.
HP
here is truth in the saying that today the right
H to read is one of man's inalienable rights. All
JL men and women must have free access to books.
Books, if they are given the chance, will transform
human beings, by making them the heirs to the
accumulated experience of past generations.
It is in early life that a taste for books and the habit
of reading are most easily acquired. A public library
must have a "children's corner." Most children have not
enough money to buy books, nor have their parents
enough money to give them books. Only in a library
will they find good books, which will save them from
reading mediocre or dangerous ones. Although the
school library is useful, it is often inadequate, owing to
lack of funds. To an intelligent chUd, shelves full of
books among which he is free to browse open up a
veritable paradise.
But it is at home, in the evening, or in a garden
during the summer days, that a child will enjoy most of
all a long and delightful read. A bright child with a
thirst for knowledge is a voracious reader. He will come
to the library to work and do his homework, because he
will find the library an intellectual centre, where he can
listen to stories, or take part in play reading, and later
on in group debates.
This children's corner should not be too big. It is
important for the librarian to get to know each of the
children who come there, from the recluse who likes to
be left to himself to the hesitating child who needs
guidance. The setting should be bright and colourful, so
that the idea of books may be associated in the child's
mind with a feeling of well-being. One cannot fail to
be impressed by the good behaviour of young readers.
Reading teaches them consideration for others.
The library will of course co-operate with the teachers
of the local schools and with the children's parents.
When a teacher is studying a particular subject with his
pupils, he may ask for a smaU exhibition on the subject
to be organized by the library. He may suggest that the
library purchase books which would be useful to his class.
Mothers who accompany their youngest children to the
library may find themselves acquiring a taste for reading.
The children's library should not serve too narrow a
purpose. It should lead on to the adults' library. For a
librarian who loves his work, there is nothing more in¬
teresting than watching a child grow into an adolescent.
There comes a day when children's books cease to interest
the young reader and one senses that he is ripe for the
great writers. This is the moment to guide him towards
the general library and advise him on books he should
choose to begin with. If he likes, a children's librarian
can be second to none as an awakener of young minds.
he librarian plays a tremendous part in community
H life. He has the culture of mankind in his
JL keeping and serves as an intermediary between
the products of that culture, accumulated throughout
the ages, and the people who are alive and working today.
There are so many books, and they are turned out so
fast that nobody can even know which ones he ought to
read, let alone read them all. The specialist runs the
risk of wasting his whole life uselessly doing again the
work that has already been done by someone else. Like
a planter who has sown too prolific a species and is stifled
by the very crop he has raised, the reader without
guidance is likely to be swamped by the vastness of man's
culture.
The librarian can and should protect him. A good
bibliography and a detailed catalogue can guide people
through the jungle of man's accumulated knowledge. The
year's crop of books, gigantic though it is, is at once
digested and assimilated by Ubraries. Since the number
of books makes it increasingly difficult to find what one
is seeking, it is essential that the classification system
should be constantly improved. It is the task of the
great libraries and therefore of their librarians to
blaze wide trails through this forest, which otherwise
would soon become impenetrable. It is their duty, too,
to see that everything the human mind has produced is
preserved.
Even in a small public library, the work of the librarian
is of no less importance. In a mass civilization such as
ours, no moral or technical progress can be regarded as
truly achieved unless it reaches all levels of the popula¬
tion. The librarian who does his work well helps to
bring this about. It has been said that he acts like a
filter between the flood of books and the people's thirst
for knowledge. This means that he must not only know
his job but also possess a sound general culture.
XT
^^ü^H e will need this, too, when building up his
H H library. Admittedly when he takes up his post,
.^L. -^L. he will inherit a stock of books from his pre¬
decessors. It is important, however, that he should both
use his funds to the best advantage every year in order
to add to this stock the best new books that have appeared
and, even as far as older works are concerned, should fill
up the gaps in his Ubrary in the Ught of his own
experience and public demand.
In every library, the Ubrarian acts as an adviser. He
guides people in their reading, and shows them how to
consult the card-index and use the collections. In fact,
apart from professional qualifications, the job of being a
CONT'D ON PAGE I 0

USIS
MORE THAN LENDING BOOKS
Modern libraries throughout the world provide many services besides
the traditional lending of books. One of the world's most modern
libraries in Louisville, Kentucky, U.S.A., houses two FM radio stations
with a complete control room for the wire network (above). The
two stations broadcast twelve hours a day, seven days a week, all year
round. A library card at this library entitles you not only to borrow
books, but also films, records, paintings, and even an umbrella on
rainy days. Many public libraries like the one below at Medcllin, Colom¬
bia, sponsor regular art shows. Another rapidly growing service of
public libraries Is microfilm viewers which permit visitors to study
books, documents and newspapers on film not available In the original.
The battery of viewers at left is In the Royal Library, Stockholm.
UNCOCO
UNESCO

STORY TIME
Latecomers take a short-cut through the fence..
* ***** *?~ *r
tüSíf.' .:' s
to the tree-shaded park where the story hour is about to begin.,
ANDRÉ MAUROIS (Cont'd;
PILOT LIBRARIES
PUT INTO PRACTICE
UNESCO AIMS
librarian calls for a real passion for this noble ministry,
an unbounded passion, unfailing good will and a keen
desire to help those who are searching for knowledge.
In Unesco's educational work, considerable emphasis
has of course been placed on libraries. All its efforts
to eliminate illiteracy would be in vain unless reading
matter could be made available to those who have
acquired the ability to enjoy it. Unesco's main task is to
work for peace through international culture. In this,
the public library is its natural assistant.
Accordingly, Unesco has contributed to the develop¬
ment of Ubraries, by organizing meetings of librarians
from the different regions of the world, Improving the
system of exchanges and working methods, sending
experts on mission, awarding fellowships and most im¬
portant of all by setting up model libraries to be a
driving force in the service of the community.
The most effective preaching is by example. Unesco
was the first to put into practice the advice it has given
to countries and cities. It set up pilot libraries, to act
both as models and testing grounds, and they have met
with great success. The first pilot Ubrary was established
at Delhi (India). It was founded In 1950 by the Govern¬
ment of India and Unesco, and Inaugurated by Mr. Nehru
In 1951, Its principal object being to provide reading
matter for new literates, in four languages Hindi, Urdu,
Punjabi and English.
There ls a travelUng library, which serves fifteen
neighbouring districts, in town and country. The stock
of books has been rapidly enlarged, and now numbers
about 165,000 volumes. About 750,000 books are borrowed
every year. Analysis of the readers' age groups shows
that the majority are young people old people read little,
or not at all.
The obvious explanation for this is that education has
only recently made any progress in that area. Many of
the reader members had not a single book, and no means
of obtaining any, until the library was set up. Because
of the customs of the country, few women came to the
library, but in many cases the men explain that the
books they borrow are for their family, and that they
are often read aloud. Apart from fiction, the favourite
reading is the lives of famous men and women, handbooks
on arts and crafts, and the history of India.
The Delhi pilot experiment has shown that there is a
great interest in reading. India's needs are many and
varied, but reading is one of the most urgent. It is
especially important that the needs of the new reading
public should be met, by producing reading matter in
all the principal languages of the country. A survey of
readers' tastes and interests recently conducted by Delhi
librarians provided valuable information on that subject.
Unesco has also estabUshed a pilot Ubrary at Colombia's
beautiful university city of Medellin. It was opened in
October 1954, and now houses nearly 50,000 volumes. The
central library, branch Ubraries and bookmobile centres
together serve nearly a thousand readers every day.
Here, too, there has been convincing evidence of the
efficacy of Ubraries as a driving force in popular educa¬
tion. As in Delhi, young people have been most eager
to avail themselves of the new faciUty. Almost as many
books have been borrowed by children as by adults. And
the "children's corner" is as lively as can be. A book¬
mobile serves not only villages but factories as well. The
central library has become a cultural centre for the
whole town, providing a full and varied programme of
cultural activities.
A similar scheme was launched by Unesco at Enugu,
in East Nigeria. This third experiment has proved just
as successful as the first two. The Ubrary, which was
10

IN BROOKLYN
In New York's punishing summer
heat with apartments so stifling
that even TV is out of the question,
the youngsters take to the parks.
There the public libraries provide
a summer programme of reading and
games. In the borough of Brook¬
lyn, the public library, along with
eleven of Its branches, holds out¬
door story hours every week. The
ancient magic of the storyteller is
still as fresh and appealing to the
present generation as it has been
for children throughout all the ages.
Photos © Bernard M. Jaffe
and on the outskirts a timid child listens attentively.
opened not more than a year ago, has a stock of nearly
20,000 volumes," and serves about 6,000 readers. Here, too,
a programme of educational activities supplements the
work of the reading-room, and the bookmobile serves
neighbouring districts. A book-box service, by rail, road
or canoe will shortly bring books to isolated readers and
to the inhabitants of out-of-the-way areas.
The aims of Unesco and those of public libraries coin¬
cide, they are: to help the various peoples to know each
other better; to give a new stimulus to popular educa¬
tion; to promote the ideal of equal opportunities for
everyone to share in cultural life; to preserve and pro¬
tect the immense legacy of books bequeathed by man to
man; and to give all nations of the world access to the
books published by every 'other nation. This common
ideal is the best guarantee that there will be ever closer
co-operation between Unesco and Ubraries.
Public libraries already play a very important part in
the Ufe of modern communities, a part which, for seve¬
ral reasons, will certainly become still greater in the
coming decades.
The number of people who can read is increasing every
year, and will continue to do so. The campaign to elimi¬
nate illiteracy is being vigorously carried out throughout
the world. It is certainly needed. More and more, people
who cannot read feel like outsiders in their own times.
Education is not the exclusive privilege of any one
class it has become compulsory for all. As a result,
hosts of readers are springing up everywhere. It is to
meet their needs that so many pocket books, cheap edi¬
tions and popular classics are being issued. These series
are extremely popular everywhere which shows that they
are meeting a need.
It is gratifying to note that the standard of the books
selected is steadily improving. New readers want books
of real spiritual, educational and Uterary value. The
vast majority of mankind, however, has not the where¬
withal to buy even cheap editions. For the masses, the
only way to get books to read is to go to the public
Ubrary. It should be compulsory for every village to have
its own public library, just as it is now compulsory for
it to have a school, of which the pubUc Ubrary is the
complement.
Economic and technical progress intensifies the need
for education. It does so in two ways. In the first place,
it enables people to look beyond their day-to-day needs.
A poor wretch who does not know where his next meal
is coming from and who has no shelter from the cold
and wet has no desire to improve his mind. The higher
the standard of living, the more concerned people will
be with their dignity as human beings, and the greater
will be their demand for the means of educating them¬
selves.
Moreover, as machines and techniques become more
and more complicated, a skilled worker has to be educated
in order to do his work satisfactorily. The machine is
replacing the labourer, who worked with his hands
alone; the workman ls becoming a technician who uses
his brain. And so we see young workmen flocking to
bookshops as well as to libraries in their eagerness to
learn. Even agriculture, now become a science, demands
of the farmer a proficiency that he can only acquire
through books. The need for learning begets a need for
reading.
Many countries are suddenly achieving self-determina¬
tion the right to self-government. This right ls a just
one, if it is accompanied by adequate knowledge not only
of their own past, their traditions, racial and historical
peculiarities, their products and consequently their eco¬
nomic future, but also of other countries, their history,
their place in the world, their characteristics in short,
everything that is needed for the maintenance of sen¬
sible and proper relations with them.
A new State, which is beginning its life as an indepen¬
dent nation, must have a sense of national Identity. In
many cases, however, the new citizens, who formerly
lived without any strong bond between them and formed
part of a different political system, cannot have that true,
deep sense of national Identity which comes from a
knowledge of the past and an understanding of the pre¬
sent. Where can they get this knowledge? They will
find it in books in which the scattered traditions have
been brought together. A library is not only a valuable
instrument for the nation's use it helps to shape the
nation itself.
Civilization creates new needs. Man today Is no longer
CONT'D ON PAGE I 3

\\ Il I Y \ 1
UNESCO now has three pilot libraries in opera¬
tion, one at New Delhi, India, another at Medellin,
Colombia, and the most recent at Enugu, Nigeria.
In addition, UNESCO experts have helped to
establish, expand, or reorganize libraries in a.
host of other countries. The pilot project at
New Delhi has helped to bring books within the
reach of thousands of people in outlying districts
thanks to the library's travelling book buses.
The two youngsters above pore over the shelves
in the book van as it makes its regular visit to
their village. The pilot library in Enugu, Nigeria
(below right) , has open shelves and an ever growing
number of volumes where readers may browse
at will. The Kochi Citizens Library in Japan
(below) is typical of more than 800 public librar¬
ies in Japan. Some smaller countries have more
libraries than Japan but few can boast the astound¬
ing figure of 20 million regular readers, who
probably make Japan's libraries the best attended
in the worjd. The people of the USSR are ardent
patrons of their libraries as this photo (right) of
the main reading room of the Leningrad public
library indicates. The USSR holds the world's
record in the number of their public libraries
with a total number of more than 130,000.
UNESCO PHOTOS

ANDRÉ MAUROIS (Cont'd;
content to be a pawn In the hands of powers greater than
himself. He wants, as far as possible, to know and to
learn. In the past, only a philosopher or a poet could
say, "I am a man, and nothing human is alien to me."
Today every man would like to be able to say this, because
he knows that the fate of far-off peoples who are stran¬
gers to him will affect his own and also because he has
become more sensitive, and is moved by an unjust deed
committed at the other end of the world. Libraries are
the most important arid the richest source of information
oti problems which concern mankind as a whole.
Lastly, through the abundant supply of energy and the
advances made In automation, our civilization, whether
we want it to or not, will become more and more a civi¬
lization of leisure. It cannot be anything but gratifying
to see how working hours are being shortened and man's
labour eased. Nevertheless, in the long run too much
leisure might become dangerous, unless tastes and in¬
terests are broadened at the same time.
Sports, games, public entertainments and television
will of course help to keep people occupied, but the length
of time for which they can do so will always be limited
by the large amount of preparation they require, and In
any case a man worthy of the name will fairly soon grow
weary of being a mere spectator. Libraries will provide
him with the means of creating for himself an unending
spectacle of space and time.
Aldous Huxley has said that "Every man who knows
how to read has it in his power to magnify himself, to
multiply the ways in which he exists, to make his life
full, significant and interesting." It is this full life,
enriched by the lives of others, that we would like all to
be able to enjoy. Other mass communication media the
cinema, television, radio and gramophone records will
take new forms, spread and help mankind to share the
delights of the arts. Yet none of them has so profound
and lasting an effect as reading, none of them brings
before us so wide a range of emotion and knowledge.
When he was opening the Eton Public Library In 1833,
Sir John Herschel said "...Give a man the taste of reading,
and the means of gratifying it, and you can hardly fail
of making a happy man... You place him in contact with
the best society in every period of history with the
wisest, the wittiest, with the tendcrest, the bravest, and
the purest characters who have adorned humanity. You
make him a denizen of all nations a contemporary of
all ages."
We might well say to any community: "Tell me what
you give your people to read, and I will tell you who
you are."
The text of this article by André Maurois has bcc7i
published in an attractive illustrated booklet entitled
"Public Libraries and their Mission." A limited number of
copies are available free to subscribers to "The Unesco
Courier". To obtain a copy, write to the Division of
Libraries, Unesco, Place de Fontenoy, Paris (T).
