Très, trèstièj/rès Uni, J=<39
dolee
^ï^ti7"^¿LÍA)
me -gher po -re megh joiine che an - dhar koL
PjijpJBwiiP
pa _ Nhe	 me-gher	 pîi-re megh joime - che an fin ar-

A LITTLE-KNOWN
REALM OF
HAUNTING SONGS
AND MELODIES
by Philippe Stern and Arnold A. liahe
Rabindra-Sadana, Visva Bharati
m 5
Sáááf*£g
re a
ITT
»
she ka -jer.
It Is not always known In the West that Tagore
was 'not only a poet, but a musician as well.
In his work, Indeed, poetry and music cannot be separat¬
ed. Songs form an important part of his creative work
and In these words and melody complete each other.
In his Reminiscences, he writes: "...I am always
reluctant to publish books of the words of my songs, for
therein the soul must needs be lacking." And again,
speaking of a Baul song: "Besides, the best part of a song
ls missed when the tune ls absent, for thereby Its move¬
ment and Its colour are lost and It becomes like a butterfly
whose wings have been plucked." (Indian Folk Religion.
Creative Unity.)
Tagore's works have reached us without the music, and
moreover the original has been modified. The "Poet," as
his disciples called him, did not think it necessary to
preserve in the English version composed by himself the
repetitions and refrains which give so much charm to the
Bengali text. He has rendered the Ideas to the neglect of
the spontaneity, the directness and vitality of their
original form.
From the musical point of view, Tagore stands at the
meeting-place of three different influences: that of
European rnuslc, that of classical Hindu music (an
extremely sophisticated one, bound by strict rules) and
thirdly that of the popular religious music of Bengal.
It is not without a struggle that Tagore managed to
throw off the Influence both of European and of classical
Indian music, so that he might Immerse himself In the
popular music of his own country and pick up the great
mystical traditions of Bengal which are carried on in his
own work.
One has only to glance at his Reminiscences to feel the
musical atmosphere in which he was steeped. Indians of
traditionalist tendencies appreciated music, but its
practice was looked down on and left to professionals.
Not so however In the vast home of the Tagore family.
One of the family wrote books on music, the father of
the poet composed religious chants, and one of his
brothers a national hymn. Another brother, Jyotlrlndra,
used to remain for days at the piano, arranging the old
classical melodies, according to his fancy, while the poet
and a friend endeavoured to compose lines to these same
tunes (Reminiscences).
PHILIPPE STERN, Chief Curator of the Musée Guimet in
Paris, is an archaeologist who, after a meeting with Tagore,
became intensely interested in his music and prepared, with
Arnold Bake, a volume called "Twenty-Six Songs of Rabindra¬
nath Tagore" (Librairie Orientaliste Paul Geuthner, Paris), from
the text of which this article Tíos been adapted. ARNOLD
BAKE, of the Netherlands, is a noted Orientalist and professor
of Sanskrit at London University.
17
CONPD ON PAGE 20

REALM OF SONGS & MELODIES (Cont'd from page 16)
Musician unshackled by tradition
Young Rabindranath also "tried to set to music the
poems of Chakravartl whose enthusiasm and creative joy
were such that "the expressiveness of his voice made up
for what It lacked In execution." And "on moonlight
nights, pacing round and round the extensive terrace
overlooking the river," Rabindranath Tagore composed
for the first time melodies for his own songs. He had
had no technical training in music. Urged by their
youthful enthusiasm and curiosity, immersed in this
musical atmosphere, nothing seemed Impossible to the
poet and his companions: they wrote, sang and acted
plays.
European influences were welcome in those days.
Whereas today the striving is against external influences
and towards a national culture, it was against a narrow
and oppressive traditionalism that certain liberal, rich
and respected families like the Tagores rose up in those
days. European harmonization, damaging to Indian
music because it distorts It, was for instance, applied to
certain songs of the poet's father by one of the latter's
granddaughters, who was given a diamond pin as a reward,
such was his satisfaction. Rabindranath had sung foreign
airs at school without understanding them; later, as a
youth, he sang Beethoven's "Adelaide." When he came
back from a visit to England, where he had been interested
In, though a little disappointed by, Irish melodies, his
manner of singing had become so westernized that his
familiy exclaimed in astonishment: "What is the matter
with Rabl's voice? How funny and foreign it sounds!"
Tagore was now entering his twentieth year. The
melodies he inserted for the first time in one of his dramas
Valmiki Prativa, and which were so essential to it, that
speaking of them in his complete works, the author
declared one could not judge the play without them, were
thus the result of the most varied influences, some being
built on a classical mode, others composed by his brother
Jyatlrlndra, and Anally some being of European origin.
Later however, Tagore's powerful personality asserted
itself, and he threw off both the Western influences of his
childhood and youth and that of Indian classical music.
Western influence still appears fleetingly in his songs,
but so intimately blended with Indian melodic phrases
that their tonality is not altered, only enriched with a
novel hue. It should be noted that Tagore never liked
polyphonic music.
As for classical Indian music, which is itself connected
with Mohammedan music, Tagore never followed the strict
rules which bind the musician in a network of precepts.
This often compels the creative faculty, bound in a rigid
frame, to develop in depth. But on the other hand it
may lead especially at the present day to a dry, stiff
and lifeless form which turns the remarkable qualities of
classical Indian music into as many failings.
Ornaments, beautiful in themselves, and necessary to
monodic music, abound to the point of suffocating both
words and melody; flexible and varied rhythms detach
themselves from the whole and focus the interest,
becoming the pretext for a contest between the drummer
and the musician he is accompanying; the râgas, which
gave such moving effects of atmosphere and colour by
their strict scales, by their few dominant notes, by other
notes which are left out or lightly suggested, by the
differences between their ascending and descending
movements, by their prescribed ornaments and pro¬
gressions, now sometimes became a tyranny.
Being connected with the hours of the day or the
seasons, with certain feelings, or even with visual forms,
these imperative formulae gradually became little more
than the pretext for a certain virtuosity, that of unlimited
development within a stereotyped frame. In this classical
music, composer and performer no longer seem to exist
separately. The musician receives and observes the
traditional outlines, and his task is to develop them,
recreate them, and enrich them with his improvisations.
His pride therein is legitimate, for in this art which is
never rejuvenated and never written down, he represents
the whole value of music.
Tagore's achievement as regards the classical music has
been, as with everything else, that of breaking fetters.
His whole life-work is imbued with that appeal to freedom
and simplicity, to the spontaneous and youthful élan
which no convention can bind. The things to be
destroyed are the hollow forms and the veneration given
to them. Hence the wrath of the old-fashioned musicians
20
MUSICAL DRAMA. Ra¬
bindranath Tagore grew up
in a home whose atmosphere
was inherently musical and
all his work is imbued with
melody, harmony and
rhythm. It has even been
said that a play by Tagore is
little more than a setting
for his songs, of which he
wrote more than 2,000.
Left and right, scenes from
Chltra, one of Tagore's
great dramatic masterpieces,
which was presented with
special musical accompani¬
ment at Unesco House last
year, in a new French trans¬
lation by Georges Fradier.
Photos D. Berretty-Unesco

brought up against a new kind of music which does not
pretend to replace their own, but which introduces the
composer as quite distinct from the performer, which
rejects rigid rules, and reverts to the simple melodic
contour of popular song that the professional musicians
held in such scorn.
In his reaction against both classical Indian and
Western music, Tagore finds his source of inspiration in
the mystic poetry and folk-songs of Bengal. Thus he
never was the "creator ex nihilo" that the Western world
sometimes imagines him to be. To see him as he really
is, rooted in his own soil, steeped in an age-long popular
tradition which culminates with him, is not to belittle
him.
In Tagore's music can be found certain modes and
certain râgas; these he sometimes uses so fantastically
that he scandalizes the votaries of classical Indian music.
His style is a simple one, and yet the melodic contour
is not harsh. It ls softened by numerous ornamentations:
guttural sounds, light, barely suggested appogiature and
discreet portandos. These never obscure or clog up the
musical phrase, but rather emphasize it by rendering it
softer and more pliable.
Equally simple are his rhythms, especially as compared
with those of classical Indian music or Kirtan, and they
seem to grow ever simpler as Tagore finds himself. They
are strict, flexible, and the beat is usually marked by a
snap of the fingers which is the only accompaniment of
this delicate music.
Music plays a great part in Tagore's life. In his Remi¬
niscences he recalls his childhood and youth steeped in
music, of long hours spent in a drifting boat while the
poet sang and his brother accompanied him on the violin,
of days spent at the piano or on the terraces, composing
songs.
In his later years, he found the same atmosphere at
Santiniketan, the school he founded to give a simple,
human education in contact with nature. Here the day
began and ended with the singing of Tagore's poems by
choirs of children. Other songs celebrated festivals. At
the frequent evening gatherings music had the place of
honour.
The Bengali system of notation Is a recent and
incomplete one, what it conveys by means of letters is the
mere skeleton of a song; the ornamentations and details
are practically left out; it is little more than a memor¬
andum which can only be of use to one who ls already
familiar with the melody. Oral tradition alone ensures
the survival of songs. Tagore knew his memory to be
poor and sometimes he even wished to forget previous
works so as to be free to create fresh ones; therefore when
he had composed a new song, he used to sing It to his
nephew Dlnendranath, thanks to whose excellent memory
the song was saved from oblivion. Sometimes the poet
had to learn his own songs afresh from Dlnendranath
whom he called "the treasure house of all my sones "
(Cycle of Spring.)
Tagore was quite conscious of the value of his own
musical compositions. "I have Introduced," he once said
"some new elements in our music, I know. I have
composed five hundred new tunes, perhaps more. This
ls a parallel growth to my poetry. Anyhow, I love this
aspect of my activity. I get lost In my songs and then
I think that those are my best work; I get quite Intoxicat¬
ed. I often think that, If all my poetry is forgotten, my
songs will live with my countrymen, and have a perma¬
nent place... All the same, I know the artistic value of
my songs. They have a great beauty. Though they
will not be known outside my province, and much of my
work will gradually be lost, I leave them as a legacy "
wrote Rabindranath Tagore.
A play by Tagore ls often little more than a setting for
the songs. The very titles of his books often suggest
music, for Instance "Sharps and Flats."
As often In Asian music, the songs of Tagore will not
suffer harmonization. The most Important things they
offer, it seems, are continuity of melodic line, delicacy,
suppleness, Intervals other than those of the temperate
scale, Inflections drawn out which melt Into tenderness
nostalgia (of which Krishna's far-off flute is the poetic
symbol). Everything which contributes to their value ls
destroyed if they are encased in the frame of too simple
a rhythm, too much cut-up, with too Insistent a beat, If
they are to become mechanical In order to give them
emphasis.
It Is thus my fervent hope that a tradition will remain
which will keep alive for ussung by a single voice and
practically without accompaniment the tenderness, the
supple, delicate and penetrating nostalgic charm of
Tagore's real songs, perhaps the most precious, moving
part of his work.
21
