THE DRAMA OF SERENGETI

Natures fight for life
at Ngorongoro Crater
by Sir Julian Huxley
At the time of my visit to Africa in 1931 there
were no National Parks either In East Africa
or the Federation of the Rhodesias and Nyasaland, and I
urged the need for their speedy establishment. Great
progress has been made in the subsequent three decades,
and today there are in the region some 15 devoted primar¬
ily to the conservation of wild life or wild scenery, besides
a number of Reserves with essentially the same function
but not officially designated as National Parks, as well
as some Parks of archaeological or historical interest.
But this has been a slow operation, often carried out
in the face of official Inertia or even resistance, always
handicapped by inadequate funds and personnel, and
without benefit of any consistent and positive policy.
As a result of these handicaps and of the common
tendency of administrations to underestimate the impor¬
tance of wild life and its value as a resource, to give
priority to agricultural and other "human" development
schemes as opposed to projects for wild life conservation,
and generally to favour the interests of tribal Africans
whenever they appear to conflict with those of wild life
conservation, many opportunities have been missed; exist¬
ing National Parks systems. have generally had to struggle
along at a low level of efficiency, and have been unable
to perform their functions fully; poaching has made
many wild animals shy; a number of wild habitats,
including even some in Parks or Reserves, have been
invaded, damaged or lost; and there is as yet little or
no sign of the framing of challenging plans for the
; future of National Parks in the region.
The Serengeti may be cited as an example of the
unfortunate treatment which an ideal National Park
area received in actual reality.
In the mid-twentieth century the Serengeti area of
Tanganyika, with the continuous Crater Highlands,
retained an abundance and variety of large wild animals
unrivalled elsewhere in Africa or indeed in the world.
The annual migration of the large herbivores, compris¬
ing hundreds of thousands of wildebeest, zebra, and gaz¬
elle, were inconceivably spectacular, and so, though in
a different way, was Ngorongoro, the second largest crater
on earth, 11 miles in diameter, with its vast floor liberally
sprinkled with antelopes, zebras, elephants and rhinos,
together with fair numbers of lions, hyenas and other car¬
nivores. I made the mental calculation that the wilde¬
beests stood in the same size-relation to the crater floor
as would fleas to the flank of a blue whale.
Other habitats in the original Serengeti area
ranged from hot and semi-arid level plains to
forested volcanic highlands, and its mammalian fauna
included no less than 170 species, comprising almost all the
most striking large forms, from giraffes and buffaloes to
lions and cheetahs. The present populations of Wilde¬
beest, Zebra, Grant's and Thomson's Gazelle are estimated
at about 100,000, 60,000, 40,000 and 200,000 respectively,
besides some 15,000 other large herbivores and 1,500
ostriches.
Two further points must be mentioned. First that
the Masai had traditional rights over the area (though
into much of It they did not penetrate owing to its infest¬
ation with tsetse or to lack of water for their stock) :
and secondly that ever since Tanganyika became a Brit¬
ish Mandated Territory, the Administration has tended
to regard the interests of wild life as subordinate to those
of local Africans.
A Serengeti National Park was nominally established
in 1940, but a National Parks Ordinance was not passed
until 1948, and the Park was not formally proclaimed
until 1951. During 1953-56 a number of reports showed
that the Park and its marvellous fauna were being
gravely threatened, partly by poaching, but largely by the
rapidly increasing Masai.
In 1956 a Government Sessional Paper set forth the
Government's policy for the area. This would so clearly
and drastically have impaired the value of the Park, that
it raised an international storm. The Fauna Preserva¬
tion Society in Britain commissioned the eminent ecologist
Professor W.H. Pearsall to examine the problem, and his
report, together with much other scientific and expert
evidence, was presented to the Committee of Enquiry
which the Government was impelled to set up. .
In 1957, the Committee recommended that the plains
area in the West, supplemented by an uninhabited north¬
ward extension to the Mara River and the Kenya border,
should remain as a true National Park, that the Ngo¬
rongoro Crater should become a Nature Sanctuary (vir¬
tually a small National Park) ; and that the rest of the
area, including the Crater Highlands, as recommended
in principle by Professor Pearsall, should become some¬
thing new in Africa a "Conservation Area," devoted
primarily to conserving the water-supplies, the forests,
the grazing potential (and therefore the wild life) of
the whole Serengeti region.
In 1958 a Government White Paper stated that
the conclusions of the Committee were
"broadly acceptable," and proposed a solution which, it
said, was to be "simple, clear and final." In point of fact,
the solution was not at all simple; it has not (as might
have been foreseen) proved final; and several of the
Committee's recommendations far from proving "accept¬
able," were rejected.
Prior to 1958, the National Parks Trustees had spent
over £150,000 on the provision of a fine lodge and
numerous other facilities for visitors to the world-famous
crater of Ngorongoro. In spite of this, and of the
Committee's recommendation, Ngorongoro was not pro¬
claimed as a Nature Sanctuary, but simply included in
the Conservation Area. The whole eastern sector of the
proposed Serengeti National Park was also added to the
Conservation Area, and this was to be administered
primarily in the interests of its human inhabitants, the
Masai, and not primarily to conserve the resources of
the entire region.
At the time of my visit, the Masai were bringing large
herds of stock to graze in the crater, and were in
contravention of the regulations invading and damaging
the forests on the crater rim, lighting fires and even
setting up bomas there. They were also killing numerous
rhinos (over 30 during the last 12 months), always
allegedly in self-defence, but pretty certainly with a view
to selling the horns. The Warusha were also attempting
to start cultivation in parts of the forest area.
Since then, new studies have made it clear that the
new boundaries of the National Park ought not to be
regarded as final, but should be redrawn, after a renewed
ecological survey of the area, including study of the
animals' habits as well as a land use survey, to guarantee
safe migration and good grazing to the enormous herds
of game that annually flood back and forth across the
Serengeti region.
Meanwhile, in 1959, the Colonial Development . and
Welfare Fund allocated £182,000 to the Conservation
Authority to be spent over 4 years for the following pur¬
poses: rehabilitation of eroded lands and prevention of 23
further erosion; increase of stock-carrying capacity; forest
conservation; and wild life conservation as far as
CONT'D ON PAGE 34

THE DRAMA OF SERENGETI (Cont'd from page 23)
34
compatible with the reasonable interests of the African
pastoralists. The Nuffield Foundation gave a further
£20,000 for pasture research in the area.
With these large funds made available to the
Conservation Authority, it might have been thought
natural to give it more power and more adequate member¬
ship, to place it under competent scientific direction, and
to provide it with a well-thought out management plan
(such as is given to National Nature Reserves in Britain) ;
but nothing of the sort was done for two years. However,
it now appears that a radical reorganization of the
Conservation Authority is contemplated, and a draft for
a management plan has been prepared.
As a result of my visit; and of discussions with numer¬
ous people both in Africa and in England, I came to the
following main conclusions. (1) That it would be wrong
and indeed immoral to jeopardize the future of the
Serengeti National ' Park area, as the most outstanding
wild life region left in the world, by undesirable restriction
of its boundaries in the supposed interests of the Masai
or of economy. (2) That it would be equally wrong, and
indeed egregiously foolish, not to give National Park
status to the uniquely spectacular Ngorongoro Crater with
all its wild life. (3) That high priority should be given (a)
to projects for improving road and air access to and
accommodation in the Serengeti National Park and
Ngorongoro; (b) to scientific surveys and research projects
concerned with conservation and basic ecology in the
area. (4) That stricter measures should be taken against
poaching and illegal killing of animals, not only in the
Serengeti-Ngorongoro area but throughout Tanganyika.
(5) That the Olduvai Gorge, with the unique exposure
of Pleistocene history, including human origins, revealed
by Dr. L.J.B. Leakey's excavations, should be accorded
National Park status. (6) That the Masai should be
encouraged to co-operate in every way in a policy of
conservation for the region, by constituting the Ngoron¬
goro crater and that part of the Serengeti plains within
the Conservation Area as Masai Tribal Parks, by giving
them a share of the financial benefits accruing from
tourists, and by educating them to appreciate the
importance of habitat conservation for their own future.
(7) That the Conservation Authority should be thoroughly
reorganized so as to give it greater autonomy and greater
efficiency.
The Authority's objectives should be redefined so as
to include conservation of soil, water-resources, forest
cover and wild life for the entire Serengeti-Crater High¬
lands area. It should be furnished with a scientific
management plan; and the specialists on the Authority
should include scientists and experts from other territories
and countries, including representatives of the East
African Agricultural and Forestry Organization (EAFRO) ;
the corresponding Veterinary Research Organization
(EAVRO) ; the newly-constituted University of East
Africa ; F.A.O. ; and the International Union for the
Conservation of Nature (I.U.C.N.). The closest possible
liaison should be maintained both centrally and locally
with the Tanganyika National Parks organization.
Only by some such means can the Masai lands in this
region be salvaged from progressive ruination, and the
area's unique heritage of wild life and spectacular scenery
be preserved in perpetuity for the benefit of Tanganyika
and the world at large.
