NUBIA'S CHRISTIAN AGE
by L. P. Kirwan
Laurence Patrick Kirwan first began exploring and excavating in Nubia
In 1929, when he became Assistant Director of the Archaeological
Survey of Nubia undertaken by the Egyptian Department of
Antiquities. He later participated in numerous expeditions. Since
1945 he has been Director of the Royal Geographical Society, London.
When we think of Nubia, and the famous historic
monuments that are now in danger from the
High Dam, most of us think mainly of the great temples
of Abu Simbel and Philae, built by the Pharaohs several
thousand years ago. Certainly, these rank with the most
splendid monuments of the ancient world. But they, and
other smaller temples and buildings of similarly ancient
date, are not the only relics of early Nubian civilization in
danger of being submerged by the rising waters of the
Nile.
In style and origin, these memorials of the Pharaohs
are not Nubian at all. They are Egyptian; projections of
ancient Egyptian art and architecture into a conquered
land; a land which belongs, unlike Egypt north of the
First Cataract, to the African rather than to the Mediter¬
ranean scene.
By contrast with these Pharaonic monuments, there are
many other relics of ancient and mediaeval times, more
truly Nubian in character. Some belong to the Sudanese
kingdom of Meroe, which ruled during the Graeco-Roman
Age over most of the Sudan and most of Lower Nubia
from its capital, Meroe, a hundred miles or so north of
Khartum.
Others belong to Christian Nubia, to the era of the
Christian Nubian kingdoms. These flourished from 542 to
1323 A.D. and thus endured for seven hundred years after
the Moslem conquest of neighbouring Egypt.
This age of Christianity in Nubia was one of great
prosperity and power. Thriving cities and townships,
churches and monasteries, were thickly clustered along
both banks of the Nile. The administration of. Church
and State alike was elaborately organized, largely on
Byzantine lines. A Nubian school of painters flourished
and adorned the walls of the domed and vaulted white¬
washed Nubian churches with religious scenes in brilliant
colours.
Seldom, in the course of their long history, had the
Nubian people, in architecture, in art, in civil and mili¬
tary organization, in the independent development of a
national consciousness, achieved such a high level of
advancement as during this Christian Nubian age.
If further evidence of the strength of these Christian
kingdoms is needed, then it can be found in the obvious
respect which the Arab rulers of Moslem Egypt paid to
the Christian Nubian kings, and in the formidable barrier
which Christian Nubia presented, over the centuries, to
the southward flowing tide of Islam.
The first of the Nubian kingdoms to be converted to
Christianity, between 542 and 545 A.D., was the northern¬
most, and the most powerful, kingdom of Nobadia. It
extended from the First Cataract, the southern frontier
of Egypt in mediaeval times, as far south as Akasha,
beyond the Second Cataract. It thus covered the three
hundred miles or so of Nubia which will be flooded by
the High Dam.
The Nobades, as the people of Nobadia were called,
ST PETER (below) replaces Egyptian gods to which
Rameses II (still depicted on right of niche) is offering
flowers in the temple of Wadi es Sebua. Nubia was
christianized in the 5th and 6th centuries and the temples
were often converted into churches. Much of the former
decoration was left alongside the Christian imagery.
i -S
38
EARLY CHURCH which was built inside a Middle
Kingdom fortress at Serra East in the Sudan. The archi¬
tecture reveals a marked Byzantine influence, as does the
painting. It was missionaries from Byzantium who spread
the Gospel in Nubia. The Christian kingdoms of Nubia
held out some 700 years after Egypt's conversion to Islam.

CHRISTIAN NUBIA Is
being thoroughly excavated.
Coptic churches, monaste¬
ries and fortified towns will
undoubtedly contribute to
our knowledge of the me¬
diaeval Christian world. Fa-
ras, left, was once the capital
of the Christian kingdom of
Nobadia. (See page 38.) In
the background, are ruins of
a Dervish fort and a church.
Unesco-Keating
were a warlike people; armed tribesmen riding horses and
camels who had often in the past been a menace to the
Egyptian frontier garrisons. In the years immediately
preceding their conversion to Christianity, however, the
Nobades appear to have been on reasonably good terms
with their Christian neighbours in Byzantine Egypt.
They traded with Egypt, and their tombs in Lower
Nubia contained many remarkable treasures of sliver,
bronze and gold from the Workshops of Alexandria and
the Hellenistic world. Perhaps because of this, they were
sufficiently well-disposed to accept peacefully the closing
of the pagan temples at Philae on the Egyptian frontier
in 535 A.D., though the shrine of Isis there had been the
Mecca of Nubian pilgrims for generations.
When the first Christian missionary, Julian,
arrived in Nubia from Turkey a few years
later, bearing letters from the Imperial Court at Byzan¬
tium, he and his companion, Theodore, the aged bishop
of Philae, were received not with hostility but with con¬
siderable ceremony by the Nubians and their king.
The task confronting Julian, as we know both from
archaeological discoveries and from a contemporary
account of his adventures, was far from easy. The cli¬
mate, torrid and rainless, he found exceptionally trying
after the cooler airs of Istambul.
Then there were the Nubian people themselves. Like
their predecessors in the days of the kingdom of Meroe,
they were still fervent worshippers of Isis and other
Egyptian deities. Even at this late date, moreover, when
their neighbours in Egypt and Ethiopia had been Chris¬
tian for two centuries, the Nobades continued to indulge
not only in animal but in human sacrifice, in the primi¬
tive belief that horses and camels, slaves, courtiers and
wives alike must die when the king died, so that they
might continue to serve their master in the After World.
However, despite the rigours of the country and the cli¬
mate and such deeply rooted pagan practices, Julian, his
successor, the missionary, Longlnus, and other missionaries
whose names we do not know, spread the Gospel, through¬
out Nobadia, and even beyond, across the desert, and
as far as the distant kingdom of Alodia, the Arabic Aloa,
whose capital, Soba, lay near the junction of the Blue and
the White Nile.
The first visible result of their preaching, as archaeology
shows, was the conversion into churches of the pagan
temples of Lower Nubia; the small temple of Rameses II
at Wadi es Sebua, for example, and the temple at Dendur,
built by the Roman Emperor Augustus, which was rededi-
cated as a church in 559 A.D. Then, or soon after, came
the building of the first churches in Nubia, at Faras, near
the present Sudanese-Egyptian border, and at Kasr Ibrim,
both influential centres in earlier times.
Radiating from such ancient centres, destined to be
included among the sites of the six or seven Episcopal sees
of Nubia, Christianity spread to the countryside and by
the early years of the seventh century Nubia, outwardly
at least, was a Christian land.
Greek was probably the language of conversion and of
the liturgy and prayers of the early Church and this, like
the distinct traces of Byzantine influence in religious
painting and architecture, reflects the predominantly
Byzantine rather than Coptic (or Egyptian) character of
Nubian Christianity In Its earliest phase. Probably after
the middle of the seventh century, however, as the result
perhaps of a great influx of ChrLstlan refugees from
Egypt, Nubia swung over to Coptic Church doctrines.
The student of Christian Nubia has some rich sources
of information to rely upon: literary, and archaeological
too, in the churches, monasteries, palaces and walled cities
whose Impressive ruins can be seen today all along the
banks of the Nubian Nile. Many of these were explored
by the eminent Italian scholar, the late Professor Ugo
Monneret de Villard. Ills pioneer work before the last
War laid the foundations of the history and archaeology
of Christian Nubia.
His explorations, illuminating as they were, were of
necessity often superficial, being carried out with few
resources and in haste, in anticipation of the last raising
of the present Aswan Dam.
Now, under the infinitely greater and Imminent threat
of flooding from the High Dam, more than superficial
exploration is needed if we are to solve the remaining
mysteries of Christian Nubia. At least one of the princi¬
pal centres of occupation should be fully excavated: a
centre such as Faras, the early capital of the Christian
kingdom of Nobadia, where I myself made some trial
explorations early last year. The need to date chrono¬
logically the very remarkable painted pottery of Christ¬
ian Nubia would alone make this worth while.
R;tuned churches must be surveyed, planned and
.studied architecturally. The delicate remains
of frescoes, like those which adorn so brillantly the walls
of the little church of Abd el Kadir near the Second
Cataract, must be removed and preserved.
Tombs, some of them pillared, and cupola tombs like
those at Kasr Ibrim, must be explored and their skeletal
remains studied so that we may learn something of the
racial origins and characteristics of the Christian Nubians.
Tombstones too must be rescued from the flood for these
often contain prayers for the dead of great Interest to the
student of the liturgy of the early Church.
Since archaeology is almost Impossible during the
Nubian summer, little time remains in which all this must
be done. That it should be done, that it should not be
overlooked at a time when the flood-lights play prin¬
cipally on the world-famous monuments of Ancient Egyp¬
tian Nubia, is urgent. Then, a new chapter will be added 39
to the history of Christianity in Africa and a new page
to the history of the mediaeval Christian world.
