THE ART OF ETHIOPIA'S PAINTER-SCRIBES
by Abbé Jules Leroy
Two years ago, in October 1959, the Unesco Courier devoted an issue to the
lost past of Africa. At that time, the archaeologist, J. Doresse, sketched a
brief but evocative picture of the marvelous and legendary history of Ethiopia
and described the essential characteristics of the Ethiopian personality and
the way in which it has been formed by geography, ethnic mixtures and the
often dramatic events of the past. His account of the "Empire of Préster
John" naturally gave some space to its art. Unesco's recent publication of
an album of reproductions of some of the most beautiful of the Ethiopian
miniatures (1) reveals certain of the specific qualities underlying this supremely
religious art which draws its inspiration from the Old and New Testaments
and the Lives of the Saints.
Ethiopia is a land of moun¬
tain peaks. In fact, it is in
the high plateau region, where one
gasps for breath on wind-swept slopes
that the life of the nation ls
concentrated. Here, at an elevation
of seven to thirteen thousand feet,
was created and developed a civiliz¬
ation which, from the point of view
of political and cultural achievement
and from that of the artistic monu¬
ments which record its long history,
has no parallel in all Tropical Africa.
The monuments which date from
the earliest period of Ethiopian
culture, the famous monolithic
"obelisks" of Axum, as huge as those
of the Pharaohs, are a lasting tribute
to the technical mastery that enabled
these artists of the last centuries
before our era to cut, decorate,
transport and erect enormous stone
blocks. They also cast light on the
origins of this civilization. Although
(1) Unesco World Art Series Album:
Ethiopia, Illuminated Manuscripts, price:
$18.00; £6.8.0. Published by the New York
Graphic Society, 95 East Putnam Av¬
enue, Greenwich, Conn., U.S.A.
Since Christianity was Introduced Into the ancient kingdom of Axum (today
Ethiopia) In the 4th century, art and literature In this country have been almost
exclusively ecclesiastical, and monasteries and churches have remained until
recent times the sole guardians of culture. Below, on the Dabra Damo cliff,
which can be climbed only with a rope, stands Ethiopia's oldest monastery church.
Through the arrival of Christianity, Ethio¬
pia shared In the flowering of art In the
Byzantine world. Monasteries and Churches
became centres of religious, cultural and
political development. Ethiopian Chris-

it has often been erroneously traced
to Egypt, Its real birthplace Is the
kingdoms of the Arabian coast, which
is only separated from the Abyssinian
highlands by a narrow stretch of sea.
Engaged primarily in the spice
trade, whieh long made Arabia Felix
wealthy, and trading also In goods
from Central Africa, these South
Arabian kingdoms (Hadramut, Saba,
Mina, Yemen...) obeyed a fundament¬
al rule imposed upon aU maritime
communities. In order to survive,
they had to establish trading posts
abroad and, to defend them, colonize
the surrounding countryside.
There can be no doubt that this
historic law governed the foundation
of the Axumlte kingdom. There Is
much evidence to prove the common
ancestry of the Ethiopian people and
their neighbours. They do not
belong to the Negro race. Both the
color of their skin and their cultural
traits relate them to the people of
the Arabian peninsula. From them
they took their first art, now well-
known because of archaeological ex¬
cavations in the region of Axum.
From them they also borrowed their
Semitic language, Geez and even their
Sabaean writing. They were not,
however, slow in transforming the
latter Into the admirable Ethiopian
alphabet which, with its 182 charac¬
ters, is capable of rendering every
nuance of pronunciation. As Mr.
Doresse noted, Ethiopian borrowing
has never been a simple copying.
Everything was assimilated and
transformed, and became the birth¬
right of a united, active people who,
at one time In their history (the third
and fourth centuries A.D.), even
succeeded In imposing their domin¬
ation over the Arabian regions from
which their ancestors came.
No doubt Ethiopia would have
remained a part of Semitic civiliz¬
ation and culture had its destiny not
been changed by a momentous event
In the fourth century. This was King
Ezana's conversion to Christianity by
Frumentlus, a native of Tyre in Syria.
The conversion, which took place
around 340 A.D., had a double effect.
It made Ethiopia the first Christian
state of Tropical Africa. It also creat¬
ed a new mentality, a consciousness
of being a special race, "chosen" by
its acceptance and maintenance of
the religion of Christ, an island in a
sea of Infidels. This frame of mind,
whose roots are so evident In the
Judaism which Ethiopian Christianity
combined with the teachings of the
New Testament to a greater extent
than was done anywhere else, finds
expression In the coronation cerem¬
ony which makes the Negus a kind
of African Byzantine Emperor. One
of his functions, according to the
text of the Constitution of 1955, ls
In fact, "to defend the Holy Orthodox
Faith based on the doctrines of
Saint Mark of Alexandria" (art. 21).
This psychology has given the
Ethiopian Church a privileged place
In the organization of the State.
With the Emperor, it ls even today
the real unifying agent of a vast
kingdom where several ethnic groups
Uve side by side and where the large
number of different languages and
dialects could easily fragment the
country. From this point of view,
Ethiopia resembles all African coun¬
tries, and has the same need for
another language to make commun¬
ication possible among Its peoples.
The Imperial proclamations, as well
as the laws, are now drawn up In
two languages, Amharlc, the language
of the Court, and English, which ls
thus promoted to the rank of a second
official language.
tianity, in common with other Eastern
churches, has never shown much interest
in sculpture. The ancient Axumite King¬
dom, however, boasted craftsmen capable
of producing works like this ornate cross.
í ...
No people has ever written so copiously on parchment as the Ethiopians. Today
the art of writing and producing books In manuscript Is still practised with the
same traditional methods and processes as for centuries past. There are many
remote churches and monasteries in the mountains where sacred books and
prayer books are still hand written. Below, miniature Illustrating the Nativity.
f\T<D£\ x-hCh-ftir. a\ 1t> i. hh-físsrftl-tfí
u
u
©

PAINTER-SCRIBES (Cont'd)
32
Illumination in the mediaeval manner
Historically speaking, the Ethiopian
Church has played a role analogous
to that of the Latin and Greek
Churches in the feudal society of the
Middle Ages. In a very real sense, it
has been the educator of the nation.
It ls In the Church that Ethiopia
has found Its scholars, artists and
schoolteachers. Although the State
ls employing more and more teachers
each year to staff the many schools
It ls constructing, It ls still not un¬
usual to find some priest or dabtara
providing the ancestral form of
Instruction In country villages. He
assembles all the school-age popu¬
lation under a shady sycamore at the
edge of the village. Swaying rhythm¬
ically, the children chant In unison
the letters or texts he has written
on the blackboard. The long staff
he carries ls not just a badge of
authority. He often uses It to call
the children to order. For It ls
difficult to concentrate on the
complicated Geez letters when
thousands of the brlghtly-hued birds
that enliven the Ethiopian landscape
are flitting through the boughs over¬
head, their song mingling with the
chorus of young voices.
The sole function of priest and
dabtaras has not been the education
of children. They have also been
the principal artisans of Ethiopian
culture as it is expressed in literature
and art.
Enrico Cerulll, who ls probably the
greatest contemporary authority on
Ethiopian literature, provides a
penetrating study of Its essential
characteristics in his Litteratura
Etiópica (2nd ed., 1960). These can
be reduced to three: receptivity, in
the sense that the Ethiopians have
found their inspiration and doctrines
In Greek, Syrian, Arab-Christian and
Western sources; ability to adapt
foreign elements to the taste of the
country; and, finally, a sort of
sclerosis, which compels authors to
shackle their work in rigid, unchang¬
ing literary forms fixed by rules
which nobody dares break.
The art of Ethiopia reflects
the same tendencies. Ar¬
chaeologists became aware of this
when they discovered the influence
of the architecture and sculpture of
the South Arabian founders of
Abyssinia upon the monuments of
the Axumite period. But the quality
of dependence is even more striking
in the works Christian Ethiopia. One
sees it in the astonishing rock chur¬
ches, of which the ensemble of Lali-
bela offers the most remarkable
examples, as well as in the paintings
that decorate the waUs of churches
and the pages of manuscripts.
Of all forms of Ethiopian art, the
illuminated manuscripts are known
best. Painter-scribes have produced
an incalculable number of them,
following traditional methods which
are still current in monasteries and
at the Court. Beginning In the six¬
teenth century, many of these books,
often decorated with brilliantly color¬
ed paintings, have found their way
Into large libraries like those of
London, Paris and the Vatican. Their
presence among us makes study of
their themes, techniques and sources
much easier.
In a general way, one can say
that Ethiopian painting
exactly reflects the various contacts
this far-off Christian kingdom has
had with the rest of the world. A
first period, as far as can be deter¬
mined at present, seems to be fairly
recent. These are the works of the
14th and 15th centuries, the period
covered by the Unesco albums. Be¬
neath the naive features and the
often clumsy drawing, analysis reveals
the influence of Byzantine or Middle
Eastern art which the Ethiopian
painters could have known either
from Imported books or because they
had seen it when they went on pil¬
grimages to Jerusalem.
A second period begins after the
arrival of the Portuguese who, at the
beginning of the 16th century, helped
the Christians drive out the Moslem
invaders led by Mohammed Granyé.
With this contact, a new style appear¬
ed. Inspired by Western painting, it
was more linear and elaborate than
the earlier work. This was the epoch
of the civilization of Gondar, which
lasted for nearly two centuries. In
the course of this long period tastes
changed, and the imitation of West¬
ern styles became more marked,
particularly as regards the use of
perspective and relief, which were
absolutely unknown before the
massive penetration by Europeans.
The penetration, which was much
facilitated by the opening of the
Suez Canal and the European policy
of Menellk and his successors, has
excercised a pronounced Influence
upon modern Ethiopian painting, and
particularly upon the work of young
contemporary artists. While some
remain faithful to the aesthetic and
iconographie rules Inherited from the
past, others, trained in the methods
taught in foreign schools, are
completely Western in technique and
style. It is too early to say what
effect their innovations will have on
the traditional painting of Ethiopia.
But one thing is sure. It will remain
true to itself and, as It has always
done in the past, will once again
assimilate outside Influence without
losing its own personality.
A scholar and authority on Middle East
manuscripts, Abbé Jules Leroy is a former
director of the Imperial Section of
Archrology in Addis Ababa. He is now
attached to the Centre National de Re¬
cherche Scientifique in France.
Paintings from Unesco World Art Series Album: 'Ethiopia, Illuminated Manuscripts'
>.<>^ää<>:o:<^<^<>;<^<>:<^<«
LUKE THE EVANGELIST. A portrait of St. Luke
writing the first words of his gospel. Miniature from
the Kebran Manuscript (early I 5th cent.). Preserv¬
ed In St. Gabriel's Church In the Lake Tana region.
SitfcftiJhs;
THE ANNOUNCEMENT TO MARY. In this
stiff, formalized version of the annunciation scene,
the Virgin is shown spinning. Taken from the manu¬
scripts of the Jahjah Giyorgis gospels (Mid- 1 5th cent.)
THE ENTOMBMENT. Here the Ethiopian minia¬
turist has depicted disciples bearing the body of
Jesus towards a grave depicted as a geometric,
abstract shape. From the manuscript of St. Arsima.
«*£»*
