TOWARDS HARMONY
BETWEEN RACES
by Alfred Métraux
The special Issue which The Unesco
\JT jf Courier published last October on
^/l "Racism" has had broad repercussions
NJ^ around the world. Many people
' Ä Ä have raised questions concerning
Unesco's past activities and expressed
interest in the organization's future
plans to fight the virus of racism.
In attempting to present the
picture of Unesco's action in this
field, I should like, first, to clear up one misappre¬
hension which seems to be widespread. Unesco is not a
political body. It is an international organization for
science, education and the arts, and can act only in those
fields which are within Its competence. It directs Itself
to the "minds of men"; It Is in the minds of men that it
seeks to construct the defences against war and racism,
leaving to other bodies action in the sphere of politics.
Unesco's Constitution denounces the "doctrine of the
inequality of men and races", but Unesco's struggle Is
aimed not only against the "racist doctrine" but also
against the attitudes and ways of thinking which are
at the root of this doctrine. Unesco's first task, there¬
fore, was to dispel the many false notions and easy ste¬
reotypes which are the basis and framework of racism.
It is surprising to see how ignorant the public at large
and even more educated groups often are on these
matters; one can even go so far as to say that there Is
a gap of at least half a century between science and
public opinion on the facts of race.
H The very Idea of "race" often breeds confusion. Ten
years ago, Unesco commissioned two groups of scientists
to draw up a Declaration on Race In which they set forth,
in "clear and simple form", the present state of our
knowledge of the problem of racial equality and of the
unity of the human species. This declaration was only
a brief summary of the results of the work carried on
for many years in research centres and laboratories.
To make available to the public Information on various
aspects of this problem and on the scientific facts behind
the Declaration on Race, Unesco published a series of
booklets entitled "The Race question in Modern Science."
For this series, specialists from various countries who had
distinguished themselves by their research on the race
problem were invited to expound their own conclusions
and those reached by other scientists as well (1).
The race problem involves human nature as a whole.
Consequently, It concerns many branches of science, both
the natural as well as the social sciences; no single branch
has the answer to all the questions. Thus, the psychol¬
ogist made his contribution by "pulling the rug" from
under certain tests designed to prove the inferiority of
one race as compared to another, by exposing glaring
errors of method used in these tests. The geneticist
produced a new definition of the notion of race In the
light of modern biology. The sociologist analysed the
nature and the forms of inter-racial conflict. The role
of the cultural anthropologist was to bring out the deci¬
sive influence of social environment upon the shaping of
personality. And only a speclallst In physical anthropo¬
logy was qualified to expose the absurd notion which so
many persons still have about the so-called harmful effect
of racial mixtures.
All these numerous facets of the same problem were
treated competently and objectively In the dozen booklets
28
Brazil ¡s a striking
example of a country
in which men and
women of different
racial groups live side
by side in harmony.
published in the series already mentioned. The scientists
who wrote them were careful to avoid any assertion of
an emotional or ethical nature. They concealed neither
our ignorance nor our doubts. However, they all felt that
they had to speak out, for, If the scientist himself
remained silent, it must have appeared that totally false
ideas and brutal doctrines were undisputed truths. That
is why it was important to impress on the public the fact
that no branch of science offers the slightest argument
in support of racism.
The Race booklets have met with considerable sucess,
and have now been translated into eleven languages, of
which the English edition runs to almost 250,000 copies.
The great interest shown by the public in the race pro¬
blem is reflected in the popularity of the Unesco Series.
The many articles that have appeared in newspapers and
periodicals based on these studies, the group discussions
which the booklets have inspired all these have combined
to bring the facts on racism, formerly available only to
the specialist, to a broad international audience, and have
thus been instrumental in reducing bias and prejudice.
The problems raised by racial prejudice and its
resulting discrimination are not only of a scientific
nature. It would be absurd to think that one could put
an end to racial conflict and its tragic consequences
merely by debunking the false Ideas and stereotypes of
racist thinking. Racism is also a problem of conscience.
And it Is for this reason that various religions and philo¬
sophies have expressed definite views on the problem.
To its collection "The Race Question in Modern Science",
Unesco therefore added a new series entitled "The Race
Question In Modern Thought". It comprises a group of
essays defining the attitudes adopted by the great world
religions towards the diversity of the human family.

The Unesco Courler. February 1961
Pierre Verger.
In the volumes published thus far, great theologians
and philosophers have discussed the attitude toward
racism adopted by the Catholic Church, the Protestant
churches. Buddhism and Judaism. The authors are dist¬
inguished not only for their scholarship but also because
of their position in the religious movements of our time.
While all world religions agree in condemning racism
and all proclaim the equality of mankind and human
dignity, they do so at times in different terms. It Is
because these differences of approach all lead to the same
conclusion that the cause of anti-racism is strengthened.
Few persons would deny that deep-rooted prejudices
and stereotypes those which are hardest to get rid of in
adults are acquired at a very early age. This means
that, to be truly effective, educational measures must
begin at school. As the UN Agency for education, Unesco
has therefore carried its campaign against racial bias
into the classroom. But realizing that the school curri¬
culum is already over-burdened In most countries, and
that the addition of a separate subject would be difficult,
it has sought to reach the student through the teacher,
by providing the latter with the most up-to-date findings
of modern science for incorporation in normal lessons.
With this purpose in view, Unesco commissioned two
textbooks: Cyril Blbby's Race, Prejudice and Education
in English (See The Unesco Courier, October 1960)
already translated into German and Hebrew, with other
language versions foreseen ; and Professor Juan Comas's
La Educación ante la Discriminación racial (Education
and Racial Discrimination), intended for school-teachers
in Latin America. A small illustrated pamphlet for
schools entitled What is Race? has also been published.
Parallel with this publishing venture, Unesco launched
a series of original research projects on race relations.
An enormous amount of research on this subject had of
course already been done by groups In many countries,
but Unesco's Investigations were focused on a relatively
llttle-studled aspect harmonious race relations.
The fact of the matter Is that the meeting of races Is
not necessarily marked by conflict or prejudice as some
people maintain. There are areas and regions where men
of different skin colour live slde-by-slde In perfect har¬
mony and are mutually enriched by their respective cul¬
tural backgrounds.
H The U.S. State of Hawaii and Brazil arc typical exam¬
ples of multi-racial lands where people get along very
well -with each other. Since race relations In Hawaii had
already been extensively studied, Unesco decided to carry
out Its research In Brazil. The task was entrusted to
teams of sociologists and psychologists who studied the
race situation in different regions of the country, both
In rural and urban environments. The results of this
work were set forth In several books, of which two were
published by Unesco (2) and the others by Brazilian Ins¬
titutions and publishing houses.
Along similar lines, Unesco organized other research
projects In countries where ethnic minorities were In
process of assimilation. Mexico, the French West Indies,
the United States and Yugoslavia offered research sub¬
jects of great Interest. The conclusions of these research
projects have been published by Unesco under the fol¬
lowing titles: Contacts dc civilisation en Martinique ct
Guadeloupe by Michel Lelrls (In French only); Racial
Equality and the Law by Morroe Berger, an excellent ana¬
lysis of American legislation to achieve racial equality.
A book prepared by Unesco but published by the Colum¬
bia University Press In the United States summarizes
field studies In the New World: Minorities in the Neto
World by Charles Wagley and Marvin Harris.
I The rapid development of African societies and the
growing number of Africans who are becoming prominent
In fields hitherto considered the prerogative of the white
race offer powerful arguments against theories of racism
and "racial pessimism", which are Invoked all too often
to justify discriminatory attitudes and measures. It was
doubly Interesting for Unesco, therefore, to make a scien¬
tific analysis of the process of modernization in Africa
which, far more effectively than any theory, proves the
aptitude of all ethnic groups to benefit from progress.
Sociological research on the new leaders who arc spring¬
ing up in Africa was carried out by Unesco In Dahomey,
Ghana and Nigeria. These studies were recently supple¬
mented by research on African women who, having
broken with their traditional environment, have now
joined the cultural revolution sweeping their countries.
Up until now, Unesco's attention has been concentrated
upon the positive aspects of race relations. But the
recent racist manifestations which have spread like wild¬
fire throughout the world have led Unesco to turn to the
question of racism and Its Influence on modern youth.
A large-scale International Investigation of a psychologi¬
cal and sociological character Is now being prepared
by Unesco to determine the depth of racial prejudice
among youth, Its causes, Its persistence and methods of
fighting It.
Furthermore, Unesco's last General Conference recently
adopted a draft convention and recommendations
concerning discriminatory measures in education, and the
adherence of Member States to this convention can hardly
fall to result In measures which are bound to counteract
racial prejudices.
I Finally, there are prospects that an International orga¬
nization will be set up to act as a permanent documenta¬
tion and research centre on race relation problems.
Unesco Is now studying the conditions under which It
can help such an organization to get started.
These are some of the main activities which Unesco
has undertaken or Is preparing to undertake to fight the
"social cancer of our time". Unesco Is well aware of the
responsibilities which, as a member of the U.N. family, It
has assumed In this field and It will not shirk them.
(1) A collective volume of these publications "The Hace Question
in Modern Science", 11 now in preparation and will be published
jointly by the Tultle Company of Tokyo and Unesco, l'aris. A special
U.S. edition will be published by the Columbia University I'ress,
New York.
(2) "Race and Clais in Rural Brazil" by Charles Wagley, and "Les
élites de couleur dam une ville brésilienne" IThe coloured /Hite in a
Brazilian Town) by Thaies de Azeiiedo (French only).
29
