HAZARDS IN FIELD AND FOREST
DANGER STALKS THE
The farmer and the farmworker are more exposed to
accident risks than perhaps any other section of the
population, a survey by WHO reveals. The farmer's
home Is also his work-place and combines the- dangers
of both.
Agricultural accidentslike those in the home, the
workshop or the factory have much in common the
world over. This has been shown by studies carried out
both in countries where agriculture has undergone
revolutionary changes in the past century and in others
where farming methods still follow traditional paths.
For example, investigations made in the United States
into the frequency and type of agricultural accidents in
7,000 Indiana farms showed that nearly 30% were due to
falls, most of them and the most serious being falls from
ladders. This situation can well be compared to Ceylon
where, out of a total of 2,800 deaths from all accidents
in 1957, 554, or nearly 20%, were caused by falls. In 350
cases the men who fell were tapping palm trees or picking
coconuts or fruit. Despite the dissimilarity of their
occupations, it looks as though the Indiana farmer and
the Ceylonese plantation worker run just about the same
risk of a fall.
In Great Britain, too, it is estimated that about one-
quarter of agricultural accidents are caused by falls. In
the same country a further 15% of accidents are caused
by handtools, 18% by light agricultural equipment, 18%
by burns and poisons and 10% by domestic animals.
"Never hold a sharp instrument pointed towards
yourself. Don't leave your pitchfork lying about. Test
your axe-handle before you use it. Never leave a scythe
standing in such a way that it can fall blade upwards. Be
André Gamet © Rapho, Paris
careful with storm lanterns in hay barns. Don't try to
mend your ladder with a couple of nails and a piece of
twine..."
Though adages like these are continually heard from
childhood, they seem not to prevent overconfldence.
Trusting, consciously or not, to his own cleverness or
physical strength, the worker on the land, like the house¬
wife in her kitchen or the workman at his bench, all too
often forgets the risks with which he is over familiar.
The farmer trusts his "instinct" and the pragmatic
knowledge handed down from older generations he is
somewhat suspicious of the city expert. Yet good advice
that otherwise would be ignored will be listened to if it
comes from a respected elder or young farmer.
This is something that an agricultural safety campaign
must take into account. For to be effective such a
campaign should be entrusted to a man of the soil.
Unfortunately only in a few countries have existing safety
organizations set up special rural or agricultural sections.
Far too many countries still neglect the problem, although
there is much that could be done. For example, rural
schools should be provided with textbooks describing
hazards encountered on farms, and rural councils might
promote adult education on similar lines.
Nowadays the introduction of mechanized farming
brings fresh dangers. New machines, freeing the agri¬
cultural worker from the most arduous tasks and increas¬
ing his productivity, demand much greater vigilance and
care on his part. A sort of "sixth sense" of self-defence
which helps to guard the farm worker against the usual
kinds of accidents gives little protection against threshers
or mechanical harvesters.
Goursat © Rapho, Paris
24

FARMER
Although he may be careless about it, the peasant
knows very well that his horse may kick him; but when
he gets his first brand-new tractor he little suspects that
this machine he is so proud of may have a deadly habit
of tipping over at the least expected moment.
One way to help counter these new risks would be to
require the manufacturer of agricultural machinery to
fix clear, legible and indelible safety warnings on his
products. Certain countries have also considered in¬
troducing agricultural driving licences which would
provide an opportunity to give agricultural workers the
safety training they so badly need. In Great Britain,
for example, agricultural safety advisers are trained and
do effective work in showing the farmer how to avoid
accidents with his new machines.
A start has already been made in applying industrial
accident-prevention methods to agriculture. With the
collaboration of the International Labour Organization, a
joint working party on forestry from the Economic
Commission for Europe and the Food and Agriculture
Organization studied the felling and sawing up or trees
and the carriage of logs to sawmills by land and water.
Its report provides detailed accident statistics, summarizes
safety regulations and describes provisions for inspection,
education, professional training, research, safety at
logging camps and sawmills, medical assistance, housing
and feeding.
Viewed in this light, agricultural accident prevention
becomes far more than merely protecting the rural popu¬
lation from accidents; it raises the whole question of
the adjustment of the agricultural worker to the present-
day economy and in so doing tends to lessen the différence
between him and the man in the workshop.
^ %nwV
Janine N'cpce O R*pho. P*rii
Overconfidence in using traditional cutting tools and careless¬
ness in operating powered machinery like threshers (below
left) are two basic causes oí accidents that occur on farms.
Timber felling and log-sawing are occupations In which a
moment of neglect or inattention can spell disaster. Mon
who work with sharp-edged axes or biting saw blades need
protection through the same kind of accident provontlon
methods and regulations that have become required in Industry.
Ciccione (Q Râpho. Piril
