REBIRTH OF A
In 1945, Warsaw
was simply a name
on the map marking
a wasteland of ruins
For many of the world's largest cities, the past fifteen
years have been, more or less, a normal period In
the continuous process of urban development. Out¬
wardly for them, not much has changed. True
enough, some old buildings have been torn down to make
room for lean and graceful modern towers in the hope of
relieving that universal city bugbear, the ever growing
traffic problem.
Other cities have had a face-lifting. There have been
the scars of war to erase, both by modernizing and
rebuilding old sections, and by raising great complexes of
modern buildings which are virtually cities in themselves.
A few cities have literally been born overnight during
the past fifteen years owing to the vision of some
statesman or architect. At least one or two have sprung
up from the bare ground providing their designers with
a rare freedom to make of them the very last word in
modern city planning.
The story of Warsaw is different.
There are few examples in history of the tragic fate
which befell this city.
It is a story which begins in 1945 when virtually nothing
but ruins remained of the city, yet which today has risen
from the ashes and rubble and has amazingly regained
its pre-war population of over a million inhabitants.
Warsaw offers a lesson on the workings of an urban
society which is astonishing. It would seem to prove that
neither the complete destruction of a people, nor their
WARSAW 1945
Central Photographic Agency, Warsaw

SHATTERED CITY
property can ring down the curtain of history on the
life of a great city.
A visitor to Warsaw today will find it hard to believe
that this thriving, bustling metropolis was a wasteland of
ruins in January 1945 when the first of the citizens began
to trickle back. Where the proud and historic city had
once stood, they found nothing but a vague outline visible
here and there among ruins and rubble. It was a vast
cemetery for hundreds of thousands. Here and there a
pock-marked building which had escaped total destruc¬
tion rose up like a lonely sentinel, and on the right bank
of the Vistula, a whole quarter the poorest in the city
where ten per cent of Warsaw's population once lived,
alone escaped the holocaust.
For all practical purposes, however, Warsaw existed only
because of its geographical position and its name.
Even though Warsaw was an empty shell, a city without
life, half of its people were still alive, scattered throughout
the world in many places but bereft of all their
possessions. They had suffered much from the war, but
with them they carried memories of the Warsaw they
had known, its traditions, its life and its people. The
barbarous order which had reduced Warsaw to rubble,
could not obliterate this city from the hearts and the
minds of her people no matter where they might be.
As the citizenry returned in ever greater numbers,
Warsaw's future became the main topic of discussion.
Some were all for turning the entire area into a giant
Today, rebuilt and
modernized, it has
grown to six times
its pre-war size
by Jerzy Hryniewiecki
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
Polish Information Office, Paris
WARSAW 1961

Shimmering ribbons
of light on the Vistula
reflect Poland's reborn
capital of 1,200,000 people
Polish Information Office, Paris
construction camp, off limits to the public, in order to
carry out a rush rebuilding programme. Others were
inclined to pick a new site and rebuild the capital city
elsewhere.
There were Utopian visions of a futuristic city, many
very attractive but often not too practical because of the
lack of economic and technical resources available just
after the war to carry out such far-sighted, and,
unfortunately, enormously expensive plans. While some
wanted to rebuild upon the old city, restoring and re¬
creating the best of the past, others talked about a
clean break with the old sweeping away all the past
shortcomings of an unplanned city which just "grew"
from mediaeval village times, and In its stead creating an
absolutely new city based on the most modern and up-
to-the-minute ideas and tastes.
And, of course, there were the "Brave New World"
variety of planners who attacked the problem statistically
and proposed a project in which the inhabitants would
be classified according to profession and allotted precisely
fixed areas of living space on the basis of the density of
population.
But real life did not wait for plans, theories and long
discussions. Within hours and days after Liberation,
thousands of former citizens were flooding back to the
deserted ruins. The new government decided to set up
its capital there, not because conditions were ideal for
an administrative centre, but because the name Warsaw
still meant so much, not only to its own people, but
throughout the world. In no time at all, the rows of
ruined houses and buildings took on the appearance of
ant hills as the people themselves set busily about the
task of rebuilding their capital with their own hands
and with whatever materials they could salvage among
the rubble.
During this first period of heroic, but primitive re¬
construction of the city, all Poland seemed to be on
the move. Not only were former citizens of Warsaw
constantly swelling the population, but large numbers of
other people too, drawn by the reviving economic system,
added to their numbers. There was also a flood of people
uprooted from territories no longer a part of Poland who
headed for the city, as well as many peasants from over-
populated rural areas. As Warsaw's industries were re¬
constructed and expanded, a far greater labour force
was required than before the war, a fact which also drew
more people to the city.
With this phenomenon of an old population and a new
population in an old city being rebuilt, Warsaw became
a crucible in which not only the people, but sweeping
changes in the social and professional structure created a
situation of extraordinary dynamism. Within fifteen
years this great force has moulded a uniform society
out of the most disparate elements. This has been
surprising to all but old inhabitants of Warsaw who are
well aware of their city's long tradition of assimilating
all that comes within its gates.
In the new Warsaw, almost all former inhabitants have
changed their residences. Many are doing jobs they
never dreamed of before the war. More recent arrivals
from generations of country folk have become city-
dwellers in a very short space of time which has made
profound changes in their habits and way of life.
It is difficult for us to realize just how all these popula¬
tion movements have affected the life of the people of
Warsaw. It is only by meeting and talking to someone
who knew Warsaw before the war and who can compare
the old order with the new that we can begin to
appreciate the kind of metamorphosis that has taken
place in so short a time.
We might compare it to compressing into a brief
span of fifteen years all the things that in other
countries have taken hundred of years to achieve.
We have seen with our own eyes mediaeval squares and
18th century house rising out of the ruins. Yet behind
the façades are dwellings with every modern convenience.
We have watched the reconstruction of the Gothic
cathedral with the same stones with which the original
was built, and we have seen the splendid 17th and 18th
century palaces of noblemen painstakingly restored in
every detail to become cultural and administrative
centres.
The restored classical façade of the Opera House, built
at the beginning of the last century, has been faithfully
copied, but behind it is a modern concert and operatic
theatre which is technically one of the best-equipped in
Europe. New and broader bridges have been constructed
on the piles of the old ones. New homes have risen on
the foundations and rubble of those destroyed. The new
city of Warsaw draws its character from this harmonious
blending of the vestiges of the past with the techniques
and living needs of modern life.
Is it then a kind of 20th century anachronism in which
museum-like façades spring up artificially to shield the
comforts of modern life which lie behind ? Certainly not,
if we consider the people of Warsaw themselves. This
recreation of the past has taken into full account the
needs, nostalgia, and feelings of a people whose past was
all but torn away from them. This reconstruction has
been a labour of love, and one cannot find a single false
note.
The task of reconstructing the old demanded tre¬
mendous effort from specialists who had to work with
CONT'D ON PAGE 12

The Unesco Courier. March 1961
The people of Warsaw
have retraced
the cavalcade of centuries
in 15 years of toil
Newly rebuilt market place in the Old City Zygniunt Szartk, W*riaw

REBIRTH OF A SHATTERED CITY (^
WARSAW'S NEW LOOK
absolute precision on what we might term "scientific"
rebuilding of the ruins. The measure of their success is
found in the fact that the results are not eclectic, nor
has their work shown signs of being cold or impersonal.
In fact, the earlier stages of reconstruction were so
fraught with difficulties and primitive technical resources
that as a result often the working methods and materials
were relatively the same as those employed in the original
constructions. This perhaps, more than any other single
factor, brings authenticity to restored Warsaw.
Today it is a fact that most people of Warsaw
instinctively try to live In "old-style" houses in preference
to modern dwellings built with air, light and parks
surrounding them. It may be that living in the "new-
old" places they feel more like old established residents
of the city. But, it is typical of the people of Warsaw
to be strong individualists, and it may be they feel more
at ease in the less ordered and more fanciful surround¬
ings than those offered by large modern blocks of flats.
With the reconstruction of the city, its old shape has
come to life again. The network of streets, established
centuries ago, and which were recognizable as an odd
geometric pattern in the ruined city, have become the
framework for the new plan. Still, the monotonous criss¬
cross of 19th century streets have been made more
functional in the new city.
It was inevitable that the resumption of city life and
the demands of town planning would lead to conflicts.
In these, sometimes one side wins, and sometimes another.
But as is often the case, lively Interest, however partisan,
lends vigour to the cause.
It is thus that a new school of town planning has
emerged in Warsaw in which the emphasis is laid on
actual execution of plans which have been shed of their
more glowing and yet impractical aspects. The people of
Warsaw themselves have learned that their opinions count
in the plans of the municipal draughtsmen, and more
than once they have caused changes in what they
considered unduly abstract plans.
It is true that Warsaw's population has now reached
the pre-war figure, but its area has increased six¬
fold. Density of population in 1939 was appalling. It
reached 5,000 inhabitants per acre in some parts of the
city's centre. Today the population is properly distributed
and green spaces spread out, shaded with trees, where
once stood some of the most wretched and densely packed
tenements. Warsaw has changed too, from a labyrinth
of dreary streets into a city of gardens and open areas.
It is not only in relation to history that we citizens
of Warsaw have spanned whole centuries in the space
of a few years. The past fifteen years can be split into
two separate parts, each representing a different phase
of development. The first was a period of primitive,
spontaneous reconstruction. Groups of buildings based on
new architectonic systems grew up within the framework
of a city organically re-established on its old foundations,
retaining the boundaries of its former buildings. Former
unimportant areas thus have become prominent hubs of
communication which draw life to the city's centre.
Difficulties created in trying to reconcile the old with
the new encouraged the construction of new housing
estates on the outskirts of the city where there is still
free land which permits unrestricted development of
12
modern buildings. There was something paradoxical
about this great ring of modern buildings pushing
skyward around the ruins of a provisionally re-established
centre and there was bound to be criticism of the de-
urbanization trend.
The result was a move in favour of establishing re¬
sidential districts in the heart of the city, and eventually
a number of relatively sparsely populated districts sprang
up there. It produces, moreover, an eclectic tendency to
repeat the faults, but also the rich ornamentation of
architectural forms of the 19th century. But thanks to
help from traditional craftsmanship and materials, this
trend made it possible to build on a scale appropriate to
a large city, even though only out-dated technical means
were available.
During this period of rebuilding certain sections of
the centre of the city became alive again with in¬
habitants. The period ended with the building of
the Palace of Culture and Science, 750 feet in height,
which houses the Polish Academy of Science. Located in
the very centre of the city, its traditional approach belongs
to another age, yet, by its size and social significance, it
marks the beginning of the construction of Warsaw's
modern centre.
Today Warsaw lives continually under pressure of an
exploding population, and ever more crowded living space.
We are compelled to build more and more modern apart¬
ment houses, schools, hospitals, and other buildings to
meet the growing public needs.
There is the beginning of a great push forward in the
fields of pre-fabrication and industrialization in building
and in the use of new materials for construction. Against
the impressive backdrop of the reconstructed old city of
Warsaw, a new city is rising, equipped with all the mod¬
ern advantages and caring for all the needs of a rapidly
expanding population. For, you may be sure, despite the
tragedies of war, the uprooting, the destruction, Warsaw's
people are filled with life and vigour.
From the shattered remains of the old city, from the
miseries of the past, from the hopes and aspirations of
its scattered inhabitants, from their sweat and toil, rises
the new Warsaw. May the joy of living flourish here
everafter.
VISION OF THE FUTURE. To the Poles,
architecture is a real passion. "Nobody should
oppose its expansion," one Polish architect
recently wrote, "for it represents a victory of
inventive thought, modern solutions and a new
approach." Many Polish designs have registered
victories at international competitions and have
turned into reality in various parts of the world
from Brazil and the U.S. to India and the Middle
East. Top, opposite page, a bold building project
called "The East Wal!" proposed for the heart
of Warsaw by architect Marek Leyckham has caus¬
ed a sensation and. much debate in Poland. Right,
apartments in Warsaw. Note effort to balance
"green spaces" and buildings in photo on left.

From Poland Magazine iO I. Jarosin'-ka, Warsaw
Zygmunt Szarek, Warsaw
Hint n
nr.
