JAPAN MISREPRESENTED
A LOOK AT FOREIGN TEXTBOOKS
by Talsumi Shimada
This article is © I960, by the Asahl Shlmbun-sha, Tokyo.
Today, when the other side of the
moon is visible to us through
photographs, one would expect
people on one side of our own
globe to be well acquainted with the
opposite side. In fact, though, there is
a surprising lack of accurate knowledge.
With countries like those of Western
Europe, which are extremely close to
each other, and where travel is un¬
hampered even by the necessity for
visas, understanding between nations
can be hoped for.
However, greater distance not to
mention differences in ways of life, reli¬
gion and cultural forms soon reduces
this understanding to a far from satis¬
factory level. Even in such cases, a
constant supply of accurate information,
together with efforts toward comprehen¬
sion by both sides, ought to make it
possible to maintain a satisfactory degree
of understanding. In fact, however,
things do not work out this way.
People tend to have preconceived
ideas about distant countries. In particu¬
lar, inhabitants of far-off Europe and
America who have never seen Japan
seem to include such preconceived ideas
in the image they cherish of this coun¬
try. The unsavoury picture of Japan as
a country of militarists doubtless still
persists, and, along with it, the romantic
ideas associated with Madame Butterfly.
Not infrequently, Japanese who
happened to be travelling in foreign
parts have been taken by surprise by
the questions put by the local inhabi¬
tants. These range from specialized
queries on, say, "the role of Shintoism"
to elementary ones such as "does Japan
have trains and streetcars?"
There are many books on every coun¬
try written either by its own people or
by foreigners well versed in its affairs.
Perusal of them would normally suffice
to erase mistaken impressions. Unfor¬
tunately, people are seldom willing to
make a special effort to find out what
is happening in other countries unless it
directly concerns themselves. As a
result, no matter how many excellent
introductions and travel books appear,
the number of readers is restricted. In
view of this unsatisfactory situation, the
question arises of what should be done
to foster a correct knowledge of each
other at a more general level among the
peoples of the world.
In the case of Japan, about which
accurate knowledge tends to be very rare
and misapprehension common, the ques¬
tion of what practical steps can be taken
to improve this situation is a matter of
serious concern. A small number of
enthusiasts, therefore, recently made a
start albeit a very unspectacular one
toward remedying the situation, by
making a thorough investigation of in¬
accurate accounts of Japan in school
textbooks in use in foreign countries.
Textbooks, unlike specialist works, are
compulsory reading for schoolchildren
From Japanese Fomily (England, 1 9 50)
and students. This means that when
they misrepresent the truth about Japan
their harmful influence is extremely
pervasive. Once errors have occurred
in the basic facts given to children in
primary and middle schools, it is well-
nigh impossible to erase these first im¬
pressions. Yet a survey of textbooks,
collected from 31 countries, which was
begun in 1948, shocked those responsible
by the depressingly large number of
distorted views of Japan it revealed.
The need of some means to remedy this
situation was evident, and in April 1958,
the "International Society for Educa¬
tional Information" (1) was established
in Tokyo.
The textbooks gathered together by
this Centre via the Foreign Ministry,
(1) The address of the Society is: Yamate
Kaikan, 22-7 Yolsuya 1-choine, Tokyo, Japan,
and the director is Nishimura Kumao.
the Japan Red Cross and private firms
and organizations already total 925
volumes from 16 countries in Europe
(including the Soviet Union), four in
the Middle East, ten in Asia and five
in the Americas. Comprising primary,
secondary, and high-school textbooks
mostly published between 1955 and
1959, they arc the works at present in
use in those countries.
In accordance with the purposes of
the survey, the majority of them arc
textbooks of geography, history and
social science. The materials thus
collected have been studied by specialist
professors and linguists in Japanese
universities. The more their investiga¬
tion proceeds, the more apparent be¬
comes the large number of inaccuracies
and outright errors in the contents of the
articles on Japan. Many cases have
also been discovered where very old
photographs and illustrations depicting
Japan in the Mciji or Taisho Period are
presented as if they showed modern
conditions.
Such cases have come as a shock to
those taking part in the survey.
The most conspicuous among them arc
the photographs and illustrations used
in the textbooks, the photographs gen¬
erally being extremely old and many of
the illustrations showing strange people
and ways of life which suggest a mixture
of Japanese and Chinese cultures without
representing cither of them accurately.
The early Mciji Period roughly
from the 1870's into the 1890's saw
work started on the Panama Canal in the
New World (1881) and on the Trans-
Siberian Railway in the Old, while in Asia
Burma was annexed by Britain in 1886.
If, in the case of any other country,
street scenes or local manners of this
period were represented as those of
today, it would cause no little surprise.
In most countries there are even con¬
siderable differences between ways of
life before and after the Second World
War. This being so, it would be a
shock to anyone, let alone the Japanese,
to find children being shown without
any explanation conditions as they
existed nearly a century ago.
In the case of Japan, however, moder¬
nization started late, and astonishing
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 3J

JAPAN MISREPRESENTED (Cont'd)
changes occurred even within fifty years.
The large towns change in appearance
from year to year, and even in country
towns and villages a constant transfor¬
mation is in progress. All this is ignored
in many foreign textbooks, however;
children arc presented with any material
that comes to hand, however old, and
told, "This is Japan."
One example is an English textbook
called Japanese Family (2). Though
comparatively new it was published
only ten years ago, in 1950the Japa¬
nese family life shown is a most peculiar
mixture of Chinese and Japanese styles,
and of the old-fashioned. The illustra¬
tions, for instance, show father and
daughter riding in a rickshaw a thing
one would have difficulty finding in
Japan today while a family like
something out of a fairy tale is shown
gazing over the sea wondering whether
there will be an earthquake or not!
One shudders to think of English chil¬
dren getting the idea that the "quaint
Japanese" arc like this, but what is
still worse is that the writer of the text¬
book seems to be unaware that such
things never existed at any period in
Japan. I am not, of course, picking out
this English textbook for particular cri¬
ticism. Endless examples of much the
same kind of error can be found in those
of other countries too.
For instance, an Italian high-school
geography textbook entitled Le Parti del
Mondo (3) carries the Kambara print
from Hiroshige's Fifty-three Stages on
the Tokaido with the caption "Snow
Scene in Hokkaido, or Ezo." One
wishes the author would let Italian
children know that this particular ukiyoe
was published in 1833! Pictures such
as the Hiroshige are acceptable any¬
where provided they are clearly labelled
as works of art.
However in works such as a primary-
school reader (4) published in Egypt in
1957, in an Indian geography textbook
entitled Over Land and Sea (5), in the
Australian This Modern Age (6), and in
the American The Background of
Modern Nations (7), one can only pre¬
sume that the illustrations were free
SUPERE, CIES COMPAREES
POPULATIONS COMPAREES
(«n miner, d'hfbilantf)
JAPON 311000 rRANCE 551 000 In'
From a primary school textbook (Egypt, I 957)
fantasies by artists who had never been
to Japan.
Some of the incorrect accounts of
Japan deal with things which, though not
completely unknown in Japan, are by
now far from common sights. For
example, in an Italian geography text¬
book for readers at secondary-school
level there appears a photograph of a
Japanese woman with her back covered
all over with tattooing, over the caption:
"In Japan there is a general tendency
for women also to tattoo themselves."
Not only is this astonishing in a text¬
book published in 1957, but it will cer¬
tainly make Italian children start off
from the first year of secondary educa¬
tion with the impression that Japan must
be a very savage country. There would
be no objection if it were used in a book
with some such title as "Believe it or
not", but a school textbook about a
country should stick to the customs
prevailing among the larger part of its
population.
In practice, though, the compilers tend
to pick out only the odd and peculiar
customs in order to stimulate the
curiosity of the reader. This is true not
only of books on Japan: it is a point on
which all the nations of the world should
exercise care, for each other's sakes.
In Japan's case, for instance, something
should be done about the tendency in
the tourist posters and leaflets she her¬
self puts out to over-emphasize the old,
traditional Japan.
Here is one of the reasons why the
modern Japan (which admittedly, being
Westernized to a considerable extent, is
less interesting to foreigners) is reported
incorrectly. Here is something for Japan
herself to remedy; it remains true,
however, that the compilers of text¬
books abroad should realize the im¬
portance of their mission in promoting
mutual understanding among the youn¬
ger generation in different countries, and
work harder to present the true rather
than merely the curious.
The International Society for Educa¬
tional Information is at present con¬
sidering various ways of pointing out
existing errors and helping to compile
From Les Grandes
Puissances Economi¬
ques (France, 1957)
JAPON FRANCE
88 43 ,
better textbooks in the future, for
example, by transmitting directly the
views of Japanese specialists, by drawing
the attention of firms publishing text¬
books to the matter, and by sending
correct information from Japan.
The textbooks being published in
Japan are also, quite possibly, out-of-date
or incorrect in some respects. Gradually
to reduce the number of such errors on
all sides would help greatly in supplying
the young folk who will form the next
generation with the correct information
necessary for judging international
affairs, and for this, international co¬
operation on a wide scale is most
desirable.
It may be added in conclusion that
the same Society also held exhibitions
From Over Land and Sea (England, 19 56)
in Tokyo and Osaka in late 1959 and
early 1960, entitled "Japan Misrepre¬
sented: A Look at Foreign Textbooks,"
which put on public view the textbooks
so far gathered together. The exhibitions
drew large crowds and attracted much
interest in newspapers and periodicals.
Reproduced from the Japan Quarterly, April-
June 1960.
(2) Japanese Family, by L.S. Eliott, published
by Frederick Warne and Co.Ltd.
(3) Le Parti del Mondo, by Manfredo Vanni,
Milan 1955.
(4) Elementary Book, By I. Mustafa and
others, Dept., of Education, Egypt 1957.
(5) Over Land and Sea: The Foundation of
Geography, by B.G. Hordingham, B.Sc, Thomas
Nelson, 1956.
(6) This Modern Age, by Donald McLean,
Shakespeare Head Press, 1953.
(7) The Background of Modern Nations, by
C.H. McLare, Ph.D., and others, Laidlaw
Brothers, 1951.
32
