IN A HONG KONG MEDICINE SHOP
A TOOTH WAS THE CLUE
by Prof. G.H.R. von Kdnigstvald
A leading anthropologist and paleontologist, Professor von
Khas done extensive field research in Indonesia and
South China, where he made important finds concerning Peking
Man and the Pithecanthropus-Group in general. He has occupied
the chair of anthropology at Utrecht University since 1948.
J UST over a century ago, in 1856, a skull was
brought to light in the Neanderthal, near Dus¬
seldorf, Germany. It was unmistakably a human skull,
but so different from that of modern man that most
scientists had no hesitation in identifying it as belonging
to a type of human being who no longer exists today.
The discovery of the Neanderthal Man was a red-letter
day in the history of man's efforts to delve into his past
and to record everything connected with it. Since then
the search has gone on everywhere, and many remarkable
discoveries of science stand out as landmarks in the
history of mankind over the past 100,000 years.
But the story of what happened to man before this time
is less weU known. The oldest undoubtedly human
remains are only about 800,000 years old and discoveries
dating back to earUer periods are of doubtful value.
Even so, scientists have unearthed at least enough ma¬
terial to be able to reconstruct about one milUon years of
human history. This seems like a staggering length of
time until we remember that the evolution of horses can
be traced back some fifty miUion years and that of
elephants for over forty milUon.
Our own history, too, goes back a very long way but
much of the evidence we would need to reconstruct It
still eludes us for various reasons. For one thing most
of the remains discovered are very incomplete: single
teeth and a few jawbones and skulls, most of which are
fragmentary. Not one complete skeleton of the older
types is known.
Another reason is that discoveries have been
made in all parts of the Old World, from
England to South Africa and from Spain to Northern
China. Thus this branch of scientific research has
become, in the fullest sense, an international one. Only
by pooling aU discoveries can we hope to turn a spotlight
on our distant past; the true and complete solution to
this great enigma can certainly not be reached from
evidence collected within the frontiers of one single
country.
There is a third factor which greatly complicates the
work: the problem of determining the age of the sites
in which finds are made and the need to make a com¬
parison of sites which are vast distances apart. We there¬
fore make studies of extinct mammals discovered in asso¬
ciation with extinct men. But as can be imagined, it is
difficult and often impossible to decide whether an
archaeological site in, say, Java, is older than another one
in South Africa. The difficulty of placing finds in chrono¬
logical order and of interpreting fragmentary relics
means we are faced with a variety of alternative conclu¬
sions and this has led to wide controversy over the sig¬
nificance of certain finds.
Disagreement exists, for example, over the remains of
an ape found in the lignite deposits of Northern Italy.
Unlike living anthropoid apes, this one has a remarkably
48 small eye tooth, and other aspects of its dentition are
similar to those found in man. Is this really a prede¬
cessor of man, ten million years old, as some half-
informed and sensationalist newspapers would have us
believe? Specialists capable of judging the discovery are
by no means all of this opinion. The preparation of a
skeleton, which one of our Swiss colleagues has discovered,
with much effort and expense, is still not quite finished,
but it already shows extraordinarily long forearms.
Where can we hope to find the remains of our fore¬
fathers? The richest treasure troves are caves where
men sheltered, especially during the last Ice Age, and
where they buried their dead. But cave homes are gene¬
rally not more than 100,000 years old.
In the deepest strata we find Neanderthal man who
is only a step removed from us. He was smaller and more
stockily built than we are, his chin was lacking and he
had a massive, jutting brow in front of a low forehead.
His only implements were of chipped stone and he had
not learned to make pottery, but he already believed in
a life after death. He buried his dead and gave them the
best of tools and food for their journey into eternity.
This is why Neanderthal Man is the only fossil man of
CONT'D ON PAGE 50

photos G.H.R. von Koenigswald
Strange as it may seem, some of the most
remarkable clues to man's earliest ances¬
tors have come from Chinese medicine
shops where "dragons' teeth" (remains of
fossil animals) are collected, ground up
and sold as medicaments. From these
shops came the first tooth of Gigantopi-
thecus and also the teeth of Peking Man.
In 193 5, Dr. von Koenigswald combed
these "archaeological treasure houses" in
the Western Market of Hong Kong (left)
for traces of early man. Among the canine
remains of panda, bear, tapir and orang¬
outang he found the upper molar of giant
ape, Gigantopithecus, shown (enlarged) at
right alongside a human molar. Above, a
tooth of Peking Man (arrowed) among
other "dragons' teeth" and a recipe.

A TOOTH WAS THE CLUE (Cont'd;
GIANT MAN OR
GIANT APE?
whom we have a complete skeleton. In the case of all
older discoveries we have only isolated remains mostly
of the victims of accidents. Thus we find human bones
in limestones, and burled in sandstones and gravels and
rock fissures.
We also find them in medicine shops and these "paleon¬
tológica! treasure houses" are certainly the most remark¬
able of all. I am, of course, not talking about just any
apothecary shops, but about Chinese ones where almost
anything which the vegetable, animal and mineral king¬
doms of China have to offer can be bought.
Such remains are used as ingredients for medicine and,
to judge by the overpopulated state of China, they are no
more dangerous than our own remedies. Among various
other medicaments "dragons' teeth" are highly prized.
These are not, as their name might suggest, the teeth of
saurians and other large reptiles, but the fossilized
remains of extinct mammals. It is already over a century
since specimens of this kind gave us our first insight Into
the fossil mammals of China and they have since proved
to be Important links in the research chain leading us
back to fossilized man.
When I was working as a geologist in Java, we
became very interested in "dragons' teeth".
Did they, we wondered, come from Java or from China?
We soon found that they all came from China but when
we went into the question more closely we found that in
ancient China there were once animals which are still
living in Indonesia. The most surprising example was
the orang-outang, the large anthropoid ape, which stiU
inhabits Borneo and Northern Sumatra.
To be absolutely sure that these remains came from
China, a visit was made to Hong Kong in 1935, and the
large apothecary shops in the "Western Market" were
thoroughly combed. The result was astounding. The har¬
vest included teeth of orang-outangs, tapirs, the Malayan
bear, Panda (the friendly Bamboo bears) of deers, pigs,
tigers and many other animals. But not one single jaw
could we find. Large porcupines had gnawed away all
the bones and teeth roots and only the crowns of teeth
remained. It was clear that all this material must
actually have come from Southern China.
The largest of all the ape teeth found had a smooth
surface Instead of the fine wrinkles found on an orang¬
outang's teeth. I immediately felt sure that we had come
across a new type of ape of enormous size. Subsequently,
In 1935, on the basis of this single find I described Gigan¬
topithecus, the giant ape of the Chinese apothecary shops.
Some of my colleagues disagreed, declaring that the
tooth was much too large for an ape, and one of them,
Professor Weidenreich, at first maintained that it was
simply that of a very large orang-outang. I made further
journeys to China, and in Canton I found a magnificent
upper molar, and in another apothecary shop in Hong
Kong an unworn lower molar. In certain respects both
these teeth show much resemblance to the teeth of man,
and Weidenreich, who had been so sceptical at first,
completely changed his opinion, saying that he now
considered my Gigantopithecus to have been a huge man.
One German anthropologist even wanted to change the
name to Giganthropus (anthropus man; pithecus ape),
and even made a fantastic reconstruction of the jaw bone.
Finally, 22 years after the discovery of the original
tooth, we were able to reach a more positive conclusion.
On February 17, 1957, my old friend and colleague, Dr. Pel
Wen Chung, exhibited in Peking an enormous jaw which
had been found in a cave in Kwangsi, in Southern China.
It was a lower jaw with a somewhat less specialized an¬
terior dentition than that of the living anthropoid apes.
But it was an ape: the tooth found In the Hong Kong
chemist's shop had not lied.
The Kwangsi jaw is larger than that of a gorilla,
50 which means that Gigantopithecus itself was larger than
Von Koenigswald, Utrecht
Taken from : Menschen der Urzeit by August
and Burian, published by Artia-Verlag, Prague 1 9 60
Above, a reconstruction of the Java Pithecanthropus made by
Professor Z. Burian of Prague. Its forehead was flat and the skull,
though lower than that of modern man, was about the same
length and width. Below, child's skull of the Australopithecus
group found in South Africa. The name means "Southern ape"
(Austral-south; pithecus-ape) but recent discoveries show
Australopithecus was similar to man and could walk upright.
Von Kcenigswald

In 1937 at this site
in Central Java, Dr.
von Koenigswald sol¬
ved a-40-year problem
that had puzzled
scientists ever since
a flat-topped skull and
thigh bone of Pithe¬
canthropus Erectus
had been found else¬
where in Java. Was
this man or ape ? The
answer was man. It
was confirmed by
later discoveries of
Dr. von Koenigswald.
Photos von Koenigswald and © L.J.B. Leakey, Nairobi
Three skulls which show that Asia and Africa (and Europe)
were all inhabited by the primitive man, Pithecanthropus,
half a million years ago. Top, skull discovered at Olduvai,
Tanganyika, by Dr. L.J.B. Leakey in I960. Centre, skull
discovered by Dr. von Koenigswald in Central Java in 1937.
Bottom, skull of Peking Man (Sinanthropus) found near
Peking in 1929, curiously similar to the Java find.
40 YEAR CONTROVERSY
OVER A FOSSIL SKULL
this ape, the largest and most powerful of anthropoid
apes living today. My Chinese colleagues estimated that
it must have been at least three metres tall. I am still
getting letters from people asking whether Gigantopithe¬
cus might not have been the "abominable snowman"
from the Himalayas, and people are very disappointed
when I have to tell them that I do not think so.
Another discovery was made which, although perhaps
not so dramatic, was no less fruitful. In 1900 a German
engineer named Haberer brought back a large collection
of "dragons' teeth" to Germany and our first extensive
knowledge of the fossil mammals of China is based on
the description of these specimens. The most remarkable
item was a human tooth, extremely worn and apparently
very old. It too had come from an apothecary shop in
Peking, and the search for the fossilized remains of
human beings was therefore concentrated on this area.
This led to a now celebrated event: the discovery of
the Peking man (Sinanthropus) of which, In the first
place, a single tooth had been unearthed. This was
claimed by Professor Davidson Black to be a hitherto
unknown fossil man. A skull found in 1929 by Dr. Pel,
who made many other important discoveries, proved that
Black was right. Successful excavations are still being
made today on the same site.
The teeth of the Peking man are very large and simi¬
lar to some of those found among our apothecary shop
specimens from Hong Kong. There were also smaller
teeth and because of the red clay which was found on
one part of the jaw, Father Tellhard de Chardin (whose
name is also linked with the discovery of the Peking Man)
identified it as coming from a Late Stone Age horizon
which is often to be found in caves. This was the jaw
of a "modern" man, only a few thousand years old. One
of the teeth is so similar to the first tooth found in the
Peking apothecary shop that both must have come from
the same strata. It was, therefore, a modern tooth which
put us on the track of Peking Man !
The discovery of the Peking Man brought the solution
to an earlier problem: whether the remarkable flat skull
cap dug up in Java by E. Dubois in 1890 was that of a
man or an ape. In 1891 an indisputably human thigh
bone was added to the earlier find though there was no
direct proof that both discoveries belonged to the same
subject. Dubois combined the two and his "erect
walking Java Ape-Man", the Pithecanthropus erectus,
remained the most controversial fossil for nearly 40 years.
T he main reason for this was that the ear
region of the Java skull was missing and it is
precisely this part of the skull which makes it possible to
reach a clear decision. In the case of the Peking man
a complete skull was available and in spite of his primi¬
tive characteristics he was, anatomically speaking, indis¬
putably human. This is also shown by the simple stone
implements and the layer of ashes found at the place of
discovery, which makes it clear that he already knew
about tools and fire.
The shape of the Peking skull was so similar to that
of the controversial Java find that Black concluded that
the Peking Man and the Java Man must have been close
relatives. The remarkable thing was that Dubois, the
discoverer of Pithecanthropus, disagreed with this theory.
Although he had always previously defended the human
characteristics of his find, he now denied that it was
related in any way to Peking Man and even went so far
as to declare that his Pithecanthropus was an ape.
The only way to resolve such a confused situation was
to redouble' our efforts in searching for the Java Man.
We found a promising site in Central Java with exposed
strata in which there were many remains of the same
extinct deer, antelopes and elephants as those discovered
by Dubois in association with his Pithecanthropus.
For years we worked In this area. During the rainy
season the downpour of water scattered the loosened ^
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

A TOOTH WAS THE CLUE (cont'd)
AFRICA, EUROPE AND ASIA ALL KNEW
PITHECANTHROPUS ERECTUS
fossils over the hillsides and we eagerly went to work,
soon assembling a large collection of teeth and bones of
extinct animals. This included the remains of hippopo¬
tamus no longer found in Asia various elephants, deer,
pigs, tigers, rhinoceros and other animals.
Then, one day in September 1937, we made an impor¬
tant find. One of my enthusiastic Indonesian collectors
came across a piece of skull. The next day I hastened
to the spot and promised the workers ten cents for every
piece of skull they brought me. I myself soon found
a large piece of the frontal bone, but my collectors only
brought me small fragments.
Too late I discovered what happened; the workers
had broken up all the larger pieces in order to make
more money! I was eventually given more than 40 pieces,
but fortunately there was very little difficulty about
joining them together since the skull was over one centi¬
metre thick.
It soon became clear that we had actually found a
second Pithecanthropus skull. It would be difficult to
find two skulls in a modern anthropological collection
which are so completely alike as Pithecanthropus I and
II, although the places of discovery were 30 miles apart.
The new find was finally complete enough to Include the
ear regions on both sides of the skull. One glance was
enough: Pithecanthropus had undoubtedly been a human
being. After 46 years the puzzle had finally been solved.
T he Pithecanthropus-Group which lived bet¬
ween 400,000 and 600,000 years ago, had a
thick brow with strong supraorbital ridges. The forehead
was flat and the skull, though lower than that of modern
man, was about the same length and width. Owing to
the thickness of the skuU bones, the space available for
the brain was very limited: Pithecanthropus had a brain
capacity of from 750 to 1,100 cubic centimetres; modern
man's is between 1,350 and 1,500.
A whole series of lower jaws of Peking Man were dis¬
covered unfortunately the best of these specimens were
lost during the Second World War and studies of the.se
revealed that they had a common link with other famous
discoveries. It became clear that the celebrated Heidel¬
berg jaw Europe's oldest and most primitive human
relic discovered in 1907 and the large Ternifine mandi¬
bles from Algeria, recently discovered by Professor Aran-
bourg and described as a relic of Atlanthropus, belonged,
like Peking Man, to the Pithecanthropus-Group.
That this group also occurs in Central Africa was shown
by the latest find of Dr. L.J.B. Leakey which has just
been announced. In the Serengeti steppes of Tanganyika
there is a gorge about 100 metres deep known as the
Olduvai Gorge. This has been cut through a thick layer
of horizontal strata, the majority of which had been
deposited in an old lake basin. In addition to numerous
remains of fossil mammals, most of them extinct, there
are also stone implements here.
Dr. Leakey, the curator of the Corydon Museum in
Nairobi, who discovered and described these remains,
found no less than ten different levels containing stone
Implements. In the deepest strata we find simple pebbles
which have been converted into a cutting tool by having
the two sides knocked off. These are the implements of
the "Oldowan culture" and the higher the stratum the
better are the tools. First of all we find large hand axes
of the "Chelles Culture", with their irregular cutting
edges, and higher still the thin oval axes with the straight
edge of the "Acheul Culture;".
These last two cultures were also known In Europe and
derive their names from the French places of discovery.
But nowhere in the world can the evolution of the hand-
axe cultures be followed step by step as they can in
Olduvai. I was able to visit the diggings under Dr. Lea¬
key's guidance and it was an unforgettable experience.
Who made these stone implements? Although Dr. Lea-
52 key began his research shortly after World War I, it is
only in the past few years that decisive discoveries have
been made. A skeleton discovered there in 1913 proved to
be of too recent interment to have any significance.
We can deal here only with the two most important
discoveries at Olduvai, the first of which was made in
1959 by Mrs. Leakey. This was a skull which came from
the lower stratum of the primitive "Oldowan culture".
Zinjanthropus, as Leakey called It, surprised us all for
it had a small ape-like skull (brain capacity about
600 cubic centimetres) with a low crest,- a large, coarse
face and powerful teeth. The molars were actually
almost twice as large as those of modern man while the
eye teeth and incisors were disproportionately small.
Leakey gave this find the name "Nutcracker man" on
account of the extraordinary dentition.
As a type, Zinjanthropus was by no means unknown to
us. We had already seen such examples of the Australo¬
pithecus-Group from deposits found in rock fissures of
South Africa. The name literally means "Southern ape"
(Austral south; Pithecus ape), and reminds us how
controversial these first discoveries were, though it has
been shown by new discoveries that Australopithecus was
similar to man and could even walk upright.
All members of this group have small brains and large
jaws. The result of this combination is that the bunches
of muscles for moving the. lower jaw meet together at the
top of the head and form between them a bony ridge
the crest already mentioned.
Similar conditions are found among anthropoid apes.
Among the forerunners of men we find a constant decrease
in the size of the chewing apparatus and a marked
increase in cranial capacity In other words, precisely
the opposite trends.
For these reasons we consider and I believe that most
of my colleagues will agree with me that Australo¬
pithecus was a side branch of the human family tree
which died out, and not a direct predecessor of Pithecan¬
thropus, still less of Homo sapiens, the modern type of
Man. Specimens of the Swartkrans Australopithecus, also
known as Paranthropus, have a crest-like ridge exactly
like that of the Zinjanthropus found at Olduvai.
N evertheless, Australopithecus is a primitive
man and this at once raises a difficult query:
did Australopithecus make implements? Various autho¬
rities have provided different answers to this question;
however, the possibility that he did use tools should not
be ruled out. But we now face another problem. Was
it really Zinjanthropus who was responsible for the
Oldowan culture? Should we consider him as a logical
predecessor of the hand-axe culture, which certainly has
nothing to do with Australopithecines?
As we were expecting, this last supposition has now
been confirmed by the latest discovery at Olduvai. On
December 2, 1960, Dr. Leakey found an almost complete
skull along with primitive hand-axes of the "Chelles
Culture 3." Though no detailed scientific description
has yet been published, the striking resemblance between
this new find and the skulls of the Pithecanthropus
Group is obvious from photographs.
This would provide a link with the North African
discoveries, for the lower jawbones of Atlanthropus
(found in Algeria) are comparable to those of the Peking
Man. It can therefore be assumed that the new find
is related to Atlanthropus, also discovered along with
primitive hand-axes, or rather with its forerunners. In
comparison with the Asiatic Pithecanthropus, the
Olduvai skull seems to have much heavier bony ridges
above the eyes.
Thus, these latest discoveries show us that Asia,
Europe and Africa were all inhabited by primitive Pithe¬
canthropi as much as half a million years ago, long
before metal was discovered and before the invention
of radio and aeroplanes which today make it so easy
and so difficult for us to get together.
