BANKS
FOR
EYESIGHT
by
David Gu nsIon
T
person
o look into happiness through another man's
eyes" the phrase is Shakespeare's but today it
can literally be true. For through the perfecting
of corneal graft surgery, it is possible for a blind
to regain sight by having a small section of a
recently deceased person's eye implanted in his own.
This quite wonderful operation, the culmination of a
century and a half of experiment and research by workers
in many countries, translates into reality a dream as old
as man. It also gives to each and every one of us an
opportunity unique in human history: that of giving
sight to others. For through this operation, modern
medical science has made it possible for anyone to
bequeath this most precious gift to those who live after
us and who are either blind or are in grave danger of
becoming so.
No other generation has held so profound and precious
a legacy in its keeping yet the world-wide ignorance of
this subject is appalling. In some small way, it ls the
purpose of this article to disseminate the up-to-date facts
about corneal grafting and those unique organizations
set up to obtain, store and provide usable eyes the eye
banks of the world.
At the outset it must be made clear that the implanta¬
tion of another person's corneal tissue Is not a magical
cure-all for blindness. Many blind people have eye
defects that are not confined to the cornea, so unfortu¬
nately this modern miracle cannot help them.
The cornea of the human eye is the transparent surface
tissue of the eyeball, covering the iris and pupil. In
normal sight, light is admitted through this transparent
window. But if light cannot penetrate the central
section of the cornea because of its clouding over or
scarring, vision is impaired and may be completely lost.
Fortunately, however, the cornea is unique in that It
is the only transparent and, so far as we know at present,
the only truly transplantable tissue of the human body.
Even grafted skin must come from the patient's own
body. But corneal tissue from another person, if properly
implanted, will knit into the surrounding eye tissue, grow,
and eventually restore the patient's sight.
At present, between 60 per cent, and 90 per cent, of
cases can be sure of improvement In their vision, or
benefit by clearer or restored sight. Even if perfect
eyesight cannot be guaranteed owing to previous damage
to the eye by disease or injury, particularly burns, the
improvement the operation can give ensures a person's
independence of movement and activity.
The only Inescapable conditions this operation demands
are that the donated eye tissue must be healthy and sound,
and it must be removed within a few hours of death,
preserved if need be at a low temperature, and grafted
(Q Atlantic Press
within a limited period while the implanted corneal
tissue is still living.
It was the British scientific investigator Eras¬
mus Darwin who seems first to have felt that this daring
operation might succeed. Writing in the period 1794-1796
he suggested: "Could not a small piece of the cornea be
cut out with a kind of trephine about the size of a thick
bristle, or a small crowquill, and would it not heal with
a transparent scar?"
These early attempts were largely made with animal
eyes: tissues from rabbits, dogs, sheep, pigs, even a
gazelle, were Implanted in humans, but although the
graft "took", In each case the patients' corneas became
opaque, so no Improvement in vision resulted.
In the first half of the last century blindness due to
disease and corneal ulceration was rife and surgical
treatment became a highly desirable goal. But
initial work was disappointing and furthermore was
bedevilled by gross scepticism, both medical and lay, by
high risk of infection, lack of anaesthetics and imperfect
instruments and technique. Although a corneal transplant
was first performed by Frans Relsinger in 1818, and a
successful case achieved by Bigger in 1837, it was much
later, about 1878-1888, before the operation could be
accepted as being more than Just a wild experiment.
In 1879, Wolfe discovered from his own successes that
a freshly-removed human eye must be used, that the
graft Inserted must be highly accurately sectioned, and
that the surrounding in the treated eye must not be
damaged. In the same year, the French eye surgeon
Louis de Wecher, addressing his fellow surgeons, declared:
We have no right In these cases to refuse the slightest
aid to sufferers who have but this one remaining chance
to recover a little sight; neither should we be deterred
by the reproach of eccentricity which will certainly be
levelled at anyone who attempts to graft a cornea.
But the greatest pioneering figure in this work was the
German ophthalmologist Arthur von Hippel. From 1878
onwards he had done corneal grafting In both man and
animals, and in 1886-1837 publicly showed at Heidelberg
a patient on whom he had done a successful animal graft,
keeping accurate records of this case for two years.
In 1888 von Hippel achieved the first completely
successful corneal transplantation from one human eye
to another, though he continued to experiment with ani¬
mal tissue, chiefly from rabbits. Above all, he devised
an accurate clockwork trephine for cutting the graft
tissue before Insertion into the patient's cornea, and
under the growing Influence of Lister and Pasteur devised
CONT'D NEXT PAGE 15

BANKS FOR EYESIGHT (Cont'd)
THERE IS NO SUCH THING
AS A WORN-OUT EYE
surgical principles and technique that still govern this
operation today.
In 1905 a Moravian surgeon named Zlrm achieved fame
for skilfully saving the sight of a man blinded by a lime
splash by Implanting tissue from a young boy's eye that
had to be removed for medical reasons. He followed
the man's Improving vision over a long period. Since
then, the art of keratoplasty, as it is known scientifically,
has been greatly developed by the unstinting work of
eye specialists in many countries, notably Elschnlg and
Fuchs, in Germany; Morax, who used graft tissue from
a patient's other eye for the first time In 1912 ; Vladi¬
mir Filatov In Russia from 1922 onwards, who showed
the value of eyes removed from a corpse ; the French
surgeons Pauflque, Sourdllle and Offret; Castravieglo
and Paton in the U.S.A. since 1939; Franschetti, In
Switzerland ; and the British surgeons Tudor Thomas and
Sir Benjamin Rycroft.
What exactly Is Involved In such an operation to restore
or repair a person's sight, and how does the eye bank
come into the story?
HP
he remarkable thing is that provided the eye
H tissue used for grafting is itself healthy and free
JL. of scarring, it matters not what the age, state of
health, effectiveness of vision or cause of death of the
donor are. The corneas of elderly people are actually
better for the purpose than those of young children, and
even if a person had poor sight or wore glasses, his or her
tissue after death may prove to be the means whereby
someone else is saved from blindness or near-blindness.
In this context, there ls no such thing as a "worn-out
eye": it ls the surface corneal tissue, not the lens, that
is used.
The Important thing Is that the eye or eyes be removed
from the body as soon as possible after death, ideally
within two hours, and with an outside limit of perhaps
ten hours. This naturally causes difficulty, but is essen¬
tial if any subsequent grafting operation is to succeed.
The removal of the eyes, their enucleation, can be easily
undertaken by any doctor, and, it should be stressed,
causes no mutilation or visible disfigurement of a loved
one's body. The length of time fresh eyes are in fact
kept in storage in an eye bank is relatively of less impor¬
tance than the immediacy of their enucleation.
This ls probably the single greatest problem in corneal
surgery: relatives are naturally loth to grant permission
so soon after decease, and post-mortem permission may
all too frequently arrive too late. The complete eye Is
removed, and usually placed on a gauze pad in a small
glass jar of paraffin oil, the Inertia of which protects the
soft, unsupported tissue. It Is then usually sent swiftly
to an eye bank in a watertight copper container embedded
inside a metal ice box.
On arrival at the eye bank an eye is Immersed for an
hour In an antibiotic solution to ensure complete sterility,
and bacterial cultures are always taken on arrival at the
eye bank and again 48 hours before use to ensure that no
infection Is introduced into the patient's open eye.
Ideally, eye tissue is used very soon after enucleation,
as may sometimes be possible in an eye hospital, or when
wanted for a patient who has himself supplied the tissue
from a useless eye to save the sight of the other, called
an autograft. But in practice, donated corneal material
must be brought to wherever it is required.
The problem of effective storage of the living eye tissue
from someone now dead has received much attention, and
is an aspect still being widely researched upon. Several
methods are currently used. For short-term storage, up
to about four days, the eye is simply kept at 4° C. in an
ordinary hospital refrigerator after its antibiotic
Amabile Battistelio, seventeen-year-old girl of
Cusano Milanino, Italy, has partially recovered
her sight thanks to theeyes of the Rev. Don
Carlo Gnocchi who, before dying in Milan
some time ago, willed his eyes to a blind girl.
Amabile was chosen as the recipient of the Rev.
Gnocchi's legacy. The operation was carried
out successfully and today, her sight partially,
restored, the young Italian girl has begun to
live the normal life of a teen-ager. Her bene¬
factor, who achieved recognition as sponsor
of Italy's war-strlcken youngsters, has joined
an ever increasing number of men and women
throughout the world who have willed their
eyes to eye banks in their communities to
provide restored or improved sight for those
who are blind or suffer from defective eyesight.
Photos © Atlantic Press
immersion. This method is ideal in a busy hospital
where grafting is regularly carried out. For longer sto¬
rage, the donated eye is kept in liquid paraffin at the
same low temperature, treated with one or more anti¬
biotics and sometimes nourished with dextrose to feed
the tissue during storage.
For even longer storage periods, that is more than
about three weeks, other methods are currently being
investigated, notably the slow freezing of the eye in gly¬
cerol Immersed In a vial in carbon dioxide "snow" at
the extremely low temperature of minus 79° C. Another
method, preferred in the U.S.A., Is to dehydrate the cornea
and store it in nitrogen gas. When reconstituted, the
tissue is as good as new.
In practice, however, the description eye bank is often
something of a misnomer, since all available graft mate¬
rial is used just as soon as it can be obtained. The
waiting list for corneal operations is frequently far longer
than the expected supply of donor eyes. Nevertheless,
there must often be storage, particularly in large countries
where great distances between surgeon, donor and patient
are involved.
The operation itself is a marvellous example of ophthal¬
mic surgical skill. Since 1945 the techniques and
Instruments used have been greatly Improved and now
contribute a strange and striking beauty to this unique
human feat. All cases are of course most carefully
selected, and waiting lists are often longer than is gene¬
rally imagined: in the U.S.A., for example, it was recently
estimated that upwards of 30,000 people could be assisted
if more donated eyes (and more skilled eye surgeons)
were available.
A patient spends between a fortnight and a month in
hospital. The pupil is contracted with drugs, and drops
of a local anaesthetic are inserted into the eye at brief
intervals throughout the operation. Basically, a circular
concave section of the opaque cornea ls cut away with
the sharp trephine, which is then used to cut out a disc,
or graft, of fresh tissue from a donor eye of exactly the
same size. With Infinite care, this tiny section is lifted
with delicate forceps, placed in position, and painstakingly
secured with about eight minute sutures of fine braided
silk or monofilament, stitched with a specially designed
needle just 4 mm. in length.
The trephine, still based on von Hippel's invention of
1880, can be adjusted at various depths to cut grafts of
any thickness as demanded by the diseased or injured
eye. The renovated eye is then treated with atropine
and covered for several days. The stitches are removed
in 18-20 days, and although the graft tends to bulge
outwards a little at first, it gradually flattens out natur¬
ally within six months, and, miraculously, becomes part
of the patient's living body.
Above all, he or she finds that sight is improved or even
16

restored where before there was only darkness. In many
countries there are records of people whose vision was
limited perhaps to a a vague appreciation of movement
to whom the corneal grafting operation has given normal
vision for both distance and reading, even with the
difficult full-thickness graft. And the implanted tissue
becomes as clear and even as a normal healthy cornea.
No wonder one lady declared in a poetic burst of
astonished realization: "Through eyes made
whole by mine, I'll see." Her sentiments when
she realized that her own eyes may well help someone else
to see after her death were well expressed but unfortun¬
ately are by no means universal. If they were, the
immense task of keratoplasty surgeons and eye bank
directors the world over would be greatly eased.
The eye bank organization is a recent Idea much
hampered by apathy, ignorance and legal and religious
obstacles. Many otherwise enlightened people object to
eyes being removed after death, while many countries
cling to outdated legal restrictions more suited to the
days of body-snatching. For example, some national
laws specify a 24-hour waiting period before any tissue
can be removed from the dead, which destroys the
potential value of the eyes.
The world's leading eye bank, and the first to be estab¬
lished, is The Eye Bank for Sight Restoration, set up
by a few interested doctors in 1944 at the Manhattan Eye,
Ear and Throat Hospital, at 210, East 64th Street, New
York 21, U.S.A., as a non-profit-making organization.
Now, with a long list of outstanding successes behind it,
with 16 affiliated eye banks throughout the United States,
it offers to the rest of the world a wonderful example not
only in the storage and allocation of donor eyes, but in
their swift supply to where the need ls greatest (by air,
if need be), and in the special training of eye surgeons.
It also runs a weekly clinic for corneal sufferers and
maintains a unique research laboratory wherein the study
of donated eye tissue (often after providing a successful
graft) plays a big part in furthering mankind's knowledge
of its optical equipment. Operating at much more than
a local community level, this eye bank is a major enter¬
prise, backed by the most careful organization.
In 1948, profiting by a 1947 decree removing the 24-hour
limitation on eye removal, La Banque Française des Yeux,
now at 21, rue Francois- 1", Paris (8e), France, was
founded, chiefly through the combined efforts of ophthal¬
mologists, veterans' groups and associations for the blind.
It now works assiduously on a broad programme, ls
backed by local or regional eye banks throughout France,
and is well supported both officially and voluntarily. This
major European development was followed In 1950 by the
setting up of the Banco Nacional de Ojos, at the Hospital
Provincial In Madrid, after legislative authorization, and
this eye bank now maintains a national programme
throughout Spain.
In 1952, thanks to a realistic educational campaign, the
Corneal Grafting Act was passed in Great Britain without
opposition, and eyes can now be removed promptly after
death If relatives have no objection, while anyone may
bequeath his eyes for this purpose without specific legal
deposition. A number of eye banks are In operation in
regional areas as well as in London, and much research
work goes on, notably at the Queen Victoria Hospital at
East Grlnstead in Sussex, under Sir Benjamin Rycroft.
Indeed, U.S.A., France, Spain, Britain and Syria have
led the way In furthering this noble work by removing
legal and other hindrances to using fresh eyes from the
recently dead. But other countries are not so fortunate.
Italy, for example, needs clearer laws on this matter, and
the legal requirements vary in Germany, where eye bank
planning ls well behind other nations.
The law is insufficiently specific in Canada, Greece,
Peru and Brazil, while in Venezuela difficulties arise with
relatives. Morocco has one eye bank and Mohammedan
spokesmen have helped in allaying religious fears. No
real legal obstacles exist In Austria or Switzerland, while
Denmark and Norway are in the happy position of having
very little eye disease and so the demand for eyes is
small. Yet Finland has a condition not considered
necessary In say Holland, and the legal procedure in
Sweden ls very different from that in Czechoslovakia.
Surgeons in Egypt still have to fight ancient prejudices,
but the greatest need of all ls in India, where a vast need
is met by two small eye banks only, one In Madras and
one in Aligarh.
Clearly, there is much need for uniformity of legislation
controlling the removal of eyes, but the problem goes
deeper than that. The real need ls for an Eye Crusade,
since helpful legislation or even tacit agreement about
the securing of fresh graft material cannot make much
headway without popular education designed to achieve
universal enlightenment.
All too often today the skill and power of this branch
of eye surgery Is balked by apathy, prejudice and
conflict. France, Great Britain, the U.S.A. and one or
two other countries already apply simple systems whereby
a person's witnessed signature on a card or form is suffi¬
cient to ensure that his or her eyes will be used after
death, but of course many more eye banks (and with
them, many more surgeons) are needed everywhere.
No one who has seen the human tragedy caused solely
by corneal opacity and the great Joy brought to many
patients by a graft of this kind can doubt the need or
the urgency.
17
