POACHING
by Sir Julian Huxley
ÉÍ"PHE most interesting assignment I have T;
Julian Huxley recently used to describe
the investigation which Unesco asked him to
undertake last year on the conservation of
wild life and natural resources in Central and
East Africa. Sir Julian's journey lasted three
months and took him to ten countries the
Federation of the Rhodesias and Nyasaland,
Tanganyika, Kenya, Uganda, Zanzibar, Mo¬
zambique, Ruanda Urundi and the eastern
strip of the Congo an area of 1,500,000 square
miles, equal to the size of Europe (excluding
Russia). The noted British zoologist and first
Director-General of Unesco visited 25 national
parks and reserves in these countries as well
as in South Africa, and had discussions with
hundreds of scientists, statesmen, game war¬
dens and administrators both black and white.
The following article is taken from the Intro¬
duction to the forthcoming Unesco book by
Sir Julian Huxley on his mission.
he wild life of eastern Africa Is the wonder
and envy of the . rest of the world. Unique
in abundance and variety, it has been gravely diminished
in the past and is seriously threatened in the immediate
future. Its natural habitats and wild lands cover more
than half of its immense area, and are of tremendous
potential importance if properly used. But they too have
been reduced in extent, their value has been sadly
reduced by improper use and they are threatened with
drastic misdevelopment in the immediate future.
With the alarming increase in organized poaching, the
equally alarming increase in population, the new methods
of controlling tsetse-fly and diseases of livestock, the
fashionable urge towards technological and agricultural
development, the spread of money values among the
African population, and the rapid emergence of African
Governments, the situation is critical.
The future of African wild life is bound up with that
of the conservation of natural resources. Both are now
in the balance. The next five or at most ten years will
be decisive in determining whether they are headed
downhill towards a point of no return, or set on the
upward path of beneficial development.
The situation can still be saved, provided that the
conservationists can induce African Governments and '
the African public to understand and follow an ecological
approach.
WASTE-PAPER BASKETS. Most poaching is done not to obtain food but trophies
like rhino horn, tails for flywhisks and elephant tusks for curios. Carcasses are left to rot.
Below, 77 elephants' feet turned into waste-paper baskets for sale to tourists. Elephants have
been known to tear half their trunks off in frantic efforts to escape the poacher's wire snare. Photos Dr. B. Grzimek,
Tierbilder Okapia, Frankfort

THE SHOCKING SLAUGHTER
OF AFRICA'S WILD LIFE
Ecology is the science of interrelations. It studies the
balance to be achieved in a system of interacting factors.
Some ecological systems are in stable equilibrium for
instance, climax communities in nature, such as un¬
disturbed rain-förest or mountain heathland. But in
others the equilibrium may be upset, either by natural
causes like climatic change, or by human interference,
accidental or deliberate deforestation as in Greece or
China or Syria; or introduction of alien species of animals
or plants, as most strikingly in places like Australia or
Hawaii.
Let me state the African situation in ecological terms.
The ecological problem is fundamentally one of balancing
resources against human needs, both in the short and
in the long terms. It thus must be related to a proper
evaluation of human needs, and it must be based on
resource conservation and resource use, including
optimum land use and conservation of the habitat.
Over the whole of south-eastern Africa, the wild life
resource has been shockingly reduced from its astonishing
past abundance. In the Union of South Africa today,
large wild animals have virtually ceased to exist save in
scattered National Parks and Reserves or on farms where
they are deliberately preserved as a source of revenue;
the white-tailed gnu is almost extinct, and the quagga
has disappeared for ever. Less than a century ago, we
have many accounts (Baldwin's African Hunting is a
well-known . example) of abundance of elephant, hippo
and rhino, and truly vast herds of antelope and zebra.
In East Africa, a similar abundance of big game
survived into the present century. In, his Kenya Diaxy
(1957) Meinertzhagen records seeing in 1903 a procession
of some 700 elephants marching across what is now the
township of Nyeri; he states that the country swarmed
with rhino, one of which charged into a race-meeting;
and in one day in an area of 24 square miles actually
adjacent to Nairobi he counted 684 Zebra, 894 Wildebeest,
276 Coke's Hartebeest (Kongoni), 326 Grant's Gazelle,
426 Thomson's Gazelle, 184 Impala and 46 Eland, besides
Giraffe, Rhino, Wart-hog, Wild Dog, and over 4,000 Masai
cattle.
At the same time, Abel Chapman in his African Safari
(1908) recorded the same profusion of Wild Life in all
these East African territories, and for many years later
the suburban gardens of Nairobi would be visited by
lions.Everyone, including myself, who was in East Africa
a mere thirty years ago, can testify to the striking dim¬
inution of its large wild life since then, and Cullen
and Downey (1960) give a picture of its present grave
state. Fraser Darling (1960) records a similar deterioration
of the game situation in Northern Rhodesia since Charles
Pitman made his survey in 1934.
In spite of all this, the wild life of this region Is still
SLOW DEATH. Wire snares are by far the cruellest method used by African poachers.
Animals often die slow, agonizing deaths. In the Northern Range of Uganda alone more
than 2,000 snares were found last year,' and reports from all over East Africa tell the same
story. Here a zebra, strangled by poachers, lies dead in Serengeti Park, Tanganyika.

AI Malotte from the film "The African Lion Walt Disney
WATER HOLES and salt licks are favourite spots for snares. Game wardens in
Uganda recently reported discovering a full grown lioness (like one above) which,
snared by the leg, had wrenched the limb off onlyto perish through gangrene. Unless
stopped, authorities say, the wire snare may ultimately exterminate Africa's wild life.
a resource of unique value. It must be preserved both
as an object of study and as a spectacle to be enjoyed.
Its scientific study is a necessary basis for proper land
use policies, and an increasing number of people from
all over the world are finding unique satisfaction and
interest in it as a spectacle.
Proper management of wild lands can yield a large
crop of wild meat as well as numerous ancillary animal
and plant products. The meat-crop could in particular
areas be commercially profitable, but of more general
importance is the fact that it would go a long way to
satisfying the Africans' meat-hunger, which springs from
the region's marked protein deficiency.
This in turn would help in reducing the threat of
poaching to African wild life. "Poaching" today is in
reality a large-scale illegal trade in slaughtered wild
animals. It is by no means confined to killing for meat:
all too often it takes the horrible and wasteful form of
merely taking the valuable trophies, such as rhino horn,
wildebeest tails, or elephant ivory, and leaving the
slaughtered carcasses to rot.
The abolition of this shocking trade is becoming just
as compelling an aim in the Africa of the present as
was the abolition of the slave trade in the Africa of a
century ago. Like the slave trade, it is profitable, highly
organized, extremely cruel, and quite ruthless.
Poaching is sometimes condoned, or at least leniently
treated, by those in authority as a result of the not un¬
common feeling among administrators that tribal Africans
should in general be favoured in getting what they want,
and specifically on the ground that they need all the
meat they can get.
This may hold in theory for the African who is permitt¬
ed a muzzleloader primarily to protect his crops, or even
for the bowmen from traditional hunting tribes who are
permitted to use arrow-poison. But it does not work out
that way in practice.
For one thing, it is quite certain that many slaughtered
10 animals described as raiding crops are really killed for
meat, with crop-raiding given as an excuse. But much
more important is the fact that illegal killing for meat
has now in several areas become a large-scale organized
racket, notably to supply the protein needs of the Africans
working in the Northern Rhodesian copper belt. Bicycle
boys deliver the meat, either directly or to lorries which
transport it to mine townships. Although often in bad
or even disgusting condition, it fetches high prices, almost
as high as beef or mutton in European shops.
Since game is naturally more abundant in National
Parks and Reserves, these are the favourite target for the
poachers. The Kafue Park in Northern Rhodesia, for
instance, is suffering heavily: large areas are being
devastated by fires lit deliberately by poachers to drive
the game to where it can be killed. This February the
Wardens in the Murchison Falls Park in Uganda had to
cope with a poaching gang of 70 Africans.
But killing for meat is a minor menace. Most "poach¬
ing" is frankly killing for money money from the sale,
often for export, of commercially valuable "trophies."
The main trophy is elephant ivory, employed chiefly for
knicknacks and curios. This is followed closely by rhino
horn, whose alleged but entirely mythical aphrodisiac
properties have led to its commanding the fantastic price
of over £4.10. a lb, for export to the East.
Hides of tangulatons, skins of leopards, colobes, monkeys
and other species, antelope and buffalo horns, sinews,
bones, and (on a surprisingly large scale) tails for
fly-whisks also find a ready market. From most of the
tens of thousands of animals killed by poachers in eastern
Africa today, the trophies are cut out, most of them to
be used for trivial or ignoble purposes, and the meat
simply left to rot.
A reliable informant in Kenya has given me the
following facts. For rhino horn, the poacher receives
from 7/- to 10/- per lb, and for elephant ivory 2/- to
3/- per lb (except in Kambaland, where the price is much
higher.) The horn and ivory passes through the hands
of several middlemen, all of whom take considerable
profits. The legal auction price in Mombasa during the
first ten months of 1960 was between 90/- and 94/- per
lb for rhino horn, and between 9/- and 23/- per lb for
ivory, according to quality.

Atlantic Press
TRIBAL PARTY, armed with antiquated guns and cheap muzzle-loaders, leaves for poaching
expedition. Guns are made available for the protection of crops, but are often used for illegal poach¬
ing. In Tanganyika alone, it is estimated that there are 80,000 muzzle-loaders and shotguns in the
hands of the inhabitants. Animals shot by such weapons are often maimed and die a lingering death.
In London, ivory prices are about 5/- a lb higher.
The yearly legal sales for 1955-1960 averaged 1,400 lbs
for horn and 73,500 lbs (nearly 3 1/2 long tons) for ivory,
representing 175-200 rhino and around 1,000 elephants.
Poaching, however, accounts for many more deaths.
The annual total of elephants legally and illegally killed
in Kenya is estimated at 4,000 to 5,000, and of rhinos at
675 to 950. While the Kenya elephants seem able to hold
their own, the much smaller and less biologically re¬
sourceful rhino population cannot possibly support such
a drain for more than a few years. Wildebeest tails for
fly-whisks may sell for as much as £2.
The poacher's methods are not only wasteful, but
extremely cruel. It is bad enough when gangs of
bowmen with poisoned arrows wait near a waterhole or
at a gap in a prepared barrier, and shoot large numbers
of animals, which then die an agonizing death. However,
pitfalls are worse; in the Serengeti, for instance, whole
series of carefully-sited pitfalls have been laboriously dug
(providing proof of the value of the proceeds).
The large numbers of animals which fall into them
suffer a much more lingering death than those shot with
poisoned arrows. But wire snares are the worst of all.
Wire is cheap, and can be obtained in all sizes, up to a
strength which will hold an elephant. Long lines of
wire nooses are laid out; zebra, wildebeest, antelope,
rhinos and elephants get caught by the leg.
A few animals are caught by the muzzle, and some
elephants by the trunk. In the Murchison Falls Park,
the Warden has seen an elephant which had lost its
trunk, undoubtedly In this way. In spite of this, it was
able to feed by kneeling on its forelegs, raising its hind
legs, and cropping coarse herbage with its lips a re¬
markable evidence of the elephant's adaptability.
The wire is attached to a stump or to a log which the
animal can barely move. Its struggles tighten the wire
and make it bite deeper; the wound festers; and the
creature dies a slow and horrible death, sometimes beset
by. vultures and hyenas. It is too often a lingering death,
for the poachers usually put off visiting the snares until
the animals are dead or dying.
The killing of game is facilitated by the abundance of
muzzle-loading guns in the hands of Africans. This is
especially serious in Northern Rhodesia and Tanganyika
(in Kenya and Uganda, muzzle-loaders are not permitted
except in a few cases for prestige reasons.) In
Tanganyika, for instance, the Kenya Wild Life Society
estimated that In 1958 there were about 70,000 muzzle-
loaders and 10,000 shotguns in African hands, while the
number of unlicensed weapons was probably greater.
In Northern Rhodesia between 45,000 and 60,000 muzzle-
loaders and guns are estimated to be in the hands of
poachers. Muzzle-loaders are either antique or home¬
made. They are essentially cruel weapons, for they are
usually inefficient and often only wound their victims.
In areas like Kenya it is to be hoped that the new
African governments will realize the importance of
continuing their prohibition, in the interests of law and
order as well as of game conservation. In territories
where they are now permitted, It would be unwise and
perhaps impossible to prohibit them by law, and measures
must be taken to reduce their numbers. This could
probably best be accomplished by raising licence fees.
One often hears of unfair discrimination against
Africans, but in this matter of licences the discrimination
is the other way round: gun and shooting licenses are
very expensive for Europeans, but very cheap for Africans.
A considerable rise in license fees for Africans, coupled
with strict enforcement of their payment, should bring
about a corresponding fall in the number of muzzle-
loaders. And there would be little sense of grievance if
at the same time governments were to take on more of
the responsibility for crop-protection, and to start game-
cropping schemes to provide more legal meat. The
poaching trade flourishes as it does because of another
factor in the human ecological situation the unim¬
portance of wild life in the eyes of most administrators in
the region.
In general, it is fair to say that Wild Life and Nature
Conservation are regarded as of little- importance 11
compared with Agriculture or Veterinary or Social
Services. Game Departments and National Parks
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PROFIT
PROTEIN
PRIDE
PRESTIGE
PROFIT FROM TOURIST REVENUE-PROTEIN FROM
SALES OF MEAT AND GAME-CROPPING - A SOURCE
OF LOCAL PRIDE AND INTERNATIONAL PRESTIGE
Organizations are starved of staff and funds, and so
rendered incapable, not only of preventing poaching, but
of performing any of their other functions adequately
research, survey, game-control, provision of tourist
facilities, publicity.
The other basic ecological factor in our region is the
existence of vast areas of wild and marginal land,
unutilized or too often misutilized. These probably in¬
clude more than half of its one-and-a-half million square
miles. Much of this is infested with tsetse (1), and much
is too arid for agriculture or domestic stock. However,
cultivation has been permitted in large areas and has
often led to their deterioration and to the reduction of
their wild life.
In other large areas, notably In Masailand and northern
Kenya, traditional nomadic pastoralism is practised. Here
we come up against human ecology: the pastoralists do
not hunt game, but cattle have a central position in their
way of life and thought, and are valued for this and not
as a source of profit. Accordingly with the help of
veterinary science, stock has multiplied, and these regions
are suffering, in some cases severely, from overgrazing.
In general, there has been a tendency to satisfy the
immediate demands of African tribes at the expense of
long-term planning, and to embark on sporadic projects
of a traditionally respectable nature, like agricultural
development, without considering alternatives like wild
life management.
What is needed is a comprehensive and conservationist
land use policy for the region, based on proper survey, to
decide which land should be allocated primarily for
agriculture and for commercial or industrial develop¬
ment; which allocated for game-cropping, watershed
protection, forests, National Parks and Nature Reserves, or
merely kept undeveloped in reserve until its best use can
be determined; and which could be best developed by
establishing a fruitful symbiosis between wild life and
domestic stock.
In official thinking and practice, projects involving
conservation, especially of wild life, are usually subject
to provisoes about "human interests" or "utility." Thus
the establishment of the Tsavo National Park in Kenya
was only permitted because the area was regarded as
"useless;" and the Conservation Unit which was set up
to conserve the resources of the Crater Highlands in
Tanganyika, including that unique wonder of the World,
the Ngorongoro crater with its herds of wild game, was
officially instructed to do so primarily in the "human
interests" of the local Masai these being of course to
keep the maximum number of domestic stock in the area.
The constant use of these phrases betrays a misconcep¬
tion of the real situation, which would be ludicrous if it
were not so serious. The term "utility" should not be
confined to customary types of development and land use,
or to the production of marketable products like beef,
groundnuts, timber, or hydroelectic power. It should be
regarded as "useful," and is certainly valuable, to
preserve land from deterioration, to maintain forest cover,
to keep habitats for scientific study, and to conserve wild
life to attract those who want to enjoy it in natural
surroundings. In any modern planning, the concept of
utility in the customary sense must give way to the
overall concept of value not only utilitarian value, but
(1) It is estimated that at least one quarter of the entire area of
the African continent is infested with one or more species of tsetse.
12
ELEPHANT TUSK below, obtained legally several years ago in the Congo, is reputed to be the world's
largest. A brisk illegal trade in ivory obtained from poaching exists throughout tropical Africa despite
government efforts to halt it. In Kenya it brings up to 23 shillings per pound while rhino horn commands
the fantastic price of£4.10. a lb. ($12.50). From 4,000 to 5,000 elephants are killed annually in Kenya alone.
UNESCO - Alain Gille

also physiological value, social value, scientific value and
enjoyment value. Enjoyment value applies notably to
wild life and natural scenery.
Sir Edward Grey (1933) has written of the significance
of this resource in human life. In amplification of
Wordsworth, he writes "When feeling is raised to an
unusual height by contemplation of natural beauty, by
something that quickens while it soothes and calms, the
mental and moral perceptions may penetrate more deeply
into the life of things." Elsewhere he tells us how "the
watching of wild animals or birds gives yet another
pleasure, that of a sense of privilege" in witnessing many
things that are usually concealed from human eyes.
This is very true: but the witnessing of wild life on
the grand scale can give not only a sense of privilege
but of wonder and deep emotion. To see large animals
going about their natural business in their own natural
way, assured and unafraid, is one of the most exciting
and moving experiences in the world, comparable with
the sight of a noble building or the hearing of a great
symphony or mass. A processional frieze of antelopes
moving across the African horizon rivals any theatrical
spectacle.
The world at large cannot afford to let this great
human resource disappear.
Wild life in Africa as a resource may be summed up
in the phrase Profit, Protein, Pride and Prestige, with
enjoyment and scientific interest thrown in. It can yield
Profit from tourist revenue, sales of meat and trophies,
and Protein from game-cropping schemes; it can be a
source of local Pride and of international Prestige; while
its importance as a source of scientific knowledge is very
great.
The best way of realizing its exceptional enjoyment
value is by means of National Parks. These are areas
established by Statute (and therefore only to be abolished
or altered by special legislation), designed to conserve
wild life and natural beauty for the enjoyment of the
public as well as for scientific reasons. Game and Nature
Reserves can also be useful, but they do not have the same
guarantee of permanence; and so can local parks and
sanctuaries, but they do not enjoy the same prestige and
international status (2).
All countries have resources or achievements of which
they are proud, .and which visitors from other countries
come to see. Eastern Africa is fortunate in being endowed
by nature with the unique resource of its wild life. All
it has to do to turn it into a source of prestige and profit
is to preserve it whole-heartedly and manage it efficiently.
This could be an important element in the develop¬
ment of its under-developed territories, and international
finance could properly and hopefully be sought for any
projects with such an aim.
In our region (and to a somewhat lesser extent in the
Union) National Parks are the main basis of the tourist
trade. This is already very valuable, but could un¬
doubtedly be increased five or even tenfold provided that
the territories develop peacefully.
Public opinion in Africa can play a vital part in the
present situation in which one of the numerous urgencies
is. the need to educate and rouse local opinion in favour
of conserving the heritage of wild life and to persuade
Africans of the international importance of their National
Parks. The rousing of world opinion is equally important.
The world is one: but it is also various. Africa's wild
life belongs not merely to the local inhabitants but to
the world, not only to the present but to the whole future
of mankind. It is unique among the world's riches.
To let it die or be destroyed would be to allow a pre¬
cious element in that rich variety to be submerged for
ever in the drab monotonous flood of uniformity that is
threatening to engulf our mass-produced technological
civilization. Unesco has roused world opinion to save
the threatened monuments of Nubia: it should take on
the responsibility of rousing world opinion for the equally
worthy task of saving .the threatened wild life of Africa.
(2) National Parks are now a matter of official international concern.
The U.N. Social and Economic Council has asked all Member States
to submit descriptions of all their National Parks and equivalent
reserves, in order that an official U.N. list, may be prepared and
kept always up to date. In this, the U. N. Economic and Social
Council is being assisted by the International Union for the Protection
of Nature and Natural Resources and Unesco.
National Parks Board. Republic of South Africa
THERE HAS BEEN a remarkable change in South Africa's attitude toward wild life. In the
early days, almost every farmer killed wild game such as these Gemsbok antelope. Practically
exterminated, they are now protected on Park Reserves and farmers breed and crop them
scientifically for meat and hides. In the Transvaal alone, 2,000 farms now stock wild game.
13
