THE REVOLT
WHICH SWEPT
ACROSS
A CONTINENT
by Mariano Picon-Salas
Tíhe War of Independence of Spanish America
Ls one of the world's great movements of
historical change. It began in 1810 and continued for
fourteen years until 1824 with the victory of the
insurgents over the Spanish crown. Like all great
movements of its kind, the Spanish-American Revolution
reflected the spirit of its timein this case liberalism
and democratic representationand was a rallying
ground for the aspirations and isolated movements
which were springing up everywhere in the . vast
conglomeration which was then the Spanish colonial
empire of the New World.
Both the War of Independence of the United States
in 1776 and the French Revolution in 1789, which served
as an inspiration for the men of the Spanish-American
Revolution, had dealt telling blows to the great monar¬
chies and dynasties of the "Old Regime". With them
were born a new spirit and a new era marked by the
will of the people, which was to find expression in a new
form of political structure.
Spain's colonies in America had by that time grown
too big and unwieldy. They stretched for thousands of
miles across the face of a continent, from the broad
grasslands of California in North America to the southern¬
most limits of Chile and Argentina in South America.
Economically, however, the inhabitants considered them¬
selves minimized by the trade monopoly or "closed market"
imposed upon them by their mother country, Spain,
which prevented them from engaging in free trade at
the very time that the growing economy of Europe was
crying for more raw materials and foodstuffs from the
colonies.
The most far-sighted of the Spanish-Americans also
considered that it was imperative to win independence
before other nations more powerful than Spain embarked
on Imperialistic ventures on the American continent.
And then the Napoleonic Wars broke out in
Europe. In 1808, Napoleon Bonaparte drove
Ferdinand VII off the throne of Spain and replaced him
with his own brother, Joseph. This produced violent
reactions throughout Spanish America.
In April and May 1810, Venezuelan and Argentine revo¬
lutionists overthrew Joseph's Vice-Roy in Buenos Aires
and the Captain-General of Caracas and swore
allegiance to Ferdinand. Everywhere the rumblings of
revolt could be heard. By June of the same year, it
was enough for a village priest like Miguel Hidalgo of
Mexico to begin tolling the church bells as a call to the
population or for a group of youths to throw themselves
in the path of the Spanish military commandant of
Caracas for "open councils" to spring up in the towns
and countryside. Everywhere the unanimous cry for revolt
echoed across the land on behalf of political freedom.
To defend its rebellious colonies, Spain dispatched its
best officers and veterans of the Napoleonic campaign to
CONT'D ON PAGE 13
5Ö&
"AyTT<-i
'-" '
JBm.
WAY OF THE LIBERATORS. Between these
jagged peaks of the Andes, General San Martin's
army crossed from Argentina into Chile to join
up with the forces of General Bernardo O'Higgins.
The combined armies liberated Chile at the battles
of Chacabuco and Maipu. Signpost recalls that on
February 2, 1817, the Army's advance guard
under General Las Heras here made a night march
at a higher altitude than any other in history.
Paul Almasy, Paris
$£*&
Api

SENDA DEL BERMÉ^t
^ l.l ... .1
K smms Lmkmhoi . ri¡aluai«.« u «*
r\m
i ,t-i
'-***
riy \
ti
\h*
' r «
£$£££
*mjr% '
"#"_
äs*
«!»
, **'¿rí*f»4f 'o¿ff»">. \"fj ' v^- »,
í¿*2
*>'
15* :*
&/.:
'
[*»"
«
saß
:«r«




a*
B^'
- A>i,
* y¿<.

REVOLT OF A CONTINENT (Cont'd)
12
HEAD OF A HERO. On September I 6, I 8 I 0, the church bells of the little Mexican village of Dolores began tolling.
From all around came the people at the call of their parish priest Father Miguel Hidalgo."Will you be free >"he
asked them. "Will you fight for your land Î". Hidalgo's call sparked off a revolt in which he himself led the patriots
until his capture and execution in July 1 8 I I. Giant head, above, ¡s a monument to him at Ciudad Juarez, Mexico.
© Paul Almasy, Paris

The Unesco Courier. June 1961
THE LONG, ARDUOUS ROAD TO FREEDOM
the Americas. The war was to be a drawn-out, bloody
struggle.
The movement for independence revolved around many
great names: Francisco de Miranda and Simon Bolivar
of Venezuela, José de San Martin of Argentina, Bernardo
O'Higgins of Chile, and other heroic leaders. Many of
them had lived in Europe where the ideas of social change
then sweeping the Old World had filled them with inspi¬
ration. From these extensive travels and studies they
had evolved their own philosophy of state and society.
Miranda had witnessed and taken a personal
part in the North American war of in¬
dependence. He was a friend of Washington, Jefferson
and Hamilton, and was also in touch with Pitt and other
English statesmen whose support and benevolent neu¬
trality he sought for the great undertaking he dreamed
of. He took part in the French Revolution, alongside the
Girondins, and his name is engraved in stone on the Arch
of Triumph of Paris as one of the generals who gave their
service to the cause of France.
When Napoleon I was crowned emperor at Notre-Dame
in Paris in 1804, Bolivar was present in the cathedral.
His deep republicanism was shocked by what he consi¬
dered the betrayal of the great democratic heritage of
the French Revolution to the pomp and inequalities of
another empire. San Martin served his military appren¬
ticeship in Spain. In the secret lodges and societies
which he frequented during this period he had already
conceived the romantic design of rising against "servi¬
tude and tyrants".
In his fascinating memoirs, the Mexican priest, Ser¬
vando Teresa de Mier, has left us a graphic account
of the lodging houses of Madrid at the end of the 18th
and beginning of the 19th centuries. He tells us how
they served as the favourite meeting centres for hosts
of students and other youth from every corner of America,
and how from their heated discussions the ideal of
American independence took shape, how it emerged as
the common goal of the whole younger generation and
fired them with an eagerness to alter the course of
history.
In London the great centre for the independence
conspiracy was the house of Francisco de Miranda. It
was there that several of the men who were later to
rocket to fame met secretly to listen to the great Vene¬
zuelan. Among them was a youth from Chile named
Bernardo O'Higgins who was to become the chief leader
of the independence movement in his country.
BjEFORE war was to plunge them into the most
extraordinary of adventures, these men and
others as well (such as Antonio Nariño of Colombia) had
lived daringly and dangerously in their American
provinces, spreading the idea of independence and
agitating for action in intellectual circles. Those who
began their lives as students and intellectuals were soon
to find themselves military strategists and men of action
as a result of the revolution.
As is the case for all great political upheavals, powerful
oratory and individual courage and energy revealed
themselves as important factors in gaining the objectives
of the Spanish-American revolution. Many of its leaders,
like Bolivar, were writers and orators of great brilliance,
and like Caesar not only wrote accounts of their campaigns
but went into the theory of every situation they en¬
countered. And, in fact, the first to tell the story of
his life, of the momentous events, the many examples
of heroism and daring, and the first to paint a picture
of the social realities he saw in the vast lands reaching
from Venezuela to the Peruvian highlands of the Andes,
was none other than Simon Bolivar himself.
The insurgent leaders never lost sight of the high goals
they were struggling for, whether they were battling in
the scorched tropical plains near the coast or among
the frozen peaks of the Cordillera. For to them political
independence did not mean a narrow, xenophobic nation¬
alism but the free integration and participation of
America in the benefits and achievements of the Western
world. That is why even during the very height of the
campaign the Liberators never stood aloof from the
ferment of ideas of their day and followed them with
passionate Interest.
It was their common belief that the unity which had
sprung from the Spanish language and the inter-marriage
of races throughout the vast American provinces would
be maintained, and that the confederation of united
states in the north would find a counterpart in another
great United States of Spanish America in the south.
As the prophet of this unity, and once the guns were
silent and independence had been achieved, Simon Bolivar
convened the plenipotentiaries of America to a congress
in Panama. There, he thought, would be sealed for ever
the legal instruments of America's unity in an alliance
of co-operation for the democratic advancement of all
the peoples of the continent.
There is no need, here, to go into the complicated
interplay of intrigues and political interests of the Great
Powers which sealed the fate of Bolivar's great dream.
Nevertheless, even today, it stands as the most cherished
moral heritage for all Latin Americans.
Like other Latin-American leaders of the war
i of independence, Bolivar passed his later
years in a shadow, crushed by the failure of his Idea. He
died in 1830, still a relatively young man, when the new
nations of America were barely beginning to recover from
the havoc of the war and to create their civil institutions.
San Martin too returned home to Argentina to find
the country rent by conflict and anarchy. Harassed
and disillusioned he was forced to seek refuge in Europe.
He died in France in 1850.
No prominent, universally respected personality thus
remained to carry out the tremendous task of unification.
In the place of one or two large Latin American Republics
there emerged instead twenty separate states. Despite
the linguistic and spiritual tics which bound them to¬
gether, other factors geographical differences and com¬
munication barriers have managed to keep them firmly
apart.
And yet how ironical It is to think that it was during
the heroic years of the war for independence that the
national history of every one of these countries really
merged and amalgamated in one great crucible, rein¬
forcing as never before their common heritage.
The liberation movements began in 1810 at Caracas
and Buenos Aires, at the two extremes of South America.
After a long series of battles, two armies from north and
south converged in a vast pincer movement of continental
dimensions towards Lima, capital of Peru, then the
greatest centre of Spanish power in the Americas.
Simon Bolivar won the independence of New Granada
(now Colombia) at Boyacá and that of Venezuela at
Garabobo. His deputy, Antonio José de Sucre, achieved
the independence of Ecuador at the battle of Pichincha,
and with troops from the north marched towards Peru
to fight the two great battles of Junin and Ayacucho.
Meanwhile, from the south, General San Martin had
already ordered his army forward. In a remarkable
march over the snow-capped Andes, he Joined up with
O'Higgins and liberated Chile at two famous battles,
Chacabuco in 1817 and Maipu the following year. From
the Chilean coast a fleet of warships, rapidly fitted and
manned, set sail to harass the Spanish armada patrol¬
ling the Pacific.
The last battle of the war was fought on December 9,
1824, at Ayacucho, Peru. Sucre was the liberation general
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
13

14
REVOLT OF A CONTINENT (Cont'd)
THESE MEN FREED
LATIN AMERICA
in command and under him served troops who had joined
his forces from all over the continent. They included
plainsmen (llaneros) from Venezuela, highlanders from
New Granada, mountaineers from Ecuador and Peru,
peasants from Chile and gaucho horsemen from the Rio
de la Plata.
Mexico achieved Its independence separately
from the two South American movements
unfurling towards Peru. Hidalgo's bell-tolling call for
revolt in 1810 was eventually crushed and Hidalgo captured
and executed. But eleven years later, in 1821, Mexico
finally achieved its independence. For a short time it in¬
cluded the small states of Central America Guatemala, El
Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Costa Rica. Like
South America, Central America too had its statesmen and
fighters of genius, like Francisco Morazan, who raised his
voice against isolating regionalism and the splitting up of
countries, and sought to achieve a strong Central
American land of unity.
All of these men from Mexico to the Rio de la Plata
lived extraordinary lives, and their biographies bear
witness to their deep love of liberty in the face of torture
and death. Thus, for example, the soldiers who had
set out from the steaming plains of the Orinoco valley
in Venezuela made a special detour to plant the flag
of freedom on the snow-roof of the Andes at Potosí (in
present day Bolivia) at 14,000 feet, one of the highest
towns in the world. This expedition alone took several
years and was won at the price of bitter fighting in
bitter cold, of starvation and isolation amidst a bleak,
desolate terrain. It brings to mind the daring, perilous
exploit of the Spanish Conquistadores three hundred
years earlier in the Andean Cordillera.
If one reads the books written about the liberation
period, such as the Memoirs of O'Leary, an Irish officer
who served under Bolivar, or the Autobiography of
General José Antonio Páez, or the celebrated Song of
Junin by the Ecuadorian poet José Joaquin Olmedo, one
understands why their contemporaries thought of these
exploits as an American Iliad and their protagonists as
new Homeric heroes.
And indeed, the story of how the llaneros of Bolivar
and the gauchos of San Martin left their flat prairie
lands astride half-wild horses and proceeded to scale
the highest, most vertiginous mountain peaks of the
Andes, is one of the most extraordinary episodes of world
history.
In the forbidding terrains of the vast
continent, the great generals Bolivar, San
Martin, Sucre, O'Higgins, Páez, Carrera, Santa Cruz and
others were obliged not only to devise sudden changes in
strategy and tactics but to feed and clothe the new
recruits who rallied to their cause as they advanced.
Between Buenos Aires and Lima, between Caracas and
Ayacucho the ultimate goal of the long journey lay
an arduous, painful road, beset with precipices, escarp¬
ments and volcanoes. And yet they marched and rode
on, clambering from the sandy wastes along the shores
of the Peruvian coast up into the enveloping cold of the
jagged mountains.
This was the price in heroism and sacrifice of the
unity of the American Republics which, in the words
of Ruben Darío, one of their greatest poets, "still worship
the Lord and speak Spanish".
Mariano Picon-Salas, distinguished essayist is author of many,
works, including Crisis, Cambio, Tradición (Crisis, Change and
Tradition); Suramerica (South America) and Dependencia e Inde¬
pendencia en la Historia Hispano Americana (From Conquest to
Independence in Spanish American History). He is now Vene¬
zuela's permanent delegate to Unesco.
JOSE DE SAN MARTIN (1778-
1850). The great hero, along with
Bolivar, of Latin America's indepen¬
dence. He freed his native Argentina,
and made an epic crossing of the
Andes into Chile in I 8 I 7 to liberate
the southern part of the continent.
He gave to South American youth an
unforgettable model of moral nobi¬
lity. San Martin eventually withdrew
to Europe, where he died in 1850.
wMf"
Me*-' àn
fÈff&;~
ma
JpïïM>AiA
\^mr À yy^m
BERNARDO O'HIGGINS (1778-
1842). Born in Chile, the son of an
Irish father, O'Higgins took up arms
and led partisan forces in the early
phase of the Chilean war of indepen¬
dence. He joined his forces to San
Martin's army to help liberate his
country. He became the head of the
first government of the Chilean Repu¬
blic but resigned five years later. A
Chilean province is named after him.
ANTONIO JOSE DE SUCRE
(1793-1830) won independence for
Ecuador at the battle of Pichincha
while serving as Simon Bolivar's
deputy. In July 1824, an army under
his command defeated Spanish forces
at Junin, paving the way for the libe¬
ration of Peru, finally assured by his
victory at Ayacucho. In 1825 he was
elected provisional president of the
Bolivian Republic, but resigned in 1828.
FRANCISCO DE MIRANDA
(1752-1816) was the most ardent
and eloquent advocate for the cause
of Spanish American independence
abroad. His efforts led him to the
United States, Britain, France and as
far as Turkey and Russia. Returning
to Venezuela after sjme 30 years of
exile, he led two expeditions against
the Spaniards, was captured by them
in 18 12 and died a prisoner in 1816.
JOSE MARIA MARTI (1853-
1895), the Cuban patriot, was a
journalist and poet. Twice deported
for his revolutionary ideas and acti¬
vities, he was a leading figure in the
Cuban independence movement in
exile and in the Ten Years Civil War,
from 1868 to 1878. Civil war broke
out again in 189 5. Marti took up
arms and was one of the first to fall.
Cuba achieved independence in 1898.

The Unesco Courier, June 1961
LIVAR
THE GREAT LIBERATOR
E
<
Statesman and soldier of the revolutions which resulted
in the independence of six Latin American countries,
Simon Bolivar was born in Caracas, Venezuela, in
1783. His short life (he died when 47) was a tremendous
historical canvas of adventure and tragedy, triumph and
defeat. Prophet and would-be architect of a strong
confederation of Latin American republics following
the liberation of these lands from Spain, he failed to
realize this great aspiration. Instead there emerged
twenty separate states. But his name is universally
remembered and respected throughout the continent.
It lives on in the name Bolivia, given to a country formed
from what was formerly southeastern Peru. Bolivar was
officially invested with the title Libertador by the con¬
gresses of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, Panama,
Peru and Boliviasix countries which owe the debt
of freedom to him. Towns and cities have been named
after him and great monuments, like the one shown
here at Caracas, have been raised in his honour across
Latin America. Others are shown on following pages.
15

LA PAZ
LIMA
16

Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris
MONUMENTS IN HIS HONOUR
ACROSS THE AMERICAS
MEXICO CITY
