Leo Tolstoy Museum, Ysanaya-Polyana
A NEW MODE OF LIFE began for Tolstoy after he renounced
his worldly belongings and made them over to his wife. He
did much manual work, learned bootmaking, adopted a vege¬
tarian diet and dressed like a peasantas he is seen here,
wearing blouse and boots walking in the grounds of his home.

50,000 letters
attest
the idealism
of
LEO
TOLSTOY
- Fifty years ago, Leo Tolstoy, the greatest
novelist the world has known, passed
away. The author of War and Peace
had friends and admirers in every coun¬
try and was a tireless letter writer
50,000 letters from all nations preserved
in the Tolstoy archives testify to his
popularity as do the 95 million copies of
his books printed in 82 languages. Below,
A. Shifman tells of one of the lesser-
known aspects of the great huma¬
nist's lifehis passionate interest in the
people of the Orient and their destiny.
by A. Shifman
of the Léo Tolstoy Museum
Afew months before his death In December 1910
Leo Tolstoy was looking through the great
number of letters he had received that day
from all parts of the world. He turned to a young friend
who was sitting with him A. Goldenvelser, the pianist
and remarked ' with a smile:
"I am ashamed to say so, but I do enjoy the authority
that attaches to the name of Tolstoy. It radiates to all
the corners of the earth and links me with the most
distant countries the Far East, India, America, Aus¬
tralia..."
And on the same day he said to the circle of close
friends around him:
"I know I don't deserve it, but here am I at Yasnaya
Polyana getting expressions of sympathy with my opini¬
ons from all sides, and that gives me great happiness."
And, in fact, there was no country in the world in
Europe, Asia, America, in distant Africa and In Australia,
in which the great Russian writer did not have friends
and admirers. Messages of affection and of approval
for his work reached him from all sides, and he sent a
kindly reply to every one of them. The 50,000 letters
CONT'D THE NEXT PAGE

TOLSTOY'S 50.000 LETTERS (Cont'd)
yA day will come
when force will
no longer be
the sole factor
in freedom'
IN 1868, Tolstoy (left), now
40 years old, was engaged
on his masterpiece "War
and Peace". Ten years ear¬
lier he had visited Switzer¬
land, Germany and France
after which lie settled at
Yasanya Polyana where he
started a school for peasant
children and published a
journal devoted to the advan¬
cement of his pedagogical
ideas. He spent the rest of
his life at Yasanya Polyana
where the photo of him ska¬
ting (right) wastakenin1898.
*
bearing the stamps of all mations, which are preserved
in the Tolstoy archives bear eloqent witness to his World¬
wide contacts.
Tolstoy set great store by his correspondence with peo¬
ple from all countries and continents. He appreciated the
opportunity it gave him to learn the truth about the
lives of far-off peoples, which was not always to be
found in newspapers of the time.
In his letters, and in his conversations with the visi¬
tors who came to Yasnaya Polyana from so many coun¬
tries, he was able to express himself even more freely
than In his articles and books to expound ideas and
views he regarded as the only true ones, and of which
he felt mankind to be in sore need. That was why he
replied with such alacrity to every one of his many cor¬
respondents, regardless of station in life, be he a Russian
peasant, an Indian philosopher, a Turkish poet, or a stu¬
dent in far-away Australia.
Among these world-wide contacts, Tolstoy paid great
attention to the countries of the East. His interest in
them grew particularly strong after 1880 when, after
passing through a profound spiritual crisis he embarked
resolutely upon a reassessment of the spiritual values of
mankind.
Thereafter he turned more and more to the East, to
the peoples of Asia and Africa. "It seems to me," he
wrote, "that it is the mission of ithe eastern nations
China, Persia, Turkey, India, Russia and perhaps Japan
to show other countries... the real road to freedom". Real
freedom meant, for him, a life untouched by tyranny or
violence, with no exploitation of man by man, no war
or conquest a life of peace, friendship and inter¬
national brotherhood.
Tolstoy's oriental correspondents differed widely in
their opinions, beliefs and religion and in their social
backgiround. Indian philosophers, Chinese scholars,
Japanese writers and publishers, Iranian poets and
journalists, Turkish lawyers, Arab peasants, teachers and
students, alii regarded the Russian writer as a faithful
friend of their own peoples and were ready to confide
their most private thoughts to him.
What drew them to Tolstoy, apart from his merits as a
great writer, was the breadth of his humanitarian ideals,
his sympathy for the oppressed and downtrodden, his
hatred of colonialism and his faith in the victory of the
righteous cause.
They told him of their intellectual quests, their doubts,
their joys and sorrows, and of their people's dreams of
freedom and happiness. Some of them described the
ordeals undergone by their people and begged him to
champion them against foreign or native oppressors.
The first distinguished Eastern intellectual to get in
touch with Tolstoy was Matsutaro Konisi, the Japanese
philosopher and writer. While in Moscow early in the
1890's, he was introduced to Tolstoy by N. Gret, the Rus¬
sian philosopher, and soon became his assistant in the
study and popularization of oriental philosophy. With
Konisl's help, Tolstoy published in Russia several books on
outstanding Asian thinkers. On his return to Japan,
Konisi translated The Kreutzer Sonata, Master and Man,
and other works by Tolstoy.
In 1896 another well-known Japanese visited Yasnaya
Polyana; this was the publisher Ijiro Tokutomi, who
24

The Unesco Courier. January 1961
3F-£Vri
^
Photo, Leo Toliloy Muieum,
used the pseudonym "Soho". He received a warm wel¬
come from Tolstoy and the two had many conversations,
enthusiastically reported in Tokutomi's paper, "The Peo¬
ple's Gazette" and his review "The People's Friend".
Translations of literary works and articles of Tolstoy's
also appeared in these publications.
Hearing that Tolstoy was so kindly and approachable,
other cultured Japanese were encouraged to get into touch
with him. The number of his Japanese correspondents
and visitors increased year by year, and so did his popu¬
larity in Japan.
TT
is novel War and Peace, Anna Karenina and
H HI Resurrection, and his polemical writings, par-
JL Jt.ticularly My Confession and Bethink Yoursel¬
ves, became favourites with the Japanese public, while his
philosophy was adopted by a considerable number of
Japanese intellectuals.
Tolstoy's interest in Japanese culture found striking
expression in his friendship with the eminent essayist
and novelist Tokutomi Roka, who spent five unforget¬
table days at Yasnaya Polyana in 1906, returned to Japan
as an enthusiastic convert to the humanitarian views of
the great Russian, and upheld those views for the
remainder of his long and noble life.
Tolstoy's influence dominates the entire literature of
Japan in the early Twentieth century. Tolstoy's ideas,
according to the critic Naosi Kato, penetrated into every
corner of the Japanese rründ and, like gunpowder conceal
ed in the crannies of rocks, exploded with such force
as to shake all existing theories and principles to their
foundations. It was almost a revolution.
Tolstoy remained in touch with leading figures In
Japanese culture until the end of his life.
His bonds of friendship with India were even stronger.
The Japanese, he felt, had been In too much of a hurry
to assimilate certain bad features of Western civilization,
and their Inner world was something of a mystery to
him; but he felt complete sympathy for the Indians, with
their lofty conception of man's spiritual mission, their
zeal for moral progress and their tradition of non-violence.
He closely studied the life of the Indian people, and It
was a joy to him to be in touch with its representatives.
In 1901, A. Ramaseshan, editor of "The Arya", a review
published in Madras, wrote a series of eloquent letters
to Tolstoy about life in his country. Referring to India's
struggle against British Westernization, he wrote: "We
are confident that a day will come when force will no
longer be the sole factor in political freedom, and when,
after long, peaceful progress, the Indian nation will live
in peace and harmony with the European nations."
Tolstoy replied to Ramaseshan in a long, sympathetic
letter giving his views on the future of India. "I entirely
agree with you", he wrote. "Your country cannot
adopt the solution of the social problem proposed to It
by Europe which is, after all, no solution at all."
Tolstoy considered that India's future depended on stead¬
fast resistance to oppression and on a social structure
based on respect for man and the rejection of oppression
and violence.
He expanded these ideas in 1908 in his famous "Letter
CONT'D CN NEXT PAGE

TOLSTOY'S 50,000 LETTERS (Cont'd)
Leo Tolstoy:
a great link
between Orient
and Occident
Leo Tolstoy Museum
HOLLOW-CHEEKED and with a piercing,
haunted look in his deep-set eyes, Tolstoy
is seen here with his daughter, Tatiana,
towards the end of his life, when he was deeply
troubled by family differences. In November
1910 he left home secretly at night and died a
few days later. His influence was already
immense and in the last 15 to 20 years of his
life he was probably the most venerated man
in the world. His fame reached into China
and India as well as Europe and America.
Visitors from all ends o* the world turned
Yasanya Polyana into a centre of pilgrimage.
to an Indian" a burning appeal written In reply to
a letter from another distinguished Indian, Taraknath
Dos, editor of a review, "'The Free Hindustan"
Tolstoy considered that evil arose in India from the fact
that, however reluctantly, the Indians were submitting
to foreign rule. He said that if the Indian people, obeying
the precepts of their ancient sages, had refused to sub¬
mit, no earthly force could have enslaved them. Tolstoy
was an advocate of passive resistance, urging that evil
should not be met by violence.
The profound inspiration and warm, benevolent tone of
Tolstoy's answers to his Indian correspondents caused a
spate of letters to pour into Yasnaya Polyana for the
rest of his life. Despite his advanced years and the
important work on which he was engaged, Tolstoy replied
regularly to these correspondents, invariably emphasizing
his respect for their country and its ancient civilization.
It was in pursuit of his widespread friendly contacts
with many representatives of India that Tolstoy began
in 1909 his correspondence with Gandhi, who played so
important a part in the public life of the Eastern peoples.
Tolstoy's ideological and artistic Influence left a deep
impression on Indian intellectuals. It did a great deal to
develop avant-garde writing in India. There is an affi¬
nity between Tolstoy and the work of Rabindranath
Tagore, Pram Chand and other eminent Indian writers.
Pram Chand translated and edited 21 folk-tales by Tol¬
stoy, whose works are among those most .widely read in
India.
Tolstoy did not correspond as frequently with represen¬
tatives of Chinese culture as with their Indian and
Japanese counterparts, but he was keenly interested in
China, and stressed in his letters that mankind's salvation
lay in the refusal to resort to violence between States, the
renunciation of the oppression and enslavement of depen¬
dent nations, and in the establishment of peace and
friendship among all peoples of the earth.
T1
olstoy's unflagging interest in the East was also
H displayed in his continual study of the philoso-
.^L. phy and literature of the Asian and African
peoples, including their epic poetry and folklore.
His attention was first drawn to the philosophical and
moral doctrines of the Orient in the early 1880's when,
having renounced the world of the rich, he was engaged
in laying the foundations of his new conception of the
world. With passionate enthusiasm he studied Confucius,
Buddha and Lao-tse, with passionate application he read
the Vedas and the Upanishads, and the works of Chi¬
nese, Persian and Arab thinkers.
What particularly impressed Tolstoy in the immense
storehouse of oriental thought was its humanitarian
ethic, its concept of the lofty mission of man. Man is
depicted as the culmination of nature. Happiness is not
to be found in wealth, nor In the exercise of authority
by one man over others, but in working for the general
good. Peace, labour and virtue are the supreme moral
values of mankind.
Discovering in the ancient doctrines of the East ideas
and principles which harmonized with his own, Tolstoy
set himself to propagating them in Russia. This led to
the publication of his anthologies, The Cycle of Reading,
Thoughts from wise men for every day, and The Path¬
way of Life, which assemble (the maxims of leading East¬
ern and Western thinkers, together with oriental pro¬
verbs, saws and legends arranged by Tolstoy himself.
Earlier, in the 1870's, wishing to make the treasures of
world folk literature accessible to Russian children, Tol¬
stoy had collected and edited with equal care a number
of Asian tales and fables and included them in his cele¬
brated Alphabet and his Russian readers. Those remark¬
able anthologies contain many examples of Indian,
Turkish, Japanese, Chinese and Arab folklore, presented
in polished literary form. The collections of oriental
tales, legends, proverbs and sayings compiled and
published by Tolstoy are among the largest and most
interesting to have appeared in Europe.
Not content with this, Tolstoy translated and published
works of oriental philosophy. A series of books on Chi¬
nese, Indian and Arab philosophy was published in Rus¬
sia under his supervision, including his own translation
of selected maxims of Lao-tse, taken froan the celebrat¬
ed Too Te King (Book of the Path ,and of Virtue).
Tolstoy's work in this field won high acclaim from
experts all over the world. "Tolstoy", wrote Romain Rol¬
land, "was the first, wide spiritual path linking all the
members of the ancient continent, from West to East."
Tolstoy was a great humanist who defended the inte¬
rests and aspirations of the masses and gave tongue to
the peoples' protest against war and subjection with a
vigour and passion never before encountered in literature.
In him the nations of Asia and Africa had a trusty friend
and champion.
26
