BECOMING
AN EDUCATED
IN OUR
MODERN WORLD
by Margaret Mead
IT IS NO LONGER the underprivileged, the
Illiterate or the villagers to whom a new road
gives access to urban life, who as adults learn
crumbs fallen from the tables of those who as
children feasted on the slowly accumulated
knowledge of the past. Now it is the elite among
the adults of the educationally elite countries who
"go back to school"even this old phrase is out
of datewith fellowships, exchange visits and
small international conferences which accomplish
in a week more than a year of reading could do.
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris

The Unesco Courler. Jonuary 1961
Perhaps no field of education has undergone such
profound changes in theory and practice as the
field once called "adult education," later expand¬
ed to Include "fundamental education," and
now, in those countries which originally sup¬
plied the models, more often referred to as "continuing
education." We may identify briefly the underlying ideas
behind these recognizable stages.
The early effort in adult education took its impetus
from the needs of the underprivileged within modern
industrialized society, the needs of workers, women, sup¬
pressed minorities, of those who had failed to receive
"enough" or "their fair share" of that transmissible block
of traditional knowledge and. skills called "a good edu¬
cation". Programmes designed to make good this deficit
were motivated by a growing demand from the" under-
educated and a growing sense of responsibility on the
part of the educated.
The consciousness of educational inferiority or deficit
ran through everything that was done; the snobbery
which identified a higher class level with a higher degree
of familiarity with "the Glassies", "great Ideas" and so
forth pervades the topics chosen for adult education
Implicitly it was assumed that the gap between those
who had read Latin and Greek in the original, and those
who had read nothing beyond an elementary school level,
could somehow be bridged by reading Latin and Greek
works in translation.
This attempt to make superficially equal the education¬
ally unequal still pervades certain aid-fashioned types of
workers' education in English-speaking countries. It has
also had a considerable effect on the kind of low-level
"higher education" given in those countries where secon¬
dary school education is becoming the ideal for all nor¬
mal children. Hastily assembled, superficial versions of
what was once taught to the few, as children, and later
taught, condescendingly, to the less educated as adults, is
now taught to late adolescents.
A second stage which later came to be summarized
under the term "fundamental education" grew out of pro¬
grammes for peasant immigrants in countries like the
United States, and for peasants who were to be rapidly
upgraded into active members of their own modernizing
societies in countries like the Soviet Union. Coupled with
this was a growing emphasis on .the application of modem
science to the promotion of health, on new forms of medi¬
cal care, public health, community organization, agricul¬
tural practices, and other new techniques.
Adult education became a device for feeding modern
health, technological and organizational practices to com¬
munities of adults who were thus being brought up to
date, or into line, with more favoured, more urban, or
more educated portions of society.
T
iteracy became very strictly a means towards
H j the conversion of the backward citizen, subject,
.^x%xmtm colonial or trust territory member, into a receiver
and executor of certain necessary techniques: vaccination,
immunization, baby-care clinics, food supplements, arti¬
ficial fertilizers, and the like. Where the older form of
"adult education" was grounded in a sense of "educational
deprivation" to be made up by acquiring access to higher
things, this new form of practical welfare education was
grounded in what was seen as either a need already pres¬
ent or one to be stimulated until it became a felt need.
As in the earlier form, the sense of urgency rested with
the superior group who were outraged at the low levels
of literacy, nutrition, and medical care found in the vil¬
lages. Considering how much work was required to find
community leaders able finally to awaken community
participation, the rationale of the whole process seems
more than a little suspect.
A tremendous amount of waste motion was involved
because the new techniques modem latrines, modern
methods of cultivation, modern methods of handling cre¬
dit were introduced without recognition of the impor¬
tance of grounding them in the culture of the recipients.
Their original culture, whether that of a village in South
America, an enclave of peasant immigrants in the United
States, a village in South-East Asia, or an African tribe,
was soon as Intrinsically Inferior to the modern world,
something to be fought with, got over, got around, by
hasty, widespread "fundamental education".
Those adults who had learned to read, to order new
seeds, to protect their wells, to drain their ponds tho.se
who were "modern" rather than' or
"traditional" were viewed rather like an army of poorly
equipped recruits who had been furbished up with acce¬
lerated methods to make It possible for them to operate
within the army setting. Although they had a lot of
new skills and acceptances, they were not expected to
be, in any important sense, changed people, merely a
new and less embarrassing sort of inferior people.
This kind of catching up at a low level has effected
the elementary educational systems of the less developed
countries. As a result, the Ideal of universal éducation
which has caught the imagination of peoples all over
the world is, In fact, an ideal of raising the bulk of the
population of countries now 80 or 90 per cent Illiterate
up to the standard of elementary third of fourth grade
education in countries with established secondary school
systems.
o the extent that these new systems of education
H borrow from the modern Industrialized world, and
-^*- teach 6-year-olds as If they were first year pupils
In a 10- or 12-year educational system, the teaching of
reading, for example, will include vocabulary and allu¬
sions in anticipation of a secondary school education that
will never be given. Moreover, the essential lack of
connexion between the literacy taught In school and a
world in which nothing will ever be read except a few
government notices and forms makes the whole system
Into a mockery.
The edge is being taken oil the hunger for "education"
almost more insistent than the hunger for better food,
in so many parts of the worldby this reflection, at the
elementary school level, of the essentially superficial Image
introduced by attempts at rapid "fundamental education"
for the adult villagers of these societies.
The most recent phase of the emphasis on fundamen¬
tal or community education indicated a growing acknow¬
ledgment of a "widening gap" between the economi¬
cally highly developed and the economically underde¬
veloped countries an idea rapidly replacing our Immedi¬
ately post World War II image of a triumphant attack
on ignorance, poverty and ill health right round the
world.
The underdeveloped countries were entering the educa¬
tional scene at a period when the rate of change In
knowledge, especially in the sciences, was the fastest
mankind had ever known; therefore, however fast these
new countries might move towards universal literacy,
towards a full complement of elementary schools for all
children, towards the beginning of secondary schools,
towards a national university, they would fall farther
and farther behind in a world race for the number of
students in universities.
This lag would be not only quantitative but also quali¬
tative; fewer students would have a chance or getting
higher education, so fewer first-rate students would be
identified. The bright optimism of freedom from Igno¬
rance for all was fading.
Meanwhile, in the most industrialized countries, It 's
being recognized that the kinds of distinctions which
were once made between "education" the orderly trans¬
mission of certain parts of our accumulated tradition to
the young while they were still in statu pupillari, and
"adult education", which imparted to adults, in odd
hours and off seasons, some things they should have
learned when they were young, are no longer meaningful.
A great deal of what needs to be taught to adults
today was unknown when they were young. Continuing
education throughout life has become a necessity in
almost every field of life, from housekeeping to atomic
physics. The emphasis is no longer upon the mass of
materials and skills contained in a "good education", dis¬
tributed in unequal amounts among the members of dif¬
ferent socio-economic groups within a nation, and among
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

OUR MODERN WORLD (Cont'd)
STEREOTYPE OF THE 'HORSE AGE' MENTALITY
the peoples of the world, in which all would soon come
to have at least a small and inferior share.
Instead, attention is being given to the relationships
between old knowledge and old skills, and new know¬
ledge and new skills, and to the difference in the ways
of learning of children, uncommitted young adults with¬
out family responsibilities, and mature adults with res¬
ponsibilities.
This recognition is coming on the heels of a period in
history when change was slow enough for the difference
In the kind of acceptance which was given by grand¬
father and grandson to a new idea to be explained by
the inability of the old to learn new ideas. Elasticity
and speed of learning were believed to be unique charac¬
teristics of childhood, and all learning was therefore
seen, although it was not usually put that way, as a
subtle Interference with any other learning.
Having learned French made one less able to
learn English, having learned to plough with
a hand plough made one less able to plough
with a draft animal, having learned to make pots by hand
made one less able to learn to use a potter's wheel.
Grandfather, who grew up in the horse age, was less able
to adapt to the machine age than his grandson ; this
observation successfully precluded any recognition that
the first machines were Invented and driven, not by chil¬
dren, but by men who had grown up riding and driving
horses.
It was not too difficult to transmute the peoples of
Asia or Africa Into a kind of exaggerated replica of this
view of grandfatherpeople who would really never learn
about the modern world, who would never catch up.
The break may be said to have come when it was not
a question of grandfather, whose ignorance could be
explained away, but of self, when modern man began
to realize that his own education was never finished,
that he could fall behind, in any field, almost overnight,
that education was no longer a matter of receiving while
young a' body of static knowledge, but had become a
matter of lateral learninglearning not only from one's
elders and one's peers, but very soon from those younger
than oneself. Now, with much more rapid change, the
deficiencies in the old attitude toward learning began to
show; the need for a new attitude became apparent.
he merest flicker of recognition of this new state
H of education where change occurs very much
.^L. more rapidly than normal human growth and a
man can become outdated (or, in that curiously snobbish
phrase, dated) not as he attains grey hairs and harden¬
ing arteries, but before he has reached middle age, the
merest hint of this ls enough to change our whole view
of what was once called adult education.
It is no longer the underprivileged, the illiterate, the
newly migrant, the villagers to whom a new road gives
access to urban life, who as adults learn crumbs fallen
from the tables of those who as children feasted on the
slowly accumulated knowledge of the past. Now it is the
elite among the adults of the educationally elite countries
who "go back to school" our words are still out of
date with post-graduate fellowship piled on post-gra¬
duate fellowship, with exchange visits and small inter¬
national conferences which accomplish in a week more
than a year of reading could do.
Our most massive endeavours at rethinking educational
devices and methods are aimed at teaching physics, or
cross-referencing biology. We are experiencing on a vast
scale what has happened before on a lesser scale, at
times when a new burst of knowledge, or knowledge-
producing activity, moved a certain number of men to
withdraw from the world and spend a lifetime master¬
ing, moulding, and organizing the new knowledge for
orderly transmission to future generations.
But if the knowledge with which men must work,
and think, and orient their actions is changing almost
daily, there is also a change in the relative positions of
those whose forebears were educated in the old sense
and those whose forebears were primitive men or isolat¬
ed peasants.
Becoming an educated man does not depend, as it
once did, on using the plastic years of childhood to accu¬
mulate' a vast static body of information, of names of
things, of forms of spelling and rhetoric, but rather upon
the way in which a child learns to approach change
itself. When that which was to be learned was settled
and absolute enough to last a lifetime, the child whose
parents and grandparents, playmates and neighbours had
learned most of the same things could safely be taught
that this particular accumulation of knowledge was true.
What once constituted an education a hodge-podge of
old and new ideas about the universe, old wives' tales
and modern untried medical research, the spelling and
pronunciation of one's language currently approved in the
grammar books and dictionaries, the relative status of
different countries, the intrinsic merits of particular forms
of government, special forms of law and punishment, the
whole mass of materials of different ages, different
degrees of accuracy, provinciality and usefulness this sort
of education once served well enough to get each indi¬
vidual through his lifetime in the state of life in which
he had begun it.
And such an education also served effectively to
prevent much learning of new things. The
observation that it was easier for an English
boy to learn Latin than it would have been for a Nigerian
was partly grounded on the ubiquity of Roman-derived
elements in English culture, but even more on the expec¬
tation that an English education included Latin. An
attempt to introduce Chinese into both a contemporary
English school and a contemporary Nigerian school would
meet objections because, in both the English school and
in the Nigerian school modelled on the English school,
Chinese was not something schoolboys learned.
The educated man simply acquired more little pigeon¬
holes which it was appropriate for him to fill, sometimes
even such bold little labels as a hit of "comparative reli¬
gion" or "oriental languages" for the very few; he was
prepared to add in certain ways, in certain little boxes,
"the results of research" as long as they did not contra¬
dict too gravely what he had already learned in which
case he fought them as furiously as an Asian peasant
resists a new type of field division. As soon as this was
recognized, it also became apparent that what was cru¬
cial in the ability to assimilate changing information
was not what had been learned but how it had been
learned.
The child who had been solemnly taught that there
is only major categorization of languages, a real language
spoken by its own group, and "'the way foreigners talk,"
is as effectively blocked off from new learning as the
peasant' who was taught to cling, with the desperation
of the man who grasps only a part of his culture,
to the way things were done in "his village," or as the
nineteenth-century rationalist who believed that all
problems of the relationship between Science, spelled
with a capital, and religion had been solved by abolishing
religion or relegating it to the level of "superstition."
Under the old system, children learned better than
adults; they filled their notebooks and their minds with
orderly sets of prejudices so arranged that there was
less and less room for genuinely new ideas which would
mean fundamental rearrangements at the root of the
system.

The Unesco Courler. Jonuory 196)
Three Lions, New York
THE GREAT CAPACITY for learning which is found in
early childhood will in future be needed for something rather
different than in the past. Childhood learning was once devoted
to impressing on young minds a mass of facts ranging from
the eternal and the trivial to the provincial and the special.
For the world of tomorrow children will need to learn about
the nature of numbers, the nature of time, ways of thinking
about space and similar problems. Here, children learn how
separate colours fuse with each other to form new tones.
Learning a language was not a matter of learning
about languages which could be expanded to include all
known languages, artificial languages, and the creation
of new languages but was rather a condensation of the
tremendous piece of learning, learning to speak, and the
acquisition of a single language viewed in such a way
that the learning of most, if not all, other languages was
successfully prevented. Each knob and twist of the sys¬
tem, each local article of food or hygiene, was elevated
into a state of absoluteness within which change could
be introduced only in carefully prescribed areas where
there were such matters as "fashion" or "new products".
But even in the old system, an adult did generalize
far more than he was required to. He learned not only
about francs or shillings or dollars, but enough about
"money" so that even though he never treated the
money of a foreign country as real he could still manage
to use it. A man who had lived in a city knew some¬
thing about the nature of cities, knew how to look for
terminals and hostels and markets, for places of exchange
and accommodation things that, as in the case of money,
no child knew. As men learned a particular culture,
were educated in a particular way, they acquired a kind
of back-handed, semi-realized knowledge of culture itself,
although this knowledge was heavily hampered by the
absoluteness with which they learned their own system.
Now today, the premium will be placed on individuals
who are most able to preserve the kind of charts of pos¬
sible knowledge and possible action into which each new
experiment and innovation can fit. It will be the adult
who has incorporated a new generalization, that ls. the
possibility of change at every point of his whole system of
knowledge, who will be able to learn most and go fur¬
thest. The tremendous Impetus to learning possible In
early childhood will be needed for something rather
different than Its past uses.
Children will have to learn that their own
language ls one among many, their own alpha¬
bet only one of the ways of writing down speech,
their own system of mathematical notations only one
among many; that these are not the final systems, and
often not the best. Childhood learning was once devoted
to printing indelibly on young minds such matters as
Sixty seconds in a minute,
Sixty minutes in a hour,
I wish I were a little linnet
Smging in a leafy bottier,
First William the Normati
Then Williayn his son,
Henry, Stephen, and Henry,
Then Ricliard and John.
or:
or:
'V before 'c'
Except after 'c'
And when pronounced 'ay'
As in neighbour and weigh.
Instead of committing to memory this dreadful hetero¬
geneous pickle of the eternal, the trivial, the provincial
and the special, children will be required In the future
to learn about the nature of numbers, the nature of time,
ways of thinking about space.
This shift in what the young need to be taught will
have a profound effect on the ability of adults, whether
adult members of a New Guinea tribe, adult peasants,
adult migrants to a big city, or adult scholars who
haven't looked at science for forty years, to learn comple¬
tely new things.
hose who have learned that there arc many
H systems in the worldlanguage systems such as
.JL. the many unwritten tongues spoken by the
adjacent tribesmen, or systems of weights, and measures
such as the English and the metric systems, or systems of
transportation (human backs, Jeeps, planes) rapidly
replacing one another within the span of a few years
those adults will be recognized as the ones who are able
to learn new things fast; their experience and expectation
of contrast and change will be part of the equipment
which they, as adults, bring to any new required piece of
learning.
Instead of pityingly, tolerantly, helping adults to catch
up with a little symbolic erudition or a few strictly uti¬
litarian skills, we shall make a real search for adults
who, just because they are adults, can build new know¬
ledge on old in a way that the young child cannot. We
won't particularly seek out adults who have learned
their quota as children, nor steer away from those who
failed to learn their quota as children; rather we shall
place our emphasis on the kind of adult mind which
ls able to make swift, accurate transference from older
experience to newer experience, because neither is felt as
absolute or exclusive.
The next few years will be particularly valuable as
we explore the extent to which adults with extraordi¬
narily simple backgrounds but with this one requirement
an experience and expectation of changecan move
into our complex modern culture and contribute new
models for the way it can be learned, not only by adult
savages but by adults everywhere.
This article originally appeared in Unesco's quarterly
bulletin "Fundamental and Adult Education", vol. XII
(1960), N° 3.
