ABU
SIMBEL NOW OR NEVER
The fate of Abu Simbel ls now In the balance.
Unesco has addressed a "now or never"
appeal to Its 100 member nations for voluntary contribu¬
tions to save the two colossal temples of Abu Simbel from
destruction under 200 feet of water as a result of the
construction of the High Dam at Aswan. The temples,
hewn out of the solid mountain rock in the 13th century
B.C., are considered to be among the great architectural
glories of Pharaonic art.
Before the end of October of this year, Unesco's
Executive Board will be in a position to know whether
these testimonials of a former civilization are to be
considered Irreparably lost to mankind, or whether a
joint international effort will save
them from disaster.
The appeal is contained in a
special message on the present
state of the Nubian International
Campaign to save the treasures of
Nubia, addressed on August 4 by the
Acting Director-General of Unesco,
Mr. René Maheu, to all of Unesco's
member states. It calls for voluntary
contributions totalling $67,000,000 to
save not only Abu Simbel but other
temples and monuments in Egypt and
the Sudan which are threatened by
the future Aswan Dam when in a few
years' time it backs up the waters of
the Nile in a 300-mile long artificial
lake. Unesco has asked all countries
to guarantee a contribution, extending
over the next seven to nine years, in
the same proportion as their present
assessment for the Unesco budget.
The two temples of Abu Simbel are
to be preserved by what has been
described as "the most daring
engineering project of modern
times." They will be sliced from the
mountainside into which they were
built three thousand years ago,
encased in concrete boxes, and raised
by giant jacks over two hundred feet.
(See story page 10).
The call to Unesco's 100 member
States was made on the recommenda¬
tion of the International Action
Committee which is advising and
helping the Director-General of
Unesco in fund-raising. The Action
Committee, made up of representatives
from all continents, met in Paris last
June to examine the present state of
the campaign. They found that the
rescue operations except the Abu
Simbel project are now almost
assured, and stressed the urgency of
obtaining the funds needed If the
two temples are to be saved in time.
The overall contract for Abu Simbel must be signed by
January 1, 1962. Before then, preparatory work must get
under way, and the main work must begin not later than
May 1962.
Before the end of October 1961, enough money must
therefore be guaranteed from international sources over
the next seven to nine years to enable Unesco's Executive
Board to give the United Arab Republic the go-ahead
signal. It is estimated that $20,000,000 will be needed for
the preparatory operations and the first payments to the
contractors in 1962, and a further $13,000,000 in 1963.
President Gamal Abdel Nasser in a statement made on
June 20 of this year described Abu Simbel as the "most
important relic of civilization in Nubia... this undertaking
represents the most serious phase In the salvaging of the
Mediterranean Sea
monuments of Nubia, a phase that calls for collective
effort."
The cost of the entire Nubian rescue operations
(exclusive of archaeological and prehistorlcal excavations)
has been estimated at $87,000,000. This will provide for
the dismantling and transfer of 23 temples, tombs, early
Christian churches and rock-hewn chapels in the U.A.R.
and the Sudan (estimated cost $10 million); the preserva¬
tion of the temple-group on the isle of Philae ($6 million) ;
and the preservation of the temples of Abu Simbel
($70 million).
Four miles south of the present Aswan Dam in central
Egypt, the new High Dam (Sadd el Aali) is being built
across the Nile by the United Arab
Republic with Soviet aid. It will
contain the river above that point
and form a gigantic artificial lake
drowning the Nile valley of Nubia in
both Egypt and the Sudan.
For Egypt the new lake will mean
the beginning of an era of great
regeneration. It will increase the
total food production of the country
by nearly one half; some 2,500,000
acres of desert will be brought under
cultivation, and an additional 750,000
acres now flooded will be reclaimed.
Egypt's hydroelectric output will be
increased by the dam something like
ten times.
The new dam is an economic
necessity for Egypt. But there
remains the fact that everything
within the Nubian lake area will be
obliterated by 1968. In 1959, the
Governments of the U.A.R. and the
Sudan turned to Unesco for help to
save the temples and monuments
menaced by the impending flood in
both countries. On March 8, 1960,
Unesco's Director-General, Mr. Vitto¬
rino Veronese, launched the now
famous International Campaign to
save the treasures of Nubia (1).
Abu Simbel
adi Haifa %^/
SUDAN
_h	
Unesco Courier Map
This map of the Nile valley shows the vast
artificial lake (shaded) which will be formed
when the new Aswan High Dam is complet¬
ed in 1 968. Its waters will submerge
numerous historical treasures and monu¬
ments in Nubia in both Egypt and the Sudan.
The response thus far has been both
generous and heartening. As the
President of the United States
recently said, it is "an international
effort which has captured the
imagination and sympathy of people
throughout the world."
Support has come from govern¬
ments, from private and public
organizations and from private
citizens in every part of the world.
Even children from different
countries have organized collections
to help. The world's press, radio,
television and cinema have all joined
voluntarily to help make the campaign a success. In
some 20 countries national committees have been formed,
made up of noted archaeologists and other leaders in the
fields of science and the arts, as well as important
officials, businessmen and members of civic groups.
The United Arab Republic has guaranteed a sum of
$20,000,000 for Abu Simbel. The United States Govern¬
ment has offered (subject to Congressional approval)
010,000,000 $6,000,000 to cover the costs of saving the
temples of Philae, $2,500,000 for the removal of certain
temples, $1,500,000 for archaeological expeditions and
research in Nubia.
Announcing the United Arab Republic's contribution,
President Nasser declared last March:
(1) See Unesco Courier, February, May and September 1960.
CONT'D ON PAGE 6

Almasy, Pans
COSTUMES OF ANCIENT EGYPT are worn by a folklore group
welcoming Unesco specialists and journalists from all parts of
the world who visited Nubia last year at the invitation of the United
Arab Republic. In the background, their feet separated from the
lapping waters of the Nile by only a narrow stretch of sand, stand
the mighty figures flanking the entrance to the Temple which is
dedicated to Queen Nefertari and the Goddess Hathor at Abu Simbel.

ABU SIMBEL (Cont'd)
NOW OR NEVER
INGENIOUS
"The world's conscience has now awakened to a deep
awareness of the importance of safeguarding the monu¬
ments of Nubia in response to the international appeal
launched by Unesco on March 8, 1960. Through thts
appeal Unesco has sought to arouse the energies and
goodwill of all peoples in a cause deeply rooted in the
ancient history of civilization and symbolic of the hopes of
mankind.
"We pin our hopes on the High Dam for the
Implementation of our plans of economic development;
but likewise we pin our hopes on the preservation of the
Nubian treasures in order to keep alive monuments which
are not only dear to our hearts we being their guardian
but dear to the whole world which believes that the
ancient and the new components of human culture should
blend in one harmonious whole.
"The preservation of the legacy of mankind is no less
important than the construction of dams, the erection of
factories and the greater prosperity of the people...
"Unesco has contributed much to the creation of this
sense of solidarity and to the action undertaken to
safeguard the monuments through the facilities and funds
it has made available and through the co-operative spirit
which has guided the specialists and the groups of
scientists who have taken an interest in this unique
endeavour.
Reflecting similar sentiments, the President of the
Sudan, Ibrahim Abboud, recently reaffirmed his country's
responsibility to the rest of the world for the ancient
monuments within his borders, "... since the history of
the Sudan ls but a part of the history of mankind."
Tïhe enormous tasks of the campaign were
divided into three categories. First there was
the urgent job of carrying out systematic surveys and the
organization of expeditions to excavate archselogical and
prehistoric sites the threatened area of both Egypt and
the Sudan.
As André Malraux has said, "Nubia, like Chaldea,
belongs to the dawn of our own history." It was the junc¬
tion point at which the cultures of inner Africa met with
the cultures of the Mediterranean world. In the region
to be flooded, scientists feel, may well lie some of the im¬
portant clues to the riddle of man's unknown past.
Today, Nubia has become a vast archaeological camp, with
almost 30 expeditions at work or about to work.
The second category comprises the dismantling and the
removal of ancient temples and other historic monuments
to safety beyond the flood area. These operations are
now under way and are progressing satisfactorily. The
U.A.R. has already removed the three temples of
Kertassi, Debod and Taffeh, while the Federal Republic of
Germany has offered to assume the task of removing the
great temple of Kalabsha, and France the temple of
Amada. (See details page 30.)
The last category includes the two most important
projects of the campaignthe preservation in situ of the
temples on the isle of Philae, and the Abu Simbel temples.
If the United States Congress approves the $6,000,000
appropriation for Philae recommended by President
Kennedy, the future of Philae will be definitely assured.
In his message to Congress, Mr. Kennedy stated:
"I consider it to be in the interests of the United States
to assist in rescuing these historic remains of a former
civilization from destructionand to join the international
effort to conduct exploration and research in the
threatened area of Nubia before it is submerged.
"The United States, one of the newest civilizations, has
long had a deep regard for the study of past cultures,
and a concern for the preservation of man's great
achievements of art and thought... I recommend that
we now join with other nations through Unesco in
preventing what would otherwise be an irreparable loss to
science and the cultural history of mankind."
Thus the Unesco campaign has almost reached its goal
6 for the two temples of Abu Simbel. The "now
or never" battle to save Abu Simbel will be decided in the
next few weeks.
