TODAY'S
CRISIS IN
ANTHROPOLOGY
by Claude Lévi-Strauss
IN A SHRINKING WORLD, from the tributaries
of the Amazon (right) to the mountain fastnesses
of New Guinea (below), traditional ways of life are
being transformed. But the so-called "archaic"
peoples are not simply vanishing into a void. They
are merging swiftly with other civilizations. Below,
in New Guinea, members of the Irabun clan wearing
ornate tribal headdresses listen to' a chief (now a
businessman and plantation owner) as he shows them
location of territory's government at Port Moresby.
Unesco - Dominique Darbois
W. Bindle - Australian News and Information Bureau.
12

T;he important place social anthropology
holds in contemporary thinking may seem
paradoxical to many people. It is a science very much
in vogue: witness not only the fashion for films and books
about travel, but also the interest of the educated public
in books on anthropology.
Towards the end of the 19th century people were apt
to look to the biologist in their quest for a philosophy
of man and the world, and then later to the sociologist,
the historian, and even the philosopher.
But for the past several years anthropology has come
to play the same role, and today it too is expected to
provide us with deep reflections on our world and a
philosophy of life and hope.
It is in the United States that this approach to
anthropology seems to have begun. As a young nation
intent on creating a humanism of its own, America
broke with traditional European thinking. It saw no
reason why the civilizations of Greece and Rome should
be admired to the exclusion of all others merely because
in the Old World of the Renaissance, when mankind
One of the world's greatest living anthropologists, Claude Lévi-
Strauss has been professor of social anthropology at the famed
College de France, Paris, since 1959. Between 1935 and 1939,
he was professor of sociology at the University of Sao Paulo, and
led many scientific expeditions in central Brazil. He has written
many authoritative works including A World on the Wane
(Hutchinson, London) also published by USA. Criterion Books,
New York, under its French title, Tristes Tropiques.
came to be considered the most proper and necessary
study of man, these were the only two civilizations
sufficiently known.
Since the 19th century and especially the 20th,
practically every human society on our planet has become
accessible to study. Why then limit our interests? And
indeed, when we contemplate humanity in its entirety
we cannot fail to recognize the fact that for 99/100ths
of mankind's existence, and over most of the inhabited
globe, there have been no customs, no beliefs, no
institutions which do not fall within the province of
anthropological study.
This was strikingly emphasized during the last war
with the struggle waged on a world-wide scale. Even
the most obscure and remote corners of our planet were
suddenly catapulted into our lives and consciousness and
took on three-dimensional reality. These were the lands
where the last "savage" peoples on earth had sought
safety'in isolation the far north of America, New Guinea,
the hinterlands of south-east Asia, and certain islands
in the Indonesian archipelago.
Since the war many names, once charged with
mystery and romance, have remained on our maps but
now they designate landing spots for long-distance jet
liners. Under the impact of aviation and with increase
in world population our planet has shrunk in size, and
improved communications and travel facilities permit us
no longer to close our eyes or remain indifferent to other
peoples.
Today there is no fraction of the human race, no 13
matter how remote and retarded it may still appear,
which is not directly or indirectly in contact with others,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

CRISIS IN ANTHROPOLOGY (Cont'd/
Last great sanctuary
of 'primitives'
and whose feelings, ambitions, desires and fears do not
affect the security and prosperity and the very existence
of those to whom material progress may once have given
a feeling of ascendancy.
Even If we wanted to, we could no longer ignore or.
shrug off with indifference, say, the last head-hunters of
New Guinea, for the simple reason that they are interested
in us. And surprising though it may be, the result of
our contacts with them means that both they and we
are now part of the same world, and it will not be long
before we are all part of the same civilization.
For even societies with the most widely divergent
patterns of thought and whose customs and mores took
thousands of years to evolve along isolated paths,
impregnate one another once contact is established.
This occurs in many, devious ways; sometimes we are
clearly aware of them, often we are not.
As they spread throughout the world, the civilizations
which (rightly or wrongly) felt that they had reached the
height of development, such as Christianity, Islamism,
Buddhism, and on a different level the ' technological
civilization which is now bringing them together, are all
tinged with "primitive" ways of life, "primitive" thinking
and "primitive" behaviour which have always been the
subject of anthropological research. Without our
realizing it the "primitive" ways are transforming these
civilizations from within.
For the so-called primitive or archaic peoples do not
simply vanish into a vacuum. They dissolve and are
incorporated with greater or lesser speed into the civiliza¬
tion surrounding them. At the same time the latter
acquires a universal character.
Thus, far from diminishing in Importance, primitive
peoples concern us more with each passing day. To take
only one example, the great civilization the West is
justly proud of and which has spread its roots across the
inhabited globe, is everywhere emerging as a "hybrid."
Many foreign elements, both spiritual and material, are
being absorbed Into its stream.
As a result, the problems of anthropology have
ceased to be a matter for specialists, limited
to scholars and explorers, they have become the direct
and immediate concern of every one of us.
Where, then, lies the paradox? In reality there are
two insofar as anthropology is chiefly concerned with
the study of "primitive" peoples. At the moment when
the public has come to recognize its true value, we may
well ask whether it has not reached the point where it
has nothing more left to study.
For the very transformations which are spurring a
growing theoretical interest in "primitives" are in fact
bringing about their extinction. This is not really a new
phenomenon. As early as 1908, when he inaugurated the
chair of Social Anthropology at the University of Liver¬
pool, Sir James Frazer (author of the monumental Golden
Bough) dramatically called the attention of governments
and scholars to this very problem. Yet we can hardly
compare the situation half a century ago with the large-
scale extinction of "primitive" peoples which we have
witnessed since then.
Let me cite a few examples. At the beginning of white
settlement in Australia, the Aborigénes numbered 250,000
individuals. Today no more than 40,000 are left..
Official reports describe them herded in reserves or
clustered near mining centres where in the place of their
traditional wild food gathering parties they are reduced
to sneak-scavenging in rubbish heaps outside the mining
shacks. Other aborigénes, who had retreated deep into
the forbidding desert, have been uprooted by the installa¬
tion of atomic explosion bases or rocket launching sites.
14 Protected by its exceptionally hostile environment, New
Guinea, with its several million tribesmen, may well be
the last great sanctuary- of primitive society on earth.
Madeiros
FROM JUNGLE TO FOOTBALL MATCH. Brazil's forest Indians have
declined in number drastically (I 00 tribes became extinct between I 900 and
I 950). But many of the surviving tribes continue to live under exactly the
same conditions and to observe the same customs of dress and ceremonial as
did their far-off ancestors. In Central Brazil, Kubenkranken Indians still consider
as an attribute of manhood their deformed lower lip (above left) which they
Indian Protection Service - N. Velloso.
&'^*

Indian Protection Service - H. Foerthmann, '
stretch with progressively larger wooden plugs. At tribal ceremonies, Bororo
Indian men (above right) don the magnificent plumed headdress (made from
the feathers of the gaudy arara parrot). Yet a few years' contact with modern
civilization is sufficient to transform the dress, habits and tastes of these same
Indians. Below, Indian footballers from the same region as the tribesmen who
are shown above proudjy pose for a photographer before the start of a match.
All photos courtesy Darcy Ribeiro.
100 Brazilian tribes
disappear in 50 years
But here too, civilization is making such rapid inroads
that the 600,000 inhabitants of the central mountains,
who were totally unknown a mere twenty years ago,
are now providing labour contingents for the building of
roads. And it is no rarity today to see road signs and
milestones parachuted into the unexplored jungle!
But with civilization have come strange diseases, against
which "primitives" have no natural immunization and
which have wrought deadly havoc in their ranks. They
are succombing rapidly to tuberculosis, malaria, tra¬
choma, leprosy, dysentery, gonorrhea, syphilis, and the
mysterious disease known as kuru. The result of primi¬
tive man's contact with civilization, though not actually
introduced by it, kuru is a genetic deterioration which
inevitably ends in death and for which no treatment or
remedy is known.
In Brazil, 100 tribes became extinct between 1900 and
1950. The Kaingang, from the State of Sao Paulo,
numbering 1,200 in 1912, were no more than 200 in 1916,
and today have dwindled to 80.
The Munduruku were 20,000 in 1925in 1950 they
numbered 1,200. Of the 10,000 Nambikwara in 1900, I
could trace only a thousand in 1940. The Kayapo of the
River Araguaya were 2,500 in 1902 and 10 in 1950. The
Timbira 1,000 in 1900 and 40 in 1950.
How can this rapid decimation be explained? Fore¬
most, by the introduction of Western diseases against
which the Indian's body had no defence. The tragic fate
of the Urubu, an Indian tribe from north-eastern Brazil,
is typical of many others. In 1950, only a few years after
they were discovered, they contracted the measles. Within
a few days, out of the population of 750 there were 160
deaths. An eyewitness has left this stark description:
"We found the first village abandoned. All the
inhabitants had fled, convinced that if they ran far away
they would escape the sickness which they believed was a
spirit attacking the villages.
"We discovered them in the forest, halted in their
flight. Exhausted and shivering with fever in the rain,
nearly all of them had fallen victim to the disease.
Intestinal and pulmonary complications had so weakened
them that they no longer had strength to seek food.
"Even water was lacking, and they were dying as much
from hunger and thirst as from the disease. The children
were crawling about on the forest floor trying to keep the
fires alight in the rain and hoping to keep warm. The
men lay burning and paralyzed by fever; the women
indifferently thrust away their babes seeking the breast."
B ut in addition to infectious diseases, vitamin
and other nutritional deficiencies are also an
important problem. Motor-vascular disorders, eye lesions
and dental decay, unknown to primitive man when he
lived according to his ancient ways, make their appear¬
ance when he is confined to villages and must eat food
which does not come from his native forest. Then, even
the old and tried traditional remedies, such as charcoal
dressings for severe burns, prove useless. And simple
diseases to which tribesmen have long been accustomed,
become extraordinarily virulent.
The decimation of the Indians is due to other, less
direct, causes, such as the collapse of the social structure
or pattern of living. The Kaingang of Sao Paulo, already
mentioned, lived by a series of strict social rules with
which every anthropologist is acquainted. The inhabitants
of each village were divided into two groups on the
principle that the men from the first group could marry
only women from the second group and vice versa.
When their population diminished, the foundations
permitting their survival collapsed. Under the rigid
system of the Kaingang, it was no longer possible for
every man to find a wife and many had no choice but ,.-
celibacy unless they resigned themselves to mating within ia
their own group which to them was incest, and even
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

CRISIS IN ANTHROPOLOGY (Cont'd)
Taboo subject in new
independent states
then their marriage had to be childless. In such cases a
whole population can disappear within a few years (1).
Bearing this in mind, need we be surprised that it is
more and more difficult not only to study the so-called
primitive peoples but even to define them satisfactorily.
In recent years, a serious attempt has been made to revise
existing thinking regarding protective legislation in the
countries facing this problem.
Neither language nor culture nor the conviction of
belonging to a group, are valid as criteria for a definition.
As enquiries of the International Labour Organization
have emphasized, the notion oí indigenous people is being
superseded by the concept of indigence (2).
B
16
ut this is only one half on the picture. There
are other parte of the world where tens and
hundreds of millions of people live who were traditionally
the subject of anthropology. These populations are
increasing rapidly in number in Central America, the
Andes, south-east Asia and Africa. But here too, anthro¬
pology faces a crisis. Not because the populations are
dying out but because of the nature of the people involved.
These peoples are changing and their civilizations are
gradually becoming Westernized. Anthropology, however,
has never yet included the West within its competence
or province. Furthermore, and even more important,
there is a growing opposition in these regions to
anthropological enquiries. Instances have occurred
where regional museums of "Anthropology" have been
forced to change their names and can only continue dis¬
guised as "Museums of Popular Art and Tradition."
In the young states which have recently obtained
independence, economists, psychologists and sociologists
are warmly welcomed toy universities. The same can
hardly be said of the anthropologist.
Thus it would almost seem that anthropology is on the
point of falling victim to a dual conspiracy. On the one
hand are the peoples who have ceased physically to lend
themselves to study by simply vanishing from the face
of the earth. On the other are those who, far from dead,
are living a great population "explosion," yet are
categorically hostile to anthropology for psychological
and ethical reasons.
There Is no problem about how to meet the first of these
crises. Research must be speeded up and we must take
advantage of the few years that remain to gather all the
information we can on these vanishing islands of human¬
ity. Such information is vital for, unlike the natural
sciences, the sciences of man cannot originate their own
experimentation.
Every type of society, of belief or institution, every way
of life, constitutes a ready-made experiment the prepara¬
tion of which has taken thousands of years and as such
is irreplaceable. When a community disappears, a door
closes forever locking away knowledge which is unique.
That is why the anthropologist believes that it is
essential, before these societies are lost and their social
customs destroyed, to create sharper observation
techniques, rather like the astronomer who has brought
electronic amplifiers into play to capture the weakening
signals of light from distant stars racing away from us.
The second crisis in anthropology is much less serious
in the absolute since there is no threat of extinction to
the civilizations concerned. But it is much more difficult
to deal with out of hand. I wonder whether it would
help matters if we tried to dispel the distrust of the
people who were formerly the anthropologist's field work
by proposing that our research should henceforth no
longer be "one way only." Might not anthropology find
its place again if, in exchange for our continued freedom
(1) These observations on the disappearance oí the Indians of
Brazil are drawn chiefly from a study by the noted Brazilian
anthropologist, Dr. Darcy Rlbelro, entitled "Convivio et Contamlnaçao"
published In "Sociológica,", Vol. XVIII, No. 1, Sao Paulo, 1956.
(2) ILO. The Aboriginal Populations. Geneva. 1953.
ONE OF WORLD'S LAST UNEXPLORED REGIONS. New
Guinea is one of the last places in the world where "primitive tribes
exist which have never seen a white man". One of the last unexplored
regions here ceased to be so recently when a French anthropological
expedition led by Pierre-Dominique Gaisseau fought its way through
dense jungles, over 12,000 feet high mountains and along streams and
to investigate, we invited African or Melanesian
anthropologists to come and study us in the same way
that up to now only we have studied them?
Such an exchange would be very desirable for it would
enrich the science of anthropology by widening its
horizons, and set us on the road to further progress.
But let us have no illusions this would not resolve the
problem, for it does not take into consideration the deep
motives underlying the former colonized peoples' negative
attitude to anthropology. They are afraid that under the
cloak of an anthropological interpretation of history what
they consider to be intolerable inequality will be justified
as the desirable diversity of mankind.
If I may be permitted a formula which, coming from
an anthropologist, can have no derogatory connotation
even as pure scientific observation, I would say that
Westerners will never (except in make-believe) be able to
act the role of "savages" opposite those whom they once
dominated. For when we Westerners cast them in this
role they existed for us only as objects whether for
scientific study or political and economic domination.
Whereas we, who in their eyes are responsible for their
past fate, now appear to them inevitably as directing
forces and therefore it is much harder for them to look
at us with an attitude of detached appraisal.
By a curious paradox, it was undoubtedly a feeling of
sympathy that prompted many anthropologists to adopt
the idea of pluralism (this asserts the diversity of human
cultures and concommitantly denies that certain civiliza¬
tions can be classified as "superior" and others as
"inferior." Yet these very anthropologists and indeed
all anthropology are . now accused of denying this
inferiority merely to conceal it, and hence of contributing
more or less directly to its continued existence.
If therefore, anthropology is to survive in the modern
world, there can be no disguising that it must be at the
price of much deeper changes than a mere enlarging of
the circle (very restricted it is true up to now) by the
rather childish formula of offering to lend our toys to the
newcomers provided they let us go on playing with theirs.
Anthropology must transform its very nature and must
admit that, logically and morally, it is almost impossible

rivers from the Arafura Sea in the south to the north coast of New
Guineathe first expedition to cross the island from south to north.
To cover 500 miles as the crow flies it was obliged to travel 1,000 by
raft, canoe and on foot. From this epic seven-month journey, the anthro¬
pologists brought back much information including a magnificent record
on film of the isolated peoples in the heart of New Guinea. The seven
man team accompanied by sixty bearers was supplied from the air
twelve loads totalling ten tons were parachuted to them. Photos from
their full-length colour film, Le Ciel et la Boue (The River without a
Name) show tribesmen, some of whom had never seen a white man
before, in their pirogues (above) and supplies being dropped by para¬
chute (left) after radio operators have contacted the expedition's base.
to continue to view societies as scientific objects, which
the scientist may even wish to preserve, but which are
now collective subjects and claim the right to change as
they please.
The modification of anthropology's subject matter also
implies modifications in its aims and methods. And these
fortunately appear quite feasible for our branch of science
has never defined its purposes in the absolute but rather
as a relationship between the observer and his subject.
And it has always agreed to change whenever this
relationship has been modified.
Doubtless, the property of anthropology has always
been to investigate on the spot of "from within". But
only because it was impossible to investigate at a distance
or "from without." In the field of the social sciences,
the great revolution of our times is that whole civilizations
have become conscious of their existence, and having
acquired the necessary means to do so through literacy,
have embarked on the study of their own past and
traditions and every unique aspect of their culture which
has survived to the present day.
Thus, if Africa, for instance, is escaping from
anthropology, it will not so easily escape from science. In
place of the anthropologist that is the outside analyst,
working from the outsidestudy of the continent will
be in the hands of African scientists, or foreigners who
will use the same methods as their African colleagues.
They will no longer toe anthropologists but linguists,
philologists, historians of facts and ideas. Anthropology
will gladly accept this transition to richer, more subtle
methods than its own, confident that it has fulfilled its
mission by keeping alive so much of the great riches of
humanity on behalf of scientific knowledge, so long as it
was the only branch of science able to do so.
As to the future of anthropology itself, it seems to lie
now at the far extreme and the near extreme of its
traditional positions. At the far extreme, in the
geographical sense first, since we must go further and
further afield to reach the last of the so-called primitive
populations, and they are getting fewer and fewer; but
in the far extreme in its logical meaning too, since we
are now interested In the essentials.
On the near extreme, in the sense that the collapse
of the material foundations of the last primitive civiliza¬
tions has made their intimate experiences one of our last
fields of investigation in place of the weapons, tools and
household objects that have disappeared. But also
because as Western civilization becomes more complex
with each passing day and spreads across the whole of
the earth, it is already beginning to show signs of the
sharp differences which anthropology has made it its
business to study but which it could formerly do only by
comparing dissimilar and widely separated cultures.
Here, no doubt, lies the permanent function of
anthropology. For if there exists, as anthropologists
have always affirmed, a certain "optimum diversity"
which they see as a permanent condition of human
development then we may be sure that divergencies
between societies and groups within societies will
disappear only to spring up again in other forms.
Who knows if the conflict between the old and new
generations, which so many countries are now experienc¬
ing, may not be the ransom that must be paid for the
growing homogenization of our social and material
culture? Such phenomena seem to me pathological but
anthropology has always been characterized by its ability
to explain and justify forms of human behaviour which
men found strange and could not understand.
In this way anthropology at every phase has helped to
enlarge the currently held and always too constricting
view of humanity. To picture the disappearance of
anthropology, one would have to conjure up. a civiliza¬
tion where all men no matter what corner of the globe
they inhabited, and whatever their way of life, their educ¬
ation, their professional activities, their age, beliefs,
sympathies and aversions were, to the very roots of their
consciousness, totally intelligible to all other men.
Whether one deplores it, approves it, or merely states it
as a fact, technical progress and the development of
communications hardly seem to be leading us to this end.
And as long as the ways of thinking or of acting of some
men perplex other men, there will be scope for meditation
on these differences; and this, in a constantly renewing
form, will be the abiding province of anthropology.
17
