MICROPHOTOGRAPHY REVEALS
THE
INVISIBLE
WORLD
by Daniel Behrman
Aworld of phantasmagorical shapes, breath¬
taking beauty, nightmarish monsters, sur¬
realist dreams, certain mortality, apparently-
eternal immortality, baroque fantasy,
»abstract starkness, utter chaos, perfect
order... this is a world as remote from our own as any
undiscovered planet beyond the edge of the solar
system and yet seldom any further away than our
fingertips. This is the invisible world, entered not
through Alice's looking-glass, but through the
microscope.
Men have been exploring it since the invention of
the microscope three-and-a-half centuries ago. It has
revealed to them countless secrets which have con¬
tained the answers to riddles of life and death. When
the biologist aims the barrel of his lens upon a deadly
organism or the chemist focuses upon a mysterious
crystal, he is usually hunting the answer to one of
these specific riddles. And yet, there are moments
when the imperative demands of science or technol¬
ogy arc suddenly overshadowed by a vision of har¬
mony or horror. Moments like these are seldom for¬
gotten by anyone who has experienced them, even
though they may have no immediate bearing on the
progress of science.
Not so very long ago, this hidden world could be
seen only by a person lucky enough to have a micro¬
scope available that is, by scientific research workers
and a handful of enthusiasts who installed micro¬
scopes in their parlours at a time when their neigh¬
bours were installing magic lanterns. Patient obser¬
vers, it is true, had painstakingly produced drawings
of microscopic images but they could not hope to
catch anything more than two-dimensional cross-sec¬
tions in which the added dimension of emotion was
lacking.
The eye of the camera changed all this. Now it was
possible to capture the hnage under the microscope
in the same way as any image of the normal world.
Still, it was no easy task. The cumbersome ancestors
of present-day cameras could be adapted to micro-
photography only with the help of equally cumber¬
some optical apparatus.
As a science and as an aid to science, microphoto-
graphy made a relatively early appearance, but it had
to await the development of modern cameras to
become an art... if we accept that definition of art as
the superfluous which makes life worth living.
Today, a good 35-millimetre camera, a simple adap¬
tor, a microscope and a stand to keep the camera
steady (for some exposures may last as long as
100 seconds) are all that is needed for microphoto-
graphy.
Not quite all, though. Perhaps the most important
prerequisite is that elusive quality of inspiration and
20 CONT'D ON PAGE 22
Tiny anchors and filigree pendants are not
from Madame's jewelbox but a microscopic
bit of the skin of a tiny sea creature.

This exquisite doily of sheer¬
est lace is only a section of a
common chestnut tree stem.
kr®
Feathery reeds in a floral arrangement are
the microscopic crystals of salicylic acid.
Photos ¡0 Louis-Jacques Lapone, Paris
It might be a wasp's nest, or some strange
fabricactually these are bay salt crystals.
21

THE INVISIBLE WORLD (Cont'd;
FIFTY THOUSAND
MICROSCOPE SLIDES
imagination which can distinguish what is beautiful
or unusual in one microscopic image out of a
thousand others. And, of course, the thousand other
images are needed, too.
There are no less than 50,000 of them in the lab¬
oratory of Dr. Louis-Jacques Laporte in Paris, on one
of those quiet residential streets in the Passy district
where nothing ever seems to happen. Dr. Laporte is
the leading supplier of microscopic slides for science
teaching in French universities and lycées, an occupa¬
tion which keeps him busy seventy-two hours a week
in this age when educators are discovering "audio¬
visual teaching aids", one of the fields in which
Uni:sco is working. It certainly keeps him too busy
to wonder what the reactions of the groceries-laden
housewives hurrying past his ground-floor quarters
would be if they knew that, only a few feet away, all
the afilictions of man from cancer to the plague were
jn storage (harmlessly, of course) on glass slides.
Even if they entered his laboratory, as we did the
olhcr day, they probably would not be very enligh¬
tened. It is one of the last citadels of the lone experi¬
menter in this era of air-conditioned assembly lines,
functioning to the rhythm of piped-in music selected
by psychologists.
The Laporte laboratory, housing one of the world's
specialists in the new science of microphotography,
might well serve as a stage setting for a play by Cour-
tclinc, the turn-of-thc-century French dramatist who
delighted in satirizing the bureaucracy of his day.
All the props are there: roll-top desk, a huge table
covered with scarred linoleum and assorted flasks,
bottles and papers, a gas radiator which has a habit
of turning itself on and off with disconcerting pops,
and files, files, files climbing the walls to the ceiling.
Over this citadel reigns Dr. Laporte, a mild, dis¬
tinguished-looking man who wears the discreet
rosette of the French Legion of Honour in his lapel.
Adjoining this office is another room containing the
simple stand used for microphotography, hundreds of
photographs and more files filled with microscopic
slides.
There is also a kitchen, converted into a warehouse,
whose contents include a few boxes of carefully
labelled sacks of earth from Barbados, brought back
after an expedition two years ago in search of new
specimens of diatoma, the fossilized algae which are
a delight to the eye of the microphotographer and
anyone else fortunate enough to see them.
Dr. Laporte is a rather rare specimen himself he
comes quite close to that 18th century notion of a
"universal man". He is not only a scientist and a
photographer, but he also happens to be a singer (he
is president of one of Paris's leading choral societies),
a writer and a painter. True, he hasn't done very
much painting since he sold sketches of the Luxem7
bourg Gardens in the Latin Quarter to help pay his
way through the Sorbonne, but he has been writing
all his life. Among his books are "The Invisible
World", "What You Should Know about the Micro¬
scopic World", a collection of poems entitled "Souls
and Landscapes"... and a detective story.
Yet it might be said that all of his talents even a
musician's sense of harmony met in one of his most
recent works, "Panorama of the Micro-World". Here,
as he explained to us in his laboratory, art took pre¬
cedence over science. Its 300-odd illustrations from
his own collection of micro-photographs and other
equally rich collections are a gallery of portraits,
The curious baubles, below left, would enhance a Christmas tree, but
a microscopic one. The pattern is the tooth of a sea fish. In centre
photo below the design is simply a minute area of the surface of
an ordinary gramophone record. The abstraction, (below right)
22 CONT'D ON PAGE 24

The Unesco Courier. May 1961
It .could be a brooch of precious stones as seen here magnified 1,860
times. In reality it is a secreted valve from a Madagascar diatom cell.
would be right at home in a collection of modern drawingsbut you'd
need a microscope to see it. It is an arrangement of body scales from
a hawk-moth. Above, a cross-section of a vine tendril running with sap
shows, under the microscope, a great variety of intricate layers.
Microphotography discovers an unusual plaid fabric design in this
section of a striped muscle of a sea insect larva magnified 1,340 times.
Photos Ç) Louis-Jacques Laporte, Parts 23

THE INVISIBLE WORLD (Cont'd)
GALLERY OF N O N- F I G U R AT I VE ART
landscapes, vignettes and non-figurative compositions
visible to the naked eye only because they have been
magnified anywhere up to 40,000 times (a ratio which
can be achieved with the electron microscope).
As wc browsed through the "Panorama of the
Micro-World" in his laboratory, Dr. Laporte deter¬
minedly went to work on his morning's mail, in¬
terrupted occasionally by the doorbell announcing
students who needed slides for an experiment or a
thesis.
"Look at this letter," he remarked, "I only get
about one a year like this nowadays." It was from a
French priest in Lc Havre who wanted a "Diatoma
Rose-Window" with some very stern specifications:
"What is important to me is the beauty of the slide.
You know that I am very demanding. You have my
entire confidence."
Dr. Laporte sighed. "There you have a vanishing
race the diatom collector," he remarked. This
species of collector is interested either in individual
specimens or else in unbelievably-complicated com¬
positions in which 'pearl-like diatoma are used to
decorate floral bouquets composed of butterfly scales.
A surface of 5 square millimetres is usually enough
for a picture.
This is the way Dr. Laporte has described a dia¬
tom collector in his "Panorama of the Micro-
World": "His penchant is revealed the day he sees
for the first time under the microscope the stained-
glass window design of a Lepidodiscus elegans and
his delight never ceases after that. When he is
making observations, he forgets his dinner time and
he consents to get some sleep only when dawn comes
to brighten the windows of his study.
Crystallization of common and uncommon chemical bodies produces some
of the most beautiful of all photographs taken through the microscope.
"If he hears of a species which lives only in the
tropics and he does not possess it, then he can love
nothing else. He moves heaven and earth to obtain it
and, if it were not for the obligations tying him to
his country, his family and his modest office job, you
would see him steal it or sail off to seek it. For it is
missing from his collection and he has set aside a
place for it in his box, as the philatelist does for
stamps in his album. This empty space hurts his eyes
and he will not be able to live until it has been filled."
And here is the happiest day in the life of a
diatomist: "In his collection, he has an extremely rare
diatom which can be gathered only on a certain small
island lost in the Indian Ocean and found on maps
only as a nameless speck. And this island, he has
just learned, has been swallowed up forever in an
earthquake; the sea has engulfed its beach and its
rocks, its mangroves, its population and (he thinks)
its diatoma. He gazes with renewed love upon the
unique specimen he possesses. His heart brims with
happiness..."
Among microscopophiles and micro-photographers,
the diatomist is in an extreme class by himself. He
not only wants to explore the micro-world; he wants
to change it to suit his own tastes. In a less acute and
more widespread form, his viewpoint is reflected in
those who see parallels between the world under
their lenses and the world around them. Magnified
21 times, a cross-section of a bramble stem becomes
the head of a grinning cat. Three caterpillar hairs
(magnified seventy-five times) reproduce the sophisti¬
cated brushwork of a Japanese artist. The cross-
section of a sea-urchin's spike (magnified 300 times)
could inspire many a jeweller. As common an object
CONT'D ON PAGE 26
So striking are some of them that even modern artists have been known
to use them as Inspiration for their abstractions. Those pictured below

Photos © Louis-Jacques Laporte, Paris
Coffee-lovers claim this ingredient keeps them awake at night. Under the microscope however, a crystal of caffeine appears more beautiful than harmful.
from left to right show, in the first two photos, crystals of a deadly poison
(chlorohydrate of pilocarpine) used in the manufacture of certain eye
washes. The third is crystallization of common soda, and the last which
looks like a butterfly's wing Is the crystallization of vegetable asparaglne.
25

THE INVISIBLE WORLD (Cont'd)
A UNIVERSE REVEALED BEHIND A LENS
as a nylon stocking takes on a mysterious pattern of
endless links when magnified 45 times. There is even
a micro-painter, Rene Ferter, in Dr. Laporte's "Pano¬
rama" who has created landscapes inspired by the
microscope: for example, the crystallization of tar¬
taric acid is the basis for a landscape, "The Tall
Palissades," showing a walled city perched on a
rocky spur.
As you might imagine, insects take on new dimen¬
sions under the microscope. Microphotography
explains many of their amazing feats. Blown up
10() times, for example, an ant's head shows jaws as
cruelly efficient and ftinctional as a pair of wire-
cutters. Many of the tools which man has taken
thousands of years to devise, ranging from the drill
to the bulldozer, have always existed in the insect
world. Some of them even resemble the marvellous
electronic tools which we are just devising. A photo
of the antennae (magnified 125 times) of a small
scarab could easily be mistaken for one of the sensi¬
tive space probes mounted on the shells of artificial
satellites.
Up until now, Dr. Laporte had been talking to us
mainly about the giants of the micro-world. His pano¬
rama changes completely, however, when it takes in
organisms which have to be magnified hundreds of
times before they become visible to the naked eye.
Then all the landmarks of the normal world disappear
and you arc plunged into a new universe living under
laws of its own.
Take the Paramecium, for example, a roughly
oblong mass with a fringe of delicate hairs which are
actually the "oars" with which it rows along. Magni¬
fied 8G0 limes, the microphotograph can show the
Paramecium reproducing by division if it is suffi
ciently nourished, or else, when food runs low,
joining with another to form one but never dying.
Here, as Dr. Laporte told us, is a world with im¬
mortality.
Parasites and bacilli which are among man's dead¬
liest enemies also appear in this world. Some are far
more horrible than the diseases they cause (we cer¬
tainly would not advise looking at a spotted, flaccid
liver fluke, for example, before lunch). Others are
quite innocuous in appearance. Magnified 3,080 times,
Koch's bacilli are nothing but little stems meaning
nothing except to the experienced eye of the physician
who knows the signs of tuberculosis.
The great strides which have been made by public
health in recent years have complicated the task of
Dr. Laporte. "It's almost impossible to furnish slides
to medical students of certain diseases, which have
been virtually wiped but," he commented.
The doorbell in the musty old office housing these
micro-marvels was now beginning to ring more in¬
sistently. Dr. Laporte, with a trace of regret, closed
the covers of his "panorama" and returned to his
everyday profession. He had not covered the subject
by any stretch of imagination and it is unlikely that
it will ever be covered. Why not? The answer lies in
the conclusion he wrote to his book:
"In the dark night of the Middle Ages, the poet
showed us Doctor Faust vainly labouring over his
retorts to learn the mysteries of the world. Yet how
many 'ardent hours' will have to be spent by the
Doctor Fausts of the future if they want to under¬
stand anything about a living cell, because this cell,
in order to be understood, apparently must be
enlarged to the dimensions of a universe!"
***!t!^
An elephant's trunk I That's almost it. The trunk (or proboscis) of a
butterfly takes on such elephantine proportions under the microscope.
26
Man never seems to go nature one better, not even with braided rugs.
This handsome specimen is the cross-section of a sea-urchin's spine.

The Unesco Courler. Moy 1961
Photos© Louis-Jacques Laporte, Paris
The ayid diatom collectors prize such jewel-like creations as this one, arranged with diatoma from Madagascar.
27
