WORLD T
SCIENTIFIC
By Daniel Behrman
Science affects both directly and
indirectly almost every human
being. So vast is the field, and so
rapid the growth of research in
the past few decades, that it has
been all but impossible to chart
its progress. Now, a comprehen¬
sive survey of world scientific
trends and technological research
is being published by UNESCO.
Prepared by Professor Pierre
Auger, it marks a milestone in the
history of international science and
its uses for peaceful purposes.
The Herculean task of taking a global look at
the world of science, detecting the principal
lines along which research ls being undertaken in fields
running from cancer to fluid mechanics and then chart¬
ing a future course of International action has just been
accomplished.
All this is under one cover and on 250 pages in "Current
Trends in Scientific Research" which has just been
brought off the press by u.n. and Unesco. It is the work
of a leading French physicist and former head of
Unesco's Department of Natural Sciences, Professor
Pierre Auger, who has carried out this survey for the
United Nations, following a resolution passed by the
U.N. General Assembly in November, 1958.
Some idea of its scope can be obtained from the
massive support which Professor Auger was able to enlist
in collecting his data. Among contributors are numbered
no less than twenty-nine intergovernmental orga¬
nizations, sixty-six international non-governmental orga¬
nizations, national research organizations from forty-
two countries and, last but certainly not least in impor¬
tance, 255 scientific experts from the world over.
But a much more vivid idea of what this survey was
intended to encompass can be found in Professor Auger's
own introduction to his book. It is quite simple: of all
CONT'D ON PAGE 43

41

WORLD SCIENCE SURVEYED (Cont'd)
Photos © Paul Almasy
42

Photos © Paul Almasy
The Institute of Applied Science in Mexico City develops and conducts
research in meteorology, hydrology and related sciences in order to
promote effective use of water and other natural resources. Modern
laboratories and classrooms were made available by the University
of Mexico in 1956, and Unesco has actively participated in the
programme by providing experts, equipment and fellowships for
Mexican scientists. Above, a scientist and his assistant take a sample
of air near a factory chimney for chemical analysis. Left, one of the
Institute's scientists adjusts an actinometer, a sensitive instrument
for measuring the intensity of sunlight in different parts of the
spectrum. Below, a solar radiation observatory on the roof of the
Institute. The instrument in the foreground records the brightness
of the sky. The circular metal band shades receiver from sunlight.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
INTERNATIONAL ACTION
the scientists and research workers since the beginning
of time, 90 per cent are alive and working today! In our
world of rapid change, Professor Auger notes, scientific
activity is increasing at the rate of ten per cent a year
which means that it more than doubles every decade.
Merely keeping abreast of this activity has become an
impossible task: while there were only 1,000 scientific
journals in 1850, .there are nearly 100,000 today.
"Current Trends in Scientific Research" is therefore
neither a panorama nor an encyclopaedia. It probably
could be compared to- a moving picture, edited from miles
of film (in this case, mountains of data) to bring out the
most important of all the events taking place before the
camera's eye. Professor Auger has used another meta¬
phor: when a ship gives its position, it reports its latitude
and longitude but always adds its direction and speed.
The position of modern research is not a fixed one.
In his recommendations for international action, Pro¬
fessor Auger has not necessarily selected the most im¬
portant realms of scientific research but specific tasks
which are beyond the reach of national or private efforts.
Here, too, are to be found a number of fields which tend
to be overlooked because they do not promise immediate
returns in terms of national policy or economic benefits
although their long-term promise is immense.
T;hese are some of the highlights of his sug¬
gestions (unfortunately, space does not allow
us even to summarize all of them) :
An International scientific conference to standardize
measurements and remedy a "chaotic state of affairs".
An international system to enable countries to com¬
municate their meteorological and seismological findings
to electronic computer centres for processing. Professor
Auger points out that such findings must be processed
immediately if. they are to be used by scientists seeking
more knowledge of our environment.
M More joint centres of high energy physics, such as
the European Centre for Nuclear Research (CERN) ori¬
ginally inspired by Unesco, which is now operating the
world's most powerful particle accelerator.
An Information service on current research work to
avoid waste and duplication incurred aU too often when
institutes or laboratories in different countries spend
years working on similar projects.
An international study of the long-term effects of
small doses of radiation.
An international conference on artifical seismic
shocks (earthquakes) induced by explosions. Interpreta¬
tion of the results of such explosions is not yet clear.
The establishment of a major astronomical observatory
in the middle latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere.
A scientific conference on cloud physics to assess the
effectiveness of various methods now used to create "arti¬
ficial rainfall".
U A study of living conditions of certain populations not
"enjoying" modern civilization to learn why the incidence
of cancer varies from one country to another. This is
urgent because traditional ways of life are dying out
faster than they can be studied.
International measures for protection against pollu¬
tion when it spreads beyond borders, as in the case of
nuclear fall-out or river pollution.
43
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WORLD SCIENCE SURVEYED (Cont'd)
MOVEMENT TOWARD UNITY IN SCIENCE
44
B Improvement of traditional methods of fertilization
and soil improvement by placing them on a scientific
basis and, at the same time, international research to
increase productivity of plants.
An international co-ordination of research aimed at
developing inexpensive nuclear fuels.
a An international conference on problems of energy
storage, especially those arising in intermittent sources
of energy such as wind or sun. In addition, international
support is needed for development of the direct produc¬
tion of electricity through the light or the heat of the
sun (through photoelectric or thermoelectric cells instead
of the inefficient cycle of the steam engine).
< A series of steps to assist new countries to formulate
scientific policy and to train scientists, technicians and
engineers.
Despite this arbitrary summary of Professor Auger's
recommendations, it should not be assumed that he pro¬
duced his survey by placing scientific discipUnes in arbi¬
trary pigeonholes. On the contrary, he brings out very
clearly that the trend of the past years toward specializa¬
tion is now being accompanied by a parallel movement
toward unity in science. The old barriers are falling with
the growth of new sciences bearing such names as astro¬
physics, mathematical chemistry or physico-chemical
biology. At the same time, the role of mathematics itself
has broadened to the point where it pervades all sciences,
substituting precision and prediction for groping.
Another barrier is also crumbling: the one between
applied and fundamental science. While Professor Auger
notes that applied research has grown to the point where
there is a danger at times that it might squeeze out
disinterested research which would be as absurd as killing
the goose that lays the golden eggs there is now a for¬
tunate tendency toward blending of the two.
The old distinction, therefore, does not stand up in the
modern world. Professor Auger replaces it by a new clas¬
sification of scientific research into four types :
Free fundamental research or pure research; oriented
fundamental research; applied research and then the
final stage of development work to secure economic or
social benefits. All are intimately linked.
On the basis of the survey, Professor Auger has
brought out an even dozen main trends in
world scientific research. He begins with the extension
of physical frontiers, pointing out that, today, "the
scientist can produce on the spot, in his laboratories,
conditions which occur only in inaccessible regions such
as the centre of the stars or the depths of the earth, or
which perhaps do not exist anywhere in the universe".
Chemical frontiers, too, are being extended in the
development of hitherto impossible purity of certain
substances. At the same time, nuclear reactions have
made it possible to extend the periodic table beyond 100
elements.
In both physics and chemistry progress is directly relat¬
ed to constant improvement in the accuracy of measure¬
ments which, Prof. Auger points out, automatically opens
the way to new discoveries.
The third main trend is automation, a science in its
own right. Not only is it revolutionizing industrial pro¬
duction, but it is taking the human error out of measure¬
ments.
The whole fascinating process of research on the
earth's crust, the ocean depths, the polar regions and the
vastness of interplanetary space forms a trend which Prof.
Auger succinctly sums up in one word exploration.
"Man against nature" is a fifth trend, englobing all of
our efforts not only to explore nature but to force it
into a mould suiting our purposes. This trend, Prof. Au¬
ger remarks, has already added years to the human life
span.
The study of natural equilibria and cycles is a trend
of increasing importance at a time when man is modi¬
fying these cycles by transforming water conditions, using
up coal and oil reserves deposited over eons and stripping
the earth of its forests. This research is essential to eco¬
nomic planning today.
Dwindling of natural resources has intensified a scien¬
tific trend aimed at increasing our supply of energy. This
has already led to nuclear fission energy and to research
on fusion or thermo-nuclear energy. Side by side with
this search for new sources of energy is to be found
revived interest in old ones: the sun, the wind, the tides
and waterfalls.
The problem of energy, Prof. Auger remarks,
was mastered by the nineteenth century. It
is the twentieth century that is mastering, in another
major trend, the analysis of the structure of matter. We
can now "see" the structure of solids, liquids, living cells
or molecules through new techniques of analysis.
While science studies existing structures, it is also
devising new ones. This synthesis of complex chemical
systems is giving us substances such as plastics which imi¬
tate or improve the properties of natural structures.
Mathematical research is closely tied to this trend.
Transport is another main field and Prof. Auger divides
current scientific research here into two aspects: electri¬
cal transport and material transport. Considerable work
is being done to cut losses in. the tranmission of electri¬
city while there is a trend to simplify the movement of
materials through the use of giant tankers or huge
pipelines.
Communications, termed by Prof. Auger as "the trans¬
port of complex patterns", are also leading scientists to
seek ways of reducing losses in transmission. At the same
time, methods must be found to move an increasing
number of "messages" of all kinds over a limited spectrum
of usable waves.
Finally, Prof. Auger singles out the interaction between
the various sciences themselves as his twelfth main trend
in the world of science, with mathematics in a royal role.
"Almost as if they could foresee the needs that would
gradually come to be felt by physicists, chemists and bio¬
logists," he remarks, "the mathematicians have almost
always evolved in advance the purely logical theories
containing the required tools of thought."
In the eyes of Professor Auger, these present trends in
science are not creating a science-fiction world dwarfing
man into insignificance. On the contrary, he stresses that
human biology is to be found at all levels of pure and
appUed research today. Automation has not replaced the
observer and the demands of the human mind are the
very source of fundamental discoveries in science.
The interaction of all sciences and this emphasis on
man are two overall movements which, the author of the
report concludes, "are jointly making a powerful contri¬
bution to the unification of scientific thought".

Industrial research plays an ever growing role in the application of
scientific knowledge to man's needs. Above, an Industrial hygiene spe¬
cialist at the University of Rochester In the State of New York, U.S.A.,
studies harmful air-borne particles from certain factories and prepares
to count the concentration of dust particles by plating them with
metallic selenium. Such research also includes testing the toxicity of
dusts on animals. Below, this maze of tubing Is part of the instrumen¬
tation apparatus atop the head of a nuclear reactor in an American
atomic-electric generating plant. The tubing feeds information from
the reactor to the control room where readings are automatically
recorded on charts and gauges. Scientific research plays a direct part
in the development of nuclear power as in the autonation of industry.
45
