£55535 Asxc^îc^a^zsï^si
*-vw?e-<*>»7jr<
READINGS FROM TAGORE
To celebrate Uie centenary of Rabindranath
Tagore's birth in 1861, Unesco arranged
this year for the translation and publication
of six books (see boxed bibliography).
On these pages we publish passages from
A Tagore Reader just issued by the Mac-
millan Co., as part of the Unesco Collec¬
tion of Representative Works Indian
Scries. The reader offers a comprehensive
view of Tagore's writing including passages
from his books on travel, his letters, short
stories, dramas, autobiographical sketches,
conversations with famous people includ¬
ing Einstein, fables, philosophical medita¬
tions, art and literary criticism, education
and selections from his poetry.
From 'A Sojourner
in Japan'
When I took my seat at early dawn on
a mat by the window, I realized that not only
are the Japanese master-painters but they
have reduced the whole of man's life to
an art.
From Letters
to a Friend
But by nature all men are dwija or
twice-born, first they are born to their
home, and then, for this fulfillment, they
have to be born to the larger world. Do
you not feel yourself that you have had
your second birth among us? And with
this second birth you have found your
true place in the heart of humanity.
From 'Pathe O Pather
Prante'
Something is taking shape throughout the
universe and through all eternity. We
feel the impact of it in the pain of our
hearts. The stage at which man has arrived
in the march of civilization has been
attained by the creative endeavours of
countless millions of unknown individuals,
the history of whose personal struggles lies
merged in oblivion. Whatever abides in
creation is the momentary handiwork of the
countless many who have passed away.
Those architects of creation, those that are
gone, are functioning within me the thing
called "I" only furnished them with a
sort of prop. The scaffolding of a house
in construction may be necessary today; by
tomorrow when there is no trace left of
it, no one will miss it. The completed
building never sorrows for its lost scaffold¬
ing. The point is that as I pace this path
I feel that much of the construction going
26 on within me is being stored in the
treasury of Man's creation, with the signa¬
ture of my name obliterated.
From 'My Life'
In regard to music I claim to be some¬
thing of a musician myself. I have composed
many songs which have defied the canons
of respectable orthodoxy, and good people
are disgusted at the impudence of a man
who is audacious, because he is untrained.
But I persist, and God forgives me because
I do not know what I do. Possibly that
is the best way of doing things in the
sphere of art, for I find that people blame
me, but also sing my songs, even if not
always correctly...
In the night we stumble over things and
become acutely conscious of their separate-
ness, but the day reveals the unity which
embraces them. And the man whose inner
vision is bathed in consciousness at once
realizes the spiritual union which reigns
over all racial differences, and his mind no
longer stumbles over individual facts,
accepting them as final. He realizes that
peace is an inner harmony and not an
outer adjustment, that beauty carries our
assurance of our relationship to reality,
which waits for its perfection in the
response of our love.
Conversation
with H. G. Wells
Tagore: The tendency in modern civili¬
zation is to make the world uniform.
Calcutta, Bombay, Hong Kong and other
cities are more or less alike, wearing big
masKs which represent no country in parti¬
cular.
Wells: Yet, don't you think this very fact
is an indication that we are reaching out
for a new world-wide human order which
refuses to be localized?
Tagore: Our individual physiognomy
need not be the same. Let the mind be
universal. The individual should not be
sacrificed.
Wells: We are gradually thinking now
of one human civilization on the founda¬
tions of which individualities will have
great chance of fulfillment. The individual,
as we take him, has suffered for the fact
that civilization has been split up into
separate units, instead of being merged
into a universal whole, which seems to be
the natural destiny of humankind.
Tagore: I believe the unity of human
civilization can be better maintained by
the linking up in fellowship and co-opera¬
tion of the different civilizations of the
world..."
From 'A Vision of India's
History'
...We have come to know that what
India seeks is not the peace of negation
or of some mechanical adjustment, but that
which is in goodness, and in truth of perfect
union... The true prayer of mother India
is:
He who is one, who is above all colour
distinctions, who dispenses the needs
of men of all colours, who compre¬
hends all things from their beginning
to the end, let Him unite us to one
another with that wisdom which is the
wisdom of goodness.
On Education
When races come together as in the
present age, it should not be merely the
gathering of a crowd; there must be a bond
of relation, or they will collide with each
other...
The object of education is to give man
the unity of truth. Formerly, when life
was simple, all the different elements of
man were in complete harmony. But when
there came the separation of the intellect
from the spiritual and the physical, the
school education put entire emphasis on the
physical side of man. We devote our sole
attention to giving children information, not
knowing that by this emphasis we are
accentuating a break between the intellect¬
ual, the physical and the spiritual way of
life...
The child learns so easily because he
has a natural gift, but adults, because they
are tyrants, ignore natural gifts and say
that children must learn through the same
process that they learned by. We insist
upon forced mental feeding and our lessons
become a form of torture. This is one of
man's most cruel and wasteful mistakes.
We rob the child of his earth to teach
him geography, of language to teach him
grammar. His hunger is for the Epic, but
he is supplied with chronicles of facts and
dates. He was born in the human world,
but is banished into the world of living
gramophones, to expiate for the original sin
of being born in ignorance. Child-nature
protests against such calamity with all its
power of suffering, subdued at last into
silence by punishment.
On Art and Literary
Criticism
A fight has been going on for a long
time around the saying, "Art for Art's
sake," which seems to have fallen into
disrepute among a section of Western
critics. It is a sign of the recurrence of
the ascetic ideal of the puritanic age, when
enjoyment as an end in itself was held to
be sinful. But all puritanism is a reaction.
It does not represent truth in its normal
aspect. When enjoyment loses its direct
touch with life, growing fastidious and
fantastic in its world of elaborate conven¬
tions, then comes the call for renunciation
which rejects happiness itself as a snare.
I am not going into the history of modern
art, which I am not at all competent to
discuss, yet, I can assert, as a general truth,
that when man tries to thwart himself in

.«r~ rrrtjïw
lusxr?
¿&MX:üg&Et&&.' Téff ypjm**
"Ol^rr^i
r*ifc*.rniigzffii5r *»«»»?»
'iSEBSET'
-V^/^^frtfT«-*
his desire for delight, converting merely
into his desire to know, or to do good, then
the cause must be that his power of feeling
delight has lost its natural bloom and
healthiness.

From 'Thoughts'
The true universal finds its manifestation
in the individuality which is true. Beauty
is universal, and a rose reveals it because,
as a rose, it is individually beautiful. By
making a decoction of a rose, jasmine, and
lotus, you do not get a realization of some
larger beauty which is interfloral. The true
universality is not breaking down the walls
of one's own house, but the offering of
hospitality to one's guests and neighbours.
Children are living beings more living
than grown-up people who have built shells
of habit around themselves. Therefore it
is absolutely necessary for their mental
health and development that they should
not have mere schools for their lessons, but
a world whose guiding spirit is personal
love. It must be an ashram where men
have gathered for the highest end of life,
in the peace of nature; where life is not
merely meditative, but fully awake in its
activities; where boys' minds are not being
perpetually drilled into believing that the
ideal of the idolatry of the nation is the
truest ideal for them to accept... where the
sunrise and sunset and the silent glory of
stars are not daily ignored; where nature's
festivities of flowers and fruit have their
joyous recognition from man; and where
the young and the old, the teacher and
the student, sit at the same table to take
their daily food and the food of their
eternal life.
We are like a stray line of a poem,
which ever feels that it rhymes with another
line and must find it, or miss its own
fulfillment. This quest of the unattained is
the great impulse in man which brings forth
all his best creations.
Our greatest men have shown immense
respect for mankind in their expectations.
The old is prudent but is not wise.
Wisdom is that freshness of mind which
enables one to realize that truth is not
hoarded in caskets of maxims, it is free
and living.
We come nearest to the great when we
are great in humility.
If you shut your door to all errors truth
will be shut out.
The false can never grow into truth by
growing in power.
Man's history is waiting in patience for
the triumph of the insulted man.
