THE TUMULTUOUS HISTORY
OF ANCIENT NUBIA
by Boris Piotrovsky
\\
D awn was just breaking and there was a slight
breeze blowing as we left the enchanting
Island of Philae. The greater the distance between us and
the island, the more picturesque became Its rows of
columns and the higher Its pyramidal pylons rose into the
air. With every movement of our boat the gloomy cliffs
took on different fantastic shapes and looked for all the
world like supernatural beings. But no sooner had the
first rays of the sun appeared than the visions of dawn
vanished like a meteor..."
These words were written more than a hundred years
ago by A. S. Norov, the Russian orientalist and states¬
man who visited Egypt at the beginning of 1835. His
Journey Through Egypt and Nubia contains colourful
descriptions of the majestic monuments to the past that
are scattered between the First and Second Cataracts
of the Nile.
When I made my trip from Aswan to Wadi Haifa in
the Sudan in 1956 to study the archaeological monuments
In the area that will be flooded by the new Aswan Dam,
I frequently recalled Norov's expressive descriptions.
For a long time only the magnificent Egyptian temples
attracted the attention of scholars. Then a systematic
archaeological survey, carried out at the time the first
Aswan dam was built, revealed the civilization of ancient
Nubia, a country whose riches constantly attracted
Egyptian conquerors.
In the fourth millenlum B.C., the formative period of
the ancient Egyptian state, upper Egypt and Nubia were
Inhabited by tribes with a common culture.
T he Nubian civilization began to
develop independently when
the centre of the Egyptian state
was moved to the north at the time of the
Ancient Kingdom. Nubia became an Egyptian border
region and the pharaohs of the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Dynasties
sent many expeditions there to bring back slaves, cattle,
gold and Ivory.
These predatory raids gave way to more peaceful
relations at a later date, at the time of the 6th Dynasty.
Although the Egyptian frontier passed through a point
near Aswan there were Egyptian fortresses farther to
the south, in the area occupied by the Nubian tribes,
and their garrisons fought off the attacks of the Bedouins.
Inscriptions made by the Egyptian nobles Una and
Huefkhor (middle of the third millenlum B.C.) record
interesting facts about the Nubians. Una tells how the
BORIS PIOTROVSKY is Director of the Leningrad Branch
of the Institute of Archceology, Academy of Sciences of
the U.S.S.R., and a member of the International Com-
28 mittee of Experts for the Safeguard of the Monuments
of Nubia.
Pharaoh Meren-ra ordered him to build cargo boats in
Nubia for the transport of stone: the timber was supplied
by the rulers of Nubia. Huefkhor's inscription contains
fascinating details about the "exploration of the road"
to the land that lay beyond the Second Cataract and
also about three expeditions that returned from it safely
with rich gifts.
N oticeable changes took place in
the ethnic composition of the
population of Nubia
in the latter half of the third mlllenium
B.C.; this was due to the infiltration of tribes of Negro
herdsmen who established a new and independent culture
and maintained intercourse with Egypt and the Red Sea
coastal tribes.
Nubia began to grow stronger in the 19th century B.C.,
the period of the Middle Kingdom, and the Egyptian
pharaohs sent their troops to subdue the country.
Inscriptions by Pharaohs Amenemhet I and Senusret I
tell of the stubborn struggle put up by the Nubian tribes
in defence of their independence and of the cruel treat¬
ment meted out to them by the Egyptians. Egyptian texts
then began to describe Nubia as "The Land of Kush."
Excavations made in various places in the Nile Valley
have provided enough evidence to enable us to define
the culture of these Nubian tribes.
As a result of the Egyptian advance against the north¬
ern frontiers of Nubia, the centre of the Nubian state
was moved to the city of Napata, near the Fourth Catar¬
act, far to the south. By the time of the 18th Dynasty
(16th Century B.C.) the Egyptians had reached even this
distant point. However, they succeeded In subjugating
only the banks of the Nile and the fortresses they built
were harassed by raiding tribes of nomads that appeared
suddenly out of the desert.
The conquest of the whole of Nubia was completed dur¬
ing the 18th Dynasty: an Egyptian nomarch (ruler of an
Egyptian nome or province), given the title of "Royal
Son of Kush," headed the administration. The famous
Egyptian conqueror, Tuthmosis III, left a triumphal
inscription at Napata, the Nubian capital: it tells of his
victories in Anterior Asia and of the Egyptian subjugation
of Nubia to its southernmost limits, as far as the "horn
of the earth." This short description tells of the conquest
of all Nubia:
"I, the Pharaoh have all the Nubians as my subjects,
they work for me as one man and are compelled to pay
tribute in the form of a host of articles from the horn
of the earth and an immeasurable quantity of gold from
Waut. There they build big barges and ships, and in
addition they pay tribute in ivory and ebony." The mag¬
nificent temples erected by the pharaohs of the 18th
Dynasty confirm that they regarded Nubia as their own
country.

The situation remained unchanged throughout the
19th Dynasty. Rameses II, the most famous represent¬
ative of that dynasty, built a number of splendid temples
In the first half of the 13th century B.C. in Northern
Nubia (at Kalabsha, Gerf-Husein, Wadi-es-Sebua and
Derr). The most famous of all is the huge temple at Abu
Simbel.
The temples built by Rameses II are the last monuments
to Egyptian rule In Nubia; the decline set in at the end
of the 19th dynasty. At this time invasions from the
north increased and although Herihor, the High Priest
of Ammon, still held the title of nomarch of Nubia under
Rameses XI, the country was gradually becoming
Independent. This was the beginning of the ascendency
of the Kingdom of Napata.
The story of the rise of the Napata Kingdom remains
unknown to us, for we know the history of Nubia (Ethio¬
pia) mainly from the evidence of conquerors, from
Egyptian written sources in particular. And, Indeed, the
magnificent Egyptian architectural monuments diverted
the attention of archaeologists from the ancient
settlements and burial sites, the less Imposing remnants
of Nubian civilization.
In the 13th century B.C., the Kingdom of Napata was a
powerful centralized state embracing the huge territory
from the First (Aswan) Cataract in the North to the Sixth
Cataract in the South. Some of the southern nomes of
Egypt, those to the South of Aswan, fell to Nubia (the
Ethiopian Kingdom).
When King Piankhi ascended the Napata throne (circa
740 B.C.) he took advantage of the Internal dissension
and the enmity between the rulers of the different nomes
to launch a campaign against the country. He had
adopted Egyptian culture and the Egyptian religion and
Invaded the country as Its legitimate pharaoh, the wor¬
shipper of the supreme deity, Ammon.
An inscription by Piankhi in
Egyptian has been discovered
on a granite monument
near Napata; it describes the victories of
the Nubian king in Lower Egypt, in particular the capture
of Heliopolis and Memphis.
The king issued the following order to his troops on
their behaviour In Thebes, In the Temple of Ammon:
"When you reach Thebes and stand before Karnak, enter
the water, cleanse yourselves In the river, put on your
best linen raiment, lay aside your bows and arrows-
There is no strength in those who know not Ammon...
Sprinkle water on his altar. Kiss the ground before
him."
Piankhi's victories were not consolidated, however, and
when he returned to Nubia, Egypt again split up into a
multitude of petty nomes.
The Nubian kings consolidated their power over Egypt
under Piankhi's successor, Shabaka, the first pharaoh of
the 25th (Ethiopian) Dynasty, who had to carry on a
burdensome war against Assyria for Egypt's independence.
Piankhi's son Tcharka also took part In battles against the
Assyrians on the approaches to Egypt.
Tcharka became Pharaoh of Egypt in 690 B.C., at the
time of the fiercest struggle against Assyria. The Nubian
ruler met with temporary success In the early stages of
the war but in 671 B.C., Assyrian troops under King
Esarhaddon invaded Egypt; seized first Memphis and
then the capital, Thebes. Tlrhaka fled to Nubia, and
Esarhaddon, to mark his victory, erected a statue of
Tcharka, brought from Egypt, on the gates of his own
capital, Nineveh.
When the pharaohs of the Sals Dynasty ascended the
throne of Egypt, relations with Nubia became strained
and intercourse between the two countries ceased. The
Napata kings, however, retained Egyptian traditions,
considered themselves legitimate successors to the phar¬
aohs whose titles they bore, and were burled In pyramidal
tombs.
Even this brief survey of the long and ancient history
of Nubia shows it to have been one filled with conquests
and destruction, undergoing periods of development and
decline. Egyptian written records and art treasures are
almost the only sources from which the history of this
rich country may be studied. On the Egyptian monu¬
ments we come across Images of black Nubian prisoners
in leopard skins with ostrich feathers adorning their
heads; there are scenes in which they are portrayed
paying tribute In gold, ivory and strange animals. But
the civilization of this country that brought such rich
gifts to Egypt has not been studied archacologically.
Monumental edifices, gems of Egyptian architecture,
were erected in northern Nubia and have remained to Uns
day, victorious in the great battle against time.
But in addition to these grandiose monuments to the
majesty of Egypt, there remain hidden In Nubia the
relics of the little-known culture of those tribes on whose
land and by whose hands these magnificent buildings
were erected. The original and exalted culture of Nubia
undoubtedly had considerable influence on the history
of the entire North-East African area; for this reason
archaeologists and historians must make a careful study
of the records of the ancient Nubian culture now await¬
ing discovery on the site of the future reservoir to be
formed by the new Aswan Dam.
'Foto-Henrcd, 5lockho(rr>
Photo shows King Gustav VI Adolph of Sweden, chairman
of the Committee of Patrons of the Unesco Campaign to
Save the Monuments of Nubia, discussing the progress of
the campaign with Dr. Mohamed Awad, Chairman of the
Executive Board of Unesco. It was taken at a special
session of the Swedish National Commission for Unesco
attended by the King in Stockholm earlier this year.
29
