MASTERPIECE IN PERIL. Built more than 3,000 years ago in the XlXth dynasty of the New Empire, the Great Temple of Abu Simbel is of colossal
scale. It measures I 08 feet in height, I 24 feet in width, and extends 200 feet in depth. On the façade are four colossi of Rameses II (seen here in a
striking night photo made by floodlight). They are 67 feet high, their mouths are 42 inches wide and their huge heads are I 3 feet from car to ear
(the head of the second colossus disintegrated centuries ago). Left a statue of Queen Nefertari (wife of Rameses II) standing between a pairs of colossi.
O
1he greatness of Egypt is popularly identified
with the petrified geometry of the pyramids,
those remarkable examples of civil engineering, veritable
mountains of masonry. Experts, however, would agree
that the sublimation of funerary art, combined with
shrewd scientific insight, were the rock temples.
There are great free-standing Egyptian temples, superb
in their proportions, In their pillars and their sculptures,
but the architects of these were able to choose the best
artificial site, and the masons to select or discard the
quarried blocks for their building and ornamentation.
A sculptor, carving a statue, would pick the most suitable,
most enduring and most flawless stone for his purpose.
The architects and the masons of the rock temples had
no such latitude; instead of choosing blocks of stone they
had to discover an escarpment or a mountain which 7
would conform to their exacting requirements. Once com¬
mitted, their artistic ingenuity was hostage to the site.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ABU SIMBEL (Cont'd)
ART & SCIENCE
CONSPIRED
WITH NATURE
Among the greatest of these temples hewn from the
living rock were the Great Temple and the Small Temple
of Abu Simbel In which the immortality of the Gods and
of Rameses II was embodied in the indestructible rock.
They were planned by Seti I but executed in all their
grandeur by Rameses II during his prodigious reign of
67 years, from 1300 to 1233 B.C.
Modern geologists who have examined the site of Abu
Simbel are unstinted in their tribute to their unknown
predecessor (or predecessors) who chose this particular
location 3200 years ago.
Thirty miles north of the Second Cataract, on the left
bank of the Nile, where the river turns east, were two
rocky prominences divided by a gully. Here was a site
which met a first elementary requirement: that the
temple, dominating the river, face the rising sun.
In the vicinity, the left bank of the valley is
steep, a cutting by the river exposing about 400
feet of sandstone cliff, which could have shown the
ancient geologists the structure of the rocks. But this
evidence was merely superficial.
How did they know, as can be determined nowadays,
that there was little or no distortion of those sandstone
beds? How did they establish that the interior of the
mountain could architecturally house the Great Temple
which they were proposing to excavate? How did they
satisfy themselves that the consistency of the sandstone
would lend itself to the carving of colossi and of the
friezes?
How much did they know about the chemistry of
minerals and how the elementary granules of the sand
were bound together by a cement of iron oxide, which
gives the rock its colour-gradations, ranging through all
shades from pink to dark mauve? What did they know
of the porosity of the rock and the highly solvent power
of the Nile water, and hence of the water-table below the
mountain, which, when the rocks were exposed to heat,
would be pumped upwards by capillary action? This
"pumping" would mean the dissolving of minerals in the
rocks, a chemical reaction, and the precipitation of salts
all likely to alter the characteristics of the rocks.
The carved immortality of their Pharaoh would
depend upon the durability of the rocks they found. How
much did they know about weathering? How did they
determine from external evidence that the rocks within
the mountain would lend themselves to the structural
engineering of an ambitious temple such as Rameses
would certainly demand? On decisions like these not
only the reputations of those ancient geologists and
engineers depended but, one would guess, their very Uves.
To quote one of the technical reports drawn up by
engineering experts last year: "The temples of Abu
Simbel are a wonderful achievement. Apart from the
importance of the monuments themselves, we are struck
with admiration at the deep knowledge of geology which
the ancient Egyptians possessed. The presence of hard
sandstone banks alternating with softer ones was used
to advantage in creating the temples and the statues.
The more compact layers were chosen for the ceilings of
the temples and inner rooms, or to support the greater
weight of the sitting statues. They also made the most of
the fissures in the rock: th« facades of the two temples
run parallel to the more fissured lines."
On what we would nowadays call the "feasibility report,"
the ancients went ahead with the construction of the
Madeleine Pottier
two temples some 300 feet apart overhanging the banks
of the Nile. But they did something more; they contrived
the design of the temples to fit in to the natural landscape
so that art and science conspired with nature to make
Abu Simbel one of the wonders of the world.
The larger of the two rock temples, facing to the east
and to the rising sun, has a façade 33 metres (over 107
feet) in height and 38 metres (over 123 feet) in width.
It was dedicated by Rameses to Ra-Horakhti, Amon-Ra
and Ptah, the most important gods of Egypt. In its
proportions and structure It equalled a temple that might
have been built on the surface instead of underground.
On entering the underground temple one finds a large
hall, or temple court. It is divided into three aisles by
quadrangular pillars eight of them each with a statue
of the King 34 feet high. There even remain fragments
of colour paintings; and the bas-reliefs covering the walls
tell in life-like sculpture the story of his victory over the
Hittites and similar battles. The ceiling has paintings of
winged vultures and tablets in praise of Rameses.
This gives on to a vestibule, the ceiling of which is
supported by four quadrangular pillars adorned with
carvings of war exploits and the protector gods.
A narrow passage leads to the inner sanctuary where
are seated the statues of the three gods to whom the
temple is dedicated, and Rameses himself. And here is seen
the purposeful ingenuity of the architects and engineers.
Like' skilful stage-lighters, they contrived that the rising
sun would penetrate 200 feet into the heart of the
mountain and illumine the faces of only three of the
immortals. The fourth, the god of the Underworld, Ptah,
on the extreme left remained eternally in darkness. This
essential feature of Abu Simbel was one of the things
taken into account in deciding how the temple should be
finally preserved from the rising waters of the High Dam.
Eight smaller chambers are irregularly disposed on
the right and left of the central ones presumably so
that they would not impair the foundations of the main
halls and these were apparently functional parts of the
temples, storehouses and treasure chambers, although
whatever valuables they may once have contained have
long since disappeared.
Tio Nefertari, his wife, Rameses dedicated the
Small Temple, several hundred feet away
across a sandy gully. Its façade measures 88 feet in width
and 39 feet in height. It is ornamented by six colossal
statues, each 33 feet high. They are In two separate
groups in each of which the queen stands between figures
of the Pharaoh with, at their feet, their sons. One of the
pillars states: "The King built this Temple by hewing it
from the rock of the hill of the country of Takens."
In the interior of the hill, there is a hall large and low
supported by six columns. Three doors lead to the
vestibule and through it to a modest sanctuary.
To quote the engineering experts once again: "The
inspiration of the Abu Simbel monuments rises above and
beyond the traditional conception of the ancient
Egyptians, for whom the pyramid was the maximum of
architectural perfection, as the only conclusion of a long
process tending to geometrical abstraction. What
prevails here is the plastic sense of the mass; the
monument merges into its environment, the architecture
marries with sculpture, and sculpture actually acquires a
dominant character in the ensemble."

~ -	 M
ti -
~"
Unesco-Van der Haagen
At any hour of the day the Great Temple of Abu Simbel
is an impressive sight, but at dawn it offers its most
breathtaking spectacle. There was nothing haphazard
about the choice of its site or in the construction of the
multiple galleries and chambers deep in the mountainside.
At dawn the purposeful ingenuity of the architects and
engineers of ancient Egypt is fully revealed. Like skilful
stage-lighters, as the photos on these pages show, they
contrived that the rays of the rising sun after first illumi¬
nating the pantheon of statues on the façade of the
temple (opposite page) would penetrate deep into the
interior. Above, from left to right, through the temple
portals, the sun bathes the huge Osirian pillars with its
golden light and at certain times of the year reaches
200 feet into the heart of the mountain to the inner sanc¬
tuary. Here it picks out from the Stygian darkness the
seated figures of divinities like Amon, (left) "The God
of Thebes ". Below, the four immortals seated at the
far end of the sanctuary: Ptah, whose statue remains
eternally in darkness for he is king of the underworld ;
Amon, Rameses II and Ra-Horakhti, morning sun god.
%J
\ *
\
Unesco-Keating
M
4
M à f
-

10
ABU SIMBEL (Cont'd)
JACKING UP
A
OF STONE
0
T:he temples of Abu Simbel are part of
mankind's heritage, irreplaceable heirlooms
from the culture of 3,200 years ago. Modem needs and
modern technology may compel and produce the High
Dam of Sadd el Aali but the Present cannot afford to
squander the Past. Confronted by the achievements of
the makers of Abu Simbel, of the scientists (and they were
scientists as we have seen from the testimony of modem
geologists); of the craftsmen; and the artists, who were
dedicating their work not only to their gods but to
posterity, the least that our modern civilization can do
is to turn minds and resources to the rescue of their
creative handiwork.
As the trustee, for the Future of the Past, Unesco has
intervened. How much of the perishable antiquities, like
the great mud brick forts of Nubia, will be explored and
their stories deciphered before the waters rise, Is a chal¬
lenge which has been thrown to the archaeologists and
the conscience of the world.
B ut Abu Simbel Is a special case and Unesco,
with the agreement and support of the
Government of the United Arab Republic, has taken steps.
For the preservation of the Abu Simbel monuments, four
proposals were given serious consideration:
1. Raising the temples and surrounding rocks above the
level of the waters;
2. Building an earth and rock fill dam, to protect both
temples;
3. Building a protective concrete dam in front of each
temple;
4. Building a large dome concrete dam, to protect both
temples.
Of all these possibilities for preserving the temples from
the flood, two schemes remained at the end of 1960. One
was a proposal submitted by a French engineering con¬
cern, the Bureau d'Etudes André Coyne et Jean Beliier
(Paris), to build a rock fill dam to enclose the two temples.
The size was planned to allow a clear space In front of
the temples but the dam itself would tower above the
façades and, among other things, would defeat the ingen¬
uity of those ancient engineers who contrived that the
rays of the rising sun would penetrate into the heart of
the mountain.
Technical difficulties of water seepage would have
meant, in perpetuity, an annual cost of $370,000 for
pumping. The capital cost of the dam construction would
be $82,000,000. Another objection raised was that, with
the filling of the High Dam, the water-table of the land
around would rise and that, even though enclosed by the
TREASURES CAPTURED ON FILM. The massive structures of Abu
Simbel and its figures are completely carved from the solid rock. Impos¬
sible to dismantle, they must be moved in one piece as they were built.
Their soft red sandstone is particularly vulnerable to dissolution by
water. Even a brief submergence would remove completely the colour¬
ful paintings which still survive on walls and ceilings. Long before the
bold plan to raise the temples out of reach of the invading Nile was pro¬
posed every square inch of the great Abu Simbel group was being mi-
/ /

nutely examined. Black and white and colour photographs, photogram-
metric negatives (from which exact models of objects are reconstituted),
architects' notes, casts and copies of hieroglyphic texts, graffiti and in¬
scriptions have gradually been amassed. Photos show, above, Jean Jacquet,
Swiss architect, working on a survey of the great temple; below left,
photographer perched high on an Osirian pillar; below, scaffolding used
for making photogrammetric shots between colossi on temple façade.
Surveys of Abu Simbel were virtually completed this summer.
E
<
protecting dam, the rocks of the Abu Simbel mountain
would become saturated and the seepage would affect the
temples Imbedded in it.
The second proposal was of a very different kind. Con¬
ceived by the Italian architect and archaeologist, Plcro
Gazzola, it was prepared by three Italian civil engineering
firms Italconsult, Impresit and Lodlglani and put for¬
ward to Unesco by the Italian Government in October
1960. This suggested encasing each of the two temples In
concrete boxes and raising the rock masses 60 metres
(200 feet) above the present level of the waters and
reconstructing the original hill landscapes so that the
final position of the temples would bear the same rela¬
tionship to the Nile as it does at present but on a
higher elevation.
In January 1961, a Committee of Experts appointed by
Unesco in conjunction with the Government of the Unit¬
ed Arab Republic unanimously recommended the accept¬
ance of the Italian project for lifting the temples. Tech¬
nical questions were raised and were referred to another
committee consisting of experts from Norway and Sweden.
They confirmed the feasibility of the Italian scheme and
in June 1961 It was accepted by the Government of the
United Arab Republic. It will cost $70,000,000.
The Italian scheme ls bold, Imaginative and grandiose
and has transferred into twentieth-century idiom some¬
thing of the ancients' massive thinking, which could con¬
template the Great Pyramid, with its 2,300,000 separate
blocks each weighing 2 1/2 tons; or the Giant Sphinx,
240 feet long and 66 feet tall, hewn out of a left-over
rock of the Great Pyramid; or Abu Simbel, the disem¬
bowelled mountain itself.
Indeed one might compare this twentieth-
century concept to the ziggurats of Mesopota¬
mia. These ziggurats began as altars on the ground-
level, but successive generations of the priesthoods
surpassed each other in raising the altars higher and
higher, by superimposing one ziggurat upon another,
producing a man-made mountain with the temple, each
time, on top.
At Abu Simbel, the two temples will be lifted separately
and each will be supported by a honeycomb of concrete
supports, forming two massive pedestals. The lifting will
be an engineering feat, raising, in the case of the Great
Temple, a wedge of mountain-rock, weighing a quarter of
a million tons, with a delicacy of movement never before
attempted.
Consider again the site. The two temples are imbedded
in solid rock. The façades with their massive statuary are
poised on the escarpment above the river. The platform-
rock on which they stand ls 120 metres (390 feet) above
sea-level. When the High Dam is completed, the water
will rise to 182 metres (591 feet) above sea-level. So to be
above water-level the rock-sections embodying the tem¬
ples will have to be raised at least 200 feet, and under¬
pinned.
Before the lifting operations begin a whole series of
precautionary measures will have to be taken. The area
in front of the temple will have to be protected by a
cofferdam, an embankment 134 metres (440 feet) high, so
that the operations can be protected as the dam-waters
rise. A pit as long as the temple façades will be dug down
to the 105 metres level, that ls, about 50 feet deep, from
which the excavation and clearing of the galleries
beneath the temple blocks will proceed.
At the same time, the temples themselves will be care¬
fully reinforced an operation almost as delicate as the
mending of cracked porcelain. The structures, Including
the colossi, have already been carefully examined for
fissures. Some of the cracks probably existed when the
temple was first built. They have caused damage to the
Ramessid colossi In front of the Great Temple and in the
case of one statue have led to the shearing off of a head
and arm.
Inside the temple there are natural pipes, hollowed out '*
by percolating water, and veins which were closed with
CONT'D ON PAGE 13

ff -sfczm
250.000 TONS LIFTED
Drawings on these pages show different stages in the proposed
operation to lift the Great Temple of Abu Simbel. (1) OUT¬
LINE OF GREAT TEMPLE. (Inset) Galleries and sanctuaries
are burrowed deeply into the rocky hillside. (2) COMPLETED
POSITION. Temple will stand on a complex concrete structure
200 feet above its present position here shown by dotted lines.
(3) PRESENT SITUATION showing a cross-section of the
temple. Dotted lines show where cuts will be made into moun¬
tain. (4) REMOVAL OF ROCK. A great mass of rock directly
above the temple will be removed to reduce the size and
weight of the mass to be lifted. Utmost caution will be needed ;
blasting will be avoided to prevent damage to the monument.
(5) BUILDING OF CONCRETE BOX. After the temple block
has been cut off from the rest of the surrounding rock a huge
cellular concrete box will be built around it to protect it while
it is raised. Base of the box will be strongest of all, partly built
: .
--'>'' 'W .'ft
©
12

200 FEET
ABU SIMBEL (Cont'd)
of fabricated steel elements. (6) LIFTING BLOCK. Cut-away
drawing shows temple being raised within its protective box
by a multiple system of jacks working in pairs. (7) GIANT
JACKS & TUNNELS. In tunnels excavated beneath the temple
hundreds of giant jacks (left and right in drawing) will lift
a weight of over a quarter of a million tons. Underelectronic con¬
trol, they will move less than one-sixteenth of an inch at a time.
After every foot of lift they will be replaced by pre-fabricated
concrete supports. (8) FACADE ROCK FISSURES. Every
inch of the temple and the colossi have been examined and all
fissures recorded. Before any lifting is done the temple will
be carefully reinforced an operation almost as delicate as
the mending of cracked porcelain. The operations illustrated
here will be repeated, though on a reduced scale, for the smaller
Temple of Queen Nefertari a few hundred feet away.
Drawings Italconsult
Sfeksi
Boxed in concrete
mortar when the temple was built. There is the risk of
scallng-off of weathered rock when work begins. Of the
eight columns in the main hall of the Great Temple, two
are not carrying any load because of cracks between the
roof and the column head, and two others have been
weakened by fractures.
The \talls and roofs are in pretty sound condition but
the greatest precautions will have to be taken to preserve
intact the inscriptions and painting. (This could be done
by covering them with adhesive textiles.) All this work,
which would have amounted to a major piece of restor¬
ation even if the temples were not due to be moved, will
have to anticipate any disturbance of the rock blocks In
which the temples are encased.
The proposal is that the blocks, and the temples they
contain, once cut out of the hill, should be enclosed in a
reinforced concrete box so rigid that the separation ot
one block from the surrounding rock and the subsequent
lifting will not introduce any stresses or strains. This box
would have a bottom and four sides and binding ties
across the top.
The bottom ls a matter of special engineering concern
because it will have to take the lifting forces. The pro¬
posed bottom grid structure will be 16 1/2 feet high (this
may be reduced to 13 feet), which will involve the excava¬
tion of three groups of five parallel tunnels. The side and
rear walls of the box will be of heavily reinforced con¬
crete. They will be constructed in three groups of vertical
shafts, excavated and concreted, and each wall section
will be rigidly connected to the bottom-girders.
T:he front walls have to take care of the façades
of each of the temples. The space between
the wall and the façade will be filled with compacted,
crushed sandstone like packing a fragile present for
dispatch.
But, first, the mountain above the rock-blocks has to be
removed, to reduce the weight and facilitate operations.
This will mean shifting the overlay from 155 metres (about
500 ft) above sea-level upwards. This may sound like
nothing more than a rather elaborate piece of landscape
gardening (since it is planned to restore the contours
around the lifted temples), but it actually is an extremely
tricky operation. Explosives cannot be used nor any
method which might cause vibrations likely to disturb
the temple-rocks.
That applies to the whole process of cutting out the
blocks. Apart from explosive shocks being entirely barred,
any tools which would cause serious vibrations would be
dangerous. However, experiments carried out In Norway,
on rocks which would vibrate more than the Nubian
sandstone, have shown that compressed air tools for
boring and breaking can be safely used.
In rocks within twenty-four feet of any decorated parts,
mechanical hammers weighing not more than 30 kilo¬
grammes and giving a thousand blows per minute may be
used. ' At closer range electric saws and chisels will have
to be used.
But before anything ls done, experiments will be carried
out reproducing similar conditions to those at Abu Simbel.
And the experts have recommended that during the oper¬
ations microseismic warning systems super-sensitive
earthquake meters should be installed. In effect, It will
be a matter of the doctor feeling the patient's pulse the
whole time, one of the "patients" in this case weighing
a quarter of a million tons!
Once the blocks are cut and boxed the most delicate
operation of all will begin. This ls the edging upwards,
two millimetres at a time, of the concrete "crates" and 13
their massive contents. This will be done by mechanical
jacks on the same principle as those used to hoist a car
CONT'D ON NEXT P/»GE

ABU SIMBEL (Cont'd)
t!SgJg&_¿%v
1
ir-
V i
s -'^l^-i^ll^^lMpi
4 . *
^>* ^^¿r^L^
ANCIENT TEMPLE
RAISED & RESCUED
'is
-#-'.'1 tS^gvS^Kv 1 1
r
il
14
when you have a punctured tyre. Outsized versions of
those will be installed within the grid of the bottom struc¬
ture in a lattice so contrived that the points of upward
pressure will be evenly distributed.
The original proposal was to use hydraulic jacks. A
later suggestion was for mechanical jacks with a maxi¬
mum lifting capacity of 2,000 tons each, driven by
hydraulic stroke cylinders moving a turnable nut through
a ratchet system. The number of jacks and their lifting
power are still a matter of debate among the experts.
Some want more of them250 with 1,000-ton lift each and
even duplication of that, so that one set of jacks would
always be taking the load while the other was being
retracted.
Although the edging upwards will be done less than
1/16 of an inch at a time, one complete lifting cycle will
raise the temple by one foot. At this stage of the lift,
prefabricated reinforced concrete blocks of 30 cms will
be slipped into position to form permanent supporting
pillars. All this will be carefully synchronized and the
functioning of each jack will be recorded on a central
control panel so that the chief supervisor can make sure
that there is no risk of warping, which would produce
stresses in the temple blocks.
As the blocks rise upwards, the jacks will follow on
taller and taller concrete pillars which will form part of
the final supporting structure. The stability of all this
stilt-like erection will be guaranteed by horizontal rein¬
forced concrete beams joining the continuous walls. Thus
in the end, each temple will be standing on the crest
of what will, externally, be an enclosed pillar, surely the
biggest of pedestals which museum exhibits have ever had.
This, the direct engineering process, does not take into
account the vast "housekeeping" programme involved.
Already surveys have discovered where the huge supplies
of suitable sand and aggregate can be obtained in the
neighbourhood.
There will be a floating quay, which will rise with the
waters of the Nile. There will be a network of supply
roads; an electricity generating station; a settlement with
a working population, and with civilized amenities which
will be desperately needed in this tract of desert; work¬
shops, etc., commensurate with one of the biggest en¬
gineering enterprises; and when the "surgical" operation
of cutting out and transplanting the temples to the point
where they will be safe from the encroaching waters of
the High Dam of Sadd el Aall is performed, there will be
the further job of "plastic" surgery.
The . "scalped" mountain will be restored and the fea¬
tures, even the parting, the gully, between the temples
will be reproduced, as a replica, on the higher level, of
what they are today. This is not merely "beauty treat-

Mighty figures of the Pharaoh gaze
out over the Aswan Dam Lake, as
they once contemplated the Nile,
in this artist's impression of the
two temples of Abu Simbel
now standing some 200 feet above
their former level supported by
concrete pillars. By using their best
resources, modern engineers will
have saved a miraculous construc¬
tion of their ancient counterparts.
Drawing lUlcomull
ment," or even sesthetlcs, although those are properly
commendable; it is also a question of the future preser¬
vation of the monuments.
We talk about "living rocks," transferring a biological
simile to geology; but it is certainly true that these
monuments have survived with remarkable durability
because^ they have "lived" in balance with their natural
surroundings.
The present day experts have a healthy respect for the
foresight and judgment of their predecessors of 3,200 years
ago. The Ancients chose the site well, for all the reasons
which have already been discussed, but they also chose
an environment in which exposed masonry could endure.
This involved factors of temperature, humidity, shelter
from the sand blast, of erosive desert wind and a subtle
communion with the waters of the Nile. (Only since the
building of the original Aswan Dam with the resulting
raising of the water has chemical disintegration, in the
base of the Small Temple, begun to appear; this minera-
logical gangrene will be halted by the proposed "surgical"
operation.)
When the dam is filled the Nile will be approximately in
the same relationship to the temples as it is at present,
and at the higher elevation, contours similar to the pre¬
sent ones will recapture the environment. The orienta
tion of the temples will be precisely as now and the
morning sun will continue to bring out of the darkness
the faces of the Ancient Gods.
MISSING LINK SOUGHT IN NUBIA: An American anthro¬
pology-geology research team is now exploring theWadl
Haifa area for relics of the missing link between the very
primitive man of Africa and the ancient man of Europe.
The leaders of the expedition, Dr Ralph Soleckl, Associate
Professor of Anthropology, and Dr Rhodes W. Fairbridge,
Professor of Geology, both from Columbia University,
consider the Nile Valley the only well-watered corridor by
which ancient man might have migrated from the northern
to the southern hemisphere. They are therefore investigat¬
ing silt deposits which probably contain artifacts dating back
much further than the Egyptian civilization. The Columbia
expedition, financed by a $38,500 grant from the US National
Science Foundation and supported by the Sudanese and
U.A.R. Governments and Unesco, plans to save such relics
of ancient man before they are submerged by two hundred
or more feet of water that will rise behind the Aswan Dam.
15
