Strobophotography sees
WHAT OUR
28
WHICH MAN IS THE PROFESSIONAL?
Two men striking a nail into a board seem to the ordinary observer
to be making an almost identical motion. By the process of strobo¬
photography, however, a marked difference between the two is imme¬
diately revealed. Not only does the strobophoto show, even to the
unpractised eye, that there is a difference in the way the hammer
descends in the hand of the man on the left as compared to that of
the man at the right, but an expert can look at the two photos and
tell immediately who is the professional and who is the "Sunday" car¬
penter. Strobophotography tells why. The hammer at the right seems
to plunge smoothly toward its goal while the one on the left is obviously
moving along a more jerky path... but the one on the left is being wielded
by a professional. Now look closely. Up at the top of its trajectory,
the hammer hesitates (two images). The empty space between these
two hammers and the five below it indicates that the carpenter has
decided to strike and the series of five shows that he held back his

EYES DO NOT SEE
AM Photos André Salesse-Lavergne
hammer slightly while he was aiming it. Then there is only a blank
space as the hammer crashes down on the head of the nail. This means
that it was a hard, determined blow (the blurred image between the
seventh position and the nail is the hammer photographed on the
rebound, returning upward for a second blow). As for that even-
spaced movement in the right-hand photo, it actually shows nothing
but inexperiencethe man with the hammer held back his stroke
all the way down to the nail because he was afraid of missing it... and
perhaps he was afraid, too, of hitting his finger instead of the nail.
by André J. Salesso-Lavergne
Take a look at the minute hand and the hour
hand of your watch. Can you see them move ?
Of course not. Yet, you know from experience
that they are moving at dilïercnt speeds but
always constantly and regularly.
Now open the hood of a car with its engine running
and look at the fan. What can you see ? At best, you
will be able to make out a vaguely circular blur, sur¬
rounded by a halo and shot through with moving lines
resembling rays without any solid substance. You
certainly will not be able to describe the exact shape
of the fan blades.
Our eye may be very sensitive to certain phenomena
of light, but it does not enable us to observe directly
either slow movement (the hands of a watch) or rapid
movement (the blades of a fan).
To tell the truth, this relative infirmity of our eye
does not bother us at all in dally life. All wc ask from
our eyesight and its often-Indispensable ally, our
hearing, is to give us a quick and adequate picture of
our surroundings so that we can act to preserve and
maintain our lives.
Actually, by limiting the range and acuteness of our
senses to grasp the world surrounding us, nature has
tried to spare us an Incessant assault by an Infinite num¬
ber of sensations which are not really needed for our
mental or physical activities and which might even
harm us by creating disturbances In our lives.
But man in his evolution and progressive conquest
of the forces of nature has always sought to penetrate
the mysterious laws which force him to think "univers¬
ally" that is, beyond the range of his own senses.
Little by little, he has conceived ways of enabling him
to expand the frontiers of his knowledge. As far as
eyesight is concerned, the magnlfying-glass, the micro¬
scope and the telescope have opened the long-forbidden
worlds of the infinitely small and the infinitely large.
With the Invention of photography, man took a
new and very Important step. It meant that
he could halt the march of time to obtain eye¬
witness evidence and irrefutable proof of phenomena
which he previously had studied only through guesswork
and hypotheses based solely upon sensory observations
which were often erroneous or else the whims of his
memory.
In other words, photography gave man a new sense.
It amounted to a concrete form of memory retaining
only facts. This infallible "memory" certainly meant
steady progress along the road to an objective study
of events and facts, but one Important element was
still lacking.
As we all know, photography can offer us only a
snapshot of a very brief aspect of an event observed
in space and time. If all we want to learn is this
aspect, then we can be satisfied. But if we also want 29
;ONTD ON NEXT PAGF

^4 SEC
THE STROBOPHOTOGRAPH
(Cont'd;
Optical illusion known as the "stroboscope effect" was discovered
In 1828 by Plateau, a Belgian scientist who showed that two
spoked wheels placed on the same axle and rotating at the same
speed, but in opposite directions, will appear to the human eye
as a single and motionless wheel. Today, In films, spoked wheels
of cars or machines occasionally seem to be rotating backwards.
Each image remains motionless on the screen in front of your eyes
for 1/24 of a second. If, during this interval, the wheel moves the
exact distance separating one spoke from another, then the
spokes and the wheel appear to be stationary (Fig. I). But if
the wheel moves over a shorter distance than that separating
two of its spokes, it will appear to be moving backwards because
your eye will have the illusion that the spoke has moved slightly
backward instead of forward. Another phenomenon occurs when
a wheel, during this 1/24 of a second, moves exactly half the
distance between two spokes. It appears to have twice its true
number of spokes. At right is shown one of the pioneer
stroboscopic photos made by General Libessart of France, who
studied what happens to a golf ball when it is hit. He used a
device known as "stroborama", capable of 1,500 images per second.
Photos © André Salesse-Lavergne
HOW TO TAKE A STROBOPHOTOGRAPH. These three
photos of the same subject illustrate the difference between strobo¬
photography and photography. At left, a snapshot made at one-
fiftieth of a second of a woman striking a match to light a candle.
In the centre photo, the lens of the camera has been left open while
she struck the match, placed it on the candle and then moved the
candle. The result ¡s a "photogram". At right, the lens has remain¬
ed open but the photographer has used a special apparatus, called

Th« Unesco Courier. Mor t"l
Magic of an orchestra conductor's hand as it creates music is dissected
here by this strobophotograph, taken in the dim light over his stand.
Long, delicate fingers contrast with the confident and authoritative
movements of the baton, none of which could be seen by normal sight.
(
Right and wrong way of designing a car's boot lid are shown in these
two photographs. In the model tested at far left, the lid showed a
tendency to smack the startled motorist's nose on its way down, a
design fault brought out clearly by the stroboscope camera (the driver
has to lean forward to close it). At left, a lid comes down effortlessly,
enabling the driver to stand well clear of it. The manufacturer thus
knows even before production begins that the problem has been solved.
a flash generator, which flashed while the candle was being lighted
with the burning match. This is a true strobophotograph, breaking
down the individual phases of motion. Industry has already used stro¬
bophotography very profitably and educators now realize its value.
Photos © André Salesse-Lavergne
AMAZING
SURREALISTIC
BALLET
to know what preceded it and what is going to follow it,
we must have a method of investigation which ls capable
of capturing the event In Its full run through space
and time.
The principle of this method was Invented by a French
physiologist, Etienne Marey, when he succeeded In
taking successive snapshots at the rate of twelve Images
per second with his famed "chronophotographlc gun".
This enabled him to study the entire process of an object
in motion.
Later, other inventors, including the Lumière brothers,
discovered a mechanical system for "parading" Images
in front of a lens. This meant that motion could not
only be photographed but reproduced as well. Chrono-
photography became cinematography. Both of these
techniques offered an extremely Important new opport¬
unity to scientific research: the events they recorded
could now be analysed as many times as was required.
Strobophotography ls a method of investigation based
both on chronophotography and clnemaphotography.
The methods it uses are rather similar. But It presents
one striking difference which anyone can detect : the
apparent strangeness of the final result. For a strobo¬
photograph gives us a very unusual picture of human
beings in motion. Their familiar gestures are turned
into amazing and surrealistic ballet movements. They
look as if double exposures had given them additional
limbs or even bodies. One is even tempted to believe
that it is all a fake just as if a number of Images liad
been superimposed. It is not a fake however. A strobo¬
photograph Is absolutely authentic. It ls taken with
only one shot and during the elapsed time of the motion
it represents.
If a person being photographed seems to be using
five arms to greet a friend or a worker is apparently
using a dozen Identical tools, the explanation ls
very simple. A motion picture film would capture these
same movements with a number of small images. Each of
these images is a "snapshot" of an infinitely small phase
of the movement. Later, the images are developed over
a certain length of film which must then be projected
for the movement to be analysed.
But strobophotography does not use a number oí
pictures to capture these different and separate snap¬
shots. Instead, it registers them on a single negative
which remains motionless inside the camera. On this
single negative, all the phases of a movement are
recorded.
Those multiple hands, ghostly bodies, two-headed
creatures and doors opening on to infinity form a dream
world which can inspire artists, attract poets and
stimulate our imagination. But the scientist and the
technician are interested in them as well. To tell the
truth, strobophotography ls used most often by scientists
for it is the child of science.
In 1934, General Libessart used a "stroborama" invent¬
ed by the Seguin brothers to study what happens to a
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 31

STROBOPHOTOGRAPHY (Cont'd)
VALUABLE AID
FOR EDUCATORS
golf ball when It is hit. It enabled him to determine its
speed (147 feet per second) and its rate of rotation (200
revolutions per minute). Edgerton in the United States
has been carrying out major research along these lines
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He is
particularly famous for the shots he made in 1949 of
Abdessalam, the tennis champion, with the help of a
lamp flashing at a rate of fifty times per second.
Since strobophotography can supply the exact data
needed to solve a large number of problems, it has many
applications. Among them are : the study of simple
movements in order to achieve a scientific organization
of work ; the study of human conduct in thé presence
of natural or accidental situations ; the study of indi¬
vidual or group reactions to certain tests; and generally
speaking, objective observation of outward manifestations.
Strobophotography can also be used profitably by
industry. For example, the styling department of a big
European car manufacturing firm recently put it to work
in order to study ways of increasing driving safety and
comfort in its new bodies.
There are two fields, however, where strobo¬
photography can play an extremely important
part: education and the preservation of our
culture. Today, education is making increasing use of
visual aids which stimulate individual effort through their
stress on observation, attention, learning by memory,
reasoning, and aesthetic sensitiveness. Strobophoto¬
graphy would be an extremely valuable aid if educators
were willing to use it. In developing countries where new
"active" methods of learning are to be introduced, it
would help young minds to grasp facts.
In these same countries, there is also a vital need to
train workers in those basic movements which are to be
found in modern industry. In this connexion, you need
only look at the hammer-blow experiment shown on
page 29 to realize the contribution that strobophotography
can make to vocational education.
As for our cultural heritage, it can also derive great
benefit from strobophotography. As a result of economic,
technological and social progress throughout the world,
traditional gestures are vanishing every day and others
are condemned to vanish very shortly. Just about every¬
where on earth, customs are dying out, so-called folk
dances are losing their original meaning and ways of
life are doomed to oblivion. Yet the least of these customs
is fraught with joy, suffering, belief, hope or simply
humble truth making it worthy to be preserved in
mankind's heritage.
We could make a precious contribution to forthcoming
generations if we recorded these human "relics" which
are now expressed in so many different ways. Strobo-
photographic archives would be a priceless treasure for
ethnology and the humanities. Just imagine for a
moment if, through some miracle, we had a series of
strobophotographs showing the life of our Cro-Magnon
ancestor and, particularly, the way he shaped his flints.
32 Then you will understand the value of such archives.
André Salesse-Lavergne
Setting in and out of a car is easy... thanks to the engineers who
have ironed out any design quirks forcing passengers to undergo
contortions. In running down such quirks, strobophotography is
an Invaluable ally. Above, a passenger gets out of a car's seat in a
laboratory. Below, a breakdown of the movement made by the
passenger sitting next to the driver when he enters a car. For
a negative of the photo above in which the movement of the hands
can be studied to greater advantage, see the same photo page two.
