32
Elementary education is free and compulsory for children in all Latin American
countries yet some 12 million children are still without schools and through¬
out the continent there are 60 million illiterate adults (40 % of the adult popu¬
lation). In their drive to wipe out illiteracy, governments have been helped
since 19 56 by Unesco's Major Project for the Extension of Primary Education
in Latin America. Between 1956 and 1959 primary school attendance rose
by about four million and the number of teachers increased by 90,000. Above,
village women in Mexico, where Unesco helped to set up a regional Funda¬
mental Education Centre for Latin America, learn to read and write in an
improvised classroom. Right, radio school teacher's voice Is heard by thousands
of students, young and old, scattered over length and breadth of Colombia.

A CONTINENTAL CHALLENGE
70 MILLION
ILLITERATES
by Oscar Vera
D URiNG a trip to Ecuador two years ago, I visited
a little village on the shores of Lake Otvalo. It
was a Sunday but I noticed a party of Indians working
with unaccustomed vigour, carrying stones, levelling the
ground and digging out the foundations for what was
to be a school.
Three or four months later when I revisited the village,
I found that the little school was finishedbuilt by volun¬
tary labour and with some help from the authorities, who
paid for materials the village was too poor to buy. Eighty
very well-behaved small boys were seated on the simple
school benches doing their lessons under the supervision
of a woman teacher.
Today, the same thing is happening over and over again
in village communities of Mexico, Bolivia, Peru, Guate¬
mala and nearly all the Latin-American countries a
striking testimony to the efforts that men and women are
willing to make so that the new generation may enjoy
a fuller life. Such endeavours encourage the governments
of all countries in the region to build schools and extend
education, and thus remove one of the gravest obstacles
to social and economic development illiteracy.
The proportion of illiterates in Latin America (approxi¬
mately 40% of the population above the age of fifteen)
is still high in comparison with the United States, Japan,
or the majority of European countries, though it has been
considerably reduced from the beginning-of-the-century
figure of over 80%. We must remember, however, that
despite the common origin and closely related cultural
traditions of the twenty Latin-American countries, con¬
ditions vary considerably not only from one country to
another, but even within the individual countries.
In several of them (Mexico, Guatemala, Ecuador, Peru,
Bolivia) large groups of the original Indian inhabitants
have lived through conquest, colonial periods and the
years of independence without ever becoming completely
assimilated in the national life. They still preserve many
of their native characteristics.
In all Latin-American countries agriculture predomi¬
nates, and in almost all of them most people live in the
country. Consequently there is a profound disparity in
living conditions between the considerable urban devel¬
opment, comparable in many respects to that of the more
advanced countries, and the extremely backward state
of the rural masses. These differences are evident from
economic, social and cultural standpoints.
The measure of this difference is shown clearly in the
table published on this page, which lists the Latin-Ame¬
rican countries in ascending order of percentage of illi¬
teracy in 1950. The table also shows the close relationship
between the proportion of rural population, per capita
income, and the incidence of illiteracy. Generally speak¬
ing it is the poorest countries, with a predominantly rural
OSCAR VERA, professor of sociology and education at the Peda¬
gogical Institute of the University of Chile, is co-ordinator of Unesco's
Major Project for the extension of Primary Education in Latin America.
population, which have had the most difficulty In
expanding their education services. There are, however,
certain exceptions, which are worth mentioning because
they suggest that the backwardness or progress of a coun¬
try's educational system is determined not merely by high
or low income, but by other factors as well.
Costa Rica, for example, is a small agricultural country
which boasts that its schoolteachers constitute Its only
army. The proportion of illiterates is as low there as in
the most advanced .countries of the continent. On the
other hand, Venezuela, with the highest per capita income
in Latin America (thanks to its huge oil reserves) has a
comparatively high percentage of illiteracy. Since 1958,
however, the Venezuelan Government has been making
a vigorous effort and in the near future, through the Judi-
LATIN AMERICA
POPULATION, ILLITERACY,
INCOME PER CAPITA (1950)
Country
Argentina
Uruguay
Chile
Costa Rica
Cuba
Panama
Paraguay
Colombia
Mexico
Ecuador
Venezuela
Brazil
Peru
Dominican Rep.
El Salvador
Nicaragua
Honduras
Bolivia
Guatemala
Haiti
Population
Illiterate
Aged 15 yrs
and over
(percen¬
tage)
Total
(In thou¬
sands)
Aged
15 yrs
and-
over
o'
/y
Income
per capita
(USdollars)
17,189 69 13.6 (1) 300-449
2,407 69 15.0 (E) 300-449
6,073 61 19.9 150-299
801 57 20.6 100-149
5,508 64 22.1 300-449
797 58 30.1 150-299
1,397 56 34.2 100
11,334 57 37.6 100-149
25,826 58 38.0 (E) 100-149
3,197 57 44.3 100
4,974 58 47.8 300-449
51,976 58 50.6 100-149
8,521 56 53.0 (E) 100-149
2,131 56 57.1 100
1,868 59 60.6 100-149
1,060 57 61.6 100-149
1,428 59 64.8 100
3,019 60 67.9 100
2,805 57 70.6 100
3,112 61 89.5 100
Rural
population
(per¬
centage)
37.5
40.1
66.5
43.0
64.0
65.4
63.7
57.4
71.5
46.2
63.8
64.6
76.2
63.5
65.1
71.0
66.4
75.0
87.8
(I) Population ajed I 4 yean and over.
(E) Estimate.
Source« : U.N. Demojraphic Year Book I955, 1956, 1957, 1958.
UN : Preliminary Report on the Social Situation in the world (New York
Unetco : World Illiteracy in Mid-Century.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
33

CUBAN CLASSMATES
IN UNIFORM
In Cuba, 1961 has become "edu¬
cation year" by government order.
Plans are being put into effect to
eliminate illiteracy from the island
by opening classrooms for the
whole of the school-age population
and launching a vigorous adult
education campaign. Right, special
literacy class for soldiers. Campaign
slogan on blackboard tells Cubans:
"How you can help Cuba if you
are a teacher, make others literate;
if you can't read, learn how." Criti¬
cal problem of classroom shortage
is subject of cartoon, far right,
in Peruvian newspaper "Hoy".
Cuban Government photo
34
clous use of its resources, will bring education to the whole
school-age population. In this way, within the next few
years, illiteracy will have been uprooted at its source.
The percentage of illiteracy cannot alone give an idea
of how far education has been developed, or to what
extent it reaches the population as a whole. Thus, for
Instance, the proportion of illiterates in the United States
and Japan is less than 3%; yet the average educational
level of the population in the two countries is respectively
9 and 7.2 years of schooling. In other words, in the United
States the average adult has attended school for nine
years, and in Japan for only seven.
From this standpoint the average educational level of
the Latin-American population in 1950 was two years
ranging from six months' school attendance in the coun¬
try with the least developed educational system to just
over four years in the most educationally advanced. It
takes about four years of school attendance to attain
what specialists call "functional literacy", that is, a suffi¬
cient command of reading and writing to ensure that
these skills will not be forgotten and can be used with at
least a minimum of efficiency in the problems and acti¬
vities of daily life.
As a distinguished Brazilian educator has put it,
education in Latin America is the privilege of a small
minority which has access to the various levels of the
educational system, while the great majority of the popu¬
lation is neither equipped to make an effective contri¬
bution to economic development nor able to take a full
share in democratic life.
The two main reasons for this situation are school
absenteeism and school-leaving. Many children do not go
to school either because their parents, even when they
recognize the value of education, cannot do without the
extra income from the children's work, or simply because
there is no local school for them to attend.
A very high proportion of those who do start school
never complete the full course. Less than twenty-five per
cent of the children who enrol in primary schools stay
on to the end of the compulsory education period.
In 1959 primary school enrolments in Latin America
stood at about 25 million, out of a total of 37 million
children of school age. About a third of the children
were therefore not attending school. To provide proper
education for them at the right time would mean building
about 400,000 classrooms, training an equal number of
teachers, and recruiting the corresponding administra¬
tive staff and inspectors.
There is also the problem of providing equipment and
teaching materials. Finally, some financial assistance must
be given to poor children or to their families.
Such measures, and others of a purely pedagogic nature,
would get rid of absenteeism. They would also consid¬
erably reduce school-leaving, which reaches alarming pro¬
portions in nearly all the countries concerned, especially
in rural districts. They would also eradicate illiteracy
within a few years.
The Latin-American countries have decided to under¬
take this formidable task. But it is a particularly difficult
one for them not only because of their under-developed
economies but also because of the tremendous speed at
which their populations are increasing. While the total
world population is growing at the rate of 1.6% per
annum, the annual rate of increase in Latin American is
2,6%, and in a number of countries it exceeds 3 per cent.
This calls for a far greater effort to maintain adequate
educational services than is required in other countries.
It is not only necessary because of the rapid and tremen¬
dous growth of the population, but also because the pro¬
portion of those over twenty years of age who can make
an effective contribution to economic life in all its aspects,
and pay for the education of their juniors, is less than
50% in nearly all the Latin-American countries. In
other countries, where population increase is more gra¬
dual, the proportion is from 65 to 70 per cent.

LA CARICATURA DE HOY
V'Ní^
Without neglecting adult education campaigns, the only
means of rapidly bringing illiterate adults into full parti¬
cipation in community life and fitting them for new
economic activities, the Latin-American countries are
concentrating their efforts on extirpating illiteracy at
its root. One of the most important weapons in this
campaign is making primary education available to the
whole school-age population. These countries have there¬
fore been playing an active part, since 1956, in an unpre¬
cedented venture, Unesco's Major Project for the Extension
of Primary Education in Latin America.
Despite the short time this project has been in opera¬
tion, encouraging results have already been obtained.
Between 1956 and 1959, primary school attendance in
Latin America increased by about four million, while the
number of teachers rose by more than 90,000. In certain
countries the increase in primary school enrolments was
positively sensational: 40% in Honduras in the past three
years; 40% in Venezuela since 1958; 40% in a single year
in Cuba, where the Government has decided to make
1961 "education year" and plans to eliminate illiteracy
completely by providing schools for the whole of the
school-age population and conducting a vigorous adult
education campaign.
Brazil and Mexico, which between them account for
half the population of Latin America, have increased their
primary school attendance by 22% and 18% respectively
in the past three years. All countries, in varying degrees,
are adopting measures which testify to an increasingly
firm determination to extend and improve their educa¬
tional services. They have resolved that in ten years'
time there shall be schools available for all their children.
Unesco is sharing in this project to the limit of its
resources. It is encouraging and facilitating the powerful
movement initiated in the Latin-American countries to
make primary education universally available. It is also
co-operating with those countries and with various inter¬
national organizations particularly the Organization of
American States and the Ibero-American Bureau of Edu
cation in an extensive plan for improving the quality
of education.
Under this plan the training of education directors and
experts is being carried out, especially in the universities
associated with the Major Project, Santiago de Chile and
Sao Paulo, Brazil. Similar training is also given at the
Inter-American Rural Education Centre at Rublo (Vene¬
zuela) and in some European countries, including Bel¬
gium, Czechoslovakia, France, Italy and Spain.
The training of teachers, also associated with the Pro¬
ject, has been undertaken in Colombia, Ecuador, Hondu¬
ras and Nicaragua. The chief function of these schools
is to act as pilot schools, contributing to the improvement
of teacher-training methods. The plan also Includes
direct technical assistance In education, the organization
of short courses, seminars and national and regional
meetings, and the issue of publications by the Office for
the Co-ordination of the Major Project.
Some idea of the magnitude of the effort made to
train experts and directors of education may be gained
from the fact that from 1958 to 1960, 580 Latin-American
fellowship-holders took advanced courses In connexion
with the Major Project. Each of these fellowship-holders
is being equipped to play a part in directing education
or to teach in the teacher-training schools, and will
influence great numbers of present and future teachers
as well as the future policy of the education services.
The experience acquired in putting the Latin-American
Major Project into operation has aroused keen interest in
other parts of the world where similar problems exist,
and it is now being applied and adapted to the needs of
South-East Asia, the Arab countries, and Africa.
These countries, like the Latin-American States, are
hoping, by progressively expanding their education ser¬
vices, to solve their urgent illiteracy problem within the
next few years, and with it overcome the greatest obstacle
to the integration of national life and to the social and
economic development of the population as a whole.
35
