BREATH OF LIFE
This little boy, a victim of drown¬
ing, is being resuscitated by an
ancient method, once abandoned
and now considered by the Red
Cross and the World Health Or¬
ganization as more effective than
usual push-pull methods. The
boy is placed on his back and
his mouth cleared of any obstruc¬
tion. The rescuer then lifts the
boy's jaw with one hand, exerting
slight pressure below the ribs with
the other, and at the same
time breathes into his mouth.
© Scope Weekly, Mike Shea

THE DANGEROUS WORLD
OF CHILDHOOD
Dangers surround a child from the moment it draws
Its first breath. The whole of human life Is Indeed,
in a sense, an unceasing struggle against danger.
During his first year, a child Is Incapable of judgment.
Unable to move or to do anything for himself, he depends
entirely on his mother, who has to think and act for him,
and protect him against all the dangers to which he Is
exposed.
There is one particular danger against which the
mother must be constantly on guard suffocation. The
first precaution Is to make sure that within the baby's
reach there is nothing that might interfere with his
breathing. Eiderdown pillows should be banished.
In recent years, a new danger has appeared in the
shape of plastic curtains, trimmings, etc. Static electri¬
city may cause this filmy substance to cling tightly to
the face of a new-born child, blocking Its nose and mouth
and suffocating It rapidly. In the United States, plastic
bags bear a notice drawing attention to this danger and
warning parents to keep them out of baby's reach.
Food Is the second great cause of suffocation. Even an
overworked mother should realize that she Is running
a terrible risk if she leaves her baby alone to suck his
bottle. Thirdly, far too many mothers appear not to
know how easy it is to stifle a baby sleeping In the same
bed with them.
While a mother should always protect her child
against danger during the first months of his
life, It Is very Important for her to start letting
him fend for himself when he' Is about one year old.
Little by little, she should lose the habit of doing things
for him, of fussing over him. A mother who Is over-
worried and over-careful Is perhaps the child's greatest
danger; for the moment he escapes her supervision as of
course he will sooner or later he Is likely to assert his
freedom by some forbidden and perhaps fatal action.
One precaution against this Instinct for self-assertion
Is to make the child's environment as safe as possible.
But passive protection Is not enough: It Is necessary for
the child to learn to understand the risks he runs. Adults
frequently make one of two mistakes: either they credit
the child with more intelligence than he possesses, or
they assume he Is quite unable to think for himself. In
both cases they fail to understand that they are dealing
with a mind and a body In constant development.
Between 12 and 15 months, the child is absorbed In
examining the world around him. He will explore the
house. He will try to touch everything he comes across,
particularly if it is on a level with his eyes. Almost every¬
thing he will try to put in his mouth. Around two, he
becomes capable of opening a door. He likes to lift up a
lid and empty a box, only to fill it up again afterwards.
He has little Idea of distance and tries to climb here,
there and everywhere. To play with water becomes a
favourite pastime. At about three, he Is surer of his
movements and likes to go walking. He learns to dis¬
tinguish right and left. He enjoys feeling responsible and
making himself useful. At the age of four or so, he
thinks of nothing but running about and playing ball.
He can ride a tricycle and climb trees. He can concen¬
trate mentally for longer periods.
Should all this exploration and these Increasingly dan¬
gerous activities by prohibited? "No," says Monsieur
Robert Sallé, head of the education and publicity section
of the French Institut National de Sécurité. "You cannot
base accident prevention on the principal of taking no
risks. In life you get nowhere If you don't take risks."
Safety education should accordingly be pursued along
two lines: teach the child to distinguish between the risks
he may take and those he had better avoid; teach him the
best way of dealing with dangers that cannot be avoided.
If parents are to provide their children with a judicious
blend of advice, reprimand and prohibition, they must
learn to know their children better. They should
for Instance admit once and for all that, as the stati¬
stics show, boys are more liable to have accidents than
girls. Not as an excuse for resignation or inaction but
as a guide to where preventive efforts should be used.
An important factor in accidents Is the time of day.
The survey carried out In 1955 in Stockholm by the
Swedish Committee for the Prevention of Accidents in
Childhood showed that a large number of accidents oc¬
curred between 10 a.m. and 8 p.m., with a slight in¬
crease from 11 a.m. to midday and a very marked increase
between 3 p.m. and 6 p.m. In Stockholm, these arc the
hours immediately preceding the midday and evening
meals, and are probably also those during which children
are less well supervised. Hunger and fatigue, particularly
towards evening, make the children more accident-prone.
Similarly In France It was noted by Dr Gravel that under
the age of 15, most accidents occur around 5 p.m.
The time of year also plays a part. According to
Dr Barbara J. van den Berg, summer is the season In
which most of the accidents among children between
the ages of 1 and 14 occur In the Netherlands.
A pilot study carried out in the United States of Am¬
erica on children who repeatedly suffered accidents
revealed a number of psychological factors. It was
found that hostility to the environment, a conflict with
the parents, or simply a state of tension within the family
may create a predisposition to accidents. Also that a
child who strains his powers in order to gain acceptance
by a group of older children may take dangerous risks.
In different regions, children are exposed to different
dangers. In Scandinavia and in the Netherlands, drown¬
ing is the most frequent cause of accidental death among
children of pre-school age. Among home accidents in
Great Britain, burns are second only to suffocation.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE 9

THE DANGEROUS WORLD OF CHILDHOOD (Cont'd)
In all countries where motor traffic Is intense, it Is
responsible, perhaps not for the most frequent, but cer¬
tainly for the most serious accidents. In Sweden, 40 per
cent, of childhood accidents occur in or around the home
and only 10 per cent, occur In traffic; but 34 per cent,
of accidental deaths among children are due to traffic.
In the Netherlands, among children of pre-school age
who are hurt In a traffic accident, most are on foot.
It has often been said that the education of the children
starts with the education of the parents. This Is especial¬
ly true In matters of safety. "If I had only known. . ."
says the mother in despair after her child has been
crippled or killed In a traffic accident. Why did she not
know that a child under five should never be allowed
to venture alone on the road?
She should have known that there are a number of
simple things a four-year-old can be taught. The great
thing In road safety for children Is to get them to stop
and think. According to British experts a "Kerb Drill"
to teach children how to cross a street has already saved
thousands of lives in the United Kingdom during these
last 30 years. As the British drive on the left of the
road, the drill goes like this:
"At the kerb, HALTl
Look to the Right, Look to the Left,
Look to the Right again,
If all clear, Quick March."
It would, of course, need adaptation in countries where
traffic moves on the right.
According to Monsieur Robert Sallé of the French Insti¬
tut National de Sécurité, safety education must not be
based on fear:
"We all know what a deep Impression terror stories
can make on the young mind. The child Is prepared to
accept them as real, even If the stories speak only of ima¬
ginary dangers. We also know that childhood terrors
may make a lifelong Impression, even though, during ado¬
lescence and later, efforts may be made to overcome the
bad effects. This being so, -it would be just as stupid to
frighten a child with real dangers as with Imaginary ones.
What Is needed is to get the child to acquire habits of
simple self-defence."
Safety education must therefore be considered part of
general education and should certainly be included In
the school curriculum. It Is also an essential part of
that "savoir vivre" that the child acquires mainly from
his parents.
The motorist or the cyclist driving in town traffic must
have his eyes everywhere, right, left, in front, and behind.
This kind of attention is exactly that of an animal, or
a man for that matter, moving through a probably hostile
forest. Schooling on the other hand tends to develop
concentrated attention. A strong case can be made out
for training this diffuse kind of attention and one of
the best ways of doing so is probably through team games
and sports.
Sport Indulged in reasonably may help young people
to avoid traffic accidents, not only because it sharpens
reflexes, but because it accustoms to the observance of
rules, and encourages a well-balanced way of life, healthy
food habits, and moderation in drinking. The best way
of substantially reducing the number of drowning acci¬
dents is to teach swimming at school.
As regards falls, an analysis of Industrial and home
accidents shows the usefulness of distinguishing two
kinds: falls on the level and falls from a height. The
large number of falls in all human activities and the sta¬
tistical predominance of falls on the level suggest that
one remedy might be to give young people the right kind
of physical training perhaps Including elementary judo
(Japanese wrestling) and simple acrobatic exercises on
the ground.
Accidents are fewer following any efforts to make
children realize the risks they are running and to teach
them how to meet the dangers they encounter.
Education offers the only hope of, little by little, over¬
coming this great malady of our times without detriment
to courage, initiative, and other human values.

Curiosity killed the cat, according to the
old saying. Carelessness on the part of
adults combined with the natural curi¬
osity of growing children can make any
house a perilous place. Simple things
like a tube of aspirin left lying on a table,
a saucepan of boiling water or unpro¬
tected electric power points (photos on
these pages) hurt, cripple and kill count¬
less children every year. Below, kinder¬
garten children out for a walk not only
observe proper traffic discipline by using
pedestrian crossing, but also keep in a
compact group within protective "reins"
leading to the teacher's guiding hand.
WHO »nd ILO photoj
11
