JOURNEY TO THE
LAND OF KUSH
by Rex Keating
Our train was running slowly across a plain; it
was a sandy plain blown into wavelets by the
strong north wind which whistled through the cracks in
the carriage windows. The train travelled slowly other¬
wise it would have torn up the tracks. Inside the
compartment, choking dust hung in the air like a mist.
Outside, through the carriage window, tinted as a protec¬
tion from the harsh light, three colours were dominant,
the yellow of the sand, the blue of the sky and the purple
of the rocks lining the horizon. Harsh colours all. In
this stretch of desert south of Wadi Haifa in the Sudan,
nothing grows, because here it rains perhaps only once
in ten years.
Over to the west of the railway flows the river Nile,
through landscapes no less harsh and forbidding. This
land was known to the ancient Egyptians as Kush :
today we call it Sudanese Nubia. The great lake which
will build up behind the new High Dam at Aswan will
flood far south through Egyptian Nubia, across the border
Into Sudanese Nubia, where it will engulf first the Wadi
Haifa district, then the Second Cataract, finally to end
just short of the Third Cataract, which is the extreme
limit of the flood, some hundred miles inside the Sudan.
What makes Sudanese Nubia so Important to
archaeologists? Professor W.B. Emery of Lon¬
don University has answered this question. "It is the an¬
cient towns, the cemeteries and the old fortresses of Nu¬
bia," he says, "which cannot be considered beautiful but
which are absolute treasure houses of Information about
the life, conditions, hopes and aspirations of our fore¬
bears. These remains must be explored and excavated
without fall."
A few months ago, I found myself in one of those for¬
gotten fortresses high above the Cataract. It was Shelfak,
picturesquely named by the ancient Egyptians "Curbing
the Foreign Countries." In this timeless setting the past
assumes almost tangible form and I found myself pictur¬
ing an Egyptian sentry of long ago looking out over the
river to the hostile desert beyond.
The wind was blowing strongly, whistling among the
rocks and sending up swirls of black dust from the mud
bricks of the sentry-walk below my shoes. With the
wind in my face, I looked towards the north along the
length of the Nile, and there about a mile away, was
a rocky Island, b'igger than most and rising to a peak.
Growing out of the peak was another fortress, its every
detail visible clearly in the crystal atmosphere.
My ancient Egyptian sentry would have seen the rocky
peak, but he would not have seen the fortress, because
this was built some 3,000 years after his time by a Chris¬
tian kinglet of Nubia. Neither would he have seen yet
another fortress, built at the end of the nineteenth
century A.D. by Kitchener in his advance against the
Dervish armies.
From this remote Nubian fortress, one can span four
thousand years of history. Forty turbulent centuries of
life along the banks of this stretch of the Nile. For this
was always a great highway between the Mediterranean
civilizations of the north and Africa to the south.
Armies have struggled along it for close on 5,000 years,
< ->
^--*?^y__-J
y
(
l*>
CONT'D ON PAGE 3 5

f « T-
JÊt Á-.
ST-
ff-.
"*,
Mb .
3Ë kP^M/-'-^" -
í«*. a. * ; -^
i»-&:
a.V
'
s%&
%: ¿&
ft
;'
-^
I * ^
/"
:x
<«ur;j¿SU
kr^s
r/-^?V
--'
Unesco- Keating
GUARDIANS OF THE NILE. On their southern frontiers,
in present-day Sudan, the ancient Egyptians selected this
site, where the Nile narrows sharply between granite cliffs,
to build two forbidding fortresses 40 centuries ago. Semna
West (top of aerial photo) is clearly visible amid the light-
coloured sandy wastes of the more arid western bank of the
river. Directly opposite is the fortress of Semna East dis¬
tinguishable from the surrounding maze of rock gulleys
by the straight lines of its fortified walls. Both fortresses
will be submerged, but their important temples, dating from
between I 500 and I 400 B.C., are to be removed to safety.
Inset Semna West temple amid crumbling fortress walls.
33

From the ruined walls of this ancient Egyp¬
tian fortress at Shelfak in Sudanese Nubia
the eye spans 4,000 years of turbulent
history along the stretch of the Nile it
once guarded. On a rocky island (upper
centre) are the remains of a fortress built
.about 1,000 years ago by a Christian king¬
let of Nubia. Away on the horizon is
yet another fortress, built by troops of
General Kitchener in his advance against
Dervish armies in the late 1 9th century.
34
This flat-bottomed boat crossing the Nile
to once strongly fortified island of Uro-
narti in Sudanese Nubia is almost identical
to the ones used by the soldiers of the
Pharaoh Sesostris nearly 4,000 years ago.

LAND OF KUSH (Cont'd)
The discovery a few years ago of the great fortress of Buhen
near Wadi Haifa revolutionized previous conceptions of
Pharaonic military architecture. Here, workers continue
the excavation of its vast fortifications which once
kept careful watch over the strategic area around the
Second Nile Cataract, dividing Upper and Lower Nubia.
The people who dwell today near the Second Cataract of
the Nile offer living examples of Nubia's remote past. Their
lives are rooted deeply in unbroken threads of tradition.
Below, typical portal decoration of a contemporary Nub¬
ian house containing symbols and emblems some of which
date back through the Christian era to Pharaonic times.
HIDDEN SECRETS
OF THE SECOND
CATARACT
the soldiers of Pharaoh, the dark-skinned warriors from
the kingdoms to the south, Greek mercenaries, sweating
Roman legionaries, the troops of Islam, the helmeted men
of Kitchener's army5 000 years of marching and count¬
ermarching.
I reflected that at last peace was to come forever to
this land, for Nubia with its rocks, its temples, its
fortresses, its memories of a past incredibly remote, is
doomed to vanish beneath the rising waters of
the Nile, the river which has given it life from the
beginning of time.
But Sudanese Nubia holds more than monuments and
relics: it contains the people of the Second Cataract and
they are a living example of life in Nubia's remote past,
as Mr. L.P. Klrwan, Director of London's Royal Geogra¬
phical Society, recently told me.
Towards the end of the 19th century the railway from
Wadi Haifa struck off across the eastern desert, leaving
these people In a great bend of the Nile and creating
an archaeological museum filled not only with monuments
but with memories of the past.
Their folklore is fascinating In this respect and it links
up with archaeological discovery and literary evidence
but, as Klrwan pointed out, the people of the Second
Cataract must leave their ancient land before the waters
close over It. They are to be moved to an area some hun¬
dreds of miles away and Inevitably the unbroken threads
of tradition rooted deep In their homeland will be severed.
Within a generation or so the folklore and traditions will
be lost so It ls important for a social anthropology survey
to be made before the exodus gets under way.
Klrwan feels that any such survey should note carefully
the architecture and decorative designs of modern Nu¬
bian houses: some of the emblems used date right back
through the Fung Kingdom of the 15th century to the
early Christian era and earlier still to Pharaonic times.
I myself found an example of these enduring
traditions in the heart of the Second Cata¬
ract. From the Semna fortresses I had followed an
ancient wall running north along the river bank for about
seven miles to a point opposite the island fortress of
Uronartl ("Arti" is Nubian for "island"). I shall never
forget the setting.
The island is long and narrow, close on a mile In
length, and the fortress springs from a crag high above
the Nile at the northernmost Up of the island. The black
rocks dazzle the eyes, their surfaces polished to a metallic
hardness by immemorial floods. Here the Nile runs swift
and deep.
We crossed in a boat as broad as it was long, flat-
bottomed, and of a construction unfamiliar to me. And
here the Second Cataract yielded up one of Its many
secrets. Professor Torgny Säve-Söderbergh of Upsala
University, Sweden, with whom I was travelling, explain¬
ed that this boat was built in the tradition of ancient
Egypt as depicted on the walls of the tombs. So we
sailed across the Nile to the Island of the King, Uro¬
nartl, on a craft that would have been familiar to a sol¬
dier of the Pharaoh Sesostris, looking down from the sen¬
try-walk high above our heads.
Another fortress on the horizon, built some 3,000 years
after Sesostris' day was a reminder that Christianity
endured In this part of Nubia for close on 300 years, until
the Increasing pressure of Islam finally overwhelmed it
and the many churches and monasteries fell into ruin.
A few days later, in Khartum, Professor P. Shennle of
the University of Ghana spoke to me about this fascin¬
ating period of history. He pointed out that the Christian 35
kingdoms of Nubia, lasting from roughly the middle of
the 6th century till at least the 14th, are hardly known.
All photos Unesco Keating CONT'D ON PAGE 37

yí>:^.:_ -._
A Unesco Radio and T.V. expedition, led by Rex Keating, last year visited
the threatened sites in Egyptian and Sudanese Nubia. Here Rex Keating
descends a street of the ancient fortress of Semna West (Sudan) while other
members follow with gear and equipment. Temple Is seen on the skyline.
LAND OF KUSH (Cont'd;
The Rock of Abu-Sir at the entrance of the Second
Cataract of the Nile in the Sudan overlooks the ancient
Nubian highway along which, for close on 5,000 years,
soldiers, merchants, travellers and pilgrims have passed
ISLAND WORKSHOP OF STONE AGE MAN
36
They begin with the coming of missionaries from Byzan¬
tium, sent by the Emperor Justinian in the middle of
the 6th century, who came up through Egypt to the then
pagan peoples of Nubia.
Still in existence are the writings of the Syrian, John
of Ephesus, which give a vivid account of the coming of
one of these missionaries, of how he suffered from the
heat and hid himself in a cave with his feet In a basin
of cold water to keep cool during the hot weather, an
action with which many of us who know the Sudan
during the summer months will be in great sympathy.
On many of the little ruined churches of the area are
frescoes of gods, of the Virgin, of saints, all showing very
strong Byzantine characteristics. The pottery of the peo¬
ple is also of extremely good quality, a fine painted ware
with many motives derived from the Mediterranean.
It is also interesting to see that this State maintained
its theological links with Byzantium and did not sub¬
scribe to the Monophyslte heresy of the Coptic Church
in Egypt; as a result of this we And gravestones written
in Greek, although in many cases a very bad Greek, right
up until the 12th century.
Professor Shennie pointed out that these are the most
remote Greek inscriptions known anywhere In the world,
and It is quite clear that those who were writing them
could have had no contact with Greece itself, prob¬
ably for many generations.
The Nubians live in a valley of the Nile, which, since
the continent of Africa attained the shape we recognize
today, has been the main overland route between north
and south between the Mediterranean coast and the
vast ethnic group of the Negro peoples of Equatorial
Africa. Man must always have used the Nile valley as a
convenient highway. Anthropologists have even sug¬
gested that Central Africa may have seen Man's first
triumph over his material surroundings. This is a
measure of the importance of the prehistoric sites which
have yet to be discovered on the banks of the Nile.
Only two years ago near the extreme southern limit of
the area to be flooded, a discovery of the first impor¬
tance was made on the prehistoric terraces of the Nile:
among many animal bones, lay the jawbone of a Nean¬
derthal man.
Traces of prehistoric man are plain to see on all sides
in the Second Cataract. On the island of Uronarti, for
example, Professor Soderbergh showed me what he des¬
cribed as a "Stone Age workshop." There lying on the
surface were typical mesolithic Implements. Professor
Soderbergh remarked that Uronarti must have been
inhabited for tens of thousands of years and that before
It was lost it must be surveyed and excavated so that
its whole history might be revealed.
This deserted island in its harsh and lifeless, yet aus¬
terely beautiful, setting, induces a fascination that Is
curiously disturbing. On all sides are tangible signs of
the generations of men and women who once lived here,
stretching back to the shadowy dawn of history and far
earlier, for possibly fifteen thousand years and more. By
comparison, the Middle Kingdom fortress on Its crag is
a manifestation of the modern world.
The earliest of the peoples of ancient Egypt regarded
the area south of Wadi Haifa with awe. Its inhabitants
were the fierce cattle owners against whom they built
the Immense fortresses which still stand along the length
of the Cataract, spectacular even in their ruin. Yet a
thousand years before the fortresses frowned over the
river, travellers and expeditions from Egypt came this
way.
Standing back from the river Nile ls an isolated hill;
a shoulder of rock fallen from the hill above and standing
a yard or so away from it, conceals on its inner face on
Inscription. This is by far the earliest Inscription in
Sudanese and Egyptian Nubia and it records in archaic
hieroglyphs that an expedition sent by King Djer of
Egypt passed this rock on its way to the south. King
Djer was the third king of Egypt's first dynasty, an Incre¬
dibly remote figure who ruled at the very dawn of Egypt's
history some 5,000 years ago. Yet here, in effect, is his
signature, a clear Indication that he did once exist.

* - :*^ifc
<«*'
-*#*
<*. xsi
between the Mediterranean civilizations to the north
and those of Central Africa to the south. Here, along
the length of the Second Cataract, the peoples of
Ancient Egypt built a series of immense fortresses.
Ancient hieroglyphs and carvings on this rock slab at Jebel Sheikh cl Suleiman,
in the Sudan, are the oldest inscriptions yet found in Sudanese and Egyptian
Nubia. Some 5,000 years old, they record that an expedition sent by King
Djer, third monarch of Egypt's first dynasty, passed the rock on Its way south.
On the rocks round about are other inscriptions, left
by travellers, armies, expeditions, traders, who passed this
way during the next 2,000 years or so, but it is the Djer
Inscription with its archaic lettering that stirs the ima¬
gination. Who led the expedition of King Djer and how
big it was, we shall never know. But we do know that
they were very brave men. They believed, In those early
days, that they were venturing into what they called
"the Land of Ghosts," a territory of nameless terrors,
where giants and pygmies lived and monstrous animals.
Worst of all, they were venturing to the very edge of
Amentat, the dreadful "Abode of the Dead." How many
similar rock inscriptions remain to be discovered?
On the site of an archaeological excavation in Suda¬
nese Nubia, I watched the workmen carrying away the
sand and singing with the voice of Africa. They could
hardly have known the significance of the objects they
were helping to uncover, yet these objects may one day
reveal knowledge of profound importance to scholars
wishing to trace the Influences which have fashioned
Africa. I suddenly recalled that a few weeks earlier, in
south-west Sudan, a thousand miles from Nubia, I had
recorded a mountain people singing with rhythms that
carried faint echoes of the Nubian song.
All over West and Central Africa strange similarities of
form have appeared In widely separated areas. The
ancient name of Kush is still preserved in the names of
Nubian-speaking peoples living today in south-west
Sudan. There are the Kagiddi, for example, who believe,
they came from the east under the leadership of a queen,
who they say is buried in a large mound grave In Jebel
Meldot. The queen was probably one of the last monarchs
of defeated Kush, in other words the Nubian Kingdom of
Meroe, which lasted nearly 1,000 years from about 600 B.C.
The Kushites were great iron workers. Their capital,
Meroe, has been called the "Birmingham of the ancient
world" and from their factories, weapons and objects of
iron spread across Africa, influencing profoundly the
neighbouring African cultures of that day. They have
left many Indecipherable inscriptions: it is possible that
in Nubia lies burled the key to the Meroitic tongue.
To this day in Benine City, Nigeria, bronze objects are
being made which recall strongly some of the bronzes
made in Meroe and Egypt to commemorate the Egyptian
god, Amon. From Ghana too. come two bronze lamps
which strongly resemble the lamps found In burial
mounds of the 5th Century A.D. In northern Sudan. These
are faint hints, but significant.
The link, Professor Säve-Söderbergh maintains, Ls to
be found in Nubia, on the banks of that 300-mile stretch
of the Nile which the High Dam will submerge.
Professor Emery described Nubia to me as the cockpit
of the ancient African world. From the north, the Egyp¬
tians, representing the highest civilization of that time,
were pushing south to exploit the gold mines and to
trade in ivory, precious woods and other products.
"The people of the south, whose culture, as wc arc
beginning to realize through recent excavations and
research", Professor Emery added, "was by no means
negligible, were pushing north to the more fertile parts of
the valley of the Nile. Consequently there was an almost
continuous state of warfare between the peoples of the
north and the south, and the results of the battles be¬
tween them, small as they were In comparison with our
modern conflicts, have greatly influenced the course of
European civilization and, through European civilization,
that of the world at the present time."
At the University in Khartum, L.P. Klrwan explained
why he considered the excavation of new sites in Sudanese
Nubia to be of the greatest importance.
"This is going to produce world history," he said. It
is going to add to the history of Africa, not only of the
Sudan but also of Africa as a whole. This Ls a subject
which is of Increasing interest to African students and
African peoples as they emerge into independence.
"The time for all this work is extremely short and every
effort will have to be made by the nations of the world
to save history from the floods, so to speak, and to preserve
the cultural heritage of this part of Africa for future
generations."
We should indeed be grateful for the building of the
High Dam for it has drawn the attention of scholars
the world over to this forgotten reach of the Nile. Of
the slow progress of man from his first faltering steps on
the tortuous path towards civilization, every foot of the
river's banks bears evidence, either above ground or below.
Here truly is an opportunity unique in the fields of pre¬
history, anthropology and archaeology. We now await
the testimony of the spade.
37
