WHY DO CAR ACCIDENTS HAPPEN?
WHOSE
Every ninety seconds on the average, a man, woman
or child is killed outright or fatally Injured on the
world's roads. The mishaps in which these 1,000
people die each day represent one-third of accident
deaths of all kinds. Everyone talks about road accidents
and deplores their ever-mounting toll, yet relatively little
Is really known about the multiple factors which Interact
to produce the most common cause of accidental death
In the twentieth century.
Some statistics tend to Incriminate drivers. Nine out
of ten accidents are the driver's own fault, they say, and
only one In ten Is due to defects In the automobile or
the road. The logical conclusion is that the driver Is to
blame for nearly 100% of all mishaps.
The truth Is much less simple. Though any traffic
accident depends on three main factors the driver, his
vehicle and the road all are involved in varying degrees,
and other factors have also to be taken into account.
How all these combine to cause an accident can only be
explained by a stringent and scientific study made by
teams of the kind that Harvard Medical School in the
United States has set up to probe the causes of fatal road
accidents. This 18-man medical and scientific team
Includes pathologists, blood chemists, tissue specialists,
psychiatrists and a sociologist.
As soon as a fatal accident occurs in Its area the team
Immediately goes to the spot and makes a thorough in¬
vestigation mechanical inspection and testing, checking
of air inside the car for carbon monoxide, study of tyre
tracks, examination of clues like paint chips on the dam¬
aged car, a study of surface conditions and road contours,
interviews with survivors, autopsy of victim, etc.
Each case Investigated Is a detailed, exhausting pro
cess. From hundreds of cases completed during a five
years' Inquiry will come knowledge to make life safer for
drivers and pedestrians.
The part played by speed, for Instance, has always been
over-simplified. There is evidence that, taken over a
driver's total mileage, most accidents on modern high¬
ways occur at lower speeds. The Harvard investigation
showed that many fatalities occurred at speeds of only
30 and even 15 m.p.h.
Other Investigations have shown that a driver's accident
rate drops as his speed rises and reaches a minimum at
about 65 m.p.h-, but rises sharply again at higher speeds.
In Britain It was found that twice as many casualties
occurred on roads with speed restrictions as on roads
without, but on the derestricted roads, 33% of the casual¬
ties were fatal as compared with 22% on restricted roads.
Facts like these need to be analysed and explained, and
although the answers to many questions are still not
known, basic research Is being carried out in most
countries of the world. Great Britain's Road Research
Laboratory, for example, has a traffic and safety section
doing research on roads, vehicles and their users, an
economic and statistical section, and one dealing with
road building methods and materials.
To keep a check on the Intensity and characteristics of
traffic of different types, the Laboratory maintains a
large number of automatic counters In continual opera¬
tion. Observations from fixed points and from moving
cars, and aerial photographs are used to study cross¬
roads and roundabouts, to measure how often and how
fast pedestrians cross the highway, and to assess the
types and speeds of different road vehicles. An electronic
RUSH HOUR IN TOKYO Is a scene repeated daily in cities across five continents whose highways are now
used by more than 1 00,000,000 four-wheeled and as many two-wheeled vehicles. The fact that one thousand
people die on the world's roads each day shows how traffic accidents have become a modern scourge.
Rapho, Paris

FAULT IS IT?
brain gives precise Information concerning the effect of
traffic lights on the flow of traffic at cross-roads.
The Road Research Laboratory also undertakes sta¬
tistical analyses of the effect of different types of road
junctions, compares the frequency of accidents before
and after changes In the design, surface or lighting of a
road, and studies the Influence on accidents of speed
limits, pedestrian crossings, the removal of tram lines,
the construction of double carriageways, etc. Intensive
research Is being carried out on street lighting and road
surfacing.
The Road Research Laboratory has done remarkable
work In connexion with road surfaces and skidding. Step
by step each aspect of road surfaces Is minutely examined
to reveal defects and show the way to improvements.
More than a thousand tests are carried out every year
on wet roads (a wet road being more slippery than a dry
one) in a car equipped with a fifth wheel connected to a
special recording device. A portable apparatus has been
devised by which road engineers or public works depart¬
ments or firms can measure the skld-reslstance of roads
without having recourse to laboratory studies.
Sections of roads, representative of the British road
network, have been tested every fortnight for three and
a half years, making it possible to measure, and to some
extent to predict seasonal variations in the skid-
resistance of roads. The summer months appear to give
more trouble than the winter, for when a road which
has long remained dry Is moistened by a sudden shower,
It becomes very much more slippery than one subjected
to regular rains.
The Road Research Laboratory has also come to the
conclusion that special non-skid surfaces could become
more slippery than smooth surfaces if the sharp edges
of the gravel used in them became worn down. Far from
improving the grip of tyres on the road, they would, on
the contrary, act like smooth beads and Increase the risk
of skid. Even the best of surfaces, of course, will not
prevent an accident caused by weak braking or worn
tyres.'
Research probes Into each accident factor separately
but the final solution must be a function of all the
factors Involved. At the Road Research Laboratory the
behaviour of a vehicle and the qualities of the road itself
are therefore studied in close conjunction, one of the
essential alms of the work being to ensure that In an
emergency the driver of a car can pull up in the shortest
possible distance without danger to himself or to others.
But the ideal is still a long way oil. The first studies
carried out by the Road Research Laboratory showed
that the average braking distance for a car travelling
at 30 m.p.h. is 75 feet; for 10 per cent, of the cars tested
it was over 100 feet. The Highway Code lays down a
distance of 45 feet. Moreover, when a driver brakes In
an emergency the wheels frequently lock, and this not
only upsets the stability of the car but reduces the
effectiveness of the brakes to zero, the course of the
vehicle being slowed down only by the resistance offered
by the road. Other experiments have conclusively shown
the Importance of tyres for road safety. It Is common
knowledge that worn tyres are highly dangerous, but
few people realize that a complicated tread Is of no
particular advantage. All that matters Is that the tread
be deep.
Then there is that great unknown, the human factor.
Here too there is need for research and co-ordination of
CONT'D ON NfXT PACE
WHO photo by Eric Schwab
ACCIDENT PRONE. Why some drivers
are more likely to have accidents than others
is a problem now occupying investigators in
many countries. An exhaustive inquiry recent¬
ly made in Finland revealed, for example, that
thirty-year-old drivers were Involved in twice
as many accidents as forty-eight-year-old driv¬
ers, irrespective of driving experience. Left,
in a Swiss laboratory a driver's reactions are
tested with an apparatus which simulates
driving conditions. With 726,000 vehicles
registered (one person in seven), Switzerland
had 42,500 road accidents in 1958, in which
3 1,000 persons were injured and 1,1 36 killed.
15

WHOSE FAULT IS IT ? (Cont'd)
research. If the psychologist Is to be able to put forward
anything better than mere theories, he must work
closely with the engineer, the policeman and the doctor.
Some not very successful attempts have been made to
draw up a composite picture of the man who is "accident-
prone" on the roads, as has been done for other types of
accidents. It has not been possible to establish any
certain link between accldent-proneness and physical or
psychophysiological fallings. One series of tests will
show that quick reactions lead to accidents, while another
demonstrates that quick reactions and slow reactions
cause about the same number of accidents. One medical
report will state that it is dangerous for people with high
blood pressure to drive; another that persons with low
blood pressure are liable to accidents. The one conclusion
to be drawn from these few examples Is that interpreta¬
tions of tests of psychomotor ability seem peculiarly
liable to error.
There Is both a simpler and a better way of looking at
the human factor. As an expert of the Harvard School
of Public Health has put It, "People drive as they live."
Dr. L. G. Norman, Physiclan-in-Chief to the London
Transport Executive, considers that a man's temperament
and his psychosocial qualities were they measurable
would make a better yardstick by which to tell a "bad"
driver.
From experience with London bus drivers, Dr. Norman
observes that given equal experience, the older driver
(even over 65 years old) Is a better one than the younger
man, despite slower reactions and less acute sight and
hearing. He is more watchful and takes more care to
anticipate dangerous situations, and in many cases this
more than makes up for deficiencies due to age.
According to another expert, marital status has a
definite influence on accldent-proneness. Married per¬
sons are less liable to accidental death than widowers,
who are in turn safer on the roads than divorcees. The
only exceptions to this rule are people under 20 years
of age; people In this age group have a higher percentage
of accidents when married than if they are single.
Alcohol, fatigue and sheer lack of attention are,
obviously, responsible for a very large number of
accidents but little systematic study has been made of
the causes underlying these factors whether physio¬
logical, or social.
From tests carried out by a special committee of the
British Medical Association it was concluded that a
concentration of 0.05 per cent of alcohol In the blood (one
and a half pints of beer or three small whiskies) is "the
highest that can be accepted as entirely consistent with
the safety of other road users."
Until a clearer light can be thrown on these obscure
matters, more limited but more Immediately realizable
goals may still be pursued. The Road Research Labora¬
tory, for Instance, has just begun a study on "the driver,"
In the course of which they propose to investigate,
separately and together, the driver's receptiveness to
instruction, his control over the car, and his behaviour
at the wheel. A special car will record and transmit
his reactions over four simultaneous radio circuits. This
experiment is still in a very early stage and its importance
cannot yet be judged, but at the very least It will be a
first step towards a real rather than a theoretical and
subjective picture of the car-driver's personality.
Other contributions to a more thorough knowledge of
the road-user include a study of the overtaking driver,
which Is now well-advanced, and research into the
behaviour of pedestrians.
In Great Britain the proportion of casualties to every
1,000 vehicles has steadily declined since the war. This
is attributed to road safety campaigns, improvements in
vehicle design and education of road usersespecially
children.
When all possible information has been obtained, It
may at last be possible for effective prevention to be
undertaken and for the roads of the world to be made
reasonably safe.
16
PEDESTRIAN PERILS
Today, no country can afford to neglect the safety-first education
of the man in the street as well as the man at the wheel. Growing
incidence of traffic accidents in Africa is reflected in poster
(below) which tells parents: "Don't let your children play in the
street." The problem is far more serious in traffic-thick Euro¬
pean and American countries. In Great Britain, for example,
pedestrians are involved in nearly one-half of all road fatalities.
A frequent cause of such accidents is lack of discipline when
crossing the street, like the case of the woman pedestrian
(right, rear of photo) who fails to use the proper crossing place.
