RABINDRANATH TAGORE WITH A GROUP OF STUDENTS IN THE SCHOOL HE FOUNDED AT SANTINIKETAN IN 1801.

PORTRAIT OF A MAN
by Satyajit Ray
This year the world celebrates the birth, one hundred years
ago, of one of India's greatest figures, Rabindranath Tagore. As
part of the commemorations organized in Tagore's honour,
the Indian Government asked Satyajit Ray to produce a
documentary film on the poet, his background and his contri¬
bution to the arts and international understanding. Satyajit
Ray is one of India's leading film directors. His best-known
film, Pather Panchall, received the "Most Human Document"
award at the Cannes Film Festival in 1956, and Aparajlto won
the Venice Film Festival grand prize in 1957. THE UNESCO
COURIER wishes to thank the Films Division of the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, for
permission to reproduce the text of Mr. Ray's commentary for
his just completed film. The article below is copyright
and may not be reproduced without prior permission.
On August 7, 1941, in the city of Calcutta, a man
died. His mortal remains perished, but he left
behind him a. heritage which no fire could consume.
It was a heritage of words and music and poetry, of
ideas and of ideals, and it has the power to move us today
and in the days to come.
We, who owe him so much, salute his memory.
Founded in the year 1690 by an Englishman named Job
Charnock, the city of Calcutta, one hundred years ago,
was a thriving metropolis. As the capital of India,
Calcutta was the seat of government.
In the northern part of this sprawling city, in the area
known as Jorasanko In Chitpore, was the family resi¬
dence of the Tagores. The Tagores had an Impressive
lineage. It dated back to the first group of learned
Brahmins that came from Kanauj and settled In Bengal
in the 8th century. One thousand years later, Pancha-
nan, a descendant, came to the new city of Calcutta and
found a lucrative position with a British shipping com¬
pany. His grandson Nllmonl added considerably to the
family fortune and built the house at Jorasanko In 1789.
The peak was reached, however, with Nllmonl's grand¬
son, Dwarkanath, one of the most brilliant and colourful
figures of the 19th century. Dwarkanath Tagore combin¬
ed cultured sophistication with largeness of heart and a
rare degree of business acumen. Coal, sugar, Indigo,
export, banking, newspapers, there was no end to his
enterprise and he succeeded In all. If his earnings were
fabulous, so were his spendings.
Although a Hindu and a Vaishnab, Dwarkanath defied
the ban of Brahmin orthodoxy and twice went to England.
There he had an audience with Queen Victoria, discus¬
sions with Gladstone, and dinner with men like Dickens,
Thackeray and Max Müller.
Before his death in England, Dwarkanath had written
a letter to his eldest son Debendranath reproving him
for neglecting the family's business affairs. For some
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PORTRAIT OF A MAN (Cont'd)
Growing up in a family
of scholars and artists
years past, young Debendranath had been developing ten¬
dencies which might well have distressed his father.
It began In a burning ghat. The last rites were being
administered to Debendranath's grandmother. Not far
away, on the river bank, sat Debendranath. Like many a
rich man's son, he had been leading a wayward life. But
tonight, he was overcome by a strange feeling. Wordly
possessions seemed to lose their meaning for him.
This led to a period of profound disquiet, followed by
a ceaseless quest for the meaning of existence in the
great source books of the East and West. He read the
materialist philosophers of modern Europe Locke, Hume,
Bentham and others whose Ideas were so much in vogue
among the students of the time. Then he learnt Sans¬
krit and read the Mahabharata. But peace of mind
would not come until one day he chanced upon a torn
page of a Sanskrit book. There was a sloka in it which
said: God ls supreme and all-pervading. Be content with
what He gives. Do not covet another's wealth.
T his happened to be a page of the Ishopa-
nishad, edited by Raja Rammohun Roy.
Rammohun had been a close friend of Dwarkanath's. As
a boy. Debendranath had a deep and silent admiration
for the man. But the greatness of the Raja's vision and
the magnitude and nobility of the tasks he had set before
himself, were beyond the boy's comprehension. The Raja
lived in times when India's spiritual heritage was being
submerged in ritual and superstition.
Rammohun advocated Western education for Indians
because he wanted the new Ideas of the West to spread
in the country. But he also wanted us to respect what
was old and true in our own heritage. His own study of
the Upanishads had led him to the monotheistic bases
of Hinduism, which he sought to spread through writings
and lecturers.
His work was left unfinished by his death in England.
And now Debendranath Inspired by the two lines of
Sanskrit text, went on to prove himself to be his true
spiritual son and heir.
Debendranath suffered social ostracism for preaching
the monotheistic faith that he called Brahmoism, but to
his followers and there were many he was Maharshi,
the Great Sage.
When Rablndranath was born, the Maharshi was
45 years old. His wife Saradamonl was 33. Rabin-
dranath was the fourteenth child. The eldest was
Dwijendranath poet, philosopher, mathematician. The
second son Satyendranath was a Sanskrit scholar who
translated the Glta and Meghdoot into Bengali verse,
went to England and returned as the first Indian member
of the Indian Civil Service. The fifth son Jyotirindranath
was a born musician, translated Molière and Sanskrit
dramas into Bengali, and wrote and staged some of the
most popular Bengali plays of his time. Among the
daughters was Swarnakumari, the first woman novelist
and the first woman to edit a literary journal In India.
Indeed it was a household which hummed with activity.
At the age of seven, Rabi was sent to school. He
went to four schools and hated them all. But to say that
he lacked education would be wrong, for his third brother,
Hemendranath, saw to his studies at home, and it was
all done by the clock.
Rabi was 13 when his first book of verse, Kabikahini,
came out. When Rabi was 16, Dwijendranath brought
out a literary magazine called Bharati, and Rabi found
an admirable platform for his literary activities. His
essays Included pieces on European poets like Dante and
Petrarch whose acquaintance Rabi had already made
THE TALENTED FAMILY into which Tagore was born
proved a potent factor in the flowering of his genius. His
grandfather went to England in defiance of contemporary
conventions. His father was a leader of revolt against ortho¬
doxy in his championship of the Brahmo faith and among
Rabindranath's brothers and sisters were a scholar, a poet, a
musician and the first woman to edit a literary journal in India.
It was a household which hummed with activity. Above left,
CONT'D ON PAGE 8

P.abindranath in 1881, aged 20, in the role of Valmiki in
his opera Valmiki Prativa (Countenance of the Great Sage
Valmiki) at its first performance in the Tagore home in
Calcutta. Above, photo taken after a family presentation of
Tagore's play, Phalgunl. From left, Abanindrath, Samaren-
dranath and Gaganendranath, all nephews of Tagore, Willie
Pearson, an English friend, and Tagore himself. Below right,
Tagore and his bride, Mrinalini Devi. Below, Tagore's parents.
All photos © Rabindra-Sadana, Visva Bharati

PORTRAIT OF A MAN (Cont'd)
Philosopher, educator, novelist, poet & painter
In the library of his elder brother Satyendranath.
Satyendranath's wife Gnanadanandini, who had been
staying in England with her two children, was a remark¬
able woman who had been persuaded by her husband to
come out of orthodox seclusion. Rabi set out for
England in the summer of 1879 and joined Gnanadanan¬
dini at Brighton. If the plan was to provide the boy with
a proper education, it came to nought. For Rabi returned
a year later without completing his course of studies at
London University.
While In England, Rabi had become acquainted with
Western music Some of the tunes he had learnt found
their way into' the enchanting opera Valmiki-Prativa.
There were other tunes, however, which had their origin
In classical Indian ragas, used for the first time in an
operatic context.
Valmiki-Prativa was performed in the Tagore residence
with Rabindranath himself in the role of the bandit-
turned-poet. The rest of the cast too was composed of
members of the Tagore family, all gifted with varying
degrees of talent.
Among those who saw and praised this perfor¬
mance was the greatest literary figure of the
time, Banklm Chandra Chatterjl. A year later, when
Rablndranath's Sandhya-Sangeet was published, Bankim-
chandra personally congratulated the poet and acknow¬
ledged his pre-eminence among the rising writers of the
day.
At the age of 22, Rabindranath married Bhabatarini
Devi; the old-fashioned name was later changed to
Mrlnalinl. Two months before the wedding Rabin¬
dranath had received a letter from his father In which
he was asked to prepare himself to look after the family
estates. After a period of initial training In the Estate's
Offices In Calcutta, Rabindranath found himself In the
very heart of rural Bengal, in the area of the river Padma.
. With a worldly wisdom unusual in a poet but character¬
istic of the Tagores Rabindranath in later life set out
in a practical way to Improve the lot of the poor peasants
of his estates and his varied work In this field is on
record. But his own gain from this intimate contact
with the fundamental aspects of life and nature, and the
influence of this contact on his own life and work are
beyond measure.
Living mostly in his boat and watching the life through
the window, a whole new world of sights and sounds and
feelings opened up before him. It was a world in which
the moods of people and the moods of nature were
Inextricably Interwoven. The people found room in a
succession of great short stories, and nature, in an out¬
pouring of exquisite songs and poems. Dominant was the
mood of the rains, exultant and terrible.
In 1901, Rabindranath was 40 years old. His already
enormous output of poems and plays had been gathered
in one big volume. It comprised 21 books and included
Sojiar Tari, his first masterpiece.
The same year, 1901, marked an event of a somewhat
different nature. In 1862, one year after Rabindranath
was born, the Maharshi had acquired some property In
Bolpur, in the district of BIrbhum in West Bengal. The
property was made over to a board of trustees, and the
deed specified that the place was to be used for medit¬
ation on the Supreme Formless Being. According to the
Maharshl's wishes, a seat of prayer and a temple of wor¬
ship had been built, and close to the temple, a residence
which was called Santiniketan the Abode of Peace.
Rabindranath had been worrying about the education of
his children, and he decided to start an experimental
educational institution in Santiniketan. It was to be a
school but not like the schools that had been the night¬
mare of his own childhood. It was to be like the forest
hermitages of classical India.
8 But to bring it into being was not an easy task. For
one thing it cost money and Rabindranath had to sell,
among other things, the copyright of his books. His wife
added her bit by selling her wedding ornaments. Three
months after the school was opened, 6he was taken ill.
Two months later, she died. For Rabindranath it was
the beginning of a series of personal tragedies.
Nine months after his wife's death, his second daughter
Renuka passed away. The hardest blow of all came four
years later. The youngest son Saml, who took after his
father in many ways, fell a victim to cholera when he was
only 12.
It was in the midst of these bereavements that Rabin¬
dranath participated In one of the greatest political
upheavals in the history of India. In December 1903 was
published the decision of Governor-General Lord Curzon
to split up Bengal into two provinces. The idea was to
create a separate province with a Moslem majority, which
would induce a rift between the two main religious groups
and thus avert the possible growth of a united front
against the Government.
But in proposing the Partition, Curzon merely fanned
the flame of patriotism that had been smouldering in the
minds of certain visionaries all through the period of the
renaissance in Bengal. These men now came to the fore
and led the millions to rise in a protest. The series of
stirring patriotic songs which Rabindranath composed
for the occasion were sung in processions in the streets
of Calcutta with the poet himself in the lead.
On October 27, 1905, the Partition became an accom¬
plished fact. In a form of protest that only a poet could
conceive, Rabindranath turned the Black Day into a mass
festival of Rakhibandhan the tying of the band of
friendship.
But the Swadeshi movement was fated to grow and
assume a character which was not possible to foresee in
its early stages. While admitting the bravery and patriot¬
ism of those who killed or were killed in a reckless bid
for freedom Rabindranath could not condone terrorism.
He stated his credo in clear terms. The path of violence
was not for India. Good could come only out of con¬
structive work carried out in a spirit of tolerance.
He had himself followed up his retirement from the
political soene by undertaking the work of rural welfare
in his estates. And there were other activities: he was
teaching at school, editing journals, and engaging himself
in almost every conceivable form of literary activity.
T hat his own countrymen now regarded him
as their leading man of letters was proved by
his 50th birthday celebrations in Calcutta. Sponsored
by the Bengal Academy of Letters and attended by
thousands, it was a unique literary manifestation in India.
But to the outside world, Rabindranath was still an
unknown name.
The object of Rablndranath's visit to England in 1912
was to study the educational methods of the West and
also to acquaint the West with his work at Santiniketan.
He happened to carry with him on this occasion a note
book containing his own English translations of some of
his poems, mainly from Gitanjail. He showed these
translations to the English painter William Rothenstein
who had met the poet on an earlier visit to India.
Rothenstein was so Impressed that he sent a copy of the
translation to the great Irish poet William Butler Yeats.
Introducing the poems to a gathering of English writers
and intellectuals, Yeats said: "I know of no man in my
time who has done anything in the English language
to equal these lyrics. Even as I read them in these literal
English translations, they are exquisite in style and
thought."
Gitanjali was published in England in
There has rarely been another instance of
world fame In like manner. The Nobel
1913 and knighthood in 1915, while war
Europe. Touring the United States and
Rabindranath made eloquent appeals for
that world peace could be achieved
the same year,
a poet gaining
Prize came in
was raging in
Japan in 1916,
peace. He felt
only through
CONT'D ON PAGE 10

*»f*H
KINDRED SPIRITS: In 1921 Tagore met the great French writer and thinker Romain Rolland for the first timo. Despite tho barriers
of language the two men reached such, a degree of sympathetic understanding that Tagore wrote to one of his friends : "Of all tho
men I confronted in the Occident it was Romain Rolland that struck me as the nearest to my heart and tho most akin to my spirit."
In 1926, when Tagore was again travelling in Europe he sat and talked with Rolland in the latter's garden at Villeneuve In
Switzerland where the photo below was taken. Above, Tagore with the famous German theologian and educator, Paul
Geheeb, in 1930. Paul Geheeb, who died last year aged 90, founded the Oldenwald School Germany, as well as tho
Ecole d'Humanité at Goldern, in Switzerland. Paul Geheeb's ideas have inspired educators in many other countries.
Photos (©) Rabindra-Sadana, Vi'.va Clurati

TWO GREAT MINDS and two great humanists were confronted
when Tagore met Albert Einstein during a visit to Berlin in 1930. Tag-
ore's humanist ideas found an echo in the best minds of Europe and
some of its great men became his closest friends. Other Europeans
came to India and worked devotedly for the poet and his cause.
No nation can be proud of isolating its life & culture
10
intellectual co-operation between nations. He said, "The
call has come to every Individual in the present age to
prepare himself for the dawn of a new era, when man
shall discover his soul In the spiritual unity of all human
beings."
Pursuing this noble idea of International co-operation,
Rabindranath gave the school at Santiniketan a new
status and a new name. "Yatra Visvam Bharati Eka-
nirham" Where the world makes home In a single nest
this was the motto of Visvam Bharati, the World Uni¬
versity, which was inaugurated in December 1918 with the
aged philosopher Brijendranath Seal presiding.
While peace had been restored in Europe, in India there
was unrest. The occasion was the Rowlatt Bill, designed
to suppress all political movements. It dashed India's
hopes of gaining the self-government that the British
rulers had kept promising through the war years.
Dominating the Indian political scene at this time was
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi. As a barrister In South
Africa, Gandhi had fought for the rights of the Indians
living in that country. As a protest against the Rowlatt
Act, Gandhi launched a movement of passive resistance.
But the masses misinterpreted the movement and follow¬
ing a rumour of Gandhi's arrest, violence broke out in
many parts of the country. As a result of this the
Government started taking repressive measures out of all
proportion to the magnitude of the violence.
In the Punjab, martial law was declared. In charge of
the troops at Amritsar was Brigadier General Dyer. On
the first day of the month of Vaisakh, a crowd gathered
in Jalllanwallabagh, as It had done every other year. It
was a peaceful crowd. But Dyer was taking no chances.
Machine guns rattled.
The news of the Amritsar incident was suppressed by
the Government, but details of It filtered through to
other parts of the country and even to the Abode of
Peace.
Rabindranath rushed to Calcutta. But the Defence of
India Act was still in force and no leaders would support
him in a plea for a meeting of protest.
At four o'clock on the morning of May 30, Rabindra¬
nath finished writing a letter. It was addressed to the
Viceroy, Lord Chelmsford, and it was published in the
newspapers. Condemning the Government for the
killing at Jalllanwallabagh, Rabindranath concluded by
saying: "And I for my part wish to stand, shorn of all
special distinctions, by the side of my countrymen whíf
for their so-called insignificance are liable to suffer
degradation not fit for human beings. And these are the
reasons which have painfully compelled me to ask your
Excellency to relieve me of my title of knighthood."
The next ten years of Rablndranath's life were filled
with ceaseless activity. The urge to travel, and the
necessity to collect funds for his university, took him to
all parts of the world and the West as much as the East,
welcomed him with open arms.
Wherever he went, he spread the message of peace and
stressed the importance of intellectual co-operation
between nations. He said: "We ought to know that isol¬
ation of life and culture is not a thing of which any
nation can be proud. In the human world, giving is
exchanging, it ls not one-sided."
His great humanist ideas found an echo in the best
minds of Europe, and some became his close friends.
In the meanwhile, the institution at Santiniketan had
come a long way from its modest beginnings. Its scope
for studies had greatly increased. There was Kalabha-
wan for the study of painting, under masters like
Nandalal Bose, who was himself a pupil of Abanindranath,

THE QUEST for the unity of man in the midst of diversity led Tagore to travel to the farthest corners of tho world. "Uniformity Is
not unity," he once said ; "only those who are different can unite. Nations that wipe out the Independence of other nations aro tho
destroyers of interdépendance.". He was the first great Indian in recent times to embark on a cultural mission for
restoring contacts and establishing friendship with peoples of other countries. Above, In 1930, Soviet citizens gather to
greet Tagore in Moscow and youngsters crowd around him as he visits a centre of the "Pioneers" children's organization.
a nephew of the poet. The Sangeet Bhawan which
neglected no brand of Indian music had also grown under
Dinendranath, another of the poet's nephews. Special
provisions had been made for conducting oriental studies,
and scholars came from abroad and stayed to lecture for
study and research. Such men were Moriz Winternitz
from Austria, Sylvain Levi from France, Victor Lesny
from Austria, and Sten Konow from Norway.
But there were some Europeans who did even more
than that. Charles Freer Andrews, a missionary who was
present at Yeats' reading of Gitanjali, and William Win-
stanely Pearson, who had also met the poet in England,
came to the Ashram in its early days drawn by the
poet's personality and stayed on until their death,
working with a selfless devotion to the poet and his cause
that few Indians could equal. Leonard Elmhirst was
another Englishmen who was drawn by the poet's person¬
ality, came over ito Santiniketan and took charge of the
Santiniketan at Surul, two miles away.
The poet's last European tour began with a visit to
Oxford where he delivered the series of HIbbert lectures
which were later published as The Religion of Man.
It was also on this last tour that Rabindranath went
to Soviet Russia for the first time. On the eve of his
departure from Moscow he told his hosts: "You have
recognized the truth that in extirpating all special evils
one has to go to the root, and the only way to it is through
education." In Russia as well as In other places that he
visited on this tour, Rabindranath held exhibitions of his
paintings. At the age of 70, Rabindranath had found a
new outlet for his creative urge.
In 1931, the leading citizens of Calcutta united in an
appeal to observe the poet's 70th birthday. It was
celebrated in a manner that was truly worthy of the
occasion. The Golden Book of Tagore was a testimony
to the love and reverence that the intellectuals of the
world bore for the poet. Its sponsors consisted of three
Europeans and two Indians. There was- Romain Rolland
from France, Albert Einstein from Germany, and the poet
Kostes Palamas from Greece. One of the two Indians
was the scientist Jagadlsh Chandra Bose, the other was
Mahatma Gandhi.
The last years of the poet's life were spent largely In
his beloved Santiniketan. He had a choice of small
houses built for him, for he never liked to stay In the
same house, or even in the same room for long. It was
In a way symbolic of the refusal to get Into a rut which
had marked his whole life. In his writings he was now
producing some of his most mature, original and striking
works, and these included text books and nonsense
rhymes for children, not an unusual occupation for some¬
one who had loved and understood children all his life
and done so much to mould them for a better future. His
health was falling but calls of duty, which he was ever
ready to answer, gave him little rest.
On May 7, 1941, Radindranath was 80 years old. Three
months later, he was to leave the Ashram, never to
return. He would be taken to his ancestral house in
Calcutta, fatally ill.
Rabindranath attended his 80th birthday celebrations
in Santiniketan In spite of his falling health. For the
occasion, he had composed a message his last message
to the world. It was called Crisis in Civilization. It
concerned Itself with the state of the so-called modern
civilization, a civilization that was being shaken to Its
very roots by barbaric wars of aggression.
In the course of the message, Rabindranath said:
"I had at one time believed that the springs of civiliza¬
tion could issue out of the heart of Europe. But today,
when I am about to leave the world, that faith has
deserted me. I look around and see the crumbling ruins
of a proud civilization strewn like a vast heap of futility.
And yet, I shall not commit the previous sin of losing
faith In Man. I shall await for the day when the holo¬
caust will end and the air will be rendered clean with the
spirit of service and sacrifice. Perhaps that dawn will
come from this horizon, from the East, where the sun
rises. On that day will unvanqulshed man retrench his ^
path of conquest, surmounting all barriers, to win back
his lost human heritage."
