BLOOD VESSELS IN E
Blood banks, eye banks (see page I 5) and bone banks have given the
world new ways of combating the age-old plagues of man disease
and disability. The latest "bank" provided by modern science is the
Blood Vessel Bank established at the New York Hospital, New York
City. In certain operations the surgeon is impeded by blood vessels
which have ceased to function normally and which must be sacrificed
to ensure a successful operation. Experiments have proved that sections
of arteries and other blood vessels can successfully be inserted to replace
malfunctioning ones. This led to the establishment of a bank In which
grafts from donors are kept in a large double door refrigerator (right).
The bank sends the blood vessels as they are required to other hospitals.
The nurse above is withdrawing an aorta from the bank which will
be sent to Its destination in a special refrigerated container. Two or
more hours at room temperature would damage the graft. Donor
grafts must be preserved in a special solution of buffered salt to which
human serum and antibiotics are added. The technician below weighs
one of the several salts employed in making this special solution.

tOTTLES
Because donor grafts must be brought to the bank swiftly, sugeons, technicians and nurses on
duty all hours must be prepared to move out on short notice both to take grafts from donors
(recently deceased people in good health so far as the vascular system Is concerned) and to deliver
grafts to surgeons requiring them for operation. The sterilized equipment and Instruments
including two complete surgical kits fill two large suitcases. All Instruments and equipment arc
sterilized in the bank's own autoclave (above) and are packed and ready to go at a moment's notice.
The actual removal of the graft like the one below is done in as sterile a manner as possible under
operating room conditions. The graft immediately goes Into the prepared solution and is later
kept under observation to ensure that it is not diseased. It will be good from four to six weeks.
All photos (Q Gcor E. Picl'ow, Nrw-York
19
