THOUSANDS OF ZEBRAS, Wildebeest (gnus) and Thomson
gazelles roam across the grassy plains of Tanganyika's great
Serengeti Park, one of the last refuges of the vanishing herds of
Africa. To count their numbers and chart their migrations the
Tanganyikan Government several years ago called upon Bernhard
Grzimek of Frankfurt and his son Michael. By zebra-striped light
18
^r
V
'm..
* *i*~ Ä.

The Drama of Serengeti
TWO MEN & A FLYING ZEBRA
by Pauline Bentley
One of the most magnificent reserves of
wild life in Africa and probably in the world
is to be found in the Serengeti Park and the
Ngorongoro Highlands of northern Tan¬
ganyika. Here in a setting almost untouched
by man, of limitless horizons, beauty and
grandeur, dwell remarkable species of ani¬
mals and birds which have drawn to this
unrivalled corner of East Africa nature
lovers, tourists, hunters and photographers.
The article below tells the story of the
animals census undertaken a few years ago.
On page 23, Sir Julian Huxley gives afrank
account of today's drama in Serengeti Park.
plane and Land Rover they spent months counting and tracking
the herds of zebra (above) and wildebeest (below) which,
although greatly reduced in numbers, still abound in Serengeti.
i TQE' t
T AKE two men, enough scientific knowledge, a
tiny aeroplane and limitless dedication, and
the result is one of the most moving adventure stories in
the struggle for the preservation of wild life. The story
starts in 1957, when Dr. Bernhard Grzimek, Director of the
Frankfurt Zoo, was asked with his son Michael to make
a census of the huge herds in Serengeti National Park.
Serengeti is Tanganyika's only National Park, 4,500
square miles shaped rather like a kneeling elephant with
its trunk extended, and stretching from Lake Victoria to
just beyond the mighty Ngorongoro crater. It is the home
of presumably the last great herds of wild animals still
surviving in Africa, where zebra, wildebeest and Thomson's
and Grant's gazelles as well as elephants, lions, flamingoes
and ostriches roam freely.
The reason for the census was a British Government
plan to reduce the size of the Park in favour of the many
Masai tribesmen; this plan had been based on an official
survey made in 1957, but the information on the seasonal
migrations of the large plains animals in this study was
sketchy and inaccurate. Dr. Grzimek realized the impor¬
tance of accurate information not only to the destiny of
the Park but to its unique herds themselves. He de¬
termined to establish .the number of animals in the Park
as well as whether the herds were actually protected by
the present Park boundaries and would continue to be so
by the proposed new boundaries.
His work had often taken him to Serengeti before, and
both he and his son Michael were passionately interested
in its fate. They accepted the task joyfully. It took
them endless patience, courage, ingenuity and sacrifice
which did not stop short of life itself, for in 1959 Michael
Grzimek was killed at the age of 25 while flying on the
Serengeti assignment. As a memorial to him we can
enjoy his father's book, Serengeti Shall Not Die (1) describ¬
ing their two years' work in Tanganyika, and Michael
Grzimek's own film of the same name which he completed
just before his death and which was awarded the 1960
"Oscar" for the best documentary of the year by the
American Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Science.
Taking into account the vast area they had to cover,
and, the fact that the number of animals in the Park
was estimated to be about a million, the Grzimeks realized
that a comprehensive survey could not be attempted by
car. They therefore decided to carry out their census
from the air ; they learned to fly. In a little single-engined
19
(1) Published by Hamish Hamilton, London, 1960, and Dutton, New
York, 1961.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

'Jfc.
i
9 *
V
BELLING THE ZEBRA. It takes energy and
ingenuity to strap a collar on a zebra, for these
fleet-footed and timid animals just won't stand still
even in their own interest. To discover what
migratory patterns the herds followed in Serengeti
Park, the Grzimeks decided to mark certain zebras
so that they could be spotted later from the air.
They tried catching them by the tail (above) but
the razor sharp hairs proved too dangerous. Later,
they mounted a platform on top of their Land Rover
and lassoed them from above with a noose at forty
miles an hour. Once caught, four men were needed
to slip a brightly coloured featherweight collar
around the animal's neck (above right and below).
Very quickly the zebra was freed to rejoin the herd
(far right). Once collared, the zebras can eas¬
ily be spotted from a plane flying at 1,500 feet.
Photos Dr. Bernhard Grzimek © Tierbilder Okapia, Munich
20
Dornier 27 painted in bright black and white zebra stripes
so that it should be easily spotted in case of emergency
landings, they set off in December 1957 on the 6,000 mile
flight to Equatorial Africa.
The little plane, specially highlegged from the ground
as protection against long grass, had excellent visibility
from its cockpit, it was able to fly at very low speeds close
to the ground and it could operate easily independently
of airstrips and landing fields.
The Grzimeks' first intention was to fly over the whole
Park and photograph it with automatic cameras, but this
idea proved impractical and prohibitively expensive;
instead they decided to divide the area into zones
demarcated by natural landmarks and fly at 150-300 feet
over each zone in parallel sweeps, counting the animals
on each side of the plane in 550 yard wide strips at a
time.
This idea worked well in practice, but it turned out
to be exhausting and earsplitting work; the plane had
no insulation against the noise . of its own engine and it
was some time before the Grzimeks became accustomed
to it; counting herds of often moving animals from a hot
and noisy plane takes some concentration, but before very
long Dr. Grzimek evolved a method of counting the larger
herds in groups of 12 to 50 at a time.
They were shocked to discover that the estimated num¬
ber of one million quadruped was far in excess of that
actually in the Park. Through poaching by Africans and
the hazards of wandering into unprotected areas, Seren-
geti's great herds now numbered approximatively 367,000
..less than one-half of the original estimate. It became
of even greater importance to discover the areas into
which they were wandering, and to ensure that these
areas should be protected, if their numbers were not to
be reduced even further.
It became obvious that the herds must in some way be
identified if their movements were to be traced and the
present and proposed Park boundaries to be studied.
The Grzimeks had already had to consider the extraordi¬
narily varying reactions of the different animals, zebra,
gazelles, wart-hog, elephant and lion, gnu, ostrich and
giraffe, to the sound of their low-flying plane while taking
the census, now they had to come down from the skies
and catch their animals to mark them !
As a veterinarian, Dr. Grzimek rejected various ideas,
such as narcotics put in the water holes used by the
herds, but he finally accepted the idea of a new "miracle
gun" a weapon looking like an ordinary gun but which
instead of bullets fires a steel hypodermic with a narcotic
that temporarily and harmlessly renders its victim docile.
They found the gun far from perfect and Michael Grzi¬
mek eventually modified It on a trip back to Germany and
they finally selected nicotine salicylate as the most suit¬
able drug to use.
Armed with this improved weapon they returned to

mm mm K ¥mw.<. '
Serengeti, still faced with the problem of catching and
marking their animals. The average speed on the ground
of the larger Serengeti herds of zebra, Thomson's and
Grant's gazelles and gnu is a high thirty miles an hour.
Temporarily abandoning the faithful plane, the Grzimeks
took to a Land Rover, an all-terrains vehicle also painted
in zebra stripes. Only the zebras would never allow them
near enough to "shoot" them with the miracle gun and
they therefore had to be caught by hand or rather, by
the tail. This proved a highly tricky and painful opera¬
tion, for the hairs of the tail are razor sharp. Later the
Grzimeks discovered the Thomson's and Grant's gazelles
could be caught in the dazzle of the Land Rover head¬
lamps provided there was moonlight. They spent many
extremely active nights doing this and marking the gentle
and elegant gazelles, without having to drug them first.
The usual methods of marking animals are by earclip
or dye, but the first would be invisible from the air and
the dye brought from Europe did not take on the zebra's
rough hide. Finally, the Grzimeks decided on a brightly
coloured light plastic collar which not only remained
distinguishable from the air but proved to have no
adverse effect on other animals in the herd.
From the air they were thus able to identify particular
herds and then study their movements; the results were
disquieting. They found that every year the large herds
move far beyond the new borders proposed for the Seren¬
geti Park. This means that the already shrinking herds
will be exposed to further dangers if the new boundaries
become law.
Michael Grzimek made Innumerable trips to different
parts of Serengeti, taking samples of soil and grasses
which were sent to Europe for analysis in an attempt to
find out why the herds wandered as they did. It was
found from this that their preferred grazing grows largely
outside the future Park boundaries in the rainy season
and that what grows within the future Serengeti is not
eaten by the animals during some parts of the year. In
other words, the conclusion was that the herds need the
area destined to be shorn from Serengeti. Dr. Grzimek
also noted that the land in the park which is adequate
for wild animals would be Inadequate for the large herds
of Masai cattle to whom it is suggested it should be given.
Dr. Grzimek's conclusion is that the new boundaries pro¬
posed for Serengeti spell certain death for large parts of
the great wild herds.
As he has written "Neither today, nor tomorrow, but
in three or four generations' time, many people may be
glad that during our era someone gave a thought to the
wild animals in Africa... Most national and political am¬
bitions for which men suffer and die are transient, bub
Nature is of abiding importance to us all. In a hundred
years' time... men will still consider it important that 21
wildebeest should roam across the plains and leopards
growl at night."

-
Photos Dr B. Grzimek © Tierbilder Okapia, Frankfort
BABY THOMSON GAZELLE (left) allows itself to be
caressed by Michael Grzimek at Serengeti shortly after
its ear has been tagged for identification. Within minutes
it will be on its feet, and a danger, despite its age, to
anyone who gets in the way of its needle-pointed horns.
Michael was killed not long after this picture was taken,
when his plane crashed near Ngorongoro Crater.
Michael's father (above) gives orphaned baby rhinoceros
a refreshing drink. Giraffes, like these below bounding
across the veld, proved to be among the least discon¬
certed of all animals by the low-flying plane. Census
count numbered 837 of them in Serengeti. Gazelles
were most numerous, and then wildebeest and zebras.
