FOOD TABOOS
ALLY
OF
HUNGER
by Dr. Marcel Autret
Director, Nutrition Division, FAO
A FISH FARMER'S HARVEST
Encouraged by their state government and
with help from FAO and UNICEF, the
villagers of Orissa, India, have become
fish farmers. This extensive programme of
pisciculture was decided on when nutrition
surveys revealed a high incidence of pro¬
tein malnutrition among the people of
Orissa. Harvests from the village fish
ponds will help to compensate for the
lack of animal protein in present diets.
26
Photo Jacques Linf. - UNICEF

w
hove and hunger lead the world," observed
Gorki, echoing Anatole France not
long before and Hesiod some twenty-seven centuries
earlier. "Hunger and sex are the two biological finalities
which govern Man's social life," wrote Audrey Richards
in her study of the Bantus in 1932. Among African
peasants or Bolivian workers with extremely low incomes,
food accounts for 80 per cent of the family budget. This,
moreover, only provides a bare subsistence allowance.
Among the North Americans or Western Europeans, from
25 to 40 per cent of the family budget is still devoted to
food.
As Professor A. Mayer has noted, three-quarters of the
world's population works to produce its food and the
remainder works in order to purchase it. Thus, all the
progress made in science and technique has been unable
to free man from this harsh necessity and has merely
succeeded in reducing the effort involved in seeking his
"daily bread" and ensuring a diversity of food production
to meet the increasingly varied tastes of an increasingly
large number of increasingly demanding consumers.
Food habits are an integral part of any culture.
Initially, no doubt, they were imposed by the environment
and limited to whatever could be gathered in that environ¬
ment; from huntsmen, the nomads, having tamed wild
animals, became first of all pastoralists and then, having
learnt to plant and look after cropbearing seeds, develop¬
ed into settled agriculturalists.
Through habit and physiological adaptation, men
acquired a taste for the basic foodstuffs produced in this
way. Depending on the regions and the ecological condi¬
tions, man's diet was to be almost solely composed of
meat (Eskimos), or milk products (the Masai) or of items
almost wholly vegetable in origin (Indians, Mayas, Bantus
and Asian peoples) while other groups, more favoured by
nature or more ingenious, were to be omnivorous.
From the outset, therefore, diet was subject to the
limitations of production. This latter was subsequently
improved by a technique which was acquired and
ceaselessly perfected and, depending on the regions
concerned, created the restrictive framework within which
emerged the various dietary types.
But economic determinism stops there. Before long,
through an uninterrupted process, man a biological being
endowed with the sense of observation and with a memory
in the course of an empirical operation covering thou¬
sands of years and often at the cost of experiences for
which he paid dearly, selected from the animal and
vegetable species those which proved . good for him, for
his health, his taste, his strength or his well-being.
All of this was accompanied by the intrusion of innu¬
merable spiritual, social and cultural obligations, created
by man himself and, unfortunately, always restrictive in
nature and by the development of certain acquired and
possibly transmittable preferences. In the long run,
this choice whether freely made or imposed created
the dietary habits which are now part of a way of life
and one of the aspects of each culture. To parody a
famous remark, we might almost say, "Tell me what you
eat and I will tell you who you are."
IODAY, of course, preservation and transport
methods encourage economic exchanges; the
French get bananas from the Ivory Coast and peanuts
from Senegal with oil which can be used in place of
butter or olive oil; the Senegalese receive rice from Viet-
Nam, the Ghanaians wheat from Canada, the Europeans
cocoa from Africa and coffee from Brazil; these are
important innovations but they are none the less minor
in the sense that they do not change the dietary type.
Dietary habits range from the most extreme simplicity
to the most infinite variety. From the nomadic herdsman
of Mauritania devoted to his camel milk to the Mexican;
with his taste for "tortillas" made of corn, beans and
fiery peppers, from the Batéké of the Congo who eats
manioc with palm oil and the Ouolof of Senegal who eats
millet with peanut oil sauce to the Asian with his
preference for rice with fish sauce, three-quarters of
mankind in essence only know one dish: the basic food
rice, wheat, corn, millet, sorghum, manioc, taro, yams or
plantains and a sauce ranging from clear broth with a
little pepper and salt to a mixture of everything which
the housewife has been able to lay hands on- oils, fats
vegetables, meat or fish.
It is in the remaining quarter of the world that we
mostly find the sequence of varied dishes, the elaborate
sauces, the heavy foods ranging from the Roman banquets
to the gargantuan repasts dear to Bruegel the Elder, from
the solid, down-to-earth meals provided at country
weddings to the subtle blendings which skilled master
cooks once set before selected initiates.
"Those who go on eating when their stomachs are full"
will one day have to learn not to "dig their graves with
their teeth," as the Turkish proverb puts it. But it is
not with them that we are concerned today. It is not
over-eating but under-nourishment and deficiency mal¬
nutrition, hunger in short, that we must combat first and
foremost.
As a cause of under-nourishment and, still
more, malnutrition, that responsibility ls a
heavy one. However limited food resources may be, man
is far from making the best use of them. All sorts of
prohibitions and taboos, innumerable beliefs or mere trad¬
ition govern the use or non-use of foodstuffs; dietary
prohibitions vary according to the clan, the family and
the individual; age, the physiological condition and the
season of the year; days, associations with the products
concerned and methods of killing, transport, harvesting,
storing, cooking; the types of cooking implements, etc.
This complexity of taboos undoubtedly derives from
many factors: empirical observation, protection of the
individual or more generally of the community, equal or
preferential sharing of resources, a concern with the
preservation of natural resources of the perpetuation of
species, abstention because of ignorance, health considera¬
tions or caution, purifying fasts, propitiatory abstinence,
hoarding (or wasting) for reasons of prestige.
All of them are causes which may be readily perceived.
Some are readily accepted by our reason, and others, for
which no scientific explanation has yet been found, we
accordingly classify as "magical," forgetting that the
difference between the magic which replaces science
among primitive peoples and our own "science" is only
one of time and degree.
Certain dietary practices whose reasons are lost in the
mists of time, however, are no longer justified today. If
they are harmless from the viewpoint of health or
economics, let us respect them by which I mean, let us
leave them alone. If they are harmful from a nutritional
or economic viewpoint, let us study them in co-operation
with the ethnologist or the sociologist and try either to
change them or to make better use of them. Bernard
Shaw's remark is to the point: "Facing the past, hats
off; facing the future, sleeves up." Faced with the
diversity of dietary habits, rites and taboos, we have all
too many illustrations for our purpose.
Dietary prohibitions apply particularly to meat, eggs,
fish and milk. They extend to absolute or temporary
prohibition among pregnant women, nursing mothers,
young children and adolescents, precisely those whose
need of such protein foods is increased. Thus, in many
regions, a pregnant woman may not eat meat of any
kind, wart-hog, antelope, rat, snake, chicken or turkey;
elsewhere, she may not eat fish. A young child must
only consume its mother's milk or light gruels made with
the predominant food which, depending on the region,
may be corn, millet, wheat, rice or manioc. Neither eggs
nor fish; no meat or "hot" foods, no fruits guava, paw¬
paw "cold" foods.
The reasons given for this today are as unconvincing
for us as they are essential for many different peoples:
milk causes sterility in women, eggs lead to the disappear¬
ance of the libido; certain meats have a harmful effect
on children; fish can cause leprosy, mottled beans or
speckled bananas cause smallpox; a number of foods
provoke digestive disturbances, eye trouble, Intestinal
worms or other more mysterious dangers!
It is not surprising, therefore, that mothers very quickly
suffer from serious anaemia and vitamin deficiency (beri¬
beri) and that children are often born with latent defi¬
ciencies which, in conjunction with the deficient weaning
diet, lead to Kwashiorkor, a protein deficiency illness 27
CONT'D ON PAGE 30

AFRICAN RECIPES
FOR
HEALTHIER MEALS
Like many other countries Ghana suffers from malnutrition despite its rich
harvests. Though a land of plenty, certain areas, have near-starvation condi¬
tions. Much of the nation lives on a basic diet of grains or starchy roots. The
biggest deficiencies are meat, milk, fish and eggs. The Ghana Government
recently launched a nationwide campaign to teach healthier eating habits and
combat food taboos with the help of FAO and Unesco. Results of village-to-
village enquiries (right) to survey the situation and discover appropriate
recipes already used, were then gathered together into nutrition-recipe book,
"Good Food for Good Health", (1959) followed by a children's book, "The
Story of the Six Food Families", both edited by Miss Ella Griffin of Unesco.
Below, a nutrition course in a Ghana village; and recipe class (below right).

Photos © P. Almasy
29

FOOD TABOOS (Cont'd)
for eating an egg
which haunts children in underdeveloped countries and
which has a name in virtually every language. Nor is it
surprising that there should be deficiencies of vitamin A
which often lead to blindness and numerous vitamin B
deficiencies (Infantile beri-beri, pellagra, ariboflavinosis)
which, when they do not themselves kill, prepare the way
for infections which frequently prove mortal.
' Whereas the infant death rate in Western countries is
between 10 and 30 per 1,000*, it is between 100 and 300
in under-developed countries. Still more striking is the
comparison between death rates among children from 1
to 4 years of age where it is recognized that the nutri¬
tional factor is a primordial cause, directly or indirectly,
of death. In this age group, for each child that dies in
Sweden or France, 4 die in Portugalbut 24 in India and
50 in Africa.
This is partly due to poor conditions of hygiene, to
poverty; to a much greater extent it is due to ignorance,
to traditions, to taboos which prevent the best use from
being made of necessary and often available foods. The
surveys carried out in Guatemala, Mexico, Nigeria and
India reveal that, even in families with a satisfactory food
consumption, young children only rarely receive the share
which they require. Mothers, thinking they are doing the
right thing or from fear of doing the wrong thing,
systematically exclude all protein foods from the child's
diet up to the age of two years with the exception of
mother's milk which is notoriously inadequate.
It should, moreover, be noted that it is in this delicate
and dangerous field of weaning that dietary habits are
most conservative. Thus mothers in Haiti, where the
essence of African cooking has been submerged under the
Caribbean, Spanish or French influence, still use akassan
and kenke to feed young children. These corn gruels,
although carefully prepared, have remained identical
with the formula brought two or three centuries earlier
from Dahomey or Ghana where they are still used today.
It is essential that this should change, that there should
be a better distribution of food within the family, that
better use should be made of local products. And this
necessitates educating the mother of families.
An example of another kind is provided by the pastoral
peoples of Africa. The Masáis of Kenya, the Moors of the
western Sahara and the Bororos of Central Africa are
proud of their herds, the value of which is calculated by
the number of head in a given herd. The larger the
herd, the greater the prestige and the higher the social
standing of the owner. Among primitive and developed
peoples alike, pride is another of the motives underlying
man's actions, to be added to hunger, love or hatred. So
these herds are not exploited and at most a few animals
may be taken from them to form a dowry, to acquire a
wife or to pay taxes.
One day, none the less, cattle must be com¬
mercialized and this will involve establishing
the deep- reasons which link the man to his herd: survival
of the worship of the cow, affection for preferred comp¬
anions, an ultimate form of saving or sheer pride of
possession. In the latter case, the time is not far off
when the herds will be weighed against other forms of
prestige since, as the anthropologist Lowrie has observed,
"man is more a peacock than a biological or economic
animal."
In any case, education of the stock-breeders will consist
of showing him that there are other pleasures besides
contemplating a herd, that there are other forms of
exploitation which are more enriching andwhy not, if
it is in the interest of the community to have the hitherto
meat or milk commercialized? that there are
other forms of prestige to be offered to the peacock.
Or let us take another example of poor food utilization.
In a region of West Africa, the. butter sold by the Peuhls
is made into soap with the result that Mobas and Gour-
mas women suffering from vitamin A deficiency wash
30 their clothes with soap containing vitamins.
Deaths in the course of the first year per 1,000 live births.
Other dietary habits are of relatively recent origin and
are no less regrettable. An example ls provided by the
consumption of tea and loaf sugar among certain
Mediterranean peoples. Today, Morocco consumes more
than 40 kilogrammes of sugar per inhabitant per year,
i.e. more than 110 grammes per day, to sugar mint tea.
This is a level of consumption comparable to that of
countries with ten times as high an income. To give an
idea of the cost of this practice, it is enough to mention
that tea and sugar absorb two months salary in the
average Moroccan family! Such expenditure, even
allowing for the social significance and the stimulant
effect of this national drink, could be considerably
reduced.
Will we one day be able to change these
unsound dietary practices? Combat the taboos,
the false beliefs, make rational use of available resources?
Make it possible for the Indonesian baby to be given fish
and the African peanut flour, for the young girls of
Uganda to be given milk and pregnant women various
meats and eggs? Undoubtedly, yes. With few exceptions,
dietary habits only seem static when observed over a
short period.
There are abundant examples of evolutions which, in
some places, even resemble revolutions. Is it necessary
to recall the history of the potato? Do not we Europeans
owe to the Crusaders many of the fruits of the Near
East, does not Africa owe to the Portuguese corn, manioc,
tomatoes, sweet potatoes, to mention only the main items
which originally came from South America?
When we measure the place which these products today
occupy in African agriculture, it is astonishing to note
the changes which have occurred in three or four cen¬
turies. And today, before our very eyes, the advance
continues: the area given over to the growing of manioc,
for example, Ls increasing dangerously at the expense of
cereals, even in regions where the treatment required by
the bitter manioc obliges the housewife to cover long
distances in order to get to streams where it can be
steeped. Similarly, bread consumption in Africa is rising
very rapidly. This is simultaneously the result of
urbanization and new habits acquired during the war by
African soldiers. Some form of spaghetti, with or without
tomatoes, constitutes the evening meal in almost every
Libyan familya practice which certainly did not exist
before the Italian occupation.
If you ask the girls of Gazaya College, near Kampala
in Uganda, who drink milk every day and eat fish, whether
they are not afraid of becoming sterile, they will tell you
that those are old wives' tales which they have not
believed for a long time past, even if, in fact, some of
them still have to make a certain effort "to do as the
others do" and even if their fears have only recently
disappeared. In the centre of the Congo, near Kikwitt,
a milk distribution programme was organized in 1952. In
less than a year, mothers who had only taken milk for
their young children and the boys, began to take it for
themselves and their little girls.
And where, a mere fifty years ago, a husband could
repudiate his wife and claim the cattle given as a dowry
if he discovered that his wife had eaten eggs, chicken
raising is now rapidly developing. (But it is not so long
ago in certain farms which I know in France, that the
boys could only have chicken, at the price of a good
hiding when they "sacrificed" a bird and the only eggs
they had were those they "pinched" from the nest.)
In both cases, if the penalties were different, the motives
were surely the sameto prevent valuable foods from
being kept from the master's table or the market. Thus,
many dietary customs described 50 or 100 years ago by
ethnologists and travellers among peoples which had
hitherto had no contact with western civilization have
today vanished.
The progress of diversified agriculture, the introduction
of new vegetable or animal species, the increased produc¬
tion of fisheries, the improvement of preservation methods

ONLY ONE DISH
ON THE MENU
Food habits, were initially imposed by the environment and the limitations
of production. Thus, an Eskimo's diet (left) is almost solely composed
of meatcaribou, seal, fishwhile that of India's people (right) is almost
wholly vegetable in origin. Three-quarters of mankind in essence
know only one dish, a basic food flavoured by a sauce of some kind.
and distribution systems, the pressure of commercial
propaganda and the emergence of a purchasing power
help to change the dietary type by modifying the economic
sub-stratum which determines it. But, above all, it is
education which, by changing the cultural sub-stratum
that shaped dietary habits, is responsible for the great
changes which have taken place. This education is
carried out:
First of all, by schools where teaching relegates to the
subordinate ranks the sorcerers and witch-doctors whose
gifts are at last being questioned; where instruction in
simple notions of agriculture, diet and hygiene is each day
occupying a larger place, linked with school meals,
gardening and even the raising of poultry and flshbreed-
ing; where the girls learn housework, cooking, care of the
family and child-care; where, in short, is trained not only
an élite which will migrate to the towns but also a rural
population better prepared than its ancestors to raise com¬
munity living standards material and intellectual.
By maternity or child centres where an increasingly
well-informed staff teaches mothers to feed their young
children in a rational way, thereby attacking and already
with success the difficult problem of harmful practices
at the moment of weaning;
By community development movements adult groups,
youth clubs, women's clubs and social centres where talks
are given by lecturers in popular agriculture and rural
domestic economy, by social assistants, health educators,
public nurses, school-teachers, in a word by all those
with access to peoples prepared by the spirit of co¬
operation and mutual assistance which community devel¬
opment implies to learn from better informed teachers
the methods needed to ensure the raising of their con¬
dition in general and their food standards in particular.
The rôle of international organizations in co-operation
with the national authorities is to train such teachers,
from the highest level to the village level.
In the nutritional field, this pre-supposes a knowledge
of dietary types and habits and of their economic and
socio-cultural sub-stratum, the determination of resistance
points and weak points with a view to attacking vulnera¬
ble practices or by-passing obstacles which are too deep-
rooted, the choice of priority targets in accordance with
the urgency of the nutritional problems and with due
regard to existing or potential resources. It calls, too,
for the orientation of production or the provision of trade
channels so that the demand to be created can be met
without an untoward effect on prices; in short, a national
food policy, an operational plan at the local level, work
methods and, finally, the training of the staff needed to
carry the programme to a successful conclusion.
Hundreds of such programmes are being conducted by
one or another of these methods while, over the last three
years, an effort has been made to strike on all fronts
simultaneously: schools, maternity and child centres,
community development programmes, public education
campaigns. Some 50 programmes of education in food
and diet are under way in more than 40 countries.
These programmes are conducted under the auspices
of FAO, UNICEF, WHO and sometimes Unesco. The
importance of the programmes has not so far exceeded
the pilot stage: thus the programme under way in Costa
Rica affects 60,000 out of a total population of 700,000.
The four programmes in India concern between 2 and
3 per cent of the population. But already governments
are convinced of the success of these programmes and are
anxious to increase them very rapidly.
Thus, India not only wishes to extend these programmes
to 16 States within three years but also intends to
increase the area of application within each State. Brazil,
whose poverty has been so well described by Josué de
Castro, wishes to set up such programmes in all the
north-east States where two programmes are now being
carried out. From throughout the world, requests for
financial and technical aid reach FAO.
The programmes are limited by the lack of credits to
carry out basic surveys, to salve certain problems of
applied research, to train directing staff or cadres, to
supply certain equipment or merely transport means
which increase the effectiveness of "know-how," and
finally to pay those who set the programmes going and run
them until such time as the national staff is competent
enough to be left to itself.
The aim of the "Campaign Against Hunger" is precisely
to come to the assistance of those countries where hunger
reigns, not only by giving them food surpluses, sent
urgently as a partial and temporary solution, but by
putting at the disposal of those countries specialists for
the training of men with whom, through additional
material aid, they will set up programmes designed to
bring about important and lasting results in the field
of the production and utilization of foodstuffs.
International aid would make it possible to reach within
twenty-five years objectives which, at the present rate,
could only be attained in a century. But time presses
and terribly so, for, as José Americo has said: o«
"Worse than dying of hunger in the desert
Is to have nothing to eat in the Land of Canaan."
