Fresco painting of Euphemius Mtatsmideli (958-1028
A.D.) an Important Georgian composer of religious
music. The musical notation used in Georgian mediae¬
val hymns has for long intrigued and puzzled scholars
and It was only recently successfully deciphered.
Manuscript of ancient hymns copied at the end of the
1 0th century under the direction of Michael Modre-
keli, a great Georgian poet and composer. Miniature
in the margin depicts John Mtbevari, a Georgian 1 0th
century hymnologist and St. Basilius of Caesarea, to
whom the hymns in this manuscript are dedicated.
Miniature of a 1 3th century Georgian manuscript
representing a dancer and his accompanying mu¬
sicians playing cymbals, a lute, a flute and a tabor.

LOST HYMNS
OF GEORGIA'
A 1,000-year-old musical mystery
unravelled by a Soviet linguist
by Pavle Ingorokva
All photos furnished by the author
Faun playing an aulos (flute). 1st century A.D.
bronze found in Georgia. Flute is missing.
H ERODOTus, the Father of History, began his
great work with an »account of the relations
between the Greece and the Colchis of hoary antiquity,
a full thousand years before our era. Colchis the
legendary land of Medea and the Golden Fleece lay in
the west of Georgia. Its mention by Herodotus gives some
idea of ancient sources of Georgian culture.
Situated in the Caucasus, the crossroads of Europe and
Asia, Georgia is a land of European culture blended with
that of the East, a kind of synthesis of both traditions.
Georgia's links in distant antiquity, with the lands of
the classical East Assyria, Babylon, the empire of the
Hittites and Urartu can be seen from monuments of
material culture and the »testimony of cuneiform
inscriptions dating back to the second millenium B.C.
Another indication of ancient Georgia's links with the
West, the world of Hellenism, is the existence of such
well-known legends as the voyage of the Argonauts from
Greece to Colchis, which stems from the Homeric epos,
or the story of Prometheus, chained by order of Zeus to
a rock in the Caucasus. This wonderful legend originated
in Colchis, and found artistic expression in Aeschylus's
masterly tragedy.
Later, during the Hellenistic and the Roman periods,
Georgia was an indépendant state with a high level of
culture. In the first and second centuries A.D., Georgia
played an important part in Rome's relations with the
East, the political authority of the Georgian state being
spoken of by ancient authors, who described the honours
paid by the emperor Hadrian to Pharasman II, king of
Georgia, during the latter's visit to Rome in 138 A.D.
The Georgian ruler took part in an important religious
ceremony, offering a sacrifice in the Capitol, and having
an equine monument raised in his honour in the temple
of Mars.
Christianity became the State religion of Georgia in
337 A.D., and during mediaeval times it was one of the
leading countries of the Christian East. Unlike Byzantium,
Georgia also saw an efflorescence of secular literature,
especially in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, which
may well be called the Golden Age of Georgian culture.
It was during the latter period that there developed a
humanistic current comparable with the Renaissance in
Europe, which came later. This was the era of Georgia's
great poet, Shota Rustaveli, the author of a poem of
genius The Knight in the Tiger-Skin, a new translation
of which is being prepared by Unesco. This work by
Rustaveli, who can justly be called a great bard of
humanism, was an early forerunner of the ideas of the
Renaissance.
An important place in the cultural heritage of ancient
Georgia is held by manuscripts of professional music,
which go back through the Middle Ages to antiquity.
These records consist of manuscripts of early Christian
hymns, with the verses of the texts accompanied by a
musical notation located over and under each line of the
text. The musical characters are in vermilion, as distinct
from the text, which is in black.
The nine extant manuscripts of ancient Georgian music
refer to the tenth and eleventh centuries. Five of them
are in Georgia, one is at the Monastery on Mt. Athos in
Greece, and three are in the library of the Convent of
St. Catherine in Sinai.
Of these manuscripts, the . most important are two in
the possession of the Manuscripts' Institute of the
Academy of Sciences of Georgia. One is a collection of
hymns copied in the years 978-88 under the guidance of
Michael Modrekeli, a great Georgian composer and poet.
The other is a collection, copied by Jordan at the close
of the tenth century. The repertory of these manuscripts
pertains in the main to the eighth, ninth and tenth
centuries. The notation used was found to be much
older. The manuscripts contain a total of- about 1,300
chorals, the repertory being very extensive.
The music recorded in such ancient manuscripts, and
the system of notation used »have long intrigued scholars,
but until recently all attempts to decipher them were
unsuccessful.
This interest was enhanced by the fact that the
evidence of history shows that ancient Georgian music
was quite independent in character, quite distinct from
Western, in particular Greek, music.
An 11th century source speaks of the existence of two
kinds of vocal music Greek and Georgian, the former
being homophonic, and the latter being sung in three
voices. It is a fact that from most ancient times the
peoples neighbouring on Georgia knew only homophonic
music. For instance Greek music, both antique and
mediaeval, »and for that matter right down to modern
times, was homophonic. The peoples of the East use
homophonic music to this day.
cONSEQUENTLY, Georgian music with its de-
iveloped polyphony both in folk songs and
church music, and its original harmonisation was an
exception to the environment, a kind of island in a sea
of homophony. The Christian church inherited this
polyphony from pagan practice. Ancient sources point out
that whenever the texts of church hymns were translated
into Georgian from the Greek, the accompanying music
was written anew, for, as a twelfth-century Georgian
source points out, "alien to our people are the Greek
incantations."
The deciphering of ancient Georgian musical notation
was preceded by an important discovery in the field of
ancient Georgian poetry, which helped to unravel the
mystery of the notation problem.
In the course of my research into the history of ancient
Georgian literature, I made a study of church hymns,
i. e. texts supplied with musical characters. At first the
hymns I studied interested me as literary monuments.
It should be noted that these hymns were always
considered purely prosaic works, because there was no
division into lines of verse in the manuscripts. In ancient
times, however, verse was not divided in separate lines;
this is borne out by manuscripts with ancient Georgian
iambics.
I found I could discern a complex rhythm in the hymnal
25
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

LOST HYMNS (Cont'd)
Pattern of dots
texts, and then saw that they had a definite metrical
structure. I also saw that the dots in the texts could not
be considered ordinary punctuation marks. They seemed
to have some other kind of function. When I counted
the number of syllables between the dots, I found a
definite pattern. Thus, in the first paragraph in one of
the hymns the number of syllables between the dots was
as follows: 7, 7, 7, 11, 7, 7, 5; the following paragraphs had
the same pattern, and so right through till the end of the
first canto of the hymn. Another text revealed the
following pattern: 5, 10, 5, 11, 5, 8, 10, and this was
repeated in all the paragraphs of the text.
All the hymns, without exception, were built on the
same kind of pattern.
It followed that the dots in the texts denoted their
metrical form unrhyming verses with a clear strophic
structure. Each strophe was followed by an antistrophe,
which repeated the metrical structure of the first strophe
with absolute fidelity.
This parallel-strophe structure is analogous to that of
the ancient Greek choral lyrics, and also of the verses
sung in ancient Greek tragedies.
It was in this way that the discovery was made of a
new and rich field of »ancient Georgian poetry the
hymnic.
The discovery of the metrical form in the hymns led
me up to the problem of how their musical notation was
to be deciphered the close link between musical and
metrical rhythm in ancient times is well known. In the
texts examined, too, the complex rhythm and the wealth
and variety of the rhythmical pattern, as well as the
metrical conformity of strophe and antistrophe, indicated
the presence of an unseparable link between the verses
and the accompaniment. The problem was to uncover the
secret of that music, whose surge could be felt in the
texture of the verses.
There was one musical character
whose meaning I realized before I
started work on the texts of the
hymns. I have already mentioned
that the texts were in black, and the
musical characters in vermilion. All
the black dots in the texts correspond¬
ed to a red dot in the musical nota¬
tion. There was absolute consistence
in this relationship, so the evidence
seemed to show that each red dot had a metrical function.
To start with, I copied out and classified all the charac¬
ters, of which I found eighteen (including those indicating
variations). A detailed comparison of these characters
with those current in the musical notation used in
mediaeval Europe showed that they were quite different,
and, what was of special significance, the Georgian
characters were fewer in number than the European. It
was »clear that the former differed not only in outline
but in structure.
After long consideration as to why the Georgian musical
characters were fewer in number than the European,
I reached a conclusion that put me on the right track.
I realized that the Georgian characters were few in
number because Georgian notation was based on a
musical alphabet, distinct from the other mediaeval
Ghelatl, ancient centre
of Georgian music.
systems of notation, which were not alphabetic, but
hieroglyphic.
The first step lay in establishing the frequency of the
characters used in the notation how many times each
character was used in all the cantos of the manuscripts
with musical notation, and the number of syllables to each
character.
This count revealed that there were eight basic
characters in the system of notation, the others being
ancillary and rarely used. The supplementary characters
were not independent, but were a graphic variation of
the basic characters.
The discovery of eight basic musical characters or notes
confirmed the original surmise that the Georgian musical
notation was alphabetic, and the fact of eight characters
coming to light was an indubitable indication that the
notation was based on the octave the eight characters
represented the eight notes of the octaval scale.
This important step along the road to the uncovering
of the secret of the ancient musical notation of Georgia
was followed by an inquiry into the order of the notes
in the octave.
The octaval scale, as is well known, falls into two parts
the lower tetrachord or diatonic series of four tones,
and the upper tetrachord, also of four tones.
6(3»;-)
2
6(34-3)
i f r r~r
Í n tí tí
» r
3¿-3fl£ 33 -3íl-ey¿-s?3
zz:
tí tí
	&
M-]p-<zn
3^
e ^
ü o
\
n -
Modern transcription of a hymn composed by Gregori
Khandsteli (758-860) a composer of mediaeval Georgia.
The notation of the leading melody (leader of the voices)
or "cantus firmus" is given in the centre (above the
original 1 0th century notation). This hymn was noted
down by members of the Georgian Society of Church
Music in the 19th century. Parts for the accompanying
voices are noted here on the upper and lower staves.
The Georgian notation under discussion also has the
same division of eight notes into two series. One series
of four characters is written below the line, which makes
it obvious that it corresponds to the lower series of the
octave; four characters are written above the line, thus
giving us the upper series of the octave.
Next came the question of the order of the four
characters in the lower series, and the four of the upper
series.
This was ascertained from the shape of the characters.
As was to have been expected, and indeed proved to be
the case, the notes were not a chance array of characters,
but followed a definite system, which showed that the
graphical aspect of the Georgian notes was built to suit
the octaval structure. Indeed, the order of the notational
characters emerged from the graphical links between the
individual signs, the gradual transition from one to
another.
The coincidence of characters
does not stop at this stage.
and musical pattern
GEORGIAN NOTATION
The first four signs of the oc¬
tave were placed below the line. ?
26 V ^ \ The last four signs of the oc¬
tave were placed above the line.
The signs (left) which resemble modern shorthand writing are, in fact, ancient
musical notes. Each one of the eight signs shown either above or below the
centre line corresponds to one of the eight notes in the octaval scale in the
Georgian musical notation of the Middle Ages. This notation which might be
called "alphabetic" was a distinct advance on the "hieroglyphic" systems of
mediaeval notation (where a sign represented a group of notes or even several
musical phrases). The first four notes of the octave (the lower ones) become
simpler and smaller in size as they ascend and the last four (above the line)
gradually increase in size and become more complex in form as they ascend

;A~ Tl&fmw&Êm&na.,, J^Y^f^"-",i v-> " -.«&- 1 \>\ \| ~ N
v .p>fJMn .^~ .£***~~% -ry f '^..^u. .¿fr .^. .^^ , rç TI
^Ci^^.^^r Â. ¿ja	 jj ,w>A 	 /' . \ ..... .
Part of a hymn composed in the I Oth century by Michael Modrekeli and entitled "The Resurrection
of Christ." The meaning of these strange little musical characters written In red and placed above
or below the texts Inscribed in black, and their melodies remained a mystery for over 1,000 years.
The extreme characters, i. e. the first in the lower series
and the last, the eighth in the upper series are related in
outline. The eighth sign repeats the outline of the first
with the addition of a pennant. The parallel is logical,
since an inverted prime »becomes an octave.
The sequence of the signs was checked in other ways.
It has »been observed that the sign for the fifth tone of
the octave is of far more frequent occurence in church
incantations than the octaval, since the fifth forms, as it
were, the centre of the »melody in church music which
accounts for its having been called the dominant.
Further: the tonic, i. e. the prime or the eighth note
in the octave should be heard in the concluding measure
or bar of each hymn. This was also found in the nota¬
tion under discussion.
Thus, success attended the efforts made to establish
the sequence of musical characters in the notation. This
was the second step towards achievement of the aim set.
Further study of ancient Georgian sources enabled me
to find out the names of the signs and the notes of the
octave, which fully bore out the conclusions drawn from
the decipherment.
The next and most radical step was to determine the
tone denoted by each particular character, I.e. to find
the "key" to a reading of the octaval notes.
In the early stages of the inquiry I
noticed that the first line of each hymn
contained an indication of the voice it was
to be sung on. In all, eight voices were
named a sure indication of the diatonic
tonality typical of the music of the ancient
Christian church. Each "voice" provided
a precise indication of the way the signs
of the octaval gamut were to be read. It
follows that the "voices" in the ancient
Georgian notation performed the function of the keynote
in present-day musical notation.
This was the final step made towards the decipherment
of the musical notation used in ancient Georgia. It was
clear that the inscription as to the "voice" to be used
showed the existence of eight tones of the octave within
each voice. Indeed, eight characters were deciphered in
the manuscripts, all this bearing out the correctness of
the conclusions drawn.
It thus became possible to express the hymnic melodies
in notation. Just as in Roman Catholic church music
until the thirteenth century, in which only the leading
voice, the tenor or Cantus firmus was recorded in nota¬
tion, the Georgian manuscripts had the leading melody
in notation (the so-called dzlispiri the "leader of the
voices") the accompanying voices following the set
pattern of the Georgian folk harmonisation, and provid¬
ing a background to the melody.
Reading of the musical texts now became possible, so
I began to transpose the tenth-century notation into
Woman playing
the aulos.
A Georgian lute.
modern notation. I began with a hymn in honour of the
Virgin Mary, entitled. Gikharoden ("Ave Maria"), and I
cannot find words to express the thrill of first hearing
melodies dating back a thousand years.
Had the decipherment been false, the result would have
been a mere jumble of sounds. As it was, I heard a
splendid and impressive melody. In all the eighty hymns
I next deciphered, the result was the same music marked
by integrity and depth of thought.
I then decided to find out whether the ancient tradition
had been preserved in the church melodies used in
Georgia in the 19th. and 20th. centuries, and, if so, which
elements, and what relation existed betweeu the ancient
style and the modern.
The appropriate texts were
found at various libraries in Geor¬
gia. Among the numerous records
of 19th century church music that
were examined, over 300 hymns
with three-part music were discov¬
ered, whose texts coincided with
those of the 10th century hymns
analyzed. They had been taken
down in notation in the 19th century by members of the
national society of Georgian church music.
To what period does the invention of the ancient
Georgian musical notation belong? What place does
this music occupy in world musical culture?
The evidence available indicates that the Georgian
notation departed from the ancient Greek system, and
developed into an independent system of notation at the
beginning of our era.
The new element in the Georgian system of notation
lay in the application of the purely octaval principle,
which facilitated a more accurate expression of musical
notes, and made it possible to reduce the clumsy Greek
system of 23 basic signs to a system of eight characters.
Further, the antique notation had letter-like signs,
which made it possible to take down the text of music
for the purpose of study, but was ill adapted for reading
at sight. The Georgian system made up for this
shortcoming in the ancient Greek system, whose letter¬
like characters were replaced by simpler signs, which rise
and fall, their outlines facilitating visual perception of the
flow of the voice. Just as in the modern staves, a
definite system of characters helps us to visualise the
rise and fall in the vocal pitch, whereas the ancient Greek
notation had all the characters linearly located above the
text. This was a signal achievement. Ancient Georgian
church music, holds pride of place with the most ancient
musical cultures of the world.
Dr. PAVLE INGOROKVA of the Institute of Ancient Manu¬
scripts, Georgian Academy of Sciences, is an outstanding Soviet 27
authority on Georgian literature and linguistics and has deciphered
Hittite inscriptions on Georgian archaeological finds.
