STUDENTS ABROAD
IN SEARCH OF KNOWLEDGE
by Gordon Behrens
SiiInce ancient times, students have been on
'the move in search of knowledge. In the sixth
century B.C., oriental scholars flocked to the Kingdom of
Lu to listen to the scholarly lectures of Confucius. The
court of the Indian king, Vikramldltya II, in the golden
age of Sanskrit literature drew scholars from as far away
as China and the Near East. The famous Academy In
Athens where Plato taught and the school of Aristotle
drew students from three continents to these ancient
centres of learning.
Europe's medieval universities like Cracow, Prague and
Paris were magnets which brought students from every
corner of Europe. In the 14th century, the forty colleges
of the University of Paris attracted students from every
country in Europe.
The trek of students from one country to another to
further their academic ambitions ls as old as history, but
until fairly recent times such study abroad was motivated
primarily by a student's desire to find the best schools of
higher learning and the best teachers available in his
field. Needless to say, he paid for it out of his own pocket.
Within the last few decades, the whole concept of study
abroad has been revolutionized. Governments, inter¬
governmental organizations, private agencies and inter¬
national organizations have recognized that the exchange
of students is one of the positive ways to promote better
understanding between countries and to help break down
those prejudices and misconceptions which distance, lan¬
guage, race and customs may create between peoples.
More recently, the exchange of students has been
viewed as an important way in which developing coun
tries, lacking trained personnel, can educate and train
their young people In skills and knowledge acquired
abroad, thus permitting them to make a greater contribu¬
tion to the economic and social growth of their own
countries.
Transportation and cost have always been the pro¬
hibiting factors in the free How of students from one
country to another. In this age of the jet aeroplane,
getting there ls easily solved, but paying for It amounts
today to a four-figure sum that only a handful of students
can afford. The medical student from Thailand who
wishes to continue his work In a specialized Held in
Vienna, or the Bolivian engineering student who wants
to study hydraulics in the United States, has to spend
practically a year's tuition and living costs In transporta¬
tion before he ever sets foot on the campus of his choice.
Realizing the benefits of student exchanges as well a.s
the prohibitive costs involved, more and more govern¬
ments and other organizations, both private and Inter¬
national, have awarded fellowships, scholarships, grants
and other forms of financial aid to enable deserving stu¬
dents to travel and study abroad. A Unesco survey esti¬
mates that there were, In 1960, a total of 200,000 students
studying In countries other than their own. Of this
number almost one-half were being helped by awards
from a vast variety of government, private and Inter¬
national sources.
Unesco has, from Its Inception, taken a great Interest
In the programme of the exchange of persons throughout
the world. In 1947 the Exchange of Persons service was
established and one of its first tasks was to catalogue
the great number of fellowships, scholarships and other
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
COI, London
OVER 200,000 STUDENTS were at work In countries other than their own during I 960 according to a
Unescosurvey. Nowadays, to Great Britain alone nearly 30,000 students come from Commonwealth coun¬
tries. Here, students from South Africa, Kenya, Ghana and Uganda study architectural photography.
29

.n'1'1''*
Ornri.il Soviet photo
NEED OF KNOWLEDGE AND SKILLS in developing
countries which lack specialized personnel is seen in increasing
flow of young people to countries with large-scale technical
and educational resources. Above, with a Kremlin tower as a
backdrop, Asian and African students chat during a sight¬
seeing tour of Moscow. Right, couriers of the British Council
meet newly arrived students at a London railway station and
help them on their way to university, technical centre or school.
STUDENTS ABROAD (Cont'd)
115,000 study awards in 113 countries
British Council, London
awards available throughout the world for students who
wish to study abroad.
This job had never been done before on an international
scale. In 1949 Unesco produced Volume I of Study Abroad,
listing 15,000 awards for students to study abroad made
by 281 agencies in 34 countries. Today in its 13th edition,
"Study Abroad" lists more than 115,000 awards available
from 1,652 agencies, institutions and governments in
113 states and territories..
Study Abroad has now become one of Unesco's biggest
"best sellers". It is now looked upon as a veritable bible
of fellowship information by students, educators and
scientists, as well as government and private agencies.
"Dog-eared" copies are consulted by scores of students
throughout the world in the offices of government educa¬
tional counsellors, university libraries and a host of pri¬
vate and public organizations which help students who
are looking for opportunities to continue their academic
work in foreign countries.
T;
30
he latest volume covering the academic year
1962 shows that awards available for study in
foreign lands ase most numerous in the fields of applied
science, social sciences (including education), natural
sciences, mathematics and humanities. But this general
breakdown does not begin to probe the scope and breadth
and unusual character of many awards waiting to be
claimed by some deserving student.
Ten young star-gazers, for example, can continue their
work in astronomy for a three-to six-month period in
a country where the telescopes are more powerful than at
home through a travel grant offered by the International
Astronomical Union. The Associated Country Women of
the World provide an all-expense one-year study abroad
for a young woman interested in studying practical nutri¬
tion, adult education, home and country crafts, or family
welfare. The International Union of Students picks
25 students each year for three to six-year courses in
a University of the U.S.S.R. in the fields of science, medi¬
cine and agronomy. All expenses are paid and an addi
tional grant is available for students from tropical lands
to buy warm clothing.
Over four per cent of all awards offered for study abroad
in the latest Unesco edition are for fellowships, scholar¬
ships and other grants-in-aid made by the United Nations
and its family of specialized agencies (including Unesco).
Future atomic scientists, bankers-to-be and budding
economists are among the recipients of the UN's annual
legacy for study abroad. Farmers, fishermen, meteorolo¬
gists, aviation mechanics and labour relations experts
can also find programmes listed for foreign study by the
UN.'s specialized agencies.
Unesco's own programme for study abroad lists more
than a dozen fields ranging from education to natural and
social sciences, cultural activities, information media,
petroleum research and the training of journalists.
One of Unesco's newest exchange programmes is for
women adult education workers, to provide a travel grant
to enable women active in their own countries in women's
organizations to travel abroad and see what is being done
in other countries by similar organizations. During the
current year, twenty women sponsored by international
women's groups holding consulting status with Unesco
will benefit from this Unesco travel grant. A woman from
Fiji will visit New, Zealand, a Japanese women's leader
will visit the United States and four Scandinavian coun¬
tries, another from Kenya will be visiting the U.K., and
a Northern Rhodesian, Australia. A Nepalese will go to
Sierra Leone and two women from Argentina and Peru
will visit three European countries.
Although international organizations account for an
ever-growing number of awards and opportunities for
foreign study (14%) individual governments still account
for almost fifty per cent of the scholarships and fellow¬
ships and other grants offered to students in Unesco's
latest edition of Study Abroad. Educational groups
account for about 20 per cent of the awards with foun¬
dations, clubs, private groups, etc., making up the balance.
Most awards listed in the Unesco annual are unrestric-
tlve as to eligibility, that ls, who can participate. About
a third of the awards, however, stipulate that a student
receiving the grant be a resident or citizen of one parti-

cular region or country. Another two-thirds stipulate that
the award is for study in a specific country or Institution
of higher learning.
Some awards specify the precise field in which the
exchange student must study, but a fair number (about
one quarter) let the student choose his own field of Inte¬
rest. In those awards which do specifically define the field
of study, applied sciences lead the field with about 20 per
cent, social sciences 14 per cent, mathematics 10 per cent
with liberal arts, humanities, philology, art, culture, his¬
tory, librarianship, museology, etc., accounting for the
rest.
Thousands of fellowships are offered to students of par¬
ticular ethnic origin, countries, regions or continents.
One small college in the midwestern United States, for
example, offers six scholarships every year two to Latin
Americans, two to Africans and two to Asians. A univer¬
sity in Iceland offers a scholarship to a student from the
U.S.A. of Icelandic background and one to a Norwegian,
while a university in Norway offers, through its students'
organization, a year's scholarship to a student from
the U.S.S.R.
Needs of the African students in the newly
Independent countries who keenly desire to
continue their studies in foreign countries, have received
immediate recognition from many countries and awarding
agencies. In a special supplement to Study Abroad
published only a few months ago. Unesco lists 10,000
opportunities for foreign study available to African stu¬
dents made by 136 agencies in 54 countries. Awards are
open to students from 35 African states and territories.
The demand for this document entitled Fellowships for
Africans has been so great that It has already gone
through a second printing.
In addition to numerous awards from international
organizations, countries like the U.S.A., the U.S.S.R., the
United Kingdom, France and Belgium, list hundreds of
scholarships available for undergraduate students to
study in the universities of their respective countries in
any field of their choice.
Private agencies olfer interesting and unusual oppor¬
tunities in a variety of fields. The British Red Cross
Society grants two Florence Nightingale scholarships to
nurses from Commonwealth countries In Africa. Nine
young musicians chosen from Ghana, Kenya and the
Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland can receive scho¬
larships to music academics In Great Britain sponsored by
the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music, and
some aspiring student of cinematography from the Repub¬
lic of Somalia can receive a 20-month course in Rome
at the expense of the Italian Government. A considerable
number of scholarships are offered by African countries
themselves for students from neighbouring countries.
In connexion with Study Abroad, Unesco has under¬
taken nine separate annual surveys of students studying
in countries other than their own. The surveys have
included not only scholarship and fellowship students but
also those who are studying on their own. The results of
the surveys are startling. They show that almost two
per cent of all the world's students In higher education
are taking their studies abroad. The total figure is
200,000 and this number ls viewed as even more significant
in the light of the fact that a high proportion of these
students will probably occupy positions of great impor¬
tance in the economic, political and social development of
their own countries.
About 50,000 of the world's students studying abroad
are enrolled In institutions of higher learning In the Uni¬
ted States, although the percentage of foreign students In
the U.S.A. in relation to the total number of students in
higher education ls below the world average. The Federal
Republic of Germany, France, the United Kingdom and
the U.S.S.R. each have more than 10,000 foreign students
enrolled in their colleges and universities. Argentina has
almost that number with a total of 9,269 students from
abroad. Japan counts almost 4,500 students from abroad
and in Switzerland and Austria where foreign students
are fewer in number, they still make up approximately
one-third of the total number enrolled In universities and
colleges.
As might be expected, geographical nearness and poll- 31
tlcal affinity show up In the distribution of foreign stu¬
dents from one country to another. In a study of 18 coun-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

STUDENTS ABROAD (Cont'd)
An adventure
in learning
tries, Unesco found that in 12, more than half of the
students came from only three or four foreign countries.
The study showed, for example, that in Japan, 59 per
cent of the foreign students were from Korea and 25 per
cent from China. The United Kingdom counts 19 per cent
from Its non-self-governing territories, 12 per cent from
India, 9 per cent from U.S.A., and 8 per cent from Nigeria.
Switzerland has 20 per cent of its foreign students from
Germany (1), 13 per cent from the U.S.A. and 9 per cent
from France.
In some countries and territories the percentage of
foreign students ls almost on a par with the country's
own student enrollment. Trinidad and Tobago, for ins¬
tance, have 66 foreign students and only 77 native enrolled
studentsa staggering 85 per cent of foreign students as
compared with the U.S.S.R. which has about 0.5 per cent
of its student population from abroad, and the U.S.A.
with 1.4 per cent.
The Unesco survey shows that more than a quarter of
foreign students studying outside their own countries are
following courses in the humanities, education and fine
arts. Not quite another quarter are taking courses in
engineering. Law and social sciences occupy about 17 per
cent and natural sciences a little more than 10 per cent.
Medicine, formerly one of the most popular reasons for
study abroad, now accounts for about 15 per cent of the
total foreign student population.
T
32
his survey made by Unesco helps to provide
agencies and governments with a clear idea of
what sort of scholarships are needed and what they can
best offer to achieve effective results for the money they
provide. Here can be found, both in the documentation
of awards available for study abroad and the survey of
students presently studying abroad which Unesco has
compiled, the clue to problems which exist in this field in
its modern forms.
Unesco has summed it up like this:
"Study abroad is widely recognized as having many
valuable uses. It can give the individual student the
diploma or the experience he needs. It can influence the
international development of the specialized field in which
he is studying. It can further the aims of the organiza¬
tion giving the scholarship which enables him to study
abroad. It can train personnel for employment in projects
for social and economic development. It can spread the
knowledge of certain languages and cultures in other
countries. It can be one of the most effective ways of
breaking down individual prejudices against people in
other lands, thereby encouraging a better understanding
among the nations between which exchanges are made.
"Study abroad can be an adventure in learning but it
can also be an adventure which puts a strain upon the
student. Strange methods of instruction and living con¬
ditions can affect his power to learn. Other things may
test his power of adaptation" (2).
Unesco seeks solutions to these problems through the
Information which it is constantly collecting from the
donors of awards to students for study abroad and from
the surveys made of students in foreign lands. It is
undoubtedly true that the student abroad faces problems
and challenges which his colleague at home escapes, but
what he faces in effect, are those problems and challenges
which face all persons going abroad to learn something of
other men's ways.
(1) Figure includes both students from Federal Republic of Ger¬
many and Eastern Germany.
(2) "Other Men's Ways", Unesco and Its Programme XIII..
Unesco 1955, Paris.
Svenska Lantarbetareforbundet, Stockholm
USIS
Courtesy, University of Washington
OTHER MEN'S SKILLS & WAYS
Seen here are three examples of the vast scope and breadth of ways in
which people are nowadays taking advantage of opportunities to go
abroad to develop skills and talents or simply to see how their own
jobs are done in other lands. Top, Austrian farm-workers spending
a day on a Swedish farm at Hornsjofors are one of many such groups,
representing many trades and occupations, which each year exchange
visits from one end of Europe to the other. Centre, a, girl violinist from
the United States practices under the supervision of a teacher at the
Paris Conservatoire de Musique. Bottom, a Philippine student (fore¬
ground) prepares for his Master of Science degree at the Fisheries
School of the University of Washington, in the northwest of the U.S.A.
