THE ART
OF SEEING A FILM
by J.M.L. Peters
For persons of all ages but perhaps more so for the
young, the best protection against the faults and ex¬
cesses of films and television is the awakening, deve¬
lopment and proper training of the critical faculties.
This is not criticism for its own sake but so people can
be more selective in the films the/ see and also under¬
stand them better. Film teaching is already common
practice in the schools of a number of countries. The
Unesco Courier strongly recommends "Teaching About
the Film " by J.M.L. Peters, a book just published by
Unesco, the Introduction of which is reproduced below.
MORE TO IT THAN MEETS THE EYE. The meaning of a film picture is
usually not identical with the object or situation represented by it. The scene
below from Robert Wise's "The Set-Up" does not merely represent a boxer
who has just knocked out another. It "says" something "The winner domi-
These days many educational authorities, as
well as parents, seem to have it on their
consciences that they ought to "do something about the
film." They often appear to envisage some form of inter¬
vention, or interference, from the sphere of education
into that of the cinema.
The arguments in favour of such action stem mainly
from the conviction of many adults, including many
educators, that motion »pictures are a danger to young
people. Their view is that even though most Ulms do not
overtly express ideas and opinions which might be consi¬
dered morally bad, and even though sympathy is not
actually expressed for gangsters and other villains,
nevertheless the cinema may form a bad emotional envi¬
ronment or intellectual climate for the young and
immature.
Certainly the world shown by many films is not a true
reflection of reality. It is often a world where, for
example, family life, work, culture and religion appear
supremely unimportant. Rarely is family life depicted
as being important in itself; it offers only a framework
for the actions of the principal characters on the screen.
Similarly, many Alms give the impression that work is
an unimportant part of man's life. Only very seldom is
the relation of the film hero or heroine towards their jobs
of any importance for the development of the film story.
As for cultural values, it can surely be said without
offending anybody that art, science, technical and social
progress are not the main concerns of many film makers
4 nor of the persons who play a leading part in their films.
Thus it is no exaggeration to say that »many films are

K. van der Groep
nates the whole situation, the loser's defeat is absolute." In this picture from
"Notorious", Alfred Hitchcock has used lighting and perspective to create
a dramatic relationship between the girl and the cups of coffee and the
shadow of the hand in foreground gives a threatening effect to the whole.
likely to induce the inexperienced and uncritical onlooker
to believe that life is made up largely of crime and sex.
The actions of the leading characters are often motivated
by the desire for social success, wealth, prestige or author¬
ity.
Sex and romance, crime and adventure, swashbuckling
heroics and personal achievement are the predominant
themes of a great many films. The sentimental element
is over-emphasized at the expense of reasonable argu¬
ment. Problems are solved in a way designed to satisfy
the onlooker's emotional wishes rather than the claims
of his intellect.
Physical advantages strength or beauty are generally
presented as more desirable than brains or character.
The social situation of »man (and woman) as depicted by
the movies also differs considerably from reality. The
heroes of the screen generally have "romantic" profes¬
sions or jobs; they may be cowboys, dancers, singers,
actors, sporting champions, detectives, officers in the
armed forces. But the office stool is not valued very
highly. Indeed, a large percentage of the characters on
the screen are already apparently so rich that they do
not need to work at all.
Similarly, the surroundings most frequently shown in
films are the prairie, the theatre (behind the scenes as
well as from the stage), the racecourse and boxing ring,
the luxury flat, the night-club frequented by gangsters,
the glamorous outpost of empire not the wash-tub, the
factory or the poor apartment.
Yet since (It is argued) one cannot prevent or counter¬
act these "hidden dangers" solely by means of negative
measures, such as film censorship, one has to do some¬
thing positive. However, what Is meant here by "posi¬
tive" has often in the past turned out to be still rather
"negative" ; young people, It has been said, ought to be put
through a process of being "disillusioned" about their
film experiences.
As early as 1933 the American Professor Herbert Blumer
wrote that one ought to teach young cinema-goers not to
involve themselves too deeply In the action of a film or
in the problems of its heroes, In order not to lose their
critical detachment towards »the film Itself.
Young people, he thought, had to learn to develop what
he called "adult discount" .that Is, they should cultivate
aloofness in order to remain consciously the spectators
and to avoid becoming sympathetic participants.
I myself think that nowadays we see more clearly that
one may develop a critical attitude towards the cinema
without at the same time becoming so detached that a
film experience in which one participates as a deeply-
engrossed spectator is forfeited.
As was remarked by Professor Edgar Dale twenty years
after his compatriot Blumer: pedagogically speaking it
would be no small loss, and seeing a film would be a less
rich experience, if one were to cultivate such an emotional
detachment among young people.
What Lord Radoliffe wrote in The Problem of Power is
worth recalling at this point: "The spread of education
has given most people the apparatus of criticism; what
it has not always given them is the knowledge of how to c
use their machine for an end that is not merely trivial or
destructive. Yet criticism is essentially a method of
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

MAGIC OF LIGHT
Basically each film pic¬
ture owes its power of
expression to a combin¬
ed use of visual and
sound effects. Among
these, lighting has an
important role. This is
illustrated by two shots
from "Variations on a
Film Theme" in which
the same face, under
different lighting condi¬
tions, has its expression
completely transformed.
ART OF SEEING A FILM (Cont'd)
Don't be bluffed by glitter & glamour
appreciation. It has no necessary connexion with the
awful luxuries of contempt or condemnation."
Therefore, the cultivation of a critical attitude means,
In a sense, "self-immunizing". The spectators must not
be bluffed by the glitter of a picture and Its stars, nor by
the refined techniques of film production. In this respect
the advice that "one ought to learn to Withdraw from
the suggestive power of the film" can have real meaning.
It really comes down to this: where a worthwhile film
is concerned, the film experience of the young spectator
should certainly be allowed to be deep; the depth of his
impressions, however, should not primarily be due to the
glamour of the stars, the fabulous production costs, or
technical novelties and trickery.
To offer a protection against this type of spurious
appeal is a negative postulate of film education: the need
for critical evaluation and assimilation is a positive de¬
mand.
In American literature on the subject, film education is
mostly referred to as "motion picture discrimination",
and in that term I think both the above meanings (of
withdrawing from the suggestive power of the film, and
of critical evaluation and assimilation) are present. How¬
ever, in the so-called Wheare Report of 1950 (1) which
could be regarded as the English charter of film-teach¬
ing the dangers of the film and the necessity of arming
young people against those dangers were given priority.
The view that the film may be also a new form of art
In Its own right has been late in coming to the forefront
of pedagogical studies and of film educational practice in
most countries. It is remarkable that, generally speak¬
ing, the teaching of appreciation of the film as art must
still be first defended with the argument that the best
way to protect young people against the moral dangers of
the cinema is to cultivate their film aesthetic taste.
Yet changes have been coming over this scene.
Whereas In England the view was held for
many years that film education had to be art education
in the first place, many members of the Socie»ty for Edu¬
cation in Film and Television (formerly called the Society
of Film Teachers) have, for instance, for a long time past
been concerning themselves with aspects of the film
other than its aesthetic ones, »that is, with social, ethical
and cultural values.
What has happened in England has also happened in
other countries where film education has become an
accepted notion, and in other circles besides those pro¬
fessionally interested in the subject. But let us not be
carried away: right up to the present there has remained
a strong and active body of opinion upholding the oppos¬
ing viewpoint that -film education can have nothing to
do with social or moral values.
Sometimes one even hears the opinion expressed that a
discussion about moral or social problems inspired by a
feature film does not rightly belong to the domain of
(1) Home Office, "Report of the Departmental Committee on
Children and the Cinema", London, HM.S.O., May 1950.
film-teaching but to the sphere of the teaching film (that
is, visual aids). Here lies a common misunderstanding.
There are, of course, points of contact between film
education and the use of film as a visual aid in teaching,
but a very essential difference Is that in film education
one always comes back to the film; the film, however,
regarded not merely as an aesthetic object, but also as a
social institution, as a means of mass entertainment
having special effects and influences on the cultural and
spiritual level of the people, a medium for communication
of ethical, religious, and other spiritual values.
As things stand, the film only very seldom qualifies as
being wholly a form of art. Most often it is something
like the newspaper, or a form of public amusement such
as a fair or a sports meeting.
Of course, one may take the view that one
cannot be bothered with this type of film
thereby excluding from one's Interest the major part of
film production. This may be a legitimate attitude for
the private Individual, but in my opinion it is not a valid
one for the educator to adopt. For the latter cannot get
away from the fact that many non-aesthetic or extra-
aesthetic elements in the film represent an Important
part of the normal world In which young people live.
This has nothing to do with the use of films as teaching
aids; it simply means that one ought to teach young
people how to integrate the experiences they have ac¬
quired from a film Into their own lives.
To the average member of the average cinema audience,
the film seems to have a similar function to the novel or
the stage play. All these "media" offer him an opportu¬
nity to participate in another life, the life of other people,
in other surroundings and circumstances, in other regions
of the world.
The cinema screen, the covers of a book, the theatre
curtain are alike the doorsteps to a second world, where
he can lead a second life perhaps in some respects a
"double life". But the reading of a book can be com¬
pared only to leading a second inner life, because the
world described in words is »an inner world, which we can
perceive with our spiritual eye only.
But the film not only represents reality almost true to
nature but also places the spectator emotionally right in
the centre of the life that is going on within this reality.
Let us examine this phenomenon a little more deeply, by
citing an illustration which may seem a trifle homely but
which is nevertheless very much »to the point.
One day when we were still at school, the physics
teacher entered our classroom. He put a mirror on the
demonstration table and placed a burning candle before
the mirror. And then we made a "scientific" discovery
about something which we had probably seen a hundred
times already: we found out "scientifically" that the
candle we were seeing in the mirror and the candle
before the mirror were Identical.
We also heard the scientific term for this: the candle
before the mirror was called In physics a real object, the
one in the mirror was a virtual object. For the rest,
CONT'D ON PAGE 8

VISUAL LANGUAGE
Each separate picture in a film can be given
special meaning depending on how the spec¬
tator stands, so to speak, both mentally and
spatially, in relation to what he sees on the
screen. This "positioning" is done by the
camera (distance, height, angle, position and
movement all play their part). It can be objec¬
tive (the spectator is a mere observer), or
subjective (he identifies himself with a person
or persons on the screen) ; or intermediate
between these two. The sequences below from
Carol Reed's film "The Fallen Idol" show the
three techniques. (1) We look with the boy
through a window and see a couple quarrelling
(intermediate objective-subjective). (2) A "re¬
verse-angle" shot. We see the boy face-to-face
(objective). (3) We witness the quarrel
as though we are looking on through the eyes
of the boy (complete identification-subjective).

ART OF SEEING A FILM (Cont'd)
From the other side of the mirror
there was almost no difference between the two candles,
except for this major one we could touch the real candle,
the virtual one we couldn't.
This school experience has been recalled to make clear
what Is meant when we say that the film confronts us
with reality in a "virtual" way. When we are truly fasci- »
nated by a film it seems indeed to reproduce reality more
or less true to nature, apart from the fact that we cannot
touch this reality; that is to say, we cannot experience it
physiologically.
There are still other similarities between the experience
of looking In a mirror and seeing a film. When we look
into a mirror, we find ourselves physically in a room in
which the mirror in question hangs on the wall. Yet at
the same time we are in some way "virtually" again
present in the room on the other side of the glass, In the
room that is reflected by the mirror. The furniture and
other objects in the real room, we see from the reflected
room. In a sense, we have stepped over into the room
of the mirror and from there we perceive our environ¬
ment.
In much the same way, like Alice through the Looking
Glass, we experience the people and things on the cinema
screen from the space (it may be a street, the interior of
an aeroplane, or a living-room) in which they happen at
that moment to be situated. If, when a film is being
made, a certain scene is shot in a living-room, where
some people are talking with each other, then the specta¬
tor sees this scene from' the same point of view as the
camera saw it from when shooting the scene.
And if the same scene Is taken from several angles, the
spectator will see the scene successively from those differ¬
ent angles. Though he is, physically, sitting down in
his chair In the cinema, he finds himself at the same time
virtually in the room where the film actors are, and
Indeed moving about in it. He sees the action on the
screen from time to time through the eyes of the actors.
Thus there is a kind of two-way traffic between the
spectator and the film, and as a result we are often stron¬
gly involved In the events of the film, even though we
still remain mere "onlookers". For, of course, we have
to limit our activity to mere looking and we cannot inter¬
vene in any real sense In what Is happening on the
screen.
And here we come across another facet of this pheno¬
menon. Again, a homely illustration: If we are eye¬
witnesses of a car accident, our activity will probably not
be restricted merely to looking but, will take some form of
practical action.
Seeing a similar accident, just as serious, depicted on
the cinema screen, we omit all such action, however
strongly we are emotionally affected by this scene. (And
we may be very strongly affected, because the. film maker
will possibly have shown us the scene through the eyes
of the driver or of the victims.)
Now in such a case, where there is no escape valve for
our inner urge for what can be called motor activity, this
activity turns inwards and our emotional reactions
become all the stronger.
Such emotional participation consists mainly of two
mutually connected processes which are, of course, usually
called "projection" and "identification". In this pheno¬
menon, on the one hand, the spectator, attaches his own
tendencies, feelings and character traits to the actors on
the screen he "projects" them into the actors and, on
the other hand, the spectator thinks himself into the
spirit of an actor and his role to such an extent that he
identifies himself with him and feels and thinks like him.
On the one hand the spectator loses himself mentally
in the screen; on the other, he incorporates the world of
the film into his own person. And again we can apply
the term "virtual" to these processes, for there Is no real
contact with the people on the screen and there Is no
such relationship between the spectator and these people
as there would be in reality because the "glass of the
mirror" stands between them.
The conclusion to be drawn from this exposition Is that
seeing a film can be a "virtual physical" and a "virtual
mental" participation in the life of other people in ano-
HOW TO ANALYS Fl L
Environment and action
1 . Where does the action occur?
2. Is the scenery familiar or
exotic?
3. Is the locale treated fully,
superficially?
4. Is description realistic and
of general interest?
5. Why does it interest you?
6. What arethechief situations?
7. Is an "exciting pursuit" a
sensational feature or an
essential element of the
action?
8. What is the chief theme;
what are secondary ones?
9. What is the genuine relative
importance of these themes?
10. How does the action develop?
The characters
11. What kind of people are the
main characters?
12. Why do you find them attrac¬
tive or displeasing?
13. Are appearance or character
stressed most?
14. How much do these influence
the action?
15. Are the professions of the
characters fairly represen¬
ted?
16. Does an attractive or dis¬
pleasing character come out
as "winner" or "loser"?
17. Is the character of the main
roles "genuine"?
18. Which professions are de¬
picted favourably?
19. Are main characters' occu¬
pations presented more fa¬
vourably than in real life?
20. How do the main characters
behave?
21. Should we approve or reject
their behaviour?
22. Does it deviate from social
or moral standards? Is it
nevertheless justifiable?
23. What are the main charac¬
ters' motives egotism, al¬
truism, idealism, love, self-
sacrifice, desire for money,
success, authority?
24. How do these motivations
become apparent?
Ideas in the film
25. Does the film have an ob¬
vious or hidden tendency?
26. Does it make propaganda
for any belief or cause?
27. What moral does it »make?
28. Can we agree with these
views?
29. What ideas are advanced
about cultural, social, other
standards and concepts?
30. Does the film use proper
arguments to defend or reject
certain views?

Scene from The World, the Flesh and the Devil, made by Roland MacDougall. In general the aim of all
film-makers is to carry the spectator into another world. We must therefore know how to "liberate"
ourselves from the suggestive effects of a film and its emotional impact. Only thus can we analyse
lucidly the action and the behaviour and ideas of the characters and benefit fully from films we see.
ther world. Or, to put it another way, to see a film is
to lead a second (virtual) life In a second (virtual) world.
For some persons this experience can be as real as
normal daily life, apart from its "virtuality", so to speak.
However, from this very virtuality It derives its own
charm, its appeal, its magic. We cannot "touch" it, but
neither can it "touch" us: it happens to us and we go
through It, but without any risk.
It is impossible as yet to state In detail, or even to
foresee completely, what will be the educational conse¬
quences of regular and repeated excursions into this so-
called "second world". But one thing is certain: a new
pedagogical situation has been created.
The situation in which youth is now growing up is
completely different from that of fifty years ago, as a
result of the fact that young people are, as we have said,
living in two worlds. They are not subjected to the geo¬
graphical, social and cultural isolation which was the
rule for former generations.
Much earlier than before, In a much more direct and
far-reaching manner, the young people of today are con¬
fronted with views, traditions and standards different
from those of their home environment. And they are
also confronted with what can only be described as a new
"language".
Some educationists for instance, professor Louis Stiick-
rath in the Federal Republic of Germany have stressed
the point that film, before being a work of art (or a me¬
dium for entertainment,- a visual newspaper, and so on)
is a new language, a new means of understanding and,
along with that, a new means of gaining knowledge.
In our culture, which until recently was mainly a book-
and-word culture, our mental life and the all-important
process of communication between human beings have
been primarily a matter of discursive thinking and rea¬
soning. Whatever is to be communicated to us by other
people by means of books and words, or whatever we
ourselves want to communicate to others, has to be ana¬
lyzed, so to speak, in a logical-rational way; it has to be
broken down and placed within the grammatical catego¬
ries of the sentence-construction.
But with the development of film language as a new
species of the general genus "language", a non-dlscurslve
means of communication has been put at our disposal.
This not only presents us with new laws of thinking and
reasoning but also leads our minds to other ways of
acquiring knowledge.
The film language opens up to our minds a new dimen¬
sion; perhaps a dimension that, in different respects,
mee>ts the needs of modern life better than verbal lan¬
guage alone is able to do. If this is indeed so, then the
incorporation of this new language Into our film educa¬
tional activities should not be merely supplementary, but
the most fundamental thing of all.
Thus it quickly becomes clear why of recent years in
almost every textbook for the teaching of English in the
United States of America there is a chapter on the film.
In that country, perhaps intuitively, they have realized
that language-teaching can no longer be limited to verbal
language alone, but has to be expanded to cover teaching
about communications in general, and that film-teaching
should not be just a part of general art education and
social and moral education but also a part of the teaching
of general communication theory. -
From this point, it is only a short step to recognition
of the fact that film education is itself just a part of an
educational process related to all the mass media of
communication and especially to the mass medium which
is most closely associated with film, namely, television.
This again presents new tasks for educators, of which
not the least important is the need to teach young people
that there are other means besides film and television
for passing leisure time in a useful and agréable way.
JAN M. L. PETERS is director of the Netherlands Film Institute
and Film Academy. He was formerly director of the Nether¬
lands School Film Services and secretary of the Institute of
Film and Youth.
