DIGGING
FOR HISTORY
An account of excavation
in Nubia during 1961-62
by Rex Keating
-^ A
J\
BRILLIANTLY-COLOURED FRESCO¬
ES as fresh as the day they were executed
1,000 years ago were found several months
ago on the walls of a Christian church at
Faras in Sudanese Nubia. Here, Professor
C. Michalowski, leader of the Polish Expe¬
dition examines one of the most remark¬
able of these murals. It depicts the crown¬
ed figure of the Archangel Michael protect¬
ing Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego
from the flames of the fiery furnace into
which they were cast by King Nebuchad¬
nezzar. Below, another of the murals at
the Faras excavation site is brought to light.
>T»- *"V
?5£*r* **^? - y 4ifeí¿ ¿$5***
18
G. Gerster, Zurich
small felucca traces an erratic course through
kthe broken waters of the Second Cataract. It
swings perilously close to a big rapid named Kabuka,
whose roar fills the air with sound and then slips to safety
under the lee of a rocky islet.
From it springs a young man, Hans Nordstrom. He is
an archaeologist and member of the Unesco Mission to
Sudanese Nubia which is engaged on an archaeological
survey of sections of the Cataract area on behalf of the
Sudan Government. The islet, Shahgil, is one of many
which give to the Cataract its well-merited name "The
Belly of Stone".
On many of these islands are the remains of churches
and settlements dating from the twilight of Christianity
in Nubia; some conceal traces of the much earlier Meroitic
civilization, as on Gumnarti where in 1962 the survey team
led by Dr. W. Adams found and excavated a Meroitic
village.
But Shahgil is a tiny Island, too small for habitation,
and Nordstrom had little hope of its surrendering
anything more than had the score of similar islets over
which he had scrambled fruitlessly during the last few

weeks. He was about to climb down from the summit to
the boat when his trained eye was attracted to a crevice
about five metres above the present high-water level of
the Nile. A quick examination convinced him that he
had stumbled on a neolithic "fishing industry" site.
Beneath a sand deposit was a layer of fish bones and
potsherds some twenty centimetres deep and a thick layer
of ash. The bones were large, similar to those of the
big Nile perch of today. This it seems was no habitation
site but a camp to which the fishermen returned
seasonally to fish the big rapid nearby. The fish thus
caught they smoked on the spot and removed the flesh,
leaving the bones behind when they departed for their
homes on the mainland.
Those fishermen casting their nets around six thousand
years ago lived on the threshold of recorded history and
the discovery may establish a bridge between Neolithic
Sudan and pre-historic and archaic Egypt. One of
Egypt's archaic kings, Djer of the First Dynasty, has left
an inscription the oldest in Nubia yet found on the Hill
of Sheikh Suleiman not a dozen miles from the Neolithic
fishing camp.
This shadowy sovereign, as the inscription records, sent
a military expedition to Nubia, around five thousand years
ago. Thereafter the mists of time and superstition close
in over Nubia for centuries and do not clear until the
intrepid Princes of Elephantine, guardians of Egypt's
southern frontier with Nubia in the Sixth Dynasty of the
Old Kingdom Period, led their expeditions from Elephan¬
tine where now stands modern Assuan, up-river into the
"Land of the Ghosts" as they fearfully termed the awe¬
some territories to the south. This was around 2 400 B.C.,
and the great caravan captains of that era established
trade links with inner Africa which became vital to
Egypt's economy and which were to endure, with minor
interruptions only, for the next two thousand years.
The tales of their exploits are graven on the walls of
their .tombs overlooking Elephantine Island where they
can be seen to this day by any visitor who takes the
trouble to climb the steep cliff to the row of sepulchres
that pierce the rock-face. To these men, then, has gone
the credit for opening up the road to that stretch of the
Nile which today is known as Nubia, and beyond. Or so
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
19

NUBIA 1962 (Cont'd)
Blast furnaces in the 'Land of the Ghosts'
it was believed, and this belief is reflected in every pub¬
lished work on early Egyptian history.
Then an archaeologist's wife taking her dog for its
evening walk along the banks of the Nile noticed some¬
thing in the sand which must lead to a revolutionary re¬
assessment of Egypt's early relations with Nubia. What
Mrs. Emery had seen was a concentration of copper slag,
and it led in the winter of 1961-1962 to the discovery by
Professor W.B. Emery, who leads the Egypt Exploration
Society's Expedition at Buhen opposite Wadi Haifa, of
a fully-fledged Egyptian industrial town.
It was a town devoted to the smelting of copper, and
the excavators found mortars and stone hammers, and
crucibles with pieces of pure copper that had splashed
over the edges, still lying where they had fallen some
forty-six centuries ago. They found the moulds and
finally uncovered the blast furnaces used for smelting
the copper.
IosT important though, were the pieces of in¬
scribed pottery which were unearthed and the
many clay sealings of the type used to secure the bindings
around papyrus documents. These sealings demonstrated
that the town was in official contact with Egypt and bore
the names of kings of the Fourth and Fifth Dynasties in¬
cluding those of the builders of the Pyramids of Gizeh, near
Cairo. So that when the first stone of the Great Pyramid
was laid, Egyptian vessels were loading pure copper ingots
at the quays of an Egyptian town deep inside Nubia. And
all this was taking place at least two centuries before the
first of the great caravan captains of the Sixth Dynasty
was born.
Not least among the tantalizing vist&s opened by this
discovery is the whereabouts of the source of the copper
ore which is of very high quality. The Egyptians, an in¬
tensely practical and conservative people, always worked
their copper as near as possible to its source, a source
which must have been considerable since the furnaces
were worked for at least a hundred years. Copper is a
valuable commodity; will the mines be located and if
found will they prove to be still rich in yield?
At the very end of the 1962 digging season, Professor
Emery cut a trench across the whole town-site and came
across buildings one below the other down to a depth
of four metres. The large size of the mud-bricks in the
lowest levels provided a clue to their date, which may
extend back to the Archaic Period to the First and
Second Dynasties. Next season's digging at Buhen
promises exciting revelations.
To add point to Professor Emery's revolutionary findings
is the discovery, made also in 1962 by the Franco/Argen¬
tine Expedition led by Professor J. Vercoutter, of an
Archaic Egyptian cemetery not twenty miles from Buhen
containing sealings of the First Dynasty.
All in all, therefore, it now looks as though the
Egyptians had a strong foothold in Nubia possibly five
hundred years earlier than the historians tell us, and that
they lost control of the territory so completely that by the
time of the explorers of the Sixth Dynasty Nubia had
20 receded into legend.
In the first weeks of this year, on top of a rocky hill
ten miles north of Buhen I watched some twenty Nubian
workmen with ropes and wooden beams heave and strain
at a great rock lying buried in rubble. The rock stirred
and excitement mounted until with a mighty heave it
lifted out of the hole, teetered for a moment, then toppled
down the side of the hill amid shouts of delight.
he hill, called Sidi Qurnein, stands some two
hundred yards from the west bank of the Nile
and its flanks merge into a desert which stretches across
an entire continent to the Atlantic, three thousand miles
away. Here there can be no life save that bequeathed by
the river surging north to the distant Mediterranean.
This is the spot where in the sixteenth century B.C., a
prince, Prince Amenemhet, of what is now called Debeira,
chose to excavate his tomb, and here, three thousand
five hundred years later a group of archaeologists from
Scandinavia re-opened it. When the great stone fell it
revealed the top of a shaft cut vertically in the rock to a
depth of twenty-two feet and at the bottom was a passage
leading off into darkness. This is the moment which
provides the field archaeologist with his greatest thrill;
will the tomb be intact or will the ancient robbers have
got in first?
The passage was forty feet long and its floor was
covered with pottery vases, among them a plaque inscribed
with the figure of the goddess Nut and several canopic
jars bearing the name of Amenemhet's brother, Djehuty-
hotep, Prince of Teh-khet, whose tomb is across the river
on the opposite bank. The burial chamber was empty
but several small objects left behind by the robbers
hinted at the richness of the original burial.
he really valuable find was in the tomb chapel
a little further down the hill where Professor
Säve-Söderbergh, who leads the Scandinavian Joint Expe¬
dition, found leaning against the wall of the shrine, the
finest stela yet discovered in Nubia. On the grey granite
are the names and titles of Prince Amenemhet and the
beautifully incised hieroglyphs are filled with yellow
paint as fresh in colour as the day it was mixed.
Prince Amenemhet and Djehuty-hotep were Nubians
who had become so Egyptianized that there was nothing
in their names, titles and form of burial to distinguish
them from true Egyptian grandees of the Eighteenth
Dynasty, living around 1500 B.C. The brothers illustrate
the final stage In the long process of Egyptian domination
of Nubia, a process which had begun about a thousand
years earlier, in the period when the Princes of Elephan¬
tine of the Sixth Dynasty were leading their expeditions
south into the Land of the Ghosts.
This was the time when a mysterious people, known to
archaeologists as the "C-group" to distinguish them from
their predecessors the "A" and "B-group" peoples,
appeared in Nubia, possibly from the south or west. They
were a people well-organized and skilled in the art of
war and were almost certainly the enemy against
whom the Egyptian kings of the Twelfth Dynasty built
CONT'D ON PAGE 22

0. Gnri^eî, Zurich
CATHEDRAL IN THE DESERT. Under
-a giant mound of Sand at Faras, Polish
^ have discovered the remains I
of what was once the greatest centre of,
'Christianity in this part of Nubia. Atl
M one end of its cathedral they uncovered
- the tomb (entrance shown in foreground)
r of Bishop Johannes, Its probable founder
and first bishop who died in the year 606.
21

NUBIA 1962 (Cont'd)
Thirty tombs unearthed per day
around 2000 B.C. the line of protective fortresses along
the length of the Second Cataract, fortresses which even
today can excite wonder by their sheer strength and
ingenuity of design.
Yet within five hundred years of their arrival in the
area this formidable people apparently vanished from
Nubia without trace. Intensive excavation of their
cemeteries, however, during the 1962 season has solved
the riddle of their fate. The area of Debeira, where the
Danes, Finns, Norwegians and Swedes of the Scandinavian
expedition were at work is particularly rich in C-group
remains.
Working against timefor all these cemeteries are
doomed to be swallowed by the flood waters of the High
Damand using the latest tools of field archaeology, the
Scandinavians were clearing and recording up to thirty
graves a day. The clearance of several C-group ceme¬
teries was also undertaken by the Spanish Expedition
under the direction of Prof. Blanco y Caro.
he thousands of objects recovered and the
design of the tombs themselves have revealed
how over the centuries the C-group culture was peacefully,
yet inexorably, absorbed by that of the Pharaohs, so that
by 1500 B.C. the native princes of Debeira have become
culturally indistinguishable from Egyptians.
Unfortunately the early C-group people, who were great
cattle breeders, seem to have had no written language
so that all that is known of their customs derives from
their curious circular graves. Buried outside several such
graves, near Faras, which lies just on the Sudan side of
the frontier with Egypt, Hans Nordstrom found a number
of ox skulls.
This was a common practice among the early C-group
people, but what made the Faras skulls interesting was
that the tip of each left horn had been bent downwards
and forwards artificially. This custom of bending down
the left horn of cattle is known from tomb paintings to
have been practised during the Old Kingdom Period
around 2500 B.C. and much later during the Meroitic
around 600 B.C. What is remarkable is that the Nilotic
peoples of the Southern Sudan the Dinkas and Shilluks
follow the custom to this day; it is, they say, a tradition
that came to them a very long time ago.
Houses of the C-group people are extremely rare so
there was excitement when In 1962 three C-group dwellings
were found by the Scandinavians and a fourth by the
expedition of the Oriental Institute of Chicago. So, pains¬
takingly, the field archaeologists working in Nubia are
piecing together the history of this enigmatic C-group
people. They have discovered what became of them,
how their culture was completely absorbed by that of
their great northern neighbour, but have yet to solve the
riddle of the origins of the C-group.
Buhen was the military headquarters of the Second
Cataract area and nerve-centre of the dozen or so fort¬
resses built around 2000 B.C. to keep the C-group people
in check. Five hundred years or so later Queen Hatshep-
sut and the Pharaoh Thutmose III built a stone temple
inside the citadel of the old fortress. Today it is the finest
temple in Sudanese Nubia and is one of the monuments
22 scheduled for removal to safety before the flood waters
close over it. Professor Emery, working on behalf of the
Unesco-Keating
Egypt Exploration Society, hopes to start work on this
rescue operation at the end of this year.
Moving inscribed and painted walls and columns which
have been weakened by exposure to thirty-five centuries
of burning sunshine and bitter nights, is an extremely
tricky business and Professor Emery proposes to take a
leaf out of the ancient builders' book. To dismantle the
temple he will in effect reverse the process they used in
building it.
The temple will be filled with sand and the stones
manhandled by local Nubian workmen straight onto the
cushioning surface without the necessity of lifting. As
each course of stone is removed so the level of sand "will
be correspondingly reduced until the temple pavement is
reached. This method will obviate the use of machinery
which, apart from being difficult and expensive to get to
Nubia, could damage the extremely friable sandstone.
The area beneath the existing temple is practically
the only part of the fortress which has not been systema¬
tically cleared, and immediately the temple has been
removed Professor Emery will start digging down to the
original foundations of the citadel. He may uncover a
second templeor find nothing of interest!
Another temple threatened by the forthcoming flooding
is Kalabsha, largest in Nubia after Abu Slmbel. It is a
Graeco-Roman edifice thirty-five miles south of Assuan.
Unlike Abu Simbel which can only be protected in situ,
Kalabsha will, despite its great size, be dismantled stone
by stone and responsibility for this most delicate oper¬
ation has been assumed by the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many. Festooned in scaffolding, the temple today is
being systematically taken apart for reconstruction
elsewhere in Egypt.
Five miles upstream from Buhen and on the island of
Meinarti is a large mound believed to conceal another

DIAMOND DRILL IN
TEMPLE. In the Great
Temple of Abu Simbel
tests have been made
to check strains in the
rock during preparatory
studies of the plan to
encase the entire temple
in a concrete block and
raise it 200 feet up the
side of the mountain
from which it is hewn,
thus saving it from the
invading waters of the
new Aswan Dam. Right,
diamond-tipped drill
operated by a Swedish
engineer cuts holes in
the temple walls. The
drillings will be used to
house Instruments for
measuring the internal
pressures in the rock.
Left, high over Sudanese
Nubia an automatic cam¬
era is used for a large
scale aerial archaeological
survey. With this all-
seeing eye, scores of
hitherto unsuspected ar¬
chaeological sites have
recently been discovered.
Unesco-Keating
of the Twelfth Dynasty fortresses. The mound was, by
the way, used as a gun platform during the River War
against the Dervishes towards the end of the nineteenth
century. Meinarti will be excavated by the Egypt Ex¬
ploration Society when their work at Buhen is completed.
Nother of the fortresses, Mirgissa, some ten
Lmiles south of Meinarti, is to be excavated
next year, by the Franco/Argentine Expedition. Already
the foundations of an Egyptian town of the period have
been located on the banks of the river below and when
this is dug it may well reveal valuable indications of how
the inhabitants of a Nubian garrison town lived some
four thousand years ago.
At Serra, a mile or so inside the Sudan border with
Egypt, is yet another fort and in 1962 it was cleared down
to the foundations, and the layout of the fortifications
was thoroughly examined and recorded, by the Expedi¬
tion of the University of Chicago's Oriental Institute,
directed by Dr. Keith B. Seele.
Inside the fortifications awaiting excavation next season
are several interesting buildings of early Christian date.
They are contemporary with the large Christian town
across the river on the west bank. Here the University
of Ghana Expedition under Professor P. L. Shlnnie has
uncovered an astonishing complex of buildings. What
started as a mudbrick church around the seventh century
of the Christian era grew over the next eight hundred
years into a large town with layer upon layer of buildings
so numerous that, according to Professor Shinnie, it would
need at least ten seasons to clear it.
Nothing could Illustrate more vividly than this town
the intensive occupation of Nubia during Christian times,
from its conversion under the Emperor Justinian in the
sixth century to its final eclipse by Islam in the fourteenth
century. Indeed only a few miles down-stream from
Shinnie's "dig" is Faras, ancient capital of Nobatia, the
northernmost of the three early Christian kingdoms of
Nubia and the Sudan.
Here under mountains of sand lie dozens of ancient sites
covering an area of some five square miles, and here
during 1961-1962 the Polish Expedition led by Professor
C. Michalowski has been making spectacular discoveries.
The huge mound on the river's edge at Faras, on which
the expedition's members have been concentrating, has
now been revealed as nothing less than a great church
and associated buildings, containing brilliantly coloured
frescoes as magnificent as they are wonderfully preserved.
The tombs of at least eight of the Bishops of Faras (its
ancient name was Pachoras) have been found, the earliest
being that of Johannes who died at the age of 82 in the
year 606 and who was probably the first bishop of Faras.
Beneath the church are the stones of a temple built by
the Pharaoh Thutmose III two thousand years earlier and
below that, possibly, another Middle Kingdom fortress.
Nearby is a fortress of the Meroitic period, not yet dug.
Truly, Faras is a field archaeologists' paradise!
When Christianity came to Nubia there was living there
another of those alphabetically Identified cultures, in this
case the '"X-group" people. Like the C-group, their
origins are unknown and they have left no written lan¬
guage. The unrobbed tombs of their kings were dis¬
covered at Ballana and Qustul some fifteen miles north
of Faras on the Egyptian side of the border.
That was in 1931 and W. B. Emery assisted by L. P.
Kirwan cleared scores of tombs which yielded a fantastic
quantity and variety of valuable objects. In 1961 Emery
did it again, finding two large unrobbed tomb magazines 23
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

NUBIA 1962 (Cont'd)
Footprints 15 centuries old
in an X-group cemetery at Kasr Ibrim, north of Abu
Simbel.
X-group cemeteries are common in Nubia and several
were dug by most expeditions in the 1962 season, but the
huge tumulus-graves were usually found plundered. A
number of bodies came to light, however, in many cases
rather too well preserved by the bone-dry sand of Nubia
to be comfortably handled.
In one of these cemeteries the Unesco mission found in
a trench alongside one of the tumuli thirty-six neatly
stacked baskets abandoned or forgotten by the labourers
who made the mound some fifteen hundred years ago.
They were perfectly preserved and look very much like
the baskets one can buy nowadays in Wadi Haifa market.
In a grave nearby were several pieces of bread.
This X-group cemetery is on a plain consisting of a
deep deposit of greyish sand intermixed with shells,
clearly the alluvial deposit of an ancient river. The
deposit slopes upwards towards the surface and while
digging another of the graves, Nordstrom found below
the top stratum of sand a number of footprints of adults,
children and camels, following what appeared to be a
path in the direction of the river which nowadays Is at
least a kilometre away.
The footprints were about a metre below the surface and
Nordstrom followed them down for about six metres to
where they disappeared under the next lower alluvial
deposit. The footprints being beneath the graves show
that the people and animals who made them lived at the
very beginning of the X-group period or immediately
before it.
The footprints were no more than half a dozen miles
from the Neolithic "fishing industry" described at the
beginning of this article, yet in time they are separated
by fifty centuries and more. This seems a tremendous
weight of years and, in truth, it very nearly spans the
whole of man's recorded history. But to the pre-histor-
ians and geologists of the Columbia University Expedi
tion led by Dr. Ralph Solecki and Dr. Rhodes W. Fair-
bridge, a figure such as this is insignificant.
Surveying the east bank of the river from the Second
Cataract down to the frontier in 1962, they found number¬
less artifacts, "workshops" and habitation sites indicating
that in Palaeolithic times this reach of the Nile was
heavily populated. All these remains among them were
two fossilized skeletons, probably of homo-sapiens came
from the tops of eroded hills that stand in the desert a
mile or so back from the Nile.
hese hills are really' terraces and are all «that
remain of the ancient plateau down through
which the Nile has cut its way for around one hundred
and fifty feet. Fossil soil and mineralized roots of plants
led the geologists in the expedition to the conclusion that
the present bed of the Nile is no more than 25,000 or
30,000 years old, and that the surrounding desert is an
even more recent feature of the landscape.
The pre-historians visited Abu Simbel, which lies twenty
miles or so down-river from the Egyptian/Sudan frontier,
and on the hills above the temple they found many Stone-
Age artifacts.
There is reason to believe that the mountain of Abu
Simbel was regarded as a holy-place long before the
masons and sculptors of Rameses II fashioned the rock-
face into two of the most splendid temples to come
down to us from the past. In 1962 I made a pilgrimage to
this shrine of Rameses, my second in two years. But how
changed was the scene when I stepped onto the beach in
the first light of dawn !
A pneumatic drill flung back echoes from the cliff face
and to its din was soon added the roar of diesel engines.
Nor was this all. The narrow strip of beach was packed
with men, women and children laden with cameras, and
drawn up at the water's edge were the three large tourist
steamers that had brought them to see the temples.
Ç) R. Keating
'
24
GRAVEYARD FIND by Scandinavian archaeo¬
logists near Debeira (left) is one of many which
help specialists to reconstruct the life and customs
of Nubian peoples who left no written history.
In this grave were the bodies of a woman and a
child. Specialist here is removing a gold mask
from the woman's skull. Below, a cache of baskets
discovered in a cemetery on the shores of the
Second Cataract of the Nile by a Unesco Mission.
Left by workmen who built the tomb 1,500 years
ago, baskets look much like those that can still
be bought in nearby market at Wadi Haifa.
Nordstrom-Unesco
-ííÜE

"
R. Keating PRINCE'S TOMB. At Debeira West (above) Sudanese workmen, watched by Professor T. Save
Söderbergh, leader of a joint Scandinavian expedition, heave and strain at a great rock blocking the
burial shaft leading to the tomb of Prince Amenemhet, a 16th century B.C. Nubian ruler.
Nearby, barges and lighters were unloading timber,
scaffolding and masses of other equipment. Rows of
tents lined the bottom of the cliff and among them
technicians and workmen were already astir. Truly Abu<
Simbel had undergone a metamorphosis in the two years
since the Nubian Campaign started.
I went into the Great Temple and there in one of the
innermost chambers was an even more startling intrusion
from the twentieth century. At one end of the narrow
rock-cut chamber an ultra-modenx. piece of machinery
was filling the place with sound, so that one could imagine
that the very figures of the gods staring down from all
sides were trembling with the vibrations of the diamond-
tipped drill. Bending over it, in the glare of a spotlight,
was a young Swedish engineer, seemingly oblivious of the
wild incongruity of the spectacle.
The machine was cutting smooth cylinders of sandstone
from walls, ceiling and floor to make way for sensitive
instruments. With these a group of mining engineers
from Sweden were to measure the vital forces which
exerting pressures within the mass of rock hold the
temple in balance and which, if disturbed haphazardly,
could bring about its collapse.
The lifting of such great masses of rock, the larger
that containing the temple of Rameses weighing around
a quarter of a million tons, to a height of two hundred feet
and more, represents a feat of engineering that is breath¬
taking. Yet for two years now, men representing a score
of disciplines and as many countries have converged on
the temples and have probed and surveyed, analysed and
calculated.
The science and technology that can put a man into
orbit and fling rockets at the moon is more than equipped
to preserve even so fragile a monument as Abu Simbel.
The world's technical resources stand ready, only the
funds are needed to launch the most spectacular' rescue
operation of our time.
Rex Keating of Unesco's Radio Section has devoted
many years to the study of the history and archaeology of
ancient Egypt. He has travelled widely in the Sudan and
in Egypt and other countries of the Middle East where he
lived for many years. Mr. Keating has led several Unesco
radio missions into the areas of Nubia to be flooded by
the Nile and again visited Nubia earlier this year to
gather material for the above article. His profusely
illustrated book, "Twilight of the Gods" on the same
subject is to be published this month in the United King¬
dom by Rupert Hart-Davis Ltd. (42/-) and in the U.S.
by Harcourt, Brace and World, Inc. (About $ 7.50).
25
