The anatomy of underdevelopment (part 3)
THE RISE AND FALL
OF GREAT CIVILIZATIONS
The Western world has not always a full understanding of the past
achievements in science and technology of other peoples who, how¬
ever, did not experience the scientific and industrial revolution that
has given birth to the modern technological world. Some of the
former accomplishments of these peoples along with the problems
raised by traditional attitudes in the transition from a rural culture
to a machine-conscious urbanized society are discussed in this, the
third article in a series which began publication in our July-August
issue. They are taken from a new study produced by the United
Nations and shortly to be published under the title "Aspects of Under¬
development: The Background to Freedom from Hunger."
28
he question has often been asked why certain
areas of the globe isaw the rise of "modern"
scientific and technological knowledge and others did
not.
It is a commonplace that the fundamental discoveries
which made civilization possiblefire-making, tool-
making, agriculture, building, calculating, writing, money-
were all apparently made outside the area which has
given us the marvels of modern science. Nor were the
mathematical and scientific concepts upon which modern
industrial society rests, themselves of Western origin, as
is so often believed.
Before the Christian era, peoples such as the Egyptians,
the Babylonians, the Chinese, the Hindus and the Greeks
all made important contributions to human thought and
to practical engineering. It is likely that today's world
has inherited only a fraction of the vast store of
knowledge accumulated by earlier peoples. Much may
have been lost, like the marvellous art of the gem carvers
which disappeared with the Roman Empire, after more
than 2,000 years of achievement, or like the stained glass
techniques of Chartres and the Sainte Chapelle, which are
the despair of modern craftsmen. If this is the case, we
shall never know how often we tread in the footsteps of
some daring, but forgotten, thinker whose papyri
parchments or clay tablets have returned to dust.
However that may be, the modern Western world has
not always a full understanding even of those achievements
of other peoples about which no doubt exists.
Few save professional archaeologists realize the scale on
which the peoples of the Ancient East carried out such
engineering projects as irrigation schemes. In the
Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt, the Pharaoh Amenemhet III
brought much of the Nile Valley under cultivation, causing
its waters, when they reached a dangerous flood level, to
be diverted into the escape reservoir of a depression in
the Fayyum which his engineers converted into an artifi¬
cial lake of great dimensions. At about the same time,
the Babylonians brought the river Euphrates under
control and caused its waters to flow into artificial ponds
covering 650 square miles, in which the water stood
twenty-five feet deep during the flood season.
For scores of generations, the Chinese worked their
miracles with jade, bronze, ivory and silk in almost
complete isolation from the cultures of Europe. Mean¬
while, they were inventing the mariner's compass,
gunpowder and printing and making other discoveries far
in advance of the rest of the world, while the Great Wall
which they were building still remains, in the second half
of the twentieth century, the largest work erected by man
on this planet.
Very early in recorded history, India's craftsmen
developed a variety of marvellous skills. Ancient Rome
was a market for Indian fabrics so delicate that it was
said they were invisible when moistened and laid on the
ground. Across the Atlantic, the Aztecs of Central
America evolved a calendar which has been called more
accurate than our own. The precursors of the Incas in
the high Andes built walls of huge dressed stones, so
skillfully laid without cement that, after nearly twenty
centuries, it is impossible to insert a knifeblade between
them. Later the Incas themselves constructed a road
system along the high Andes, many hundreds of miles in
length, which is still one of the engineering marvels of
the world.
NOT one of these astonishing cultures produced
I what we understand as an industrial revo¬
lution. From the time of the Greeks, some of the finest
products of China and India found their way to Western
markets but, unlike our machine civilization, the cultures
which found such perfect expression in them exercised
little influence on other peoples.
The Arabs, during a relatively brief but brilliant flower¬
ing, bequeathed to Europe much of the inherited science
of Ancient Greece and made fundamental contributions of
their own in the fields of chemistry (an Arabic word) and
mathematics. The figures now used in calculation by
Western scientists, financiers and village schoolchildren
were brought to Europe from India by Arab mathemati¬
cians, and displaced the clumsier Roman numerals.
No one can say with confidence why the impulse of
Arab science and learning withered, for we are here
dealing with the little understood problems of the rise and
fall of civilizations. What is certain is that the spirit of
inquiry and experiment first fostered by the Ionian Greeks
later passed, by way of the Arabs, to various European
peoples, and that the birth of the "modern" technological
world was entirely a European phenomenon.
It looks as if the world is now entering upon a phase
in which non-Western peoples are about to be drawn once
more into the field of scientific and engineering progress.

@ Almasy ENGINEERS FOR INDIA. India boasts one of the most modern institutes of technology in Asia with the
recent completion of the Indian Institute of Technology in Bombay shown here. Established with the help
of U. N. Technical Assistance funds, the institute can accommodate up to 2,000 students. Nine hundred
students and 150 trainees are already taking courses. Unesco has spent since I955 nearly $1 million
on specialists, $3 million to provide scientific equipment and $200,000 for scholarships. Nineteen
Unesco specialists are working on the staff. The institute will be officially inaugurated later this year.
With the great stress now being laid upon the training of
research workers and engineers and the vast increase in
the pool of human talent which the spread of education
will open up outside the Western world, it is tempting to
speculate on the immense advances which the next
hundred years may witness.
As the impulse of the Moslem thinkers waned, a deep
stirring began in eleventh and twelfth-century Europe.
New ideas, new ways of thought and possibilities of living
continued to present themselves, until the life of the
Western European peoples was affected in 'all spheres,
from the conditions on which a tenant farmer held his
acres to the technique of portrait painting.
Then, in the fifteenth-centuryand still more in the
sixteenthcame the great explosion. Henry the Navi¬
gator began the patronage of seafarers which was to lead
to Columbus, Vasco de Gama, Magellan and the new maps
of an unsuspected world. Giotto had shown the way, but
now came Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo. The rare
personal touches which a mediaeval memoir writer
allowed himself blossom into the ironic self-exploration of
sr Montaigne. Cervantes writes the first great novel- of
Europe, though not of the world, and Shakespeare
gathers up in himself the resources of an age, and of
every age. Bacon and Descartes lay the foundation of
modern thought. Rembrandt for the first time puts all
experience into the lights and shadows of an aging face.
Nothing quite like this was happening in the other
cultures of the world. Europe's intellectual and spiritual
experiments at this time were associated with changes in
Western man's relation to his fellow citizens, in which
economic elements played an important part. Especially
in England, society was moving from a static condition
centred on the country gentleman into a dynamic phase
in which the merchant was working and working with
grim persistence toward supremacy. The great explorers
of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries we're advance
guards of commerce. Columbus won support, and sailed,
because he believed that he could open a more profitable
route for trade with India.
One immediate result of the discovery of the New World
was a flow of gold and silver into the treasuries of Europe.
Economic historians have shown how this new supply of
the precious metals released fresh energies in many
departments of European life. It did more than help to
finance new merchant ventures and to pay for more goods
offered for sale. It led to the endowment of numerous
public institutions such as schools, which opened the doors
of learning and opportunity to many, and so helped to
cultivate the resources of Europe's most gifted minds.
Shakespeare's grammar school at Stratford-on-Avon was
endowed in this way about a century before his time.
There is reason to think that a good many inventors In 29
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

30
UNDERDEVELOPMENT (Cont'd)
Revolutions in
farming & industry
mediaeval Europe may have worked secretly and kept their
discoveries to themselves, for fear of persecution as
wizards. With the dawn of the "modern world" new
discoveries of all kinds became fashionable and rewards
were attached to those that had money-making possibili¬
ties.
By the eighteenth century, even provincial clergymen in
England were inventing new appliances for the spinning
and weaving which were so prominent in the early stages
of the industrial revolution. Such inventions held the
promise of bigger profits for mill owners and merchants,
and this was the best way to secure a hearing In a world
where manufacturers and investors of capital were coming
rapidly to the fore.
In seeking an explanation for the rapid growth of the
factory system in England around 1800, we shall find no
more important cause than the rise, over the previous five
centuries, of an enterprising and increasingly prosperous
commercial class. These new merchants or businessmen
began to emerge with the shift from subsistence agricul¬
ture to an economy of exchange. They formed a new
middle class with certain very distinct qualities. Work
for its own sake gradually became a fetish, and thrift,
leading to a steady accumulation of capital, was regarded
as an essential part of the good life. The English diarist
Samuel Pepys, writing in the 1660's, continually dwells on
his growing capital. He could not know that he was the
unacknowledged mouthpiece of a new age.
he industrial revolution In England found
ready to hand rich natural resources like coal
and iron, a large merchant class eager to seize the new
opportunities for profit, ample capital to pay for the new
factories and machines and an abundant supply of very
cheap labour, consisting largely of women and children
uprooted from the countryside and almost unprotected by
the law.
New inventions placed at the disposal of the merchant
class provided railway and steamship facilities for the
rapid transportation of raw materials to their factories,
and of manufactured goods to their customers. The
Royal Navy guaranteed their safe passage and Lloyd's
insured them against loss.
In spite of all these advantages, the English industrial
revolution could hardly have succeeded unless a revolu¬
tion in agriculture had taken place first. This agricultural
revolution in Western Europe, led to the growing of more
wheat through enclosure of common land, to the rotation
of crops, to the winter feeding of cattle and to other
improvements in efficiency. It was less spectacular than
what happened soon afterwards In the factories, and it
is much less vivid in our minds. Yet the two movements
were Intimately connected.
Before any large-scale economic development can take
place in an underdeveloped country, the output and
efficiency of Its agriculture must be increased. The
growing populations of the cities and industrial areas must
be fed, because they are not self-supporting, as are the
villagers. The country-dwellers must also be able to
produce more food in order to earn higher incomes by
selling surplus produce, or they will be unable to buy goods
from the factories, and the industrialists will be without
an essential market. It was fortunate for the nineteenth-
century England that these technical changes on the
farms had largely taken place by the time the first
factories were being built.
CONT'D ON PAGE 32
ENGINEERING
The Spanish Conquista¬
dores who arrived in Peru
in the 16th century found a
civilization already highly
advanced. The empire of
the Incas had an extensive
network of well-built roads,
a remarkable irrigation
system. Using stones of
considerable weight, Inca
engineers perfected an
amazing method of build¬
ing construction, but were
ignorant of the wheel.
ASTRONOMY
The ancient Mayas, in the first
centuries of our era, were
highly skilled astronomers.
Through their celestial obser¬
vations and mathematical cal¬
culations they worked out a
complex calendar which is con¬
sidered more exact than the
present-day Gregorian one.
Buffalo Museum of Science
(g) Giraudon, Paris
A History of Technology
Oxford University Press
WEAVING
More than 4,000 years ago in
Peru cotton was grown and
woven into such striking pat¬
terns as that of this poncho
from Narca (opposite). Cotton
was not raised until the year
500 B.C. in the Nile Valley.
Early Egyptians cultivated and
spun only linen and hemp.
Collection Cleveland Museum of Art

WORLD PIONEERS
OF TECHNOLOGY
This 16th century map of the
voyages of Magellan shows only
a few of the vital contributions
which many of the so-called
"underdeveloped" countries have
made in the past to the techno¬
logical and scientific development
of today's industrialized society.
N*^"*-
THE COMPASS
It was largely thanks to the
compass that Portugese and
Spanish explorers found dis¬
tant lands in the 15th century.
But Chines^ sailors were the
first to navigate with a magne¬
tic needle in the 7th century.
© Builoz, Paris
IN I AG, Paris
Z?fl
PRINTING
The oldest known printed document dates from the 8th
century in China. Chinese paper was first manufactured
in 105 A.D. Printed impressions were made from engrav¬
ed plates until 1041 when, centuries before Gutenberg,
the Chinese Pi-Chang invented the first movable type.
SHIPBUILDING
Egyptian sailboats cruised the
Mediterranean in 1500 B.C.
Under Rameses II Egyptian sail¬
ors voyaged by canal from
the Nile to the Red Sea. Size¬
able naval squadrons from
Egypt penetrated the Indian
Ocean in 1200 B.C., probably
as far as Sumatra, in ships
220 feet long with large crews.
"A History of Technology"
Oxford University Press
METALLURGY
Mining of copper, silver,
and gold and the making
of glass was current in
Mesopotamia and Egypt
6,000 years ago. Iron was
not discovered until 1,000
years later in the same
countries. Above, an iron
axe decorated with copper
and gold (1300 B.C.) found
at Ras Shamra in Syria.
MEDICINE
The world's first med¬
ical treatise dates back
to 2700 B.C. under the
Chinese Emperor Chen-
Nong (opposite). Some
thousand years later
the Babylonian King
Hammurabi decreed a
series of laws governing
the practice of medi¬
cine and surgery. By
the year 500 Indian
scholars had identified
700 medicinal herbs.
" La Médecine chinoise, " Ed. Dacosta, Paris
:m-
MATHEMATICS
Mathematics owes much to the
Orient. The formula of Pytha¬
goras' theory is found on Meso-
potamian clay tablets dating
back to 1770 B.C. In 400 A.D
India produced one of the early
mathematical treatises, the
"Surya Siddhanta," and during
this period gave the world its
first recorded works on algebra.
Yale University
tS
m
i'ír':¡, \;\\ , ... r,
Vinlrs'.'y*' ,'óái
WRITING
Three thousand years before
Christ the Sumerians had an
alphabet of 500 to 600 charac¬
ters one hundred of which
were phonetic. Tablet-writing
in Mesopotamia (opposite) pro¬
gressed steadily to cuneiform
letters. By 1300 B.C. the libra¬
ry of the Hittite capital, Hat-
tusa, held texts in 8 tongues.
Oriental Institute, Chicago

UNDERDEVELOPMENT (Cont'd)
Can ancient values survive a machine age ?
But even the agricultural revolution at home would
not have sufficed to feed the rapidly growing popula¬
tion, which was concentrating more and more on work
that did not produce food. Just at this moment,
another fortunate circumstance came to the help of the
manufacturers and businessmen. Broad farmlands were
being opened up in North America, Argentina, Australia
and New Zealand from which ample supplies of wheat,
meat and dairy produce were to flow to the crowded cities
of the United Kingdom in return for her eagerly desired
manufactures.
The historian cannot explain why European thought
took the direction it did at the dawn of "modern" times
or precisely why the industrial revolution occurred just
when it did and how it did. Nevertheless, he has no
difficulty In pointing out the contributing factors at which
we have glanced, factors that help to explain why
progress was so rapid. When we turn to the problem of
economic development in our contemporary world, it Is
obvious that conditions differ in many important respects
from those we have been considering.
Many of the underdeveloped countries of today do not
possess the raw materials required for industrialization.
Still more important, few of them have undergone the
long preliminary period of social change which took place
in England before the industrial revolution began there.
In particular, most of these underdeveloped countries have
never seen the emergence of a powerful mercantile class
with the enterprise, the experience and the accumulated
capital, as well as the broad international connexions,
which the businessmen enjoyed in England, the centre
of a world-wide empire.
In some of today's underdeveloped countries, the small
educated class has tended to despise commercial and
industrial pursuits, while lack of education and capital
has prevented the mass of people from using trade as a
means of substantially improving their condition.
Perhaps most fundamental of all is the different
philosophy of life obtaining in many of today's under¬
developed countries. The success of Western technological
civilization has depended upon the willingness of large
numbers of men persistently to devote their energies to
the acquiring of material goods and social prestige
symbols. The habits of industry, thrift, accumulation of
capital and shrewdness in the far-sighted employment of
it opened the doors of society, while earning the plaudits
of moralists. As the twentieth century advanced, the
désire for possessions and security has been Intensively
stimulated, lower and lower down the social scale, by all
the resources of professional advertising.
I T would be a mistake to suppose that, even in
the West, man has always been eager to make
this effort. In fact, lack of discipline and absenteeism
were among the most serious obstacles to economic pro¬
gress in the early factory age. A contemporary observer,
Andrew TJre, in his Philosophy of Manufacture (1835)
remarked: "The main difficulty of the new industrial
system did not, to my apprehension, lie so much in the
invention of a proper self-acting mechanism.. .as in train¬
ing human beings to renounce their desultory habits of
work and to identify themselves with the unvarying regu¬
larity of the complex automaton... Even at the present day,
when the system is perfectly organized and its labour
lightened to the utmost, it is found nearly impossible to
convert persons past the age of puberty, whether drawn
from rural or from handcraft occupations, into useful
factory hands."
Long ago, Aristotle said in the Nicomachean Ethics:
32 "We busy ourselves in order that we may have leisure"
and it has been pointed out that the Greek language has
only a negative Word for "job" or "business"asxolia,
literally "the lack of leisure." The Latin equivalent for
"business" is neg-otium or "absence of leisure." The
German for work arbeit comes from a Middle High
German word, arebeit, which had the meaning of
"hardship" or "distress."
We have contemporary evidence to show that it took
much effort and not a little brutality to create in the
early factory workers the habits of unremitting attention
and regularity that machinery demands, habits which, in
the fields and the artisan's shop, can be less rigid and
exacting, thanks to the relief afforded by varying tasks,
seasonal changes, weather conditions, traditional religious
festivals and folk ceremonies.
If the discipline of industry took a long time to assert
itself in the West, obstacles of a still deeper nature may
hinder its development elsewhere. Compare the outlook
which is now typical of many Western societies with the
traditional attitudes of a civilization like that of India.
There, renunciation and the conquest of desire are
principles deeply admired. Matter is the great illusion
and desire the root of all evil, a force which draws man
into a material world with which his real self can have
no affinity, and to which his genuine interests would
never bind him. From the standpoint of this ancient
culture, the stimulation of material desires and the crea¬
tion of means to satisfy those desires are in the highest
degree vanity and foolishness.
here are, of course, many underdeveloped
countries in which these views are not held,
or are restricted to certain spiritual teachers and their
disciples. Few Indians would today see an irreconcilable
conflict between the Hindu religion and an effort to im¬
prove standards of living. The existence in non-
industrial societies of such traditional attitudes before
the great mystery of life and a widespread reluctance to
submit for long to the monotony of' industrial labour
should however be noted.
Critics of the West have pointed out what they believe
to be a certain selfishness and superficiality in the atti¬
tudes which have made "Western Industrial civilization
possible. They see in Western man a desire to "have"
rather than to "be," and they compare this unfavourably
with the more communal, less individualistic and
acquisitive state of mind that prevails in much of Asia
and Africa. There, at least in many rural communities,
personal aggrandizement tends to be condemned as a
motive for human conduct. Sharing with one's fellowis is
taken more readily for granted and time is something to
be enjoyed, rather than used, like a song by firelight that
enriches companionship, even if it leaves the coffers as
empty as^-ever. Such attitudes could perhaps restore to
the "acquisitive society" a dimension of human warmth
which it has, to some extent, lost. In any event, they
cannot be overlooked if we seek to compare the mentality
of today's underdeveloped countries with that of industrial
England or America.
In the attempt to move from an earlier, rural culture
into the mobile, machine-conscious, urbanized, technolo¬
gical society, the "less developed" countries may risk
losing precious social values consecrated by tradition and
also art forms which satisfy as manufactur¬
ed goods can never do. Only economic development and
industrialization can reduce the material sufferings and
insecurity of the less privileged peoples, but respect for
these social and artistic values may still be a guiding
principle both of those who are seeking to diversify their
economies and of the experts from industrialized
countries who go among them, sometimes without fully
realizing what treasures an "underdeveloped" culture may
conceal.
(To be continued.)
