Feast during the grape harvest (1 0 ft X 3 % ft).
NIKO PIROSMANI
Still life (small painting: 27 X 8 in. ).

UNKNOWN MASTER
OF PRIMITIVE ART
A beauty from Ortastchal (46 in. X 20 in.).
16

In every age and land there have been painters
who in all simplicity and without special
study have sought to express their picture of the world
In paint. They were little interested In being classed as
artists and In fact they were not recoginized as such since
their works clashed with the artistic canons of their time
and were not considered "beautiful."
But the present half century, for the first time since
the Renaissance, has witnessed the disintegration of the
more or less official rules of academic art as the existence
and importance of hitherto neglected forms of art came
to be appreciated, such as the Romanesque, Pre-
Hellenic, Oceanian, and African art, the art of ancient
civilizations unearthed by archaeologist as well as that
of prehistoric man.
by Jean A. Keim
Subsequently, art historians also began to turn their
attention to a style of painting termed "simple-hearted
painting" in Germany, "primitive painting" in the United
States and Yugoslavia and "naive painting" in many
countries.
This variety of labels shows how difficult It is to find a
suitable classification for those unsophisticated artists for
whom the world was a great canvas to be reproduced
as simply as possible. Perhaps a better name might be
the one used as the title of a Paris exhibition In 1935:
"Popular Masters of Reality."
The most famous of these artists was a Frenchman, the
Douanier Rousseau, whose paintings are now eagerly
prized by museums the world over. But when Rousseau
held his first major exhibition' in Paris in 1912 his
canvases were greeted with sniggers of scorn by the
fashionable critics of the day.
Siiince then countless other such painters have
been discovered, some good, some bad for
simplicity alone does not make a great artist. A fairly
representative selection of their works was shown at the
New York Museum of Modern Art in 1938.
Today many pages would be needed to list all the
painters who can be grouped in this same category yet
whose works are as markedly different one from another
as Dietrich of Switzerland, Generallc of Yugoslavia,
Greffe of Belgium, Guillen of Nicaragua, Hyppolite of
Haiti, Metelli of Italy, Grandma Moses of the United
States of America, Ociepka of Poland, Paps of Germany,
Pasada of Mexico, Shalom of Israel, Theophllos of
Greece, Urtiaga of Peru, Vivancos of Spain, and Wallis
of Great Britain.
Each day brings us the name of a new artist, of greater
or lesser talent, as well as many unsigned works the
authors of which are now being sought by art collectors.
A number of these painters are of exceptional merit yet
their names still await the world recognition they fully
deserve. Foremost among these is the Georgian popular
painter Niko Pirosmanashvili, or Pirosmani as he is known
for short.
THE COOK (42 in. x 18 in.). Niko Pirosmani often
chose his models from the simple folk he knew best.
17
CONT'D ON PACE 21

AUTUMN DAYS
AND
HARVESTS
In Niko Pirosmani's works the same themes
appear time and againscenes from rural life
or of craftsmen at work, sometimes arranged in
anecdotal groups. Above, "Harvesting": from
the grape and fruit harvest to the wine press.
The painter was fond of poetic touches like
the autumn pumpkins (foreground) and the
flight of migrating birds (left rear). Painting at
right is entitled 'The Childless Millionaire with
Poor Woman and Her Children" (52 in. x
45 in.). As canvases for his paintings, Pirosmani
employed a wide range of materials including
wood, tinplate, black oilcloth and shop walls.
Strikingly rich colour characterizes his work.
18

19

PIROSMANI (Cont'd)
20
MARGARET THE ACTRESS. (3 ft. 1 0 in. x 3 ft.)
This striking primitive painting is aglow wih colour.

AL FRESCO FEAST. Though he
himself often went hungry, Niko
Pirosmani was fond of painting
others at table, thus combining
portraiture with studies of still life.
Above, a vintager, detail from
" Feast During the grape Harvest "
a painting reproduced on page 1 6.
In a dark cellar, a lonely man
Plrosmanashvili was born in 1860 In a small village In
the Kakhetli district of Georgia. When he was still a
boy his parents died and he found himself alone In the
world. He made his way to Tiflis, the capital of Georgia,
where he found work with some small traders and taught
himself to read and write. But all the time he was
doing sketches and drawings.
In 1882, at the age of 22, he joined up with a painter
and opened a small paint business but his commercial
sense was very poor and he was soon forced to close shop.
He then found a job as a labourer on the railways, and
later opened a small dairy and finally a butcher's shop,
but all these ventures ended in failure.
Alone In the world, without either friends or
relatives, Pirosmani lived a miserable, hand-
to-mouth existence. He wandered about Tiflis trying to
scrape a bit of money together by decorating restaurants
and cellars, and painting signboards. It was not long
before his health failed and he sought refuge from his
frustration and bitterness in alcohol. In the words of
one authority, Professor Dudchava, "he drank to paint
and painted to drink." More often than not he received
no money for the work he did; instead the tradespeople
paid him with food and drink, estimating that it was
cheaper to allow Pirosmani to decorate their walls with
frescoes than to hire an ordinary house painter to redo
their walls.
In 1912 he was discovered by a French artist named Le
Dentre, then by the Zdanevlch brothers of Tiflis, painter
and poet respectively, and Pirosmani's name began to be
mentioned in art circles. In 1916 the Union of Georgian
Painters expressed concern about him and sent the
painter Gudiashvili to try to help him. Gudlashvlll has
left us a description of him as "a very tall, grey-haired
man with a small beard and drooping moustache; pale
and exhausted by his life, but gentle and serene; his
jacket and trousers covered with paint stains; living in
extreme poverty In a dark cellar."
One day, when a meeting was In session at the head¬
quarters of the Painters' Union at Tiflis, the door opened
and Plrosmanashvili walked In. He sat down, folded his
arms and stared dreamy-eyed In front of him. Only once
did he open his mouth during the discussion. "Well,
brothers" he said, "Do you know what we need? We've
got to build a big house In the centre of town where we
can all meet, buy a big table and a samovar to keep us
going, and talk about painting." He later left, never to
return. A Tlllls newspaper published a photograph and
then a caricature of him. This apparently Infuriated him
and he decided to break with his fellow painters.
Some time afterwards the Union again sought to come
to his aid, but Pirosmani had left Tlllls and disappeared.
The search for him went on In vain. When he did
return he was a dying man. Three days later a friend
found him lying In a cellar and had him transported to
a hospital. There he died on May 5, 1917. His place of
burial is unknown.
Plrosmanashvili was a noble-hearted, proud man who
never complained of his sad fate. His works are simple
and unsophisticated; he painted what he saw, as It stood,
with a purity of feeling and lyricism which reveal his
true love of mankind. In all his painting one senses his
deep attachment to ordinary folk, and the vitality of his
decorative art is vividly expressed In a combination of
brilliant colours, sharp greens, bright yellows and intense
blues often set against a background of deep black.
Again and again he painted the same themes, on re¬
quest, depicting scenes of abundance and plenty which
he himself had rarely known: Harvest Festival; Gay
Feasts; Banquet Under the Trees. But In the apparent
gaiety of these scenes his own Inherent melancholy can
always be felt.
His models were the simple people he knew: the Inn¬
keeper, the Cook, the House Porter. Today, their por¬
traits strikingly Illuminate a gallery of the Tiflis Museum.
He painted the Noble Lord, the Wealthy Peasant Holding
CONT'D ON PAGE 24
21

PIROSMANI (Cont'd)

23

THE HOUSE PORTER (portrait, 42 in. X 18 in.).
a Riding-Crop, the Millionaire with a Poor Woman and
Her Children, and later a Protest Meeting... perhaps an
unconscious gesture of revolt against the social conditions
of his time.
He had a great love for animals and portrayed them
in many works. He painted bucks and does, like The
Wounded Hind; bears and cubs as In the magnificent
She-Bear Under the Moon; eagles, as in Eagle and Hares;
and even a Lion and a Giraffe.
For Pirosmani also painted subjects he had never
actually seen. Though his whole life was spent in and
near Tiflis he has left us some remarkable scenes like the
Port of Batum, a Hunting-Party in India, and views of
the Russo-Japanese War.
Steeped In the history and legends of his country, he
painted portraits of Tsarina Tamara, and the Georgian
national poet Rustaveli, and illustrated salient passages
from the Man in the Tiger-Skin. He also painted innume¬
rable still lifes showing shashlik on a skewer, Georgian
vegetables and fish, and the traditional glass of red wine.
Although he was Georgian to the core, Pirosmani's
works stand apart from those of his contemporaries
which were completely dominated by European influen¬
ces; nor can they be placed In the tradition of the-ancient
frescoes which adorn Georgian churches. A born genius,
his style was all his own, and without affectation he
painted what his heart led him to paint.
After the Revolution, the Soviet Union began to give
prominence to his work. In 1930 his pictures were
exhibited in Tiflis, Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev and Kharkov,
and in 1938 and in 1960 important exhibitions of his
works were held in Tiflis. Many poems have been
written about him, and his life is the subject of a play
now being performed at the Rustaveli Theatre in Tiflis.
Years after his death a renown has come to this "ill-
starred" painter which he did not seek and certainly
never expected. Special tribute to Pirosmani was paid
to the artist In 1960 with a retrospective exhibition of his
paintings In Tiflis Museum. In the catalogue published
on that occasion, the director of the Tiflis Museum,
Academician Amiranashvili wrote: "In the history of
modern Georgian art prior to the Revolution, the work
of Plrosmanashvili stands out as a great milestone. And
it is to Soviet art criticism that we owe the present
understanding and appreciation of his painting."
But far beyond Georgia, by virture of his genius and
humanity, Niko Plrosmanashvili belongs to world art.
24 Jean A. Keim, former Cultural Attache at the French
Embassy in Moscow, is a member of the International
Association of Art Critics.
