THE FOOD DESTROYERS
INSECTS AND OTHER PESTS RAVAGE CROPS
THAT COULD FEED UNTOLD MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
by Dr. J. Vallega
Director, Plant Production
and Protection Division, FAO
32
AGE-OLD ENEMY of
the desert locust, still
tests over 60 countries and
territories. A single swarm
of these hungry marauders
may number as many as
1,000 million and can weigh
anything from 50,000 to
100,000 tons. It eats the
equivalent of its weight in
green plants every day,
leaving desolation behind
it. Areas in the path of
advancing swarms are now
given warning by a special
service jn which the FAO
rid Meteorological
on join forces.
echiney-Progi!, Paris

J. P.. Geigy S.A.. Basel, Switzerland STOREROOM RAIDERS like Insects and rodents each year cause losses
equivalent to the produce of scores of millions of acres. Modern methods of
grain storage could greatly reduce damage by such pests as weevils and rats.
J;IuxiAN Huxley in his essay on "Living in a
Revolution" said, "human evolution has been
getting faster and faster its tempo during recorded
history is at least 100,000 times faster than that of pre-
evolution."
Fascinating changes which characterized the last decade
of the nineteenth and the first decade of the twentieth
century support Huxley's view. Human knowledge, from
physics to sociology, vastly expanded during this time and
an impressive number of discoveries brought men to the
dawn of a new age of wealth and achievement. Then,
in less than 25 years, two world wars threatened to destroy
this modern civilization and lay waste the efforts of
thousands of brilliant scientists and technicians who had
paved the way to a better life. But, despite the havoc
wrought, the wars acted as "a hot house" in forcing the
pace of scientific and technological progress. Even the
terrifying, development of the atomic bomb has made
possible man's peaceful uses of atomic energy.
. While this progress in the technically advanced
countries is apparent for all to see, in some emerging
countries it has slowed down, in others it has come to a
standstill and in some the situation has grown worse than
it was before the Second World War.
Today, although more food is produced than at any
previous time in history, we are still a long way from
being able to provide enough food -for everybody. Indeed,
the world food situation is perhaps more serious than
ever. Pests and parasites continue to take a very heavy
toll of the food produced, although scientific means exist
to keep them under control.
More than one-fifth of the food that should be harvested
from the crops planted by mankind never reaches the
dinner-table. For example, It has been estimated that
about 20 per. cent of the annual world food crop plantings
is destroyed, or seriously damaged, by insects, disease and
other pests, and that in some countries as much as 10
per cent of grain production food on which money and
labour have been spent in cultivation, processing and
transportation is destroyed in store by Insects, rodents
and fungi.
Other factors which take their one per cent toll here
and their two per cent toll there, make up an annual loss
of food, which, if saved, would feed several tens of
millions of people. The world production of cereal grains
in 1959, excluding the U.S.S.R., was 856,000,000 metric tons,
of which at least 10 per cent was destroyed in store,- a
loss of 85,600,000 tons which, at an average ration of about
800 grammes daily per person, would have fed almost
300,000,000 people for a year.
From hiblical times, locusts have provided the most
striking example of an insect plague:
"A nation is come upon my land, strong and without
number, whose teeth are of a lion. Like the noise of
chariots on the tops of mountains shall they leap, like
the noise of flames, of fire that devoureth the stubble.
The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses
and as horses 'so shall they run. The land is a garden
of Eden before them and behind them a desolated
wilderness. Joy is withered away from the sons of
man."
So spoke the prophet Joel of the locusts three thousand
years ago, and -they still plague humanity, bringing with
them the threat of famine to many lands. Throughout
the centuries, they have been the scourge of farmers in
the Near and Middle East and the northern half of Africa,
CONT'D ON PAGE 36
33

INSECTS WHO CAME TO DINNER
COCKROACH is a serious pest with
house-invading habits. Found in all
parts of the world, it feeds on all sorts
of things in a house, contaminates
food and has an unpleasant odour.
34
All photos © Pechiney-Progil, Paris
/'"/'
35


THE FOOD DESTROYERS (Cont'd)
SCOURGE OF TROPICAL
AFRICA. More than 750,000 dif¬
ferent species have been counted
among the world's insects. Some
are man's friends and others are
his foes, among the most deadly of
which is the tse-tse fly (left) which
infests over four million square miles
of tropical Africa. The tse-tse's
bite infects man with deadly sleeping
sickness and transmits other orga¬
nisms fatal to cattle and domestic
animals. As a result vast areas
suitable for farming are uninhabi¬
table either by man or his livestock.
-Victory over the tse-tse would
restore these lands to man's use.
© J. P.. Geigy S.A., Basel, Switzerland
MAN-MADE INSECT. A helicop¬
ter fitted with agricultural spraying
gear flies over a forest in the Uni¬
ted States projecting a cloud of
pesticides over the trees. Heli¬
copters and other aircraft have pro¬
ved their worth in the war against
insect pests that ravage man's
food crops. They have actually carr¬
ied the battle against locusts into the
air, spraying the swarms in flight.
USIS
Sirens, bombs and flamethrowers of no avail
a persistent plague which has hampered agricultural
development. Swarms of locusts, each swarm weighing
anything from 50,000 to 100,000 tons, are carried by the
winds over thousands of miles. They eat the equivalent
of their weight of green plants every day, leaving desola¬
tion behind them.
More than 20 countries, members of the FAO Desert
Locust Control Committee, are co-ordinating their efforts
against the plague. A field force composed of locust
specialists, air-spraying experts, meteorologists, biologists,
etc., is working in teams over vast areas of Africa, the
Near East and the Far East, to destroy the locusts in their
breeding areas on the ground or the swarms in the air.
But still the locusts are eating our food, although it is
hoped that the present campaign will go far towards
bringing this pest finally under control.
Monoculture, a practice which consists in cultivating the
same crop over vast areas, has also considerably increased
the spread of destruction caused toy insect pests and
parasites because it disturbs the biological balance of
nature. Examples of this practice are to be found over
large areas of the Americas, Africa and Europe, where
thousands of square miles are now cultivated uninterrup¬
tedly with the same crops: wheat in the TJ.S.A. and
Canada, sugar cane in the U.S.A. and Cuba, rice in a
number of Far Eastern countries, rubber, cocoa, palm
trees, groundnuts in many parts of Africa and the Far
East.
The natural enemies of the pests and parasites that prey
on the crops have disappeared, allowing an extraordinary
proliferation of the enemies of the crops. Pesticides and
insecticides when available and properly used permit
control of most invasions of crop predators.
It appears now, however, that many of the predators
3g have developed a resistance, and even an immunity, to
the chemicals which only a few years ago destroyed them
in masses. New methods of control and new chemical
compounds have to be continuously developed to keep on
top in the struggle against man's enemies.
But insects are not the only enemies man has to cope
with. A pretty little bird with a red beak, black collar
and beige body feathers, which is often kept as a pet, is,
next to the locust, perhaps the most damaging winged
pest to be found in Africa. Weaver birds in swarms of
millions' devour crops over hundreds of thousands of
square miles from Senegal to Somalia and Transvaal,
sometimes driving villagers from their homes by com¬
pletely destroying their crops.
Here, again, man has struggled to control this pest but,
so far, without conspicuous success. The African farmer
tries to protect his crops by frightening the birds, beating
drums, boxes, tins and anything to make a loud noise.
Sirens, detonators, smoke producers and low-flying air¬
craft have been tried in recent years, but with equal lack
of success. Air bombing, flame-throwers to burn the
nests and biological control have also been tried but have
failed to establish full control of the pest.
Unknown plant diseases continuously appear. About
Í928, a new disease appeared in a coconut plantation on
San Miguel Island in the Philippines. At that time
nobody suspected that this disease would, in about 25
years, destroy all coconut trees on the island 250,000.
Then in 1951 it spread to Luzon where 1,788,000 trees
were affected. Destruction soon became widespread, with
44 million being infected in 1952, 5i million in 1953,
6 million in 1954, 8 million in 1956, and 9i million in 1958.
The total loss in coconuts for 1958 was estimated at 164
million dollars. If the disease continues to spread at the
same rate, 17 million trees in Luzon will have succumbed
by 1964. The probable cause of "Cadang-Cadang," the
local name for the disease which means "death," is a
virus but this has not yet been identified.
It took several centuries to establish control over
epidemics of human diseases, such as smallpox, plague,
yellow-fever, etc. This was achieved mainly through

mass-vaccination, constant medical checking, enforced
quarantine regulations and permanent medical vigilance.
Man has not yet established similar control over animal
diseases, nor is he fully aware of the need to do so.
Economic losses resulting from animal diseases are
tremendous. For example, in Burma, nearly a million
cattle were lost from rinderpest during the Second World
War. Most of these were plough and draught animals, and
so the farmers were deprived of the power they needed
to cultivate their land, as well as milk for their children
and dung fuel for heating and cooking. As a result,
Burma lost the whole of her annual export surplus of
3,000,000 tons of rice. This not only ruined her economy
but threatened famine to neighbouring Bengal.
The 1951-1953 outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in
Europe cost $420,000,000. Mastitis, another serious cattle
disease, costs the British dairy industry some $28,000,000
a year, and the U.S.A. about $200,000,000 a year, although
the incidence of the disease is only 10 per cent today
compared with 30 per cent 25 years ago. In a report
published by O.E.E.C. in 1952, it was estimated that the
total of animal losses to Western Europe for that year
amounted in value to about $16,800,000,000, or 15 per cent
of the total output of livestock products and this in one
of the most advanced agricultural regions of the world.
Norris E. Dodd, a former Director-General of FAO, once
said that, "if the blood-sucking intestinal parasites of
domestic animals could be removed the resulting increase
in food would more than satisfy the needs of all the
deficient areas of the world."
Technical means exist but the lack of knowledge and
purchasing power, particularly in the less-developed
countries, have made it impossible up to now to control
the enemies. Besides, new dangers have appeared. Air
travel, for instance, has considerably complicated man's
struggle against animal disease. Long sea journeys, often
occupying several weeks, allowed time for symptoms of
infectious diseases to develop. .But with air travel the
time taken seldom permits the development of recog¬
nizable symptoms.
Staff, funds and equipment for research work in plant
and animal disease control are insufficient in relation to
the magnitude of the problem. Much has been done in
the past, more is being done today, but very much more
still remains to be done. For this present world is still
a rival world where man is struggling against Innumerable
enemies. There is no turning aside from this fact, no
escape and no shortcut. More food must be produced
and less food eaten or destroyed by insects, pests and
parasites. Only through satisfying the basic needs of
man and food is certainly the first of these requirements
can we "hope to build a peaceful world for the coming
generation.
CORROSIVE HUNGER
If mankind fails to put into effect, urgently and
on a world scale, measures capable of halting
the corrosive inroads of hunger, then all that
human genius has created will crumble and be
swept away like dust, long before a natural
erosion could destroy the untold riches hidden
in the ground. And mankind, already haunted by
the distant threat of a world transformed into
desert by the using up of its natural resources,
will witness the paradoxal arrival of a world
become barren and depopulated even though it
still overflows with hidden fertility and riches.
Josué de Castro
in "Géopolitique de la Faim", Editions ouvrières, Paris, 1956 37
