NTERNATIONAL LAND OF SCIENCE
hy Ross C. Peavey
& Laurence M. Gould
L
ong a mystery, later the scene of ad¬
venture and exploration, and finally
an area of the world whose principal
product is fundamental scientific infor¬
mation: this is the history of Antarctica.
The last and most important stage has
been characterized by international
scientific co-operation for the benefit
of mankind without the intrusion of
political tensions and national rivalries
so prevalent in other regions of
the world. (cont'd on next pace)
nil : 1*1 1 \

LAND OF SCIENCE (Cont'd)
A TREATY WITHOUT PRECEDENT IN MODERN WORLD HISTORY
The culmination of Antarctic collaboration took place
on December 1, 1959, when a 12-nation treaty was signed
at Washington, D. C, ensuring that Antarctica will
continue to be used for peaceful purposes only. The
Antarctic Treaty, unique in modern diplomatic history,
must be listed as one of the more Important results of the
International Geophysical Year (IGY) of 1957-1958.
The IGY, man's most ambitious attempt to understand
better his physical environment, inevitably focused much
attention on Antarctica. The IGY was an endeavour-
to observe our whole planet and the atmosphere that
surrounds it; to ensure a global picture, it was necessary
to enlist the co-operation of the scientists of all nations
and to co-ordinate their observations. Full geographic
coverage demanded specific data from the southern
continent. Thus it was that the global aspect of the IGY
led to the scientific investigations which opened up
Antarctica, and to the international collaboration which
has been the essential ingredient in scientific under¬
standing of the Antarctic.
In recent years international scientific collaboration
has assumed new meanings and importance, now widely
recognized by national leaders throughout the world. For
this reason, and because of the growing recognition of the
need for even greater knowledge of the world in which
we live, it is profitable to examine the history of the
Antarctic scientific programme, the factors which have
contributed to its extraordinary success, and to look
toward the future.
The Antarctic research programme of the International
Geophysical Year was the first large-scale and concerted
international effort to investigate the scientific secrets of
this vast unknown continent and Its environs. Never¬
theless, the numerous expeditions of geographical
exploration and scientific study conducted in the decades
La Uruguay, Ar¬
gentine vessel
which rescued the
crew of the Swedish
shi p, Antarctica,
trapped in southern
ice pack in 1903,
is shown on this
stamp issued on
50th anniversary of
Uruguay's exploit.
science in the context of an Antarctic programme. In
summary, they are:
Scientific knowledge derives from the synthesis of
ideas, principles, and research developed by able scientists
of all nations.
Science develops best in the environment of free
communications.
Direct access to things and processes in nature is
fundamental to basic scientific advances.
Common standards of observation and measure¬
ment and a common pool of basic data are essential for
s.s - , .,' .-- ..
\ mhñvmm's.wm
Antarctic penguin and
Japanese Antarctic ship.
Soya, figure on this 1957
stamp issued to mark part
played by Japan in the
IGY Antarctic research.
the description and understanding of the physical
phenomena under investigation.
Means for full co-operation among scientists have
become necessary for detailed observation of varying
phenomena, a criterion particularly applicable to the
study of transient geophysical phenomena.
Modern means of transportation and communication
and many post-war developments in scientific instru¬
mentation facilitated application of these principles and
thus made possible a concerted programme of geophysical
research in the Antarctic during the International
Geophysical Year.
From the start of the planning, international co-op¬
eration and a willingness to adjust national programmes
for common goals prevailed in the development of the
IGY Antarctic programme. First, scientists of each
country prepared their own plans to implement IGY
objectives. Scientists of many countries (Argentina,
Australia, Belgium, Chile, France, Japan, New Zealand,
Norway, South Africa, the United Kingdom, the U.S.S.R.,
and the USA) then met in a series of regional conferences
before the IGY provided scientific contributions of great
value which can never be discounted in the unfolding
scientific knowledge of the continent.
Some of these expeditions were, in fact, primarily
scientific in purpose and several were international In
character (in recent history, for example, one should note
the collaborative work of the Norwegian-British-Swedish
Antarctic Expedition of 1949-1952, the British-Australian-
New Zealand Antarctic Research Expedition of 1929-1931
and the British-United States Wilkins-Hearst Antarctic
Expedition in 1928-1929).
The work of scientists on all of these previous expe¬
ditions provided an invaluable base on which to develop,
as a major part of the IGY programme, a co-ordinated
attack in the geophysical sciences in Antarctica. Here,
in particular, factors of terrain, inhospitable environment,
remoteness, and the great size of the unknown area
clearly postulated an international approach for the
programme. These factors are related so directly to the
guiding principles upon which the whole IGY programme
was based that it may toe useful briefly to consider these
principles for international scientific co-operation in
Belgian explorer, Adrien
de Gerlache, who led
an Antarctic expedition
In 1897, is seen on
stamp by which Belgium
commemorated expedi¬
tion's 50th anniversary.
BF1GII BLLUIUUll
to exchange information on these plans and to consider
necessary adjustments.
As in the global IGY programme, the spirit of
international collaboration and scientific give-and-take,
in the common interests of the maximum Antarctic'
research effort, was notable. Mutual problems were
discussed and resolved, gaps in station coverage of
Antarctica were defined and voluntarily filled by
increased programme efforts of several countries, mutual
logistics-support arrangements were outlined, and a

successful plan for Interstation radio communications
was established.
Similarly, the actual IGY Antarctic operational pro¬
gramme was replete with occasions of international
collaboration. Space does not permit recounting all of
these occasions, but a few of the more significant should
be briefly cited. An IGY International Antarctic Weather
Central was established, not only to permit Immediate
research in Antarctic meteorology tout also to permit the
regular development and dissemination of dally weather
forecasts so important to all of the Antarctic stations in
the day-to-day conduct of their research arid logistics
operations. Although operated by United States scien¬
tists, the Weather Central was truly international in
character with scientists from Argentina, Australia,
France, New Zealand, Union of South Africa and the
U.S.S.R. participating fully in its work.
A programme for the exchange of scientists was Institut¬
ed, whereby research workers of one country joined In
the programmes of other countries, thus enabling a free
and prolonged exchange of scientific information, ex¬
perience in working with different equipment, and mutual
collaboration in standardization or interpretation of data.
The Antarctic radio communications network proved
effective in many ways: meteorological data were rapidly
collected for use by the Weather Central and forecasts
then disseminated; warnings of significant geophysical
:^	7\]
IWTESN
GEOFTBSK JU
1ISÏIt«
Wa^^
Norway's Antarctic ter¬
ritory, Queen Maud Land,
is shaded area on the
map of the continent seen
in this stamp marking
Norway's contribution In
IGY Antarctic research.
events were promptly distributed throughout the contin¬
ent; mutual scientific problems were discussed; and
emergency situations were made known where common
assistance could be of help.
Several countries conducted scientific traverses, each for
their own specific research objectives with common
scientific goals, but all contributing to a comprehensive
understanding of the extent of the vast Antarctic Ice cap
which covers the continent and to a delineation of the
underlying terrain features.
In some cases stations were operated jointly, as in the
case of the Hallett Station at Cape Adare where New
Zealand and United States scientists have now colla¬
borated for some five years.
Perhaps most illustrative of International co-operation
in Antarctica and the surrounding oceans is the direct
logistics assistance given to other expeditions; the record
of the scientific effort in this region is full of examples In
which nationality had no part of icebreakers relieving
ice-bound ships or aircraft flying to the rescue of beleag¬
uered personnel.
Although it is not the purpose of this article to recount
or evaluate in detail the scientific findings in Antarctica
since the inception of the IGY, It ls profitable to summar¬
ize at this point three significant contributions of the
programme.
First, the purely scientific results, and their scientific
meanings, both regionally and globally, have been unpar¬
alleled in history.
Second, quite aside from the importance of the research
investigations themselves, these findings are destined to
ROSES IN THE ANTARCTIC, but In this case on a
cake being cut by Phillip Law, of Australian Antarctic
Expedition. Cake was baked for a reception given to Aus¬
tralia'» Antarctic team at French base of Dumont-d'Urvllle.
have practical Impacts of great value. Here It ls only
necessary to suggest the progress already occurring In the
understanding of Antarctic meteorology and the conse¬
quent Improvements to Southern Hemisphere weather
forecasting, or the advances to be anticipated In radio
communications through our Increased understanding of
physical processes In the Antarctic upper atmosphere and
Ionosphere.
Third, International collaboration in the programme
has led to the close and personal association of able scien¬
tists from many countries, associations which, unimpeded
by political restraints, have been down-to-earth and have
led to lasting friendships and scientific associations,
mutual appreciation of problems and goals, and perhaps
even In some measure, to the relaxation of current-day
political tensions.
Fourth, successful negotiation of the Antarctic Treaty.
As the Antarctic scientific programme progressed, It
soon became apparent that the scientific discoveries were
coming too fast and their significance, both regional and
global, was too great to stop with the official termination
of the IGY research effort. Much had been learned, but
scientists In many fields recognized that the search for
scientific knowledge had only begun. Moreover, great
effort and Investments in station facilities and scientific
equipment had been made, which could be capitalized
upon to continue the programme at relatively little extra
cost.
Consequently, even during the first months of IGY,
recommendations were made to the International Council
of Scientific Unions (ICSU), that a means be found to sus¬
tain international scientific co-operation in Antarctic
research following the close of the IGY. The ICSU
responded by establishing a Special Committee on Antarc¬
tic Research (SCAR) with representation provided by
Interested constituent scientific unions and by the scien-
11
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

LAND OF SCIENCE (Cont'd)
WORLD ROSTER OF SCIENTISTS
tifie academies of the twelve countries already conducting
Antarctic research.
As in the IGY programme, SCAR has preserved and
extended the character and conduct of international co¬
operation in planning and implementing Antarctic re¬
search. The close personal relations initiated during IGY
among scientists of many nations have been cemented in
the continuing SCAR deliberations and have been valu¬
ably augmented by a growing body of participants with
first-hand Antarctic experience.
Through working groups in each principal scientific
field SCAR has built upon and extended the IGY pro¬
gramme of research. New programmes in the fields of
biology, geology, and cartography have been added to
those in geophysics. At each SCAR meeting the status
of the scientific programme is assessed and modified as
necessary, so that scientists of all participating countries
are working toward common goals with mutual interna¬
tional scientific appreciation of the programme aims.
12
In several fields SCAR has initiated new efforts
in international collaboration. A SCAR inter¬
national register of scientists has been established by
which research workers from any country can make their
interests in Antarctic research known to the planners in
countries already conducting programmes; this register,
although only established in recent months, affords a real
opportunity to find and utilize mature and able scientists
to best advantage in research without regard to their
national origins.
At its fourth meeting in September 1960, SCAR recog¬
nized the special problems of nature conservation occa¬
sioned by continued human activity in the Antarctic.
SCAR noted the Antarctic environment as one of the im¬
portant bio-geographical regions of the world from a
scientific standpoint and developed a series of recommen¬
dations for international co-operation in protection and
conservation of its unique life forms.
SCAR early made arrangements for continuation of the
IGY International Antarctic Weather Central as a perma¬
nent part of the post-IGY scientific programme; with the
collaboration of the Australian Meteorological Service, a
permanent International Antarctic Analysis Centre was
established at Melbourne in 1959. This Centre, continuing
the work of the IGY Weather Central, is placing greater
emphasis on basic meteorological research and its south¬
ern hemispheric effects. To date, scientists from Argen¬
tina, Australia, France and the United States have parti¬
cipated in the work of the Analysis Centre.
In related fields also, SCAR has taken measures to colla¬
borate with other international programmes in geophy¬
sics: the World Magnetic Survey, the ICSU international
programme for the Year of the Quiet Sun, studies of the
earth's crust and upper mantle, and the SCAR Indian
Ocean Expedition are particularly noteworthy in this
regard.
Thus, through many avenues SCAR has recognized the
urgent need for international scientific co-operation in
Antarctic research. As in the IGY, such research becomes
the vehicle by which scientists of many nations, collabo¬
rating fully and freely, can provide the common ingre¬
dient so necessary to further scientific understanding of
the region.
Political leaders throughout the world have recognized
the unique qualities of the Antarctic research pro¬
gramme and, in 1958, moved to preserve this amicable
accord. Upon the invitation of President Eisenhower,
representatives of the 12 nations then conducting Antarc¬
tic scientific investigations met to develop the terms of a
treaty which, in the words of the President, would
promote:
ARMADA
OF PEACE
A U.S. Navy tractor team (above)
leaves Little America on a 600 mile
trip to a scientific base in Marie Byrd
Land. Right, an American photo¬
grapher-scientist learns about An¬
tarctic weather the hard way when
caught in a three-day blizzard. Note
face mask coated with ice. Below,
International solidarity of science :
Soviet and U.S. explorers meet
at the South Pole (shown opposite).
USIS-
A. Maximova-Soviet photo
CONT'D ON PAGE 14

!AÍ
U.S. Navy
I
SOUTH POLE
Air view of Amundsen-
Scott Station set up by the
U.S.A. for IGY research.
Exact site of geographic
South Pole (at top) is 'mark¬
ed by a circle of barrels. This
South Pole Station was estab¬
lished and is maintained by
"Operation Deep Freeze".
USIS 13

LAND OF SCIENCE (Cont'd)
NUCLEAR EXPLOSIONS BANNED
"Freedom of scientific investigations throughout An¬
tarctica by citizens, organizations and governments of all
countries; and a continuation of the international scien¬
tific co-operation which is being carried out so success¬
fully during the current International Geophysical Year."
These overtures resulted in an Antarctic treaty confe¬
rence which convened in Washington, October 15 to
December 1, 1959. The product was the Antarctic Treaty,
agreed to by representatives of all twelve nations, and
now ratified by all of them. The treaty contains the
following important principles governing future activities
in Antarctica:
The continuation of international scientific co-op¬
eration which characterized activities of the IGY and
SCAR programmes.
The reservation of Antarctica for peaceful purposes
only.
Preservation of the status quo on all national terri¬
torial claims for 30 years and a provision that no scientific
activity during this period shall be used as the basis
for asserting a claim.
The prohibition of activities for military purposes
and the prohibition of nuclear explosions, and
A system of free inspection of any part of Antarctica
by observers of signatory nations.
The successful negotiation of the Treaty can
only be ascribed to the groundwork in interna¬
tional collaboration laid by the world's scientists in
planning and undertaking the comprehensive Antarctic
scientific programme of the IGY and the following years.
Especially during the decade preceding the IGY, several
nations had attempted to secure international agreements
on Antarctica through negotiations within the United
Nations. All of these attempts had foundered on the
troublesome problems of territorial claims and for want
of the harmonious and co-operative international arran¬
gements developed by the IGY and SCAR programmes.
This unprecedented contribution by science to interna¬
tional diplomacy was widely acknowledged by national
throughout the Treaty negotiations and, indeed,
is the theme of the preamble of the formal Treaty
document.
It is not surprising, therefore, that continued inter¬
national co-operation in Antarctic scientific investigations
is also the central theme of the Treaty Articles of Agree¬
ment. During the 30-year tenure of the treaty, provision
is made for full international exchange regarding nation¬
al scientific programmes in Antarctica, the exchange of
scientific personnel between expeditions and scientific
stations, and the full and free interchange of scientific
observations and results.
There seems little doubt that new scientific data and
results will continue to be the principal export from
Antarctica for many years to come. Successful negotia¬
tion of the Antarctic Treaty acknowledges science as its
goal, and the Treaty Agreements preserve the favourable
climate for international scientific activities. Thus, in
Antarctica the coming years should continue to produce
scientific discoveries and results of great significance to
basic research as well as many practical applications for
the benefit of all.
14
Ross C. Peavey and Laurence M. Gould are respectively
executive secretary and chairman of the Committee on Polar
Research U.S. National Academy of Sciences. Dr. Peavey is one
of the editors of the two-volume study, Science in Antarctica
produced by the Committee for the National Academy of Sciences
(Publication N". 839 and 878). Dr. Gould has led expeditions to
the Arctic and Antarctic and was director of the U.S. Antarctica
programme during the IGY.
Photos Courtesy Scott Polar Research Institute

