LITTLE-KNOWN MASTERPIECES
OF BULGARIAN MEDIAEVAL ART
by
Assené Vassilev
The religious frescoes executed
in Bulgaria from the 12th to the
15th Centuries to decorate small
chapels or country monasteries
have survived although secular
painting from the same period,
whose existence is mentioned by
contemporary chroniclers, has
unfortunately vanished with
time. Today, a " Unesco Art
Album " has given us an oppor¬
tunity to judge these rare marvels
and to appreciate the evolution,
in all its subtle turnings, of
an art form strongly marked by
Byzantine influences but still
expressing its own originality.
Striking mosaic figure of St. Theo¬
dor now in the Preslav Museum.
Official Bulgarian photo
T;owARD the end of the 7th century, the Proto-
Bulgarians, coming from the East, entered the
Balkan peninsula and founded their nation between the
Danube and the Balkan mountains. The first Bulgarian
empire encompassed all the Slavic tribes living in the
region. From then on, a new culture was superimposed
upon old traditions inherited from the Thracians, the
Greeks and the Romans. The Proto-Bulgarians were
remarkable goldsmiths and skilled sculptors. As for the
local Slavs, their mastery of decorative themes textiles,
embroideries or wood-carvings was to exert a deter¬
mining influence upon Bulgarian art itself.
The first Bulgarian kingdom preceded the Carollnglan
dynasty whose empire later spread to the frontiers of
Bulgaria.
Monuments of the culture created between 681 and 1081
(the date of the Byzantine conquest of Bulgaria) were
destroyed during subsequent centuries, particularly during
the period of Turkish domination. Nevertheless, a large
number of objects, unearthed during the past 100 years,
point to the great achievements of the Bulgarians,
wnether in architecture or ceramics. In addition, des¬
criptions by contemporary writers give us an idea of the
Bulgarian capital and Its cultural apogee during the
Upper Middle Ages.
From documents, we learn that, as early as the 9th
century, the palace at Pliska, the first Bulgarian capital,
was decorated with frescoes. Later, the capital was
moved to Preslay and, according to contemporary ac¬
counts, the splendour of this city, which existed until
the end of the 10th century, dazzled all foreigners. Build¬
ings were decorated with carved stone and painted wood¬
work. Palaces with their varl-coloured marble were
Incomparably beautiful.
Virtually nothing remains of the works of art of this
era palaces, churches, frescoes and wooden icons
because Preslav was destroyed and burned in 967. At the
Patellna monastery, painted enamelled tiles dating back
to the 10th century have been found with the image of St.
Theodor. A large number of kilns and fragments of 29
ornamental tiles bearing traces of human faces lead us
to believe that Bulgarian painting was already highly
CONT'D ON PAGE 31

THE NATIVITY OF THE VIRGIN. A I Sth century frieze from the Monastery of Krem i kovts. As a
composition it is typical of the Bulgarian 14th century tradition; it reveals a more realistic, popular style:
the earrings and hair styles are those worn by the women of I 5th century Bulgaria and the distaff with
which the little girl is spinning is exactly the same as that used until recently by Bulgarian peasant women.
30
THE ARCHANGEL GABRIEL (left) detail from
a mural at Boyana entitled "The Annunciation".
DETAIL FROM JUDAS' BETRAYAL, from the
monastery of Zemen ( I 3 50). This work shows a strong
folklore influence, contrasting strongly with earlier works.

The frescoes of Boyana, executed in I 259 in Bulgaria, occupy a special place In I 3th century European painting
as examples of developed art of portrait painting. Above, Princess Dessislava, who, with her husband, Prince Sabas-
tokrator Kaloyan, founded the Boyana church. Below, the emaciated face of Saint Ephraim, monk and ascetic.
Second only
to Byzantium
developed. However, it is impossible to retrace its various
stages during the period of the first empire.
At the beginning of the 11th century, Bulgaria came
under Byzantine domination. She recovered her indé¬
pendance only in 1187. Though the influence of Byzantine
art was felt more strongly, Bulgarian artists continued
to follow their 10th century traditions. Later the casting-
off of a foreign yoke gave national Bulgarian art a strong
stimulus. Tirnovo, the capital of the second empire,
became the second-ranking cultural centre of the Balkans
behind Constantinople. Its art schools contributed to the
development of the nation's art. Thanks to Bulgarian
painting of this period, we have a more precise grasp of
religious painting in Byzantium. Frescoes from the 13th
and 14th centuries surpass the general level of Byzantine
art. It must also be noted that they offer some purely
national traits.
Despite barbaric devastation during the Ottoman
conquest, some paintings escaped destruction. Among
them were the justly celebrated frescoes of the church at
Boyana; and frescoes from the chapel at Berende, the
rock chapels of Ivanovo and the church at Zemen. All
dating from the second Bulgarian empire (1187-1396),
31
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
All photos C Un-esco, Album : Bulgaria, Mediaeval Wall Paintings

BULGARIAN ART (Cont'd)
Avant-garde painters
of the 13th century
they are among the masterpieces of medieval art in the
Balkans.
The Boyana frescoes are remarkable because of the
innovations which a Bulgarian artist brought here to
Byzantine art. Their style enables us to state that they
preceded the new concepts of the first period of the
Italian Renaissance. The master artist of Boyana,
working in the 13th century, broke away from the tradi¬
tions of painting in his time to create remarkable works
whose execution was technically perfect. Various images
of Christ, the angel In the "Annunciation," the "Descent
into Hell," the "Last Supper," the "Crucifixion," "Christ
Among the Doctors," the "Ascension" and several other
compositions, including images of St. Euples, St. Eustrate,
St. Damlen, St. Ephraim and various saintly warriors and
deacons are painted so realistically and so sensitively that
they cannot be compared to anything executed during
this era. National elements, borrowed from daily
Bulgarian life, were used to bring out religious subjects.
Here are also found four portraits: Kaloyan, the local
feudal lord; Dessislava, his wife; King Constantine and
Queen Irene. The anonymous artist, trained in some
studio at Tirnovo, succeeded remarkably in expressing
the individual characteristics, physical as well as spiritual,
of his subjects. These portraits stand as true master¬
pieces not only of art in the Balkans but of European
art in the 13th century.
F1 OLLOwiNG the Boyana frescoes (1259) , Bulga¬
rian painting continued to develop for 150
years until the conquest of Bulgaria by the Turks in 1396.
Some very interesting frescoes from the 13th and 14th
centuries have »been preserved in several rock chapels near
Ivanovo on the banks of the Russenski-Lom, one of the
branches of the Danube in eastern Bulgaria. The compo¬
sition of these scenes is remarkable and their colours, in
which gilded ochre predominates, have a charm of their
own. Though the artist followed Byzantine style, his
original talent and his new conception of painting are
revealed in his treatment of forms and in his achievement
of a third dimension through gradual shading of colours,
as well as in his expression of subtle psychological mean¬
ings. Among various compositions whose subjects were
taken from the life of Christ, we should mention "Judas
Throwing the Thirty Pieces of Silver," "Players Mocking
Christ" (a very rare subject in religious iconography), the
"Kiss of Judas," and "Christ Before Ann and Caiaphas."
Also worth noting are two scenes from the life of St. John
the Baptist the judgement and the beheading.
Frescoes in the Zemen monastery in the valley of the
Struma also date back to this same period, the 14th
century. Here, all the walls of the church were decorated
by frescoes. The forms of bodies and faces were brought
out by outlines and the artist did not attempt to stress
a third dimension. Light, pleasant colours and well-
executed details make this style particularly attractive.
Certain scenes are unknown in iconography for example,
the forging of the nails used in the Crucifixion. Gripping
portraits are to be found of the donors; Deyan, a local
lord, and his wife Doya. They have not been stylized in
the same manner as the religious compositions and
darker colours were used.
With the Renaissance, the decline of the mystical and
religious ideals of the Middle Ages became marked, but
nothing was to alter the basic characteristics of Bulgarian
painting although architecture evolved considerably
during the period of Turkish domination. Up to the 18th
century, that strange balance between skilled composition
and realistic detail achieved by painters during the
second empire continued to guide Bulgarian artists.
© Unesco, Album : Bulgaria Mediaeval Wall Paintings.
The deacon Lawrence. One of a row of saints
painted at the foot of the walls of the Boyana
Church, set beneath scenes of the Life of Christ.
