A general view (above) and details of "The
Citizens of Calais" by Auguste Rodin, who made two
originals, one for Calais and the other for London,
and authorized seven originals to be cast in bronze.
These are now on view in Tokyo, Philadelphia,
Basle, Copenhagen, Belgium, in an American pri¬
vate collection and in the Musée Rodin in Paris.


RODIN AND
by Rainer Maria Rilke
In 1347 six burghers of Calais volun¬
teered to give their lives to save
their beseiged city, and though they
were eventually spared, the event
has gone down as one of the most
glorious examples of the spirit of
self-sacrifice in history. Five hun¬
dred years later, in 1895, Auguste Ro¬
din chose the theme for one of his
greatest works in bronze, and in
1903 the poet Rainer Maria Rilke
wrote a moving description of this
immortal scene. Rilke's text and the
group scene above are reproduced
in the first volume, War and Peace,
of a new art series entitled Man
Through His Art appearing early next
year (see page 11). The Unesco
Courier presents the Rodin and Rilke
works in this issue not only for their
intrinsic beauty but as an example
of the struggle for Human Rights to
mark the 14th anniversary this month
(December 10) of the adoption of the
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights by the U.N. General Assembly.

Photo* C Dominique Lajoux


THE CITIZENS OF CALAIS
he most supreme instance of Rodin's power
of exalting a past event to the height of the
imperishable, whenever historical subjects or forms
demand to live again in his art, is found perhaps in "The
Citizens of Calais".
The suggestion for this group was taken from a few
passages in the chronicles of Froissart that tell the story
of the City of Calais at the time it was besieged by the
English king, Edward the Third. The king, not willing
to withdraw from the city, then on the verge of starv¬
ation, ultimately consents to release it if six of its noble
citizens deliver themselves into his hands "that he may
do with them according to his will." He demands that
they leave the city bareheaded, clad only in their shirts,
with a rope about their necks and the keys of the citadel
in their hands.
The chronicler describes the scene in the city. He
relates how the burgomaster, Messire Jean de Vienne,
orders the bells to be rung and the citizens to assemble
in the market-place. They hear the final message and
wait in expectation and in silence. Then heroes rise
among them, the chosen ones, who feel the call to die.
The wailing and weeping of the multitude rises from
the words of the chronicler, who seems to be touched for
the moment and to write with a trembling pen. But he
composes himself once more and mentions four of the
heroes by name; two of the names he forgets. He says
that one man was the wealthiest citizen of the city and
that another possessed authority and wealth and "had
two beautiful maidens for daughters"; of the third he
only knows that he was rich in possessions and heritage,
and of the fourth that he was the brother of the third.
He reports that they removed all their clothing save
their shirts, that they tied ropes about their necks and
thus departed with the keys of the city and of the citadel.
He tells how they came to the King's camp and of how
harshly the King received them and how the executioner
stood beside them when the King, at the request of the
Queen, gave them back their Uves. "He listened to his
wife", says Froissart, "because she was very pregnant".
The chronicler does not continue further.
For Rodin this was sufficient material. He felt immedi¬
ately that there was a moment in this story when some¬
thing portentous took place, something independent of
time and place, something simple, something great. He
concentrated all his attention upon the moment of the
departure. He saw how the men started on their way,
he felt how through each one of them pulsated once more
his entire past life, he realized how each one stood there
prepared to give that life for the sake of the old city.
Six men rose before him, of whom no two were alike,
only two brothers were among them between whom there
was. possibly a certain similarity. But each of them had
resolved to live his last hour in his own way, to celebrate
it with his soul and to suffer for it with his body, which
clung to life.
Rodin then no longer saw the forms of these men.
Gestures rose before him, gestures of renunciation, of
farewell, of resignation. Gestures over gestures. He
gathered them together and gave them form. They
thronged about him out of the fullness of his knowledge,
a hundred heroes rose in his memory and demanded to
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

10
RODIN (Cont'd)
be sacrificed. And he concentrated this hundred into six.
He modelled them each by himself In heroic size to
represent the greatness of their resolution, modelled them
nude in the appeal of their shivering bodies.
He created the old man with loose-jointed hanging
arms and heavy dragging step, and gave him the worn-
out walk of old men and an expression of weariness that
flows over his face into the beard.
He created the man that carries the key, the man who
would have lived for many years to come, but whose life
is condensed into this sudden last hour which he can
hardly bear. His lips are tightly pressed together, his
hands bite into the key. There is fire in his strength and
it burns in his defiant bearing.
He created the man who holds his bent head with both
hands to compose himself, to be once more alone.
He created the two brothers, one of whom looks back¬
ward while the other bends his head with a movement
of resolution and submission as though he offered it to
the executioner.
He created the man with the vague gesture whom
Gustave Geffroy has caUed "Le Passant". The man moves
forward, but he turns back once more, not to the city,
not to those who are weeping, and not to those who go
with him: he turns back to himself His right arm is
raised, bent, vacillating. His hands open in the air as
though to let something go, as one gives freedom to a
bird.
This gesture is symbolic of a departure from all uncer¬
tainly, from a happiness that has not yet been, from a
grief that will now wait in vain, from men who live some¬
where and whom he might have met sometime, from all
possibilities of tomorrow and the day after tomorrow;
and from Death which he had thought far distant, that
he had imagined would come mildly and softly and at
the end of a long, long time.
This figure, if placed by itself in a dim, old garden,
would be a monument for all who have died young.
Hus Rodin has made each of these men live
again the last concentrated moment of life.
Each figure is majestic in its simple greatness. They bring
to mind Donatello and, perhaps, Claux Sluter and his
prophets in the Chartreuse of Dijon.
It seems at first as though Rodin had done nothing
more than gather them together. He has given them the
same attire, the shirt and the rope, and has placed them
together in two rows: the three that are in the first row
are about to start forward, the other three turn to the
right and follow behind. The place that was decided
upon for the erection of the monument was the market¬
place of Calais, the same spot from which the tragic
procession had formerly started. There the silent group
was to stand, raised by a low step above the common life
of the market-place as though the fearful departure were
always pending.
The City of Calais refused to accept a low pedestal
because it was contrary to custom. Rodin then suggested
that a square tower, two storeys high and with simply-
cut walls, be built near the ocean and there the six
citizens should be placed, surrounded by the solitude of
the wind and the sky. This plan, as might have been
expected, was declined, although it was in harmony with
the character of the work.
If the trial had been made, there would have been an
incomparable opportunity for observing the unity of the
group, which, although it consisted of single figures, held
closely together as a whole. The figures do not
touch one another, but stand side by side like the
last trees of a hewn-down forest united only by
the surrounding atmosphere.
From every point of view the gestures stand out
clear and great from the dashing waves of the
contours; they rise and fall back into the mass of
stone Uke flags that are furled. The entire impression
of this group is precise and clear. Like all of Rodin's
compositions, this one, too, appears to be a pulsating
world enclosed within its own boundaries.
Besides the points of actual contact there is a kind
Archaeological Survey of Ind
'Love & Marriage'
of contact produced by the surrounding atmosphere
which diminishes, influences and changes the character
of the group. Contact may exist between objects far
distant from one another, like the conflux of forms
such as one sees sometimes in masses of clouds,
where the interjacent air is no separating abyss, but
rather a transition, a softly-graduated conjunction.
To Rodin the participation of the atmosphere in the
composition has always been of greatest importance. He
has adapted all his figures, surface after surface, to their
particular space and environment; this gives them the
greatness and independence, the marvellous complete¬
ness and life which distinguishes them from other works.
When interpreting nature he found, as he intensified
an expression, that, at the same time, he enhanced the
relationship of the atmosphere to his work to such
a degree that the surrounding air seemed to give more
life, more passion, as it were, to the embraced surfaces.
When Rodin concentrates the surfaces of his works
into culminating points, when he uplifts to greater height
the exalted or gives more depth to a cavity he creates
an effect like that which atmosphere produces on monu¬
ments that have been exposed to it for centuries. The
atmosphere has traced deeper lines upon these monu¬
ments, has shadowed them' with veils of dust, has
seasoned them with rain and frost, with sun and storm,
and has thus endowed them with endurance so that
they may remain imperishable through many slowly-
passing dusks and dawns.
The effect of atmosphere, which is the monumental
principle of Rodin's art, is wonderfully achieved in "The
Citizens of Calais." These sculptural forms seen from
a distance are not only rounded by the immediate
atmosphere, but by the whole sky; they catch on their
surfaces as with a mirror its moving distances so that
a great gesture seems to Uve and to force space to parti¬
cipate in its movement.
