THE ANATO
UNDERDEVELOP
With this issue The Unesco Courier begins publication of a series of
articles on the main aspects of the economic development process,
particularly as they impinge on the work of the United Nations family
of organizations. These articles are taken from a new study produced
by the United Nations as part of the World Campaign Against Hunger.
Y OF
ENT
H ARDLY any international problem is more
frequently discussed in our time than econo¬
mic development. Few questions, however, are more
complex or less understood by the non-specialist.
An important initiative within the context of economic
development was taken on July 1, 1960 when the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
launched the Freedom from Hunger Campaign.
Dr. Norman Wright, Deputy Director-General of FAO,
has said that, "from the physical and biological point of
view," there is no reason why food production should not
be expanded to meet even the world's anticipated needs,
at least to the end of the century.
It is important, however, to view this authoritative
statement realistically. It will not be possible to under¬
take and, still more, to sustain so great an increase of
food production without the help of economic and social
measures which go far beyond the improvement of
agriculture and fisheries. It is this background theme
which is treated in the present study.
A major objective of economic development is to ensure
higher earnings, and therefore increased purchasing
power, for the mass of the people in the economically
less developed countries, of which many are the concern
of the Freedom from Hunger Campaign. It is well-
known that most of the inhabitants of the poorer coun¬
tries have to spend a much higher proportion of their
earnings on food than do most of those in the countries
classified as economically advanced. The margin of
money left over for other purposes is therefore pitiably
small and this fact serves as a brake on the whole process
of economic development by which alone the lot of the
impoverished and underfed could be improved.
Some simple figures on earnings give further point to
the existing imbalance. In 1959 the average annual per
capita income was about $2,250 for the United States,
about $1,000 for some of the West European countries
and for Australia and New Zealand. For the less deve¬
loped countries as a whole it was in the neighbourhood
of $100 with an average of only $70 - $80 over great areas
of Asia, Africa and Latin America.
This imbalance is likely to become more and more
marked for, at the present time, average incomes are
increasing very much faster in the more prosperous
countries than in the rest. During the 1950's they rose
by over $200 in the United States and Western Europe
and probably by less than $10 in the other countries.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
Sunil Janah, Calcutta Ancient water wheel of the kind still used to Irrigate crops in India.
55

56
All countries in some
way underdeveloped
(Cont'd from previous page)
If countries classed today as economically underdevel¬
oped are to experience a real rise incomes and to move
into the category of the more prosperous, malnutrition is
one of the principal evils which must be attacked. It is,
however, by no means alone. Both health and education
need to be vastly improved. Technical training must
make possible a far better utilization of resources. The
economies of countries that depend for earnings on one
or two primary products must be diversified to absorb
the shocks and uncertainties of world trade. Capital
must be forthcoming for investment in roads, railways,
harbours, airfields, factories, hospitals, schools, training
colleges, as well as for industry.
It is therefore important to see hunger and malnutri¬
tion as part of a vicious circle of factors opposing econo¬
mic advance. The physical weakness to which they give
rise reduces the working capacity of many millions and
opens the way to increasing poverty and disease. Disease
is hard to combat where the hungry and poverty-stricken
are ignorant of hygiene, but their ignorance also extends
to the new techniques and methods which, if introduced
among them, could help to increase their output of food,
both to eat and to sell. Until far-reaching measures are
taken in the economic and social fields, these people will
have neither funds to start the process of economic
development nor the possibility of acquiring them by
their own efforts.
While the problem of eradicating or reducing hunger is
not one that can be approached in isolation, malnutrition
constitutes in itself a major obstacle to economic progress.
Not much is likely to be accomplished in other respects,
as long as hunger continues to afflict so many of the
world's potential producers of wealth.
Each of the two forms of solution the direct or agri¬
cultural approach to the production of food and the indi¬
rect approach through a supporting movement over the
economy as a whole must pay full attention to the needs
and problems of the farmers, not only because it is they
who produce the food but also because they still form a
majority of the world's population. Their co-operation
will be essential to any programme by which economic
progress is sought through industrialization and other
methods not connected with food production as such.
General industrial and economic development is a vital
part of Freedom from Hunger. The success of that cam¬
paign depends upon expanding markets for food as well
as upon rising production of food. Increased commercial
demand for the food that farmers produce can come
only from greater buying power on the part of consumers
who are not farmers, both in the same country and in
other countries.
Economic development, putting more people at work,'
and raising the productivity and the income of workers
generally, is the only road to greater buying power and
greater demand for food. For all these reasons, speeding
economic development is one of the essential steps
towards a world free from hunger.
What do economists mean when they call a country
underdeveloped? The expression "underdeveloped" is
difficult to define in precise terms.
All countries are in some respects underdeveloped, for
all are still in the developing process. There is none
which has reached the stage where no further progress
is possible or where no useful changes could be intro¬
duced. It is nevertheless clear that we can distinguish
between those countries which have reached an advanced
stage of economic development and those who are still in
a more primitive phase.
Probably the broadest distinction is to be found in the
distribution of the national income through various levels
of the population. Those countries which are economi¬
cally advanced have a much higher general level of pros¬
perity and superior standards of living among the mass
of their people.
(To be Lintinued)
efr \
FAR EAST
EUROPE
U.S.S.R.
NORTH AMERICA
LATIN AMERICA
AFRICA
NEAR EAST
W
U RLD'S
FARM AND
NON-FARM
POPULATIUN,
1959
Farm population
shown in white
Non-Farm
in black
