© Sunil Janah, Calcutta

THE CHALLENGE OF HUNGER
by Dr. Binay Ranjan Sen
Director-General, FAO
T
J
4 » «tf JbX '
Innumerable weak and hungry
people were driven by the
famine which gripped southern
India in 1945 to wander the
countryside in search of food.
he greatest challenge that faces mankind
today and in the coming decades is the
problem of feeding the growing population of the
world. While the world population is increasing
at an unprecedented rate, food production in the
areas of the world where most people do not have
enough to eat is lagging. Thus, today, mankind
as a whole is not being adequately fed and there
is a population increase of such dimensions that
by the end of this centurypossibly earlier
the number of mouths to be fed will be more
than double.
The implications of this situation are grave in the
extreme; yet, except for a few prophetic voices crying in
the wilderness, it is only in recent years that the leaders
of nations, the philosophers, the thinkers, the scientists
and, later still, the governments have awakened to the
perils of the food and population problem.
Indeed, FAO has tried to bring this dual problem into
focus, through the McDougall Memorial Lectures given
by Professor Arnold Toynbee (1959) and Mr. John D.
Rockefeller (1961), and through the Freedom from Hunger
Campaign, launched by FAO on July 1, 1960.
For several years FAO has pointed out the dangers
inherent in the situation. It has stressed that food
production as a whole, but especially in the underdevelop¬
ed and developing countries, is not increasing fast enough.
The rate of population growth in the developing countries
is well over 2 per cent, while the volume of agricultural
production is increasing at slightly less than 3 per cent
per annum a margin which is clearly precarious. Any
major set-back in agriculture in any part of the world
owing to climatic or other natural factors could quickly
wipe out the gains which have been so painfully won. The
latest statistics reveal the realism of this warning.
Estimates of world agricultural production in 1960-1961
(excluding Mainland China) show an increase of no more
than one per cent over production in the previous season
which is less than the estimated rate of population
growth of 1.6 per cent. Further, if Mainland China Is
included in the world agricultural production figures, the
total production for 1960-1961 would probably be less than
that of 1959-1960 instead of a one per cent increase. And
set-backs due to bad weather in several regions of the
world indicate that the 1961-1962 production may again
be small.
But let us look a little more closely at food production
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

CHALLENGE OF HUNGER (Cont'd)
Millions still go hungry
as seen in recent years. Since the Second World War
there has been a great expansion in the production of
food and agricultural goods but, unfortunately, by far the
largest part of this has taken place in Europe, in North
America and in Oceania.
All these are countries where standards of living are
high and the people generally are well fed and adequately
nourished. In the food deficient regions of Africa, Asia
and Latin America the Increases have so far barely kept
pace with the population increase.
Thus, although the Far East Region, which is the worst
nourished and most populous area in the world, has had
a good harvest for three successive years (excluding
Mainland China), the 1960-1961 food production per head
has only brought consumption levels up to those of pre-
1939.
In other words, improvements in diets which could have
been expected as a result of increases in food production
have, in fact, been largely nullified by population increase.
In Latin America, for example, per capita food production
continues to lag behind pre-war levels. In the Near East,
however, per capita production is now about 10 per cent
above the low levels prevailing in the pre-war period. In
Africa, a rather stationary situation has prevailed with
some ups and downs. These regional figures, of course,
conceal wide differences among individual countries.
A statistical study of the incidence of hunger and
malnutrition was recently made by Dr. P. V. Sukhatme,
director of the Statistics Division, FAO, based on the
international reference scale for calorie requirements and
on the variation in energy expenditure among men of the
reference age group.
Applying the FAO calorie standards as a basis of
comparison for the quantitative aspects of the diet, the
study showed that calorie supplies in Europe, North
America and Oceania are of the order of more than 3,100
calories per capita per day and exceed the requirements
by about 20 per cent.
In the Near East, Africa and Latin America they are
about equal to requirements, amounting to some 2,400.
In the Far East, the supplies are of the order of only
2,050 compared with a calorie requirement of some 2,300.
The supply thus falls short of the requirement by 11
per cent.
This gap is particularly striking when compared with
the total calorie supplies of other regions. Thus, the
shortage in the Far East is of a quantity large enough
to feed the entire population of the Near East and still
have some to spare.
Even for other regions where the overall picture looks
balanced there are wide variations within the region. In
the Near East, for instance, there is apparently enough
food in a group of countries where one-half of the popula¬
tion lives. But the other half lives in a relatively poorer
area. The calorie supplies in this area are only 2,100 to .
2,200 per capita per day. It is therefore justifiable to
conclude that many millions of people in the world still
go hungry at least for a part of their lives.
Thus, a recent study conducted in FAO has shown that
the gap of 11 per cent between the calorie supplies and
the calorie requirements in the Far East is shared by one
fifth to one fourth of the population of the region. Since
this region comprises one half of the total world popula¬
tion it is clear that a conservative estimate of the propor¬
tion of undernourished in the world is between 10 and
15 per cent. In actual numbers this means that between
300 and 500 million go hungry for part of their lives even
in normal times.
i
THE
WORLD'S LANDS
TOTAL
NEGATIVE AREAS
-cold, mountainous,
arid- n
(After Professor Dudley Stan
ACTUALLY CULTIVATED
'/.{ 2 1
AJA4
A./
2V
Á
ACRES PER HEAD
OF POPULATION
Y
POTENTIALLY INADEQUATE
USABLE SOIL
TOO ARID TOO MOUNTAINOUS TOO COLD
.

EDUCATION
NOT A LUXURY
It has been said that it is too much to expect
countries fully engaged in building their econo¬
mies to make sacrifices for education. " Sacri¬
fice " is a word I cannot accept. There is no
such thing as making "sacrifices" for education,
and the funds set aside for this purpose are
never sacrificed. On the contrary, they are an
enrichment and investment for a nation. Perhaps
the greatest intellectual task of Unesco today
is precisely this to prove that money used for
education is not just money spent, but money
invested. For education cannot be considered
a luxury. It forms part and parcel of the
equipment of every country. And all the mate¬
rial and technological equipment to develop
industry or agriculture would be wasted to a
great extent without prior investment in the
human resources needed to exploit a nation's
material resources.
René MAHEU
Acting Director-General of Unesco
in an interview on the French radio, May, 1962
Differences in protein supplies between countries are
very striking. For example, for the USA the average daily
per capital figures in grammes for total protein and
animal protein for. 1959 were 93 and 65 respectively,
while the corresponding figures for Peru were 52 and 13,
for India 51 and 6 and for Ceylon 46 and 9. There is
very concrete evidence that much ill-health and disease
due to lack of protein are prevalent in many parts of
the world. Protein malnutriton affects mainly young
children aged 1-4 years and in many underdeveloped
countries a high proportion of children suffer from it. It
can safely be concluded that existing supplies of protein,
particularly protein of good quality, are seriously
inadequate in many of the developing countries.
Taking into account the evidence of numerous small-
scale experiments on social feeding with better diets,
reported from different parts of the world, showing
increased working officiency and vigour, and also the
numerous reports on malnutrition, particularly in chil¬
dren, with effects ranging from retardation in growth to
serious diseases and death prevailing in these countries,
the incidence of malnutrition in the less-developed coun¬
tries, relative to the United Kingdom and France, may
be placed at well over 50 per cent. In other words well
over 1,000 million people in the world today suffer from
various degrees of malnutrition.
I have mentioned these figures to show the magnitude
of the food problem as it exists today and to indicate the
even greater problem which will face the world in the
coming years. It is clear that only the most heroic
efforts to increase food production and raise standards of
living in the underdeveloped countries will enable us to
feed tomorrow's six thousand million people.
The possibilities exist to bring about an increase in
food production at a much greater rate than that being
achieved at the present time. What has been done in
Europe, North America and some other parts of the world
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
Un. ted Nations
Refugees receive food and medical care at a dispensary
in South Kasai, Congo, in 1960, when emergency food g
supplies were rushed in under a relief programme to
fight famine caused by political and social upheavals.

CHALLENGE OF HUNGER (Cont'd)
Wheat yield doubled in Mexico
can also be done in the rP7ions where food deficiencies
now exist.
It is not so long ago, in terms of history, when the
standard of living and levels of nutrition in Europe were
low and famines were recurrent. But through techno¬
logical progress in agriculture and as the result of the
general economic and social development of Europe,
famine conditions are non-existent in these parts of the
world.
This freedom from hunger has been achieved even
though there has been a tenfold or more increase in
population since the times when famines and food short¬
ages were a common occurrence.
On the basis of existing scientific and technical
knowledge, food and agricultural production can be
increased substantially in all the underdeveloped coun¬
tries, a fact that needs hardly to be argued. For instance,
tests have proved that the use of improved varieties of
seed alone could ensure increases in crop yields up to 50
per cent. If such seeds are used along with improved
agricultural practices, more fertilizers, better irrigation,
mechanization, double cropping to mention a few of the
more obvious steps the increase in production of the
great range of food crops could reach several times its
present level in the underdeveloped countries.
This point was made recently by Professor D. L. Linton
of the University of Birmingham in an article in the
journal of the British Association for the Advancement
of Science. In writing on population and food in the
tropical world, he stated: "... what has been done in
Europe can be done in the tropics. It is not desirable,
as some agriculturists thought a generation ago, to
substitute European type crop rotations and cultivation
practices for those of the tropics, but it is very necessary
to find ways of bringing to tropical husbandry the
benefits of scientific knowledge and especially of appro¬
priate fertilizers.
"The average yield of wheat per acre in Pakistan today
is no more than that of England in the fifteenth century
and only a quarter of the modern yield. That it can
certainly be raised is dramatically shown by the way in
which the average wheat yield of Mexico the most
advanced of all the tropical countries has been doubled
in the last ten years. The staple food grain of Mexico,
Primitive farming techni¬
ques are one of the chief
reasons why people in
some countries are un¬
able to win from the soil
all the food it is capable
of producing. Viet-Nam
farmer (right) returning
after the day's work, car¬
ries a rudimentary plough
and harrowall he has
for working the land.
© Pierre Pittet, Geneva
however, is maize not wheat, and here the National Maize
Commission created in 1947 is undertaking an agricultural
revolution. Regional centres supply hybrid maize for
seed, specify cultivation techniques and necessary
fertilizers, and already the national harvest is three times
what it was twenty years ago.
"Even in the lands of intensive rice cultivation the
possibilities of deriving more food from the soil are far
from exhausted. The average yield of rice per acre in
It happened to me too, but I could' not see myself,
only what happened to others: saw their flesh melt
away and their skin sag and sink between their jutting
bones, saw their eyes retreat into their skulls, saw
their ribs curve out from under the skin; and what
withered the young bore doubly hard on the old and
they were emaciated twice over.
But of us all Kuti suffered the most. He had never
been a healthy child; now he was constantly ailing.
At first he asked for rice water and cried because
there was none, but later he gave up asking and
merely cried. Even in his sleep he whimpered, twist-
THE FACE OF FAMINE
ing and turning endlessly, permitting no one to rest.
Ira was gentlest with him, and tirelessly patient, nurs¬
ing him in her skinny arms and giving him most of
what came to her. But more often than not he turned
away, unable to take the rough food we offered, and
then she would hold him against her and give him her
breast, and he would pull at the parched teat and be
soothed, and for a while his thin wailing would die
away.
KAMALA MARKANDAYA
© from "Nectar In a Sieve"
Published by: Putnam and C°, London.; TheJohn Day Co. lnc.,New York,
10

AN EVIL FOR ALL MEN
The hunger which ravages immense areas of the world is an affliction for all men every¬
where; and all peoples, whether famished or well-fed, must fight this evil, for In this
struggle there is no place for neutrality.
ILYA EHRENBURG
Speaking at the "Rencontres Internationales de Geneve", 1960

India today is no more than the yield in Japan nine or
ten centuries ago, and only a quarter of the current
Japanese yield. Small wonder that the suggestion has
recently been made that the best form that western aid
to India could take might be the building of 40 or more
regionally-distributed fertilizer plants."
While the application of existing scientific and technical
knowledge to agriculture in the underdeveloped and
developing regions could, as the case of Mexico shows,
transform the food situation, there is a continuing need
of course to carry on fundamental, long-term research.
The key to progress is the enquiring mind, the search
after knowledge, the achievement of new triumphs in
science and technology. It is the thrust of new ideas
and new techniques that is the force of progress. This
is as true of agriculture as of industry, of food growing
as of food processing.
For example the development of the technique of dry
land farming in Canada, the U.S.A., and Australia which
called for the design and manufacture of specialized
machinery, has opened up the possibilities of productive
farming in a wide range of countries throughout the
world. It has given realism to hopes and plans for
producing more food in such semi-arid countries as
Tunisia, Libya, Arabia, Jordan, Saudi. Arabia and many
others elsewhere.
If the underdeveloped countries are to play their full
part in their own development and such self-help is
essential they too will ultimately have to contribute to
research on a scale comparable to that of the technically
advanced countries. Of course, research is already being
carried out in many of the underdeveloped countries but
it is restricted by the limited resources of trained
personnel facilities and equipment.
Successful economic and social development of these
countries will make it possible for them to join in the
costly, complex and highly skilled research programmes
which are characteristic of technically advanced countries.
The main problem at the moment, however, is how to
apply on as broad a scale as possible existing knowledge
and techniques so that food production can be
substantially increased season by season and year by year.
First and foremost, we must realize that agriculture
cannot be dealt with in isolation from the rest of the
economy. It cannot be pulled up by its own boot strings
from the bog of tradition, inefficient practices, prejudices,
illiteracy and poverty. It is so basic and so linked with
all aspects of life in the underdeveloped countries that
any plan or programme to increase productivity must be
an integral part of an overall development scheme if it
is to succeed.
This fact is stark enough when it is realized that 80
per cent or more of the people in these countries live by
some sort of farming mostly subsistence farming, result¬
ing in a life always threatened by serious food shortage,
if not famine. It is among these masses of illiterate
people, numbered in their millions, that hunger or mal¬
nutrition is a life-long affliction.
The prerequisite to any progress is, as I have said, an
overall economic and social development plan and in this
plan agriculture must be the cornerstone. Such a plan
calls for increased investment of capital, materials,
services and manpower. While a large part of the capital
needed must come from within the country, the various
international agencies or countries in a position to offer
bilateral assistance or private commercial enterprise must
assist to the extent possible and in a growing measure.
Any long-term plan to increase agricultural production
involves many sectors of national life and at various
levels. For instance, adequate government administrative
and extension services must be organized; training and
instruction in improved techniques must be provided if
the introduction of improved tools and equipment is to be
effective; facilities must be made available for the
development of improved varieties of seed, the use of
more and better fertilizers and for the development of
' irrigation schemes and so on.
To take action along any of these lines calls for capital
investment of one kind or another and for personnel
training schemes. This latter requirement is of front rank 11
CONT'D ON PAGE 14

POLYGON OF THIRST & HUNGER
In northeastern Brazil are some 300,000 square
miles of parched land where 23 million people
live in constant fear of the periodical droughts
and resulting famines which have given the area
the name of "'polygon of thirst and hunger." Some
dates have been burned into the memory of these
people: 1877, 1899, 1915, 1957. Worse than the
dearth of rainfall is its irregularity. When, as
sometimes happens, rains fail to materialize for
two orthree years running, disaster strikes. Water
has to be brought from afar and measured out
parsimoniously (left). Herds are wiped out and
entire towns go hungry. Below, a farmer contem¬
plates the sun-bleached bones of his cattle.
Droughts set off a mass exodus of peopie from
the Polygon (right), seeking work on the plan¬
tations and in the factories in southern Brazil.
*-
*^*ij -^.
*¿ -'- **»
...1 ' Pr-
->'.'. ". 'y-.. ©***. >.-' ir
12

*<tJtí>
" ' . > . ». - Ri» - .
. * r v.- -T
~ ... * ...»'* . . -. -..' ."<
-"* £- f.- ' ' .*
. * .
. T't -
13
Photos © O Cruzeiro and Mánchete, Rio de Janeiro

CHALLENGE OF HUNGER (Cont'd)
A literate farmer is a better farmer
14
importance. Even with capital, equipment and facilities
available, little effective progress will be made without
trained personnel. It is the lack of such personnel that
characterizes underdeveloped countries; therefore, any
development plan must take into account the need for
training at all levels, particularly, in the first instance,
at practical workaday levels.
One of the most valuable of the services provided by
FAO and other international organizations has been, and
remains, technical training programmes. We have carried
out such training in many ways, especially through
working parties, seminars and training centres. In most
cases these have been essentially practical in instruction.
For instance, some years ago FAO was concerned with
the Government of India in setting up training centres to
teach illiterate fishermen how to operate and maintain
outboard engines, to handle Improved types of fishing gear
and equipment, and to navigate by compass and chart.
In a six months course, 80 per cent of which was practical
demonstration, these fishermen were taught to sail to
and from fishing grounds far out of sight of land and
far beyond the near shore grounds which they had always
fished in catamarans and other local craft. The first two
of these training centres were so successful that a number
of others have been opened up in India.
Instruction in improved techniques, imparting the
practical "know how," is the key to all our technical
assistance work. Every expert we send into the field has
local assistants to work with him. In this way, personnel
are trained while the job is being done, with the object of
their being able to carry on the work when the expert
leaves the country.
Any plan for the economic development of a country
must take into account sociological factors, and this is
particularly true in the agricultural sector. Farmers and
rural dwellers are proverbially conservative people, having
very little margin of income to undertake application of
new ideas and new techniques, deeply rooted in traditional
ways life and embedded in a social structure which resists
change and experiment.
WE ARE ALL
EQUALLY
RESPONSIBLE
...We should like to express Our sincere appre¬
ciation for the highly beneficial work which the
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organi¬
zation is undertaking to establish fruitful
accord among nations, to promote the moderni¬
zation of agriculture especially in countries in


the process of development, to alleviate the
sufferings of hunger-stricken peoples.
...Mindful of Our role of universal Father, We
feel obliged solemnly to stress what We have
in another connexion stated: "We are all equally
responsible for the undernourished peoples...
Therefore, it is necessary to educate one's
conscience to the sense of responsibility which
weighs upon each and everyone, especially
upon those who are more blessed with this
world's goods."
POPE JOHN XXIII
Encyclical Letter "Mater et Magistra", May 15, 1961
As I said earlier, a great majority of them in the
underdeveloped and developing countries are subsistence
farmers who do not own the patches of land they till and
are often in debt. As a result, the poor harvests they
reap have to be divided, one part to pay off their debts
or the interest on them and the other part to live on.
Furthermore, even where such farmers are owners of the
land, inheritance has resulted in fragmentation of
holdings to a point where the area worked is so small
that the fanner cannot produce enough food to feed
himself and his family throughout the year.
It is obvious that in the circumstances, an essential
condition for the development of agriculture is land
reform. This is a very complex, intricate and politically
difficult question, and one which can only be tackled
effectively by the government of the country concerned.
We, in FAO, have been closely concerned with these
problems of agrarian reform for many years. Many
governments have asked for our advice, and have acted
upon it. Even so, the problem remains acute and is of
such a nature as to hold back progress. The mere passage
of land reform bills is not enough. These must be made
effective operationally at all levels, from the government
department down to the farmer. Such reform measures
are but a start towards tackling the problem.
PROBABLY the only way to overcome the obstacles
presented by traditions and prejudices, and
the established patterns of life in rural communities, is
through education in its broadest sense. Obviously, any
effort to introduce new ideas, even in the shape of a
useful tool, must be done with sympathy and under¬
standing, if it is to be accepted. And communicating new
ideas and techniques is very difficult if only the spoken
word can be used, and that just to a limited extent.
Even the most elementary education, that of learning
to read and write, smooths the path for people who are
trying to introduce new techniques and equipment. It is
axiomatic that a literate farmer has a much better
chance of understanding a reform and development
programme and grasping the opportunities offered than
does one who can only rely on his memory to understand
and make use of what he has been told.
Thus, the progress of any development plan for
agriculture depends to a large extent on overcoming the
obstacle of illiteracy. And while practical demonstrations
will enable the adults to understand and adopt new
techniques, children and the younger generation need to
be educated. They learn quickly and it is on them that
the pace of future progress depends.
From what I have said it is quite clear that no national
or international programme of assistance on the present-
day scale is big enough to encompass all that should be
done. The problem is too vast to be left entirely to
governmental action.
For many years I have lived with this problem and when
I became Director-General of FAO in 1956 I became more
and more conscious of the fact that all we had done so
far through international and bilateral aid was insuffi¬
cient. I felt that the problem could only be tackled
effectively if people everywhere in the world became fully
conscious of its nature and magnitude. It was with these
ideas in mind that I proposed the "Freedom from Hunger
Campaign" so that all men and women and children in
all countries could join in the struggle to eliminate
hunger.
Clearly we cannot hope to achieve victory in a few
years, so this is a struggle which must go on for a genera¬
tion, even several generations. In order to make that
possible it is necessary that people in all countries should
be fully informed as to the nature of the task and of its
significance to the future well-being of people everywhere.
