One of the world's great civilizations, the Mayan, vanished
from pre-Columbian Central America in the I Oth century
A.D. When the Conquistadores arrived 600 years later
they saw only a few vestiges and ruins of their glorious past.
Amazing architects and artists, the Mayas built numerous
cities throughout their empire, some of which are still
being uncovered from the tangle of jungle which has hidden
then for centuries. The unique character of Maya art comes
from the treatment of the serpent which has left its mark
on all the civilizations of Central America and southern
Mexico. Above, copy of a relief found at Chichen Itza, Yuca¬
tan (Mexico) representing the famous "Plumed Serpent" with
human head. Below, a small temple at Pelenque, in Mexico.
26
Soviet mathematicians have succeeded in deci¬
phering the hieroglyphic script of the ancient
Mayas of Mexico and Central America with the
help of modern electronic computing machines.
Last year at a session of the All-Union Mathe¬
matical Congress, historians and linguists and
hundreds of other people packed the assembly
hall of the Leningrad Mining Institute to hear a
famous Soviet mathematician, S.L. Sobolev, an¬
nounce the deciphering achievment in a special
paper. Dr. Sobolev is Director of the Soviet Insti¬
tute of Mathematics, Siberian Division, of the
Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R., who was in
charge of the work on the Maya manuscripts. The
article below tells the fascinating story of the
Maya manuscripts, why electronic computers
were used, and how the deciphering was done.
When Europeans first reached Central America
they discovered on the Yucatan Peninsula the
highly-developed civilization of the Mayas. The Mayas
had built awe-inspiring cities and possessed their own
system of writing. ActuaUy it was the only system of
writing »ever invented by any of the aboriginal inhabitants
of America. The Maya priests possessed astronomical
observatories very much like those of Ulugh Beg In Cen¬
tral Asia, the huge stone edifices of which were designed
for the study of the sky with the naked eye. (1) The
calendar constructed by the Maya priests was, despite
its Intricacy, more accurate than our present Gregorian
calendar. How many centuries' observation must have
gone into »the production of such a calendar!
The Europeans, however, showed no Interest in the
Maya calendar; the Conquistadores destroyed the Maya
state and hurried the Maya books; Maya idolatry was
replaced by Christianity, Mayan young men were sent to
Catholic schools, and in a very short time the secret of
the Maya system of writing was forgotten, no one could
read the old manuscripts and, indeed, very few of them
were left to read.
(1) Ulugh Bey (1394-1449) a grandson of Tamerlane, founded about
1420 a splendid observatory at Samarkand. Under his patronage
astronomical tables were drawn up which constitute one of the great
legacies in astronomy that the Hast has bequeathed io the West.

Cryptogram technique used
to solve linguistic enigma
COMPUTER DECIPHERS
MAYA HIEROGLYPHS
by Felix Shirokov
Lecturer, Moscow Power Institute
i i i i in i n m
u it
m u it
mi it.
Ill mi II II i I
II IUI HU H I'
. I II IUI IUI H <
I I II IUI I" U "I
Novosibirsk Institute of Mathematics, U.S.S.R.
Soviet scientists using cryptogram -deciphering techniques and modern electronic computers have cracked the Mayan script. Photo shows two perfo¬
rated cards used in the operations. Computers took only 40 hours to do the job for which the human brain would have needed thousands of years.
Only three manuscripts have been preserved; they are
now in museums in Madrid, Dresden and Paris. The
Paris codex was in a bad state from the time of its
acquisition and the Dresden codex was badly damaged
during the Second World War and may be considered
as non-existent; fortunately this »manuscript had been
published and research workers are able to use a printed
copy. There are also a number of inscriptions on stone,
done in a special "lapidary" script. These, taken
together, constitute the sources of our knowledge of the
Maya system of writing.
The language of the Mayas, on the contrary, is well
known. There exist two Maya-Spanish dictionaries the
Motul and one compiled by Brasseur de Bourbourg. The
Maya words in these dictionaries (there are about 10,000
in the Motul) are transcribed in accordance with the old
Spanish spelling.
There are also some texts in the Maya language, such
as the Chilam Balam books of chronicles and prophecies
written by Maya priests using the same Spanish alphabet.
The scribes had not much idea of how to break up
phrases into their constituent words and the Chilam
Balam books contain some very lengthy word-monsters.
Furthermore, since the sounds of the Maya language
were different from those of Spanish, the scribes used
combinations of letters for each sound. It is not known,
however, exactly what sounds these letter combinations
were intended to represent.
The Chilam Balam books are based partly on original
Maya documents and describe events that took place at
the time of the colonization of the country. Lastly, there
are about a million people in Guatemala and Honduras
who speak a Maya language that differs very considerably
from that spoken four hundred years ago owing to the
changes that have taken place since the Spanish conquest.
Diego de Landa, second Archbishop of Yucatan, compiled
a book entitled Report on the Affairs of Yucatan (1566).
He believed the Maya symbols to be the letters of an
alphabet and reproduced them as such in his book.
Scholars have since tried to read the Maya manuscripts
by using de Landa's alphabet but have always been
unsuccessful. The "alphabet" actually bore little
resemblance to the symbols in the manuscripts and,
furthermore, it has been shown that the Maya system of
writing is not alphabetic.
Many years devoted to deciphering the Maya writings
have produced some results; symbols indicating dates
have been identified, individual words have been read,
and, finally, a Leningrad scholar Y. V. Knorozov, has
succeeded in reading whole phrases; Knorozov proved that
the Maya script is hieroglyphic and that the symbols may
27
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

COMPUTER DECIPHERS MAYA HIEROGLYPHS (Cont'd)
A gigantic crossword puzzle
represent a sound, a syllable or a whole concept (ideo¬
gram).
Such was the situation when three young scholars of
the Institute of Mathematics, Siberian Division of the
Academy of Sciences, tackled it; the three mathemati¬
cians were E. V. Yevreinov, Y. G. Kossarev and V. A. Usti¬
nov, »all working at the Novosibirsk Institute of Mathe¬
matics.
On the one hand there were the hieroglyphic manu¬
scripts (the mathematicians used the Madrid and Dresden
MSS) in which each character might depict any one of
the "elements" of the language a sound, a syllable or
a word. On the other hand there were the Chilam Balam
books and the dictionaries from which the elements of the
language were known. The hieroglyphic symbols had to
be correlated with these language elements and for this a
process of mathematical substitution was necessary; in
other words, for the manuscripts to be readable the
symbols had to be replaced by the language elements they
represented. There are altogether some 400 hieroglyphs
in the manuscripts, about a half of which had not been
identified when the mathematicians hegan their work.
S ucH a substitution is not difficult in principle.
All you have to do Is to sit down and try out
all possible substitutions in all possible combinations until
you strike the correct one. Unfortunately this is impossi¬
ble in practice because the number of possible substitu¬
tions is such that all the people on earth, all those
living In the past, the present and the future, would
never complete the task. And to find the solution by
guesswork would be as improbable as getting an ape
armed with a typewriter to write Alice in Wonderland.
This is where the electronic calculator, the modern,
rapidly functioning »computing machine come into the
picture. This electronic secretary was given the job of
solving a unique crossword puzzle that contained several
thousand words in an ancient language. But before the
solution could be found the appropriate data had to be
fed into the machine.
The Maya manuscripts were the work of different
scribes living at different times and the hieroglyphs
looked different when drawn by a different hand. The
first thing, then, was to identify individual hieroglyphs.
In this the Novosibirsk group received considerable help
from Y. V. Knorozov.
The scholars adopted an entirely new principle; instead
of trying to discover the meaning of separate symbols they
tackled the text as a whole. The statistical method, the
basic method used by the Novosibirsk scholars, can be
applied only »to a complete text. Furthermore, the
correctness of the "substitution" would be guaranteed
only when a text was readable and understandable as a
whole and in connexion with drawings accompanying it.
The entire mass of words constituting the Maya
language was arranged in a number of sequences that
would enable any word to be found from any of the letters
it contained, initial, medial or final; this is actuaUy what
we do when we are solving a crossword puzzle when some,
of the letters of a word are known we fill in the others
according to those already in the squares.
The Motul dictionary and the entire Chilam Balam
text (about 60,000 words) and the symbols for calendar
dates were also arranged in order and codified; Maya-
Russian glossaries were compiled for such subjects as the
animal and vegetable kingdoms, crafts, deities (with
ritual, sacrifices, etc.), astronomical and chronological
terminology and, lastly, the words most frequently
occurring.
It was possible to hazard a guess at the contents of the
Maya manuscripts from the drawings on them and the
thematic glossaries helped the search for the necessary
words. All this mass of material was recorded on
perforated cards and magnetic drums, the computing
machine's auxiliary memory. The hieroglyphic characters
were then analyzed in the same way. Finally, the
drawings in the manuscript were broken down into
elements and codified. The whole material thus obtained
was then processed statisticaUy.
Y ou will remember how in Poe's story, The
Gold Bug, William Legrand found his gold
bug wrapped in a piece of parchment on which was
written a cryptogram compiled by William Kidd the
buccaneer. It began.
53TT + 305))6*; 4826)4 -T .)4 T )
You will also remember that Legrand counted the
number of times each symbol occurred in the cryptogram
and arranged them in descending order of frequency.
Legrand assumed that Captain Kidd would not be
capable of compiling a complicated cryptogram, and
therefore decided, that each symbol in the cryptogram
would represent a letter of the English alphabet. Legrand
knew that the letter "e" occurs more frequently than any
CONT'D ON PAGE 31
28

Photos Novosibirsk Institute of Mathematics
PEOPLE OF THE CALENDAR
Soviet scientists E. Yevreinov, Y. Kos-
sarov and V. Ustinov compare Maya
manuscripts with the deciphering
results obtained by their computer.
Manuscripts were found to be priestly
books. Fragment, right, describes
how the gods of good and evil made
their fires. Left, a fragment from a
Maya priestly calendar indicating
when the maize god, the god of death
and other gods fired pottery. The
Mayas were amazing astronomers and
mathematicians and produced the
most precise calendar known to this
day. Scholars have long known that
the Maya monuments do not contain
a single ornament, relief or frieze
that is not connected with some date.
There is no other case In the world of
such subordination of architecture to
the calendar. The Mayas used not one
but two types of notation for their
numbers. These systems were deci¬
phered many years ago. Shown
above right are: glyphs with varying
human heads and bar-and-dot numerals
29

MAYAS VISIT THEIR ANCESTORS
Since the middle of the 19th century archaeologists have
been uncovering the remains of Maya cities in the tropical
forests of Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras and Mexico.
The descendants of the Mayas still speak dialects resem¬
bling the language of their ancestors. Here, an Indian
family visits a museum in Guatemala City where many of
these treasures made by their forebears reliefs, sculp¬
ture and stelae are preserved. Whether the sudden
collapse and disappearence of the remarkable Maya
civilization was caused by wars, destructive epidemics or
a natural disaster of some kind is still a complete mystery.
Photos © P. Aimasy
30
F l.í
f Ml j*À

COMPUTER DECIPHERS MAYA HIEROGLYPHS (Cont'd)
From Poes gold bug to the seven of diamonds
other in the English language and is followed in descend¬
ing order of frequency by a, o, i, d, h, n... This gave him
the clue.
The symbol "8" was the most frequent in the crypto¬
gram and Legrand therefore identified it as the letter
"e". Then he guessed the definite article "the" and
so on, filling in the missing letters on the basis of those
already identified until he had the whole message: "A
good glass in the bishop's hostel in the devil's seat forty-
one degrees and thirteen minutes..."
The Maya priests were probably no more efficient as
"cipher clerks" than the bold Captain Kidd and it was
assumed that their hieroglyphic "cryptograms" were
compiled by the same method. The Novosibirsk mathe¬
maticians therefore decided to try and solve them by the
"Edgar Allan Poe" method.
In any language, be it Russian, Spanish or Maya, every
language element (sound, letter, syllable, etc.) occurs with
a frequency typical for the given language. An English
text written in a phonetic alphabet, say that of Bernard
Shaw, would be easy to decipher. It would only be
necessary to find the frequency of occurrence of all the
symbols used and compare it with the known frequency
of English sounds.
^>
tmKm
I
&3
The Novosibirsk mathematicians used their
electronic computer to find the frequency of
letter combinations in the Maya language as revealed by
the Chilam Balam books. Then the computer found the
frequency of occurrence of the hieroglyphs in the Madrid
and Dresden manuscripts. After that, there remained
only the job of correlating the frequencies. But here
they came up against a snag.
Let us imagine that Captain Kidd, instead of terrorizing
the Caribbean on his buccaneering trips, took a devoted
interest in entomology. Any tiny insect would then have
had greater significance for him than the sordid yellow
metal. He might even have written a Treatise on Gnats
and enciphered it. The combination of letters "gn,"
which is not typical for English, would have occurred very
frequently in the cryptogram and would have upset
William Legrand's statistical picture, even if Legrand
himself had been profoundly interested in insects; the
"gnat effect" would have provided greater difficulty for
him.
The Novosibirsk scholars came up against a similar
"gnat effect" in their work; the hieroglyphic manuscripts
and the Chilam Balam books belong to different epochs
and deal with different subjects.
The simplest hypothesis was that one hieroglyph
represented a pair of letters in the Maya language (had
each character represented a letter the script would have
been alphabetic). This was the working hypothesis
adopted by the mathematicians. The frequency of
occurrence of the hieroglyphs and that of the »pairs of
letters, however, simply refused to coincide the symbols
could not be directly identified with the letter pairs.
Could their working hypothesis possible be wrong? No!
the cause of the trouble was the specific nature of the
texts. Let us try to show by an example what the
mathematicians had to do.
Let us take a pack of 52 playing cards and
i arrange it by suits in the order spades, clubs,
diamonds, hearts, with the cards in each suit proper
sequence from ace to king. This we shall call the "nor¬
mal" order of the cards. Then let us shuffle each suit
separately and replace the cards with the suits in the
same order. The pack will now be arranged in a "spe¬
cial" order that will not differ very greatly from the
"normal" order. The cards have been shuffled by suits,
that is, within a relatively small group of cards; we may
guarantee that the seven of diamonds (card 33 in the
"normal" sequence) will not be in the first place but
will lie somewhere between the twenty-seventh and
thirty-ninth card.
In a specific text (as opposed to a "normal" one) there
is also a shuffling of letter combinations that disturbs the
normal order of frequencies. But, as we saw from the
playing »card example, the displacement is within fairly
small limits. The frequency of a pair of letters does not
change very greatly. Even in the Treatise on Gnats the
"gn" pair would not occupy first place in the frequency
list (diamond cards remain within the range of the
diamond suit).
The mathematicians took advantage of this fact and,
Instead of comparing individual characters with the
31
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

COMPUTER DECIPHERS MAYA HIEROGLYPHS (Cont'd)
Easter Island writing future target
individual pairs of letters, began to compare groups of
each. To be more precise they found which hieroglyphs
occur most frequently, the overall frequency of the first
two most frequent, the overall frequency of the first three,
and so on. They then did the same for the pairs of
letters.
In this case they found a marvelous coincidence. The
frequencies of the letter combinations in the Chilam
Balam texts almost completely coincided with the
frequencies of the hieroglyphic symbols. Half the words
in the Chilam Balam texts (frequency 50 per cent) began
with one of seventy pairs of letters, and half the
hieroglyphic groups in the Madrid and Dresden
manuscripts began with one of seventy-three hieroglyphs.
According to the working hypothesis the meanings of the
seventy-three symbols should be found among the
seventy letter combinations.
The same work was done for other groups in the Chilam
Balam texts and the hieroglyphic manuscripts, for
instance, for the final pairs of letters, the computer being
used for all these operations.
In this way, step by step, identifying and comparing,
using the computer to analyze the thematic glossaries and
calculate frequencies, the three Novosibirsk mathemati¬
cians deciphered the Madrid and Dresden manuscripts in
full. They employed only forty hours of the computer's
working time and even of that forty hours a considerable
amount of time was used up in setting the machine to
programmes of work.
Thus the key to one of the greatest puzzles in world
history was found.
The scholars are now preparing a three-volume report
on their work. The first volume will contain the Madrid
and Dresden manuscripts with an alphabetical translitera¬
tion in the Maya language and translations into Spanish
and Russian. The second volume will contain a complete
catalogue of the symbols and the third, une programmes
for the computer and the results of the mathematical
analysis.
The manuscripts proved to »be »priests' boàks of auguries,
prophecies, etc. To the left there are dates from the
Maya 260-day cycle (the Maya "year" contained thirteen
months and the "month" twenty days which gives a
cycle of 260 days).
This differed from another Mayan calendar, a true
calendrical year of 365 days, admirably calculated by the
Mayas and divided into 18 months each of 20 days and a
supplementary five-day month. For each day of the
sacred calendar there is a description of the activities of
the deities the gods fire pottery, make idols, decorate
temples, tend bees and crops (in other words they engage
in the same activities as the Mayas themselves). The
Mayas, following the recommendation of the priestly
books, planted trees, fired pottery, etc., at propitious times.
The extensive Maya pantheon contained good and evil
beings. There were the gods of the winds black, yellow,
white and red; the Lord of the Skulls and the young
maize god (maize was the chief Maya crop) ; the kindly
god of the North Star and the malevolent yellow jaguar.
There was even a goddess allotted to people who had been
hanged, for the Maya people believed that beyond the
grave there existed a special paradise for these
unfortunates...
Here are some examples from the translation:
The young maize god fires pottery from white clay;
The god of death, the destroyer, fires a pot;
The god of the North Star fires a pot;
The yellow jaguar fires a pot.
There are some phrases that sound very modern,
although the Mayas no doubt pu7, a different meaning
into them; the legend to one of the drawings reads:
"The woman's burden is the god of war."
The work on these manuscripts has been completed but
there are other systems.of writing that have not yet been
»deciphered. A special group of philologists in Novosibirsk
contemplates working on the Rongo-Rongo inscriptions
from Easter Island.
The use of mathematical methods and computing
machines in the most diverse fields of science and culture
is typical of our age. This amazing piece of work on the
Maya manuscripts is only the beginning of the applica¬
tion of mathematics to the study of linguistics and
history.
32
