As part of the Freedom from Hunger
Campaign, the Food and Agriculture Orga¬
nization and other U.N. bodies have been
preparing a series of 16 "Basic Studies"
to help citizens in discussing the great
issues involved (see bibliography, page 64).
In a general foreword to the series, the
FAO chief, Dr. B.R. Sen, notes: "These
volumes... cover broad subjects such as
the adequacy of food levels in the world,
the possibilities of producing more food
and the ways in which economic develop¬
ment and training in the newly-develop¬
ing countries can raise buying power and
thus help hungry people to buy more food
for themselves." "These studies," writes
Dr. Sen, "attempt to summarize the known
facts... and thus provide useful and reliable
background material for study groups and
public discussions." The Basic Studies aim
not only at stimulating thought and action
on the problem of hunger, but also to bring
about "an ever-expanding understanding of
the related social, economic and technical
issues." The agencies co-operating with
FAO in producing this series are ILO,
WHO, Unesco, WMO, and the U.N. itself.
The article below is taken from the U.N.
Basic Study, "Population and Food Supply"
which is to be published this summer.
Prepared for the U.N. by the Population
Reference Bureau it seeks to present an
objective picture of world population in
relation to the food problem.
GREATEST INCREASES . in
population growth are taking place
today in regions where tempo of
economic development is slowest
and food deficiencies most pro¬
nounced. Africa's present popula¬
tion of well over 200 million, for
example, is expected to more than
double in the next 40 years. Today
more than half of Africa's people
are under twenty years of age.
F
38
rom a relatively rare creature over half a
million years ago, man (or proto-man) moved
upward from tens or hundreds of thousands to tens and
hundreds of millions by the beginning of the Christian
era. For the time of Christ's birth, scholars very tenta¬
tively set the total world population in the neighbourhood
of 200-300 million.
This guess is probably as good as the assumption gene¬
rally accepted that this number approximately doubled
by the middle of the 17th century to 500 million. The
thousand million mark was reached about two centuries
later by 1850; and in the succeeding 110 years the
3,000 million mark has been reached.
Today world population is increasing at a rate which
would double the number in about 50 years, and certain

FOOD
populations numbered in the millions are growing so fast
they would double in 25 years. This sudden increase is
explained not only by the rise in the birth rate but by
the sharp decline almost everywhere in "the adult and
especially the child death rate.
Moderate population growth now extends over all
Europe (including the U.S.S.R.), northern America, tem¬
perate South America, Japan and Australia, containing
about a quarter of the human race. Yet even in these
areas the low death rate is resulting in a rapid increase.
In the U.S.A. for instance the present rate of three chil¬
dren per family is increasing the population by almost
50 per cent per generation.
Asia with now more than 1,600 million people (excluding
Asian U.S.S.R.) may have 2,000 million by 1975 and

Aîmasy, Paris

AND PEOPLE
3,900 million by 2000, according to a U.N. analysis. A
recent report of the U.N. Economic Commission for Asia
and the Far East (ECAFE) indicates that if present trends
continue, the population of the region will nearly double
in the next 30 years and will then almost equal the entire
world population today.
The ECAFE report points out that the Western world
witnessed a slow, gradual transition from high death rates
and birth rates, to low death and birth rates, in step
with a similarly slow and gradual improvement in econo¬
mic and social conditions. "Per capita income, nutrition,
housing and sanitation improved, the death rate gra¬
dually fell, and after a time lag the birth rate also fell.
But in Asia and the Far East... mortality has fallen before
any major improvement in social and economic conditions
has occurred. (For example Denmark took 50 years to
reduce the death rate from 20 to 14 per thousand; in
Ceylon it occured in one year 1947-1948 but with no drop
in birth rate).
The ECAFE report contends that the rapid population
growth may well act as a brake on economic develop¬
ment of most of the countries of Asia. "This is all the
more true," it says, "since the " emigration outlet, which
provided substantial relief to population pressure in
Europe during its demographic transition, is not avail¬
able to Asian countries to any significant extent."
The combined population of Africa (240 million in 1960)
and Latin America (206 million in 1960) is less than a
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
39

FOOD & PEOPLE (Cont'd)
Four general
world trends
third that of Asia. Population density is lower and land-
resource possibilities are more favourable. The U.N.
"Basic Study" on Population and Food Supply points out,
however, that actual living conditions over large areas of
Latin America are marginal, and cites the case of north¬
eastern Brazil where famine conditions are reported
"despite the fact that Brazil's agricultural resources are
quite adequate to feed a much larger population than the
current 66 millions. With a per capita annual income of
less than $250, 42 per cent of the population under 15 years
of age and with half the adult population illiterate, the
difficulties of utilizing available resources to meet the
needs of the people of Brazil effectively are enormous."
From this the U.N. report draws a general conclusion:
"The persistence of poverty and hunger in the face of the
very real potential for food production and economic
development... demonstrates a tragic truth: little advan¬
tage is gained from such a potential if the ability and
capacity to exploit the natural resources and to build
up social and economic capital do not proceed hand-in-
hand with population growth."
T-
pi
he Population and Food Supply study then
oints out that despite many attempts to
define and measure "over-population" and "under-pop-
ulation", no generally accepted indicators have been
devised. Population density, while it is sometimes a useful
indicator of population pressure on agricultural resources,
does not take into account the relative abundance or
availability through commerce of other natural resources,
the extent of industrial development, or the degree of
technological progress and other factors which are
important in determining the welfare of the population.
"In recent years," the report states, "attention has
turned increasingly toward analysis of the relation be¬
tween rates of population growth and factors influencing
economic development, particularly for the under¬
developed countries where the need for economic progress
has taken on such importance."
The U.N. study summarizes the four world trends which
influence the social and economic situation: the first
is a decline in the percentage of agricultural population,
rapid in the developed regions, slower in the less-
developed regions. The second is an increase in urban
population proportionately slower in the developed
countries than in the under-developed ones. Third is the
decline in intercontinental migration since the early part
of the 20th century, as contrasted with its great importance
in the 19th. Fourth is the relatively rapid decline of death
rates in the developing regions in recent years compared
with the slower previous decline in the industrialized
countries, without comparable declines in birth rates.
The effects of rapid population growth, the report con¬
tinues, compared with slow or moderate growth are sev¬
eral: 1. It tends to increase the pressure of the farm popu¬
lation on land which may already be densely settled,
further complicating the effects of excessive fragmenta¬
tion and land holdings so small as to be ineffecient;
2. It increases the urgent need for capital investment to
equip the growing labour force productively;
3. It tends to reduce the amount of capital that can be
40 invested in productive equipment. The capacity to pro¬
duce does not rise proportionately with the rise in popu¬
lation in countries with a labour-surplus, though the
The rise in world popu¬
lation since the Augus¬
tan Age of the Roman
Empire is illustrated in
this drawing recently
published by the"Gior-
nale d'ltalia" of Rome.
$*=«
v.v.-.-.
fflp
£X!X:X
...
-v.v.v.v
vXvXv
t
In the time of Augustus *Mi*5«
*
NVV
Nit
300 millions
In 1500
600 millions
In 1850
1,200 millions
In 1960
2,900 millions
In 2210
200,000 millions!
V. V
4v>
i »
%v
vX
» * »
^ *
"
v.v.v.v
"
need to consume does, and this puts heavy demands on
limited capital to meet social needs that are not imme¬
diately productive in economic terms but are nevertheless
essential (such as schools and hospitals) ;
4. It results in a population with a relatively low per¬
centage of people In the effectively productive age groups,
so that on the average each person of working age will
have to support a large number of dependents.
"In terms of simple arithmetic,* it seems evident that
the problem of achieving the needed increases in food
production during the next decades would be made easier,
and the risk of failures would be diminished, if the popu¬
lation were to increase less than present trends indicate
for the economically less developed regions of the world.
Actually, the mathematics of the problem are not so
simple; it is not just a question of addition of a larger or
smaller number of consumers to share a certain quantity
From here on this article ls composed oí verbatim passages from
"Population and Food Supply."

FUTURE PROSPECTS
" | N the world picture of food needs and
population growth, these four features
deserve to be highlighted:
1. Demographic changes take place slow¬
ly. There is no prospect that there will be a
sudden decline in the world birth rate. Bar¬
ring catastrophes, there is a good prospect
that the world death rate will decline still
further. Hence, during the immediate future
extending over the next few decades, there
is every prospect that population growth will
continue at a rapid rate.
2. A vast increase in the production of
food to meet the inevitable population in¬
creases over the next decades is imperative
if appalling disasters are to be averted and
the possibility of an orderly and constructive
transition to a satisfactory, stable balance
between food and population is to be
assured.
3. If such a transition is to be achieved, the
magnitude of the operation must be re¬
cognized. It is all very well to say that
"much more food can be produced." To
create the technology and the education and
the storage and transportation facilities and
everything else required to bring this transi¬
tion to pass is an operation on a scale far
vaster than anything contemplated in the
plans either of individual governments or of
the co-operative undertakings now contem¬
plated by United Nations agencies.
4. Indefinite multiplication of people on a
finite planet is impossible. If the rate of pop¬
ulation growth which is occuring in some
areas of the world today were to be applied
to the total human population of the planet,
within only two or three centuries the entire
land surface of the earth would be covered
with human beings."
from the U.N. Basic Study. " Population and food Supply "
of food, for people are producers as well as consumers.
While population growth adds to requirements, it also
contributes through increasing manpower to the possi¬
bilities of producing food and other goods.
With few exceptions, the experts who have studied this
question agree that the outlook would be far more favour¬
able if the present rates of population increase in the
under-developed countries could be slowed down by mode¬
ration of birth" rates. In fact, some experts hold that
unless the growth of population becomes slower in the
near future, there is little hope of improving the condi¬
tions of life in many of these countries, or even to hold
the present low levels of living may prove to be difficult.
In the case of India, for example, it is clear that the
present rate of population growth is a very serious im¬
pediment to the country's economic development and the
solution of its food problem. A.J. Coale and E.M. Hoover
have worked out a series of three models to show how the
conditions appear in 1986. In each model it is assumed
that the death rate will fall. by more than 40 per cent
by 1986.
Model I assumes that fertility begins to decline imme¬
diately and continues down to half its present level by
1981.
Model II assumes no change in fertility until 1966,
and then a decline so sharp that fertility is cut in half
by 1981.
Model III assumes that fertility will remain at the pre¬
sent level until 1986.
Under Model I, with an immediate decline in the birth
rate, the population will grow to 589 million by 1986. Since
there is no immediate prospect of an effective lowering
of the Indian birth rate, this model is mainly of theore¬
tical interest. But if India's birth rate had miraculously
started to decline in 1959, her economy and the welfare
of her people would be far more advanced in 1986 than
under either of the other alternatives.
Under existing conditions, there is a definite possibility
that Model II might be achieved. If the birth rate should
begin to drop sharply after 1966, the population would
grow to 634 million by 1986.
Under Model III, with the birth rate remaining at its
present level, a population of 775 million is the prospect
for 1986. That is nearly double the present population.
C;OALE and Hoover find that continuing high
i fertility would present a major barrier to an
economic break-through. The proportion of children
under 15 in 1986 would be so high (42 per cent, compared
with 30 per cent for the low projection) as to constitute
a decisive handicap to economic development.
By that time, only 10.1 per cent of India's national
income would be available for productive investment.
With almost twice as many people, each year a larger
proportion of capital would be diverted for essential social
services, such as health and education and for non¬
productive investment, such as housing. In contrast,
under the low-fertility pattern of Model I, 14.7 per cent
of the national income would be available for productive
investment.
The difference between 10.1 per cent and 14.7 per cent
of the national income may not seem impressive. But for
a nation struggling to emerge from a marginal agrarian
culture, it might well mean the difference between victory
and defeat in the battle for economic self-sufficiency. The
higher percentage would be adequate to provide a gra¬
dual improvement of living levels.
The problem is not the same where the density of popu¬
lation is lower and there are large reserves of unused or
little used land suitable for agriculture, as in many coun¬
tries of Latin America and Africa. But it has been pointed
out that even in such circumstances, excessively rapid
growth of population is a major hindrance to economic
development. The report of a recent United Nations semi¬
nar on population problems in Latin America makes the
following observations on this score:
'Of course for each new mouth there is also a pair of
hands. But the mouth has to be fed now; the hands
become useful only some years later. In several Latin
American countries as much as 40 per cent of the popu¬
lation is under the age of fifteen. At the same time,
Governments must find productive jobs for a rapidly
growing and sometimes poorly trained labour force, a
task which entails demands on scarce capital resources
which would not be made by a population growing less
rapidly. From each of these points of view, present rates
of population growth are a real handicap to economic
development.'
The issue of population policy and birth regulation is
not purely one of economics. It also involves questions
of cultural ideals, moral principles, and social and political
philosophy which are seen in different lights by the people ^1
CONT'D ON PAGE 43

;WrfJ
FOOD
AND
PEOPLE ».i 1
(Cont'd) ^
i <ll "'»1
Almasy, Pans
BIG CITIES
GETTING
STILL
BIGGER
The concentration of urban populations in
swiftly expanding cities is a world-wide pheno¬
menon of modern times. To these growing
towns and cities flock the workers who found
they could no longer gain a livelihood in agri¬
culture. In Japan, whose 90 million population
has doubled since the start of the century,
Tokyo alone (left) has over 11,000,000 in¬
habitants and is now the world's largest city.
Buenos Aires (above) was one of the last of
the world's great cities to experience a popu¬
lation "boom" through the influx of emigrants.
Inclusive of its suburbs it now has six and a half
million inhabitants, which Is equivalent toalmost
the total population of Argentina ¡n 1914.

» Mam
Official Argentine photo
and the governments of different countries. Some groups
object in principle to birth regulation in general or to
certain forms of it; others hold that the decision to prac¬
tice it or not should be left strictly to the people without
any governmental interference or pressure.
The councils of the United Nations, confronted with
the sharp differences in view on this question, have taken
the position that it must be left to each national govern¬
ment to decide its own policy.
The United Nations Population Commission declared in
the report to the Economic and Social Council on its
eleventh session (1961): 'It is the responsibility of each
Government to decide its own policies and devise its own
programmes of action for dealing with the problems of
population and economic and social development. In par¬
ticular, each Government must decide for itself whether
or not any measures should be taken for the purpose of
modifying the trends of population as an aid to the solu¬
tion of these problems, taking into account the work of
the Population Commission.
'On the other hand, it is in the interest of the United
Nations that decisions on national policies should be
taken, and national action programmes should be
planned, in the light of knowledge of the relevant facts,
and that the programmes should be adequate to assure
satisfactory economic and social progress. Among the
circumstances which must be considered are the relevant
features of national culture and ideals as well as the
trend of population, the physical resources and other
economic circumstances of each country.
'It is appropriate that the United Nations should
encourage and assist the Governments, especially of the
less developed countries, in obtaining basic data and
carrying out essential studies of the demographic aspects,
as well as other aspects, of their economic and social
development problems. It is also considered appropriate
for the United Nations to give technical assistance, as
requested by Governments, for national projects of
research, experimentation and action for dealing with
problems of population.'
It would appear from the above that the United Nations
neither encourages nor discourages adoption by Govern¬
ments of any particular population policy, but stands
ready upon request to give technical assistance to Govern¬
ments for the purpose of making effective whatever poli¬
cies they may adopt.
In four of the most populous Asian countries India,
Pakistan, China (mainland) and Japan the Governments
have sponsored various kinds of measures aimed at
encouraging limitation of births and moderating the rate
of population growth, as an aid to economic and social
advancement.
In India, a programme introduced with the first five-
year plan in 1951 provided advice and assistance on family
planning as part of the services in hospitals and health
centres. In the second five-year plan, this programme
was intensified. The third five-year plan provides for
further expansion in the programme. However, neither
this programme nor a similar one in Pakistan appears
as yet to have brought about any great reduction in
births.
In mainland China, the programme of family planning
was launched in 1955. The results of the 1953 population 43
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

FOOD & PEOPLE (Cont'd)
Know-how exists to feed a bigger world
44
census had just been published, and the effect of the
rapid population increase on the problem of industria¬
lization and economic development was realized. But there
is no reliable information regarding the effects of this
programme on the birth rate.
In Japan, the Government, before and during the
Second World War, enforced a pro-natalist policy. But
public interest in family planning rose sharply soon after
the close of the War, probably owing to economic pressure
upon the families. The birth rate dropped from 30.1 per
1,000 population in 1945-1949 to only 17.2 per 1,000 in
1957. As the death rate dropped during this period from
17 to 8 per 1,000, the net result was to bring the annual
rate of natural increase of the population down from
1.3 per cent to 0.9 per cent.
Japan's birth rate at present is as low as or lower than
the rates of most European countries and considerably
below the present birth rates in the U.S.S.R., the United
States and Canada.
In Japan's case, the movement to limit births was
greatly facilitated by the comparatively high degree of
industrialization and economic development of the coun¬
try, and the high level of education of the people, in
comparison with other countries in Asia and the Far
East.
In a number of other areas, including Ceylon,
China (Taiwan), Hong Kong, and Singapore,
family planning activities are supported by the Govern¬
ment although the Government itself does not take a lead
in promoting such measures. In countries such as the
Federation of Malaya and Thailand, family planning
activities are supported by private organizations only,
with no direct assistance from the Government.
In those parts of the world where there is strong oppo¬
sition to birth-control programmes on moral, religious,
or other grounds, the solution of the population problems
is all the more difficult. The report of the United Nations
seminar on population problems in Latin America, men¬
tioned earlier contains the following remark on this
subject:
'Most Governments in Latin America would be very
hesitant to adopt a policy aimed at encouraging family
planning. For them, if they feel any need to slow down
population growth, the appropriate measures of policy
will be less direct they might be concerned, for instance,
with possible means of instilling into the minds of the
poorer and less educated classes of the people a keener
sense of responsibility and prudence in regard to marriage
and the birth of children, which would be consistent with
their religious ideals and the highest values of their
culture.'
In spite of all the difficulties, it may prove possible
within a decade or two to achieve with determined efforts,
appreciable reductions of birth rates in the countries
where national policies having this aim have been
adopted, or where they may be adopted in the near future.
But it scarcely seems realistic in view of all the circum¬
stances to expect a radical reduction of births in the
under-developed countries generally during the next ten
or twenty years.
Meanwhile, the population of most of these countries
can be expected to go on growing rapidlyquite possibly
even more rapidly than it is growing at present. Thus
it is absolutely imperative to find adequate solutions for
the problems of increasing food production sufficiently
during the decades ahead, especially in those countries
where the present standards of food consumption are
lowest and where the largest increases of population are
in store.
Experts are convinced that technical knowledge exists
to meet the world's present food shortages and to take
care of the needs that will result from population growth
for some time to come. Similarly there is enough tech¬
nical knowledge of the means of controlling births to
bring about a decided moderation of the rate of population
growth whenever the Governments and more important,
the people have the will to do so.
If everything possible were done to bring the existing
technical knowledge of food production methods to bear
fully throughout the world including, among other
things, large-scale programmes for training key person-
Unesco - Almasy

nel, vigorous and imaginative attacks on ignorance and
traditional inertia, and massive mobilization of capital
on a world-wide scale for investments in agricultural and
industrial development of the underdeveloped regions
the Freedom from Hunger Campaign might achieve its
great objective over the course of some decades. But
neither the present programmes nor the efforts to imple¬
ment them are adequate.
In India, for instance, the current large expenditure on
agricultural research and development has served to
increase food production by about 3 per cent a year, but
an 8.2 per cent annual increase is necessary to meet the
1965-1966 targets for adequate production.
With reference to the countries of Asia and the Far
East, the ECAFE report previously quoted puts the prob¬
lem in these terms:
'...If Asian agriculture adopted the modernized techni¬
ques used in some parts of the world, food production in
PLOUGHING A WET FURROW. Despite its relatively small area of
arable land, Japan's agricultural production will soon exceed its needs. This
is due to a greater use of chemical fertilizers, the mechanization of fishing
fleets, the elimination of illiteracy and improved ways of cultivation (below).
FOREWARNED
IS FOREARMED
a part from the direct help which the Freedom
from Hunger Campaign could provide, it
was Important, above all else, in teaching by
example the younger generation who, in twenty
years, would be sharing the world with
4,000,000,000 people. Everyone, everywhere,
must be brought to recognize that this, together
with the menace of nuclear destruction, is one of
the two most pressing problems of our times,
overriding patriotism, national aspirations or
ideologies.
RITCHIE CALDER
from " Common Sense About a Starving World "
Gollancz, London, 1962.
most of the countries could probably be made to keep
pace with this upsurge in demand for food. In addition,
research and technological advance may make it possible
to cultivate land which has been hitherto considered
uncultivable... On the assumption that average land pro¬
ductivity in Asia could be raised to Japanese levels, that
calorie supplies were increased to 2,500 per person per
day and the present low-protein type of diet maintained,
many countries could still support a population two or
three times as big as their present population. Assump¬
tions, on the other hand, of calorie supplies at the same
level as in, say, the western European countries, and a
diet of a high animal protein content would Imply that
many countries, even at the very high Japanese levels
of land productivity, could support fewer people than
their present populations...'
In addition to the programmes for increasing
agricultural efficiency through fertilizers,
seeds, mechanization and better techniques, there is the
technical possibility, although at somewhat higher costs,
of producing foods from sources not now exploited: algae,
yeasts, fish meals, and hydroponics (crop growing
without use of soil), and by the use of extractive methods
for converting plants directly into proteins and oils
instead of raising secondary sources of nutrients such as
fish and animals.
By 1970, the population of the earth will be increased
by over 500,000,000. Most of this increase can be expected
to occur in the underdeveloped, food-short regions of
Asia, Africa and Latin America, where population growth
rates in some countries are now higher than any that
have been known in the history of the human race.
Time is too precious to be wasted in arguments over
what steps should be taken first to deal with the problem
of population and food supply. Nothing less than an
'all out' attack on all major aspects of the problem can
bring success. To banish hunger and achieve a minimal
diet for all people in the face of rapid population growth
will at best take time. To check population growth in
those countries where such is the desire of the people and
their governments will also take time. And time is of
the essenoe."
45
