tri* .' i ? * .«' '-
r
SAMARKAND
FA
E
BU LOU
Milos Hrbas. Prague
Capped with a bright, blue-green tiled cupola, the Gur Emir (above) is one
of the most striking monuments of Samarkand, an ancient city renowned for
the beauty of its 14th and 15th century architectural and decorative treasures.
Tamerlane and one of his grandsons, Ulug Beg, are buried within. Tamerlane's
tomb was opened for the first time in 1941 and examination of his skeleton proved
that, as it had been told, he was lame.
It was to Timur (the iame Timur) commonly known as Tamerlane whose
empire finally spread from northern India to Asia Minor, that Samarkand, capital
of the kingdom of Transoxiana owed its legendary splendour. For Tamerlane,
whose ruthless cruelty became a black legend recounted down the centuries,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
17

4
I- *V*" jUlÍ* í" '1 »V - -Ö 1-" '"""
J|«b| ^$$ -Ir1
J , . ' ¿ ; Pv
i';tó¿IA ' r-i
SAMARKAND
(Cont'd)
18
and who devastated entire regions during his 35-year reign (1370-1405), embellished
his capital with care and affection.
His son, Shah Rukh and his grandson, Ulug Beg, as pacific as he himself
had been warlike, in their turn made Samarkand a brilliant centre of Persian
culture. It was already a very ancient city for its name first appears in accounts
of Alexander the Great's expeditions. After the Islamic conquest it became
a metropolis famous for its gardens, canals and fountains. It was well-known
as a centre of paper-making. In 1220 A.D. it was sacked by Ghengis Khan.
Ulug Beg, a patron of science and the arts, was passionately interested in
astronomy and built an observatory on a hilltop, close to his capital. His mea¬
surements of the astronomical year made in the 15th century are said to differ only
by one minute from the calculations made four centuries later.

Intricately carved designs (above)
decorate walls of mausoleums out¬
side Samarkand, burial place of
Tamerlane's family. Tiles are col¬
oured yellow, lilac and turquoise.
Immense tiled walls of the Babikha-
nim Mosque, erected in 1388 by
a Chinese wife of Tamerlane, tower
above the streets and colourful
bustling bazaar of Samarkand.
Photos Milos Hrbas, Prague
Ruined towers of Tamerlane's pal¬
ace in Samarkand still testify
to the city's former magnificence.
After 1 369, Tamerlane and his suc¬
cessors enlarged and beautified it
The kingdom of Khiva once held the keys of the mighty Oxus River (Amu
Darya) in Central Asia. Changes In river's course have brought desert condi¬
tions. The palace of the Khan (below) recalls Its capital's ancient glories.
