THE EMPEROR PENGUIN
MONARCH OF ANTARCTICA
by Jean Prévost
OVER 100,000 EMPERORS,
largest and stateliest of the Antarctic
penguins, live for ten months of
each year in colonies on the ice like
the one shown here, in Adelie Land.
Of all the teeming flocks of seabirds which
»breed and raise their young on the islands
and coasts of the frozen continent of Antarctica and in
the sub-Antarctic regions to the north undoubtedly the
most curious and fascinating are the penguins or
Spheniscidae.
Comprising 17 species, the penguin family Is primarily
found in the frozen south, although some of its members
breed much further north. The more temperate habitats
of some penguins in southern Australia, New Zealand,
South Africa and the west coast of South America are
certainly explained by the existence of cold marine
currents from the Antarctic. The most striking example
perhaps are the most northerly colonies of penguins
which live close to the equator in the Galapagos Islands
MALE OR FEMALE? With no outward differ¬
ence between male and female emperors, iden¬
tification of the sexes is a difficult business. Weigh¬
ing them, as French biologist, Jean Prévost, is
doing here, helps to solve the problem as males
are on the average heavier than females. Studies
of this kind revealed that heaviest males weigh 88
lbs, females 8 I, at the start of the breeding season.
18
off the coast of Ecuador. (See The Unesco Courier, Sept.
1961).
With their endearing and amusing appearance and
habits, penguins have become the most "popular" and
best known of Antarctica's birds. On land they stand up
straight on short legs and walk with a flat-footed, clumsy
waddle. They are most at home in the water and, using
their short flipper-like wings as paddles, they are first-
rate swimmers.
While most of the species offer definite possibilities for
observation and studies, one in particular, the emperor
penguin, is of special interest. Unlike all other penguins
it reproduces its young in the depth of the polar winter
in extreme southerly latitudes on the sea ice near the
Antarctic continent.
The dangers of navigation by sea in these regions and
the utter impossibility in winter of crossing the barrier of
sea ice which is several miles deep explain the fact that
the first specimens of this species were only recently
discovered. It was not until 1820 that the Russian
explorer von Bellingshausen had the good fortune to
come across them some distance from the coast.
Access to the Antarctic continent is only possible during
the summer months after the break up of the ice. But
as this break up carries away the emperor penguins, it
was not until the beginning of this century that a colony
was first visited and studied, while most of the others
have only been reached in the last few years.
Until recently there were very few permanent missions
on the coast of the Antarctic continent and their limited
resources in mechanical transport confined them more or
less closely to their stations. Hence, although four new
colonies were discovered, it was not until the Inter¬
national Geophysical Year (1957-1958) that new resources
and the combination of movement by air, land and sea
with powerful and suitable equipment brought the total
number of colonies visited to 20.
The total population of Aptenodytes forsten (the scien¬
tific name of the emperor penguin) is currently estimated

All photos © Jean Prévost
at more than 100,000, though there is a chance that
various other colonies exist in some unexplored regions
of the Antarctic coast.
A few individual birds may move north as far as the
60th parallel but the colonies do not go beyond the polar
circle and they are not found further south than the
Antarctic coast itself. The most southerly colony is in
the heart of the Ross Sea, at Cape Crozier, 77° 29' latitude
south.
As already mentioned, the emperor penguin breeds on
the pre-coastal sea ice. With its heavy gait and relatively
small steps, the bird is better adapted to the smooth sur¬
faces of sea ice than to the frequently broken contours
of the continental ice which, moreover, would prohibit
the semi-permanent winter groupings. Two colonies,
however, have chosen to install themselves on the con¬
tinent which unquestionably affords better conditions
and greater security than the surrounding ice floe.
In consequence of their extreme latitude, these habitats
have a particularly cold climate. The average annual
temperature at Point Geology (Adelie Land, 66" 40' S,
140° 1' E), where one of the most northernmost colonies
is found, is in the region of -12° C which is between
4 and 5 degrees lower than for the Cape Crozier colony
in the Ross Sea.
Generally speaking, temperature is the determining
factor in climate, but in the Antarctic, and especially in
Adelie Land, it is the wind which, by its regularity and
strength, plays the paramount rôle. Its speed at Point
Geology reaches between 30 and 33 feet per second, where¬
as 50 miles to the east, at Port Martin, it is twice as high.
At the latter station, the temperature is two degrees
lower than that at Point Geology although the latitude
Is virtually the same. This clearly highlights the cli¬
matic advantages of the places inhabited by the emperor
penguins and is surely one of the reasons which guided
their choice.
In the course of his extensive research in Adelie Land,
Dr. Sapin-Jaloustre examined the potentialities of wind
action by means of a heat loss calorimeter of his own
construction; this enabled him to define the cooling power
of various Antarctic environments. Some figures from his
notes indicate the fundamental importance of this for
warm-blooded creatures »living in the Antarctic climate.
Given a temperature of -10° C without wind, it takes
67 minutes 30 seconds for the temperature of the calori¬
meter's water to fall from 40 to 20 °C whereas it requires
only two minutes at -15° with a blizzard-laden wind of
85 m.p.h.
Dr. Sapin-Jaloustre's many experiments led him to con¬
clude that while wind may greatly accelerate cooling
power, its high ice-particle content multiplies this factor
twofold. The foregoing figures all relate to general cli¬
mate as defined by daily meteorological checks at a height
of 6J feet for temperature and 33 feet for wind.
Although the emperor penguins have chosen a specially
favourable point on the Adelie coast, it is certain that in
such an atmosphere they would, normally speaking, have
little chance of living and breeding. But since their
height is less than 3 feet, they are in fact subject to very
much more favourable climatic conditions, as revealed
by the surveys of micro-climates.
As early as 1950, Sapin-Jaloustre established that, while
temperature varied little in relation to height, the vertical
gradient of the wind, on the other hand, was very marked.
His study of the micro-climate in the colonies of Adelie
penguins (a micro-climate between ground level and
20 inches above) led to the conclusion that its thermal
demand was 50% lower than that of the general climate.
A few years later, we were able to observe that the same
was true for the emperor penguin colony. The wind at
a height of 8 inches was between 50 and 60% lower than
the reading given at the same moment by the anemo¬
meter at the meteorological station.
Apart from these climatic advantages, the choice of
breeding ground would seem to be motivated by a second
consideration as important as the first. The existence
near the colony of a permanent opening in the ice or of
stretches of water free from ice is apparently essential
19
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PENGUINS
(Cont'd)
ZIG-ZAG TRAIL
left by tail and feet of
emperor penguin in
freshly fallen snow
betrays a waddling
gait. Yet despite
their short legs set
far back on their bod¬
ies, emperors move
along with a majestic
and dignified air
which probably earn¬
ed them their name.
Unlike some other
penguins, Adelies, for
instance, the empe¬
rors walk with their
flipper-like wings held
close to their bodies.
jft
20
to provide the birds and their young with regular food
supplies thoughout the year.
The adult emperor penguin is approximately 3'9" in
length, the males being slightly longer than the females.
Weight varies greatly according to the time of year. It
reaches a maximum on arrival at the colony when males
of 88 pounds and over are by no means rare, with the
maximum for females being 81 pounds. This variation
between the sexes persists throughout the year, the ave¬
rage weight being in the region of 55 pounds, and has the
advantage of greatly facilitating the determination of sex
in the absence of any sound indication. The sounds made
by the birds provide the only criterion for separating
males and females since there is no outward difference.

the emperor penguin Is a particularly calm
and apathetic creature which moves over the
ice slowly and with dignity. This heavy, swaying gait is
in sharp contrast to the speed and agility which the bird
displays in the water and his remarkably streamlined
body and his sleek plumage indicate the extent to which
his morphology is adapted to the aquatic environment.
The pectoral muscles are far and away the heaviest in
the body and have several important functions. They
cushion the bird's fall when, in order to get on to the
ice surface, he throws himself from the water and lands
on his breast. They also provide considerable power to
the paddles which they operate and which are used not
only for swimming but also during fights within the colony
when the paddle may strike an opponent with sufficient
strength to knock him down.
The coloration of the plumage is noteworthy. The
head, the back part of the body and the flippers are
covered with a very close blue-black plumage. Two wide
orange-yellow marks divide the lateral sides of the head
and meet in the region of the neck where their coloration
gradually fades into the pure white of the front of
the body.
One of the species' outstanding characteristics is the
reversal of the breeding cycle. The first emperor pen¬
guins return to the colony site in the month of March,
the beginning of autumn in the southern hemisphere,
when the sea ice has only been covering it for a short
time.
The birds at this point are particularly bulky on
account of the considerable quantity of fat reserves Which
may exceed 25% of the total weight of the body.
By April, the whole colony of some 13,000 birds has
assembled and its songs and cries shatter the monotonous
silence of the Antarctic coast. Each bird seeks a mate,
and, after a series of mating cries, the couple come toge¬
ther and remain together throughout the mating period.
The creation of such couples is sometimes accompanied
by fights provoked by the intrusion of a third bird, gene¬
rally female, competing with the first female and seeking
to oust her. These momentary conflicts end when the
fc ñ
©

PENGUIN NURSERIES
FOR BUSY MOTHERS
(1) Handsome emperor couple with their pure white bodies
and blue-black head plumage at the start of the breeding season.
(2) Parents take an anxious look at the 4 1/2 by 3 1/2 inch egg
which is incubated by the male (he maintains a fast for up to three
months before and during this period) and loses as much as
45% of his weight. (3) New-born chick peeps out from beneath
its parent's feet where It is sheltered during its first two months
of life. (4) Mother nourishes the chick from the pulpy mixture
of fish and crustaceans she has stored in her stomach during a
prolonged feeding period at sea. (5) A "huddle" of chicks who
quickly learn to emulate their parents by gathering together in
densely packed groups as a defence against the cold. (6) "Nur¬
sery" of youngsters whose parents are away hunting for food.
On return the parents "call" in front of the group until they
have located their own chick. Family life is thus maintained.
All photos © Jean Prévost
third bird, attracted by the call of a member of the
opposite sex, abruptly leaves the couple in peace.
When separated by a scuffle of some kind, the two
mates almost invariably manage to join up again soon
afterwards thanks to the calls they utter and aided by
their ability to recognize one another visually over short
distances.
Proof of this recognition was obtained by the use of
rings. In order to reduce the disturbance caused by this
operation, we habitually ringed couples after they had
been formed. The operation calls for three men, two to
capture the couple and a third to place the numbered
rings on the paddles. The two birds are then released
side by side in an isolated spot where they can more
easily come together fairly quickly.
The first laying of eggs takes place in May. Each female
lays one egg weighing approximately 1 pound and having
a length of 41 inches and a diameter of between 3 and
34 inches. This volume and weight explains why the
expulsion of the egg is often slow and difficult. Once the
egg is laid, the female entrusts it to her male partner
and leaves the colony in order to seek her food in the
sea. The females have eaten nothing since their arrival
and have lost almost 25% of their original weight.
There are, however, certain exceptions to this quasi-
general behaviour. In 1956, we had occasion to observe
several cases of laying by females whose partners, for
some unknown reason, were absent from the colony.
Such females may hatch the egg for a period of several
days but they soon abandon it in order to rejoin their
kind.
The incubation of the egg, assured almost wholly by
male birds, lasts for from 62 to 64 days at a temperature
above 30°C. To maintain this temperature, the egg is
placed on the feet of the brooder and protected from
behind by a sort of incubation pocket and in front by a
fold of abdominal skin. Even while carrying this fragile
burden, the male can cover short distances in an upright
posture and can even glide on his chest without dropping
the egg.
S|Ince the egg is hatched in the middle of
'winter, it is not surprising that the birds'
physical and vocal activity should be greatly reduced.
Additionally, the brooders have taken no food since their
arrival and can only do so when their task is taken over
by the females. How do they manage to go without food
for so long in such a chilling atmosphere? The system
they have found is as simple as it is effective.
To reduce as far as possible their loss of warmth during
blizzards, the birds gather in extremely densely packed
groups or "huddles." Each bird in such groups, which
may include virtually all the brooders of a given colony,
is pressed close against the others and benefits from the
warmth which they radiate. Since the group as a whole
is all but impermeable to wind, the micro-climate within
the "huddle" enables each individual bird to effect a
slight reduction in his central temperature and thus eco¬
nomise on his fat reserves.
In this way the duration of the foodless period may be
¡markedly prolonged. Various experiments, moreover,
showed us that a bird subjected to total isolation and
directly exposed to the cold and storms had little chance
of completing incubation of the egg since his daily loss
of weight could amount to twice that of those birds able
to join a "huddle."
Some of these experiments were carried out on a
breeding ground which we set up on the exact site of the
colony. Between 6 and 12 birds were kept within this
ground, thus forming a sort of small-scale colony with
very much reduced means of defence against the cold.
Some of our captives remained there for over three conse¬
cutive months.
This special social behaviour or forming "huddles"
has been made possible by the absence of nests and hence
of fixed dwelling places and by the reduction of the
antagonisms and conflicts which are so frequent and so
extreme among other species of Spheniscidae.
Having completed their journey in search of food, the
females return to the colony a few days before or after
the eggs are hatched. In the latter case, the death of 21
the chick might seem inevitable but, in fact, such is not
the case since the male bird's crop is capable of secreting
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PENGUINS
(Cont'd)
FRIGID ENCOUNTER between an emperor penguin (who
manages to look stiff and haughty despite his moulting plumage)
and his smaller cousin, the Adelie penguin. Emperors average
3 feet 6 inches in height; Adelies are rarely more than 15 ins.
FIRST VENTURE into the ocean by young penguin chick (left) marks
his complete Independence. From now on he will hunt for his own food.
Penguins lose their clumsiness the moment they enter the water. Won¬
derful swimmers (right) they can catch fish under water with great ease.
THE SNOW EATERS (foreground, above) are demonstrating
an old penguin custom drinking from snowdrifts, by plunging
their beaks deep inside and swallowing snow whose temperature
Is often as low as -20 degrees C. Below, penguins taken from
main colony by French biologists for heat loss studies. These
showed that isolated birds exposed to cold and storms could
lose twice as much weight as those grouped in large "huddles".
Life-saving huddle
a whitish substance resembling pigeon's milk even after
a foodless period of as much as three months.
The exceptional nutritive quality of this emergency diet
enables the chick to wait for the pulpy mixture of fish
and crustaceans which the females have kept in their
stomachs during their time at sea for the benefit of the
young bird. In July, the thin and famished males (who
have lost almost 45% of their weight since arriving) set
off in turn for a period at sea.
While they take no food during their stay in the colo¬
ny, they do drink regularly, finding this liquid in snow
they take from small and especially clean drifts. They
plunge their beaks deep in the drifts and absorb quanti¬
ties of snow whose temperature is often as low as -20° C.
The "snow eaters" tend be more numerous when the
humidity level of the air is low and we observed that,
for some time preceding the thaw, the majority were
females. This need for water is probably due at that
time to the preparation of the constitutive elements of
the egg.
Chicks weigh approximately 11 ounces when hatched.
The scattered grey down which they have at birth gra¬
dually thickens with age and eventually forms a sort of
thick fur an inch or more long. During the first two
months, the young bird remains sheltered by the feet of
the male parent or the female who takes over periodically
in order that her mate can feed. These two months,
moreover, are not wholly free of danger. A certain
number of birds of both sexes, having lost their own
chicks, are determined to steal those of their neighbours.
They sometimes succeed, despite the parents' resistance,
but there is every chance of the chick being crushed or
pecked to death during the fight between the adults.
After September, the chicks are able to
maintain their internal temperature at a
constant level unaided. At this point they are left to
themselves in the colony. They weigh about 4è pounds
and are too bulky to remain any longer on the adult's
feet. This abrupt transition from family life to freedom
exposes them suddenly to cold and blizzards. The death
rate would therefore be relatively high but for the fact
that the young birds group together for protection in
"huddles" like the adults.
Most deaths observed at this period occur during
blizzards. The chicks, weakened by undernourishment,
no longer have the strength to gather In "huddles" ; they
accordingly lie down on the ice to which they are soon
attached by deposits of snow. This ice gangue insulates
them from the external atmosphere but thereby only
prolongs their sufferings. Other chicks fall in the cre¬
vasse which opens at low tide between the land ice and
the sea ice; we succeeded in saving a number from being
crushed by the closing of the break at high tide.
From September onwards, the two parents are able to
go away together hunting for food to satisfy the growing
appetites of their offspring. Even so this change to an
independent existence does not lead to a sort of communal
pooling, with each adult feeding a chick taken at random.
On the contrary, family life is maintained and, on
returning to the colony, each parent calls in front of
various groups of young emperors in order to locate its
own offspring. In this search by calling which varies In
length according to how far the colony is dispersed over
its territory, visual recognition also plays a part.
After these preliminaries are accomplished, the chick
slips his beak into that of the adult which thereupon
regurgitates a part of his or her stomach contents. The
chick rapidly grows to a weight of 22 pounds, at which
point he can consume up to 6 or 8 pounds in a single meal.
By the beginning of December he weighs close on
30 pounds and his down begins to fall by patches and is
replaced by young plumage. When the down has almost
completely disappeared, the young emperor (who, for
several days past, has no longer been fed by his parents)
moves towards the sea. He is then quite independent.
After spending a complete year on the edge of the ice
pack, during which period his weight almost triples, he
CONT'D ON PAGE 24

'^ESs o
** -Ai*
*4¿^-
-
Ail photos © Jean Prévost
ANTARCTIC RENDEZVOUS for thousands of emperor penguins Is in Marchstart of the Southern
Hemisphere's autumnwhen they gather at some 20 colony sites like that above at Point Geology in
Adelie Land (13,000 birds have been counted here). Penguin, below, looking like a block of stone, has
Its back to the howling blizzard. One youngster has strayed from its parents and crouches down in
the snow to the rear of the penguin in the foreground. The warm side is already occupied by another chick.
23

FENGUINS (Cont'd;
Crushed by an iceberg
acquires adult plumage at the end of a month-long moult
on the coast.
While the death rate for eggs and chicks is low during
life in the colony (roughly one-quarter of 6,000 eggs laid),
life on the sea, where virtually all the predators are to be
found, brings a great increase in mortality. A premature
break-up of the sea ice, before all the chicks have finished
growing, may reduce the number of survivors still further.
But we also saw a still more impressive sight. On
December 26, 1952, a piece of an iceberg freed by the
break-up came hurtling down with a thunderous crash
onto a group of chicks and scores were crushed to death
or drowned.
The emperor penguin's biology, which was such a mys¬
tery a few years ago, can now be seen and understood
more clearly.
The reversal of the reproduction cycle, probably due
to the winter period spent on the sea ice, enables the
chicks born in July to complete their period of growth
by the time the ice break-up takes place. They can
therefore take immediate advantage of the abundant ma¬
rine life of the summer.
The adult's highly developed individual and social
adjustments enable him to live and breed in the middle
of the Antarctic winter with a relatively low death rate.
The emperor penguin is truly a remarkable bird.
JEAN PREVOST is a member of the biological research staff at
the National Centre for Scientific Research, Paris. M. Prévost
spent the winters of 1952 and 1956 at Terre Adélie as biologist
for the Expéditions Polaires Françaises. He made a special study
of the emperor penguin for his doctoral thesis, "L'Ecologie du
Manchot Empereur," which has been published by Hermann,
Paris, 1961.
THE STORY
OF ARTHUR
& HALF PINT
24
In 1952, Jean Prévost and the
members of the French Ant¬
arctic Expedition encamped
for the winter at Point
Geology, Adelie Land, decid¬
ed to become foster parents
to two young emperor penguins. Their purpose was to
study the effect of artificial rearing on the growth and
behaviour of these two chicks. "We had no trouble in
finding things for them to eat", writes Jean Prévost,
"for the ice around was strewn with food which the other
youngsters in the penguin colony had discarded as too
large to swallow."
"Our two chicks quickly learned to come in answer
to a special whistle and soon appeared to look on us as
their parents.
"Arthur and Half Pint, as we named them, lived like
this for five months without ever seeing the colony
where they were born. Arthur became rather shy, but
hunger quickly banished fear when mealtimes came.
"When we left Adelie Land to return to France we
took the chicks with us. But Half Pint, the weaker of
the two, died before we reached Australia. Arthur,
however, quickly got used to the heat of the Indian
Ocean which probably reminded him of the stove in our
camp against which he used to warm himself. But he
was no luckier than Half Pint and died of food poisoning
while the ship was docked at Port Said".
