MEDICAL RESEARCH TODAY
by Pierre Auger
T:he progress, of benefit to mankind, that has
come from great discoveries such as the
microbial origin of communicable diseases, chemothe¬
rapy, antibiotics, residual insecticides, etc., has actually
taken medicine almost from the Middle Ages to its pre¬
sent level in no more than the past half century.
Although the diagnostic skills of doctors thirty to forty
years ago can still be admired, the therapeutic facilities
at their disposal can now be seen to be, in many instan¬
ces, little better than pious hopes, and those few that
were effective were not well understood and were often
not properly used.
Clinical experience and acumen are greatly amplified by
precise investigations; skilfully prescribed and compound¬
ed medicines, to be taken with water before or after
meals, are largely replaced by single substances adminis¬
tered in a definite dose per kilogramme of body weight at
intervals chosen to maintain a desired blood level.
A further important and fundamental development
greatly influencing research is the change in attitude from
that wholly concerned with the sick individual to that
more widely concerned with keeping the healthy person
fit. The concern for sickness of the patient has thus
widened into that for the health of the community. The
older communicable diseases, for example tuberculosis and
syphilis, are being rapidly conquered and the problems of
the newer ones, such as poliomyelitis and other virus
diseases, are being solved.
These benefits are of value both to developed and
underdeveloped countries. For the former where people
live longer and where their lives are more sophisticated
the importance of cancer and the degenerative diseases
is great; in the underdeveloped countries so great is the
rate of change that these diseases may well be problems
there in the next generation. Another result Ls the in¬
creased size of populations and the attendant problems
of food supplies and nutrition; both of these call for
much thought and study.
The results of past research have been great and bene¬
ficial for man; those of the increasing research of the
future can be expected to be no lass, and will arise more
and more from fundamental studies though these may
often commence during the search for answers to practi¬
cal problems.
Medicine and medical research are no Ipnger mainly
concerned with bedside observations on diseased persons
and the study of the effects on them of empirical
remedies.
Advances in medicine today are based on the study of
the healthy as well as of the sick and the dead, parti¬
cularly In relation to their total bodily and mental envi¬
ronment. Disease is a condition that can be defined in
terms of deviation from the normal, and this means that
the medical research worker must observe the behaviour
of the so-called normal man as well as that of the
sick one.
For the effective prosecution of medical research not
only is the clinician needed but also workers in a number
of other disciplines, 6uch as physics, nuclear sciences,
chemistry, biochemistry and statistics. These are con¬
cerned with ' the examination of normal, as opposed to
abnormal phenomena, which are studied in the sick
person by the clinician and the pathologist.
For future progress clinical medicine must be integrated
with the basic sciences. Many medical problems are in
fact really problems in applied biology, physics, che-
17
CONT'D ON PAGE 19

MEDICAL RESEARCH ,c:vo
The labyrinth
off
a sick mind
Fortunately, the artist who becomes ill does not lose his
creative ability. This enables the progressive psychiatrist,
using new techniques, to stimulate artistic talents and thereby
gain deeper insight into the sick man's mind. It is not an
accident that the painting reproduced here recalls the work
of Hieronymus Bosch, who was obsessed with the folly and
horror of this world and commented on it in nightmare terms.
The painter, a young Canadian who was familiar with Bosch's
work, did it while he was a patient in a mental hospital in
England. He shows himself lying on stoney ground, his skull
divided into the compartments of a maze from which there
is no escape. Various compartments depict his miserable
childhood, his sympathy for the Ukraine, his mother country,
his disillusionment with political activity, his hopelessness
at ever beiag able to share other people's faith in ¡deal values,
his feelingji of unreality and of estrangement from the sunlit
"normal" world, his frustated sexuality, his fear of imminent
destruction his impulse to cut himself to the bone to see if
he has a sjblid skeleton like other men. The crows represent
doctors viewed in a paranoid light. Below this is a fantasy
of hospital treatment seen as a benevolent conspiracy. In
the centre, at the bottom, he shows how it feels to be the
subject of a clinical conference. The defeated rat that can
find no way out is also himself. It is the work of a hypersen¬
sitive, obsessional patient, a prey to depressive ruminations
and feelings of unreality. His severe inhibitions against
expressing or even admitting positive feelings have prevented
his using his undoubted talents to their fullest advantage.
Mobilizing the sciences
mistry and mathematics Thus suigcrv is no longei a
matter ol operative tec biilquc, lmpoi tant a;, this may be
The .surgeon must understand his patient m his biological
and social setting, his metabolic and clectiolyte balance
his nutrition and his respn atory, ciiculaloiy, ti--p.it li and
renal functions
Medical research Is no longei a bedside stuch .epaiatcd
from the laboratory The Hist hall ol the < entuiy
witnessed the disintegration ol medicine into pecialtle.s
Now in the second halt it is being iclntegiated with other
disciplines derived directly I rom the ba lc sciences
Medical research Is becoming mole and nmir a combined
operation conducted on a wide front 1'iogic-, in e.udiac
surgery, for example demands the pai tlclpat ion ol a team
of experts versed In dltlerent discipline. The study of
drug addiction needs the co operation ol the phanna
cologlst, biochemist, psychiatrist, < rlminologlst and
sociologist
There have been |>ollticnl change.-, in the pattern ol
medical research At one time this was done mainly in
the universities, but nov. II ha-, .spread I rom then confines
and is carried out m hospital, and icsearch institutions
and by organizations .sponsored bv cc-ntial government
and international organizations, such a.s the Woi Id Health
Organization
In the past, national governments win- interested in
medicine mainly from the preventive aspect Hy mtio
ducing the necessary legislation and a public- health sei
vice many countries have reduced I he incidence and
morbidity of the ma|or baclerlal lnlectloiis, although
these have to a lesser extent been ieplaced bv vlius
infections
With the changes m the economic structure ol manv
parts of the world, the community has had to play an
increasing part in the economics ol medicine, part lculai ly
m the provision of medical care, and (he llnanclng of
medical education and research
As a result ol government sponsorship at the
national and International level, attention Is
being focused on the study of diseases that were once
considered ol minor medical Interest Mental Illness and
the chronic degenerative disease-, such as rheumatism,
coronary disease, atherosclerosis and diabetes, are attain¬
ing greater prominence m the practice o! medicine and
In research programmes They are of economic import¬
ance because of the chronic disability that they cause
Government Intervention is also changing the pattern
of medical economics A whole bcxly of research is
growing up Into the economics of the provision of medical
care, and although strictly speaking not a scientific acti¬
vity, it is a necessary one
Another economic trend In medicine that has reper¬
cussions on medical research is the growth of health
insurance, which In some countries lias grown to such
an extent that there are very few free beds left in public
hospitals This means that there are fewer hospital
patients available as .subjects for research and teaching
Furthermore, the increasing dependence oí universities on
government funds will result In some of the research done-
there being subordinated to the needs of the nation and
national security This ls particularly true In the field of
nuclear medicine.
Government aid can be of value to medical research
In providing funds and amenities for those projects that
are socially urgent and those than can only be solved on
a national scale In some cases the government has acted
through a nationally formed research institute, of which
thirty or more have been created in different countries
in the last fifty years.
A corollary to national government aid is international
co-operation in all fields of medicine An Increasing num¬
ber of research workers, and research workers in training,
are improving their knowledge and outlook by spending a
period In the hospitaLs and research organizations of
another country.
19
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

MEDICAL RESEARCH (Cont'd)
Mobil zing the •sCiences
nistry and mathemaJtics. Thus su gery is n longer a
matter of operative techn1que, important as this may be.
The surgeon m st understand his patient in his biological
and social setting, his metaboUc and electrolyte balance,
his nutrition and hi respiratory, circulatory, hepatic and
renal functions.
Med.icaJ research is no longer a bedside study separated
from the laboratory. The first half of the~ century
witnessed the disintegration of medicine into spoo1alties.
Now in the second half it·is being reintegrated with other
disciplines derived directly from the basic sciences.
Medical resea.rch is becoming more and more a combined
operation conducted on a wide front. Progress in cardiac
surgery, for example, demands the participation of a team
of experUi versed indifferent disciplines. The study of
-drug addiction needs the co-operation of the pharma­
cologist, biochemist, psychiatrist, criminologist and
sociologist.
There have been political changes in the pattern of
medical research. Atone time this was done ma.1nJly in
the universities, but now it has spread from their confines
and is carried out in hospitals and research institutions
and by organizations sponsored by central government
and intemaJtional organizations, such as the World Health
Organization.
In the past, national gov,ellnments were interested in
medicine mainly -from the preventive aspect. By intro­
ducing the necessary legLslationand a public health se,r­
vice many countries have reduoed the incidence and
morbidity of the major bacterial infections, although
th-ese have to a lesser extent been replaced by virus
infections.
With the changes in the economic structure of maJIlY
parts of the world, t community has had to play an
increasing part in the economics of medicine, pa.rticularly
in the provision of medical care, and the financing of
medical education and research.
As a result of government sponsorship 8;t the
national and international level, attention is
being focused on the study of diseases th Jt were once
oonsidered of minor medical interest. Mental illness and
th chr nic degen rative diseases such as rh umatism,
coronary disease, atherosclerosis and diabetes, are attain­
ing greater prominence in the practice of medicine and
in research programmes. They are of economic impoI'lt­
ance because of the chronic disability thaJt they cause.
Government intervention is aJso c nging the pattern
of medical economics. A whole body of iJ."esearch is
growing up into the economics of the provision of medical
care, and although strictly speaking not a scientific acti­
vity, it is a necessary one.
Another economic trend in medicine that has reper­
cussions on medical research is the gllOWth of health
insurance, which in some countries has glIOWn to such
an ex,tent that there are very few free beds left in public
hospi·tals. This means that there are fewer hospital
patients vailwbleas subjects fo research and teaching.
Furthermore, th i creasing dep ndence of universities on
government funds will result in some of the resear done
there b ing subordin:ated to the needs of the na on and
national security. This isparticuIarly tllue in the field of
nuclear medicine.
Government aid can be of value to medical research
in providirig funds and amenities ,for those projects that
ar socially uI1gent and those than can only be solved on
a national scale. In so e cases the government has acted
through a nationally formed research institute, of which
thirty or more have been created in different countries
in the last fifty years.
A corollary to national government aid is internationa:l
co-operation in all fields of medicine. An increasing num­
ber of research workers, and researeh workers in training, 19
are improving their knowledge and outlook by spending a
period in 'the hospitals wnd research organizations of
another country.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE


MEDICAL RESEARCH (Cont'd)
Studying man
against his background
With the growth of industrial development In many
countries industrial health and welfare are becoming of
increasing importance, and both government and industry
are concerned with reducing wastage of manpower due to
disease and injury. Many large plants now have rehabili¬
tation schemes for their workers after injury or illness.
The pharmaceutical industry has contributed towards
progress in therapeutics by the discovery of a number of
new and useful drugs. Whereas at one time new drugs
were discovered in university or hospital laboratories,
almost all those marketed in the last fifty years have
come from the laboratories of the pharmaceutical Indus¬
try. This industry is also sponsoring research in the
hospitals and universities on fundamental work.
In recent years there has been a trend towards the
study of man in relation to "his environment. Illness,
particularly mental illness, is being studied against its
social background. If the concept of positive health is to
be pursued many sociological factors must be considered.
Medical education programmes are undergoing modi¬
fication. Medical teachers are going into the under¬
developed countries on an exchange basis to train doctors,
and new medical schools are being built there. The heed
for a close relationship between medical education and
medical research is emphasized in some quarters.
It is now accepted that medical teachers benefit by
undertaking research and similarly the education of the
medical student benefits by carrying out a piece of simple
research. The increasing number of full-time appoint¬
ments in medical schools should give teachers more time
for reflection and research hy relieving them of the
necessity of part-time medical practice outside the
hospital.
The general public is becoming more sickness-conscious
as a result of the medical Information that is now dissem-
CANCER PREVENTION & CONTROL calls for a world-wide
expansion and co-ordination of research, not only to prevent a dupli¬
cation of effort, but because of marked differences in the incidence
of various forms of cancer among different populations. Laboratory
animals, like these mice, are widely used In research work on cancer.
Photos WHO
20
RADIOACTIVE ATOMS are today used both to track down cancer
(radio-isotopes act as "tracers" to locate its site) and to attack cance-
tous tissues. Following exhaustive research, radium, once the main
weapon for attacking cancers, has now commonly been replaced by
radio-cobalt, controlled and directed by machines like the one above.
inated by press, radio and television, although it is often
the more sensational aspects that are stressed. The
patient can no longer be treated in ignorance of his
disease. It should be explained to him in simple terms
and if incurable he should be told how to live with it.
Much disease would be prevented if the layman were
taught the principles of healthy living without producing
hypochondriasis.
With the great reduction in communicable diseases and
with more adequate nutrition there is a resulting increase
in population and increase in length of Ufe. The ultimate
aim of geriatrics which ls concerned with problems of
aging has been summarized as the adding of life to
years and not years to life.
The implications of the longer life are seen when the
expectation of life of 30 years for rural populations in
underdeveloped countries is compared with that of some
other countries of perhaps 70 years. In the latter popula¬
tions there will obviously be many more older people than
in the underdeveloped countries.
In the last decade the problems resulting from this have
come to the fore. They are social, economic and medical.
There is increasing need for older people to be able to
earn at least part of their dayjto-day expenses and even
more to be able to care for themselves as long, as possible.
Much success has been achieved In preventing the elderly
from becoming Immobilized and bed-ridden.
Further work is needed into the understanding of all
aspects of aging and this probably involves studies of
all ages and of the degenerative diseases and cancer.
Experimental research on aging is now being done In
some centres. The varying rates of failure of different
organs with age opens up a wide study of the part
played by environment in its broadest sense and by
genetics. Thus it will be seen that the problems of the
aging will benefit from many aspects of medical research
while their study will in turn contribute to the solution
of other medical problems.
Professor Pierre Auger is Chairman of the National Centre
of Space Studies in France and of the Administrative Council
of the International Computation Centre in Rome. He is the
author of many studies in the field of nuclear physics and his
works include Les Rayons Cosmiques (Cosmic Rays) and
L'Homme Microscopique (Microscopic Man).
