PAUL GEHEEB
In a world of violence
the search for a new humanism
by Aurobindo Bose
To live in the idea, means so to deal with the impos¬
sible, as if it were possible. (Goethe.)
Every child comes with the message that God is not
discouraged of man. (Tagore.)
T>
20
hese quotations from Goethe and Tagore aptly
describe the reason for and the essence of
Paul Geheeb's activity as an educationist in our time. The
official educational policy in every country gradually gets
Into a rut; it is then that we need pioneers and revolu¬
tionaries like a Pestalozzi, a Tagore and a Geheeb to bring
fresh life into the dead, mechanical system, to blaze a
trail into the unknown and beckon us to follow and strive
to realize the impossible.
The Unesco charter says that the ideals of peace, of
brotherhood and tolerance should be planted in the
tender hearts of children then only can we emerge one
day from the jungle of national rivalries that is the world
today. From this lofty height alone should we appraise
the activities of "Paulus," as his children and fellow
workers endearingly called him.
He was born on October 10, 1870 in Geisa in the moun¬
tains of the Rhön in Germany and died on May 1, 1961,
in Goldern, Switzerland, amidst his children and co¬
workers, who were so near to his heart till the very end.
Both his grandfather and father were pharmaceutical
chemists, and his father was also an active botanist, a
specialist in mosses, who had a unique collection
of mosses from all over the world. The young boy was
greatly inspired by his father's hobby and accompanied
him In his wanderings through the nearby forests, so
at eight years of age the precocious child signed his
letters: "Paul Geheeb, student of Natural Sciences."
After his matriculation he studied for 20 terms in the
Universities of Berlin and Jena, and was almost what
Germans call an ewiger student, for his thirst for
knowledge was insatiable; his striving to reach the
heights of a perfectly integrated being (In whom science
and humanism, philosophy and activity should blend into
a whole) was unceasing.
Wilhem von Humboldt, the friend of Goethe and
Schiller, was his dearest teacher all through his life. In
the university he studied theology, philosophy, oriental
and classical languages (Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Aramaic),
anatomy, physiology and psychiatry. He took his theology
degree and was ordained as a pastor. But soon after his
first sermon from the pulpit he strongly felt the call to
spend his life educating young growing minds.
The subject of his doctor's theses under Professor
Rudolf Eucken was: "Spinoza's Conception of God and
Its Influence on German Thinkers of the Classical Era."
But the almost penniless student, who had with great
effort saved 300 Marks for the doctorate fee, thought that
this sum could be more usefully spent to save the family
of a drunkard from ruin, and so he never became a "Herr
Dr." so all-important for the German bourgeoisie!
However, on his 90th birthday both the Universities of
Tübingen and Tagore's Visva-Bharati awarded him the
honorary doctorate.
Before he left the university, Paulus felt that his real
vocation was among the poor children of great cities and
so he started work among them in the poorest quarter of
Berlin. In 1902 he joined Hermann Lietz (one of the
early pioneers of the new education) in Haubinda, who
later appointed him as its head. But two years later
Lietz leased it out and, as many parents were eager to
have their children remain under Paulus' care, he started
"a free school community" in Wickersdorf.
Here Edith Cassirer, the daughter of a rich Berlin
industrialist, who hated the narrow constraints of a very
well-to-do family, joined Paulus as a kindergarden
teacher. It was nothing less than a revolt on the part
of the young lady at the turn of the century, who was
not willing to wait with docility for a rich man to come
and ask for her hand, but claimed a woman's right to
work, and further her self-development! She too, like
Paulus, had her novitiate among the slum children of
Berlin.
Three years later she became Paulus' wife and for
nearly 52 years stood by his side, firm as a rock. She
helped him, sustained him and served him to the last
and still is serving his ideal, with selfless devotion.
Without Edith, Paulus could never have realized his
dreams. And it shows the nobility of Edith's father,
Stadtrat Max Cassirer, that he who had at first bitterly
opposed the marriage, now lavishly poured out his wealth,
to found the Odenwaldschule in April 1910 with its
extensive grounds and twelve houses.
cHiLDREN from the elite of Germany (in litera¬
ture, arts and music), flocked to Paulus'
school, where blew a fresh wind in the stifling atmosphère
of Imperial Germany in the day of the last of the Kaisers.
It flourished and grew, till the chilling blast of Nazism
came like a hurricane and ushered in a new barbarism.
As a matter of fact Hitler wanted Geheeb to stay, because
of his great international reputation, especially in the
USA, but Geheeb was, as Einstein wrote to him after the
war, "one of the few upright men" who kept the honour
of Germany.
So with rucksacks on their backs Paulus and Edith
wandered to the land of Wilhelm Tell in April 1934 and
started again from scratch. In Switzerland they were
without money, without properly trained teachers and
they had few pupils (as the war soon broke out). They
had to change the location of their school five times, till
CONT'D ON PAGE 22

Photo Ecole d'Humanité, Goldern
After a life devoted to the training of young, growing
minds, Paul Geheeb, died one year ago, aged 90.
21

Love and affection for the animals and children surrounding him; respect and tolerance for the con¬
cepts and religions of others: these were the dominant precepts of Paul Geheeb, who counted among
his friends men like Gandhi, Albert Schweitzer, Romain Rolland and Albert Einstein. In 1930 he
first met Rabindranath Tagore (above) who was visiting Europe, and they became life-long friends.
'Beyond all borders, go beyond'
they found a permanent home for their "Ecole d'Huma¬
nité" in Goldern, Bernese Oberland, in 1946.
I have heard Edith Geheeb say that they were proudest
of their work during the war-years in Lac Noir (near
Fribourg), in a tiny "Home for the Friends of Nature,"
which stood empty. There, persecuted children with no
money in their pockets, escaping from various countries
of Europe, partly from the horror of concentration camps,
came and found a home and warmth of love, while the
world outside was drenched in blood and the atmosphere
poisoned with hatred. And the Geheebs shared what
little they had, with these hapless children.
When the war ended, the Americans (in occupation of
Hessen) asked Paulus to come back and re-start the
Odenwaldschule, but he refused to go, because, as he
said to me, "My countrymen have disappointed me too
deeply." But there was a more profound reason. The
minds of the truly great, develop and grow; they do not
remain static. Just as Tagore's tiny experimental school
92 slowly developed into an International University, so
Paulus' ideas were growing into a "School of Humanity,"
where children of all colours, races, and faiths might
gather, to cultivate universal tolerance and learn each
others' ways of life and culture. And where could it be
more ideally situated than in a country, where people
speaking four languages live in harmony and amity?
Today, among a hundred boys and girls in the "Ecole
d'Humanité" are children from fourteen countries.
Having been brought up in Tagore's school, I was keen
to visit the Odenwaldschule. T saw so many things that
the two schools had in common that I persuaded Tagore
to visit Paulus. They became life-long friends.
Among his friends Paulus counted men like Romain
Rolland, Gandhi, Tagore, Albert Schweitzer, Einstein
men who put their stamp on their Age. What did all
these men have in common? To answer in the words of
Tagore, they were all:
Travellers
Whose eternal journey is toward the future.
Climbing barriers, crossing mountains.
Through the gaping century they strode out
Into the Unknown, into the Unseen.
In their blood the trumpet sounded:
'Beyond all borders, go beyond'.
