LIVING AT
BELOW
TO° C
ERO
by Paul A. Sipie
This scientist participating In America's "Operation
Deep Freeze" in Antarctica, wears full face mask and
dark goggles as protection against wind, ice and snow.
In Antarctic temperatures a nose can freeze In seconds.
The U.S.A. established five major Antarctic stations
during the IGY, four of which are still In operation.
USIS. US Navy
Most persons who view Antarctica only from a
great distance, recoil at the thought of per¬
sonally visiting the region, sure that they could not stand
the torture of Intense cold. Even those who live In parts
of the world where snow Is unknown have sensed the
unpleasant sensations and pain associated with unsea¬
sonably cool periods. If I feel so miserable on a chilly
CONT'D ON PACE 24
21


i '-'« Vi'* M.-"
* £, /«' ¿ J*
RE NO WAN EVER TROD
sftig td over 16,000 feet this
ighty mass of rock dominates
II other peaks or the Sentinel
nge in the Ellsworth Highlands
Antárctica. No man ever set
ot on these desolate slopes.
--
U.S. Navy
23

70° BELOW ZERO (Cont'd;
The secret of
keeping comfortable
day, they reason, how could I ever stand temperatures
of minus ten, let alone minus seventy.
Fortunately for the explorers of Antarctica, who of
course need to learn the technology and use of protective
clothing and shelter, nature too helps to make the cold
more tolerable. First of all, the body itself adjusts by an
acclimatization process to conserve its heat better and
tolerate the sensation of cold more comfortably. This
adjustment alone is roughly worth the equivalent of at
least one layer of clothing. Secondly, cold climate visitors
are relieved to discover that intensity of pain sensation
does not increase proportionately to the degree of cold¬
ness.
Pain due to cold is nature's way of warning the cons¬
cious mind that unless something is done to correct the
situation, we may get into trouble. It is like a fire alarm
which is just as loud and noisy for a little fire as it is for
a disastrous conflagration. Therefore, anyone exposed to
an unseasonably chilly day in the temperature or even
sub-tropic zone when inadequately clothed or sheltered,
may suffer just as much as one exposed to extremely low
temperatures in polar regions.
L¡
24
rviNG and working in Antarctica is not at all
(Impossible for anyone who has the desire to
learn how. In fact, it can be enjoyable much of the time.
But there are many things to master and sometimes the
difficulties seem insurmountable to the novice. All his
reading and concepts seem different from what he
actually encounters.
Getting comfortable is perhaps the first problem
learning not to get overheated in exercise. Perspiration
can cause accumulation of a kilo or two of water in one's
clothing which later evaporates to chill the wearer or
turns into ice and makes him still more uncomfortable.
An old polar hand working next to the newcomer, just
as hard, ventilates or controls sweating at the right
moments and has dry clothing and no excessive after-
chilling.
Every normal task outdoors seems to take much longer
to perform. Walking is slower, gloved and stiff fingers
hinder dexterity, bulky clothing gets in the way, small
tools laid down beside a worker disappear like magic if
there is enough breeze blowing to shift grains of snow
about. Boxes, barrels, and whole caches of material can
disappear from sight in one blizzard and can be lost for
all time if not marked with poles.
Visibility is hampered by fog and drifting snow or by
white-outs a phenomenon occurring when the whiteness
of cloud cover and the snow surface blend into a shadow¬
less world. Distance becomes hard to judge when there
are no familiar landmarks, such as trees or houses on the
horizon. Wind is not only a furious force, at times whip¬
ping up and filling the air with snow, but the breeze also
intensifies the feeling of cold to three times that of a
calm day. Sun and wind burn the face and dryness cracks
the lips.
Still, after one gets adjusted, the beautiful calm days,
sunsets that last for days, halos, Aurora australis, the vast
quietness, and the quaint animal life, add a charm found
nowhere else. Many learn to love life in the Antarctic and
return time and again.
Man can look back on a long process of overcoming and
adjusting to the extreme environment of the polar regions.
Eskimos developed adequate, though primitive solutions
Photos courtesy of Scott Polar Research Institute
FIRST BALLOON. Members of Scott's "Discovery" expedition
(1901-1904) prepare to send aloft a captive balloon with an observer
in the basket. This method was also used by the German expedition
under Drygalski but was later abandoned as too risky an operation.
FIRST AEROPLANE in the Antarctic was brought by the Australian
expedition under Douglas Mawson (1911). After the wings were
destroyed in an accident, it was used as a propellor-driven vehicle.
Wooden skis protected the propellor from danger of nosing over.
for clothing and shelter against cold. Early polar tra¬
velers adopted these principles and survived. Fur cloth¬
ing, snow or sod huts and dog teams, however, are no
longer compatible with the life and activities of modern
Antarctic exploration.
Roald Amundsen and Robert Peary owed their success
in being first to reach the earth's poles to adopting Eskimo
clothing, protection, and travel methods. Shackleton and
Scott met with less success in their efforts to attain the
South Pole because they tried less well-proven techniques.
On the other hand, though Scott and his men lost their
lives and Shackleton failed to reach the Pole by less than
two degrees of latitude, their parties were equipped to
make better scientific observations.
As a member of Richard Byrd's various Antarctic expe¬
ditions I had the personal privilege of experiencing first
hand the transition of polar technology from the primi¬
tive to modern. In 1928, some 17 years after Amundsen's
and Scott's South Pole ventures, we arrived at the Bay of
Whales, Amundsen's old base site. We not only had dog
teams aboard our sailing vessel, but also three new advan¬
ces in polar technology airplanes, aerial mapping came¬
ras, and radios, offering a safeguard against loss of life

FIRST MOTOR CAR to be used in Antarctica was this Arrol-Johnson
12-15 H.P. which Shackleton took with him on his 1907-09 expe¬
dition in the "Nimrod". It proved to be very useful when running
on hard sea ice, but was unable to travel across soft surfaces.
Ta»
FIRST VEHICLES used were sledge and dog teams. Many specialists
still consider them the safest form of transport for detailed study of
difficult mountain terrain. Sometimes they are equipped with a
bicycle wheel and mileometer for clocking distance covered.
on the trail. Radios could have saved the lives of Scott
and his men who died of cold and hunger only a few
miles from help. Primitively, however, we still depended
upon fur clothing, lived in congested quarters to conserve
coal, and our food included use of whale, seal, and pen¬
guin meat to supplement canned, salted and dry rations.
By 1934 most of our material was transported by re¬
inforced metal freight vessels, and tractors were available
to augment dog-team transportation. Six years later our
housing was far more comfortable by comparison and less
congested. Fur clothing was retained for emergency trail
and flight use only. Tractors and airplanes supported
ground parties so that dog teams were no longer heavily
laden. Food included frozen meats, vegetables and fruits.
Amateur radio channels permitted frequent voice contacts
with friends and loved ones. Electric lighting replaced
candles and fuel oil lamps. Labour expended for living
began to lighten and men were free to carry on research
between stints of shoveling snow which had to be melted
for water, little of which was available for baths and
laundry. Toilet facilities were unheated.
After World War II powerful ice-breaking vessels and
Polar town-planning
fast ice-worthy freighters became available. New scien¬
tific curiosity of world-wide geophysical phenomena
pointed to the polar regions as keys to important new
knowledge. The scientific demand for tills knowledge
rose to Its height at the outset of the International Geo¬
physical Year (1957-1958). Not only did 12 of the GO co¬
operating nations decide to establish or utilize some
50 stations in high southern latitudes, but bold concepts
arose to establish observation stations Inland, and criss¬
cross the continent by traverses to study past climate con¬
ditions by seismic measurements of snow accumulation
and total thickness of the ice.
The urgency to learn more about earth phenomena
transcended fears of the ley unknown which In the past
had claimed the lives of men pitted against Its frigid
elements. In 195G France, the United Kingdom, the Soviet
Union, and the United States planned Inland stations In
addition to their coastal quarters at least three of which
were later to house In excess of 100 men over winters.
Although the science programmes were internationally
closely correlated, logistics were largely the responsibility
of the Individual nations. Some countries, such as Bel-
glum, Japan, and New Zealand and South Africa, had not
had recent experience In modern polar operations and
had to make a fresh start; Argentina, Chile, and Great
Britain, on the other hand, converted their operating
bases to IGY use. France had been established in Antarc¬
tica since 1950, Norway, and the United States had more
recent bases, and the U.S.S.R. had developed Its com¬
petence In the high Arctic. Exchange of technology was
freely dispensed to those who needed help, and communi¬
cation, rescue plans and logistic aid, where possible, were
jointly planned.
E nation had its own tastes in housing,
clothing, food, and transportation so that the
stations had their own individual character despite simi¬
larities of purpose. Some stations were built on solid,
snow-free land and others on kilometre-thick snow fields
with no bare rock in sight for hundreds of miles In any
direction.
Building houses on rock or rubble permitted more con¬
ventional construction techniques; foundation excavation,
however, was difficult. Cold and lack of sand Inhibited
the use of concrete and a short summer construction
period demanded the use of impromptu techniques rather
than the best. Sewage and waste dLsposal was difficult,
If Immediate access to the sea was not available. Ponds
or snow patches for water supply were at times located
at considerable distance from the houses. Cables were
essential to anchor the houses against heavy wind and at
least at Hallett Station, the Joint New Zealand-United
States Station, penguins from an adjacent rookery had to
be removed and fenced out to permit flat space for the
camp.
Placing a station on deep snow requires different tech¬
niques. The foundation must be compacted or excavated,
Insulated and blocked to prevent differential settling. At
some stations a deep pit ls dug in which the house ls
erected. Then snow which fills In around the building
provides Insulation necessitating less heating than is
required for houses built on open ground, fully exposed to
excessive wind-chill.
Another technique not requiring excavation Is to build
the houses on the surface and simply let snow drifts
accumulate around the buildings until they are covered
up to the eaves. In this latter construction method stacks
of stores are placed around the houses, covered by chicken
wire and burlap or dunnage and tarpaulins, to form
passages or framed tunnels. Houses buried from the start
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
25

70» BELOW ZERO (Cont'd)
Fire one of greatest hazards
Australian official photograph
AUSTRALIAN EXPLOR¬
ER demonstrates latest
clothes style in Antarctica.
are usually connected by snow
tunnels dug between build¬
ings. Excavated snow rooms
and snow block storage shel¬
ters save on materials which
must be brought in. Sewage
and refuse are usually dump¬
ed directly into pits. Snow
for water supply is always
close at hand in areas upwind
away from station contamin¬
ation. Ventilation for buried
camps becomes a problem at
times. Added floor vents are
required as well as ventilator
outlets. Carbon monoxide
created by snow covered flues
or icing of condensed moisture is often a hazad.
Fires at isolated drifted-over stations is perhaps the
greatest hazard to men in polar camps. Fires seem to
occur on the coldest or windiest days. Passages can fill
with smoke and fighting tre in submerged snow is next
to imposible. Notonly is Are disastrous to men and
equipment inside the building, but the fire fighters during
a nocturnal blizzard are also exposed to danger decause
often in their haste they rush to the emergency with
insufficient time to clothe themselves properly. The most
disastrous Antarctic fires occured in the 1960-1961 season
at the Soviet Mirny Station where eight Uves were lost
and at the American McMurdo Station with an estimated
property loss of about two-hundred thousand dollars.
Some stations are built from lumber and . materials
similar to normal frame houses, but much time is saved
by having houses prefabricated. A large house can be
assembled in a single work day, if the panels arrive
undamaged and no parts are lost in the thousands of
miles of transit and frequent handling. Gable-roof houses
shed melt-water better, but drifts build higher than on
flat-roofed structures. In deep snow-field areas, drifts
engulf the entire camp to the height of the largest struc
ture. Thin towers or observation booths placed above the
surface on legs, permit the wind to blow past without
dumping its load of snow.
Inland stations were handled in different ways. The
British built South Ice Station, Lat. 82° S., Long. 29° W.,
in a hole by constructing a sturdy building for three men
of timbers taken in by tractor. France's Station Charcot,
Lat. 69° 30' S., Long. 140° E., was a small, arched roof
bungalow built on sleds and dragged to its destination by
tractors. The various Soviet inland stations of Vostok I
and II, Pioneerskaya, Komsomolskaya, and Sovietskaya,
located at or en route to the Geomagnetic Pole and the
Pole of Inaccessibility, were uniquely designed tractor
quarters which could be expanded at the wintering des¬
tination and re-supplied by air.
The American Byrd Station at Lat. 80° S., Long. 120° W.,
was the largest inland station designed for 25 men. It
was originally supplied by great tractor trains and later
by air. The American geographic South Pole Station,
named Amundsen-Scott, where I served as the Scientific
Leader during its first year of occupation, was a station
for 18 men, supplied by C-124 Globemaster parachute
drops and a few P2V and R4D ski-plane landings. The
altitude of over 9,000 feet required jet assist to lift off
the planes, even lightly loaded ones. Since 1960 C-130
turboprop aircraft land at the pole to discharge their
cargo directly.
The coastal stations at some places are near or even
north of the Antarctic circle so that although they have
little daylight in winter, they virtually have no sunless
or continuous daylight periods and the coldest tempera¬
tures in winter rarely go below -40° C. Summer time
temperatures frequently rise above 0° C. Inland con¬
ditions aire much colder even if not as windy.
The stations farther poleward have sunless periods in
mid-winter and continuous sun in midsummer, and at the
geographic pole there are six months of each. On the
high, mid-continental plateaus, extreme temperature in
winter drops below -75° C. and in some places perhaps
down to nearly -90° C. At the South Pole the first year
BURIED TO THE CHIMNEYS in a sea of snow this Australian outpost, 50 miles from the
Wilkes Antarctic base, permits scientists to live and carry out research for an extended period.
Photo R. Dingle-Antarctic Division. Australian Department of External Affairs
26

US Navy
SPRING CLEANING for the walls of a snow tunnel which Is the main street of America's Byrd Station at an
altitude of 5,000 feet in the mountains of Marie Byrd Land. Here, as In all ma|or U. S. IGY stations, research
was made in meteorology, geo-magnetlsm, glaclology, physics of the Ionosphere and studies of the aurora.
there were 159 successive days during which the tempe¬
rature never rose above -40° C. and the wind averaged
over 15 knots.
Inside the quarters at most bases the temperature was
maintained at a comfortable (15 to 18° C.) shirt-sleeve
temperature (i.e., a wool shirt over heavy underwear).
Men sleep in beds with sheets, blankets, and pillows.
They have excellent libraries, warm toilets, showers, and
laundry facilities, movies, and normal meals except for
the absence of fresh greens. At some stations greens were
grown and at Mirny a herd of pigs solved both the gar¬
bage disposal and fresh meat problem. In short, life
indoors was fairly normal at all bases except for the
absence of women.
One time at the South Pole two of our men
wanted to go out and see how long they could
stay in the open it was about -72° C. with a 12 knot
wind. We knew that under exposed conditions we had
clocked freezing time of noses, cheeks, and ears at about
30 to 45 seconds. But they were well bundled up in several
layers of clothing totaling about 12 to 13 kilogrammes
including their boots and a belt of batteries next to their
bodies to light a head lamp.
It was dark outside and they planned to move about.
One man stayed out three hours and the other four hours.
They quit not so much because it was cold, but because
they were growing tired ; they had already put in their
day's work and were cutting into their bed time. They
were cold in spots, but they suffered no frostbite or other
ill effects.
There are some physiological limitations to the extreme
environment of Antarctica. With fast'walklng or heavy
work at sea level, when temperatures drop below about
-50° O, men become winded and they may start to
cough and spit blood. They have not frosted their lungs
but have ruptured capillaries in their bronchial trachea.
At high altitudes men working heavily at low tem
peratures despite ample food tended to lose a tenth of
their body weight in a month's time. Leaving eyes unpro¬
tected from bright reflection from the snow and sky In
summer time, caused painful temporary blindness.
Although there ls a wide variety In clothing from sta¬
tion to station and sometimes an equal diversity from
man to man In any single station, the basic principles are
nearly the same. In summer, when temperatures range
between 0" C. and -20° C, the men who arc outside for
considerable periods and quite active, wear surprisingly
light clothing, often only a light set of loose-fitting cotton,
windproof trousers and hooded Jackets over wool or heavy
cotton underwear. More sedentary or unaccllmatized
persons will wear an Intermediate layer of wool trousers
and wool shirt, sweater or vest.
Boots vary widely. There are oversized ski boots, or
mukluks with room for heavy socks and insoles, felt
boots, or the Insulated boot (the Invention of which I was
associated with) which is a double-layer rubber boot with
insulation sealed Inside a light pair of socks ls all that
ls worn Inside.
Hand gear ls usually in two layers a wool mitt with
a leather or canvas protective cover. Special thin contact
gloves are used by some who work with delicate Instru¬
ments and heavy work gloves are generally preferred by
mechanics.
Head gear ranges from the conventional wool cap and a
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
NO IRONING.
When laundry is hung
outside in Antarctic
winter it becomes as
stiff as an ' ironing
board within minutes.
US Na//

FROZEN HISTORY
Scientists from many countries are now busy
studying Antarctica's ice. New methods
make it possible to tell what temperatures
existed when the ice was formed aeons ago.
Here French Polar expedition members
remove cylindrical ice samples (left and below)
and measure the density of granular ice (right).
Photo Jicquis Misson i£. Exploration! rjol»ir« françiis«!
70° BELOW ZERO (Cont'd)
Vacation land
of the future?
long wool cap which has a face opening to leather or
fabric helmets with ear flaps. For bushy-haired active
individuals a ski headband with open crown, giving ear
protection, suffices until the sun goes behind a cloud or
the wind rises. A supplementary windproof cloth hood,
usually attached to the jacket, is pulled up over the head
for added protection. Dark glasses or goggles that cut
down about 75 to 95 % of the light complete the ensemble.
Winter clothing follows the same principles, but
increases in thickness or number of layers,
and usually has more positive closures to keep out the
wind at the neck, waist, ankles, and wrists. Head gear,
boots, and mitts increase to optimum values. Some men
include a felt, chamois or windproof face mask, others
grow beards. No amount of clothing will keep an inactive
man protected for more than an hour or two, but if his
heat production is increased by activity, the same clothing
will keep him warm down to 40° C. or even below
C.
Because of the law of diminishing returns for insulation
over cylindrical shapes (i. e., the surface for losing heat
increases more rapidly than insulation is gained in
thickness), the approximate optimum thickness of insula¬
tion is as follows: Fingers less than 1 cm; head, hands,
and feet; 2 to 3 cm; legs and arms 3 to 5 cm; torso and
sleeping bags 10 to 20 cm.
Transportation across snow surfaces is now almost
exclusively accomplished by tracked vehicles. Numerous
countries have introduced their own versions. The Ame¬
rican-built Sno-Cat, with tracks over four triangular pon¬
toons where wheels would be on a normal truck, has per¬
haps been the most popular. These were used by Fuchs
28 on his transcontinental trip. Hillary, on the other hand,
used small Ferguson farm tractors with added belt tracks
most successfully.
Heavy freighting is carried on by the largest sized trac¬
tors manufactured with sleds that can hold several
thousand kilogrammes. Russian tractors at the begin¬
ning of IGY had too narrow a tread width, but with each
succeeding year they came back with new designs and
have developed enormous tractors with built-in living
quarters that have been used over wide areas of East
Antarctica. They visited the South Pole in 1959-60 and a
year later the Americans delivered giant D-8 tractors over¬
land to the Pole. The World War II American Weasel, or
vehicles of a similar design, serve as light, faster trans¬
portation.
Speed of the larger tractors is usually only 3 or 4 knots,
but the lighter vehicles cannot go much faster than 6 to
15 knots because of the sastrugi (drifts of snow on the
surface). Crevasses, which are great cracks in the snow
and ice surfaces, frequently bridged over by drifting snow,
form unseen hazards to travelers. Several lives have been
lost by tractors dropping into these pitfalls.
Future Improvements in Antarctic living are already on
the horizon. Increased air travel makes direct contacts
with neighboring continents possible throughout the
summer. Winter-night flights have been made. We may
soon expect year around contact. Women have visited the
continent and some have wintered over. An increasing
percentage can be expected to make up family teams or
to serve as scientists and technicians in their own right.
Use of atomic reactors to supply heat, power, and
lighting, is projected for the near future. The new Ame¬
rican Byrd Station (1961-1962) is being modeled after the
U.S. Army Greenland research station Camp Century,
with deep excavated trenches cut by Swiss Peter Snow
Millers. Both Chile and Argentina have carried out paid
tourist visits in summer and soon anyone who wishes to
badly enough may visit Antarctica almost any time he
prefers. Commercial flights and even tourist hotels have
been seriously discussed.
Paul A. Siple, U. S. explorer, geographer and author, was
the youngest member of the first Antarctic expedition of
Admiral Richard Byrd (1928-30) having been chosen from
among 600,000 American boy scouts. He has since taken
part in many Antarctic expeditions and was the scientific
leader of the U.S. IGY Amundsen-Scott South Pole Sta¬
tion in 1956-57. He is the author of 90 Degrees South
(Putnam, New York).
