WORLD CAMPAIGN
AGAINST
HUNGER
s'a
^F
When hail or rain threatens to ruin a crop, har¬
vester crews in the United States work around
the clock. Combines like those shown here
can do the work of 40 farm hands. Right,
wheat harvesting near Lahore, Pakistan.

The first half of the 20th century has witnessed three major revolutions.
The political revolution has brought self-government to nearly a third
of the world's population and has brought their aspirations for a better life to the
forefront of world attention.
The revolution in communications has broken down the barriers of distance
and language, and the dynamisms of ideas can no longer be contained within the
limits dictated by social privilege or political considerations.
The demographic revolution has imparted to the challenge of poverty and want
a new dimension.
It is against this background that the Freedom from Hunger Campaign was
launched in 1960 by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO). Its main objectives are twofold: first, to create a world-wide awareness
of the problems of hunger and malnutrition which afflict more than half of the
world's population and which, apart from the human suffering and human degra¬
dation that they involve, pose a serious threat to peace and orderly progress ;
and second, to promote a climate of opinion in which solutions to these problems
can be organized both on a national and on an international basis.
In the short time since its launching, the Campaign has already provided a focus
for co-operative endeavour for international organizations, national govern¬
ments, non-governmental organizations and various citizens' groups all over the
world. The 104 member nations attending the biennial FAO conference in Novem¬
ber 1961 paid unanimous tribute to the significance of this Campaign for the future
well-being of the world.
The Freedom from Hunger Campaign attempts to attack the problem of hunger
on a broad front and at all levels of economic and social thought and action ; but
for practical purposes it defines three sectors of operation: (a) information and
education, (b) research, and (c) action.
The information and education programmes will help bring to citizens every¬
where a living awareness of the concrete facts and issues, and provide bases for
deciding what new national and international policies and action programmes
are needed. This effort to create informed and active awareness will rise to a
climax with the World Food Congress to be held under FAO auspices in 1963.
Many international, professional and citizens' groups will hold forums on Cam¬

paign issues this year and in 1963. Many national Campaign committees will also
organize similar discussions. Representatives from all these bodies are expected
to participate in the World Food Congress and help bring into focus policies and
action for plans for the future.
This special issue of The Unesco Courier has been prepared to help people
throughout the world to understand the great issues involved. An attempt has been
made to summarize in popular form the major facts known and the agreed conclu¬
sions of experts up to now. The Editors hope that this special number will provide
study groups in schools and public discussion groups with useful and reliable
material on a critical world problem that is of vital concern to us all.
m
'&**%.
o
<
