SOCIETY CALLS
THE TUNE
by Peter Lengyel
A:LL art reflects the complexity of the society
.which produces it. Music, perhaps the most
spontaneous of the arts, is no exception and we shall
examine here how musical taste and production are
related to social structure. Can one learn anything about
a culture by listening to its music? I believe that one
certainly can, and that the reverse also holds true: one
needs to know something about a culture before really
appreciating its music.
The history of music goes back to the various folk
idioms, which are the collective and mainly anonymous
characteristics of certain cultures, or of stages in their
evolution. Their origins are not commonly known with
any precision, though the effects of certain recorded
events can often be clearly distinguished.
Thus typical elements of North African origin in Spanish
folk music are a relic of the Moorish occupation of Spain,
just as the diffusion of certain modes and phrasings of
Mediterranean origin to other parts of Europe bear
witness to the passage of the troubadours and trouvères,
those wandering minstrels of the Middle Ages who,
Peter Lengyel is in charge of projects on economic and
4 social development in the Department of Social Sciences
of Unesco. For many years he has studied the shifting
place of music in social life through the ages in Europe.
fanning out from Provence, came to be greatly admired
for their accomplishment in distant parts.
Folk music is essentially traditional and mostly un¬
written (except when collected and noted by scholars):
like the great Gothic cathedrals or the ancient sagas and
myths, it is the result of an accumulation of artistic effort,
most of the individual contributions to which are hard
to distinguish from each other. No doubt there were
important musical Innovators who exercised an incisive
influence in their day, but their names are lost and it
is probable that they were not particularly honoured in
their lifetime, for the folk audience did not take a sophis¬
ticated interest in art for art's sake.
On the contrary, folk pieces tend to be short and specific
to common situations: they might be dances, ballads,
songs for festive or special occasions (banquets, lullabies,
work songs, dirges), hunting calls or military marches.
Also, they are generally intended for performance by the
voice or on selected and usually simple instruments, widely
available and none too difficult to play.
Melody and rhythm, rather than harmony and timbre,
are their outstanding features: "abstract" music, long
compositions in complex form and music which calls for
considerable technical equipment (whether in the shape
of instruments or performing skills) has little or no place
in folk music.
Folk musicians rarely had the benefit of formal musical

Left, concert in an 1 8th
century drawing room.
Right, jazz drummer Lionel
Hampton in action. Jazz, a
music in which improvisa¬
tion plays a major role, has
been called a new folk idiom,
reflecting as it does many
aspects of our time and
appealing to the most di¬
verse audiences. The ab¬
stract and "learned" classical
music of two centuries ago
was written for the plea¬
sure and appreciation of a
cultured minority audience.
Jean-Pierre Leloir
training other than that which might be handed down
from father to son, nor were they acquainted with a
repertory beyond the traditional one. These limitations
gave them a simplicity and constancy which their less
naive successors could not validly claim. Thus the folk
musician strove to encompass the entire gamut of his
listener's emotional experience in the only terms available
to him. If many cultures never really moved beyond the
folk stage in their musical expression, this is an index
of their continued homogeneity, separateness and cohe¬
sion. Undisturbed in patterns of living and basic values,
they reflected such simplicity in their art.
In Europe, as in several other parts of the world, notably
in Asia, however, increasing social differentiation brought
with it the rise of "learned" or "classical" music. This
was distinguished from folk music by being addressed to
minority audiences, giving expression to increasingly
singular emotions or abstract sentiments and being the
product of composers schooled in certain established
conventions and techniques. Also, classical music is
mostly written, leaving a decreasing amount of latitude to
the performer's fancy and introducing a formal distinction
between the creative artist (the composer) and the
executing artist (the player or singer), which is rare in
folk music.
The rise of classical music owed a great deal to the
patronage of churches and courts, both of which used it
to enhance their prestige and as a commonly acceptable
vehicle to convey uncommon concepts. In Europe, the
earliest school of classical composers were the Poly-
phonists, who flourished from the 10th to the 17th
centuries and whose art, as the name suggests, lay in the
combination of several voices singing different but super¬
imposed melodic lines simultaneously.
Since they were chiefly in the service of the church, the
works of prominent Polyphonists, such as Byrd in
England, Orlandus Lassus and Josquin dès Près in
Flanders, Victoria in Spain and Palestrina in Italy, were
typically couched in the form of masses, anthems and
motets. Their most important output for profane use
were the madrigals, written for amateur domestic
performance, of which large collections by various masters
are known to us today.
From the combination of several voices singing different
parts, the logical development was to have these parts
performed by instruments, or by voices and instruments
together. It is to this art that the succeeding school of
European classical composers the Contrapuntalists
devoted itself. By this time (the second half of the 17th
and the 18th century), two other important developments
were also taking place.
Firstly, great strides were being made in perfecting
instruments through inventions (keyboard instruments),
refinements (string instruments) and technical improve-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SOCIETY CALLS THE TUNE (Lonfd)
Orchestras for kings, dukes and generals
ments (wind instruments) which not only allowed for
hitherto unknown flights of virtuosity in performance but
also encouraged the exploration of novel timbres and
effects through orchestration.
Secondly, increasing attention was paid to the formal
aspect of music as the "learned" tradition took hold:
simple two-section (binary) or three-section (tertiary)
pieces were supplemented by compositions cast in the
more complicated form of fugues or airs with variations.
Such evolution, in turn, reflected the increasing
complexity of European society and the widening of
audiences and sources of patronage. While the Polypho-
nists relied chiefly on the church for support, and to a
lesser extent on the courts and on educated amateurs, the
Contrapuntalists already had wider profane outlets
including increasingly wealthy aristocratic circles and the
rising middle classes.
Johann Sebastian Bach successively held posts as a
choirboy, violinist in a princely band, town organist, chief
court musician and cantor of the municipal school of
Leipzig. George Frederick Händel speculated in public
entertainment with his operas and made a career in
Germany, Italy and England.
Most of the Contrapuntalists tried their hand at many
kinds of music choral, instrumental, orchestral, stage,
military, ceremonial, sacred frequently in response to
commissions. They were artisans who responded to new
demands: in the widening field open to them, they be¬
came acknowledged masters of a versatile trade with
enlarged horizons for themselves and for their art.
U;p to this stage, the folk and "learned" tradi¬
tions of music in Europe tended to diverge.
Learned composers became men of the world who mixed
with the upper classes, had access to kings, dukes, popes
and generals, and formed as well as shared their tastes.
Folk musicians remained obscure, playing to the common
people in what came to be regarded as a crude and rustic
manner; they did not have great orchestras or choirs at
their disposal, nor were they challenged by the theatre,
the pomp of state and religion and the demands of
talented amateurs. Their idiom was unsuited to the
expression of lofty abstractions, like charity and humility,
patriotism and loyalty, and they could not compete with
their grand colleagues. This state of affairs carried over
into the next important period of * European musical
history, the Classical epoch.
It is true that Haydn introduced German, Hungarian
and Slav folk melodies into his music, sometimes for light
relief, sometimes with deliberate expressive purpose, while
Beethoven gave full symphonic treatment to peasant
dances and Schubert derived the lied (or art song) from
traditional German patterns. Yet these were but episodes,
paralleled by attempts to present popular music to
sophisticated audiences, such as the ballad operas of the
18th century, amongst which the Beggar's Opera by Gay
and Pepusch achieved enduring fame.
It was the Romantics of the 19th century who, after an
fi excess of courtly and ecclesiastical discipline, suddenly
discovered the as yet untapped sources of folk music
which lay all around them and provided material as rich
and diverse as it was colourfully attractive to mixed
audiences removed from the traditional life.
"Nationalistic" composers, working the vein of folk
music and incorporating it into their personal styles,
flourished everywhere: Mussorgsky, Borodin, Tchaikowsky
and Rimsky-Korsakov in Russia, Smetana and Dvorak in
Bohemia, Chopin in Poland, Liszt, and later Bartok and
Kodaly in Hungary, Grieg in Norway, de Falla, Granados
and Albeniz in Spain, Vaughan-Williams in Britain, and
more recently, Enesco in Rumania, Villa-Lobos in Brazil,
Copeland and Gershwin in the U. S.
T here was even a considerable amount of
fascination with the folk music of foreign
countries. Bizet's Carmen, undoubtedly the most popular
opera ever written in the Spanish idiom, is the work of
one Frenchman, based on a story by a second which, in
turn, was adapted as a libretto by two others. Tchai¬
kowsky wrote several pieces incorporating popular Italian
airs, as did Mendelssohn, "who also used Scottish tunes.
Brahms' Hungarian dances are famous; so are Dvorak's
New World symphony and his American quartet, incorpor¬
ating Negro themes.
There now occurred a period of convergent development.
While folk music was being studied, recorded and worked
up by "learned" composers, classical music was also to
some extent passing into the popular domain. The
operetta is a typical example of musical entertainment
which, while cast in a version of the "learned" idiom,
appeals to the taste of a public that is not necessarily
sophisticated in its musical tastes.
Those who flocked to applaud Offenbach's excellent
comedies, or the endlessly tuneful light operas of Johann
Strauss might not have been able to tell Berlioz from
Rossini, nor cared to do so. But they were equally
strangers to pure folk music being, for the most part, city
dwellers and members of an industrializing, specializing
society, . increasingly cosmopolitan, increasingly eclectic,
decreasingly linked to their own traditional sectors.
Without being particularly conscious of the
process, the pace-setting elites and their
crowds of imitators, had gradually been made familiar not
only with elaborations of their home folk materials, but
also with exotic elements originating, perhaps, from
Africa, the Far East or Polynesia. The process was,
incidentally, two-way, for it also acquainted audiences in
Tokyo, Cairo or Rio de Janeiro with the musical fashions
of Paris, Vienna and Milan.
At the same time, however, true folk music itself began
to decline, for it was assailed with increasing strength by
an international idiom (the amalgam of several folk tradi¬
tions, plus an infusion of "learned" styles) which caught
the imagination of millions all over the world. Thus,
some of the lieder of Schubert, arias by Mozart, Verdi and
Puccini, a few instrumental or orchestral pieces as well as
a host of airs and dances, from "John Brown's Body'' to
CONT'D ON PAGE 10

1 Ad
%
9 3i %
_J^
f___j__l
HP*
: -»if1
1 v.
*A
. _s
<**
* *
^
%
SOCIETY CALLS THE TUNE (Cont'd.)
The many faces
of modern jazz
"Auprès de ma blonde," from the tarantella to the tango,
passed into the international cultural patrimony.
Folk music, in the old-fashioned sense of the term,
flourishes, if at all, only in regions still shielded from the
mainstream of modern life, though mixed forms of it
naturally continue to evolve everywhere, and with
specially creative vigour in countries with mixed popula¬
tions, such as Brazil or Israel.
Yet the victory of any single "learned" or semi-learned
idiom of music is far from complete. For with the emer¬
gence of an international audience, there also arose an
Industry which sought to cater to as wide a consensus of
its tastes as possible. It is often argued that the products
of this industry "pop" songs, dance music, film music,
etc. are hopelessly debauching contemporary musical
standards by throwing out immense quantities of a
commercial product hastily stitched together from worn
and disparate patches.
A captive public, exposed to such music wherever it goes
at the factory, In airports, over television, in restaur¬
ants, at parties, in cars is having its testhetic responses
blunted by a sort of journalese of sound which panders
to fashionable fads and exploits the most banal, superficial
and conventional reactions of the listener, deliberately
avoiding anything that might conceivably displease at
first hearing.
The situation today strikes many critics as one where
people face only the choice between the remote, in-
J. Gome, Paris
MUSIC EVERYWHERE. Wherever they go today people have
access to music. Music is brought to them constantly by radio, TV,
records and loudspeaker systems. "Pop" songs blare out from juke
boxes like this one (right) in a Parisian cafe with its teen-age
audience. To feed juke boxes, gramophones in the home and disk
jockeys on the radio, millions and millions of records are being
produced. Above, a gramophone factory worker separates recording
plate from matrix with which records will be mass-produced.
tellectualized and difficult work of serious composers and
the half-baked, half-heard leftovers which constitute the
background to daily activities. One consequence of what
has been called "the appalling popularity of music" is to
make the effort at communicating something that is at
once artistically valid and widely accessible an increasingly
delicate task.
BALLET DECOR BY DALI. Ballet with its themes of drama, fairy-tale, fable and life has offered a rich medium
for musical expression. Since the time of Lully, the 17th century French composer, often considered as the first
to make an art of ballet music composition, many great musicians have combined their efforts with those of
choreographers and artists to produce spectacles enchanting equally to eye and ear. Below, a Salvador Dali
painting for a backdrop used in a modernistic ballet "Sentimental Colloquy", first produced in New York in 1944
by the Ballet International Company, with music by Paul Bowles and choreography by André Eglevsky.
4 /<**;

Alm?^y-Vauthcy
There is also the opinion which asserts that an entirely
new folk idiom has recently arisen, one that is a character¬
istic of our age, and as good an expression of its quality,
as the folk music of earlier, more circumscribed and
simpler cultures. This is jazz. Born of a cross-current of
influences Spanish, French, African, English, Creole,
Protestant hymns, military marches in a country which
is itself a melting-pot of cultures, jazz certainly transcends
frontiers with amazing ease, and seems to mirror current
moods in the most distant places.
Its element of improvisation has about it something of
the tentative, episodic and rapid features of modern life.
Then, too, the interpénétration of jazz and "learned"
music appears significant: if Haydn used folk tunes, a
Milhaud, a Kurt Weill or a Stravinsky turn as naturally
to jazz, while the ideas of Bartok, Ravel, even of Scarlatti,
are not absent from Its "progressive" examples.
A'ttractive though it sounds, there are object-
. ions to this thesis. For jazz itself is com¬
partmentalized: it has its "learned", "'naive" and
"commercial" branches, each appealing to a different
audience. Those who appreciate the first and second
varieties overlap significantly with the audience for class¬
ical music, which is hardly true for the fans of the com¬
mercial variety, strangers to connoisseurship in any shape.
Furthermore, jazz only expresses part of the total range
of experience within the cultures of which it is a product.
It does not even aspire to express them whole, or to
encompass many of their refinements and complexities.
Thus jazz has a layered structure, precisely reflecting that
of modern industrial communities. One extreme is shoddy,
the other esoteric while the middle ground is strewn with
soiled remnants.
If we now try to explain what is going on in sociological
terms, we may say that, as societies have become more
similar to each other at comparable levels, so they have
been further differentiated internally. The arts have
followed suit. People in comparable situations resemble
each other more closely, In their ways of life, their
mentality and their emotional make-up which governs
taste, while being cut off more completely from those
whose experiences are essentially dissimilar, even If they
happen to be neighbours.
While this has no doubt always been the case to some
extent, its repercussions today are much greater than
ever before, more rapid in their impact and on the whole,
more deliberately organized. Despite certain appearances,
there is a lot of spontaneous segregation in the world
based not on force and prejudice so much as on the
perfectly legitimate desire to pursue one's own interests
and one's own temperamental preferences, which has led
to dependence upon indirect and roundabout means of
contact rather than on physical propinquity.
What, in these circumstances, Is likely to be the future
of music? If one can venture a guess on the basis of
visible trends, I should say that music will again tend to
become somewhat anonymous, something of a collabora¬
tive product and that the remaining free-lancers will be
mainly concerned with the technological exploration of
the frontiers of sound.
Why? Because Interest in, and sympathy for the isolat¬
ed person and his problems is declining, displaced by
interest in groups, in associations and in identifiable mass
movements. Also, the percentage of musical participants
(i.e. amateur or professional performers) is declining in
comparison to the total number of "spectators" (i.e.
listeners).
The patronage for music is now in the hands of the
controllers of the great institutions the radio, the cinema,
recording companies, the state itself who are forced to
think in terms of wide public responsibility and the
economics of mass production and marketing. What
is more, the unparalleled accessibility of the standard ^.
CONT'D ON PAGE 13

SOCIETY CALLS THE TUNE (Cont'd.)
EXPLORING
NEW FRONTIERS
OF SOUND
In the past half century there have
been many attempts to extend the
frontiers of the world of music. Musi¬
cians have experimented with "concrete
music" and new tonal forms of music,
and even explored the possibilities of
new musical instruments. Photos here
show the recent efforts of two young
Frenchmen, François Baschet, a stringed
instrument maker, and Jacques Lasry,
who have invented startlingly new
types of instruments which bear strange
names such as the "pneumatic guitar",
"echo screen", "crystal organ" and the
"lameliphone". The crystal organ exists
in three tonal ranges, one of which,
the deep crystal, is shown on left. It
has three sounding boards made of
steel or duralumin connected to small
crystal rods which the player rubs
with wetted fingers. The instrument
has been used to play revolutionary
compositions and classical masterpieces.
12
Two hands moving
along a small forest
of rods conjure
sounds from the so¬
prano crystal organ
that are short and
non-resonant.

y#>
All photos © Almasy
This strange assembly of metallic domes and "lifebuoys"
(above) called "l'homme" (the man) is a new kind of per¬
cussion instrument which produces sad, drawn-out tones.
Left, the workshop where Baschet and Lasry have experi¬
mented with and built their extraordinary new instruments.'
François Baschet inflates a pneumatic guitar (right). One of
the simpler instruments he has devised, it has attracted
many amateur musicians and soon may be mass-produced.
Future dimensions of music
repertory encourages the use of music quite freely to
match the whim of the passing moment. How often do
we not twiddle a knob, or change a record, because we
don't feel like Rachmaninov in the morning, or because
Wagner happens to overwhelm us over tea?
Taking such logic a step further, one can ensure a steady
flow of suitable sound by assembling it functionally
(Music for Expectant Mothers, Relaxing Tunes, Gay
Melodies, the Rhythms of Productivity). Thus one elimi¬
nates the personal projections and tensions which
composers reflect in successive sections of their works, to
obtain a homogenized quantity varied at the behest of
the listener alone. From becoming an art which carries
the listener beyond himself, music is already largely
converted into one which the listener manipulates, so we
may expect its patrons to make the consumer's job even
easier.
By the same token, composers, instead of seeking a style
of their own to give as great a range as possible to what
they Individually wish to express, may endeavour to
discover new sound-combinations (not necessarily made
by instruments) to tickle the fancy of auditors in moods
not yet scaled by the output of their predecessors.
Already, this is the orientation of what is known as
musique concrète.
The vision of squads of sound-engineers turning out
music in response to preferences revealed by opinion polls
and sample surveys is perhaps repulsive. But is it, in
fact, any worse than the possessed genius trying to make
headway against indifference, or the master craftsman
executing a composition to special order?
The whole history of Western music is one of conflict
between the innovators and the conservatives, between
those who reached out for something beyond the already
achieved, and those who were automatically outraged by
any infringement of the established rules of their day.
Possibly, in the coming decades, this conflict will take a
different shape: tension between those who stress music
primarily in its personal and dimension, and
those who develop it along lines of utilitarianism and1_
therapy. Which would be perfectly in accord with the
wider tensions to which modern societies are subject.
