A FROZElfCONTÎ
i
HOWLING WINDS, bitter cold,
and a vast white desert of shifting
snow, slippery ice and hidden
crevasses make all movement a
laborious and hazardous enter¬
prise. This is Antarctica against
whose inhospitable climate scien¬
tists and explorers must prevail
in their efforts to uncover the
secrets of the icy continent.
Photo shows tracked vehicle and
sledge of French Polar expedi¬
tion bogged down in deep snow.
Jacques Masson
Expeditions Polaires Françaises

NENT OF MANY PARADOXES
by Georges Lacla vera
'-y**-- ,.-^-
£\ ntarctica, with a total surface of about live
* »million square miles, covers an area as large
as Europe and the United States combined. If one
Includes the great Ice shelves which fill the deep seas and
the bays surrounding the continent, another half million
square miles must be added to Its Immensity. Further¬
more, in winter the outlying seas freeze over for hundreds
of miles, and when the ice pack has reached the limit of
its extension, Antarctica becomes a solid mass of more
than fourteen million square milesequal to a quarter of
the earth's entire land surface.
Antarctica ls the highest of the world's continents.
Great mountain chains, with peaks often rising higher
than 10,000 feet, crisscross it In every direction. But these
mountains are visible as such only around the edges of the
continent. As soon as one penetrates a short distance
Inland they vanLsh and only the tips of their peaks emerge
from the Ice.
The entire land relief of the interior Ls in fact engulfed
under a gigantic Ice cap. This ice cap mantles Antarctica
from the coast inland, rising slowly until It reaches an
elevation of 12,000 feet near a point known as the "Pole of
Inaccessibility", situated some 600 miles from the geogra¬
phic South Pole which Itself ls no more than 9,800 feet
above sea level.
The thickness of the ice Ls greater than four kilometres
(two and a half miles) In certain places. Even on an
average It is more than two kilometres (one mile) thick.
If all the Antarctic ice were to melt, the level of the seas
would rise to drown most of the seaports of our planet
together with great stretches of fertile coastal plains.
The climate of Antarctica ls the severest known any¬
where on earth. The world's lowest temperature of
-88.3° C (-126.9° F.) has been recorded at Vostok, the Soviet
station situated some 800 miles from the coast at an
altitude of 12,000 feet. The annual mean temperature
along the coast drops to -30" C. (-22" F.) Winds of
incredible velocity and violence rage unceasingly across
the continent and make the bitter cold even more
difficult to bear.
Plant life ls practically non-exLstent save for certain
mosses, lichen and algae. Animal life, however, Ls abun¬
dant along the coasts and In the seas. Teeming colonies
of seal, penguins and petrel abound, and the ocean waters
are rich in plankton and deep sea creatures. (See article
page 35).
One of the many amazing features of Antarctica is its
shape which Is almost a perfect circle. ThLs has an enor¬
mous Influence on meteorological conditions all over the
continent with far-reaching effects throughout our globe.
Two vast seas cut deeply into Antarctica, the Ross Sea
and the Weddell Sea. The most southerly point of the for¬
mer is only 350 miles from the Pole, and it was this route
that both Amundsen and Scott took to get to the South
Pole. But to do so they had to cross the forbidding Queen
Maud range, a precipitous mountain chain whose peaks,
towering more than 15,000 feet, are amongst the highest
In Antarctica.
Against great odds they made their way through this
jagged barrier by following the great glaciers which carry
the Ice of the polar cap in its slow flow towards the sea.
Scott travelled along the Beardmore glacier which Ls more
than 60 miles long and 18 miles wide. Despite its .huge
size, it Ls by no means the giant of Antarctica's glaciers.
Between the Ross and Weddell Seas an extraordinary
mountain peninsula shaped like a horn extends to the 5
north. It Ls a prolongation of the Cordillera of the Andes
which, when it reaches the southern tip of South America
CONT"D ON NEXT PAGE

FROZEN CONTINENT (Cont'd)
Under the polar cap, remains of a desert
at Tierra del Fuego, sinks beneath the waves of the
Atlantic Ocean to re-emerge in Antarctica.
A glance at the map of Antarctica may lead one to
suppose, as did certain geographers when our knowledge
of the continent was much more superficial, that the Ross
and Weddell Seas are joined by a channel filled with ice,
and that Antarctica is in reality divided into two parts.
This gave rise to the much debated question: "Is Antarc¬
tica a continent or an archipelago?"
The answer has come only In the past few years as a
result of the many expeditions which have explored the
area., These expeditions set out to determine what the
coastline of Antarctica would look like if the ice were to
vanish, by carrying out systematic measurements of the
thickness of the ice.
The method used is to set off an explosive charge on the
surface. The concussion wave travels down through the
ice until it reaches rock when it is reflected back to the
surface and the echo recorded on instruments. Since the
speed of the concussion wave is known, we can measure
the time elapsed between the explosion and the return¬
ing echo, and thus calculate how far down the rock lies.
As a result of these measurements, scientists now feel
fairly sure that the major part of Antarctica is made up
of a single rockbed dating back to very ancient times.
However, a separated rock mass has been recently dis¬
covered on the edge of the Bellingshausen and Amundsen
Seas. This has been found to be of more recent origin
and of different composition from that of the rest of
Antarctica. It is separated from the main continent by
a very deep channel filled with ice several miles thick.
So, despite the fact that since the start of the Inter¬
national Geophysical Year in 1957 scientific expeditions
have undertaken numerous soundings, our knowledge of
the topography and geology of Antarctica's hidden rock
masses Ls still uncertain, and many enigmas remain
unfathomed.
Thus, the recent discovery that certain portions of
Antarctica's coastline are very similar to those of South
Africa has raised anew Alfred Wegener's theory of conti¬
nental drift. (1) Again, carbon deposits have been found
which indicate that in former geological times Antarctica
enjoyed a hot and humid climate. Elsewhere, vestiges of
an arid burning desert intrigue geologists.
J usT as ash and sand have preserved civili¬
zations of the past so the Antarctic ice has
served to protect the history of the Earth.
Better still, the snow turned to ice and slowly deposited
on the surface of Antarctica may soon tell us the story
of the evolutions of climate during the course of many
millions of years. Tests carried out on ice crystals
with radio Isotopes now enable scientists to distinguish
between the different seasons, and so it will soon be
possible for us to know the temperatures that existed in
Antarctica when the ice crystals were formed aeons ago.
Here, indeed, are the real archives of our planet, and
neither natural forces nor vegetation nor human
Influences have altered them-.
For how many hundreds of thousands of centuries have
volcanic ash and the dust of meteorites been deposited
here ? Perhaps they hold the key to the intriguing puzzles
of the Ice Ages and their causes, and the mysterious vicis¬
situdes of climate.
(1) Editor's note: How the continents originated and came to
occupy their geographic positions has from early times been a subject
of controversy. In 1915 Alfred Ly Wegener of Germany set forth his
theory of continental drift in his book The Origin of Continents and
Oceans {published in English translation in 1U24). According to
Wegener, the continents were separated from an original continuous
or nearly continuous land mass by drifting apart and a shifting of
the poles. Wegener s¡>oke of a general westward movement and a
drtft of the continent* away from the poles. The way in which the
bulge of South America can be fitted into the coast of West Africa
ii'nv offered as supporting evidence for the theory.
But let us leave this subject of the distant past, fascinat¬
ing though it Ls, and return to the Antarctica of today
which is of no less interest.
If the amount of the ice in Antarctica should increase
it will be at the expense of the waters of the ocean, the
level of which will drop. If, instead, the ice diminishes
the oceans will benefit from this and, as already noted,
the seas will rise. The danger, of course, is in no way
imminent, yet a rapid melting of the ice is not at all
inconceivable and would have incalculable repercussions
on the state of our world economy.
Scientists have therefore been attempting to find out
whether the balance sheet for Antarctica's ice is positive
or negative. To do this, they calculate the amount of
water vapour which the winds blow over Antarctica from
the surrounding oceans where it then falls as snow. At
the same time, they also calculate the losses, that is,
how much snow is driven into the sea by the winds, how
many icebergs "calve" or break off from the ice cap and
drift away, how much ice melts on the surface of and
within glaciers, etc.
The findings have been most contradictory.
Certain scientists claim that. Antarctica's
mass of ice is stationary. A number of observations prove
without possible doubt that the line of coastal ice is
definitely receding. But the correlation of all the data
assembled since the International Geophysical Year was
launched tends on the contrary to show an increase in
the amount of ice. This increase corresponds to an
annual condensation in the Antarctic equal to a film of
water three millimetres (about one eighth of an inch) thick
taken from all the oceans of the world. Yet there is no
trace of such a drop in the level of the oceans from any
of the hundreds of coastal observation stations which
carry out daily testing throughout the globe.
Of more immediate importance are the problems of me¬
teorology in Antarctica which can be summed up in two
questions: 1) What Ls the role of the Antarctic continent
on the general circulation of the atmosphere? 2) How
does the Antarctic influence air circulation globally?
The South Polar region probably holds more than 90%
of the world's supply of permanent ice. It is thus an
enormous reservoir of cold temperature and acts on the
earth's climate by cooling the masses of air which circu¬
late above its surface as well as the waters surrounding
it. In addition, the circular shape of the continent, with
the Pole as its centre, increases air circulation in the area.
The winds reach fantastic velocities, churning the seas
into mountainous waves all along the 40th parallel, and
it is no wonder therefore that seamen refer to this part
of the world as the "Roaring Forties."
These winds provoke the transfer of heat (or cold) be¬
tween Antarctica and the rest of the planet. But to what
extent? This can only be determined by a minute and
prolonged study of Antarctica's meteorology. And one of
the most important contributions to a better understand¬
ing of our planet during the I.G.Y. was no doubt the
setting up of a network of 57 meteorological stations on
the continent and the islands of the sub-Antarctic zone.
Most of these stations are still in operation today. An
international meteorological centre to assemble and
analyse their data was created in Melbourne, Australia,
after the central meteorological post at "Little Amer¬
ica V" was closed down at the end of the Geophysical
Year.
But science's interest in Antarctica is by no means limit¬
ed to geology, glaciology and meteorology. Like the Arctic,
which it resembles in many ways, it is an ideal place for
the study of the upper atmosphere and the complex phe¬
nomena caused by solar radiation and solar particles
under the influence of the earth's magnetic field.
These studies alone would have justified the extraor¬
dinary efforts made by the twelve nations who partici¬
pated in the International Geophysical Year programme.
CONTD ON PAGE 3

From " Secrets of Antarctica " by Dr.
Raymond J. Adie, " New Scientist ",
May 25, 1961
SOUTH PACIFIC OCEAN
SOUTH SHETLAND ISLANDS
AMUNDSEN
SEA
BELLINGSHAUSEN SEA
M fi-
JfJ
ICE-LESS ANTARCTICA.
This map of Antarctica shows
perhaps one of the most start¬
ling geographical discoveries of
the century how the continent
would look if all the ice melted.
Marie Byrd Land would be
reduced to a series of islands
separated from the mainland by
a 500-600 km. channel. Freed
from the tremendous weight of
ice, the continent would rise
a total of 500 to 600 metres.
ROSS SEA
- - .#
-
m4rj« bVrd
t4D
o
. -'
r ^W
è
- t.
ELLSWORTH
HI CHADS'.
A r FiLCHNER I
ICE ¿HELF
SOUTH
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
WEDDELL SEA
r ¥\
- %
y . y
f . *
- >
Q
N?
.
/ ROSS ICE
CAPE ADARE
-fr-
SOUTH POLE
FROZEN CONTINENT (Cont'd)
Now these efforts are being continued year after year
under the auspices of the Scientific Committee of Antarc¬
tic Research, better known as SCAR.
The economic value of Antarctica, apart from whaling,
is practically nil. The only resource which seems to exist
in any abundance is coal but its exploitation hardly seems
feasible. The real wealth of the Antarctic lies in the
ocean and the living things within it. It is not at all im¬
possible to conceive that this great reserve of protein rich
food may one day play an important part in nourishing
our planet.
Many suggestions have been made to put the Antarctic
to use, some quite fantastic and crackpot. One idea put
forward was to turn it into a cold storage warehouse.
Stocks of meat would be frozen in icebergs which when
needed would be towed across the oceans for delivery to
the consumer.
Another idea has been to fly sealed containers with
radioactive waste from nuclear factories to the heart of
the continent and drop them on the ice cap. The slow
creep of the ice flow would not bring them to the ocean
before several thousand years when they would have lost
most of their radioactivity and become harmless.
The creation of trans-Antarctic airlines has been envi¬
saged between South Africa, South America and Australia,
but the estimated commercial traffic would hardly jus¬
tify the highly expensive installations which this scheme
would require.
ANTARCTICA,
Co-operation between twelve nations dur¬
ing the International Geophysical Year
made possible the most ambitious scientific
exploration yet carried out in the conti¬
nent of Antarctica. Here, the "Lena"
unloads supplies and equipment for the
Soviet expeditions' Antarctic stations.
T he world now celebrates the 50th anniversary
_ of the conquest of the South Pole by Amund¬
sen and his companions on December 14, 1911, reached
only a few weeks later by Scott and his party who met a
tragic fate. How much progress we have seen in the short
span of 50 years!
The expedition of Admiral Byrd, and the international
Maudheim expedition in which Great Britain, Norway
and Sweden took part, to cite only these two examples,
were the prelude to the parties which set out for Antarc¬
tica during the International Geophysical Year.
The IGY expeditions reaped a rich scientific harvest
but let us not forget that they embodied the most
impressive effort of international scientific co-operation
the world has ever seen despite the most inhospitable
continent on the globe and the most inhuman of living
conditions.
In 1955 the Special Committee of the IGY decided to set
up a special group to prepare an Antarctic programme.
Fears were expressed that political difficulties might
threaten the success of the project. But all such diffi¬
culties were happily overcome and every scientific confe¬
rence on Antarctica, before, during and after the Inter¬
national Geophysical Year has taken place in a friendly
atmosphere of mutual understanding which has greatly
contributed to the success of all scientific undertakings.
All governments tacitly agreed not to allow political fac¬
tors to impede the work of the expeditions.
This has led to the Antarctic Treaty which has now
been ratified by the 12 nations who had dispatched expe¬
ditions to the Antarctic during the IGY. The treaty gua¬
rantees freedom of scientific research in Antarctica for a
period of thirty years. The signatory countries promise
to use the treaty zone defined by the 60° South Parallel
only for peaceful purposes, to ban nuclear explosions in
this territory as well as the deposit of atomic waste, and
finally, to exchange their programmes and scientific data.
This is the first treaty ever drafted to protect scientific
research and to entrust a non-governmental organization,
the Scientific Committee of Antarctic Research of the
International . Council of Scientific Unions, with full
power to determine the programmes. Here is a precedent
and the pattern of a concrete formula for harmonizing
relations between science and governments. Is it not a
paradox that the continent most hostile to man should
be the one to have done the most for the cause of peace.
Georges Laclavère is president of the Scientific Commit¬
tee for Antarctic Research and served on the Special
8 Committee for the International Geophysical Year. He
is head of the Department of Cartography at the Na¬
tional Geographic Institute, Paris.
Tass
