© The National Galle
Three great works of art in the volume " Love
and Marriage ", one of a series of 14 art portfolios
to be published under the title " Man Through
His Art ".From left to right : Standing couple
Courtesy of The Art Institute of Chicago
on the façade of Caitya Hall, Karle, Bombay
(Ist century B.C.) ; Wedding portrait of Giovanni
Arnolfini by Jan Van Eyck (1434) ; American
Gothic, a painting by Grant Wood (1930).


'MAN THROUGH HIS ART
HROUGHOUT the ages, from the time he dwelt in
caves to the present day, man has beep impelled to
an artistic expression and across the long tapestry or his history
he discloses in his art the same inspirations prompting his
painter's brush or sculptor's chisel.
The great themes of his art admit no frontiers; they vanquish
both time and conflict, providing a perfect basis for the introduc¬
tion of one culture to another.
On this basis a series of art portfolios called "Man Through
his Art" is being prepared by an international group of scholars
and art historians working within the framework of Unesco's
Major Project for the Mutual Understanding of Eastern and
Western Cultural Values.
"Man Through his Art" is sponsored by the World Confede¬
ration of Organizations of the Teaching Profession (W.C.O.T.P.)
and will be published with the collaboration and financial aid of
Unesco. It has received a research grant from the Rockefeller
and other foundations in the United States, and many of Unesco's
national commissions those of India, U.S.A., Sweden, Federal
Republic of Germany, Cambodia, Spain, Ghana and the United
Kingdom have also co-operated to make the project possible.
The complete series will appear over a seven-year period in
14 folios on 14 separate themes: War and Peace, Music, Nature,
Man at Work, the Human Face, Festivals, the Vision of Bliss, Love
and Marriage, Charity, Death, Man and Beast, the Family, Dreams
and Fantasy, and the Experience of God.
The first two portfolios, War and Peace, and Music, are sche¬
duled to be published early in 1963. The immense theme of
war and peace ranges from works of art from the modern period
to 3,500 B.C. Saharan rock paintings (the Archers of Tassili)
through the heroic epics of ancient India and Greece (the Maha-
barata and Homers Iliad), and the Chinese Buddhist cavo painting
"Meditation before the Setting Sun" expressing visually the
Chinese saying that "Peace comes through a man's ability to
listen not only with the ear but with the mind, not only with the
mind but with the spirit."
Each portfolio will have 20 reproduction plates (12 1/4" by 9",)
16 in full colour and 4 in black and white. The plates will be
detachable for display in classrooms, adult education and commu¬
nity centres, and a text prepared by eminent scholars will
combine information about the approach of different cultures to
each theme with a detailed analysis of each work of art chosen.
The volumes seek to reveal to the modern 6tudent not only the
multiformity of the world's civilizations and the inter-relationship
of their artistic expression but man's fundamental similarity of
response within them.
Within the shrinking bounds of our world today we live in the
immediate presence of other civilizations and our understanding
of them has become indispensable to the discovery of our own
identity. The editors of the "Man Through His Art" series hope
that the recurring themes of man's creative history will bridge past
and present and link the people of the world in better under¬
standing.
All orders and enquiries should be directed to WCOTP, 12, rue dc
Ponthieu, Paris, who are responsible for making arrangements for the
publication of editions in all languages or (for the U.K.) to Educational
Productions' Ltd., East Ardsley, Yorkshire, England (publishing agent
in the U.K.). Provisional price for the U.K. edition £1; France about
15 NF. Other editions at comparable prices.
NO ORDERS SHOULD BE SENT TO UNESCO, PLEASE.
11
