King of story-tellers
daWta^A^MMMM \Wm* ¥ ' AiBaB^B for Kyoto's children
á$FíO-5
6y Muneharu Kitagahi
On December 31, 1959, an old man of 77 died
peacefully In Kyoto, the ancient capital of
Japan. With his death, a familiar figure disappeared
from the city]s streets. For some fifty years, passers-by
had been accustomed to see Jodo Kumami riding around
in his tricycle wheelchair pulled by two dogs, a con¬
spicuous sight with his long hair and moustache which
made 'him look somewhat like a Chinese physician or
a fortune-teller.
Jodo Kumami was a story-teller and a friend of chil¬
dren for whom he organized many activities at a time
when few people thought of providing playgrounds or
arranging excursions for youngsters in the city. He was
born in 1882, son of a poor family In Osaka, and after his
parents' death, was brought up by his brother in Ako, a
town famous in Japanese feudal history. Burns on his
legs crippled him for life at thirteen, when he acciden¬
tally upset a lighted oil lamp. Being unable to walk,
however, seems to have spurred his Imagination and
obliged him to develop other talents.
His first ambition was to become an artist. He went
to Kyoto to study under a master and, while he earned
a meagre living by drawing designs for kimonos, he began
to make up fairy tales to entertain his neighbours'
children. As they told their friends about his stories,
more and more children flocked to him. Finally, his
small room would not hold them and he had to hire
a large public meeting hall.
About this time, he organized the Kyoto Fairy Talc Club
which held regular meetings for boys and girls and pub¬
lished a monthly magazine in which his stories appeared.
But he did not confine his activities for children to ln-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
Jodo Kumami (1882-1959)
became accidently crippled
at the age of 1 3. Afterwards,
for some fifty years of his
life he was a familiar figure
in the streets of Kyoto.Japan,
riding in his wheelchair.
ï¿in ¿K "
cvÄtiV**1
.
m
to s '
- . - mJt*
31
Unesco photos

JODO KUMAMI (Cont'd)
The magic of 'once upon a time'
venting stories for them ; he also arranged baseball teams
and excursions and organized summer camps.
By now, he was well-known as a story-teller and a
familiar figure In Kyoto. Children loved him, and called
him "Sense!" (master). They used to push his wheel¬
chair for him and In exchange he gave them drawings
illustrating scenes from his stories.
To commemorate the tenth anniversary of the Kyoto
Fairy Tale Club, Kumami organized Kyoto's first story
competition for schoolchildren in the Town Hall in 1920.
More than ten schools took part in the competition, which
was sponsored by a leading Japanese newspaper. On an¬
other occasion, the Club launched a fund-raising cam¬
paign for Lieutenant Shlrase's Antarctic expedition, an
event which opened up vistas of a new world in the
children's imagination. When Britain's Prince of Wales
visited Kyoto in April 1922, the Club gave him a set of
dolls made by master dollmakers of Kyoto to illustrate
the famous fairy tale of the Tongue-Cut Sparrow.
When it came to money, Jodo Kumami, like many
artists, was impractical. From time to time, financial dif¬
ficulties forced him to close the Club. One evening, when
he had been evicted for not paying his rent, an eight-
year-old girl who had listened to his stories found him in
the street and brought him home. Her parents, who owned
32
a hotel, approved their daughter's generosity and allowed
him to stay for a year.
Kumami wrote many tales, but lack of money prevented
him from collecting them in book form, and in the course
of time, the manuscripts were scattered and lost. Usually,
the stories began with. "Once upon a time." They
had simple, dramatic themes, and the chief characters
were ants, butterflies, dragonflles, rats, mice, rabbits and
goldfish.
Public recognition of Jodo Kumami's activities for
children only came a few years ago, and by then his
name meant little to the rising generation of Japanese
youth who prefer radio, television and cinema to story¬
telling. In 1953, the old man who had given joy to
hundreds of youngsters, was presented with a motor-
driven wheelchair by the Mayor of Kyoto. But even this
brought him no luck. He soon crashed it into a streetcar,
and was seriously injured. He was not at home in the
world of modern machines any more than he was in
the world of modern entertainment. When he got well
after his accident, he again went back to using his old,
trustworthy, dog-powered tricycle-chair.
When he fell ill in 1959, one of his friends asked a
nearby primary school to send some schoolchildren to
visit him. The request was granted, and a group of boys
and girls brought musical instruments to console the for¬
gotten storyteller with a concert. It was only a half-
hour visit, but Kumami was excited to tears, and re¬
marked that he was so happy that now he was ready
to die.
In Kyoto there are still many grown-up people who
cherish a childhood memory of Kumami Sensei. But out¬
side of Kyoto, and among young people and children even
there, he is almost unknown. One Japanese writer of
children's books calls his work old-fashioned. Neverthe¬
less his tales are deeply implanted in the minds of hun¬
dreds of people doctors, university professors, bankers,
merchants, housewives who listened to Jodo Kumami
when they were small.
Because he became an almost legendary figure in the
lives of people familiar with his stories, he has been
compared to Hans Christian Andersen. The two had
much in common: both came from poor families and
spent a poverty-stricken childhood, and both became
story-tellers. But there are differences. Andersen had
opportunities to attend school, while Kumami had none.
Andersen had the advantage of travelling all over Europe
to Rome and to London but Kumami was a cripple and
never went beyond the city of Kyoto. Andersen met
Charles Dickens, and was helped by King Frederick VI
of Denmark, but Kumami had no such distinguished
friends. And, unlike Andersen, Kumami had no opportu¬
nity to publish his fairy tales. Recently, however, efforts
have been made to bring him recognition. Fairy tales
never really die ; and for young children, the world around
there is still magic in the words: "Once upon a time..."
Professor Muneharu Kitagaki is a member of the faculty
of Doshisha University, Kyoto.
