WILD LIFE
Nature has created unique species in
the world's coldest climate. The arrival
of man now threatens their existence.
by Rodolfo N. Panzarini
Antarctica presents us with an environment
singularly unsulted to the development of
living things. It ls in fact the largest of the world's
deserts where freezing weather and winds, the absence of
fresh water and the extreme rarity of soil surfaces all
combine to make it impossible for plants to thrive. And
it is on plants that all animals must depend for food,
either directly or Indirectly.
The picture is totally different when we turn to the
Antarctic waters. Here we find conditions highly
favourable for the growth of a marine flora of microscopic
plant organisms which in spring and summer multiply
by the millions and provide the basic nourishment for an
abundant animal life.
The vegetable and animal kingdom of Antarctica is
composed of a relatively small number of species but each
is represented by an incredible number of individual
creatures. They are a striking demonstration of how
evolution has operated a high degree of specialization to-
adapt life to the harsh and very special conditions of a
particular environment.
And since this environment provides very little food on
land we find that no exclusively terrestrial animals exist
anywhere in Antarctica. This explains too why birds and
animals are to be found only on the shores and islands
where nourishment in abundance is available from the
sea; why so many animals emigrate from the region in
autumn; why there are forms of life typically and
exclusively Antarctic in nature; and why, finally, all plant
and animal life is circumpolar in distribution.
On the mainland the chief botanical species are algae,
mosses and lichens, but on the sub-Antarctic islands a
sparse tundra has succeeded in establishing itself.
Despite the sub-zero temperatures micro-organisms are
known to exist in the atmosphere, and scientists have
recently been successful in obtaining a proliferation of
life from air samples cultivated in low-temperature labor¬
atories. Various species have been isolated Including
several of the micro-fungi yeast variety.
I t
he Antarctic seas have been found to be
teeming with an extraordinary multitude of
microscopic unicellular algae of the diatom family. These
form the greater part of the phytoplankton upon which
birds and sea animals, including whales, regularly prey
for food.
Land creatures are limited to the lower forms of life,
a number of which are capable of subsisting in a state of
suspended animation when conditions are particularly
unfavourable. Birds and mammals are all of the marine
variety except for the white-plumed Antarctic sheathbill
which haunts the rookeries of penguins and is known for
its predatory attacks on their eggs.
Rear-Admiral Rodolfo Panzarini is director of the "Instituto
-_ Antárctico Argentino" and was in command of Argentina's
«*> Antarctic expeditions in 1950-51 and 1952-53. He was previously
head of Argentina's Maritime Meteorological Service and is the
author of "La Naturelza del Antárctico."
The penguins are the best known of the sea birds of
Antarctica, and their social habits are both curious and
fascinating. Every spring they arrive on the islands and
coast of the frozen continent and gather together in
gigantic colonies. Here they breed and raise their chicks
which must be strong enough by autumn to be able
apparently to migrate to warmer latitudes further north.
The emperor penguin, the largest and stateliest of all the
penguins, behaves in quite a different fashion. It makes
its appearance in these latitudes not in spring but when
the autumn is drawing to a close. No nest ls built, and
each couple produces only a single egg. The egg is
incubated during the dark polar night by placing it on
the feet of the male who shelters it under a fold of skin
hanging apron-like from his abdomen.
In January the colonies of emperor penguins disperse
and set themselves adrift on ice-floes moving out to sea.
Where they spend their time until the following autumn
remains a mystery.
Petrel, albatross, tern, gull, cormorant and skua, which
all make penguin chicks their preferred prey also nest in
Antarctica and remain there during the milder season.
Of the five species of seals only one the sea ele¬
phant is not a uniquely Antarctic creature.
Among the others are the leopard seal, an Implacable
enemy of the penguin which it hunts voraciously and
devours when they meet in the water. The fur seal
belongs to another group which was almost completely
exterminated by indiscriminate hunting about the middle
of the last century. Now, after a hundred years, its popu¬
lation seems to be recovering.
Whales, our planet's largest animal, visit Antarctica in
the spring to feed almost exclusively on the millions of
tiny shrimplike crustaceans known as "krill." Over 80 per
cent of the world's whale oil comes from Antarctic waters
with the result that the whale is in perpetual danger of
extermination.
The plants and animals of Antarctica, both those found
on land and in the waters, form an integrated community
with all its members closely dependent on each other for
survival in this harsh climate which is a permanent
challenge to them. All forms of life there play a role that
is important from the standpoint of science, aesthetics
and economics.
For the scientist Antarctic wildlife is of exceptional
interest because the environment has given rise to forms
of structural, physiological and ecological adaptation
which are astonishingly specialized and refined, and which
are to be found nowhere else in the world. And also
because the same environment has led certain species to
form colonies during the reproduction season and to
disperse and seek refuge elsewhere during the remainder
of the year. The former type of behaviour ls usually
associated with a highly developed social organization and
the latter with migratory habits.
From the aesthetic viewpoint Antarctic animals possess
not only great beauty but elegance and grace, and the
charm that one attaches to things rare. Their very

»5 Jean Prévost TEETH OF A KILLER. Holding open the jaws of a sea leopard, or leopard seal, this biologist member of a
recent French polar expedition, displays the powerful fangs of the mortal enemy of the penguins. Named for
the variegated colours of Its fur, this Antarctic seal can grow to I 2 feet In length. It Is an especial foe of the small
Adélle penguin; In the stomach of one leopard seal the remains of nofewer than I7pengulns were recently found.
presence brings life to the austere landscape, breaking
its natural monotony and softening the feeling of dismay
and oppression which the white wasteland makes on the
human mind. Most of the animals show no signs of fear
in the presence of man and allow him to approach to
study their behaviour at close range. Though only of the
most rudimentary type, the vegetation found in Antarctica
also helps to break up the all-pervading whiteness.
The animals of Antarctica have an economic value too,
since several species provide marketable products and In
emergencies can be used by explorers for fuel and food.
At present the economic value of its wildlife cannot com¬
pare with its scientific and aesthetic Importance but this
situation may well change before long.
The Antarctic is the last of the earth's continents to
have been invaded by man and the only one still almost
entirely in its natural state. But nature cannot escape
the effects of man's arrival. By merely Installing ourselves
in the few places where vegetation can grow and animals
congregate during the breeding season we threaten the
flora, already extremly rare, and inevitably do damage to
the fauna, the more so when we decimate their numbers
for our own ends.
Such inroads can do irreparable harm and lead to the
extinction of entire species of the utmost importance. In
the past the damage caused by the massacre of animals
hunted for their meat or skins has been disastrous even
though limited to a few species.
Today's scientific invasion of Antarctica is obviously not
aimed at hunting down the wild life of the region. Yet
though inspired by totally different motives it constitutes
a new but no less dangerous threat to the vegetable and
animal kingdom of Antarctica.
Along with the great influx of men have come animals
and other forms of life alien to the snow-covered
continent, resulting sometimes In competition and even
open hostility to the native fauna. The ccnturles-
long Isolation of Antarctica made It unnecessary for the
species there to build up defence mechanisms to meet the
challenge of outside encroachment. Ill-equipped to
defend themselves they found themselves especially
vulnerable to attack and their very survival was thus
threatened .
Two examples of man's improvidence In Antarctica
deserve special mentionthe whale and the fur seal. The
whale ls being hunted In such numbers today that there
are signs of Its serious depletion. The seal, as already
noted, has not been hunted on a commercial scale for
the past century and ls only now recovering from the
ravages of the past.
Both need protection, the whale to avoid reaching the
danger level of extinction, the seal until studies have
shown that its population ls stabilized and a safe maximum
hunting quota has been determined.
Fortunately, when uncontrolled hunting eventually
reduces catches to such an extent that commercial
exploitation ls abandoned, the recuperative power of the
animals still appears to be strong enough to save them
from total extinction. But It takes a long time before
the species recover. Nevertheless it ls both dangerous 37
and uneconomical to approach this critical point.
Dangerous, because any unforseen big catch may have
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WILD LIFE (Continued)
Forbidden sanctuaries
catastrophic consequences on the survival of the depleted
species; uneconomical because prolonged idleness in a
commercial enterprise involving many men and machines
obviously spells financial loss.
Although no one can deny man's right to turn to plants
and animals to satisfy his needs we should remember
that it would be unwise to do so in excess of what nature
can provide. For example, the mass collection of eggs
does not really affect the result of a breeding season since
many of these eggs would never have reached the hatching
stage anyway in the cold Antarctic climate. But the
parent birds may be so disturbed as to abandon their usual
mating grounds and seek another which it is very difficult
to find outside of Antarctica.
If science is to progress, however, some measure of inter¬
ference is Inevitable and must be accepted, if only in the
interests of nature preservation itself which depends on
science and its findings to achieve positive results.
The problems of nature protection and preservation in
Antarctica were first taken up in March 1959 at the third
meeting of the Special Committee on Antarctic Research
held in Canberra, Australia. A provision covering the
subject was later included in the Antarctic Treaty signed
in Washington the following December.
The preservation methods now recommended are based
on general principles and on what little we know about
the Antarctic biological world. It goes without saying
that they will be revised in the light of new facts as
they emerge from future scientific investigations.
But it is already abundantly clear that man's presence
in Antarctica, which is increasing with every passing year,
represents an increasing threat to the flora and fauna,
and that protective measures are needed before it Is too
late.
38 The whole of Antarctica should now be recognized by all
countries as a nature reserve, and even predatory species
should receive protection so as not to disturb the natural
Photos Jacaues Masson © Expéditions Polaires Françaises
LOW-FLYING HELICOPTER dumping supplies near Adélie pen¬
guins. This can often be a source of disturbance and danger to Antarc¬
tica's bird colonies especially during the breeding season. The small
Adélie penguins are among the most comical and endearing of this
family of Antarctic sea-birds. They bow, swagger, chatter and doze.
They seal their courtship with a kiss (above) and watch carefully (below)
over their downy chicks. Undoubtedly they look like ugly ducklings when
compared with the handsome chicks of the emperor penguin opposite.
5 Jean Prévost
/Mm
*«K
'PENGUINS* THAT FLY. Though true penguins are only found
in the southern hemisphere in Antarctica, certain northern oceanic
birds are also mistakenly referred to as penguins. These belong to the
Alcidae or Auk family whose members nest in great colonies from
Greenland, Iceland and Spitzbergen to North America and Northern
Europe. Unlike Antarctic penguins these northern birds can fly (photo
below) though one of their number, the great auk, became extinct
because it could neither fly nor run. Two centuries ago millions of
great auks still existed, but so many were killed off in a short-sighted
hunt for their flesh and feathers that finally not one was left alive.
© Dragesco, Paris
CONT'D ON PAGE 40

^T
EMPERORS AND
KINGS OF THE
PENGUIN WORLD
O fcyjione
Largest of Antarctica's flightless birds are the emperor penguins, above, seen warming chicks
between their feet, and king penguins, below, out for a stroll along the seashore. Fossil bones
of penguins found In the Antarctic show that some species must have been as tall as a man.
Emperor penguins stand 3 1/2 feet high and weigh 90 pounds or more. They breed In the
depth of winter, their single egg being hatched on the feet of the male (he maintains a fast,
totalling 90 days before and during Incubation). The emperors feed chiefly on fish or small
octopuses (most other penguins eat shrimp) and usually live as monogamous couples.
<

Wild Life (Cont'd from page 38)
biological equilibrium of the region. Areas deemed to be
particularly important or vulnerable must be given special
status as "sanctuaries" where human intrusion or inter¬
ference of any kind would be strictly forbidden.
Special attention should be given to the protection of
food sources from the sea. This could be done by
prohibiting the exploitation of rich marine areas near
points where birds and animals congregate.
Since nature recognizes only natural frontiers, inter¬
national co-operation is indispensable if we wish
conservation measures to be effective. These measures
must also be the result of the international effort of all
the countries now working together in the Antarctic in
view of the circumpolar distribution of species, the isola¬
tion of the region and the precarious balance of the food
cycle for all wild life.
Furthermore, no plant or animal species new to the
region should be introduced before scientists have carefully
examined all the possible consequences such action might
entail. Domestic animals should be imported under strict
control and limited to the minimum according to their
chances of survival, their breeding capacity and usefulness
to man.
Overall protective measures should be aimed particularly
against actions likely to cause the most serious damage,
.f. i.e. allowing dogs to run loose, permitting helicopters,
planes and motor vehicles to frighten or disturb bird
colonies, setting off explosions or discharging firearms in
the vicinity of seal rookeries during the mating season,
molesting birds and seals by too frequent visits, permitting
ships to discharge oil into the coastal waters.
Authorization can be granted, however, to obtain
specimens of the flora and fauna of Antarctica provided
that this is done under appropriate controls to ensure the
conservation of the species. Thus the granting of
permission would be considered quite legitimate for the
completion or maintenance of zoological and botanical
collections, for scientific collections or study, for enriching
private collections of stuffed animals (for this purpose
animals should never be killed but must have died a
natural death). It is equally legitimate when required
for the feeding of men and animals in Antarctica, and
for commercial exploitation with the proviso that this
be carried out in accordance with the established
principles of nature preservation.
But it is not enough to define the elements of the
problem and admit its importance, to pursue the study
of the behaviour and characteristics of Antarctic plant
and animal life, to lay down standards based on these
findings and then prepare an international agreement for
their application. What is needed, perhaps above all, is
for each of us to feel personally responsible for the
defence of a common interest. Without this the world
at large may soon be deploring the loss of a beautiful and
irreplaceable heritage which the wild life of Antarctica
represents.
