A UNIVERSITY TOWN
BUILT BY A COUNTRY DOCTOR
Unesco photographer Paul
Almasy made special Jour¬
neys to Asia, Africa and Latin
America to take many of the
photos in this issue, inclu¬
ding the photo-story on the
following pages.
I N 1942, Manipal was a village with a few hundred
Inhabitants on the outskirts of the town of Udipl in
the State of Mysore, southern India, hardly distinguishable from scores
of similar hamlets In the region. Today, Manipal is a town of nearly
10,000 Inhabitants. It has a medical school, an engineering college, a
college of arts, letters and science, a college of commerce, a school of
music, three elementary schools and a secondary school. How did this
obscure village become a thriving town and a vigorous educational and
cultural centre?
The transformation of Manipal has come about through the vision and
determination of a country doctor named T. M. A. Pal who sparked a
remarkable community enterprise in education and science. Dr. Pai,
who was born in a village not far from Manipal 67 years ago, studied at
the University of Madras and after obtaining his medical degree returned
to practise in his native village.
As he went his rounds, Dr. Pal mused on many problems, but the one
that preoccupied him most of all was India's lack of schools, not only
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
37

COUNTRY DOCTOR (Cont'd)
THE UNBELIEVABLE
BREAM COME TRUE
schools to train other doctors like himself, but schools for engineers,
technicians and teachers of all kinds. "Knowledge Is power" was his
guiding maxim.
In his own area there were no facilities for higher education and he
knew that many promising young men and women were without the
means to continue their education at Mangalore or Madras. How could
he help them?
The answer came in 1940 when, after discussing the problem with
leading citizens of Udipi, he decided to create an educational co¬
operative to give the area the schools it needed. Two years later, In
1942, his courageous project came into being with the foundation of the
Academy of General Education at Manipal. The first aims of the Aca¬
demy were to make available technical and commercial education by
A street in Manipal. With
the gradual expansion of
schools and faculties this
tiny village has become a
town whose inhabitants
38 now number nearly ten
thousand, of whom seve¬
ral thousand are students.
- . '' . -

On the building site (left) Doctor Pai and members of his staff study
the layout for the foundations of a new library which is the latest
addition to the university complex that has been created in the village
of Manipal. Right, the entrance to the Kasturba Medical College,
established in 1953. In this modern faculty of medicine, lessons are
given by some of India's most eminent doctors and scientists.
supporting or building schools and colleges. A vigorous drive was
undertaken to enlist support and donations from all sections of the
community.
The project started modestly enough with a few vocational courses but
soon expanded to include two primary, a higher elementary and a secon¬
dary school. By 1949 Dr. Pal was able to enter the field of higher
education with the establishment of an Arts and Science College later
named the Mahatma Gandhi Memorial College to honour the memory of
the great Indian leader.
Four years later, in 1953, he astounded educationalists by setting up
India's first privately-sponsored medical college, the Kasturba Medical
College, named after the wife of Mahatma Gandhi. This was one of
Dr. Pai's most significant achievements. He and his friends had been
moved by the plight of the many young men for whom there were no
places in existing medical colleges in India, so they launched the
Kasturba Medical College on a co-operative basis, asking the parents
of the students who would benefit from its tuition to contribute equal
amounts to the project. Sixty-seven per cent of the first class graduated
as doctors in 1959.
In 1960 a large teaching hospital was added to the College. This has
provided clinical facilities for the students and has helped to relieve
some of the region's urgent medical problems.
Today the Academy has 800 medical students, 700 at the Polytechnic
School, 1,200 at the College of Arts, Letters and Science, 200 at the
School of Commerce. The primary schools founded by Dr. Pal have
900 boys and girls, the secondary school 550 and the School of Music,
350.
Dr. Pai's achievement Is a triumph of educational planning and educa¬
tional financing from co-operative sources, for today the Academy's
resources amount to £250,00 ($700,000).
Most men would be satisfied to see their hopes and dreams realized
on such a lavish scale. But Doctor Pai is still looking far ahead. Today
he Is giving Manipal a large modern library of which the Academy's
present library will be the nucleus.
"I believe", he said recently, "that It Is the duty of everyone to give
everything he can to help the development of education."
A nurse gives her report to Dr. Pai as he
does the rounds of the hospital at Manipal
which has been operating since 1960. It
has 600 beds and besides providing clinical
facilities for the students, it helps to relieve
some of the region's urgent medical problems.
39

COUNTRY DOCTOR (Cont'd)
A PEASANT BECOMES AN ENGINEER
Jayakar Shetty, the son of
a poor farmer in the Indian
state of Mysore, seen here
(photo on left) helping his
parents, would never have
had the chance of a school
education if Dr. Pai had
not launched his educa¬
tional project at Manipal.
Right, Jayakar now cycles
daily from h¡s home to
Manipal, ten miles away, to
attend courses (below) at
the Engineering College.
4P
