SENSIBLE SHOPPING IN THE
SUPERMARKET OF SCIENCE
by Patrick M.S. Blackett
Nobel Prize for Physics
'ROBLEMs of formulating practical and
realistic plans for the application of science
and technology today face the government of many a
newly emerging country. I specifically have in mind the
new African nations, since, for various historic reasons,
they are very short of trained manpower.
The first thing which must strike, say, the Prime
Minister or Minister of Finance of such a young nation,
ls that science and scientists are expensive and that their
financial demands clash with the innumerable other
demands on a country's very limited financial resources,
and still more limited foreign currency. Even in the field
of scientific and technical education alone, there will be
the choice to be made of the proper allocation of finance
between primary, secondary and higher education;
or between training science teachers, scientifically trained
administrators, research workers in pure and applied
science, and engineers and technologists. Then there are,
of course, the essential problems as to what the scientist
and technologist should be used for.
It is important to note that these main decisions have
to be made by the Government. For the Government
alone, in general, has the financial resources to carry out
any worthwhile programme. Even when financial aid
from other countries is available for specific educational
and scientific projects, government assessment and
approval will generally be necessary.
So today a great deal of very detailed decision-making
in the scientific and technical field will fall on the govern¬
ment of these newly-emerging countries, and just at a
time when vital political, economic, and social problems
have to be solved. It is evident that a high priority for
the educational system of an emerging country is the
training of an adequate number of scientifically and
technologically minded executives, able to make these
complex and difficult decisions.
Any minister or other high official from an emerging
country attending the U.N. conference on science and
technology will, no doubt, be in two minds about the vast
display of scientific and technological developments which
are dealt with in the hundreds of communications. On
the one hand, the conference will make clear the great
possibilities, inherent in modern scientific industrialization
and agriculture, for the raising of the material standards
of life of the emerging countries. On the other hand, it
will confront such a statesman or official with a frighten¬
ing number of decisions which must be taken. For, even
leaving new research and development out of account, the
sheer bulk of advanced technology which is available to
be bought in the world today, by a nation with the cash,
is staggering.
Even rich countries like the United Kingdom do not
buy every process, plant, machine tool or vehicle on sale.
How much more must this be true of the newly-emerging
countries, with their very limited resources both of finance
and of trained manpower! Their representatives may feel
like window-shoppers, admiring the riches of modern
technology through the plate glass window of their limited
resources in money and men. Moreover, when they have
some money in their pockets they must clearly be very
discriminating purchasers.
In considering the formulation of national policy in
30 relation to the application of science and technology to
the increase of material wealth, it is useful here to
distinguish three main aspects.
The first is that of known and available technology.
Most of the most urgent needs of the emerging countries
in the early stages of development come into this category.
To set up a motor bus service, it is necessary to have the
foreign exchange to buy the vehicles and fuel, and the
technical schools to train the drivers and repair personnel,
but no research or development at all is needed. Nor is
new research and development required to set up an
airline, or a television system, or an electricity supply, or
a sewage system and piped water supply, or the majority
of normal manufacturing plants.
Though such projects do not involve any appreciable
research and development, they do require a large supply
of technically and scientifically-trained personnel to run
them. A big increase of indigenous-trained scientific,
technological and administrative personnel will be needed
before a country can make full use of the known techno¬
logies without undue and expensive reliance on foreign
personnel. A major task of a new nation's educational
system must be to provide as soon as possible the necessary
technological intelligentsia to make use of all the known
and available technology which the country can afford to
buy.
Prominent among the vital tasks which such trained
people will have to tackle is the formulation of a sensible
"shopping list" I mean by this homely phrase the deci¬
sion as to what to buy and what not to buy in the world's
well-stocked supermarket for production goods and pro¬
cesses. In one sense the UNCSAT conference is a cata¬
logue of what is available, and so should be of great value
to the citizens of the emerging countries who have the
responsibility for making these decisions. One cannot
over-emphasize the importance of recognising the necessity
for wise choice of what to buy. Incidentally, the mere
reading and digesting of the mountainous mass of the
conference documents will provide a major task for the
scientists and engineers of the emerging countries.
The second most important aspect of the
application of science and technology to a
less developed country is that concerned with problems
which are related to the special conditions of the country,
and the solution of Which must be done on the spot.
Prominent among these, of course, are those special
aspects of agriculture and medicine which have specific
local significance and so cannot be studied elsewhere.
Then there are many problems in meteorology, geology,
geophysical surveying, road building and housing, where
original research and development related to local condi¬
tions Is required. In addition, many new technological
problems arise in the setting up of local industries, due
to the special properties of the local fuels, raw materials,
textiles, foodstuffs, etc.
In relation to these problems, the importance of a first
rate Information service is vital. It must be made as easy
as possible for the research and development personnel
to be kept continuously aware of the state of general
world knowledge on a particular subject, so as not to be
led by ignorance into expensive researches to find out
what is already well known. The opposite danger is to
assume too easily that some process, technique or method,
which has long been in successful use in some other
country, can be transferred without modification to new

AN OLD
TWIST
This African leather
craftsman possoses no
machino of any kind
for processing tho ani¬
mal skins ho usos in
his trade. To soften
the skins ho uses an
age-old method of his
people which consists
of stringing up tho
undressed hides to a
tree, attaching a heavy
weight to them and
then twisting and turn¬
ing them until they
are in a workable state.
© Paul Almasy. Pans
surroundings. Some of the most valuable research pro¬
jects in the early stages of a country's development will
surely lie in the imaginative adaption of known methods
to local conditions.
There is one ever imminent danger in such fields as
medicine and agriculture. This is, that the policy¬
makers may become so impressed by the latest triumphs
of science that the more humdrum requirements of public
health and good husbandry may get too little emphasis.
The danger of relying on wonder drugs and neglecting
the plumbing is very real. Historians of the future may
be amazed that our present epoch had the genius to
discover penicillin, but had not the wit to give the ma¬
jority of mankind a sewage system up to the technological
level of River Valley civilization 5,000 years ago.
The third aspect is the group of new technologies which
are not yet in general use but are still under development,
mainly in the technologically advanced countries. I refer,
for instance, to such things as solar heat, fuel cells,
desalination of Water, and hosts of improved processes
and manufactured goods. Though a close watch must
be kept on these developments, I am convinced that the
national economic and technological planning of a new
country's development, over the next decade or so, should
be based on what is now known.
Useful technological innovation, when it arises, should
be welcomed as a windfall profit: it should not be relied
on for planning purposes. In fact, most of the now
emerging new technologies are likely to be of only mar¬
ginal economic Importance to those countries, which are
in the early stages of development, compared with the
possible gains from fully utilizing existing technologies.
For often, but not always, new developments like nuclear
power, desalination of water, etc., are expensive In capital
cost and It is capital, particularly In the form of foreign
exchange, that emerging countries tend to be most short
of.
It is essential that the applied scientists and technolo¬
gists of the emerging countries develop a sound sense of
the economic realities of the related phases of research,
development and production. The first two stages are
expensive. Only when the last stage of production ls
reached ls there any Increase in material wealth. Though
no one would admit to believing that modern science is
a magic wand to be waved over a poor country to convert
it into a rich one, not a few seem to act as if It were
true! In fact the advance of scientific technology can
only be a part of a concerted national programme of
educational, economic, industrial and social change. Only
when integrated into such a plan will the full fruits of
scientific technology be reaped.
Patrick M.S. Blackett of Great Britain was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Physics in 1948. Since 1953 he has been 3^
professor of physics at the Imperial College for Science
and Technology, University of London.
