The enigma of the Hittites
A LOST CIVILIZATION
EMERGES FROM THE PAST
by Emmanuel Laroche
14
MODERN FORMS
4,000 YEARS OLD.
Among the intriguing and
puzzling relics found on
ancient sites in Central
Anatolia are some strange
objects judged to be about
4,000 years old and usually
made of bronze or copper,
which have been con¬
ventionally called "stan¬
dards ". Some of them
bear animal figures such
as stags and bulls (see
page 20), while others
(left and right) have plain¬
er, surprisingly modern¬
istic formssquare, round
or sickle-shaped. Some of
them also bear swastika
designs, an emblem whose
long-established associa¬
tion with the sun has
led to the standards in
general being given the
name of "sun emblems".
Photos © Ara Güler

he story of the Hittites is a new chapter in the
_ history of the Ancient World. It Is the story
of a people living twenty centuries before the Christian
era who were only recently "discovered" by scholars after
nearly a century of detective work excavation, research
and subtle reasoning.
One hundred years ago the very existence of the Hit¬
tites was little more than a vague surmise. Only during
the past few decades have they emerged from the sha¬
dows. Only since then has their history been recon¬
structed from the records they themselves inscribed and
the meaning of their religion and beliefs been revealed
through painstaking studies of their rock-hewn sculpture.
The wondrous civilizations of the pre-classical Orient
were at least known to the Greeks, both through tradi¬
tional accounts and actual contacts.
But an impenetrable curtain of oblivion had fallen over
ancient Anatolia from the day when the last independent
Anatolian tribes were crushed and then absorbed, first
into the Assyrian and later into the Persian Empire.
We know that in one of his texts Homer makes passing
reference to the people of Ketelol and this we now pre¬
sume to be an allusion to the Hittites, disguised under a
Hellenic label. But the fact is of little value, for the
poet has no precise information to give us nor can he
situate this people within the immensity of Anatolia.
Herodotus, our eloquent informant on the lands and
peoples of the eastern Mediterranean, speaks of the fore¬
bears of classical Lydia and mingles with authentic names
others of far-off dynasties. Among them we find a cer¬
tain Mursilis, a Hittite King who has since become a fami-
lar figure to historians. But of what value is such infor¬
mation more often fable than fact?
Close to ancient Izmir (the Turkish seaport of Smyrna),
however, there are two rock-hewn monuments carved out
by the Hittites. These were known to the Greeks but
were wrongly interpreted by them. The monument at
Karabel, depicting a prince and bearing hieroglyphic ins¬
criptions, was attributed to an entirely fictitious journey
there of the Pharoah Sesostris. The othererroneously
Identified as a NIobe overcome with griefIn reality
marked a sacred spring and was cut Into the side of
Mount Sipylos (today called Manlssa Dagh). Alongside
it, the Hittite writing forming the name of the dedicator
can still be made out.
Deeper in Anatolia, were the mysterious Pontus moun¬
tains which, the Greeks believed, were the home of the
Amazons, those redoutable female warriors who, legend
told, fought on the side of the Trojans and were defeated
after violent struggles by Achilles who slew their queen,
Penthesllela.
The story of the Amazons Is still a complete mystery.
Were they a purely mythical people or an exaggerated
description of some matriarchal society? Some authors
maintain that the legend originated with a false Interpre¬
tation of figures found at Yazlllkaya, near to Bogazkoy
(site of the capital of the Hittite Empire). But it Is a far
cry from the procession of divinities at Yazlllkaya to the
fury of Penthesllela.
It was the Chalybes who, in the mists of Antiquity In
Armenia, were said to have first discovered the secrets of
Iron-working. They in fact gave their name to the Greek
word for steel. Here one discerns a glimmer of historical
truth. Throughout the second millennium B.C., the Hit¬
tites were considered by the peoples of other Eastern
countries as the masters of metal-working who forged
first-quality Iron.
But as the centuries passed, iron-working secrets were
divulged and became known to other peoples. The Hittite
tribes degenerated to a barbarian way of life and when the
military campaigns of Cyrus the Younger brought Xeno-
phon and 10,000 followers into this region at the end of
the 4th century B.C., they found only an unfriendly and
wary people, given to pillage and looting, and living In
hovels of dried earth.
The Hittites are mentioned by name several times In the ,,_
Bible from the Patriarchal period down to the time of '^
CONT'D ON PAGE 17

*m
afe."
-<
&*>£
¿*Vj
V
*- ' «
àfifVG
v:
^
K- »
¿&.
M
m
16

THE HITTITES (Cont'd)
Revealing letters in a Pharaoh's archives
the Exile. But these are the Hittites of Syria, all that
remained of the states created by the great kings on the
Euphrates and the Orontes rivers at the time of their
expansion towards the south. These peoples were partly
Semitized and partly Hurrlan. In other words they
belonged to a diverse and lateral branch of the Anatolian
family.
Viewed in the new historical perspective which the most
recent deciphering of texts has opened up, the Hittites of
the Old Testament are in reality Neo-Hittites. Contem¬
poraries of the Assyrians, the Phoenicians and the
Hebrews, they can in no way be said to represent the true
Hittite civilization which flowered between the 19th and
13th centuries B.C. and "which must be sought out in
Central Anatolia.
The "re-discovery" of this people and its civilization
was almost an accident and came about through the
chance and haphazard movement of travel and explora¬
tion. Between 1750 and 1900 many travellers related their
discoveries of monuments bearing inscriptions In an un¬
known writing composed of pictures similar to that of
the Egyptians. These inscriptions were given the name
"hieroglyphics" and, as it later proved, rightly so, for
it has since become certain that the invention of this
writing the work of the Hittites themselves took place
in religious sanctuaries and that it was designed to meet
the needs of religion.
But the meaning of the Hittite hieroglyphs was for long
to remain a mystery. All the efforts to decipher them
Photos © Ara Güler
HISTORY WRITTEN IN STONE. A feature of the Hittite
religion was the major role played by open-air sanctuaries, the
most celebrated being Yazilikaya close to the former Hittite
capital of Hattusas (the present-day Turkish Village of Boghaz-
koy). From studies of the rock-cut reliefs and inscribed hiero¬
glyphs at Yazilikaya, scholars have been slowly reconstructing
the story of the Hittite people. Left, procession of figures wear¬
ing long pointed caps and carrying scimitars on their shoulders.
Above, King Tuthalija in the embrace of the young god Sharrumma.
failed because scholars were faced by two simultaneous
obstacles: an unknown language In an unknown form of
writing. It was only when another kind of writing,
cuneiform, had been deciphered that it became passible
to tackle the hieroglyphs with the aid of the few existing
bl-llngual texts and also by searching for the keys to the
Hittite language through a careful analysis of monuments.
Begun with some success about 1930 by several scholars
working Independently, this task Is still unfinished. It
was, however, made easier and was stimulated by the dis¬
covery of a Hittite city at Karatepe In 1947. The bilin¬
gual Phoenlcian-Hittltc texts uncovered here Immediately
confirmed the accuracy of earlier work while enabling
minor errors to be corrected. In addition these finds
gave a new impulsion to the work.
The results of the work of deciphering that Is going on
have proved somewhat disappointing to many historians
because the texts have not turned out to be the full and
detailed accounts for which they were hoping. Usually,
the inscriptions arc of local significance, relating events
of limited, personal Interest the dedication of a tem¬
ple, of the construction of a palace, for example. The
numerous Hittite seals generally bear only the signatures
of princes and officials.
I T was not possible to fit the Hittites Into a
I given historical time and space on the basis
of the facts gleaned from the hieroglyphic-Inscribed
monuments. This Information was revealed to the Orien¬
talists In the second half of the 19th century by an
Indirect source.
One of the first important Egyptian texts to be deci¬
phered the Pentaour poem described the Syrian expe¬
dition of Rameses II which ended In the battle of Kadcsh
and the subsequent Egyptlan-IIlttlte peace treaty. This
document at once proved that one of the great Illttlte
kings, Hattuslls III, who concluded the peace treaty with
the Pharoah, reigned at the end of the 14th century B.C.
Parallel to this discovery, the annals of the Assyrians
told the story of the western campaigns of this Mesopo-
tamlan Empire, of Its dealings and quarrels with the
"People of Hattl", and of the later progressive absorp¬
tion of the Neo-Hlttltesthe biblical Sons of Heth. It
soon became clear that the cultural and political heart¬
land of the Hittite people had been In Central Anatolia
and not, as previously supposed, In northern Syria.
The discovery of the Egyptian diplomatic archives at
Tell el Amarna, on the Nile, added what was needed to
complete the previous fragmentary Information. Written
In the cuneiform script of the Babylonian language, they
contained the correspondence which had passed between
the Pharoah (Amcnophis IV) and the minor Syrian and
Palestinian rulers. The Hittites arc mentioned many
times In this correspondence. They appear as enemies
from the north, exerting an ever-growing pressure on the
tiny Semitic kingdoms of the Middle Euphrates and
Orontes.
Thanks to these dated texts, the Hittites now entered
world history and were allotted a place in Its chronology.
One of these letters from Amarna written from an
Anatolian principality, was Inscribed In a new language
the language of the Hittites. At last the scholars were
approaching their goal: a knowledge of the Hittites based
on documents actually written by this people.
All our present knowledge of the Hittite civilization has
been obtained from the royal archives of Hattusas, the
former capital of the empire. Its site near the present-
day Turkish village of Bogazkoy, about 100 miles east of
Ankara, had for many years past attracted travellers,
intrigued by the imposing ruins and rock-cut monuments.
Excavations began there in 1905 under the German
archaeologist, Hugo Winkler. Like much similar work
that was done at that time It was somewhat lacking in
order and method. But to seekers upon whom fortune
smiles all can be forgiven. In the course of several
expeditions thousands of cuneiform clay tablets were 17
CONT'D ON PAGE 20

<
" f.,
SKILLED METALWORKERS of ancient Anatolia
have left evidence of their remarkable craftsmanship
in gold, silver and copper objects of variety and ele¬
gance recovered from graves and other archaeological
sites. Statuette (left) of a female figure wrought in
gold and silver is now in the Hittite Museum, Ankara.

LINGUISTIC CLUES ON
THE BLACK MOUNTAIN
Photot © Ara Gülcr
In the late summer of 1945, a group of Turkish archaeologists, hunting for traces of
ancient Anatolian civilizations, uncovered the remains of a former Hittite city at Kara-
tepe, on a towering ridge known as the Black Mountain. Subsequent expeditions have
unearthed many statues (above) and reliefs. Among the innumerable inscriptions
brought to light the most significant were bilingual Phoenician texts and Hittite hiero¬
glyphs. These corresponding inscriptions enabled hieroglypic Hittite the unr.-
nown language of an unknown people written in an unknown script to be read.
19

THE HITTITES (Cont'd)
Unknown languages in a borrowed script
Former Hittite centres in what is now Turkey and northern
Syria. After the collapse of the great Hittite Empire about
1200 B.C. its cultural traditions continued to thrive in
provincial cities for another seven centuries when the last
Hittite city states were absorbed by the Assyrian Empire.
recovered and sent off to the museums of Istanbul and
Berlin.
Interrupted by the First World War, this research was
re-started in earnest at Bogazhoy in 1931 this time care¬
fully and methodically under the direction of a young
German archaeologist Kurt Bittel. These excavations
went on right up to the outbreak of the Second World
War and led to the uncovering of the whole of the Acro¬
polis where the royal library of the Hittite kings (13th
century B.C.) was brought to light. Hundreds of other
tablets found during these expeditions are now conserved
in the Ankara Hittite Museum.
The writing on these clay tablets is a well known ver¬
sion of the classical Babylonian cuneiform, the same one
that has been discovered in all the ancient western sites:
at Amarna, at Tell Atchana, near to Antioch, and above
all, at Ugarit.
This writing is comprehensible to any competent Assy-
riologist, but in this case it had been used to record seve¬
ral languages a fact which immediately created serious
problems for the researchers. At Bogazhoy at least seven
languages figure among the texts of the archives, and by
far the most numerous were those in "Hittite", the offi¬
cial language of the empire.
Fortunately, many international documents (diplomatic
treaties, for example) in Babylonian along with items of
traditional literature originating from Mesopotamia were
also recovered. The meanings of these texts were easily
accessible to Assyriologists and almost immediately
revealed the general outlines of Hittite history.
But the rest of the tablets the major partpresented
Innumerable enigmas which seriously challenged the
shrewdness and skill of scholars. They were required to
decipher from a known writing, languages which were
completely unknown and about whose links no sure
theory could be advanced. The situation was in many
ways comparable to that of contemporary Etruscan stu¬
dies, except for the advantage offered by the existence of
several bilingual texts.
It was a Czech scholar, Friedrich Hrozny who decided
to use a completely unbiased approach and to tackle the
problem of deciphering the texts analytically, working
directly from the evidence even if this should mean a
contradiction of all established views.
After the discovery of some obvious equivalents had
revealed to him the meaning of two or three simple phra¬
ses, he became convinced that the Hittite language
belonged, by the general form of its grammar and part
of its vocabulary to the great Indo-European family of
languages (Indo-Iranian, Greek, Latin, Germanic, Slav,
Celtic, etc.). Ignoring the scepticism of linguists, he went
ahead and translated at his first attempt, and in
masterly fashion, the Code and large sections of the royal
records. Thanks to Hrozny, a new branch of Orientalism
was created.
We can now understand why, through force of circums¬
tances, the archaeological science of Hittitology remained
split into two parallel disciplines for an entire generation.
They were not the same men who deciphered the Hittite
cuneiform writing at Bogazkoy and the Hittite hierogly¬
phic writing in Syria.
These two series of documents correspond to two widely
differing dialects. The "classical" Hittite of the cunei¬
form tablets disappeared without trace after the destruc¬
tion of the Hittite capital around 1200 B.C. The
"Luvian" language of the hieroglyphs, however, continued
to be spoken in the southern part of Asia Minor between
1200 and 500 B.C., surviving in the Lycian language of the
Greek era (in the south west of Anatolia).
An important task awaits the new generation of Hittlto-
loglsts. It is to assemble these individual and dispersed
fragments of knowledge, to complete the publication of
many new texts and to persevere with the deciphering
of the most ancient hieroglyphic monuments whose
riddles still remain unsolved.
Emmanuel Laroche is professor of linguistics at the University
of Strasbourg and a research director at the Ecole Pratique des
Hautes Etudes in Paris. Editor of the Revue Hittite et Asia-
nique, he is the author of works on the Hittites and of many
articles on the languages and civilizations of Asia Minor.

20 STAG AND BULLS on this standard found in royal
tombs at Alaca Hoyuk are divinities which came
down to the Hittites' pantheon from earlier inhabi¬
tants of Anatolia. The term "Hittite Art" is some¬
times used to describe not simply the art of one
people, but rather forms from a cultural complex
extending from northern Syria to Central Anatolia.
