Europress
by Kenzaburo Takeyama
WANTED:
1
Courtesy Prof. K. Takeyama
SPECIAL STRUCTURAL DESIGN of the
40-story Latino-Americana Building in Mexico
City brought it unscathed through the earth¬
quake which struck the Mexican capital In 1957.

HEAP OF RUBBLE ¡s all that remains of a multi-story building, its floors shattered and piled
in concertina-like layers by last July's earthquake in Skoplje, Yugoslavia. Less than ono-quartcr of
the city's 35,000 buildings can be repaired. Skoplje, a city of 220,000 inhabitants covering
70 sq. kms.,, was seriously damaged by quakes on two other occasionsin 518 A.D. and 1904.

MORE QUAKE-PROOF BUILDINGS
i n 1906, more than half a century ago, a young
Japanese building engineer visited San Fran¬
cisco in the wake of the disastrous earthquake that had
wrought havoc in the city. He was deeply impressed by a
reinforced concrete structure he saw standing among a
charred stretch of ruined brick buildings. It was un¬
scathed either by the earthquake or by fire. Reinforced
concrete buildings were becoming popular In Europe and
the United States, but in Japan, only one building using
this modern technique had been completed in the pre¬
vious year.
Firmly convinced that this was the best antlseismic
construction, the Japanese engineer, Riki Sano, returned
home and devoted himself to developing the construction
of reinforced concrete buildings in Japan and the study
of earthquake-proof structures. Sano thus laid the foun¬
dations for the study of earthquake engineering in Japan.
Sano's work was continued and further developed by
his pupil, Tachu Naito. An interesting tale explains how
Naito came to develop his own theory of earthquake-proof
construction. While visiting the United States to study
reinforced concrete buildings, he one day had his suitcase
smashed when it was thrown rather violently from a
train to a station platform. Naito bought a new suitcase
with partitions in it. When he saw that his new bag
withstood many severe shocks yet still retained its ori¬
ginal shape, he hit upon the Idea of designing a building
as "a box partitioned with several floor slabs and wall
slabs." On the basis of this idea, Naito developed a
theory of earthquake-proof construction and designed a
number of buildings applying this technique.
It was after these buildings were completed that the
Great Kanto Earthquake of 1923 struck the Tokyo area.
Some 250,000 houses were destroyed, about 450,000 houses
burned down and approximately 140,000 lives were lost.
While the violent earthquake felled or severely damaged
most of the multi-story buildings In the city all of Nalto's
constructions survived the tremor undamaged, thus pro¬
ving the validity of his theory. Together with Nalto's
buildings, the Imperial Hotel, a lower, three-story struc¬
ture, designed by the famous American architect Frank
Lloyd Wright withstood the harsh trial of nature, and
won world wide attention.
This disastrous earthquake greatly stimulated Japanese
construction engineers in the study of earthquake-proof
structures. They were given more opportunity to experi¬
ment and improve their theories and antlseismic engi¬
neering techniques when a number of big tremors hit
other parts of Japan following the Kanto Earthquake.
These studies bore fruits in the form of steel reinforced
concrete construction (a structure with a steel frame in
the core and reinforced concrete enveloping it) which ls
almost without exception applied to the construction of
buildings higher than five stories in Japan today.
Thus Japan's earthquake-proof constructions have
developed from the costly lessons of natural disasters and
the theories arising from these experiences. How¬
ever, other new theories of earthquake-proof cons¬
truction were being developed using an entirely different
process. For this, we must turn to the United States.
In California, the major earthquake zone of the United
States, seismological observations grew in scale beginning
around 1925. The Long Beach (California) earthquake of
1933 which claimed 140 lives provided a major stimulus
to the research of earthquake-proof structures. One of the
positive outcomes of the studies stimulated by the earth¬
quake was the development of a strong-motion seismo-
CONTD ON NEXT PAGE
31

QUAKE. GENERATOR :
Artificially created earth
tremors are supplied by
this unique quake-generat¬
ing table at the Japanese
Government Building Re¬
search Institute in Tokyo.
Capable of simultaneous
horizontal and vertical vi¬
brations, the machine is
being used here to test
the resistance to quake
shocks of the core of an
atomic reactor. Earthquake
damage to a nuclear power
station might cause the
release into the atmosphere
and the ground of radio¬
active material which could
not only contaminate the
immediate area but also
spread over great distances.
Courtesy Prof. K. Takeyama
QUAKE-PROOF BUILDINGS (Cont'd)
Test-bench for seismic disasters
32
graph designed to record the tremors of big earthquakes.
Work on this strong-motion seismograph observation is
still being continued today. Records taken in this way
have greatly contributed to the advancement of earth¬
quake-proof engineering research.
Actually, it had been Impossible until recently to com¬
pute the behaviour of a building being shaken by the
irregular vibration of the earth caused by an earthquake.
Earthquake engineers were compelled to calculate by
shifting the irregular earthquake waves into regular ones
but the results obtained by this process were unreliable.
However, in 1950, G.W. Housner of the California Techno¬
logical Institute succeeded in determining how a building
reacts to earthquake waves, by feeding actual records of
a major earthquake and the theoretical model of a build¬
ing into an analog computer which was developed during
the last war. This epochal development marked a major
breakthrough in earthquake-proof engineering research
and opened up a new field.
Recovering from the damages of war, Japanese scientists
designed and constructed strong-motion seismographs on
their own, and installed 120 of them in various parts of
Japan by 1960. Electronic computors too came into gra¬
dual use, and the antlseismic designing of buildings,
hitherto developed in Japan on the basis of experience,
is now being tested in the light of this new technique born
of a modern scientific calculating machine. Ironically,
however, since the strong-motion seismographs have been
installed in Japan, the country has not been hit by a
major earthquake although many disastrous ones have
occurred in other countries.
These new developments in earthquake-proof engineer¬
ing have taken place not only in the United States and
Japan but also in other earthquake-prone countries,
especially in the Soviet Union. As an outcome of advanced
earthquake engineering, a trend toward relaxing the
height limit imposed on buildings is being observed today
in most countries that are liable to earth tremors.
One building which has provided an invaluable stimulus
in the development of earthquake-proof engineering is the
40-story Latino Americana building in Mexico City which
was unharmed in the earthquake of 1957.
A great problem facing earthquake engineers today ls
that while multi-story buildings are being made more and
more earthquake-proof, residential houses have remained
as vulnerable to earthquakes as they were years ago. Still
fresh in our minds is the violent tremor west of Teheran,
Iran, which destroyed 3,000 houses and took 13,000 lives
in September 1962, and the even more recent disaster at
Skoplje in Yugoslavia where 85% of the buildings were
destroyed by a severe shock on July 26 this year.
Generally speaking, residential houses in these earth¬
quake countries have no resistance whatsoever against the
earthquakes because they are usually made of brick or
adobe (sun burned clay). If a violent earthquake hits a
heavily populated city in Southeast Asia where the houses
are made of wood, a disaster similar to the 1923 Kanto
Earthquake may be repeated.
Studies of ways to make wooden and brick buildings
earthquake-proof have advanced- most In Japan because
of her repeated history of earthquake-fire calamities.
Research on the development of earthquake-proof, fire¬
proof and inexpensive constructions has progressed ra¬
pidly since the end of the last war. Most impressive is
the big quake-generating machine used in the Building
Research Institute of the Japanese Government to test the
seismic resistance of buildings of two to three-story con¬
crete-block structures or prefabricated reinforced con¬
crete buildings.
No less useful is a large quake-generating table recently
developed at the same institute for antlseismic tests. This
table is unique in that it can give both horizontal and
vertical vibrations simultaneously. Similar vibration-
generators have been set up by other research organiza¬
tions in Japan, the United States, Italy, India and other
countries recently and are used to test the seismic resis¬
tance of arch dams and other structures as well as
buildings.
There are moves in many countries to make residential
houses as well as high buildings earthquake-proof. But
mainly for economic reasons many of the lands where
earthquakes occur most frequently have made little pro¬
gress in this direction. In addition, these countries have
very few seismologists and earthquake engineers and basic
observation of earthquakes has yet to be done.
In an attempt to remedy this situation, Unesco has estab¬
lished the International Institute of Seismology and
Earthquake Engineering in Tokyo, expanding a pro¬
gramme started by the Japanese Government a few years
ago. With the assistance of the United Nations Special
Fund, a project has been to invite trainees from earth¬
quake-prone countries to conduct joint research with
specialists from all over the world.
It is hoped that this international project will hasten
the day when people of all countries threatened by earth¬
quakes are protected against these natural calamities.
dr. KENZABURo takeyama of Tokyo Municipal University is coun¬
sellor to the International Institute of Seismology and Earthquake
Engineering, Tokyo. He is also a former director of the Build¬
ing Research Institute, Ministry of Construction, Tokyo.
