INTO THE W
58
CSF, René Bouillot
Two symbols of today's vast scientific revolution. Above, telemetering
equipment for tracking the orbits of satellites in space. Opposite
page, completion of a huge parabolic mirror used in helio-technology
to capture the rays of the sun and turn them into useful energy.

ORLD OF THE FUTURE
by Nicolai Semenov
Nobel Prize for Chemistry
Soviet photo. SCR photo library. London
What will the world be like 20 or 40 years hence,
at the close of the century? What levels, so
far unimaginable, will science and technology attain by
that time? And what fundamental changes will this
have wrought in the world economy? In this age, when
science is moving ahead with such amazing speed, it is
impossible to predict new scientific discoveries. But we
can foresee, with a certain degree of probability, the very
considerable practical consequences of scientific trends
that are already apparent.
The 19th century is often described as the age of steam
and electricity. How are we to describe the 20th cen¬
tury? As the age of nuclear energy, of the conquest of
the air and of outer space, of plastics, of radio, television
and electronics, or of cybernetics and electronic computers,
of chemicalized and mechanized agriculture, of new
medical compounds and longevity?
Modern science is ceaselessly producing new and varied
types of technique and new kinds of production. The 20th
century is characterized not only by the great increase in
the volume of scientific knowledge but by the qualitative
change In the character of science itself.
Comprehension of the inner structure of matter, the
attack on the inner regions of the atom, began In the first
20 years of the 20th century and It was that which started
this revolution in natural science. This understanding
of the internal structure of matter has made it possible
for us consciously to determine some of the characteristics
of some materials.
In chemistry this has led to a new method of synthesis,
by which we can create new compounds and improve the
technology of producing previously known substances.
In physics it has led to a great number of new dis¬
coveries in the field of solid bodies, of which we shall men¬
tion only a few. They are the emission of electrons
under the Influence of heat and irradiation by light; the
discovery of semiconductors with their astonishing
electrical properties; the discovery of the phenomena of
the transmission of energy in a solid body and, connected
with it, the possibility of coherent radiation of a narrow
59
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WORLD OF THE FUTURE (Cont'd)
Brief encounter with an 'anti-man'
60
beams of light and short radio-waves in the so-called
lasers and masers.
All this led to the creation of new techniques in very
different forms. For example, the discovery of radio-
waves, predicted by Maxwell and made by Herz in the
19th century, has acquired very great technical signifi¬
cance only as the result of the application of the dis¬
coveries of physics in the 20th century. New fields of
science and technology have appeared, such as radiotech-
nology and electronics.
Many wonderful discoveries were made as a result of the
study of the atomic nucleus. When nuclei are being
formed a tremendous amount of energy is liberated from
the protons and neutrons as a result of the nuclear forces
between them. According to the well-known equation
formulated by Einstein on the equivalence between mass
and energy, the energy liberated corresponds to the loss
of mass. Depending on the content and the structure of
a nucleus the concentration in the nucleus varies, as a
result of which different nuclei have different losses of
mass which can be measured. This loss of mass is called
the mass defect.
In nuclear reactions the less the mass defect of the
initial elements, the greater the energy released. I feel
confident that the day is not far off when we shall be
able to achieve a controlled thermonuclear reaction which
promises quite unprecedented prospects for the develop¬
ment of world energy.
Our galaxy consists of substances built of protons and
neutrons In the nucleus, and electrons in the shell of an
atom. However, there is a possibility that some other
galaxies are made of anti-substances, of anti-protons and
anti-neutrons in the nucleus and positrons in the shell
of the atom. In these worlds anti-particles will be stable
and our particles will be unstable.
It is noteworthy that all physical and chemical quali¬
ties of the atom will be identical in both worlds. In these
other worlds we might find the same chemical combina¬
tions with the same structure and qualities and it is quite
probable that living matter and even human beings simi¬
lar to those in this world may exist there.
Imagine the meeting of a man and an anti-man some¬
where in space. They will be able to study each other
and even become bosom friends, but they will not be able
to touch each other. If they should try to do so, they
would both explode with a power considerably greater
than that of a thermonuclear bomb...
here need be no doubt that coming decades
will see a powerful upsurge in physics which,
as is always the case, will have as its "end" result very
Important technical achievements. In fact, I believe that
two fundamental problems stand out in modern natural
science. The first concerns the theory of elementary
particles in physics, or, in other words, the problem of
the primary particles of matter. The second, in contrast,
concerns the structure and behaviour of highly organized
matter in biology and chemistry.
Animate matter is the most highly organized matter.
The revolution which began in physics, and partly in
chemistry, in the early years of the century, reached
biology about half a century later, some 10 or 15 years
ago. Working in concert with physicists and chemists,
biologists began to penetrate the inner physical and
chemical foundations of the amazing phenomena of life.
In these fifteen years we have obtained highly interesting
scientific results, and the pace of research is constantly
being increased.
Just as in the case of the study of atomic structure,
these major scientific discoveries have not had, and prob-
The very real dangers of air
pollution resulting from indus¬
trialization are now being stud¬
ied intensively by scientists
in all parts of the world. Here,
samples of air are analyzed in
a laboratory in Mexico. Uni¬
versal application of electric
power in the future would
drastically reduce even per¬
haps eliminate altogether
the emission of harmful gases
and dust into the atmosphere.
© Paul Almasy. Paris
ably will not for some time have, serious practical results.
But it Is beyond doubt that sooner or later they will lead .
to revolutionary changes in medicine and agriculture. For
instance, I feel sure that the problem of cancer can be
solved only by developing this trend in biology. And I am
equally certain that research in the mechanism of physical
and chemical processes in vital activity will likewise lead
to a veritable revolution in chemistry.
By applying the same principles to inanimate matter we
should be able to create catalysts of unprecedented power
and specific properties, notably for photochemical pro¬
cesses. We should also be able to design fundamentally
new types of machines which, working like muscles, will
directly and efficiently convert chemical energy into
mechanical energy, etc. That is why I believe that the
problem of highly organized matter is the second main
problem in the decade ahead.
It is very characteristic of modern science to make a
profound investigation of the internal structure of matter
and to produce on this basis new unprecedented techniques
and new types of production. Research which now seems
very abstract and of no practical application, such as the
Investigation of the properties of matter, sooner or later
leads to revolutionary changes in industry. The more
purely scientific the research appears, the greater the
changes that result. The research that seemed most
abstract of all turned out to be that which produced the
greatest practical results the discovery of atomic and
thermonuclear energy.
Here, I can only give a brief outline of the gigantic
prospects opening up before mankind as a result of the
further development of science and its practical applica¬
tion.
Available sources of power, notably electric power and
deposits of coal, oil, uranium, thorium, and water power
resources will not last forever. They are gradually being
exhausted, and though the reserves are great, they are
nevertheless limited. In addition, the mining of coal,
uranium and thorium, even with maximum automation,
will always involve strenuous working conditions. The
question therefore arises of the new, more powerful and
practically inexhaustible sources which could be developed
with relative ease.
At present there are three ways of solving this crucial
scientific and technical problem: (1) by controlled thermo¬
nuclear reaction: (2) by the utilization of solar energy;
and (3) by the utilization of the underground heat of
the magmatic stratum below the earth's crust.

achieve this in practice. However, the progress in photo¬
electric and thermoelectric research should, within a few
decades, enable us to devise new photo- and thermo¬
elements and find special catalysts of photochemical
processes. This. In turn, should make it possible to
convert solar energy Into electricity with an efficiency
rate of 30 to 40 per cent. I am convinced that the
problem of utilizing solar energy for power purposes can
and will be solved before the end of the century.
The third potential and practically inexhaustible source
of energy is the underground heat of the magmatlc strata
of the earth, located about 30 kilometres below the surface
and much nearer under the ocean bottom. The chief
problem here is effective and economical technological
methods of deep boring. Recent years have seen revolu¬
tionary changes in boring techniques, but many formida¬
ble technical problems have still to be solved before wc
can tap these underground heat depositories.
Several countries are working on new methods of deep
boring, and In some cases they are actually being applied.
Given an abundant supply of low-cost electricity and
Improved transmission techniques, we should be In a posi¬
tion to replace boring by the melting of rock and extrac¬
tion of the melted substance.
Controlled thermonuclear reaction would open up
altogether new and incomparable vistas for the human
race. However, it seems that a continuously controlled
thermonuclear reaction is practically impossible because
it releases such tremendous heat and such high tempera¬
tures to sustain itself that the walls of the "thermo¬
nuclear furnace" would be immediately vaporized.
But physicists have suggested the principle of magnetic
isolation, which reduces heat radiation through the walls
and makes the process feasible in principle. By using
a powerful current impulse they have succeeded in
obtaining temperatures close to those required to start a
thermonuclear reaction and test the principle of magnetic
isolation.
However, to start a self-sustained thermonuclear reac¬
tion we shall have to obtain considerably higher tempera¬
tures. There are also many other major difficulties, for
instance, the problem of effective magnetic isolation in a
continuous thermonuclear reaction.
Controlled thermonuclear reaction has not yet been
achieved. Undoubtedly its achievement calls for new
ideas, new departures. It is hard to say when this
cardinal problem will be solved, tomorrow or many years
hence. But I believe that solved it will be, and within
this century. For all the experience of modern science
shows that what is possible in principle soon becomes
possible in practice.
Ery great prospects would be opened to
mankind If we learned to transform solar
energy Into electric energy with a high efficiency
standard. The sun sends to earth 4x10" calories per
second. Most of this solar energy is diffused or absorbed
by the atmosphere, particularly by clouds. An average of
only 30 per cent reaches the earth's surface in any given
year a little more in southern latitudes, a little less in
northern latitudes. Yet even one-tenth of what reaches
the land surface would suffice to generate thousands of
times more power than we have today. This is the second
major potential power purveyor, and one that will always
be there and will never require mining or expenditure of
fuel.
In principle, 100 per cent of solar energy can be
converted into electricity, but we are not likely ever to
ND so, In addition to coal, oil, uranium and
i thorium, we have other, much more potent
suppliers -of energy. If we put them to efficient use, all
the power requirements of the world's growing population
will be fully met, for these new sources are practically
limitless. But they can be utilized only If there ls a vigo¬
rous and concerted effort by scientists and technicians,
and, needless to say, by all the peoples of the world.
Thus, I feel sure that by the close of the century all
three new sources of energy will have been put to work
and the first thermonuclear, solar and underground
generating plants will have been built. The 21st century
will see the mass construction of such plants. That will
bring electricity to every Inhabitant of the world, in
virtually limitless quantities.
With a superabundance of electric power at its dLsposal,
mankind could tackle and accomplLsh other, even more
ambitious tasks. One example Ls the regulation of the
earth's climate. Temperature and rain control could
turn our planet into, a flourishing garden.
The auspicious beginning of space travel poses another
problem, one which today seems rather far-fetched. I
refer to the possible role of thermonuclear energy In the
exploration of Mars and other planets of the solar system.
We know, of course, that Mars has an atmosphere but, In
the first place, it ls much more rarefied than the Earth's,
and secondly and more important it contains a very
small proportion of oxygen. Apparently there Ls water on
Mars, but in relatively small quantities. The climate ls
colder than the Earth's, and that would be an additional
drawback.
Let us consider whether or not it ls realLstlc to create
on Mars, within a relatively short period (say, a few
decades) conditions that would support life. The first
requirement for this Is to obtain several hundred trillion
tons of oxygen, to bring Mars's oxygen content near to
that of our own atmosphere. Oxygen can be produced
from the water we shall find on Mars. Calculations show
that if we build thermonuclear power plants on Mars
capable of generating ten thousand times more electricity
than ls now produced on Earth, and if this energy is
used for the electrolysis of water, then we should be able
to accumulate the needed oxygen in a few decades.
I do not know whether mankind will ever need to do
that. It may well be that it will find better employment
for its superabundance of power. But I cite this example
to indicate the majestic alms mankind can set itself once
it has inexhaustible sources of energy. g4
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WORLD OF THE FUTURE (Cont'd)
Transistor network on the moon
In discussing the practical problems involved in explor¬
ing the solar system, I should like to go a step further in
my fantasy and examine opportunities for utilizing the
moon to supply power to our planet. The moon Is 16
times smaller than the earth, but since It has no
atmosphere It gets three times more solar radiation, per
unit of territory, than the earth. Consequently, in terms
of solar energy absorption, the moon ls equivalent to one-
fifth of the earth's surface or, what amounts to the same
thing, gets nearly as much energy as all our continents.
Thus, if we were able to cover the moon with a network
of high-efficiency transistor photo-elements, and if, in
addition, we devised ways and means of transmitting this
energy (say, via directed radio beams), then the moon
would become a huge generating plant serving the earth.
It might also become a suitable location for nuclear and
thermonuclear power plants that could rid our earth of
all radioactive contamination.
Utilization of thermonuclear and solar energy and of
underground heat would naturally involve fundamental
changes in industry, agriculture and what we sometimes
describe as household service. Inorganic chemistry,
metallurgy and the building materials Industry would, in
the main, use high-temperature reactions and arc dis¬
charges. There would also be a sharp increase in the use
of electrolysis techniques. Super-high temperatures
would be obtained either through arc electric furnaces
or from thermonuclear reactor waste gas, heated to several
thousand degrees.
For example: nitrogenous fertilizers would be obtained
chiefly from the air, through a synthesis of nitrogen
oxides. All the elements of the Mendeleyev Table could
be produced either by electrolysis or by decomposition of
ores, effected by high-temperature thermonuclear reactor
waste gases. In fact, the very concept "ores" would
change, for any combinations, notably those that have
not been used hitherto because of their chemical inertia,
could be employed as "ores."
On the other hand, utilization and enrichment of poor
ores would be greatly simplified. Essentially, any soil
treated by high-temperature techniques could become a
building material. Universal application of electric power
would lead to maximum automation in all lines of pro¬
duction and would drastically reduce even perhaps
eliminate altogether the emission of harmful gases and
dust into the atmosphere.
There would, of course, be a great demand for polymers,
and their production would be on a scale comparable to
the production of metals. All deposits of natural gas, oil
and some of coal would be used for this purpose and for
obtaining a wide variety of organic substances. All that
will be possible when electricity replaces gas, oil and coal.
However, despite total electrification, there would still
be automobiles, aircraft and rockets; they would still be
using liquid and gaseous fuels; there would still be a need
to produce substantial quantities of oil and gas.
The problem can be solved by (1) producing synthetic
fuel from inorganic raw materials. This can be done, for
instance, by employing electric techniques to obtain
hydrazine from nitrogen and hydrogen; (2) by using
carbon dioxide and hydrogen for an artificial synthesis
of conventional fuels.
Agriculture and the food industry would be electrified
arid automated throughout. When we have a supera¬
bundance of cheap electricity, the production of fertilizers,
as I have already pointed out, will be greatly simplified
and enlarged. Irrigation, too, would be expanded, by
using plastic sheets to retain moisture, both under and
over plants.
Another development would be soil heating in northern
areas and a vast expansion in hot-house cultivation.
Combined, these methods would produce high harvests
and. in many areas, two harvests annually. Lastly,
electricity would be used on a very large scale to augment
our fresh-water supply from seas and salt lakes.
^ * *
ELECTRONIC
MARVELS
Today's gigantic technological
achievements often have as
their basis the tiny electronic
components in these photos.
Transistors, opposite page, and
diodes, right, are the miniature
amplifiers and detectors for
which almost limitless useshave
been found wherever electro¬
nics is needed, be it in TV,
radar,atomic energy equipment,
electronic computers, aeronau¬
tics, space research and auto¬
mation processes in industry.
Diodes shown here are sealed
glass tubes only six millimetres
long, containing a single wire
solded to a germanium plate.
Photos CSF. René Bouillot
There is no need to dwell on the fact that electricity
adds to our comfort. I will, however, mention two
beneficial developments: electric heating and air
conditioning in every home in every part of the world.
Universal automation would reduce the working day to
three or four hours, leaving many hours for sports,
gardening, amateur theatricals, art, literature, civic duties,
and for research in excellently equipped public labora¬
tories, which would become centres for bringing science
to the people and ensuring its continuous development.
That is how I visualize life in the 21st century: an
age of total electrification. That ls my vision of the
heritage we can and should bequeath to our children,
grandchildren and their children.
The ideal of social progress can be approximately denned
in the following way: the maximum happiness for the
maximum number of people, for almost everybody. The
first precondition for this is naturally the full satisfaction
of the material and cultural needs of every man on earth.
However, the satisfaction of material needs alone is not
enough for a happy Ufe, though it is, of course, the main
and necessary precondition for the full spiritual activity
of man. But by his nature man is also a creator of
material and spiritual values. The need of creative
activity Is not only one of the noblest but also one of the
most Important fundamental and Ineradicable needs of
homo sapiens. So our greatest task ls to bring varied
creative activities within the reach of the mass of the
people.
Some people may not agree with my understanding of
happiness; they regard happiness not as a creative but
as a passive thing. Others regard happiness as a turbu¬
lent thing arising out of work or leisure. But I personally
believe that such views of happiness are due to spiritual
poverty or to the lack of the social conditions necessary
for the discovery and development of the creative talents
which exist potentially in every normal man.
In a word, to demonstrate his creative ability and to get
pleasure from doing so, every man must have a certain
level of knowledge, of mental and emotional development,
of aesthetic taste, and a moral attitude towards society
and himself. This can be achieved if such economic and
social conditions are created as to ensure an all-round
development of people and their creative labour.
Nicolai Semenov, Soviet physicist and physical chemist,
was the winner of the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1956. 53
A member of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, he is pro¬
fessor of physics at Moscow State University.
