THE HIDDEN FACE OF THE CINEMA (END)
THE USELESS
BARRIERS
by Paul Léglise
In this, the fifth and final article condensed from a special world study
describing lesser-known aspects of the cinema industry, Paul Léglise
discusses some of the problems created by the international exchange
of films and shows how Unesco and other organizations are helping
to overcome various barriers to the free flow of films. The author is
now working on a final chapter to be devoted to the future of the cinema.
The Editors hope to publish portions of this text in a future issue.
THE movement of films across frontiers
can do much to advance mutual under¬
standing between peoples. Specifically,
the cinema gives a direct stimulus to trade
through its industrial, technical and agricultural
films. A well-proved asset in the field of
mass communication, it is able to bring home
to vast audiences, through newsreels, docu¬
mentary and information films of every kind,
the significance and purpose of national and
international projects for economic develop¬
ment. And, thanks to scientific, art and
educational films, it plays an all-the-more
decisive role in cultural exchanges.
The whole economy of the cinema, however,
is dominated by the concept of the film as
a form of entertainment. Films become
consumer goods whose profitability depends
largely on box-office returns in countries
where they are imported.
National laws and regulations which affect
international trade in films seek, in reality, to
protect home-produced films and at the same
time to encourage their export. These regu¬
lations, however, are applied indiscrimi¬
nately to all classes of films. Today, efforts
are being made to change this situation.
Firstly there is an increasing trend towards
economic, technical and artistic co-operation
of the kind mentioned in an earlier article
in this series on international co-productions.
Secondly, efforts are being made to place
cultural, educational and scientific films in a
special category to free them from obstacles
that hinder their development and free
movement across frontiers.
Just over half the income of film companies In
the U.S.A. comes from the export earnings of
their productions. Roughly the same figure can be
applied to most of the other major film-producing coun¬
tries: 60% in Italy and 50% In the United Kingdom, for
example.
These are significant figures and they have an equally
Important counterpart: the export of films leads to a
corresponding increase In the circulation of foreign films
within the exporting countries and a resulting decrease
in the screening of national films on the home market.
From these facts alone we can recognize the Impor¬
tance of the problem and understand the two-fold
reactions of governments anxious to facilitate world¬
wide export of their countries' films and to protect these
films within their own frontiers. Some have enacted
laws under which exported films receive financial help
and others give subsidies to the organizations responsible
for the distribution of their countries' films abroad.
The second kind of official reaction Is the traditional
protectionist kind that can take many forms. Of these
the most long-standing arc customs duties which protect
home markets and contribute to national revenues.
Through exchange control the State can keep an eye on
all payments involving foreign currency as well as on
the transfer of national capital abroad.
The most common form of control ls the import licence
which must be presented by any Importer wishing to
obtain foreign currency. This licence ls not always deli¬
vered automatically, for restrictions can be Imposed on
the importation of certain articles according to their
nature (films are a case In point) or to their origin. A
ceiling is sometimes imposed on the amount of foreign
currency that can be spent on certain Imports. Finally,
export licences enable a country to retain its essential
resources, or to plan and control the flow of Its foreign
trade, encouraging exports towards hard-currency coun¬
tries and placing restrictions on those with soft-currency
countries.
Unesco has carried out a systematic survey, country
by country, of these methods in so far as they apply to 21
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

CINEMA (Cont'd)
Dubbed films or sub-titles?
educational, scientific, and cultural materials. The result¬
ing report, "Trade Barriers to Knowledge" is of first-
rate Importance for everyone concerned with problems
of international trade.
Protectionist action also takes the form of quotas.
One type limits the number of import licences granted
for foreign films; another requires cinema proprietors
to show a certain number of nationally produced films
during a specified period.
The import-quota system is simple to enforce: a sti¬
pulated number of foreign films ls authorized for entry
during a given period.
The Internal-quota system was introduced for the first
time in the United Kingdom in 1927, and gave a remark¬
able boost to the British film Industry, whose annual
production rose from 26 films to 128 within two years
and reached 225 by 1937. The general principle of the
internal-quota system is the one applied in France
today: all cinemas must show French films for five weeks
In every quarter. In the United Kingdom, 30% of the
feature films shown in a cinema must be British (25 %
In the case of short films). In Italy, 100 days in every
year are reserved for the screening of nationally-pro¬
duced films chosen by a jury.
These restrictions on the free movement of films are
thus Justified by the desire of governments to make sure
that film companies in their own countries are not
deprived of the substantial revenue offered by the home
market. But the walls of cinematographic protectionism
are undermined to a certain extent by bilateral, and
sometimes even by regional agreements for co-production
and exchange which are stimulated by the obvious
advantages to be gained from entering foreign markets.
Although International action aimed at bringing about
the free circulation of educational, scientific, and cultural
films is a real possibility, action of this sort becomes a
much more complicated affair when it concerns the
kind of commercial films usually shown in ordinary
cinemas.
These regional centres would also house the technical
equipment needed for making film copies; or, failing this,
would see that this work was done by existing services
in different countries of the region on a co-operative
basis. Lack of technical equipment Is, in fact, another
major barrier to the movement of films.
Therefore in order to facilitate exchanges of educa¬
tional, scientific, and cultural films within these regions,
Unesco has been asked to encourage countries with
developed cinematographic services to place their labo¬
ratories at the disposal of others which have none.
One new difficulty has appeared in all countries during
the last few years, as a result of the most recent dev¬
elopment in film technology. This is the wide screen, or
the "panoramic format." This has become very popu¬
lar; moreover the use of 70mm film has made it possible
to project onto very wide screens. The width of the
S
)ne of the greatest difficulties is language. An
imported film must undergo transformation
before it can be shown to audiences speaking a different
language. Sub-titles are still the cheapest solution to
this problem. But generally speaking audiences have been
found to prefer to hear the dialogue or the commentary
In their own language without having to read sub-titles
at the moment when their attention should be focused
on the picture. Nevertheless the true cinema lover by
far prefers undubbed films which preserve the original
voices and sounds of the film without distortion.
Dubbing, on the other hand, gives a film a greater
commercial value, but costs far more. A mere translation
Is not enough. The dialogue must come as close as
possible to the original text so as to avoid major discre¬
pancies between the lip movements seen on the screen
and the syllables that are actually spoken.
The complexity of this problem is soon brought home
to us when we consider the number of languages spoken
in the world. In India, films are dubbed in 13 different
languages. Recording studios and laboratories carry out
this work of post-synchronization in many countries. In
some countries the dubbing of all imported films has
been made compulsory in order to keep the teams of
actors and technicians who do this work in .full employ¬
ment.
But what happens in countries In which technical
facilities are lacking? Conferences held at Bangkok,
Santiago, Paris, and in Chile were all obliged to go into
this question. While the problem is less serious in Latin
America than elsewhere thanks to common linguistic
links there, It is very much more difficult to resolve in
Africa or in South-East Asia. It has therefore been
22 proposed that regional centres should be established and
equipped to produce local versions of educational and
documentary films.
A scene from the
Argentine film
"Shun ko", evoking
problems of primary
education in the rural
areas of northern Ar¬
gentina. Chilian di¬
rector-actor, Lautaro
Murua, is here seen
as a schoolmaster,
teaching Angel Greco
(Shunko - the boy's
name in Quechua)
to count with the
help of an impro-
vized abacus. The
film won first prize
for the best Spanish-
speaking film at the
International Film Fes¬
tival of Mar del Plata,
Argentina in 1961.
From the film " Shunko "
i
4P
I
fJ

projected Image is twice, and sometimes even more than
twite that of its height.
As a result, the old format now seems quite outdated.
That is why many cinema proprietors use a wide screen
at all times, even when they are showing standard-sized
films which have not been expanded horizontally. In
such cases, the projected image is considerably distorted.
There is, in fact, little co-ordination in the development
of new cinematographic techniques, and there is no
doubt that the introduction of new sound and picture
processes, all demanding widely differing filming and
screening techniques has led to a disquieting situation.
The image undergoes wide and indiscriminate modifi¬
cations. As a result, the audience often sees on the screen
something which bears little relationship with what the
producer of the film wanted them to see: actors are
shown with their feet or the tops of their heads cut off
(and sometimes the subtitles are cut off, too) ; propor¬
tions are faulty, there is distortion at the sides of the
picture; as for the so-called sterephonic effect, it often
turns out to be mere cacophony.
René Clair has said: "The cinema is on the decline
when the universal character given to it fifty years ago
is threatened by the existence of too many different
systems. In these conditions, all progress ls mere Illu¬
sion. What ls a landscape without the tops of trees,
without sky and clouds? What ls a palace without Its
ceilings?"
Unesco realizes the cultural Importance of this tech¬
nical problem and at the 1958 General Conference, it
referred to the International Cinema and Television
Council the Idea of studying the possibility of "an Inter¬
national Instrument to secure standardization of prints
of 35mm. cinematographic film."
The principles are virtually Identical In the case of
commercial shorts. The chief obstacle to the free cir¬
culation of such films ls the way In which they are dis¬
tributed and screened. They are chlelly used as pro¬
gramme Allers and they are usually obtained very
cheaply, sometimes even without charge. Their prospects
are thus closely linked with those of feature films and
their production should be lower, or at any rate, not
exceed that of feature films. In fact, more are pro¬
duced than can be absorbed by the International market.
In France, the producer of a feature film Is granted
additional financial help when his film has been awarded
a special mention, provided that a short film of similar
CONT'D ON PAGE 32

CINEMA (Cont'd from page 23)
Top priority freedom for films
category is always shown on the same programme during
the first three years of the feature film's Ufe. This boils
down to saying that only those short films which have
received an award stand a chance of being chosen to
accompany a French feature film. In Italy and in Argen¬
tina, short films In the top category have a certain num¬
ber of days set aside every year for them alone. In
Italy, the minimum number of days is 180.
In Argentina, category "A" films which are not taken
up by any cinema proprietor within one month are allo¬
cated by lot to certain cinemas which are obliged to
show them. The aim is to keep down the number of
home-produced films to reasonable proportions, thus
ensuring an improvement in their quality.
What are the general characteristics of International
trade In newsreels? Most of such trade is subject-matter
(i.e. sequences dealing with a particular event or subject
included in a newsreel). There is rarely a market for a
complete newsreel, for not all the items even in a special
national edition would appeal to local tastes. Most news-
reel firms have trade agreements by subject with their
colleagues in other countries.
Unesco keeps a watchful eye on all problems to do
with educational, scientific, and cultural films. When all
the Immense and varied difficulties that must be overcome
before International agreements applicable all over the
world can be reached are taken into account, there are
Indeed grounds for satisfaction with results achieved.
In 1961, when it received the report on international
relations and exchanges in the fields of education, science,
and culture prepared for the U.N. Economic and Social
Council, Unesco's Executive Board pointed out that these
international contacts, apart from their general aim of
developing peaceful relationships between nations, had
two no less Important objectives:
1. The organization between nations of exchanges of
persons, information, knowledge, ideas and equipment;
and
2. To enable the more fortunate and better equipped
nations to aid the less privileged ones.
This general aim and this double objective are an
intrinsic part of Unesco's action in the field of educational,
scientific, and cultural films. Permanent contacts have
also now been established between Unesco and interna¬
tional organizations concerned with the cinema, thanks
to the creation of the International Film and Television
Council.
uI nesco has already achieved some impressive
results in the field of international agreements
for the circulation of objects of educational, scientific, or
cultural interest. Films benefit from the many facilities
which have been obtained in this way.
Unesco has adopted an international instrument, known
as the Florence Agreement, which facilitates the free
circulation of books, publications and educational, scien¬
tific and cultural materials.
Films which meet these conditions are covered by the
agreement, which provides for exemption from customs
duties and from certain Import dues; it also makes provi¬
sion, as far as possible, for the granting of foreign
exchange and Import licences.
Certain limitations, however, are imposed on the scope
of the convention where films are concerned. Films must
be Imported only by organizations approved by the com¬
petent authorities of the importing country for the
purpose of duty free admission of such material and may
only be exhibited by the approved organizations; in
practice, this means that the films in question can be
used only for non-commercial purposes.
The other Important international agreement adopted
by Unesco, the Beirut Agreement, facilitates the inter-
32 national circulation of visual and auditory material of
an educational, scientific and cultural character. This
instrument differs from the preceding one in that 1) It
applies only to visual and auditory materials, 2) it grants
exemption not only from customs duties but from
quantitive restrictions on imports and the need to apply
for Import licences, and 3) in general, it does much to
reduce difficulties arising from the international circula¬
tion of educational, scientific, and cultural films, even
when these are shown commercially.
Three drafts which were drawn up by the Customs
Co-operation Council in conjunction with Unesco were
adopted by this Council in 1961. These new provisions
supplement the measures already adopted concerning
temporary importation. Temporary importation is an
arrangement by which states allow educational, cultural,
and scientific films to enter a country and suspend the
application of customs duties for a limited period.
What are these new agreements? First of all,
there is one which makes use of international
carnets to exempt importers from a large number of
formalities to which they were previously subject. Second¬
ly, all professional and cinematographic equipment needed
for film-making in a foreign country has been brought
within the scope of temporary importation regulations.
The third agreement concerns the temporary importation
of material for International exhibitions.
International trade ls controlled by agreements of a
worldwide, regional, or bilateral nature. There are other
agreements which deal specifically with cultural
exchanges. Rather than describe these in detail, or make
an analysis of their application to the international cine¬
matographic trade, let us simply take a brief look at the
general way in which they work.
The General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (G.A.T.T.),
which came into operation in 1948, has turned out to be
one of the most decisive steps in freeing international
trade from hampering restrictions.
Through it, the quota system has been considerably
reduced in many countries, and many categories of
articles, particularly those of an educational, scientific,
or cultural nature, have been freed from various forms
of control. For example, during a conference held at
Geneva in 1956, Unesco asked that tariff reductions
should be granted on a series of articles and many
countries agreed, and on films In particular.
There are also regional agreements affecting film
exchanges. The European Economic Community, better
known as the Common Market, was established by the
Treaty of Rome. This treaty is concerned particularly
with the economic aspects of European trade, and for Its
purposes films are treated as trade commodities.
In our field, therefore, the aim of the treaty is the
integration of the film industry on Common Market lines,
the implication being that national help and fiscal charges
will be brought into line and trade made easier.
In other parts of the world, there are regional
agreements which make a similar attempt to create
economic communities or to establish the foundations
of cultural co-operation. One example, is the Council for
Mutual Economic Aid which brings together countries
having a socialist economy, although films do not seem
to play an important role here. Amongst regional agree¬
ments with a more pronounced cultural nature, is the
convention signed by the members of the Organization
of American States with a view to encouraging inter-
American cultural relationships, and also the activities
of the Cultural Committee of the Nordic Council (Nordisk
Kulturkommission ) .
This brief survey of the different agreements covering
cinematographic exchanges highlights the importance of
the problems involved and the extent of the interest
shown in them by national authorities as well as by
regional and International bodies.
Films, as consumer goods, follow the general trends
of trade liberalization. But as intellectual and culture
products, they deserve an even more rapid liberation on
a world-wide scale a top-priority freedom.
