A SPUTNIK'S EYE VIEW
APOGEE
it»
"Man pierces the ce¬
lestial vault and ex¬
plores the spheres".
Today, this prophetic
16th-century woodcut
(right) by an unknown
engraver has become
fact. With the help of
artificial satellites
launched into orbit
around the earth man
has "taken the mea¬
sure" of his planet.
Other, more far-rang¬
ing "cosmic laborator¬
ies" have begun "the
exploration of the
spheres". Diagram on
left shows (schema¬
tically) the changing
path of a man-made
satellite observed at
the perigee (nearest
point) and at the apo¬
gee (point farthest
away from our planet).
\\ \ \\ V
" OF THE CIRCUMFERENCE
^T- ' \ '
Y' \ ,' ' ..' .* '
.* /'' \ . '
£a\\¥ 1 ~Ä1&'',i§S^/V'^«S>MBE21 0F ,HE CIRCUMFEI!ENI:E
^m . . Tv " l,',\r..'' V V *
,'"'' -"'' ' >- Jr^'V'-V: "*
>_>.;- '; . t* ? ISv \ ' ?
- .' * í 0S V' , *» ..
H ' :ik:: m "' yjKíLiW KWB CENTRE OF THE EARTH Sgl
- :.jSBB . ': -'::"\^'r-v-i. *;V *"!.
Unesco
ERATOSTHENES' WELLS. Twenty-five centuries ago,
Eratosthenes, poet, philosopher and astronomer, in¬
geniously calculated the earth's dimensions. As dia¬
gram shows, he observed that while the sun's rays
shone vertically into a well at Syene in southern
ESypt (at midsummer noon) their angle from the
vertical at Alexandria corresponded to 1 SO of the
circumference of a circle. His calculation of the dis¬
tance between the two towns as 1 SOth of the earth's
circumference gave him a total distance of about 24,700
miles (best modern measurement is 24,860 miles).
When asked what shape the Earth is we usually
say without thinking that it is a sphere. But
how many of us could give proof that this is really so?
Probably only the spacemen who have flown round the
Earth at a height of several hundred kilometres have a
real visual perception of the sphericity of our planet.
The circular border of the Earth's shadow as it moves
across the moon's disc during an eclipse, and the gradual
rise of a moving ship as it approaches the observer, gave
the ancient Greeks, with their keen, penetrating minds,
the idea that the Earth on which they lived was like a
ball. All those proofs of the roundness of the Earth that
a teacher recounts nowadays to ten-year-old schoolchil¬
dren were recorded by Aristotle about 2,500 years ago.
Eratosthenes, curator of the famous Alexandrian libra¬
ry, poet, philosopher and astronomer, who lived about the
same time as Aristotle, based his calculations on the
dimensions of the Earth on the assumption that it Is a
spherical body. His method was simple but bore all the
hallmarks of genius.
He had observed at Syene (Southern Egypt) that the
sun at midsummer noon was directly overhead so that It
shone on the water of the deepest well. When the sun
was observed at the same moment from Alexandria, where
Eratosthenes lived, its angle from the vertical corres¬
ponded to one-fiftieth of the circumference of a circle.
Lines drawn from Syene and Alexandria to the centre
of the Earth would enclose the same angle; therefore,
reasoned Eratosthenes, the distance from Syene to Alexan¬
dria must be one-fiftieth of the Earth's circumference.
This gave him a figure of approximately 24,700 miles as
the Earth's circumference (the best modern measurement
is 24,860 miles) and Eratosthenes lived twenty-five cen¬
turies ago!
Is the Earth a true sphere in shape? Before we can
answer this question we must decide exactly what we
mean by shape. There are plains, plateaux, deep hollows
and high mountains on the Earth's surface. But It is the
relatively uniform surface of the ocean, covering as it
does three-quarters of our planet, that represents more
exactly the real shape of the Earth. It is not very diffi¬
cult to transfer this concept to dry land ; in fact it is done
when we speak of heights being so many feet above sea
level.
Sir Isaac Newton, who lived over three hundred years
ago, knew that the Earth could not be a true sphere.

Fron "Le Soleil" published by Arthaud, for the Federation d'-s Cooperatives Mijros. Zurich. 1961
This was the proof he offered: let us imagine two wells
sunk from the surface of the Earth to its centre, one at a
Pole and the other on the Equator. If the Earth did not
rotate the water would be at the same level (reckoned
from the centre of the Earth) in both wells.
Because the Earth does rotate, the water in the equa¬
torial well would rise, under the influence of centrifugal
force, until the pressure of the additional column of
water compensated weight lost by centrifugal action.
The same thing must actually happen to the water In
the seas and also to the body of the planet itself, since
there are no absolutely rigid bodies In nature; this means
that the Earth must be slightly flattened at the poles and
bulge a little at the Equator, its shape resembling that of
a tangerine or a pumpkin.
The measurements made by eighteenth century French
scholars proved the accuracy of Newton's theory; working
at the Equator and beyond the Arctic Circle they found
that the meridian is 40,009 kilometres in length and the
Equator 40,075 kilometres; the polar and equatorial radii
differ by 21 kilometres. Newton computed the amount of
flattening of the Earth (the ratio of the difference bet¬
ween the equatorial and the polar radii to the equatorial
radius) to be 1/230. Huyghens, a Dutch scholar living at
about the same time, made the same calculation and
arrived at the figure of 1/530.
One may well imagine the consternation of the learned
world when this big difference was made known. It was
soon discovered, however, that the two scholars had based
their calculations on different assumptions. Newton had
assumed that the Earth's density is uniform throughout
and does not change with depth, whereas Huyghens had
assumed that the Earth's gravitational pull Indicates that
Its mass Is concentrated mainly in the centre, i.e., that
density rapidly Increases with depth.
Later measurements showed that the actual difference
in the length of the radii is about 1 unit in 300 so that
Newton was closer to the truth than Huyghens; the den¬
sity of the Earth does increase with depth but not as
greatly as Huyghens assumed. From this Jt- follows that
accurate measurements of the Earth's dimensions can
help us understand something of what Is inside It, thou¬
sands of kilometres below the surface.
It has now been demonstrated that the simplest and
most accurate measurements of the shape of Earth may
be made by observations of artificial earth satellites.
Man-made satellites circle the Earth In elliptical orbits,
so that the distan«; from the Earth to the satellite is
constantly changing. If the Earth were a true sphere the
satellite would pass through the same points at its apo¬
gee and perigee in each orbit (relative of course to the
fixed stars).
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
21

SPUTNIK'S VIEW (Cont'd)
Space-vehicles help to measure our planet
To put it another way, If, say, the perigee of the vehicle
were visible from the Earth in line with a certain fixed
star, the direction would be the same for each orbit. If,
however, the Earth is an oblate spheroid and not a true
sphere, this would not be strictly true.
Actually the perigee of a vehicle orbiting round the
Earth changes with each orbit and gradually moves
round the Earth; the amount of the shift for each orbit
depends firstly on the flattening at the poles, the greater
the flattening the greater the shift, and secondly on the
angle between the plane of the vehicle's orbit and the
plane of the terrestrial Equator (the smaller the angle the
22
Unesco
ISAAC NEWTON'S WELLS. In the 18th century,
Sir Isaac Newton declared that the earth could not be a
true sphere. To support his theory he imagined two
wells sunk from the North Pole and the Equator to
the centre of the Earth. If the Earth did not rotate, he
said, the water would be the same level in both wells.
But because of the earth's rotation, water in the equa¬
torial well would rise under the influence of centrifugal
force. The same must happen to the water in the seas and
the body of the planet. Thus the Earth must be slightly
flattened at the poles and bulge a little at the Equator.
greater the shift). The movement of the vehicle's perigee
(or apogee) around the Earth, therefore, enables mathe¬
maticians to determine the exact shape of the Earth.
When the vehicle is in flight the position of its perigee
among the stars is noted; on each successive orbit the
position is again noted and the difference in position,
between successive orbits gives us the angle of displace¬
ment of the perigee. Knowing this displacement, the ave¬
rage distance of the vehicle from the Earth's centre, the
time taken for one orbit and the declination of the orbi¬
tal plane from the Earth's equatorial plane, an astrono¬
mer can calculate the oblateness of the Earth by the use
of ready-made formulae.
In practice, of course, the position and dimensions of
the orbit are much more difficult to calculate because
they are affected by the resistance of the terrestrial
atmosphere in a complicated manner that is not yet fully
understood. The usual method is to strike an average for
a large number of orbits.
It is important to observe the sputnik's perigee and the
displacement of it from as many points on Earth as possi¬
ble; this requires the co-operation of many countries and
all continents.
In the twenties of this century the American scholar,
John Hayford, spent some years analyzing geodesic data
that had been accumulated over dozens of years and
found the difference in the polar and equatorial radii to
be 1 unit in 297. In 1940 a large group of Soviet geodesists
headed by F. Krasovsky completed their many years of
work on the same problem and arrived at the figure of
1 in 298.3. A few months' observation of Soviet Sputnik II
and American Vanguard I produced the figure of 1 in
298.2, and the data was analyzed within a few weeks.
Observations of artificial earth satellites are made by
over one hundred stations in the Soviet Union; positions
of the vehicles in space are recorded by means of visual
observation and by photographs taken with specially de¬
signed precision cameras. These observations have pro¬
vided further information on the peculiarities of the
Earth's shape.
We now know that the Earth is not a simple
oblate spheroid. It is made like the figure
known in geometry as a triaxial ellipsoid, that can be
obtained by squeezing the sides of an oblate ellipsoid.
The Earth's Equator is not a true circle, it is slightly
flattened on two sides and has its greatest diameter
approximately on the meridian of Prague. True enough,
the difference is very slight not more than 200 metres.
By careful observation of the displacement of the peri-
. gee of a "Sputnik's" orbit, scientists have discovered that
the northern hemisphere is "higher" than the southern,
the distance from the centre of the Earth to the North
Pole being between 30 and 60 metres greater than from
the centre to the South Pole.
This is only the beginning of the space age. Artificial
satellites have been used for less than five years, but the
observations have produced some outstanding discoveries.
The study of the Earth with the aid of small satellites
has a tremendous future. If we know exactly how a
"Sputnik" is moving and measure its position simultan¬
eously from two points on the ground, we can measure
the distance between those points accurately.
By locating observation posts in different continents and
repeating the measurements over a number of years we
can decide whether the continents are movingare the
positions of Eurasia, America, Africa and Australia fixed,
relative to the Earth's centre, or do they drift about?
Changes in the character of an artificial satellite's orbit
described above (the motion of the perigee) are caused
by the greater concentration of mass in the vicinity of
the Equator and the slight flattening; this excess of mass
(in relation to the main mass of the Earth) helps to pull
the satellite out of a "regular elliptical orbit".
It follows that the path of a satellite will change with
every change in the Earth's gravitational pull so that the
motion of a satellite over a mountainous area must be
different from its motion over seas, because the mountains
are composed of material that is denser than water and
effect a greater pull on the satellite.
The satellite, furthermore, will "feel" big deposits of
some extra heavy or extra light substances burled deep
below the Earth's surface because of the difference In gra¬
vitational pull and will change its course accordingly.
Thus we see what great prospects for the study of the
Earth's interior are opened up by the observation of even
tiny man-made moons In flight.

*
. W *
» » -/
« r H*»P
$
SPUTNIK TRAIL INTO SPACE. Soviet
rocket carrying the world's first arti¬
ficial satellite on October 4, 1957,
soars aloft, its path marked by a lu¬
minous trail in the night sky. Since
the first "Sputnik" went into orbit,
the flight of space vehicles has been
plotted by technicians and scientists
on tracking boards resembling huge
cobwebs (right). Observations of and
from these vehicles have given man
new information on the peculiarities
of the earth's shape and shed new
light on the composition of its interior.
Official Soviet photo
