ORIENT-OCCIDENT
A STUDY IN IGNORANCE
by Georges Fradier Flames from myriads of tiny oil lamps twinkle in the November
night, lighting up a ghatone of the flights of stairs which lead
down to the River Gangesin Benares, the sacred city of the
Hindus. The time is Diwali, the Festival of Light, a day of cele¬
bration throughout India, marking the triumph of light over
darkness. Right, a group of Greek children, each carrying a
lighted candle, takes part in a traditional Easter Eve procession.
Richard Lannoy From " La Joie de vivre " (Joy of Living ) published by the Federation des Cooperatives Migros, Zurich.

...AND PREJUDICE
The article below is taken from " Encounters and Celebrations ", a study on the
mutual appreciation of cultural values in Orient and Occident by Georges Fradier,
which is shortly to be published by Unesco. The article on page 8 " Dialogue
Between Orient and Occident on the Film 'The Island' " which comes
from the same work was written in collaboration with Miss Tomiko Takeda.
re you more intelligent than your parents?
kMore tolerant? Do you have a more developed
awareness of things? Is your outlook more forthright
and independent? Do you think that nations or people
in general are more friendly today and that the world
is a less incomprehensible place than your elders found
it?
All these are questions which one would like to put to
young people who talk in an abstract way about progress.
For the images and ideas which the word Progress seems
to evoke nowadays are increasingly vague and obscure.
Most of the younger generation recognize, of course, the
existence of progress in technology, science and medi¬
cine. Only a minority believes in ethical progress or if
others do believe in it they are afraid to say so.
As for progress in art, philosophy and literature, this
is an even more difficult theme. For we have got into
the habit of describing progress in statistical terms, of
illustrating development by charts and some subjects
simply do not lend themselves to such interpretation. It is
easy to point to the steadily increasing output of litera¬
ture, music and painting and to the hundreds of millions
of readers. But it is impossibe for us to say whether
the books are better, the pictures finer and the readers
more perceptive; indeed, the very question lacks meaning.
One day an attempt may be m|ade to assess the results
of the Major Project launched by Unesco in 1957 to
promote the mutual appreciation of Eastern and Western
cultural values. It will be asked, for instance, whether
the English or more particularly the younger generation
in England now know more about the cultural values of
the Chinese, and appraise them with more perceptiveness
and friendly understanding, and vice versa. Ingenious
methods and infinite patience will need to be applied here.
Meanwhile we may perhaps begin to draw a general, and
let us hope, credible picture of the progress achieved.
One might, indeed, begin by applauding the substantial 5
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

STUDY IN IGNORANCE (Cont'd)
Beware of the superficial
increase of information now everywhere available about
the history, development, social and political problems,
way of life, scenery, religion and art of almost all
countries. Efforts have been made, for example, in the
field of education. In several countries studies of the
history and culture of wide areas which were hitherto
ignored have recently found their places in official school
curricula.
It would be even easier to show the growing influence
again in the field of cultural values of films, broad¬
casting, television, newspapers and magazines, records
and publications (journalistic reports, surveys, transla¬
tions of classical works and contemporary novels, etc.).
Then there is the part played by travel, now becoming
easier and easier for young people, and by meetings,
youth festivals and international work camps not to
SMILE FROM EUROPE...
Alongside the saints, angels and demons with which
they embellished the cathedrals of Europe, Gothic
sculptors carved remarkable and distinctively human
portraits in stone. One of these a young woman
carrying one of her glovesadds a note of youth and
gaiety to the figures on Basle Cathedral, Switzerland.
From "La Joie de vivre" (Joy of Living) published
by the Federation des Coopératives Migros, Zurich
mention the wonderful introduction to international life
afforded to fellowship-holders studying abroad.
In other words, the amount of information that young
people from Western countries, for instance, can pick
up nowadays about the habits, problems and amusements
of Eastern countries is out of all proportion to the know¬
ledge that was available on the same subjects twenty
years ago.
The casual listener to a radio programme may hear
a sarode concert or a Balinese orchestra. The cinema
will already have introduced him to the daily life of
peasants in the Nile Valley and to the most varied
episodes of Japanese mediaeval or contemporary history,
and he may have been lucky enough to come across
documentary films revealing the beauties of Borobudur,
Angkor Vat, Isfahan and the Taj Mahal. In daily and
weekly papers he will have seen a wealth of pictures,
generally beautiful and always picturesque, of the differ¬
ent "developing countries" whose glories, contrasts and
mysteries never fail to interest and intrigue.
Thus, most young people in the West have now a
broad access to facts about the Eastern countries, and
the same applies to youth in the East (most of whom
have become enthusiastically fond of dance music and
films imported from America and even from Europe).
Does this mean that the Major Project has achieved its
aims? That is less certain. A mass of superficial Infor¬
mation, unrelated Ideas and images arbitrarily removed
from their contexts as well as isolated statistics may
well be the raw material for lively conversation, but do
not necessarily add up to genuine understanding.
O|n the contrary, there is some danger that all
this information, most of it haphazard and
passively absorbed, may build up a sense of blase com¬
placency. After seeing a little of everything and hearing
epochs and countries brought up in conversation in any
and every connexion, people quickly come to believe that
they are well informed and have understood all there is
to know.
Information which is too rapidly acquired does not
always even have the advantage of overcoming prejudice.
The other day an article on Japan, describing a "typi¬
cal" Japanese family, appeared in a glossy magazine with
an international circulation. Many such articles are
published, and this one was better than most; it conveyed
a good deal of accurate and Interesting information
about the economic and social life of the "professional
middle class".
At the same time, to lend a picturesque flavour to
his article, the writer stressed those well-known conflicts
between tradition and modernism which observers are
always noticing In the East. These conflicts, or tensions,
take various formsin terms of language (foreign words
brought into the vocabulary), in terms of psychiatry
(people living half in the atomic age and half in a tradi¬
tional environment become schizophrenic), or in terms
of history (the Middle Ages lingering on into the 20th
century) .
This last approach is the most popular with the caption
writers; a pair of trousers symbolizes the 20th century,
a kimono is mediaeval; the naval shipyard belongs to
the 20th century and the Shinto temple to the Middle
Ages. There is a grain of truth in all this. But to dwell
on these alleged contrasts is unwittingly to perpetuate
prejudice. We are told that "the East derives its scien¬
tific cultureeven its 'rationalism'its comforts, its

politics and its amusements from the West ; it is painfully
or ludicrously torn between the traditional, Oriental mind
and the modern mentality; the result of adaptation to
technologies which its culture is unable to absorb can
only be fatal", etc.
In order to come nearer to the truth, I would suggest
an article written in the same style, with the same skilled
photography about, let us say, a "typical" family in Würt¬
temberg. Nothing would be easier than to underline the
contrasts, or even the irreconcilabilities between the
modern life of a German engineer and the mediaeval
traditions that linger in his home.
HI is old mother, his wife and perhaps even he
himself still read an ancient work called Die
Bibel, which was translated by a monk revered even
today long, before the Industrial Revolution. The man
works all day in an ultra-modern office. In the evening
he meets his friends in a building which looks, and may
even be, Gothic and joins them in drinking a beverage
made from fermented barleythe formula for which goes
back to the Teutons and Celts to the accompaniment of
ancient ritual choruses.
A young Chinese spending a few weeks in Stuttgart
would notice these contrasts without seeing any reason
to deplore them; he would meet people ready to supply
a good-natured explanation of them. Knowledge picked
up during travel is not so piecemeal as that acquired from
the newspapers; it is more concentrated, and its appeal
is not solely to the memory.
Through individual or group travel, and even more
by international meetings, young people are enabled
in greater numbers every yearto discover their distant
contemporaries in the East or West. Their contacts
will probably be confined to young people like themselves,
however, for it is not easy to discover a whole country,
let alone a whole culture.
Nothing is better, of course, than to learn to express
ourselves and be understood on the level of friendship;
to work together, to play together and to join in reso¬
lutions about peace and harmony all these are to be
encouraged. But even the rrçost cordial meetings some¬
times fade to dim memoriesand also tend to over¬
simplify the problem of different cultural values.
IIn such cases, the preconception about insur¬
mountable barriers makes way for an as¬
sumption of uniformity, which affirms "We are all alike.
The world is the same everywhere. We all have the same
needs and the same ambitions." This can lead to the
conclusion that intellectual effort of any kind is super¬
fluous.
On the other hand, a different danger seems to lie
in wait for those with more exacting minds, who have
a taste for history and for currently fashionable his¬
torical theories. The tendency to generalize, while
excellent as an antidote to narrow-minded specialization,
sometimes leads people to dip too hastily into the past and
into human geography and, for the sake of convenience,
to classify whole nations in one civilization or cultural
group.
Whatever may be the advantage of these vast, all-
embracing explanations as a means of conveying ideas,
we must not overlook the drawback that they aré
frequently no more than optical illusions. Even the
most cultivated people may be taken In by them.
For a long time, for instance, we have heard criticism
I Sunil Janah, Calcutta
...SMILE FROM ASIA
This graceful Yak. sini or nymph was carved over ten
centuries ago on the Temple of Siva at Bhubaweshar
In the Indian State of Orissa. A holy place, Bhuba¬
weshar was once known as "The City of Temples".
But of 7,000 temples only a few hundred now remain.
of the sweeping judgments pronounced on Orient and
Occident; but it is astonishing how they persist. We are
still told that the East has a monopoly of spiritual
enlightenment and that all Western nations are mat¬
erialistic. Other concepts, less far-reaching but equally
unsubstantiated, also survive; authoritative writers still
publish reflections on happiness "conceived in the West
as the plenitude of life and in India as release from life,
as absorption into the Infinite"; in the East one still
meets distinguished professors leaving for Europe, looking
forward confidently to unrestricted and profitable meet¬
ings with their opposite numbers in the West, "because
In Europe all cultivated people speak English, just as
they do here".
In reality problems relating to the mutual appreciation
of cultural values are by no means simple ones. They
are still neither outdated nor solved. And even in the
case of collective problems it is still up to the individual
to solve them on a personal level by facing up to situa¬
tions in which disputes or misunderstandings are likely
to occur but in which, providing the necessary effort is 7
made, understanding and cultural enrichment can also
be found.

STUDY IN IGNORANCE (Part 2)
»
DIALOGUE BET
ON THE FILM
ONE small islet, only five acres in area, was chosen by the film director
Kaneto Shindo, from among the countless islands that compose the stately
yet delicate landscape of the Inland Sea of Japan, as the setting for an extraor¬
dinary film which some people consider to be worthy of comparison with the
work of Robert Flaherty, and in particular with " Man of Aran ".
It is a film in which nothing happens. Or, more precisely, in which a host of
episodes, trivial and yet intense, take place without forming a story. This island
is an arid waste of stones and poor soil ; but it is inhabited and cultivated (meti¬
culously, inch by inch) by a couple, who are still young and who labour unceas¬
ingly from dawn to nightfall, with the frenzied obstinacy associated with certain
insects such as bees, ants and termites.
They have two little boys, the elder of whom is at school all day on the big
island, where his parents go almost hourly to fetch water. For their own islet
has no well, no springit is completely dry. For the greater part of the year
the couple spend their lives rowing to and fro in a boat and bringing back water
in buckets which they carry, slung from a yoke, carefully and slowly to the
top of their hill, where they meticulously water their beans and their sweet pota¬
toes plant by plant. They also grow maize and wheat.
Planting, hoeing, watering, rowing, carrying, digging, day after day such
is the round of their existence. They hardly pause to eat] or sleep. They
know nobody in the outer world, on the big island. This is simply the place
where they go for water, the place where the school is situated, and the shop¬
keepers to whom they pay rare, respectful visits, and also the doctor who arrives
too late one day, to find the elder boy dead.
The film is as simple as that; it shows us people living, working and dying
without uttering a word. It is not a silent film ; it is a film in which people do not
speak. The photography is admirable, but the spectators do not always notice
the beauty of the scene, they are so gripped by the two chief characters, or rather,
by the concentrated performances of two great actors, Yasuji Tonoyama and
Miss Nobuko Otowa.
Oriental and Occidental impressions of "The Island" are reflected in the
following dialogue between a Japanese girl student (J) and a European man (E)
both of whom have seen the film several times.

WEEN ORIENT & OCCIDENT
THE ISLAND
On an arid island in
Japan's Inland Sea a peas¬
ant couple toils around
the clock tending crops
and fetching water from
the mainland. From these
simple facts Kaneto
Shindo has made a re¬
markable film in which
the roles of wife and the
husband are played by
Nobuko Otowa (left) and
Yasuji Tonoyama (right).
Photos Kmdai Eiga Kyokai
E. When I was in Japan a few months ago, it struck
me that "The Island" was very little known or appreciat¬
ed. I asked several people about it but they only said
vaguely. "Yes... a documentary film?"
3. No one in Japan took much notice of it until
people in the West became interested. A documentary?
Yes, Shindo Kaneto has a reputation for making shorts
and feature films in a proletarian spirit, films taken from
real life, perhaps to show up its Injustice: a kind of
socialist realism. And people admired Nobuko Otowa, who
usually plays glamorous parts, for agreeing to depict an
earthy character, whose face is often covered with
sweat and dirt. Then the film attracted attention abroad
and won a prize at the Moscow festival; so finally, in
Japan it came to be classed as a "melodrama."
E. Thafs a strange description. But let us assume
for a moment that the film really is a documentary. If
that is so, what does it teach us about Japan apart from
the beauty of the scenery? We see the fields of corn or
rice looking like gardens, sown in perfectly straight rows;
scrubbed and polished. There is the impression that the
sea carries an unceasing traffic of small boats, tugs and
steamers. We are taken to visit the town, which is of
course noisy, crowded and industrious.
3. That's Onomichi. It is worthwhile, in any case,
to have a glimpse of a town that is so old and at the same
time so modern a medium-sized town and the scenery,
both are quite typical. As for the houses, a foreigner who
has never seen our Japanese houses, except in films, finds
it very difficult to imagine what they look like. For
instance, French people think of houses as buildings
made of stone a material never used for this purpose
in Japan or brick, with a roof of slates or red tiles. The
first thing we Japanese think of is wooden posts and
exposed beams, and whitewashed earthen walls which are
hollow, built upon a framework of woven bamboo stems.
The roof is thatched, or, in more modern houses, made
of grey tiles. The building gives straight onto the outer
world, through big French windows another term which
is likely to give the wrong idea. The paper door (shoji),
the paper partition (fusuma) and the traditional tatami,
which carpets the whole of the interior, are things one
has to know about before one can imagine a Japanese
house.
E. The film does, I agree, give us a glimpse of all that.
But the hut on the island where the couple live seems too
squalid, quite to correspond to this idea of a house. Does
this mean that all Japanese peasants are as poor as that?
3. Certainly not. On the whole they are by no means
well off, although they create so much wealth for the
country. But the people in The Island are not really
destitute. They are in no danger of starvation; they are
quite respectably dressed. Yet people who live so
wretchedly and work so hard are a very small minority.
E. So this may, after all, be a "propaganda film,"
intended to expose the injustice from which that minority
suffers?
3. Yes... It looks as if the director tried to give it that
meaning at first. But he was too much of an artist, too
much of a poet, to be satisfied with that alone. In the
end it turned into a poetic work.
E. I think so too. Even a tragedy. After setting out
to describe the living conditions of a peasant family in
a remote part of Japan, the film goes much further. Or
rather it is not quite a tragedy; just one thing is lacking.
3. What do you feel is missing?
E. Speech. These people live together and suffer
together without exchanging a word. The chief quality
that distinguishes man from the other animals is speech, q
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

STUDY IN IGNORANCE (Confd)
Silence that speaks
from the heart
or so we are usually told. But these people never, abso¬
lutely never, say anything; one wonders whether they
are really together, or merely side by side, one person and
then another, each quite alone.
3. Oh yes, the absence of communication! That
Is what always strikes foreigners. Several times already,
people have asked me, "Have they nothing to say to each
other?" But believe it or not, I myself did not notice
the silence at all. In Japan, in moments of the most
intense emotion, the deepest grief, people say nothing.
E. I remember that terrible scene when the young
wife, after once again climbing the hill with her infinitely
precious supply of water, stumbles and upsets one of the
buckets. Her husband looks at her, comes closer, and
knocks her down with a single blow. That blow is the
only way he can express himself.
10
J. And yet he loves his
wife, there is no doubt of
that. He does not strike
her out of cruelty. She
has unintentionally done
wrong. He is putting
things to rights. I think
she understands that.
Later on, in the evening,
she is looking across at
the big island. She is all alone, watching the fireworks
(it is probably August 16, the Feast of the Dead, associat¬
ed with fire ; after the fireworks, we see illuminated boats ;
in the old days this was the season of epidemics, and
people are still afraid of typhoid fever); she watches.
Her husband comes up behind her. He says nothing.
Can he find no word to comfort her? No. He does
not know how to tell her that he, too, is unhappy, and
that he understands her. And she does not even know
that her husband has paused for a moment to watch
her, with an aching heart. And without a word they
both go up the hill, spade in hand, to bury their son's
ashes.
E. Do you mean they know instinctively that words
cannot relieve a deep sorrow?
3. It's not that; the Japanese, like other people,
know very well that when one is unhappy it is a comfort
not to feel alone, and that two people together are better
able to bear a great grief.
E. You mean it is a kind of awkwardness?
3. I suppose so. But awkwardness of that kind is
so common that it does not upset us. That's why I
found the silence of this film perfectly normal and na¬
tural, apart from the fact that the director wanted it to
be like that. The members of that family don't talk to
one another; and that inevitably reminds me of my own
family, I wonder how it is that where I come from
people express themselves so little and so badly brothers
and sisters, husbands and wives, even lovers. Perhaps
we talk more freely to friends or school companions...
When I first came to Europe I was struck by the way in
which the children of the family I knew (two teenage
boys and one younger one) used to argue with their
parents at meals. They had no hesitation about
contradicting their father's opinions. And sometimes he
would say calmly "Yes, you're right." In my own home
it would never have occurred to me to argue with my
father! Even if I thought he Was mistaken, I would
never say "Father, I don't agree. I think so-and-so,
because...!" I don't know whether he would be angry
or pleased ; I have never tried. I have never talked, really
talked, to my mother, either.
Every precious drop of
water for cultivation has
to be rowed over to the
island and then carried in
buckets slung from a yoke
to the top of the hill
where the crops are grown.
J. No, let's make no mistake about it; it is simply
the absence of argument. I don't mean chatter...
E. But Japanese life is changing, and so is the rela¬
tionship between parents and children...
3. Japan has recently experienced social changes
perhaps more abrupt and violent than those In any other
country. How can I explain? Two hundred years ago
our most successful dramatists were writing popular plays
in which the hero killed his own son in order to save the
son of his feudal lord, as loyalty required of him. That
kind of hero was applauded without hesitation. And even
when those plays are given nowadays, the audience sheds
floods of tears without pausing to ask itself whether a
father is entitled to kill his own child. One such play
was forbidden during the American occupation, because
its feudal code of morality was contrary to democracy and
human rights. But a few years later it was revived, and
received as enthusiastically as ever. Reason and law have
proclaimed that the individual, starting in childhood, has
certain rights. And nowadays nobody would sacrifice his
own son to save the son of his superior. But for all that,
a present-day audience sees nothing criminal or immoral
in such plays.
E. And what does that show?
3. In my opinion, family life is not yet up to date
in its spirit. We have not entirely shaken off the vestiges
of the fine Confucianist ethical code.
E. You consider it a fine code?
E. Perhaps that is a sign of good behaviour?
dience?
Obe-
3. It really was very
fine. As for married
couples, they are on a more
equal footing than fifteen
years ago. The wife's
situation has changed.
There is a scene in the
film which I find signi¬
ficant. It comes towards
the end. In a sudden fit
of rage, the woman deliberately knocks over the precious
bucket of water; she deliberately repeats the action
for which her husband had not hesitated to strike her.
And then she throws herself on the ground and begins
frantically uprooting the plants... But this time the man
does not move. With deep compassion, he watches his
wife, who has lost her self-control because of her child's
death. He says nothing. If he were to let himself go,
perhaps, he, too, would throw himself on the ground.
But as usual he says nothing. He turns back to his work.
He quite understands his wife's grief and her revolt against
the poverty which caused them to leave their little boy to
die. She has no other way of expressing herself. Neither
has he. They are not in the habit of speaking, of
expressing their thoughts or feelings.
E. Sometimes it's better that way. In Tokyo a woman
friend took me one day to the Asakusa temple. As we went
though that districtwhich might be called the religious
birthplace of the city with its cinemas, its places of
entertainment, and its stalls of souvenirs and religious

objects, I was expecting to be given all kinds of explana¬
tions about the temple, which was destroyed during the
war and rebuilt recently, with modern materials, though,*
exactly as it had been standing for centuries, down to the
smallest details. Nothing of the kind; my friends merely
suggested that I should go up the steps and take my shoes
off. Then we knelt (or rather, sat down in the Japanese
fashion) among the congregation. We stayed there for
quite a time, naturally without uttering a word. And
words would have been superfluous. In similar circums¬
tances, one of my own countrymen would have shown
me the statues and ornaments, pointed out the beauties
of the architecture, and remarked on amusing or
touching things concerning the behaviour of the monks
and pilgrims. He would have tired me out. There,
instead, there was this long, silent contemplation. And
it left an impression I shall never forget.
3. So you do appreciate silence. Yet In the life of a
family, or of a married couple, it baffles you. A man
and a woman may be aware that they love each other
deeply and yet find no words in which to say so.
E. Is it true, as I have been told, that the Japanese
language has no words to express affection?
3: It is rather that people don't know how to use
them. A young Japanese friend of mine once admitted
to me that he would find it easier to tell a girl he loved
her in a foreign language than in his own. I was not
surprised. A Japanese boy who will say "I love you," in
English will not be so ready with the corresponding words
in Japanese. That is because he has probably never
heard them spoken. He has often read them in romantic
stories, but they are never used in daily life, and hardly
ever even between Intimates. Even a couple who are
madly in love will not speak them aloud.
E. Then how do they make themselves understood?
J. ^Wlth their eyes. There is a proverb that says
"The eyes speak more clearly than the lips." So Japanese
loversN remain silent. It is not necessarily a falling, but
it is certainly characteristic.
E. 7s it also characteristic to remain completely
silent at a funeral when you have come, as we should
say, to offer your sympathy? In "The Island," I found
the funeral sequence unbearable. The schoolchildren
come with their teacher to attend the cremation of their
little school-fellow. The bonze (priest) is with them,
young and well-fed, in his beautiful robes; his manner is
cold and indifferent...
3. I have never known a bonze to show emotion. But
did you notice how serious, hcrargrave the little boys and
girls were?
E. The parents and the small brother go down to the
shore to receive all these visitors, they greet one another
politely, one almost expects them to smile.
3. They might smile. It would be proper. And you
would be even more puzzled, wouldn't you?
E. Yes, the smile of Asia... Ortega y Gasset explain¬
ed it as a result of dense population, saying that the more
people you expect to meet, the more polite you are likely
be.
3. We have heard a lot about the "Oriental smile..."
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
Photos Kindai Eiga Kyoka'
Planting, hoeing, watering, rowing, carrying, digging, the life of the family on the Island Is an endless,
unvarying round of toll. Sometimes interpreted as a cry of protest against the lot of the Impoverished,
Sindo's film Is also seen as a poetic work showing man's ability to triumph over grief and adversity.
'--ci'
11

STUDY IN IGNORANCE (Cont'd)
A merciless picture of the human condition
A Frenchman who has lived for a long time in the Far
East told me how his Chinese secretary came to him one
day to announce the death of his mother. With a smile.
Anyone would have thought that the secretary was
either mad or pleased at his mother's death. Not at all.
It is simply politeness; the smile sets up a barrier both
against you and in your own interest. You must not
express opinions or feelings to your superior before being
invited to do so. In the event of misfortune, one is
still less entitled to thrust one's own unhappiness upon
people to whom one owes respect, such as neighbours.
This is a hard-and-fast rule, the same in Japan as in
China or in Viet-Nam. During the funeral on The Island,
no one sheds tears; but the impression is heart-rending.
E. The funeral pyre is still burning. The visitors
take their leave. The boat sails round the island; the
little brother runs from field to field, watching till it is
out of sight. Later, the parents bury the ashes and put
up a little board on the grave.
j. They have written the dead boy's name on it.
From the top downwards; his name under the Law, which
the bonze has just given him for his future life, and his
own name, Taro.
E. As you say, the impression is heart-rending. Our
own feelings can easily be explained, because we are eye¬
witnesses of the unbearable scene; we see the people's
faces; and besides, we hear the music. Music plays a
tremendous part in a film, and this is often overlooked.
J. Yes, Hayashi Hikaru's music is perfect for this
film. A very simple tune, repeated at various moments,
with slight variations.
E. Was Hayashi trying to compose a traditional air,
the kind of thing one might call "typically Japanese?"
j. 	 No, not at all. But the instruments sound very
Japanese. One has the impression of hearing the
shakuhachi, flute, and the Koto rather than the guitar.
E. The musical score is extremely effective. But I
would like to point out that what we hear is incidental
music, intended to work upon the feelings of the audience;
not music within the film, such as the actors would hear.
There is hardly any of that. To introduce the Spring
sequence, a woman's voice sings the beginning of the
traditional cherry-tree song, Sakura... The characters,
one may suppose, have it running through their heads.
And later we hear the schoolchildren singing a little song
in class. And then a few really ancient folk-songs, in
two very short scenesthe games and dances of the
harvest, and the New Year festivities. The two little boys
are present on these occasions, but do not take part in
them. Much less their parents, who have no time. They
do not belong to the world in which people sing, dance,
play and say their prayers...
j. They are very poor. They live apart from the
community. And it is true that the community, the
village, the big Island, despises and rejects them for that
reason. They draw their water from a brook, where it
runs out of the riceflelds. Water that has already been
used. And the Island does not belong to them. When
they go to deliver their wheat to that horrible man who
does not even come out to greet them, they are paying
their rent. I think they sell one sack out of four for
their own benefit, that brings them enough to buy a
few groceries and a bottle of saké.
E. That's right, they are outsiders, outsiders and
alone. That must be why I can't help seeing this film as
a tragedy, a merciless picture of the human condition,
or, if you prefer it, of a certain human condition. For
the people we see in it, life is essentially a matter of toil,
grief, production, reproduction and death. Once in a
while there is a digression towards something loftier and
out of reach; a thought is given to "culture," to more
exalted values national and religious traditions, as re¬
mote from real life as are the great liners that glide along
the horizon. These values have not been forgotten; they
are added ironically, dangled just beyond people's reach.
Then there is another thing: these people are poor and
12 exploited. Could they improve their lot?
j. How? By fixing up a winch to hoist their buckets?

Family rejoicing (left) when
one of the sons catches a
large fish which will pay
for a rare visit to the nearby
city. A poignant moment
(below) after the death of a
son, when boys and girls
from his school arrive by
boat to attend his funeral.
The wife (right) is an image
of grace and serenity even
as she lifts her heavy buckets.
Photos Kindai Eiga Kyokai
By digging a cistern? Perhaps. But I think they are
too poor, too deeply Involved in their work... As for
leaving the land and becoming a labourer in the town, the
husband would never dream of it. He would be just as
poor and have even less freedom.
E. Yes, they are prisoners in their existence. Shindo
has succeeded in expressing alienation not only among
the proletariat, but in ourselves. His view of the world,
is completely pessimistic though the pessimism has a
dignified restraint.
3. I don't agree. I do not feel the irony you speak
of. "The Island" is simply a very beautiful film in which
the director shows a family that is happy, in spite of
great material difficulties and in spite of the death of a
child, which would not have happened in wealthier
surroundings. We are shown the contentment of these
peasants, who have complete confidence in the soil. One
sees the ecstasy which they regard the thirsty earth and
the young shoots.
E. You really call that happiness?
J. Yes, enviable happiness. There are moments of
real delight. When the little boy catches a big fish, they
are all delighted. The next day they put on their best
clothes and take the steamer to the town, intending to
sell the fish to some gourmet for a good price. Finally
they sell It to a fishmonger, rather too cheaply, perhaps,
but making the best of it, for fear of disappointing the
children. And it fetches enough money for them to have
dinner at a restaurant (a great event), and buy some
shirts, and go for a ride in the funicular, high above the
rooftops. All that is gay. But more important, there are
many other moments of even simpler happiness: those
that come while working quietly at home during the rainy
season, and those that follow the hard day's work in the
evening. Picking up a handful of leaf-mould. Rowing
slowly in the morning, at earliest cock-crow. Watching
the sun as it sinks into the sea. Taking the evening
bath. You remember that? They heat lots of water.
The children jump into it first. Then the father. And
lastly, the mother. Did you notice her smile then? It is
the smile of a happy woman.
E. I feel that in discussing "The Island" you have
taught me an enormous number of things about Japan.
J. You have taught me a great deal about your own
outlook. And I must admit that it is always my foreign j 3
friends who reveal to me more about my country through
the interest they take in it.
