DOES LIFE END
AT SIXTY? I
by Alfred Métraux
MONG the many problems facing our modern
^civilization, the fate of the aged is certainly
one of those foremost in the public mind, judging by the
number of articles on this subject carried by magazines
and newspapers. Over the past century, in fact, the
average life span in industrialized countries has increased
by leaps and bounds until it has now reached 73 years.
This growing percentage of old people in our population
Is a new phenomenon demanding new solutions. After all,
how can we reconcile the very understandable Impatience
of new generations with the enforced retirement of men
and women who still have many years of life ahead of
them and who still feel energetic enough to remain active
far beyond the time limits imposed on them by society.
How can we find occupations for these people whose
physiological age does not correspond to their real age?
Here I do not intend, like so many others before me, to
seek answers to the problems, but rather to describe
briefly some of the attitudes observed in primitive socle-
ties towards elderly persons who can no longer share the
normal activities of their group.
A stubbornly persistent legend still maintains that
many "savage" societies put people with failing strength
to tests in which failure is tantamount to a sentence of
death. It is said, for example, that in the South Seas, old
men of some tribes are forced to climb coconut trees which
are then shaken. Those unable to hang on would thus
inevitably be eliminated. These particular tales are quite
untrue. '
I T is true, however, that among certain peoples
I living under very hard conditions as In the
past among the Eskimos or the inhabitants of Tierra del
Fuego those no longer able to join in the struggle for life
were condemned to death. In such cases it was usually
the individual himself who felt that he had become a
burden. When he realized, through the veiled remarks of
his relatives and friends, that his presence had begun to
20 weigh upon them, he asked to be put to death. With that
extreme discretion so characteristic of the Eskimoes, the
men who decided to die merely stepped off their sledges
WHO photo by Pierre Pittet
without saying a word and stretched out In the snow to
await their end. Or else a member of the family was
asked to put an end to their life. The American anthro¬
pologist, C. Weyer, once met an Eskimo who told him
frankly how he had killed his own father in these cir¬
cumstances. His father had even pointed out the exact
spot where the son was to plunge his knife blade.
Often, too, the aged were imprisoned in an igloo where
they died of cold. Even though these executions were not
condemned by the Eskimoes, they nevertheless gave rise
to signs of remorse. This feeling of guilt is expressed in
Eskimo myths that often tell of the miraculous rescue of
an old person and the punishment of those who had left
him to die.
It would be unjust to consider these peoples, whose
slender resources forced them to get rid of their old people,

A PATRIARCHAL SOCIETY. For the Dogons, a tribe which settled on the banks of the Niger
River some 800 years ago, the word of the elders Is law. As in other societies whose traditional
ways of life still hold sway, they revere the head of the family whose authority Is unquestioned.
as cruel or barbarous. One must not forget, that the
question here was a matter of life and death for the entire
group. In most cases, the nomads who applied this harsh
law did so upon the very request of those who could no
longer keep up with the group and who knew that they
were harming it by slowing Its progress. Usually, nomads
would abandon an invalid only after vainly trying to carry
him and not without leaving him a food supply in the
hope of finding him still alive when they returned.
In a comparative study devoted to The Role of Age in
Primitive Societies, Dr. Lee Simmons reached the con¬
clusion that most societies that live by hunting and food
gathering do not neglect their aged who receive their fair
shares of game or fruit.
It is true that "primitives" at this economic level are
more willing to share their wealth than peoples living
from agriculture or grazing. Here, solidarity is the rule
and no exceptions are made for those no longer capable
of participating in the group's activities.
When a Crow Indian hunter on the Great Plains of the
United States killed a large number of buffalo, he would
cry out: "I shall take neither my arrows nor my skins."
Then the meat of the carcasses belonged to the elderly
people who were the "poor" of the tribe. In the same
manner, Creek hunters always set aside a share for the
old people who also knew that no hut in their clan would
be closed to them.
In the past, the Samoans found it difficult to understand
what it meant for a white man to be poor. To them, It
was inconceivable that a person burdened by age could go
hungry and without shelter. In the rural communities
of the Inca Empire, farmers organized working parties to 21
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

DOES LIFE END AT SIXTY (Cont'd)
Living
of the tribes
cultivate land whose produce was reserved for widows,
orphans and old people. Even today, among the descen¬
dants of these same Indians, village solidarity to the
needy is an invariable rule.
It might often be wondered if the lot of the aged in
archaic civilizations is not preferable to what they
experience in our own society. First of all, they do not
feel quite so useless. Even when their declining strength
prevents them from doing their share of the work required
for their community's subsistence, it is easy for them to
find a new role in the group in occupations which, by
common consent, are reserved for them. They become
counselors or helpers. While they may no longer take
the Initiative, they at least co-operate in the work of
others and these new activities, far from being considered
In any way inferior, reward them with the respect and
esteem of their community.
The situation of men considered as tribal elders among
the Cayopos whom I visited a few years ago could not be
described by any stretch of imagination as pitiful. Part
of the "men's house" was set aside for them and there
they manufactured arrows or wove baskets. They kept a
watchful eye on the village and Intervened each time a
quarrel broke out. In addition, they lectured the younger
generations and their speeches, which often went on for
hours, enabled them to evoke epic incidents in their past
lives as hunters or warriors.
In a great many tribes, the most useful artisanal activi¬
ties are the prerogative of the veteran craftsmen. Their
skill, acquired through long experience, assures them
ample customers among the younger men, eager to acquire
tools or weapons.
The National Film
Board of Canada
À
THE PRESTIGE OF AGE. Persistent legends
that aged people in some societies are treated
harshly, even to the point of being put to
death when weakness and infirmity make them
a burden on their community, are discounted
by studies of anthropologists. They have
concluded that most old people are helped
by village or tribal solidarity and In fact are
held In respect and esteem. As custodians of
'ommunities also turn to the aged when they
'need someone to supervise a difficult opera¬
tion, such as the building of a house or a boat. Medicine,
too, is a field in which old people excel. They are reputed
to know the right herbs to treat any sickness and, above
all, the appropriate magic formulae which are no less
indispensable. One has only to recall the extent to
which magic enters into the life of these peoples, to realize
the importance of the elder's knowledge for a tribe or a
village. Hunters, fishermen and even farmers must all
turn to them if they want to be sure of good luck and of
protection against evil influences.
Furthermore, who better than the elders, knows the
tribal rites and the details of ceremonies? They have
witnessed them all their lives and make sure that they
are now carried out in accordance with tradition. The
importance attached by "primitives" to ritualistic details
is well known, and the custodians of these traditions are
the men and women of age and experience.
These people are also the tribe's living archives. It is
their duty to transmit their group's historical myths and
legends to Its young generations. They can also be con¬
sulted not merely on a point of knowledge but to settle
questions of tribal law.
Among the Akambas, an African tribe, anyone in doubt
as to how custom required him to act in any situation
consulted an elder whom he paid. During disputes the
elders were expected to produce legal precedents for
settling these quarrels.
This knowledge and wisdom not only bestows prestige
and status on many elders, but Is also a source of wealth.
For the magic formulae that they chant or the advice they
give, they are paid on the basis of agreed rates.
22 In the case of the Akambas, for example, anyone
wishing to seek an elder's advice does not go to him
empty-handed. He brings with him an ox or, at least, a
goat in payment. The chants, charms and prayers that
the Navaho Indians stored in their memories was literally
a goldmine of knowledge which was a rich source of profit.
Old men shared their knowledge only upon payment of
large sums and it has been said that the sum total of
medical formulae, sacred names, secrets and songs were
worth more than a herd of three thousand animals
sheep, cattle and horses. Any man could thus accumulate,
during his life, the scientific, religious or historical
elements of this oral literature and in his old age use it
for the benefit of others and for his own profit.
The prestige and influence of the aged are so great in
these societies that it would be no exaggeration to describe
them as gerontocracies. The classical example of this
ascendancy of age is offered by the aboriginals of Austra¬
lia. The elders among the bushmen wield almost tyranni¬
cal authority over almost every aspect of tribal life. Often,
they form secret societies whose mysteries are divulged
to young men seeking initiation only at the price of
absolute obedience. Initiation rites so widespread In
primitive societies are usually conducted by elders who
have made them an Instrument of domination.
This gives them control over young men who are made
to pay dearly for the religious privileges bestowed upon
them. In Australia, the elders terrorized the women and
youths by using ritual instruments that made noises like
the roaring of bulls.
According to the British anthropologists, B. Spencer and
S. J. Guillen, the main purpose of certain ceremonies was
to engrave into the minds of youth their obligation to
obey the laws of the tribe and to convince them of the
superiority of the old men who alone knew the ritual of
these ceremonies.
Knud Rasmussen, the Danish explorer, and a perceptive

tribal lore, ranging from remedies for sickness
to tribal rites and details of ceremonies, the
elders wield great influence. They are much in
demand for tasks like house and boat-build¬
ing which call for skill and long experience.
With age women too enjoy an enhanced status
and are allowed many privileges normally
reserved for men. Above, eskimo Igloo builder
carves out his Icy bricks in Canada's northern
territories. Right, an aged African woman.
Unesco, Gerda Böhm
interpreter of the life of the Eskimo people, recorded the
following remarks made by the Eskimoes about their
medicine men: "We do not understand hidden things,
but we have faith in those who say that they know them.
We believe in our angakuts, in our magicians... for we
wish to Uve a long time and we do not want to expose
ourselves to the dangers of hunger and poverty. If we
did not follow their advice, we would perish."
North American ethnography brings us countless
examples of respect for the aged. A man, even a young
man, would be called an "elder" as a sign of respect. In
point of fact, this respect was often based on fear. The
elders, after all, were close to those ancestors whom they
would soon join. If they were slighted in any way, they
might well complain to these ancestors who would then
withdraw their protective powers leaving the descendants
exposed to all kinds of dangers.
This, too, was the way the Dahomeians reasoned when
they explained the consideration they showed for old
people. To them, a long life is evidence of divine favour
and proof that a person has been able to gain the good¬
will both of the gods and the spirits. Among the Palungs
in Burma, prestige increases with age so much so that
women even try to pass themselves off as older than
they are.
Not the least of the advantages enjoyed by the aged is
their freedom from numerous taboos. It is widely believed
that those who have reached a ripe old age are immunized
against dangers which taboos are supposed to ward off.
Furthermore, when death draws near, a man has less need
to guard against the perils that threaten youth.
When women reach a certain age, their status tends to
rise to that of men. They are allowed to smoke, to drink
and to use strong language. In New Guinea, they are even
permitted to enter the meeting house of the men. The
myths and legends that make up oral literature also
favour the aged who are readily represented as sages and
as the benefactors of the tribe. The authority of which
they dispose in daily life is reflected in the supernatural
powers attributed to them in the fabulous adventures of
which they are the heroes.
Family ties have always been the safest guarantee of
well-being for the aged. Many societies give elders the
privilege of marrying young women who will take care of
them. Often it is the first wife who feels the burden of
her years and she urges her husband to take a young wife
who will make her work easier. In Australia, the elders
had acquired a monopoly of young women so much so
that young men had trouble finding wives and had to
settle for partners who were much older than themselves.
Within a family, particularly affectionate relations
nearly always exist between grandparents and grandchil¬
dren. For the youngsters the old people appear in a
protective role. Their relations are closer than those
between the children and their parents. Grandparents
are protectors, friends and also playmates. They often
talk to each other as if they belonged to the same genera¬
tion and they do not hesitate to jest and to play jokes on
each other. And this is why the elders prefer to confide
their secrets to their grandchildren rather than to their
sons or daughters.
When we look once more at our own society after this
brief glimpse of the way of Ufe of the aged in primitive
societies, we see more clearly what our technological pro¬
gress has cost us. We certainly live longer than "savages,"
but we have paid a high price for this privilege.
To be respected, to feel one's self a useful and active
member of society, to enjoy the friendship of one's grand¬
children... are not these advantages worth far more than
the comfort offered by our communal homes for the aged
or our "towns for old people?"
23
