A SCHOOLBOY IN SUMER
by Sir Leonard Woolley
he literate element of the Sumerian and Old
Babylonian population was proportionately
larger than in Egypt. There were "junior" and "high"
scribes, scribes of the temple and "royal" scribes of the
palace, scribes who served as leading officials in the gov¬
ernment and scribes specialized in particular cate¬
gories of administrative work, schoolmasters and notaries
public, the latter being the more in demand because of
the immense importance of foreign and domestic trade
and because the law required documentary evidence in
any civil action that came before the courts.
It may well be that apart from all these professional
writers, who numbered many thousands, the business¬
man also might acquire at least a smattering of literary
education for his own purposes; in any case it is clear
that there must have been numerous scribal schools... the
best example of a school is one in a private house of the
Larsa period (c. 1780 B.C.) at Ur . . . .
It was a small school it could scarcely have accom¬
modated more than two dozen boys but presumably it
was typical of the schools of the time, and certainly it
was not just an elementary school but one catering for
pupils of all ages.
The bun-shaped tablets [found here], bearing on one
face the teacher's fair copy and on the other the pupil's
attempt to reproduce it, start with single syllabic signs,
then have lists of words beginning with the same syllable,
and go on to proper sentences and extracts from the
classics. Of the other tablets found here many were
religious texts which were probably used for dictation
or for learning by heart; there were numerous mathe¬
matical tablets multiplication tables, rules for extracting
square and cube roots, etc., problems in practical geome¬
try, e.g. land surveying or the calculation of the amount
of earth to be moved, given the measurements of an
excavation, and there were also what one must call belles
lettres, amongst them a favourite classic describing school
life 	
Only boys attended the schools. Women scribes exist¬
ed, and examples of their work have come down to us,
but how they received their education we do not know;
girl students are never mentioned in the literature of
the schools ....
Cases are known in which a charitable person
who had adopted an outcast baby "rescued him from
the jaws of a dog" crowned his benefaction by sending
the child to school to "learn the scribal art . . . ."
The full school course was a long one, lasting for
many years, "from the time of childhood to maturity",
but after about two years a lad might qualify as a
dubsar tur, a junior scribe, and would be entrusted with
the task of helping in the education of one of the smaller
THE SCRIBE
14
The scribe, even if he
were not in government
employ, had the intellec¬
tual arrogance of the
better-educated man and
his contempt for the man¬
ual labourer. There is
an amusing illustration of
this In the Teaching of
Khety, Son of Duauf, an
Egyptian work perhaps
dating as early as the Eleventh Dynasty
but current in much later times, in which
a father taking his son to school exhorts
him to industry by passing in review all
the other occupations and trades and
showing how ill they compare with the
blessings of the scribe's calling:
"I have never seen the smith as an
ambassador, but I have seen the smith at
his work at the mouth of his furnace, his
fingers like the crocodile's, and he stank
more than fishes' eggs ....
"The stonemason finds his work in every
kind of hard stone. When he has finished
his labours his arms are worn out, and
he sleeps all doubled up until sunrise.
His knees and his spine are broken . . .
"The barber shaves from morning till
night; he never sits down except to meals.
He hurries from house to house looking
for business. He wears out his arms
to fill his stomach, like bees eating their
own honey ....
"The farmer wears the same clothes for
all times. His voice is as raucous as a
crow's. His fingers are always busy, his
arms are dried up by the wind. He takes
his rest when he does get any rest in
the mud. If he is in good health he shares
good health with the beasts; if he is ill
his bed is the bare earth in the middle of
his beasts. Scarcely doeo he get home at
night when off he has to start again.
"Therefore, apply your heart to learning.
In truth there is nothing that can compare
with it. If you have profited by a single
day at school it is a gain for eternity."
SIR LEONARD WOOLLEY
Part II, Chapter III
(The Social Structure)
Portrait in stone of an unknown
Sumerian who lived about
5,000 years ago. Though seated
in an attitude of prayer, the
figure recalls the famous Egyp¬
tian scribe statuette (left) now
in the Louvre Museum, Paris.
Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek, Copenhagen

This seated figure of a woman
whose statuette was unearthed
at Mari in north-west Sumer
has been identified as a choris¬
ter. Her songs and dances may
once have delighted the court
of Mari some 45 centuries ago.
Museum of Damascus
Drawing from " History of Mankind '
Thirty-seven centuries ago the city of Ur pos¬
sessed numerous schools. Above, the plan of
a typical one which comprised several classrooms,
a courtyard and a lavatory and could accomodate
25 pupils. Sumerian schools were originally
attached to temples but in time became secular¬
ized. With an ever-widening curriculum, the
Sumerian school became a real seat of learning.
"Within its walls", the Sumerian scholar, S.N.
Kramer, has written "flourished the scholar
scientist, the man who studied whatever theolo¬
gical, botanical, zoological, mineralogical, geogra¬
phical, mathematical, grammatical and linguistic
knowledge was current in his day, and who in
a number of cases added to this knowledge".
boys, setting his exercises, instructing him in the way
in which they should be done, correcting them (prior to
final correction by the headmaster) and flogging him
when he deserved punishment.
Discipline was strict. Boys might be "kept in" over long
periods; probably already they were given impositions,
though it is only in the Neo-Babylonian time that we
find actual examples of pupils having to write "fifty
lines" or "a hundred lines" by way of punishment: but
for the most part correction was by the stick, and the
stick was used freely, by masters and by pupil-teachers
alike.
This is made very clear in the "Schooldays" essay.
"What did you da at school?" "I reckoned up [or.
'recited'] my tablet, ate my lunch, fashioned my
[new] tablet, wrote and finished it; then they assigned
me my oral work, and in the afternoon they assigned
me my written work. When the school was dismissed.
I went home, entered the house, and found my father
sitting there. I told my father of my written work, then
recited my tablet to him, and my father was delighted."
This must have been a lucky day, but on the morrow
the boy was to be less fortunate. "When I awoke early
In the morning I faced my mother and said to her: 'Give
me my lunch; I want to go to school.' My mother gave
me two rolls and I set out. In the school the 'man on
duty' said to me: 'Why are you late?' Afraid, and
with my heart pounding, I entered before my teacher
and bowed."
But the teacher was correcting the student's tablet of
the day before and was not pleased with it, so gave him
a caning. Then the overseer "in charge of the school
regulation" flogged him because "you stared about in the
street." and again because he was "not properly dressed"
and other members of the staff caned him for such
misdemeanours as talking, standing up out of turn and
walking outside the gate; finally the headmaster told him,
"Your handwriting is unsatisfactory." and gave him a
further beating.
The luckless youth appeals to his father to mollify the
powers above In the orthodox way, so the father invites
the headmaster to his home, praises him for all that he
has done to educate his son, gives him food and wine,
dresses him In a new garment and puts a ring on his
finger; the schoolboy waits upon him and In the mean¬
while "unfolds to his father all that he has learnt of
the art of tablet-writing."
The gratified teacher reacts with enthusiasm: "Of your
brothers may you be their leader, of your friends may
you be their chief, may you rank the highest of the
schoolboys. You have carried out well the school's acti¬
vities, you have become a man of learning," the schoolboy,
claiming now the proud title of "Sumerian..."
The picture Is, of course, satirical to the point of cari¬
cature. Admittedly, In the private schools at any rate,
the headmaster had to make his living by means of the
tuition fees collected from the students and may have
been glad enough to receive something in addition;
admittedly methods of Instruction were primitive and
sometimes brutal; yet the Mesopotamian schools did pro¬
vide a sound education and did uphold the general res¬
pect for learning as such.
- Part II, Chap. VI (Languages
it Writing Systems, Education)
15
