<&2¿¿s
THE APOSTLE
OF AFFLICTION
by Barbara Bray
From July 1962 to July 1963 the world is celebrating the
250th anniversary of the birth of Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
During this Rousseau Anniversary Year innumerable tributes
are being paid in all parts of the world : lectures, exhibitions,
ceremonies, films and radio broadcasts. The event has been
accorded a place of honour In Unesco's calendar of an¬
niversaries of great men and events. The Unesco Courier
now offers its tribute to Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and devotes
a large part of this issue to the 18th-century philosopher,
social reformer and educationalist, whose doctrines and
ideas are as modern today as when they were first expressed.
Blibiothèque Nationale, Paris
lean-Jacques Rousseau was born in Geneva of
French stock on June- 28, 1712. His mother
died nine days afterwards. "My birth," he said, "was the
first of my misfortunes."
The apostle of affliction, Byron called him...
"The apostle of affliction, he who threw
Enchantment over passion, and from woe
Wrung overwhelming eloquence..."
Dr. Johnson, speaking to Boswell, was more severe.
"Rousseau, Sir, is a very bad man. I would sooner sign a
sentence for his transportation, than that of any felon
who has gone from the Old Bailey these many years.
Yes, I should like to have him work in the plantations."
Was Rousseau "a very bad man"? A lot of people
thought so, many still do, and certainly, considered as an
individual he was not a conspicuously good one, with such
peccadilloes as lying, stealing, and untiring if unsuccessful
amorousness.
He sent all his five children to the Foundling Hospital
almost as soon as they were born, and thought up what
seemed to him good reasons for it; he was always difficult
and vain, and ended up such a prey to persecution mania
that when he died he had hardly a friend left in the
world. Yet his real crime in the eyes of his contem¬
poraries was not personal: it consisted rather in being one
of those great rare originals who have the effrontery and
bad taste to change the course of history.
Rousseau furnished a blue-print for the French Revolu¬
tion, his ideas were written into the American Constitu¬
tion, his teachings on education are still heard indirectly
in almost every classroom in the world, and his influence
on literature is not yet spent.
Europe in the middle of the eighteenth century was
ripe for change. France in particular was a powder-barrel
That spark was Jean-Jacqueswaiting for a spark.
Rousseau.
One day in the summer of 1749, When he was still
unsuccessful and unknown, he set out from Paris, where
he had settled, to visit his friend Diderot, the editor of
the great Encyclopedia, who had been imprisoned in the
Chateau of Vincennes for reasons not unconnected with
the atheistic and materialistic tendencies of his writings.
"The state of my finances not permitting me to pay for
hackney coaches," relates Rousseau, "I went on foot.
I thought a book in my hand might make me moderate
my pace. I took the Mercure de France, and as I walked
and read, I came to the following question proposed by
the academy of Dijon, for the premium of the ensuing
year: Has the progress of sciences and arts helped to
corrupt or to purify morals?
"The moment I read this, I seemed to behold another
world, and became a different man... On my arrival at
Vincennes, I was in an agitation which approached deli¬
rium. Diderot perceived it; I told him the cause, and read
him what I had written with a pencil under a tree. He
encouraged me to pursue my ideas, and to become a com¬
petitor for the premium. I did so, and from that moment
I was ruined.
"All the rest of my misfortunes during my life were the
inevitable result of this moment of error... All my little
passions were stifled with the enthusiasm of truth, liberty,
and virtue; and this effervescence continued In my mind
upwards of five years..."
Rousseau, maintaining the then paradoxical view that
the cultivation of the arts and sciences always generates
moral corruption, won the prize. He immediately became
CONT'D ON PAGE 6

R.M. Clermont-Ciné Club du Val de Bièvre
ibliothèque Nationale, Paris
A PLACE OF PILGRIMAGE
Tall poplar trees which give their name to this tiny island in a lake at Ermenonville,
near Paris, surround the tomb where Jean-Jacques Rousseau was buried on July 4,
1778. The island soon became a place of pilgrimage and people flocked there in
such numbers that for a time permission for visits had to be curtailed. The visitors
vented their enthusiasm on the trees in the park which were soon covered with ins¬
criptions carved in many languages. The Swiss artist Geissler evoked this wave of
enthusiasm in "Resurrection of Jean-Jacques Rousseau" (left) in 1794, when
Rousseau's remains were transferred with great ceremony to the Panthéon in Paris.

Turning point in a vagrant life
At the age of 1 6 Rousseau
ran away from Geneva.
Then began an extraor¬
dinary series of wander¬
ings and adventures,
At Annecy came one
of the turning points
of his life; his meeting
with Madame de Warens
(far left) who took him
into her home. Later,
she gave him affection,
good advice and a stu¬
dious atmosphere in
which to work. It was
in her house at Char-
mettes (left) from 1738
to 1 740 that he expe¬
rienced " the short-lived
happiness in my life ".
ROUSSEAU (Cont'd;
The boy who learned
to hate oppression
involved in a series of controversies which brought him
more and more into the public arena, and led him to deve¬
lop his political ideas over the years that followed in a
number of works that culminated in 1762, two hundred
years ago, in his treatise concerning "The Social
Contract."
"Man is born free, yet everywhere he is found in
chains." These, the opening words of Chapter One,
echoed round the world. Basic to The. Social Contract as
to all Rousseau's writings is the belief than man is natu¬
rally good, and that society is something artificial and
necessarily corrupting. At the origin of civilized society,
he imagines, was some act of political association, unde¬
sirable but necessary for survival, which has led to the
present discontents. What would be the best form of
social contract?
For Rousseau individual sovereignty should be surren¬
dered voluntarily in favour of the State a political entity
which acts through laws. These laws must express the
collective sovereign will of the people, by means of a
representational system free from influence or corruption.
The object of all legislation must be liberty and equality.
In his Social Contract the implied criticism of the actual
state of France was of course devastating, and was one of
the most powerful elements that, working in the mind of
the revolutionaries, led ultimately to the destruction of
the old order.
How did Rousseau come by the passions which animate
The Social Contract? He gives us some clues in the
Confessions, his autobiography. After telling of a childish
injustice suffered at the age of about twelve, he goes on:
"Even while I write this I feel my pulse quicken, and
should I live a hundred thousand years, the agitation of
that moment would still be fresh in my memory. The
first instance of violence and oppression is so deeply
engraven on my soul, that every relative idea renews my
emotion. When I read the history of a merciless tyrant,
or the dark and subtle machination of a knavish designing
priest, I could on the instant set off to stab the miscreants,
though I was certain to perish in' the attempt."
He also gives us a picture of one of the origins of his
horror of oppression. Wandering as a young man in
France, he approached a peasant's hut in a particularly
pleasant and prosperous-looking part of the country, and
asked if he could have a meal, which he would pay for.
One day In 1749 Rousseau went to visit the
philosopher, Denis Diderot, imprisoned in the
Chateau of Vincennes. On the way (below) he
decided to compete for the Dijon Academy prize
offered for an essay on the effect of the progress
of civilization on morals. " All the rest of my
misfortunes during my life were the inevitable
result of this moment of error... " he wrote.

Photos Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris Music meant much to Rousseau. He taught and composed it and actually invented a new system of
musical notation. For long periods he lived by copying musical scores. This engraving shows him singing
verses which he composed to show his thanks to the family with whom he lived on the island of Saint-Pierre.
At first the most meagre fare was provided, and then, as
the countryman's suspicions were lulled, he brought some
ham and some wine and some eggs out of hiding.
Refusing payment, he pronounced tremblingly the terri¬
ble words "Commissioners" and "Cellar-Rats."
"He explained," wrote Rousseau, "by giving me to under¬
stand that he concealed his wine because of the excise,
and his bread on account of the tax imposed on it; and
he would be undone if it were suspected he was not
almost perishing with want.
"What he said to me made an impression that can
never be effaced, sowing seeds of that inextinguishable
hatred which has since grown up in my heart against the
vexations these unhappy people suffer, and against their
oppressors... I left his cottage deploring the fate of those
beautiful countries where nature has been prodigal of her
gifts only that they may become the prey of barbarous
exactors."
A point that Rousseau Insists on in The Social Contract,
and one that is perhaps his most important contribution
to the safeguarding of all the principles he cared for, is
that the government that executes the laws is composed
merely of officials paid to carry out the general will, but
all governments will tend to usurp power if not carefully
watched and held in check. The precious and enduring
truth of his great work is that sovereignty belongs to the
people, and must never under any pretext be transferred
to any individual or group of individuals.
Some details of The Social Contract have been distorted
or exaggerated to justify totalitarian practices, but this
is in direct contradiction of the author's spirit.
As Viscount Morley, Rousseau's greatest biographer,
said: "It was in Rousseau that polite Europe first
hearkened to the strange voices and faint reverberations
from out of the vague and cavernous shadows in which
the common people move." And polite Europe hearkened
not because Rousseau was a model of correct thought or
a brillant exponent of practical organization, but because
his Ideas were what they had been waiting for, and
because they were proclaimed with depth and fervour.
Needless to say it was not in Rousseau's lifetime that
he was acclaimed. While he lived he was persecuted, and
hounded out of France and Switzerland. In an age which
still bowed to the divine right of kings Rousseau was a
republican and believed in the divine right of the people.
When the faculty of reason was held- to be man's highest
attribute, Rousseau abandoned its cool systems in favour
of the flushed and unpredictable promptings of the heart.
And when the churches were shoring themselves up with
dogma against the storms to come, Rousseau was the
advocate of "natural religion," which required no inter¬
mediary between man and God.
But in spite of the unpopularity and even personal dan¬
ger to which his writings exposed him, Rousseau scorned
to take the usual course of seeking refuge in anonymity,
nor would he obliterate a word of what he had written.
It was Emile, his treatise on education, published like
The Social Contract in 1762, that really got Rousseau into
hot water. For in Emile, occurs the digression on religion
known as the Profession of Faith of the Savoyard Vicar.
This a composite portrait of two priests whom Rousseau
had known and revered. He Is a man who seeks God not
by reason, as every previous philosopher from Plato
onwards had done, but by introspection.
Rousseau's Vicar interests himself not at all in dogmas,
does not, it goes without saying, believe in original sin, and
in discussing the after-life never once mentions the Christ¬
ian doctrine of Redemption. If interpretations and forms
of worship vary, no matter. The book of nature is open
for all to read: "The essential worship, Is of the heart."
Rousseau thus brought about a simplification of belief
a simplification that seems cautious rather than con¬
troversial nowadays, when his views have become part of
the general atmosphere. But in 1762 his was a highly
dangerous doctrine. To his Dutch publisher, who seeing
the book seized in France, begged him to cut the offending
passage, he wrote: "There is no reproach or danger or
violence or power on earth that will make me ever retract
a syllable."
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ROUSSEAU (Cont'd)
Tamile' a bold new concept of education
Emile has been called a sentimental manifesto where
we must not look for too much intellectual cohesion. Yet
the idea that there is a kind of instinct in human beings
that provides the deepest sanction of right and wrong is
one of the many flashes of Insight in Rousseau which to
this day have not been made to yield their full signifi¬
cance.
Besides being an advocate of natural religion Rousseau
was the prophet of a revolution in education no less cata¬
clysmic and far-reaching than the revolution in politics.
His qualifications as an authority on education were
strange indeed.
His father had introduced him to literature at an early
age by reading inflammatory French romances with him,
afterwards progressing at random to a few more solid
works that happened to be lying about. Later Rousseau
was sent with his cousin to board in the country with a
tutor for a couple of years "to learn Latin, with all the
insignificant trash that has obtained the .name of
education."
Up till now, according to Rousseau himself, he had
always been surrounded with the tenderest and most
healthful care although some of the details he mentions
in passing may seem to us to bode no good at all to the
infant that was exposed to them. At the age of thirteen
he was apprenticed first to a notary, then to an engraver,
but he hated all restraint and after three years ran away.
The next few years were spent in a vagabond sort of
existence, wandering about the country and from time to
time taking jobs of a more or less menial kind.

The main formative influence during these years
was Madame de Warens, an attractive Catholic
proselytiser older than himself, whom he long loved in his
own peculiar way and who did a great deal to civilise him.
It was not until he was about twenty-six, when he was
installed with Madame de Warens in the beloved rural
retreat of Les Charmettes, near Chambéry, that Rousseau
set about educating himself systematically. He was han¬
dicapped by a very poor memory: "I must have learned
and relearned the Eclogues of Virgil twenty times over,
and I cannot recollect a single line of them."
Although by this time he was convinced that his talent
lay in music, he took a job for a time as a tutor, with
farcical results. In Book VI of his Confessions he tells us :
"The natural gentleness of my disposition seemed calcu¬
lated for the employment, if hastiness had not been
mingled with it. While things went favorably, and I saw
the pains (which I did not spare) succeed, I was an angel;
but a devil when they went contrary.
"If my pupils did not understand me, I was hasty, and
when they showed any symptoms of untoward disposition,
I was so provoked that I could have killed them... I could
only make use of three means, which are very weak, and
often pernicious with children; namely, sentiment, reason¬
ing, passion... Everything I undertook failed, because
all I did to effect my designs was precisely what I ought
not to have done."
What Rousseau ought to have done we find in Emile.
Here again we are offered not so much a practical plan as
a sort of ideal embodying the principles to be observed.
Emile, the pupil, is to be given a "natural education"; that
is to say, one that preserves as long as possible against
the corruption of the world that original goodness, happi¬
ness and innocence Rousseau believed to be born in every
human being.
The method Rousseau prescribes means interfering as
little as possible with the free development of the child's
mind and body, and making the unavoidable adaptation
to society so careful and so gradual that the pupil suffers
the least possible harm in the process.
Emile is to be brought up alone by a tutor, away from
his parents, in an environment scientifically calculated to
produce the best conditions for free development. He is
to be treated not as a miniature adult, but as a natural
being whose virtues as such must be preserved and culti
vated. The influence of Emile was electric and is still
reflected today in almost every modern school.
A point that is not sufficiently remembered is that Rous¬
seau founded his educational method on the cultivation of
the sensibilities above all things. Right feeling is an indis¬
pensable preliminary to right thinking and acting, and
any educational system that neglects or blunts the sensi¬
bilities of children in order to concentrate on intellectual
or technical achievement has left out the whole essence
of the matter. Here is another idea of Rousseau's that
has not yet been made full use of.
It was also as a man of feeling that Rousseau made his
great contribution to literature. Everything he did was
original in some way. His Confessions, which were not
published until after his death, are the first example of
what is now one of the most characteristic elements in
Western literature the completely unashamed exposure
of all an author's most intimate thoughts, experiences and
desires. And the Confessions, like his work Reveries of a
Solitary Wanderer, introduce a new attitude to nature,
though it is the pleasurable and more mildly sympathetic
aspects of the landscape that please him and not the full
romantic diapason.
From his sensibility, then, all Rousseau's virtues, like
all his vices, sprang. The Scottish philosopher Hume, who
was his friend until Rousseau quarrelled with him as he
did with everyone else, and with as little reason, described
him thus: "He only felt during the whole course of his
life, and in this respect his sensibility rises to a pitch
beyond what I have seen any example of; but it still
gives him a more acute feeling of pain than of pleasure.
He is like a man who is stripped not only of his clothes,
but of his skin, and turned out in this situation to combat
with the rude and boisterous elements."
On July 2, 1778, at Ermenonville, after years of wander¬
ing and quarrelling and of illness that does much to
explain some of his behaviour, Rousseau died of uraemia.
His main source of income for many years had been music
copying: he had scorned to set up as a professional writer.
His companion was a coarse illiterate servant-woman who
had been with him for more than thirty years. This
relationship has been very roughly handled by many
critics, but in fact, as Morley with great magnanimity
points out, it shows that Rousseau for all his faults was
capable of almost heroic loyalty and forbearance. Some
have called his life deplorable, but the man whose name
stands for liberty and equality, for the beginning of
reasonableness and sympathy in education, and for a new
kind of poetic beauty, is one who deserves to have his sins
remembered kindly. Many of his ideas were golden, and if
they are still as powerful now as they were in his own day,
it is because he had also the gift of a golden tongue.
Barbara Bray is a regular participant on the BBC programme,
"The Critics", and literary contributor to British newspapers and
periodicals. She has translated various works of I8//1 century
French authors. This article is adapted from the radio programme
she wrote for Unesco in honour of Rousseau.
Publications Filmées d'Art et d'Histoire.
Portrait of
Madame
d'Epinay

BROKEN FRIENDSHIPS & A LITERARY TRIUMPH
By nature Rousseau was sensitive and quick to take offence and
eventually quarrelled with many of his friends. He fell out with Madame
d'Epinay (portrait on opposite page, by the Swiss painter Jean-Etienne
Llotard) who for long had been his protectress and confidante. She
gave him the use of her house, "L'Hermitage", in the valley of
Montmorency, near Paris, and he lived there from April 1756 to
December 1757. After their friendship ended, Rousseau moved to
"Mont-Louis" (above), another house in the same valley. There he
finished The New Eloísa, whose success was great and immediate. In 1778,
he returned to the valley of Montmorency shortly before his death.
