Drought and resulting famine periodi¬
cally strike the Sertao, the backlands
of northeastern Brazil, and are fol¬
lowed by a mass exodus from out of
this parched land. Carrying only a
few belongings, men, women and chil¬
dren set off down the roads leading
to Brazil's more prosperous areas.
© P. Verger
OPERA

Brazils bold programme
in the hunger campaignm n i
TION NORDESTE
-V. "- K, " ' ' ~~
by Josué de Castro
There is more talk of hunger today than
at any time in the past. Hunger, in fact,
has become one of the great issues of
our time. It almost seems as if it had novor
existed beforea calamity that only appoarod
in the 20th century.
This, of course, is a completely false im¬
pression. Hunger has always oxistod side
by side with wealth and abundance. Neithor
hunger nor poverty are new facts in tho world
of today. What is new, as India's Primo
Minister, Pandit Nehru, has told us, is that tho
hungry peoples have come to realize as novor
before the true facts of their condition and
are showing a mounting impatienco to bo
freed from tho yoke of hunger and povorty.
It is the new awareness of tho social and
economic inequalities in the world now
shown by these hungry millionstho so-
called underdeveloped peoplosthat has
brought the problem to the foreon the radio
and in the press, in speeches by statesmen
and on the agendas of world congresses
and international meetings.
| ne of the chief and persistent causes of
present-day social tensions ls the world's
economic disequilibrium and Its resulting social
Inequalities. The deep economic gulf which separates
economically-developed from underdeveloped countries ls
one of the greatest threats to world peace. Growing
wider all the time It thus causes discord and fear and
gives rise to political and Ideological conflicts.
Economic inequality is the basic cause of Innumer¬
able other types of Inequality which are often
blamed on racial or climatic factors. It is responsible
for a life expectancy in most underdeveloped regions
of 30 years (in India, 27) whereas In countries of Europe
and North America, life expectancy ls 65 or more than
twice as high. It has a decisive Influence on the infan¬
tile mortality rate in the rich and the poor areas of
the world. In some places this mortality rate rises to
around 200 per thousand and yet in others it ls only 30
per thousand seven times lower.
The United Nations' "World Social Survey" highlights 25
CONTD ON NEXT PAGE

OPERATION 'NORDESTE' (Cont'd)
A scheme to revitalize 1/7th of Brazil
clearly and In great detail the stark contrasts prevailing
between prosperous and poverty-stricken countries.
Facts and figures in every field from production to
health, and from education to levels of consumption,
reveal the precarious state of the underdeveloped
regions.
But the most striking feature, the darkest and
most constant blot on the economic and social
condition of the underdeveloped regions, ls the chronic,
widespread hunger from which the mass of the people
sufferthe "vast disinherited masses," as Tibor Mende
has called them, whose only inheritance from generation
to generation has been their unchanging share of hunger
and wretchedness.
The very fact that huge concentration camps exist in
time of peacewhich is what the underdeveloped areas
really are underlines the sombre realities of our 20th
I
4
I
The north east
?
k Bl^
ern area of Brazil \ "typ
(shaded) covers N J
460,000 square \ -J
miles (14% of the 4^
country) but the 1 y
23 million who \ ~f
live there repre 1 ,j
sent one-third of I f SOUTH
the population. y AMERICA
century as gathered In the statistics of the U.N. Special¬
ized Agencies namely, that at least two-thirds of
mankind live on a inadequate diet or In a state of chronic
hunger. Out of the 2 1/2 thousand million individuals
who Uve on our planet, almost 1,700 million have still
not succeeded in escaping from the iron grip of hunger.
Lamennais spoke the truth when he said that hunger
was both the whip and chains for the slaves of our
civilization.
26
his present world situation, expressed in the
precise and unemotional language of stati¬
stics, was revealed to the 10th Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization held in Rome in 1959. It led
the Conference to approve a resolution, submitted by
Dr. B. Sen, Director-General of FAO, for the launching of
a World Freedom from Hunger Campaign, and calling on
governments of FAO member states and national and
International bodies concerned with social welfare to take
part.
Approval of this FAO resolution is a victory for the
ideas of a small group of pioneers who for years have
fought to make the whole world recognize that here was
a problem basic to mankind's future that must be faced.
This resolution made it possible to break the silence of
dominating majorities who had sought to stifle the cry
of the hungry masses, to conceal the true facts of their
everyday existence and to avoid even the mere mention
of hunger.
¡Thanks to this resolution, the taboo surrounding hunger
has been removed and a new era in international policy
has begun: the struggle against the scourge of hunger is
no longer a question of benevolent aid designed only to
make the effects of hunger less intolerable and to prevent
the explosive revolt of the hungry; it is a struggle which
goes to the very root of the problem. This new philo¬
sophy of action is based on the premise that hunger is
merely the biological expression of the whole complex
of economic underdevelopment and that, in the final
analysis, the struggle against hunger is part of the
struggle against underdevelopment.
The first meeting in May 1960 of the campaign's
advisory committee in Rome, at which the writer had the
honour of presiding, approved a report in which there
was the following passage: "The Campaign must attack
the roots or basic causes of hunger in the world and not
restrict Itself to the adoption of palliatives." Thus, in
1960, began the ten-year period of the World Freedom
From Hunger Campaign which was subsequently
broadened by the United Nations resolution establishing
the Development Decade, one of the basic aims of which
Is the struggle against hunger.
II t is an immense task to eliminate a world-
'wide scourge with roots deeply embedded in
the soil of the socio-economic structures prevailing
throughout most of the globe. With the limited
resources available to the United Nations, it is obvious
that the problem cannot be attacked simultaneously in
its full range and in every region where it exists.
It therefore seemed preferable to establish the
campaign's precise philosophy of action and to launch a
limited number of regional plans or pilot projects.
During the 1961 FAO general conference we suggested
the use of northeastern Brazil as a pilot area for the
campaign and the reasons we gave led the FAO to accept
this proposal made by the Brazilian Government. The
result has been closer co-operation between FAO and
Brazil aimed at eliminating the scourge of hunger from
northeastern Brazil through a realistic development of
the region.
To understand why we considered the Nordeste as
an appropriate pilot zone for the campaign against
hunger and proposed its choice to FAO, one needs to
take a look at the geo-economic characteristics of the
region.
Northeastern Brazil comprises an area of 1,200,000
square kilometres (460,000 sq. miles, or 14% of the whole
country) stretching from the State of Bahía to the State
of Maranhao. The region is neither geographically
homogeneous nor has it a clearcut geo-economic unity.
It comprises two typical and complementary regions: the
eastern Northeast and the western or central Northeast.
The eastern Northeast consists of a narrow stretch of
land near the coast with an average width of 50 miles;
the soil is dense and fertile and the climate is
distinguished by regular and abundant rainfalls. Sugar¬
cane monoculture has developed on this strip of land,
wiping out the forests which once covered it and
occupying every Inch of arable land with terrifying
thoroughness.
It is in this area that the sugar industry has been
established on the basis of monoculture and large estates,
an industry which, via a feudal land system and slavery,
CONT'D ON PAGE 29

DROUGHT &
OVERPOPULATION
irtf&Q
- . '- ;^£"*ss-»..x- - -.--."" v- .
'' .-3 v :<¿r¿ .* 'Y~v¿-» >.'.,» * -'. ,r .
Antonio Ronek © O Cruzeiro, Rio de Janeiro
José Pinto © O Cruzeiro, Rio de Janeiro
m Much of northeastern Brazil is an unsmiling land, a '.piney wilder mv, ul twr.ted
dwarf shrubs surrounded by cactuses (left). Over population p. anoihei sn iuu-,
problem in this "Polygon of Drought". Young men on a railway '.talion platfurm
(below) are migrating "Retirantes" waiting foi a tr am to take them to mon- (ultimate
regions where they may find |obs. Farming here is always at the hick y ul ihe
weather. One long-established activity is cultivation of small ihr ubs (being liar vested,
above) the fibre of whose stem is dried and turned into sacking, ropes and nets
27

28
FAO

OPERATION 'NORDESTE' (Cont'd;
A 10-point guide for development
now forms the basis of the region's economy while at the
same time completely upsetting the regional economy
as a whole and preventing any possibility of other types
of cultivation.
The other Northeast^-the central or westernconsists
of semi-arid land known as the Sertao. This is the
"polygon of drought," periodically subject to a complete
absence of rain or to inadequate rainfalls which disor¬
ganize the region's entire economy and thus bring epi¬
demics of hunger during the drought seasons. The
economy of this sector is based on cattle-raising and
cotton-growing together with food polyculture which, in
rainy years, makes it possible to provide a well-balanced
diet.
he 23 million people who live In the Northeast
one-third of Brazil's total populationhave
a very low standard of living. The average gross per
capita income in Brazil ls 320 dollars; In the Northeast
it is only 100 dollars. This is the largest population group
in Latin America to have such low productivity and so
small an income. Thus, while Brazil can point to some
remarkable advances, this northeastern region continues
to be widely regarded as a problem area, since there
hunger remains a pitiless scourge.
In. fact, the Northeast suffers from two types of hunger.
The sugar-growing region is plagued by chronic
hunger caused by a lack or Insufficiency of various
elements in the everyday diet which ls based on
manioc and beans. The affliction of the Sertao
region is acute hunger, epidemics of hunger provoked
periodically by periods of drought.
This dismal picture of the northeastern economy has
given many people the impression that the Northeast,
with its complex and unfavourable geo-economic
situation, can never be reclaimed. Nothing could be
further from the truth, and more void of scientific reason
than this hasty and pessimistic interpretation of the
Northeast's economy. The hunger and poverty of the
Unesco- E. Aubert de la Rue
PHOTO LEFT is not the bombardment of some lunar
landscape but heavy rain falling on soil, loosening and
lifting it, and thus making it more vulnerable to erosion.
Northeastern Brazil's real plague is irregularity of
rainfall rather than a dearth. When the rains come
they fall in torrents and bring a quick harvest... but
they also wash away huge quantities of topsoil, leaving
a parched eroded surface like the one shown above.
Northeast are not attributable to natural conditions to
basically poor physical characteristicsbut rather to the
deformations and errors that accompanied Its economic
exploitation.
This Is proved by the surveys and research In economic
semiology which have been carried out with scrupulous
scientific care. The Ills of the Northeast are structural
ills whose origin lies in the colonial-type exploitation,
in the monoculture and large estates. Some of the
original social characteristics of these large land
holdings which the Portuguese colonists established
there four centuries ago still survive today.
Surveys carried out by SUDENE. an organization set
up specifically to assist the development of the North¬
east by integrating its economically marginal population
In the national economic system, leave no room for doubt
on this point. The great difficulty in the Northeast is
not, as has so long been claimed, the intermittent pheno¬
menon of drought but the archaic feudal structure of the
system of agrarian ownership which results in both the
failure to use the region's natural resources and to the
non-employment of the working capacity of the north¬
eastern population.
It would be difficult to find any other regions in the
world so well-suited to a pilot experiment In the struggle
against hunger as northeastern Brazil. It ls a thickly
populated area, in which different types of hunger are
rife and the situation there is socially explosive because
the population has become aware of the reasons for its
sufferings. It ls also suitable because it has poten¬
tialities for recovery and possesses technical organizations
like SUDENE which are equipped to carry out properly
planned large-scale projects. To this array of factors
favouring the experiment we may add the fact that
several years ago, at our Instigation, a plan for the
struggle against hunger was initiated In this region
through the World Association for the Campaign Against
Hunger (ASCOFAM).
Within the framework of the present experi¬
ment, here, broadly, is what has already been
done and what is planned for the years ahead. In Brazil,
ASCOFAM has concentrated its work on the Northeast,
dividing Its efforts between a broad educational pro¬
gramme as well as the shaping of a practical philosophy
of action, and the execution of projects designed to
stimulate the public response vital to any attempt to
transform the economy of the region.
Let us examine some of these activities in both sectors.
ASCOFAM initiated surveys and research on the agrarian
structure of the Northeast and Its elfect on the economic
and food situation of the region. On the basis of these
surveys, it even drew up an economic plan for agrarian
reform In the region, Including the total investments
this would require. It organized seminars on regional
problems. Including one on endemic diseases in rural
areas and undernourishment. The basic conclusions
of this seminar which took place in 1958 with the
participation of outstanding scientists, deserve to be
widely publicized. They present an analysis of the corre¬
lation between the problem of endemic diseases and the
problem of hunger in underdeveloped regions with an
objectivity which makes them valid for any under¬
developed region In the world.
These are the 10-point conclusions reached at the
seminar:
"1. The current socio-economic situation of the North¬
east, resulting from the serious mistakes made over many 29
CONTD ON NEXT PAGE

OPERATION ' NORDESTE ' (Cont'd)
Peaceful upheaval
in the backlands
years, is primarily responsible for the deficient diet of the
population and has thereby helped to aggravate the ende¬
mic diseases prevailing there.
2. The bulk of endemic diseases cannot be eliminated
without changing the socio-economic structure and diet¬
ary habits.
3. Aid programmes and public health programmes,
while essential, do not generally provide results any
more lasting than long-term social objectives unless
parallel action ls taken to change the socio-economic
infrastructure and the dietary conditions of the people.
4. The Northeast must be incorporated in the national
economy and has need of public and private action
capable of raising the economic level and improving
the distribution of wealth.
5. The regional phenomenon of drought, although
serious, cannot in the light of the present level of techno¬
logy and science be claimed as the main factor in the
Northeast's economic stagnation.
6. The productivity levels for the Northeast must be
raised as a matter of urgency In order to improve health
standards and overcome the incidence of regional en¬
demic diseases.
7. Under-capitallzatlon and under-employment are
major obstacles to the rational exploitation of the North¬
east's wealth and potentialities and, coupled with the
bad distribution of agricultural property, are serious
handicaps to production, acting as a brake on the
region's agricultural economy.
8. Sugar-cane monoculture, because of the form it
takes and despite the wealth It produces, is a serious
negative element in the social and dietary imbalance
of the peoples In the Northeast.
9. Emergency projects and action can only relieve
specific situations of a temporary or catastrophic kind
but will not lead to permanent results.
10. Industry and agriculture In the Northeast should
not be regarded as conflicting activities but both require
technical organization and financial assistance to reduce
production costs, to create and expand markets and to
ensure that useful individual man-power is fully occupied
and thus ensure the firm establishment of the north¬
eastern peoples."
s part of its programme to turn Brazilian and
^world attention to the problem of the North¬
east, ASCOFAM has produced a film entitled "The
Tragedy of Drought." This presents an eloquent picture
of the social reality of the semi-arid Northeast and points
to the possibility of solving this regional problem through
the struggle against drought and hunger.
ASCOFAM's main achievement, however, has been the
artificial enrichment of the region's basic foodstuff-
manioc flourby the addition of proteins and mineral
salts. Three small pilot factories set up in northeastern
Brazil turn the flour the sole source of hydrocarbons
and caloriesInto a foodstuff rich in acids, mineral salts
and certain vitamins. The process is economical and
practical and thus helps to combat habitual diet defi¬
ciencies of the region.
3Q A year-long experiment carried out in the town of
Surubim, one among the main centres of endemic pella¬
gra, revealed that the general use of this enriched flour
virtually banished this deficiency disease from the region.
Enrichment of manioc flour has so far been effected
on the basis of fat-free soya flour and a mixture of salts
and vitamins but ASCOFAM is currently studying a still
more practical and rational process which consists of the
addition to the usual manioc flour, made from the plant's
roots, of a flour made from the actual leaves of the
manioc which contain some 20% of proteins and
which have a high content of betacarotine (prqvita-
mine A).
Efforts are now being turned to a total utilization of
manioc through a project to be carried out in the town
of Nazareth, a semi-urban, semi-rural community which
is typical of the sugar monoculture region.
In this selected pilot area, techniques, relatively simple
but capable of greatly increasing the region's well-being,
will be used to develop production of certain Items, mainly
foodstuffs, to Increase and improve basic services in the
fields of health and education and to develop available
social capital.
In short, the Nazareth project consists of mobilizing
within this experimental area all the unused or Inade¬
quately used local production resources, primarily labour,
land, building materials and a certain physical capital
such as tools, working animals, etc.
Once the results of this experiment have been collected
and collated, they will be passed to other national and
international groups which are looking for co-operation
techniques capable of promoting community ' develop-

STAMPS AGAINST HUNGER
On this page we present a selection of the special stamps marking
Freedom from Hunger Week, mid-point in the five-year, world-wide
crusade of the U. N. Food and Agriculture Organization to improve
production and distribution of food supplies. Commemorative stamps
were issued by over 140 postal administrations on or around March 21 .
The double purpose of the international stamp plan was to publicize
the gravity of the world hunger situation and to enable people
everywhere to identify themselves with the Campaign. Stamps shown
here and others issued in support of the Campaign can be obtained
from the Unesco Philatelic Service, Place de Fontenoy, Paris (7 ).
ce POUR UN MONDE AFFRANCHI Dt LA FAIM
Mali's efforts to raise food production
through improved farming methods
are recalled in design of this stamp.
SUOMI
ISTA.LIE -A.
FOIS
Nutritional needs of children are also
emphasized in this stamp from Finland.
It bears Campaign slogan in Finnish and
Swedish, Finland's official languages.
Stamp above depicting a child,
eagerly drinking his milk, has
been issued by Argentina. The
drawing was inspired by photo
(right) taken by Paul Almasy
and published on the back
cover ot the special Freedom
from Hunger (July-August
1962) issue of The Unesco
Courier. Argentina has litho¬
graphed over two million.
Special French stamp incorporates, at
do most other issues, heads of wheat,
symbolizing FAO's concern with raising
nutritional standards the world.
ment in other areas afflicted by similar problems.
In addition, FAO, in co-operation with Unicef (the
United Nations Children's Fund) is carrying out a pro¬
gramme of dietary education in the Northeast. This
aims to introduce Improved dietary habits and to encour¬
age the production, preservation and better use of
foodstuffs possessing a high nutritive value. Several
other projects are now being examined by the World
Food Programme which might contribute, as a form of
investment capital, some of the food for workers engaged
in these development projects.
SUDENE has now laid down as one of its objectives the
improvement of food resources in the region, thus contri¬
buting to the direct struggle against hunger and under¬
nourishment. SUDENE'S activity Includes the following
projects: redistribution of the population so as to make
better use of surplus manpower in certain areas, encour¬
agement of stock-breeding by increasing the quantity of
fodder plants adapted to the ecological conditions of the
region, a programme of agricultural expansion and im¬
provement of production by gradual changeover to new
products.
In co-operation with the programmes of the Alliance
for Progress and other international bodies. SUDENE
cb-ordinates many activities designed to combat
hunger in the region.
FAO has already sent a technical commission to the
Northeast to survey this experiment. Many of the reso
lutions adopted by the last FAO regional conference for
Latin America, In Rio de Janeiro, related to problems of
agricultural structure, and the Brazilian Government has
taken account of these In Its recovery plan for the eco¬
nomic and food resources In the Northeast.
Northeastern Brazil ls today being watched by the world
whose interest has been drawn to this geographical area
by the obvious complexity of Its problems, the surprising
vitality of its people and the social tensions which
threaten it Internally. It may render the world an ines¬
timable service since it ls the scene of a peaceful revo¬
lution in which the application of science, technology and
planning will make it possible to uproot the scourge of
hunger, the most characteristic feature of economic and
social underdevelopment.
JOSUÉ DE CASTRO, the distinguished Brazilian nutri¬
tionist, is President of the Association for the World
Campaign Against Hunger, and a former President of the
Council of the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization.
He is the author of many works on 'the problems of food
production and nutrition, of which the best known is
"The Geography of Hunger." He is now chief of the
Brazilian permanent delegation to the international
organizations in Geneva with the rank of ambassador.
31
