K'Av*
THE DRAMATIC PROBLEM
OF 150,000 REFUGEES
By
Stanley
J. C. Wright
PEOPLE WHO WAIT.
Like many thousands of
their fellow people from
Rwanda, this mother and
her son (left) have found
sanctuary, but the sadness
in their eyes tells of a home
lost perhaps forever and
doubts about the future.
Right, other refugees
climb into a truck sent
by the League of Red Cross
Societies which will take
them to one of the four
resettlement centres in the
Kivu Province of the Con-
So far over 21,000
refugees have been taken
care of in these centres.

AFRICAN EXODUS
During recent years, the
Office of the United Na¬
tions High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and
the League of Red Cross, Red
Crescent, Red Lion and Sun
Societies have been carrying
out a number of joint opera¬
tions. From 1957 onwards
they gave relief and main¬
tenance to the Algerian re¬
fugees in Morocco and Tuni¬
sia, an operation which ended
with a repatriation move¬
ment to which both organiza¬
tions lent active assistance.
Elsewhere in Africa, in Togo,
UNHCR and the League
joined in giving relief to a
small group of exiles needing
reestablishment. In the Congo
(Leopoldville) an operation
was undertaken in 1961 to
help over 100,000 refugees
from Angola who could be
settled locally. At present,
UNHCR and the League are
trying to solve the problem
of the refugees from Rwanda
in the Kivu Province. Parallel
to this action, UNHCR has
been taking an interest in the
Rwanda refugee situation in
Uganda, Tanganyika and Bu¬
rundi. (On July I, 1962, the
Trusteeship territory, Ruan-
da-Urundi, administered by
the Belgian Government until
June 30, 1962, became inde¬
pendent as two sovereign
statesRwanda and Burundi).
In all these undertakings, the
two organizations plan and
work together at all levels.
The League relies on support
from its national societies and
accepts the responsibility for
storing and distributing relief
and, in some cases, the co¬
ordination of activities in the
field. UNHCR for its part
maintains liaison with govern¬
ments, seeks funds for pro¬
jects from governmental and
private sources, and delegates
"Chargés de Mission" who
work in close co-operation
with League operational per¬
sonnel in the areas concerned.
Both organizations are of a
non-political and a purely
humanitarian character.
band of perhaps a hundred people have
gathered in the shadows of a cluster of banana
trees. They are sitting quietly on the ground by a
primitive sandy track, waiting. Among the tall men and
women are several almost too ill to move, their bodies
emaciated by starvation and disease. Many babies and
children are frighteningly thin with swollen bellies. They
are refugees from Rwanda, who have come to the Kivu
Province of the Congo.
But soon the ordeal of these "waiting people" Is over.
Three-ton trucks painted with the emblems of UNHCR and
the League of Red Cross Societies pick them up and,
after a five to ten hours' journey over primitive tracks,
bring them to one of the four resettlement centres in the
Kivu.. There they find medical aid and food. Later they
will be given the means to start a new life.
The exodus of Rwanda refugees began when political
unrest led to violence between the two major tribesthe
Batutsi and the Bahutu. The Batutsi, a tall, handsome
people, came to Rwanda some six hundred years ago,
probably from far away Ethiopia. Although forming even
today not more than sixteen per cent of the population,
these shepherd warriors subjected the local tribes of the
Bahutu and set up a feudal society both In Rwanda and
Burundi under separate kings called Mwami. During this
century, under the impact of education and, later, of the
movement towards Independence, the social structure in
both countries underwent certain changes.
In Rwanda, where the segregation of the two peoples
was maintained over a longer time than in Burundi, the
Batutsi. as the ruling class, came to be identified with the
more traditional and conservative form of government.
When the king was deposed in January 1901 and Rwanda
became a republic, political clashes led to tribal violence.
Hundreds of people were killed, villages burned and crops
and cattle destroyed.
An exodus began which culminated in a tragic flight
of over a hundred thousand Rwandcse. By September
1962 it was estimated that 150,000 refugees had found
shelter in the countries bordering on Rwanda: 00,000 in
the Kivu Province of the Congo, 40,000 in Burundi, 35,000
in Uganda and 15,000 in Tanganyika.
Some of these refugees, particularly those in Uganda,
brought with them their anlmaLs, the long-horned cattle
so reminiscent of the oxen on Egyptian bas reliefs. The
overwhelming majority, however, found themselves
destitute, without means of livelihood.
At the time of this exodus, Rwanda and Burundi were
passing through one of the periods of famine characteristic
of the area. The administration had distributed the
existing reserves to those refugees who had earlier sought
protection near the Catholic missions inside both
countries. This meant that the fleeing populations were
weakened and open to disease.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
15

AFRICAN EXODUS (Cont'd)
m
UNHCR photos
FLIGHT for over
100,000 refugees from
Rwanda began in Novem¬
ber 1961. Some, parti¬
cularly those who reached
Uganda, managed to bring
with them their animals
(left) long-horned cattle
reminiscent of the oxen
on Egyptian bas-reliefs.
But the immense majority
found themselves desti¬
tute, without any means of
livelihood. Right, at the
Kalonge reception camp in
the Kivu Province, re¬
fugees queue up for manioc,
beans and palm oil.
'We are ready to learn and work'
The Kivu also was passing through a difficult phase as
a result of the administrative dislocation in the Congo.
Access to the large Ruzizi Valley, for instance, was barred
by rebel soldiers, thousands of refugees found themselves
in unhealthy marshland cut off from every form of help.
The Batutsi used to live in the mountains; they were not
used to the heat, nor the unhealthy conditions in the
lowlands. They were therefore particularly vulnerable to
malaria. No statistics exist regarding the death rate but
starvation, intestinal diseases caused by polluted water,
malaria and scabies took a very heavy toll.
When in March 1962 a joint fact-finding commission
(UNHCR, the League of Red Cross Societies, UNICEF and
UNOC) succeeded in reaching this area they reported
"the general health situation (among the refugees in
Kivu) to be bad and very bad, with the exception of areas
south (the Ruzizi Valley) where the situation must be
considered catastrophic."
Indeed, in one of the villages visited by the fact-finding
mission a family of eight was completely wiped out In the
course of a fortnight. Said Dr. Volgtberger of WHO in a
report to Geneva, "the refugees have become a reservoir
of Infectious diseases that threatens the entire region."
The situation, although extremely precarious, was not so
tragic everywhere. The refugees who had gone further
inland and reached the Masisi territory had found
temporary work and help from the settlers who had
migrated in earlier years under plans to alleviate the over¬
population problem in Rwanda. These settlers, though
Bahutu, received the Batutsi In their midst and allowed
them to work on their land. Those who had stayed in
Goma, Bukavu and Uvira, the three main Kivu towns near
the border, received occasional assistance. Others in rural
areas found work on local farms and plantations, but even
among them there was occasional famine.
When the UNHCR "Chargé de Mission" in the Congo
visited the Kivu in December 1961, there was not only
an urgent need for relief but also for action which would
give the refugees a possibility to move away from the
unhealthy areas and to resume life in more normal
conditions.
At the request of UNHCR, sixteen tons of food and
three thousand pounds of medical supplies were flown in
by UNOC planes from Leopoldville. Forty-five tons of food
were shipped by river to Stanleyville and carried by UNOC
trucks along the one-thousand kilometre tracks to Goma
(the distance from Geneva to Rome).
The Oxford Committee for Famine Relief in the United
Kingdom made £10,000 available to the Norwegian Pro-
'" testant Mission in Bukavu so that food supplies could be
bought locally, and later sent another £10,000 to the
ïC2
Swedish Protestant Mission in the
same town. The Swedish Mission in
Rwanda sent four tons of food to
Goma when the supplies of the
Catholic Mission there ran out.
Eighty tons of milk from the United
States' surplus food were carried by
UNOC trucks from Usumbura' in
Burundi to the Kivu Province.
In the meantime, the League of
Red Cross Societies had agreed to a
joint action with UNHCR. A plan
was drafted to create resettlement
areas in the mountainous areas of
the Kivu and, with the full approval
of the Prime Minster of the Province,
Mr. Miruho. It was put into opera¬
tion almost overnight.
Under the Belgian Administration,
several attempts had been made to
establish Rwanda farmers in the
highlands. An organization, the MJP (Mission d'Installa¬
tion des Populations), had been created which for several
years had been entirely in the hands of Congolese officials.
On its own initiative it had begun to help refugee families
by assisting with their establishment in Northern Kivu,
but their efforts had been hampered by lack of food.
On the strength of this experience, it was decided to
create four resettlement centres in Iuhula, with the help
of the White Fathers; in Bibwe with the MB?; in Kalonge
with the Norwegian Misson, and in Lemera with the
Swedish Mission. These centres were all situated in thinly
populated areas where the implantation of refugees is
unlikely to cause any social, economic or political distur¬
bances in the future and where the land offers excellent
prospects for agriculture.
It is actually wrong to speak of "centres." Bibwe, for
instance, which has already received more than 5,000
people, Is now composed of six villages and more will be
created as the number of refugees increases. Each family
has received four hectares of land and there is enough
virgin forest around to carve out a four-hundred hectare
tea plantation which is one of the projects of the
programme.
Practically every day one or more lorries bought with
UNHCR funds by the League of Red Cross Societies picks
up groups of refugees in Goma or from the border areas.
Every day also refugee families arrive on foot, some having
walked over a hundred miles.
Upon arrival they are registered and given temporary
shelter in communal accommodation until they' can build
their own huts (which takes about two weeks). They
tf

w
unsntrs r*^4^
Pt^/JW
receive an average of three kilos of food per person per
week (manioc, beans and palm oil). Each family Is allotted
a machete, a hoe and some seeds for immediate planting.
A beginning has been made with community develop¬
ment plans: the creation of a tea plantation, the establish¬
ment of a saw mill, the setting up of a community store
where the refugees will eventually be able to buy essentials
(seeds, tools, fertilizers, etc.), and the organization of the
sale of handicrafts which will help to maintain the 130
widows and their children who have come to Bibwe.
There is a heartening spirit of pioneering among
the refugees. Several students who studied In Europe
or who were in technical schools in the Congo when
events in Rwanda prevented their return, have come to
Bibwe to settle provisionally. It is they who have built
the huts for the widows, the two schools and a mission
house. Several are acting as unpaid teachers to the
350 children of school age.
Right now activities are concentrated on planting
manioc, sorgo, maize, potatoes, sweet potatoes and beans
the staple diet of the population. By early 1963, the
refugees, if all goes well, ought to be completely self-
supporting. In two years' time, thanks to the community
plans, the standard of life In the new villages will rise
above subsistence level and allow for further development.
Many of the refugees are, in fact, looking ahead with
quiet hope to better times. They want to build houses of
stone, give their children a chance to learn better methods
of agriculture, raise the standard of health. "There Is
no reason why we should not do as well as the planters
around here," says Brother Alphonse, a Catholic monk.
himself a refugee. "It may take time, but our people arc
ready to learn and work."
The part taken by the Congolese and the refugec-.s
themselves Is indeed one of the important aspects of the
resettlement of the refugees in the Kivu Province. They
are actively associated with the drafting of plans, work
out all the administrative details, and are fully responsible
for the execution of the projects. To them, the presence
of UNHCR. Red Cross League and UNOC officers is a
guarantee of continued support and friendly help.
So far, the contribution of the International community
to the Kivu operation has been comparatively modest,
even if without it the operation could not have been
undertaken with any chance of success. UNHCR has
already contributed $70,000. UNOC, .$50,000, UNICEF
$24,000, the Oxford Committee for Famine Relief $50,000,
the League of Red Cross Societies $25,000, to which must
be added United States' surplus food, and private dona¬
tions. At least $65,000 more will be required to complete
the operation. The League has two officers In the areas, a
Swiss and a Dane.
So far, over 21,000 refugees have been resettled In the
four centres. Their number may rise in the next few
months to 40,000, possibly even more. Within less than a
year they will have travelled the road from starvation to
plenty, a short road Indeed, thanks to their own energies,
the understanding and active assistance of the local chiefs,
and support given by the international community.
Stanley J. C. Wright is Chief of the Information Section, Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Geneva.
17

Leaving fear and famine behind them, refu¬
gees from northern Rwanda set off on the
road to a new life. One group (left) climbs
aboard a Red Cross truck which will take
it to the Bibwe reception camp in the
Kivu Province of the Congo. Below, a small
girl, wearing a makeshift dress cut from a
food sack, patiently waits her turn. A few
hours later, greeted by shouts and waves
of welcome (below left) the group arrives
at the camp of the Reinstallation Mission.
The refugees are determined to build them¬
selves a new life and become self-support¬
ing. At the weekly food distribution (below,
centre) the men select the best beans for
planting. As the framework of a new home
takes shape (below right) hopes rise and
smiles broaden. After work is over there
is time to enjoy traditional festivals and
dances (right). The land is good. New
crops will soon raise their heads. Life once
again begins to take on a real meaning.
k TK
ON THE ROAD...
-w
TO A NEW LIFE
18
im 11/ n 'Li i.mir. kulTbjli,
. CHEF »A CIIA.VTiri! ADA
IMBWA IIT/AMA
'/->iv san
'
a j»
19

