HOLIDAY CURE
FOR BORED
TEEN-AGERS
by Arthur Gillette
24
THE youth of today is bored. This
is a foregone conclusion of the
Study of the Objectives and Content of
Out-of-School Education that UNESCO
is undertaking in 1963-1964. Young
people in the industrialized countries
are faced with increasing amounts of
ready money and free time and often
find themselves at a loss to put these
to creative use. Growing minds and
muscles seem to lack stimulation in the
atmosphere of material ease prevalent
in Europe and North America, and
untapped energies of young people
from all social backgrounds express
themselves increasingly in acts of
hooliganism and gratuitous violence.
In the developing countries, young
people frequently those who have
attained a relatively high level of edu¬
cation are pouring out of the country¬
side into the cities in search of paying
jobs and the stimulation of urban life.
Many find neither employment nor ex¬
citement and more often than not
spend months, if not years, perfecting
the art of wasting time.
Meanwhile, in all countries, newly
independent and technically advanced
alike, there is no lack of social prob¬
lems which youthful energies could
help solve. In even the wealthiest of
societies the material and, above all,
the psychological needs of certain
groups old people, slum dwellers, the
mentally ill, immigrant labourers, racial
minorities, juvenile delinquents, etc.
go largely unanswered. The needs of
the newly developing countries are
even greater: roads and railways,
schools and community centres,
teachers and technicians the list of
necessities in a modern society.
Here then is the paradoxical situa¬
tion today. On one hand, young people
the world over are at loose ends,
bored, marking time before they gain
the rights and accept the responsibi¬
lities of adulthood. On the other hand,
some of the world's most crying needs
are unheeded. One answer to this
paradox though by no means a pana¬
cea for all today's ills is to yoke rest¬
less youthful energy to these pressing
needs, to give young people the oppor¬
tunity for exciting and creative service.
This is the function of the international
voluntary workcamp movement.

Unesco - Louis van Paridon
Cheerful workcampers prepare for the day's activity on a housing construction project in Waldkappel,
German Federal Republic. This exceptionally large voluntary summer workcamp project was attended
by some 2,500 volunteers who put In a total of over 240,000 working hours on the building sites.
he first "modern" workcamp was held near
Verdun, France, in 1920 when young people
from France, Germany and other nations helped rebuild
war-rravaged farms. The movement has grown, especially
since the second world war, until now each year some two
million volunteers from all continents and most countries
gather for from three to six weeks in camps of five to 200
(the average is 25) to make a personal contribution to
the welfare of their less fortunate neighbours.
During the day there are long hours of hard physical
work: slums are painted in the U.S.A., France and Great
Britain, schools built in Bolivia, Ghana and the Ukraine,
roads laid in Yugoslavia, India and Togo, flood and earth¬
quake damage repaired in Morocco, Chile and the Ger¬
man Federal Republic...
In the evening, guitars, recorders and mouth-organs are
brought out to accompany folk-singing and dancing. Or
else, lively, sometimes heated (and always earnest)
discussions spring up. In some camps, those devoted
specifically to improving Orient-Occident understanding
for instance, lectures and discussions are carefully pre¬
pared in advance, but volunteers everywhere join in with
youthful verve usually tempered by the experience of
trying to do something concrete about the problems they
are discussing.
Whether many nations or different regions of one coun¬
try are represented in a given camp or not there is
never a dearth of topics: the rôle of the developing
countries in the United Nations, abstract art. Eastern
religions, "are workcampers do-gooders with a guilt
complex?", racism, etc.
On weekends there are excursions to points of local
interest, hikes and a chance for the weary to catch up
on 6leep.
A good example of the kind of project undertaken is
the camp that was held a few summers ago at Blitzingen,
a small picturesque village perched high in the Swiss Alps.
Every summer for decades, perhaps centuries, the people
of Blitzingen have carried their cows' milk down miles of
twisting road once or twice a day from their summer
pastures perched 1,200 feet above the village.
As mechanization became widespread in Swiss dairies,
Blitzingers could no longer compete; the young people of
the village began to move away arid Blitzingen seemed
doomed to wither and die. Then 20 young workcampers
representing several nations and races came to help. For
about a month they worked side by side with the villagers
who had remained and laid a plastic pipe down the moun¬
tainside. Now the milk comes down from the summer
pasture in six minutes (instead of three hours) and Blit-
zingen, encouraged, is beginning to revive.
As well as short-term service there also exist oppor¬
tunities for experienced volunteers to do long-term
(6 months to two years) workcamping, primarily in Asia,
Africa and Latin America. Long-term volunteers are
putting their knowledge and experience to work trans¬
forming the slums of New Delhi, preparing a student-run
literacy campaign in Bolivia, helping refugees in Morocco
and Austria.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
25

CURE FOR BOREDOM (Cont'd)
Vacation time, gay but useful
In one typical long-term project, Nicole Leymann, a
young French social worker, and Max Hildesheim, a Bel¬
gian architect, spent a year in Togo, helping to strength¬
en the activities of the Togolese workcamp organiza¬
tion "Les Volontaires au Travail." Nicole had the special
task of Interesting Togolese women in literacy, home-
making and other educational activities of the workcamp
group, while Max worked together with local development
officers to encourage young village men to build schools,
dig wells, surface roads and accomplish other projects.
The main aim of the work done by Nicole and Max,
was to make young Togolese aware of their own
constructive potential and to teach them the techniques
which will enable them to put their potential to
work. Now back in Europe, Nicole and Max agree
that they learned as much as they taught. Their
year of service was not a one-way flow of information
from the "developed" to the "developing" countries but
rather a truly human exchange.
At present, long and short-term workcamp projects
are run by some 250 organizations located in more than
50 countries throughout the world; there are small, large,
regional, national, international, Buddhist, Catholic,
Jewish, Muslim, Protestant, non-religious, governmental,
non-governmental, political and apolitical organizations
involved.
The most active of these (80 at the time of writing)
are grouped in the Co-ordination Committee for Inter¬
national Voluntary Workcamps, a supra-national, non¬
governmental organization located in Paris, to which
Unesco has granted Consultative Status. The work
of the Committee (whose Secretariat is staffed by long-
term volunteers) includes publicity and co-ordination
of workcamp activities as well as several Major Projects.
(For news of the latest project, see page 34.)
Hard physical effort of the kind furnished by these
volunteers in England is combined with lectures,
discussions and other educational activities in work¬
camp projects now run by over 250 organizations in
more than 50countrlesforover 2,000,OOOvolunteers.
Unesco
26
Weht ' > "y
One of these, provides young people from Eastern
Europe and Western Europe with an opportunity to
labour, play and live together in voluntary work camps,
to get acquainted with one another as individuals in an
atmosphere of common effort. To date, they have worked
together in camps in France, the German Democratic
Republic, Poland, Sweden, the U.S.S.R. and Yugoslavia.
Another Major Project of the Co-ordination Committee
is the organization of regional training courses for
prospective workcamp leaders in the developing countries.
In many of these countries workcamp movements
already exist; but expansion of their activities demands
leaders and there are simply not enough experienced
qualified leaders to go around. Without solid leadership,
the energy and purpose of these new movements would
be wasted.
he Co-ordination Committee tries to remedy
this situation by organizing, in collaboration
with local workcamp groups, regional leader training pro¬
jects. So far, four projects have been organized in South
East Asia (three in India and one in Pakistan), three in
Africa (Ghana, Togo and the U.A.R.) and one in Latin
America (Paraguay). In each project between 30 and
50 trainees, sponsored by local workamp and other youth
organizations, divide their time between theoretical
sessions (talks and discussions led by workcamp and
community development specialists) and practical phy¬
sical labour (building schools, digging wells, etc.).
As a result of this combination, future leaders come
to feel the exicitement of workcamping and, at the same
time, learn how to put their newly acquired techniques
into practice. Through these regional training projects,
which are generously supported by individuals and
groups who contribute through the Unesco Gift Coupon
System, voluntary workcamping has been strengthened
in countries where it existed and spread to new areas.
At the First Latin American Training Project, for
example, 29 young people from eight countries came
together in the village of Primavera, Alta Paraguay, in
early 1961 for a month's intensive instruction by several
experts from the Americas and Europe. As a practical
project, they added a wing to a rural hospital.
Typical of the trainees was Jaime Reyes Mérida, Gen¬
eral Secretary of the Bolivian University Confederation.
Soon after his return to La Paz from Paraguay, Jaime
and other student leaders began making careful plans
for a literacy campaign, in which student volunteers
would serve as teachers of reading and writing and
builders of schools and literacy centres. With the help
of Unesco, interested workcamp organizations in Europe
and international student groups, this campaign was put
into action.
This activity and growing interest in voluntary service
projects is now being "boosted" by the second Latin
American Training Project which takes place in Sucre,
Bolivia, from March 15 to April 13. This project combines
the hard practical work of building a university literacy
training centre with a period of intensive study of the
techniques of organizing workcamps. Some 30 volun¬
teers from 9 countries in Latin America now working and
studying together will return after the training project
to use their new-found knowledge in their own countries.
It would, of course, be unrealistic to expect all young
people everywhere to be interested in giving their free
time to physically strenuous voluntary service activities.
Yet, each year, more and more discover that work¬
camping is a means of doing something practical about
the world's problems, of bridging the political, social,
racial and other chasms that divide men, in short, of
building peace. This is certainly one answer to the
boredom of today's youth.
A
Arthur Gillette, of the United States, is General Secretary of the
Co-ordination Committee for International Voluntary Workcamps,
in Paris. A specialist in the organization of volunteer training pro¬
grammes in developing countries, he is at present in Bolivia helping
to organize the Second Latin American Training Project.

DRUMBEATS CALL
TOGO
VOLUNTEERS
TO WORK
"
In the newly-developing nations of Africa,
the International Voluntary Workcamp Move¬
ment has done much to guide and encourage
work on community development projects.
In the Republic of Togo, for example, a young
French social worker spent a year assisting
the local workcamp organization, Les Volon¬
taires au travail, her special task being to inte¬
rest Togolese women in literacy, home-making
and other educational activities. A Belgian
architect worked with local development
officers to encourage young village men to
build schools, dig wells and surface roads. Left,
volunteer builders working to the sound of
drumbeats are constructing a pre-natal clinic
In the Togo Republic. Below, another Togo
volunteer group thatches a newly-built home.
Photos© Paul Almasy, Paris
27
