THE
Rousseau chases his hat
blown off by a gust of
wind. This engraving based
on a painting by Jean-Michel
Moreau dates from the
period when Rousseau was
a butt for ridicule and
hotly attacked by the philo¬
sophers of his time. Right,
Rousseau gathering flowers
near the house in which
he lived at Ermenonville.
R
16
ousseau's work and personality are so rich and
varied that it is not always easy to grasp their
deep-reaching unity and to see them as a whole. While
we should keep in mind the connexions between the diffe¬
rent aspects of the man and the multiple facets of his
talent, it is also rewarding to concentrate on one of these
and to try to walk with Rousseau along one of the paths
he followed, in this case, the path of reverie which, in his
own words, became for him "an intense passion."
Reverie for him effaces the misery of existence and
leads to true happiness, such as he enjoyed during his
enchanted stay in the island of St. Pierre, in the autumn
of 1765. To his experience there, he devoted some of the
finest pages of Book XII of his Confessions and, above all,
the famous fifth walk in the Reveries of a Solitary Wan¬
derer. This, his last work, left unfinished and published
four years after his death, had a considerable influence on
so many of the greatest poets and prose-writers of the
19th century, from Senancour to Baudelaire and Rimbaud,
and, among many others, Novalis,." Nerval and Hölderlin.
To reach the heart of Rousseau's experience, we must
cast a glance at the part played in his life by solitude and
the contact with nature he found when walking alone.
We shall then see how, to use Rousseau's own words (The
Second Dialogue) "an active heart and a lazy tempera¬
ment," aided by a lively imagination, found in day-dream¬
ing the supreme form of bliss.
Although Rousseau was often alone, enjoyed solitude
and at certain periods lived very introspectively, he was
far from being the sour recluse his enemies tried to make
him out. He was no egoist pent in an ivory tower, but
an expansive and sensitive being who had, since youth,
obviously had great difficulty in adapting himself to
society, partly because of certain traits of character and
partly because of the circumstances of his life. In the
first book of the Confessions, he speaks of the lasting
influence of the novels he had read in his childhood.
They had given him "extravagent, romantic notions of
human life, which experience and reflection have never
been able to eradicate."
Self-adaptation means taking the rough with the
smooth; not accepting everything, but compromising to
a certain extent; admitting the transition from the
absolute to the relative. Rousseau was not always able
or willing to make this effort. Disappointed in his human
loves and friendships, he sought refuge in a world of
reverie, peopled with beings after his own heart. He had
an innate tendency to prefer the immediate and readily
accessible joys of the imagination to the struggles and
suffering involved in facing up to reality.
It was natural, then, that the persecution his bold ideas
brought upon him and the hatred he felt growing round
him, magnified by his morbid and pessimistic imagination,
should aggravate his love of solitude and his deep convic¬
tion that he was different from other men. This persecu¬
tion created an ever-widening gulf between him and his
contemporaries, aggravating the differences between him
and them at the expense of what they had in common.
Although he believes himself alone of his kind "I am
not made like anyone I have been acquainted with," he
writes in his preamble to the Confessions he does not
yet, at the time of writing his great autobiographical
works, the Confessions and the Dialogues, feel himself cut
off from the rest of humanity. By justifying himself to
his contemporaries, by leaving to posterity a portrait
which he believes faithful and absolutely sincere, he is
trying to establish contact with his reader.
t is only in the Reveries that he claims to be
writing for himself alone, so that in old age
he may recapture both the memory of the walks and
thoughts that would otherwise vanish so swiftly from
his failing memory, and the joy he feels at the moment
of penning them. In his first walk, he describes his
situation as he sees it two years before his death.
"All that is external to me, is now strange henceforward.
I have in this world, neither neighbour, nor kinsmen, nor
brothers. I am upon this earth as upon a strange planet,
whence I have fallen from that which I inhabited... Alone
for the rest of my life, because I cannot find except in
myself consolation, hope and peace, I ought not, and do
not wish to occupy myself any longer save with myself...
The leisures of my daily walks have often been filled with
delightful contemplations of which I regret having lost the
memory. I shall set down in writing those which may
still come to me; each time that I reread them will give
me new pleasure.. I shall forget my sufferings, my perse¬
cutors, my opprobrium, in dreaming of the reward which
my heart has merited."
Rousseau had no expectation of the astonishing success
the book was to have or of the ever-growing public it has
attracted since its publication. We come closer to him
in the Reveries than we have ever been, for he takes us
with him into the heart of his spiritual life. The title of
his last meditations is revealing. Far from breaking
with his past, the Reveries of a Solitary Wanderer throw

SOLITARY
WANDERER
by Anne-Marie Pfister
Photos Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
light on his whole life, for the enchantment of solitude,
the love of walking and day-dreaming have been familiar
to Rousseau since his youth. On one of the playing cards
which he carried around in his pockets so that he could
jot down the ideas that flashed across his mind as he
walked, he wrote these revealing words:
"In order to justify the title of this collection, I should
have begun it sixty years ago, for my whole life has
scarcely been anything other than a long reverie divided
into chapters by my daily walks."
Solitary life and social life are the two poles between
which Rousseau's life oscillates, ¡as does that of each of
us. He knows, and he reminds us in the Dialogues, that
"absolute- solitude is a lonely state and in contra¬
diction with nature: affectionate feelings nourish the
soul, the communication of ideas quickens the mind.
Life at its sweetest is relative and collective and our real
self is not entirely contained within us. Finally, man is so
constituted in this life that he can never really be his
happiest self without the aid of someone else."
But this aid, as Rousseau conceives it, pre-supposes
the establishment of a friendly relationship between
people, a relationship entirely free of superficiality and
based on reciprocal confidence and equality. Because of
the disappointment of his profound longing for a society
in which heart would speak Intimately to heart and men,
instead of hiding behind the mask of conventional words,
would spontaneously express their innermost thoughts;
because this absolute transparency cannot be realized in
practice, Rousseau has gradually, "as he got to know men
better," thrown himself back upon solitude.
He wrote this as early as January, 1762 in the
first of his four great autobiographical letters to Monsieur
de Malesherbes. The originality and the vigour of his
thought, combined with extreme sensitivity, could not fail
to isolate Rousseau. Moreover, the ups and downs of a
stormy life prevented him from ever quite fitting into
a social group or community. Throughout his life, he was
never in harmony with those about him and long before
his exile and his years of wandering, this "citizen of
Geneva" who lived outside his own country, was already
a person without roots.
Even among the Encyclopedists, the liveliest of
intellectual circles, where he met people of his own level,
he did not feel entirely at his ease: their basic convictions
differed too widely. Everything conspired, then, to
strengthen his taste for solitude which set him free from
the, to him, unbearable constraint of community and
social life and enabled him to indulge his inclination for
sweet reverie, the source of certain and immediate joy.
The love of nature, dating from his childhood years
at Bossey, at the foot of Mount Salève, was another,
unchanging characteristic of Rousseau's life. The passion
for rustic scenery is not necessarily a concomitant of the
love of solitude, but they are often linked. Going for long,
lonely walks through beautiful countryside filled
Rousseau's heart with bliss and gave him an exalting
sensation of freedom.
Recalling his departure from Geneva at the age of
sixteen, he describes the elation and the illuslonary joy
that filled him: "Having attained my liberty, I thought
everything attainable; I entered with confidence on the
vast theatre of the world."
he wandering life he led in the prime of his
youth was an essential experience which
should be kept in mind when one reads the following
admirable page from the Confessions: "What I most
regret is not having kept a journal of my travels, being
conscious that a number of interesting details have slipped
my memory; for never did I exist so completely, never live
so thoroughly, never was so much myself, if I dare use
the expression, as in those journeys made on foot.
Walking animates and enlivens my spirits; I can scarcely
think when in a state of Inactivity; my body must be
exercised to make my judgement active.
"The view of a fine country, a succession of agréable
prospects, a free air, a good appetite, and the health I
gain by walking; the freedom of inns, and the distance
from everything that can make me recollect the depen¬
dence of my situation, conspire to free my soul, and give
boldness to my thoughts, throwing me, in a manner, into
the immensity of beings, where I combine, choose and
appropriate them to my fancy, without constraint or fear.
"I dispose of all nature as I please ; my heart wandering
from object to object, approximates and unites with those
that please it, is surrounded by charming Images, and
becomes intoxicated with delicious sensations... In stop¬
ping, I thought of nothing but a hearty dinner; on part¬
ing, of nothing but a charming walk: I felt a new
paradise waiting for me at the door: my one object was
to go and find it."
The paradise opened to him by his imagination gives 17
CONT'D ON PAGE 20

SOLITARY WANDERER (Cont'd)
A longing for closeness with Nature
him more real satisfaction than do worldly goods which,
at any moment, may "escape in a thousand ways from
whomsoever thinks he holds them." Rousseau gives
pride of place to the imagination which he describes as
"the consoling faculty." It compensates him for his
disappointments and agrees with his temperament. He
describes himself as being "lazy to act because of too much
eagerness to desire." In his second Dialogue, he stresses
his tendency to withhold: "contemplative life makes one
loth to act."
Occasionally, Rousseau succeeds in "soaring into ethe¬
real regions and hovering there, sustained by sublime
contemplation." He then defies the "blows of fate and
the Insane opinions of men," but what efforts are required
to reach such detachment! Often, he feels so overwhelm¬
ed by his sorrows that his terrified imagination foresha¬
dows only a dark and despairing future. At such times,
nature, and plants in particular, help him to exorcise the
gloomy aspect of his Imagination.
"In this state an instinct which is natural to me, making
me fly every saddening idea, imposed silence on my imagi¬
nation, and, fixing my attention upon those objects which
surrounded me, made me, for the first time, absorb in
detail the spectacle of Nature, which I had scarcely con¬
templated except in mass and in its whole."
Aj BANDONiNG himself to reverie, he "loses himself
with a delicious intoxication in the immensity
of the splendid scheme with which he feels himself
identified." But the moment comes when fusion with all
creation gives way to attentive and detailed observation,
which likewise brings Rousseau release and calm. "It
costs me nothing, nor need I take trouble in wandering
carelessly from herb to herb, from plant to plant, in order
to examine them, to compare their divers characters, to
mark their similarities and their differences... There is
in this leisurely occupation," says Rousseau, speaking of
botany, in the 7th Reverie, "a charm which is only felt
when the passions are calmed, but which alone suffices to
render life happy and sweet."
Rousseau's imagination needs the support of perceptible
things; when too abstract, meditation tires and wearies
him. The type of reverie, therefore, which recurs most
frequently in his life is that which replaces disappointing
and painful reality by an ideal company, consisting of
good, enlightened men, charming and virtuous women,
reliable and faithful friends.
In such reverie, life is enacted against a perfectly har¬
monious natural background and the day dreaming is
fruitful. It gives birth to The New Eloisa. Nevertheless,
it Is only a first stage in Rousseau's experience. Not only
does the "nothingness of his chimera" sometimes cloud
and obliterate the prestige of this enchanted world; he
sometimes realizes that even if his dreams became reality,
they could not satisfy him.
I felt in myself", he said, "an inexplicable void
which nothing could fill, a certain longing of
the heart for some other kind of happiness which I could
not imagine, yet felt the need of." The thirst for the
absolute and for eternity that lies at the centre of our
being makes us crave for such happiness as can only
rarely be enjoyed on earth, that "sufficing happiness,
perfect and full" which the soul, free of all particular
affection, enjoys in the pure feeling of existence, when
time itself stands still and an unlimited present com¬
prehends, without distinction, both past and future.
This purified reverie, lulled by the coming and going of
20 the waves on the shore, when the imagination is silent
and thought inexistent, is the final achievement of Rous¬
seau's inner experience. In this natural mystic ecstasy,
world and self lose themselves in one identity; all separa¬
tion disappears; all desire fades; man suffices unto him¬
self, as does God. Such was the happiness Rousseau
enjoyed in the privileged moments of his stay in the island
of St. Pierre. The experience is described in the fifth
Reverie.
"The flux and reflux of this water, its continuous sound,
swelling at intervals, struck ceaselessly my ears and eyes,
responding to the internal movements which reverie
extinguished in me, and sufficed to make me feel my exis¬
tence with pleasure, without taking the trouble to think.
"From time to time was born some weak and brief
reflection on the instability of earthly things, of which the
surface of the water offered me the image; but soon these
light impressions effaced themselves in the uniformity of
continuous movement which rocked me, and which,
without any active help from my soul, did not fail to
attach me to such an extent that when summoned by the
hour and the signal agreed upon, I could not tear away
without an effort."
Anne-Marie Pfister is curator of manuscripts at the library
of the University of Geneva. The article above is taken from the
text of the address she delivered at a commemorative ceremony
honouring Jean-Jacques Rousseau, held in Unesco House, Paris, on
November 29, 1962.
SOUVENIRS OF REVERIES &
REVOLUTIONARY CHANGES
<&*íi¿¿3 ¡í''y IA '«Vf« /a n«-
§£> ^i^^j bûj en. t t lnyJ ¿C
b "'On
poj ci ty-ti fi'- ' * > 0-e-Y/ortft.
Itxt' n' cyx. (&¿t ' >-££-«_
* * 4
During his long promenades, Rousseau noted down ideas for his
Reveries on the playing cards he carried in his pocket. Later, his
own features appeared on cards of the French Revolutionary period.
Rousseau, depicted as a sage (below), replaces the King of Clubs.
i ¡t ctfíi vr» /gn f,
- l/Xi U Ii
A f H i*. I -
la. ¡Jeninij;,
A ;h<j<zi, A"«y»nr-/
*>V,ii/W f/i fi'n.f'- ^ii,t,t I
'V /<U- ./ \lC fir- f***Vrt':>i.\ " /"Y icu
¡it? jti (f/tff n - i AtItem
flu. ¡U (,li- ttt' f.luiUitvL*J- urjAni
/-«f 9au *, .o ifi^j* 'tit .c'TT/j
u* /W-'-wi,« ¡u>,ii U#.wn*. /, Ju/,
«iViVtèiï* >ií tau 7m: ¿m**v «a
Photos Bibiotheque
Nationale, Paris
