UNCHARTED LANDS
Neglected masterpieces in the world of translations
by Roger Caillois
he world grows smaller every day and whether
we like It or not, each of us Increasingly feels
his country Is a mere province on the planet, its history a.
sequence of local episodes not necessarily coinciding with
the history of the world. Naturally, the ties which bind
us to our cultural background remain strong. We may
even continue to think of this culture as universal and
world-embracing. But we know it can only lay claim to
such resounding titles in so far as it has drawn upon all
the world had to offer and If it gathered this nourishment
in almost every corner of the globe.
Nowadays, too, there are powerful travel stimulants:
business, holidays, politics and science. An increasing
army of globetrotters moves more frequently, more easily
and ever further afield. Its members bring back from
countries they have traversed an irresistible desire to know
more about things they have only glimpsed in passing, the
kind of nostalgic longing fed by images of history,
customs, literature and arts in lands only . half-
apprehended.
Even the stay-at-homes, rooted in their familiar haunts,
find delivered to their door, by the magic carpets of press,
the radio and television, all the colour, sound and scents
distilled from the bustle and riches of far-off lands, a
heady foretaste of all kinds of stimulants for the mind.
Once aroused, their curiosity soon demands some less
superficial, less fleeting acquaintance with these fabulous
travellers' tales, and a chance to enjoy them more directly.
For painting, sculpture, music, this need can be satisfied
without much difficulty. A recording, a reproduction in
colour, a copy or a model, all carry with them an essential
message whose meaning is clear anywhere. Museums and
albums offer an easily accessible panorama of the things
that are best in world art. A library of records, carefully
chosen, provides its owner in a very small compass with
the most significant examples of music composed in the
most divergent modes.
Writing, by contrast, does not enjoy these
migratory qualities of easy and direct trans¬
mission. Mere mechanical reproduction can never convey
the beauty of works in which language is both the
substance and the vehicle. Words are not like colours,
forms and sounds, which are self-evident and accessible
to every eye and every ear (though there are excellent
eyes blind to painting and keen ears closed to music).
No innate Intellectual intuition transmits thought and
poetry automatically to the mind. Their vehicle is
language, and language implies translation, if words are
not to remain, as the old tag rather harshly puts it,
"dead letters."
There is no question here of using recordings, photo¬
graphs, castings, mechanical reproductions, as with the
dance and music, frescoes and bas-reliefs. Translation,
that thankless, complex and elusive task. Is inescapable.
Every language is a cipher, a secret tongue, to be decoded
and made plain, to be transposed from its author's terms
into those of his audience.
This audience, potentially, is the literate public in a
world itself employing several hundred languages;, in
other words, several hundred different cipher-systems.
These ciphers, moreover, these codes and catalogues of
4 signs, are each the fruit of an infinitely long birth; they
have evolved in different climates, in contact with
different flora and fauna, influenced by different condi
tions and techniques; they express a multitude of cultures
and conflicting customs.
Inevitably, they are not simply interchangeable. White,
to take only one small instance, may be a symbol of purity
In one society, of mourning in another. The Eastern
author, to suggest an atmosphere of grief, describes his
heroine as "clad from head to foot in white." The rigid
translator, denying himself the least deviation from literal
exactness, unhelpfully renders sorrow as innocence.
Christian missionaries, charged with teaching the
Gospels and interpreting the Bible to the most diverse
peoples, know the difficulties of explaining, to societies
innocent of money, private property and interest rates,
the parable of the servants who invested their talents
and the other who buried his, or of bringing home the
parable of the tares and the wheat to men who live in
deserts, laboriously watering and desperately sheltering
from sun and wind their least blade of grass.
et here it is only the meaning that has to be
explained. What happens when, as in poetry,
the potency of writing lies in its harmony or powers of
evocation, in the alignment of syllables or flow or vowels,
in alliteration or inner resonance? The original language
may dispose of articles, verbs, inflexions and syntactical
subtleties unknown in the tongue of the translator.
What paraphrase can be proposed that does not risk
weakening not only the structure of the language, but the
implicit and all the more exacting movement of its
thought and feeling?
Such reflexions seem to suggest that translations can
never hope -to be more than approximate renderings. But
first they must actually exist. In point of fact, they are
rare, at best scanty, and glaringly inadequate.
If we set out to compile an atlas of translations in which
each map represented a country or at least a language
and we shaded in each map according to the extent to
which works written or published in each have been
translated into other languages, the results would astonish
us. The chief cause of our surprise would be the large
number of white spaces and lightly-shaded ones indicat¬
ing, on this world cultural map, literatures which are
completely unknown or nearly so. Just as olden-time car¬
tographers, at a loss to explain unknown terrains, wrote
on their maps "Here be lions," so, vast tracts to-day could
be labelled with "Here be masterpieces." Masterpieces,
beyond doubt, abound; but unknown and inaccessible.
Even when, as is sometimes the case, a fair number of
translations of these literatures exist, their presentation
more often than not is such as to render them of little
interest to the average reader. They set him down in a
civilization of which he knows virtually nothing, where all
is unfamiliar. Customs are disconcerting, emotions alien
and strangely expressed. The touch-stones of beauty,
emotion, persuasion and communication are all quite
foreign to him. Their most subtle poems dwindle into
flat banality. All their allusions are meaningless. The
reader brave enough to launch himself into this unknown
country is baffled, by inexplicable simplicities, by unintelli¬
gible words of wisdom, a seeming monotony or incoherence
which dismay instead of delighting; presently he feels he
is simply forging fruitlessly through impassable jungles
or over implacably empty deserts.
Yet palliatives can be imagined which, by taking
account of these obstacles, can stave off this kind of

SAINT JEROME, who was
born in Dalmatia about
331 A.D. and died In
Bethlehem in 420 A.D.
is regarded as the patron
saint of translators. After
being a student of theology,
he lived for three years
as an anchorite hermit in
the desert wastes of Chalcis
in Asia Minor where, it is
told, he tamed a lion. He
later settled in a monastery
in Bethlehem where he
translated the Old Testa¬
ment directly from the He¬
brew with the aid of Jewish
scholars. This Latin trans¬
lation of the Scriptures
became the Vulgate or autho¬
rized version. Saint Jerome
has been depicted by many
painters down the ages.
Shown here is the cele¬
brated work of El Greco.
The Frick Collection, New York
discouragement. Only a few will be mentioned here.
They in no way supplant the unabridged integral texts
required by scholars, but they might often serve to reassure
a hesitant public.
For example, in the case of exceptionally long works,
such as the Indian epics and the great Chinese,noveis,
selected extracts could profitably offer the most character¬
istic and most memorable passages.
Then there are the works really difficult of access, such
as the mystic poems of Persia or the ceremonial "No"
theatre of Japan, fruits of an intricate refinement and
complex convention, or the enigmatic tragedy of Sev¬
enteenth century France; typical extracts from these,
presented with commentaries that situate the work in its
historic and cultural context, ought to be able to commun¬
icate the aesthetic, philosophical or moral Inspiration
behind writing which at first sight says nothing to or
frightens off the uninitiated reader.
Similarly, a style which flourished at a given moment
and in a particular civilization should be capable of
illustration in a relatively small compass by skilful antho¬
logies, filling in the outlines of its evolution, summarizing
the most meaningful contribution of a school, and assem¬
bling the best examples of a significant style.
Lastly, around the figures of great men founders of
religions or of empires, great monarchs, Inspired reformers,
bold explorers it should be possible to gather a body of
anecdotes drawn from traditional records, which could
instruct and explain at the same time as entertaining.
Certainly the problem here is delicate: a question or
beguiling without betraying, of pleasing without im¬
poverishing the original.
The root causes of the present situation are abiding.
Indeed inherent in the nature of things. The task of
redressing them is immense, demanding continuous
extension and continuous perfecting. The challenge, for
the moment, is to contrive to vary the menu and maintain
the appetite of a public already disposed to partake of
the feast. One could wager that the scarcely-tapped
resources of world literature will be exhausted more
rapidly than the curiosity of enthusiasts of masterpieces
silted over by the centuries or introduced from the anti¬
podes. But as a start,. they have to be translated.
The Ideal Universal Museum requires only wall-space:
photography can do the rest. But the Ideal Universal
Library needs more than shelves and even printing- 5
presses. It demands Interpreters; In other words, a
human labour of learning and of love.
