STANISLAVSKY
Revolutionary of
the modern theatre
by Grigori Kristi
This year is the centenary of the birth of
Constantin Stanislavsky, Russian actor,
director and theatrical producer, whose
ideas on the teaching and practice of
dramatic art have revolutionized the dev¬
elopment of world theatre. On the follow¬
ing pages " The Unesco Courier "
presents some aspects of the life and
work of this great man of the theatre.
Official Soviet photos
FROM HIS SEARCH for a way to
help actors master their art, Stanis¬
lavsky (left) evolved a system whose
influence has spread from the theatre
to the world of the cinema. One
of Stanislavsky's innovations was the
theatre studio where students and
professional actors too could experi¬
ment, improvise and work out their
art together. America, in particular,
adopted his studio idea and from
the American theatre studios a
whole modern tradition has sprung,
known in America as "The Method."
The now well-known Actors' Studio
in New York is associated with the
names of many talented actors and
actresses of stage and screen, and
these include Géraldine Page, Paul
Newman, Joanne Woodward and
Marlon Brando. Marlon Brando is seen
above in the film "On the Waterfront,"
produced by Elia Kazan, a former
co-director of the Actors' Studio.
Nearly half a century ago, Stanis¬
lavsky wrote : "Modern cinemato¬
graphy actors will teach real actors
how to live. Everything is exposed on
the screen and anything stereotyped
is recorded forever. Here you are
able to see more clearly the difference
between the old and the new art."
!
|
*
-;

cONSTANTIN Stanislavsky Is one of the great
_>names In world theatre. The 75 years of his
life were marked by events which brought great changes in
world history. Stanislavsky was born in Moscow in 1863,
soon after the abolition of serfdom in Russia; he lived
through the First World War and the Russian revolution,
and he died in 1938, on the eve of another world war.
Enormous changes took place during these 75 years.
Stanislavsky's art, which echoed the needs of the times,
also underwent constant changes. Its development is
marked by continuous research, fresh attempts and new
achievements.
Constantin Alexeyev (he later adopted the pseudonym of
Stanislavsky), came from a well-to-do family of the
Moscow bourgeoisie, which from the second half of the
19th century played an increasingly important part in the
cultural and social life of Russia. Among members of this
cultivated middle-class, close to his family, were Pavel
Tretiakov, founder of the Museum of Art, Savva Mamon-
tov, patron of the arts and creator of a private opera,
Sabachnikov, the publisher, and Morozov, an industrialist
who gave considerable help towards the building of the
Art Theatre in Moscow.
From the age of 14, young Stanislavsky played on a
family stage. The theatre was a tradition in his large
family and the education he received stimulated his inte¬
rest in the stage. His mother was the daughter of a
French actress, Marie Varley, and his two sisters and
two brothers all later became actors or producers.
In 1888, Stanislavsky became director of a troupe in
Moscow, the "Society of Patrons of Art and Literature."
He played many roles, from vaudeville characters to parts
in the tragedies of Shakespeare and Schiller.
It was at this time that he first tried his hand as a
stage producer and at once attracted the interest of artis¬
tic circles in Moscow. Stanislavsky's productions were
Columbia Pictures - Cahiers du Cinóma
startling for their realism and the new ideas he expressed.
He used novel production methods and had an entirely
new concept of the role of the actor. From the start, he
declared war on old theatrical conventions and outmoded
aesthetic Judgements. To a French critic who accused
him of violating tradition In his production of "Othello,"
Stanislavsky wrote: "Believe me, the work of our gene¬
ration consists in doing away with outdated traditions and
routine. To save art, we must give free rein to imagina¬
tion and creativeness."
In 1898, Stanislavsky, together with the critic and play¬
wright Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko, founded the
since famous Moscow Art Theatre. The first play produced
by the Theatre was Alexis Tolstoy's historical tragedy
"Czar Fedor Yoannovlch," but Its real première was the
production of the "Seagull" by Chekhov. In Chekhov, and
later in Gorky, Stanislavsky and Nemirovich-Danchenko
found authors whose work reflected the problems of the
time. Their plays contributed to the rapid growth of the
Art Theatre and determined the course of its development.
To-day, the "Seagull" has become the emblem of the
theatre, which was later named after Gorky.
Stanislavsky was bound to Chekhov by literary and
artistic interests which later developed Into a warm per¬
sonal friendship. Chekhov's plays were fresh and original;
they called for a new treatment. With them was born the
art of stage-craft in Its modern sense, the idea of the play
seen as a whole.
Stanislavsky's Interpretations of Chekhov's and Gorky's
characters have become classics. But the Art Theatre was
also famous for its production of works by contemporary
playwrights from other countries: Hauptmann, Ibsen,
Maeterlinck and others. Almost every new production,
every new role, was in the nature of a discovery. In his 13
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

STANISLAVSKY (Cont'd)
youth, Stanislavsky tried to create a stage impression
close to naturalism, and later he was drawn to symbolism.
But with time he turned to simpler and more expressive
forms, which, he maintained, were best fitted to render on
the stage all the complexities of the human spirit.
After the setting up of the Soviet regime, Stanislavsky
continued his efforts on behalf of realism. The Revo¬
lution had opened the doors of the theatre to a new pro¬
letarian spectator who, as Stanislawsky said, needed
plays "with real human feelings expressed in a simple
and understandable, yet strong and convincing form."...
"In art, as in his food," said Stanislavsky, "he is not
accustomed to piquant delicacies that stimulate appetite."
He did not confine himself to modern plays, but
extended his repertoire to include Russian and foreign
classics, producing works by Ostrovsky, Gogol, Pushkin,
Shakespeare, Moliere, and Beaumarchais.
Nor did his reforms affect only the dramatic stage. In
1922, in his apartment on Leontievsky street, he produced
Tchaikovsky's opera "Eugene Onegin" in an entirely new
setting which broke with all traditional ideas regarding
the lyric theatre. From then on he spent his time between
opera and drama.
On the basis of his own experience on the stage, Stan¬
islavsky tried to define the principles of acting. For
young actors, to whom everything seemed simple and
easy, he listed the qualities necessary for a stage career.
An actor, he said, must be able to observe; he must be
sensitive; have a good memory, fantasy and Imagination
so as to bring his part to life; he must have taste, intelli¬
gence, a sense of rhythm and timing; he must be musical,
sincere, spontaneous, ingenious and know how to control
his emotions; he must be prepared "to follow a hard and
painful path, covered with brambles and thorns, spurning
fame and devoting himself entirely to his craft."
I any years of research, trial and error, led to
the formulation of Stanislavsky's "system"
which subsequently became famous. This "system" is a
collection of methods designed to set the actor on the
right path by encouraging him to make a more or less
"systematic" study of the dual instrument he possesses,
his mind and his body, and of the psycho-physical tech¬
niques of dramatic art which spring from them.
Stanislavsky continually repeated that no technique,
however perfect, could bestow genius. "The theatre," he
wrote, "is the most important of all the chairs of learning,
more Important even, through its influence, than books
and the press... The task I have set myself, to the limit
of my ability, consists in showing to the rising generation
that the actor Is the apostle of beauty and of truth."
But this task was no simple one. He was obliged to
make a stand against dilettantism and stale custom,
against a naturalism that was barren and a formalism
without spirit.
Stanislavsky trained several generations of producers,
of whom two of the best known in Russia are Meyerhold
and Vakhtangov. Many actors and opera singers were
also his pupils or his disciples. A few, like Mikhail Chek¬
hov, Sanin and Boleslavsky continued his teaching In
other European countries and In the United States. Stan¬
islavsky had bonds of friendship with many leading
figures of the Western theatre Gordon Craig, Max Rein¬
hardt, André Antoine, Jacques Copeau who visited Russia
or whom he met while on tour with the Art Theatre com¬
pany abroad.
Today the Influence of this Russian stage producer
continues to make a profound and ever-widening impact
on the development of the theatre in all parts of the
world. Well-known actor-producers like Jean Vilar, of
France, and Eduardo de Filippo, of Italy, have acknow¬
ledged the debt they owe to Stanislavsky and so have
other leading men of the theatre in Great Britain, the
United States, Japan, China, Czechoslovakia, Poland and
many newly- independent countries.
Official Soviet photos
GRIGORI vladimirovich KRISTI is a Soviet producer who teaches
in the school of the Moscow Art Theatre Studio. He was a friend
4 and pupil of Stanislavsky, under whose direction he made his
debuts as an opera producer and as a teacher in the studio of
dramatic art created by Stanislavsky in 1935.
FAMILY TRADITION. Stanislavsky made his
first stage appearance at the age of three in the miniature
theatre at his family's country house in Lioubimovka,
near Moscow (right). By the time he was 14 he was
appearing regularly in plays and entertainments produc¬
ed by his family who had a deep and traditional
interest in the theatre. Stanislavsky's mother was the
daughter of a French actress, Marie Varley, and his
two sisters and two brothers all eventually became
actors or producers. Above, in 1881 at the age of 18,
Stanislavsky plays the part of Megrio in an amateur
dramatic group production of "A Woman's Secret."
The following year he produced his first play.
