330 MILLION BR
A fully-equipped language-teaching laboratory complete with separate booths, tape-
recorders and playback machines is now used at the University of Dakar in Senegal.
Paul Almasy. Paus

AINS FOR A NEW ERA
by René Maheu
Director-General of Unesco
When looked at from the standpoint of educa¬
tion the major factor underlying underdeve¬
lopment is the absence, for much of a given population,
of the minimum of schooling required to learn those
basic signs and characters which are the key to the Intel¬
lectual and technical creations of our civilization. This
major factor, in short, is illiteracy.
There are today an estimated 700 million adults or
more than two-fifths of the world's total populationwho
are illiterate (the word adult here being taken to mean
persons 15 years of age or older). And it is in the less
developed regions that most of these adult illiterates
live.
As for children of primary school age (5 to 15 years),
47 per cent did not attend school during 1960 in the
countries of Latin America, Africa, the Middle East and
Asia. If we add to this figure those children who are
going to school now but who will drop out before they
master reading and writing and hence will grow up
Illiterate, we can say that there are today 150 million
future illiterates in these countries and that there will
be an additional 20 to 25 million illiterates added to the
world's adult population in the next 6 or 7 years.
It is in the light of this general context of educational
under-development that the special problem of training
scientific and technical personnel in the less developed
regions must be viewed.
First of all let me emphasize what a frightful loss of
mindpower these hundreds of millions of illiterates repre¬
sent for technological progress. Who can say how many
scientists, engineers and technicians potentially existed
among all these forsaken adults as well as the children
consigned from birth to the shadows of ignorance.
There is certainly no need for me to make the point
that an illiterate person never ceases to be a human
being endowed with his own natural dignity and ability.
I have personally known individuals who, despite the
fact that they were illiterate, possessed unusual intelli¬
gence, keen judgement and a high standard of culture.
The realm of signs and characters does not encompass
the whole gamut of human experience. Nevertheless,
illiteracy by the very fact that it makes science and
technology a closed book makes active participation in
modern civilization impossible. The millions of illiterates
I have referred to submit to history, they do not make it.
The question then Is raisedwhy isn't a big
International campaign started to help these
countries to get rid of this blight, since to allow it to
continue is an absurdity in terms of economic efficiency
as much as it is a disgrace on the moral conscience of the
world. Unesco considers that the political, economic and
technical conditions are at the present time such as to
make a campaign of this kind possible, if we so desire it.
At the end of last year, after a series of consultations
with many experts on the question, I submitted a plan
to the Unesco General Conference for making some
300 million adults between the ages of 15 and 50 literate
within 10 years. The plan applied to illiterates living In
Africa, Asia and Latin America.
The real question is, are we willing to undertake such
a job? We cannot blink the fact that it will be a very
expensive operation. Unesco has calculated that It will
cost about 1,900 million dollars for the ten years, four-
fifths of which will have to come from national budgets.
But Is it not much more expensive to allow 330 million
brains to go to waste? And are there not other types
of expenditure which are also very costly but which our
planet could well afford to do without?
A country with a high percentage of Illiterates does
not only suffer an Intrinsic loss in terms of wasted man
and mindpower; the progress of the educated segment
of the population is equally slowed down and made more
difficult. It Is a well-established fact that the degree
of education of the adult population as a whole has
a direct bearing on the lasting effects of the education
given to children In school.
We can no longer afford to have, as we unfortnately
do in many of the developing countries, an enormous
gulf separating one group or generation from another,
that is, those who have had a full, modern education
from those who are illiterate. Such an unhealthy state
of affairs disrupts the equilibrium and unity of a country
and completely defeats any effort to create a nation-wide
positive attitude toward scientific thinking and technology
without which there can be no real development.
n educational system Is or purports to be an
^organic whole, both intellectually and admi¬
nistratively, the different parts of which at their various
levels are mutually dependent and Intrinsically related.
Hence It is neither desirable nor possible to plan the
Improvement or expansion of one particular stage
of education in Isolation from all the others. Obviously
this does not mean that emphasis and resources must be
equally divided throughout the entire school system.
Priorities do exist, depending on the circumstances and
situation of a country, and these of course make for
differences. But It does mean that no serious reform
should be contemplated or carried out even in a priority
area of the school programme except within the frame¬
work of an overall reform of the educational system as
a whole.
In my oplntion there is one principle which Is basic
to the organic unity of education and Its administration,
namely, that the general always conditions and prepares
the specialized. In the context of our discussion this
means that specialized technical training always presup¬
poses a general technical education Just as this in turn
implies a grounding in general science. And general
science too must itself be viewed as an integral part of
general education.
To turn now to the -question of educational planning
as a national policy, I am convinced that such planning
is not only justified but absolutely Indispensable. Three
considerations lead me to make this statement.
In the first place educational planning follows logically
from the idea I have just referred to, namely, the organic
unity of education. For obviously If students are to
advance rationally from one stage of education to another
within a total framework there must be some kind of
plan.
Secondly, planning carries with it the very great advan-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
25

BRAINS FOR A NEW ERA (Cont'd)
Education's new role in a modern society
tage of not neglecting the importance of time as a factor
in education, first determining the time available and then
putting it to the best advantage. Educational planning,
therefore, has a special added function for the developing
countries, that of providing a much-needed standard or
yardstick to gauge the future.
In these countries, where the past offered little oppor¬
tunity for advancement, where the present is fraught
with impatience and the future charged with emotion,
educational planning serves as a measure of caution
since the practical necessity of making the best use of
available resources Is usually out of all proportion to
actual needs. But it also commends itself, perhaps even
to a greater extent, as an invaluable mental exercise to
prepare the way for the building of a sound future. It
serves as a reminder to the developing countries that
anything at all cannot happen at any time whatever
and that even acceleration must obey the rule of rhythm
and order.
Thirdly, educational planning Is now being increasingly
recognized as an Integral part of the planning of eco¬
nomic and social development as a whole; an essential
part since it is basic to all the others and so broad in
scope, but nonetheless only a part, which should be
perceived as such. When it is so integrated, educational
planning is of the greatest value in helping a country
speed up its development since it becomes possible to
gear the educational system to the specific needs and
potentialities of the nation. This is especially true for
the training of scientific and technical personnel for
they are the ones who will be most directly involved in
the actual development process.
One of the most striking and encouraging aspects of
the change taking place in the world's educational
thinking in recent years has been the growing recog¬
nition of precisely this threefold need for educational
planning.
Unesco Is proud of the part it has played here and
will intensify its activities in this priority area of Its
programme. This year, for Instance, Unesco is setting
up an international institute with the specific purpose
of training top-level specialists and promoting research
in educational planning; and its regional centres now in
operation" or about to start functioning, mostly in con¬
junction with the planning institutes of the U.N. Regional
Economic Commissions, have the same purpose. I am
certain that these institutions will all play a tremendous
role in advancing the theory and practice of educational
planning which is still in its infancy, and will be able
to help the member countries of Unesco' in setting up
their own national centres and in training their own
leaders in this field.
. knowledge of what the organic unity of the
»education system implies together with metho¬
dical planning these then are the frames of reference
and the basic requisites for any realistic approach to the
special problems facing the less developed countries in
the training of scientific and technical personnel.
Broadly speaking, there are three areas of major diffi¬
culty education, university training and
methods of science teaching.
Probably the greatest need for expansion and impro¬
vement lies in the field of technical and vocational
education, particularly at the secondary school level
since this is certainly the part of the school system of
the most immediate importance for the growth of the
26 developing countries.
Here Unesco has devoted considerable effort in recent
years to helping the developing countries in two different
ways : by working on international standards for technical
education, and by direct aid in the field. For three
full years a Unesco team of experts studied the question
of standards, and in 1962 the Unesco General Conference
approved the terms of an international Recommendation
one section of which specifically deals with standards of
scientific and technical education. The drafting of this
Recommendation was carried out in consultation with the
International Labour Office concurrently with the revision
of a similar Recommendation on vocational education by
the International Labour Organization.
I n its operation activities in the field, Unesco
has been giving its member states direct aid
in setting up or developing national schools for post-
secondary or higher technical education, thanks to large
financial contributions made by the U.N. Special Fund.
At present Unesco is the Special Fund's executive agency
for 22 projects (totalling about $24,500,000) for the estab¬
lishment of trade schools and higher institutes of tech¬
nology. This work, on what I would call the general
technology level supports and serves as a basic foundation
for that of the other bodies of the U.N. family who are
engaged in specialized technological training in specific
fields.
As for the role of universities in training senior scien¬
tific and technical personnel, the importance of which
cannot be stressed too strongly, it varies considerably
since conditions in the less developed countries are by
no means uniform.
In certain countries the problem is chiefly one of
quantity. Here the key word is shortage: a shortage of
universities, a shortage of instructors and professors, a
shortage of equipment, mainly laboratory equipment,
even a shortage at times of adequately prepared students
arising from the inadequacies of secondary education.
In other countries the problem is chiefly one of quality,
that is, lack of organization and guidance services with
the result that higher education is poorly adapted to the
needs of a modern economy and technology. Thus most
of the university students in these countries are advised
to prepare for degrees in traditional subjects; and those
who do major in science and technology often do so by
chance or for personal reasons that have little to do with
the real top-priority problems of economic and social
development in their country.
As a result, though these countries can boast eminent
scientists in no way inferior to those of the more deve¬
loped countries, such men are few in number and lack
sufficient fellow scientists and technicians to work with
them or under them and on whom they can count or who
can follow in their footsteps. In other words what is
missing is the rank and file for the teams of scientists
which are now becoming a standard feature of scientific
work and a prerequisite for optimum results.
And so, though we find a need for new universities in
one place,, for expansion in another and reform elsewhere,
everywhere the development of universities remains an
urgent, vital problem. Foreign study grants or scholarships
no matter how generously endowed or wisely planned can
never really compensate for the basic deficiencies I have
just outlined. The evil of underdevelopment must be
attacked at its very root by creating national structures
for training qualified personnel where they do not exist
and strengthening and improving them where they do.
In the present state of things in the world there is no
question but that study abroad is absolutely essential.
But if practised indiscriminately it has a serious drawback
in that it separates the fellowship holder from his native
land and environment and may eventually detach him

from his own country and its needs. In point of fact it
often happens that the student who goes abroad finds it
difficult to fit into the pattern of his home country for
psychological, social or economic reasons. He rarely uses
more than a fraction of the knowledge and techniques
acquired abroad after his return. Sometimes he simply
never returns, and so an erosion or drainlng-off process
begins with the most talented minds migrating from the
underdeveloped nations to the developed ones.
In reality training abroad is required chiefly to enable
technicians and other specialists of an advanced or even
professional level to acquire additional technological skills,
and as such serves its full purpose only as an adjunct of
the studies carried out at home within the pattern of the
nation's cultural, economic and social requirements.
If a country Is to build a sound foundation for its tech¬
nological development it is of paramount Importance that
science be taught in the schools at every level. For the
point cannot be too often made that only meagre, super¬
ficial and short-lived progress can be achieved by the
acquisition of technical skills or knowledge when the
people of a nation are almost untutored in science. The
real basis for development is a scientific civilization.
Merely importing techniques without the science which
This wide-eyed Philippines schoolgirl is one of the world's
lucky children. In countries of Latin America, Africa, the
Middle East and Asia, 47% of the children of school age
have no schools to attend. This is the measure of under¬
development in education which each year condemns
millions of children to adult ¡lliteray. How many potential
scientists, engineers and technicians are thereby lost?
Unesco - Pierre A. Pittet
r
produces and serves them will not in Itself equip the
underdeveloped countries for the full utilization of their
natural and human resources whereby they hope to
achieve their great transformation. And though the
Importing of techniques results in a number of immediate
improvements in certain domains It prolongs and rein¬
forces the state of dependency of the general economy
of these countries.
Now It can hardly be denied that, as a general rule,
there are many things wrong with science teaching In
the underdeveloped countries and that something must
be done about it as quickly as possible.
Too often there is a tendency In science classes to
overstress the Importance of knowledge as such, especially
practical knowledge, to the detriment of scientific thinking
and the scientific attitude of mind. As a result very little
of the real scientific attitude Is more than superficially
apparent In the thinking of the technical and other super¬
visory personnel who occupy subordinate and Intermediate
positions in society. In most cases the only thing learned
from science is a series of formulas and prescriptions
applied mechanically and unthinkingly.
Teaching of this sort, which puts exercise of memory
before the cultivation of the mind seems closer to tralned-
seal-learning than to genuine education. It is the very
antithesis of science which seeks In essence to achieve
the liberation of the mind as well as the mastery of
nature... In the same manner It Is the antithesis of
everything that the less-developed countries require
most in order to regain control of their own destinies.
here is much talk of the disequilibrium and
tensions brought about In these countries by
the conflict between the Imported scientific and techno¬
logical civilization and the traditional national cultures.
This certainly constitutes a problem such as arises when¬
ever a society is subjected to a process of swift change
under the impact of outside factors. But the resultant
conflict and tensions are chiefly due to the fact that
science does not appear to these countries In Its true guise,
that Is, as a civilizationIndeed the only civilization of
potential universalitybut as a kind of alien magic
imparting sudden power. And if the civilization aspect of
science is not apparent to those whose eyes are chiefly
fixed on its more practical technological consequences, it Ls
fundamentally because the heart of the matterthe .scien¬
tific spirit and its methodsis neglected In the teaching of
science.
This teaching ls particularly defective as regards the
practice of the experimental method and the understand¬
ing of its significance as a general mental discipline.
Training In the experimental method, which ls the most
effective initiation to modern civilization for both young
minds and young societies ardently desirous of progress,
must contend with many obstacles In these countries.
Some are due to local circumstances In that there is
often a distressing shortage of even the most essential
laboratory equipment for schools and universities, and
purchases and gifts are not always wisely made.
But the educational system ls responsible for other
obstacles which are no less serious for being less directly
apparent and can be overcome only by sustained effort.
In many cases, curricula are ill-conceived, textbooks and
teachers' handbooks are not suited to local conditions,
either material or psychological, and the training of
teachers leaves a very great deal to be desired, turning
to little account the substantial progress made over the
past few years In both the psychology and technology
of education. In all these spheres, Unesco Is at pains to
promote and back up the efforts of Its member states.
Everywhere the results are heartening, but like the funds
available, they are limited. Far greater resources must
be marshalled by international aid for this vital contri¬
bution to progress.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
27

TV LESSONS
FOR 1,500
COLOMBIAN
SCHOOLS
n^Tziiii'
Colombia boasts the largest TV network in all Latin America.
This year a special transmitter. Televisora Educativa, will begin
to televise a series of educational programmes to classrooms of
1,500 schools, many of them in isolated villages high up in the
Andes. More than half Colombia's population lives in rugged
mountain terrain, but TV engineers have overcome communica¬
tions problems this presents by siting transmission stations
high up on the mountain sides. Today TV programmes cover
90 % of the country. New experimental and teacher-training
telecasts are due to begin this autumn and the regular school
programmes next February. Above, announcer introduces an
educational programme which is followed (left) on studio control
panel. Right, studio teacher in "What do we know?" programme.
BRAINS FOR A NEW ERA (Cont'd)
Catching up with science's dizzy pace
28
However, it is questionable whether, even If national
efforts and foreign aid, both bilateral and international,
are stepped up considerably, the educational system, as
it ls run at present and with its existing teaching methods,
ls capable of meeting the tremendous quantitative and
qualitative needs of technological development In
our modern era of population explosion and quickened
scientific progress.
To this question, which it is the duty of educational
leaders to ponder most seriously, I for one must resolutely
answer no. I do not believe that the educational system,
with its present organization and methods, can meet the
demands of the growth of our civilization in the developed
countries, let alone those in the underdeveloped areas. It
is far too costly In terms of money and still more so in
terms of qualified personnel, and the returns are not high
enough.
Education cannot make its full and decisive contribu¬
tion to the technological revolution which must take place
in the less developed countries unless it Itself drastically
overhauls its own technology, which in many respects
is out of date.
Changes are needed both in the utilization of staff and
in the use of teaching aids.
So far as staff is concerned, we all know what a long
and costly process the training of teachers is at no matter
what level. There can be no question of economizing in
this vital field; far from it. But it is rational to keep
such qualified personnel for the most vital tasks in educa¬
tion. Experience has shown that for the performance
of other duties, assistants, with a far less advanced train¬
ing, are quite adequate. The savings made in this way
may be quite considerable.
Even the machines now being tried out for programmed
instruction, by increasing the contribution made by the
pupil's or student's own efforts, reduce proportionately the
need for personal coaching by the teacher and thus enable
him to concentrate on the truly decisive steps in educa¬
tion.
As for teaching aids, the audio-visual media for the
recording and dissemination of information that have
been created by modern technology over the past fifty
years and ' are constantly being perfected open up for
school and university education as well as for the out-
of-school education of young people and adults tremen¬
dous possibilities as yet insufficiently explored and only
half-heartedly exploited. It Is undoubtedly at this point
that the all too belated technological revolution of modern
education should be carried through, particularly in those
fields relating to scientific and technical training.
Nowhere is the wholesale, systematic use of audio¬
visual media more natural and surer of having a strong
psychological impact than in those countries where,
owing to the high proportion of illiterates, the image and
the spoken word are the traditional media for the acquisi¬
tion, preservation and appreciation of knowledge. The
cinema, radio and television not to overlook such Valu¬
able teaching aids as filmstrips and the gramophone
have demonstrated over and over, again how potent they
are as means of conveying ideas, imparting knowledge, and
expressing emotions and passions, too. Educators must
lose no further time in discovering what the professional
entertainers and political propagandists have already
found out in other fields, the vital part these media can
play in the progress of education in the developing
countries.
After considering the question of the training of scienti¬
fic and technical personnel against the general back¬
ground of educational underdevelopment, on the one hand,
and of the educational system on the other, one must also

view it in the light of the demands of science Itself and
of its offshoot technology.
The inexorable consequence of the quickened pace of
progress in knowledge, is the speedwhich increases with
each higher* degree of specialization with which the
content of scientific education and technical training
becomes' unusable. I mean that the knowledge and prac¬
tices acquired through this education and training are
being ever more rapidly outstripped by the constant
advance of science and technology and must accordingly
be revised and renewed. We have taken quite a long time
to realize this, but in one generation the phenomenon has
assumed such proportions that by now it has revolution¬
ized the position of scientific and technical education.
The obligation to keep scientific and technical know¬
ledge constantly up to date affects teachers and taught
alike. Teachers, particularly those at the university level
or those concerned with specialized technology, must
increasingly be prepared to attend intensive training and
refresher courses. The same applies, with even greater
force to those actually engaged in technical work. As
for the general educated public which merely aspires to
understanding the scientific factors underlying modern
civilization, and accordingly to keeping in a position to
play an active part in the life of this civilization, a veri¬
table permanent education must now be planned and
organized for it. In neither case can scientific and tech¬
nical education stop short at the end of their formal
studies.
Does this mean that these studies should be extended
and diversified so as to cover all the ever-growing expanse
of science itself? Not at all. This would be an utterly
exhausting and fruitless endeavour for schools and uni¬
versities, which are already showing all too many
symptoms of hypertrophy and take up too much time and
energy. No, they must deliberately confine themselves to
providing a relatively general training, leaving more spe¬
cialized knowledge to be acquired later in direct contact
with practical- life.
In my opinion it is not in schools or universities (though
both can continue to promote educational activities
beyond their scope) that this renewal or extension of
scientific education and technical training must be
effected. It must take place wherever the main part of
an adult's life and energies are spent at a place of work
and during leisure hours.
Places of work are ideal centres for specialized scientific
and technical education on a continuing basis. The major
undertakings are becoming increasingly aware of this
educational responsibility which they bear and which has
Incomparably wider implications than the immediate
concern of improving production and fostering harmonious
relations between employers and workers. This Ls a task
on a scale commensurate with modern society as a whole.
The fact Is that the major industrial and commercial
concerns are bound to assume more and more the cha¬
racter of specialized training establishments supplement¬
ing the work of schools and universities. The university,
far from ignoring or vying with them, is In duty bound
to keep In very close touch with them in order to stimulate
and guide them, for they are its natural extension.
As for the considerable amount of leisure made available
by industrialization. It ls being increasingly taken over or
at least controlled by the mass communication media.
It ls already clear that it ls from these media that the
vast majority of adults and even a proportion of those at
school and university derive the bulk of what I would
term their scientific and technical culture.
While the diversity of situations which distinguish the
less-developed countries from the industrialized ones call
for different approaches to the problems of development,
there are, however, no ways and means too novel or
modern for the less developed countries in applying the
solutions adopted for those problems. Quite the contrary.
And this is why the training of scientific and technical
personnel is so urgent a necessity for them. For on this
personnel depends whether or not they are to play a real
part on the contemporary scene.
29
