wo movements dominate the life of our age.
One of these Is the growth of knowledge.
Vast conceptual changes, new terms for the understanding
and definition of nature, have gone hand in hand with
spectacular technological results. Man is now clothed
with a power which he never previously held to generate
and control energy; to fructify land; to conserve and
utilize water; to combat disease; and to draw mankind
together in close and constant accessibility.
Together with the growth of knowledge we have
celebrated the growth of freedom. The movement
of scientific progress has been accompanied by an intense
movement of national liberation. More than fifty states,
most of them in Africa, have added their flags to the
international family within the past two decades.
Fifteen years ago a quarter of the world's population
lived in colonies and dependent territories under the rule
of Imperial powers. Today the emancipation of Asia is
almost complete. In Africa the family of Independent
states has grown from three to thirty-three. All but a
few of the 230 million Africans have achieved their sover¬
eignty or are negotiating for Its early attainment.
Multitudes are newly embarked on the adventure of
freedom with its pitfalls and hazards but also with its
deep, enduring satisfactions.
jQ If constitutional freedom could itself guarantee welfare
and equality we should now be celebrating mankind's
golden age. But in the awakening continents political
freedom has not been attended by a parallel liberation
of peoples from their social and economic Ills. Behind the
new emblems of sovereignty millions continue to languish
in squalor, illiteracy and disease. Men awaken to learn
that they may be free in every constitutional sense and
yet lose the essence of their freedom in the throes of
famine and want. As the political inequality between
nations passes away, a new inequality comes to the fore.
It is the inequality between those who inherit the new
abundance and those who can only look in upon it from
outside.
N ow the United Nations conference on the
of science and technology for the
benefit of the less developed countries has sharply
revealed the extent of the gulf separating those two
worlds. In the advanced countries the average per capita
income varies between $900 In Europe and $2,500 in North
America. In most countries of Asia and Africa it is $50
to $100. In advanced western countries the average life
expectancy has reached 68 to 71. In the undeveloped
areas it stands between 29 and 39.
In the west industrialization goes forward with swift
momentum. In most of the new states it is Impeded by
the lack of basic technical skills, of power and transport,
and of the social and economic Infra-structure necessary

for a technological society. Natural resources are abun¬
dant but not developed. The lack of momentum In the
educational movement prevents a wider acquisition of
technical skills. Debilitating diseases continue to enfeeble
the people and set a limit to production. At the same
time the expansion of welfare in the advanced countries
is swift and headlong. And the gap is becoming wider,
with the science and technology of the advanced coun¬
tries increasing it dynamically year by year. Meanwhile
the pressure of population on resources grows more
intense.
The disparities in achievement between the advanced
and the developing states do not arise from any inherent
inequalities in moral and intellectual capacity. Nothing
has been achieved by Europe and America of which Africa
and Asia are intrinsically incapable. Indeed, If a con¬
ference similar to this had been convened some centuries
ago, the east would have been defined as the advanced
world, the west as the backward region. The truth is
that since the scientific revolution began, one part of
humanity has been cut off from contact with processes
of thought and action which have endowed another part
of humanity with the elements of its power.
It might seem that all we need to do is to "export"
science and technology from countries in which it is
abundant to countries in which it is scarce. Such an
easy formulation would distort the truth. Science is a
plant which can only grow in certain conditions of social
climate and economic soil. It cannot be transferred fully
grown. Science is not a monopoly of any social system.
It has flourished both in capitalist and In socialist socie¬
ties. It has prospered In big states, but some of Its most
eminent representatives and institutions have arisen in
small communities. Nevertheless, it is a tree that will
only grow In a society which possesses a vision of dev¬
elopment, which allows freedom for the creative Imagina¬
tion, and In which education, the pursuit of scientific truth
and the penetration of the spectacle of nature are held
In profound respect.
Every state, however poor and small, can train
enough of its citizens to ensure its own entry
Into the domain of scientific thought and action. Indeed,
the prolonged exclusion of any state from that world Is
compatible neither with Its national dignity nor with Its
economic and social progress. But the narrowing of the
gap between advanced and developing states requires
international action going far beyond scientific advice
and technical training.
There must be a vast Increase in the flow of capital
available for developing states. Some of us have Joined
in calling attention to the improbability of such an
Increase so long as 150 billion dollars and untold eilorts
by scientists and technicians are spent annually on the
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
11

FREEDOM WITH KNOWLEDGE (Cont'd)
Standing on a new threshold
arms race. Even If our hopes in this direction are not
fulfilled, something can be achieved by a more logical
system of human priorities In the world's scientific effort.
How is It possible to Justify the expenditure of tens of
billions of dollars In prestige projects in outer space, when
there is hunger, disease and illiteracy on this planet
where the human condition stands to be determined for
good or ill? Is it our business to invade the moon or to
save the earth for our common humanity?
The advanced states and the international agencies
should regard this problem as having a higher priority
than it has hitherto enjoyed. If we cannot change the
relationship between advanced and backward regions
within two decades, the chances of a peaceful and ordered
human society may be forever lost. By 2000 a world
populated by 6,280 million people will not be able to endure
the Inequalities which now exist between states. The
problem which has engaged the attention of the UNCSAT
Conference should be solemnly considered by the heads of
all governments interested in international development.
The problem is not less urgent than those on which other
"summit conferences" have been held.
Nothing of value can be achieved without the Initiative
of the governments of developing states. These govern¬
ments must be given a deepened confidence in the modern
scientific movement as one of their sources of their pro¬
gress. The course open to them is clear: Draw up a
survey of resources; formulate a ten-year development
plan; give the most urgent priority to human resources;
establish an indigenous science through the training of a
scientific elite: make maximal use of the U.N. Specialized
Agencies, of bilateral agreements, and of the specialized
assistance which is so patently available to governments
seeking accelerated development.
WHO
12

Largest advanced training centre for Israel's scientists is the Weizmann Institute at Rehovoth
founded nearly 30 years ago. Two hundred scientists work here in nuclear physics, experimental
biology, electronics, plant genetics and other subjects. Above, in the special cold room (up to
-15 degrees C.) of the bio-chemical department research workers wear arctic clothes.
Opposite, woman scientist uses an induction heater for research on iron magnetism.
Í5 Poul AlmdSy, P.iMS
Let us hope and believe that the leaders of new nations
will approach the problems of development and technical
progress with the same ardour and perseverance which
they have hitherto devoted to the struggle for national
liberation.
While I advocate a full use of international machinery,
I do not believe that the United Nations should claim a
monopoly of initiative and responsibility. The communion
between the world of science and the world of national
liberation should be sustained at every level. Individual
states and scientific institutions should do what they can
to stimulate the reciprocal flow of experience and know¬
ledge. Bilateral programmes sometimes have an intimacy
and speed which large international agencies cannot
always achieve.
Many of the new states have territories and populations
too small to constitute viable units of development.
Irrigation projects, universities and research institutes
except in such unusual conditions as those which affect
my own country, Israel require a broad demographic and
territorial basis. There is a strong case for regional
organization of planning and research, especially in Africa.
It is not impossible to combine individual sovereignty with
collective development.
FUTURE conferences held by the United Nations
or in member states should be of more limited
scope and should address themselves to clearly defined
fields. Believing that soil and water are still the main
source of life for millions in the awakening continents,
Israel proposes to hold a conference 'In 1963, bringing
experts on agricultural planning and agrarian education
together with ministers and officials of developing states
concerned with these problems. I believe that similar
specialized conferences could usefully consider problems
of disease control, technical and scientific education, the
use of new energies, Initial Industrialization and planning
and survey techniques. The dialogue held here must be
maintained and even intensified, but on an Increasingly
functional basis.
IIf we understand the U.N. Conference In its
special context of history, we have no reason
to be disappointed. There has never been such a
concentration of scientific knowledge and responsibility
in the service of humanity's submerged millions those
who have secured the outward form of liberty and now
seek its inner content. There is evidence that the world's
scientific conscience Is being galvanized by the pathos
and opportunity of the less developed regions. This is
the first generation of mankind In which the elimination
of poverty and disease has become objectively possible.
Science Is the father of this possibility. Scientists do not
wish to retreat into their laboratories in an cifort to
escape the challenge of human anguish and human hope.
They have the will and the capacity to transform the
human situation.
If we can only fertilize their will and organize their
capacity we may yet inaugurate one of the Great Ages
of History.
Abba Eban has been president of the Weizmann Institute
of Science since 1958. He was Israel's representative to
the United Nations between 1948 and 1959.
13
