ROUSSEAU, FATHER
by Claude Lévi-Strauss
The Invitation you have extended to an anthro¬
pologist to take part in this commemorative
occasion offers an opportunity to a young science to pay
homage to the genius of a man who, it might well seem,
had been fully honoured in every possible facet of his
life work which included such fields as literature, poetry,
philosophy, history, ethics, political science, education,
linguistics, music and botany to mention only a few.
In addition to this, though, Rousseau was more than
just a keen and subtle observer of peasant life, an im¬
passioned reader of books on foreign travel, a skilfull and
accomplished investigator of exotic customs and beliefs.
Without fear of contradiction it can be stated that a full
century before anthropology was actually born he con¬
ceived, desired and foretold it, placing it directly in the
ranks of the natural and human sciences then in
existence. He even guessed correctly the practical way
in which it would later begin to function, namely, by
individual or collective patronage.
This prophetic conception, which he formulated both
as a plea and as a programme of action, appears in a
long footnote to the Discourse on the Origin of Inequa¬
lity. "I have difficulty in comprehending," Rousseau
wrote, "why in an age that prides itself on learning, two
men cannot be found, one of whom would sacrifice
twenty thousand crowns of his wealth and the other ten
years of his life, to make a historic journey round the
world, studying not only the inevitable stones and plants,
but for once men and customs."
And a little further on he exclaims: "The whole of the
world is a weave of nations of which we know only the
names. And we presume to judge mankind! Imagine
a Montesquieu, a Buffon, a Diderot, a d'Alembert, a
Condillac, or men of that stamp, travelling to instruct
their fellow-countrymen, observing and describing as
only they know how, Turkey, Egypt, Barbary, the empire
of Morocco, Guinea, the land of the Kaffirs, the interior
of Africa and its eastern coast, the Malabars, the Mogul,
the banks of the Ganges, the kingdoms of Siam, Pegu
and Ava, China, Tartary, and above all Japan; and in
the other hemisphere, Mexico, Peru, Chile, the Magellan
lands, not forgetting the Patagonias real or imaginary,
Tucuman, Paraguay, and if possible Brazil, the Caribbean,
Florida and all the savage lands. Such a journey would
be of more importance than all others and would have
to be made with the greatest of care. Imagine that
these new Hercules, on their return from those unfor¬
gettable travels, -were to write at their leisure a natural,
moral and political history of what they had seen, then
we would see for ourselves a new world arise from their
pens, and we would learn to know our own..." (Discourse
on the Origin of Inequality, note 10.)
Is this not the very subject matter as well as the work¬
ing method of modern anthropology? And are not the
10

OF ANTHROPOLOGY
illustrious names cited by Rousseau the same ones that
present-day anthropologists still revere and seek to emu¬
late in the firm conviction that only by following their
example will their science continue to deserve the
respect so long denied it?
But Rousseau did not just foresee anthropology, he
actually founded it. Firstly, he did so in practice by
writing the Discourse on the Origin and Foundations of
Inequality Among Men which posed the question of the
relationship between nature and culture, and is perhaps
the first treatise produced on general anthropology.
Secondly, he founded the science in theory by setting
down with remarkable clarity and precision the aims of
the anthropologist as distinguished from those of the
moralist and the historian:
"When one wishes to study men, one must look close
at hand; but to study man, one must learn to look into
the distance; one must first observe the differences in
order to discern the properties." (Essay on the Origin of
Languages, Chapter VIII.)
This method of approach which Rousseau assigned to
anthropology marks the birth of the new science and
helps to clarify what at first may appear to be a double
paradox: that Rousseau could at one and the same time
advocate the study of men living in the most remote
corners of the earth, but in effect, devoted most of his
attention to the one man nearest to him, namely himself;
and that in all his writings his systematic desire for iden¬
tification with others went hand in hand with his total
refusal of identification with himself.
Now every anthropologist at some time or other during
his life work must resolve these same two seeming contra¬
dictions which in reality are no more than the two inter¬
changeable sides of one coin.
All anthropologists owe a special debt to Rousseau: for
he not only traced the precise course of their new science
in the scheme of man's knowledge, but by his work and
the character and temperament it displayed, by the in¬
tensity of his feeling, his nature and personality, he
provided anthropologists with the fraternal solace of an
image in which they recognize their own image and are
thus led to a deeper understanding of themselves not
in the abstract sense of pure intellectual thought but as
the Involuntary agents of the profound transformation he
has wrought within them and which all mankind has
come to find in the person of Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
Each time that the anthropologist goes out into the field
he plunges into a world where everything around him is
strange and often hostile. He finds himself alone with
nothing but his own person, his subjective self, to help
him survive and carry on his work. Physically and
mentally wracked as he is by fatigue, hunger and
hardship, by the "disruption of his normal habits, and by
the sudden revelation of prejudices which he had
never suspected to exist, his self reveals itself in these
unfamiliar surroundings as it really is battered and
buffeted by all the shocks and impacts of his personal life,
which not only affected his choice of a career but would
thereafter deeply mark its entire course.
I
'NOBLE
SAVAGES' OF
THE FRIENDLY
ISLES
Rousseau's idea of the "noble
savage" uncorrupted by civilization
caught the imagination of 1 8th-
century Europe and was often
distorted Into a fairy-tale image,
both in people's minds and in the
paintings and engravings of the
period. Left, the artist shows
Captain Cook landing at Middel-
burgh in 1778, one of the Friendly
Islands east of Australia, and depicts
the islanders dressed in the flowing
robes of ancient Greece or Rome.
Bibliothèque Nationale
N the work of anthropology, therefore, the
» observer uses himself as his own instrument of
observation. As a result, he must learn to know himself,
to look at himself objectively and at a distance as if he
were another person. And so the anthropologist turns to
this other person within him, which is different from his
self, in order to arrive at an evaluation. And this -then
becomes an integral part of all the observations he carries
out in the field on groups and individuals and the other
within them. The principle of "confessions," written or
unacknowledged, is thus basic to the work of every
anthropologist.
But if Rousseau's experience helps us to see that of
anthropology in a clearer light, it is because
Rousseau's temperament, his personal history and cir¬
cumstances spontaneously placed him in a situation
which is precisely that of the anthropologist. And like
the anthropologist, Rousseau did not fail to note at once
the consequences that this situation had on him per¬
sonally:
"So there they are," -he wrote of his contemporaries,
"foreign, unknown, nothing to me, since they wished it
so! But I, detached as I am from them and from all else,
what am I? That is what it remains for me to discover."
(First Promenade)
And the anthropologist contemplating for the first time
the savages he has chosen to study might indeed almost
echo Rousseau's words and exclaim: "So there they are,
foreign, unknown, nothing to me, since I myself wished
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
11

FATHER OF ANTHROPOLOGY (Cont'd)
The key question: 'what am I?'
it so! But I, detached as I am from them and from all
else, what am I? That is what / must first discover."
For in order to rediscover one's own image as reflected
in others, which is anthropology's single purpose in study¬
ing man, one should first reject one's image of oneself.
It is to Rousseau that we owe the discovery of this pro¬
found principle and the only one on which the sciences
of man could be founded. But it remained out of reach
and grasp and incomprehensible so long as the accepted
philosophy was based on Descarte's doctrine of the Cogito
(Cogito ergo sum) and was fettered to the alleged logical
proof of the ego upon which the edifice of physics was
constructed though only by renouncing that of sociology
and even biology.
Descartes believed that he could pass directly from the
interiority of man to the external world, overlooking that
between these two extremes there existed societies and
civilizations, that Is, worlds made up of men.
Rousseau speaks eloquently of himself in the third
person as "he" (sometimes even splitting this "he" into
two distinct parts as in the Dialogues) heralding the
famous formula "The me is another" (the anthro¬
pologist does the same thing before proceeding
to show that other people are men like him
self, or in other words, the other is me.
Rousseau thus emerges as the great
Innovator of the concept of unconditional
objectivity. In his first Promenade, he
defines his aim as "to study the modi¬
fications of my soul and their sequels,"
and then adds: "In a sense, I shall
perform upon myself the same experi¬
ments that the physicist carries out
on the atmosphere in order to dis¬
cover its daily condition."
What Rousseau reveals to us (and
though modern psychology and anthro¬
pology have now made it more familiar,
it is nevertheless a most astonishing revel¬
ation) is that there is a third person "he"
that thinks within me, and at first leads me to
doubt that It is I who am thinking.
To Montaigne's question "What do I know?" (which
started the whole discussion) Descartes thought he could
provide the reply with his "I think, therefore I am."
To this Rousseau retorted with the query "What
am I?" which cannot be answered until another, more
fundamental, question has been resolved: "Am I?" And
the answer that personal experience has given is the "he"
concept that Rousseau discovered and which he proceeded
at once to explore with consummate lucidity...
Now if we are to believe that when first human societies
appeared on earth man achieved a triple transformation,
passing from a state of nature to culture, from sentiment
to knowledge, and from an animal-like state to that of
humanity (which is precisely what Rousseau set out to
prove in his Discourse on Inequality) we can do so only
by attributing to man in his very earliest primitive condi¬
tion some vital faculty or quality which impelled him to
make this threefold transition.
And we must consequently assume that from the very
start this quality latently possessed both contradictory
elements at least as attributes if not as intrinsic parts,
so that it was at one and the same time both natural
and cultural, emotional and rational, animal and human.
We must also assume that the transition could be made
from one to the other providing this quality became
conscious in man's mind.
j- This quality, as Rousseau repeatedly stated, is pity
which issues from man's identification with another not
just a relative or a companion or a compatriot, but with
any man because he is a man; and indeed with any living
creature because it is alive.
Early man thus began by intuitively feeling himself
identical with all his fellow beings. And he never wholly
forgot this feeling even when the rise of population forced
him to migrate to new lands and to adapt himself to new
modes of living, and led him to the awakening of his own
personal identity.
But this awakening came only after he had slowly
learned to recognize the identity of others and to dis¬
tinguish the various animals according to their species,
the human state from the animal state, and his own
individuality from the individuality of other men.
The recognition that all men and animals are feeling
beings (which is what identification signifies) long ante¬
dated man's awareness of their differences: first with
regard to the characteristics common to all living
creatures, and only later to the human as opposed to non-
human attributes. It is with this bold conclusion that
Rousseau put an end to Descarte's doctrine of the Cogito.
If this interpretation is correct, if by the use of anthro¬
pology Rousseau did indeed shatter the traditions of
philosophy as radically as I believe, then it
becomes simpler to grasp the fundamental
unity which marks Rousseau's varied and
heterogeneous works, and to understand
why subjects like linguistics, music and
botany held so preponderant a sway on
his thoughts even though they at first
appear to be somewhat remote from
his main work as a writer and philo¬
sopher.
The evolution of language, as Rous¬
seau described it in his Essay on the
Origin of Languages, can be seen to
follow almost an Identical path
(though on a different plane) with that
of the evolution of man.
In the first stage no distinction was made
between the strict and figurative meaning of
things, and only progressively did the strict
meaning detach itself from the original metaphor
(in which one object is contained in several others.)
With regard to music no form of expression seems to me
better suited for refuting Descarte's theory of the oppo¬
sition between the material and the spiritual, mind and
matter. For music is an abstract system of both contrasts
as well as relationships, and when performed elicits a dual
effect: First a transfer occurs in the relationship between
the self and the "he" in us, since when I listen to music
I hear myself through it; and second, a transfer occurs in
the relationship between mind and matter since the music
actually lives within me. "A chain of relationships and
combinations," Rousseau termed this in his Confessions
(Book Twelve) but one which nature presents to us incar¬
nate in "perceptible objects" (Reveries, Seventh Prome¬
nade).
It is in these terms too that Rousseau defined his
approach to botany, thus proving that here again he
hoped to find both sensitivity and intellect united as one
because this constituted man's original estate and existed
at the moment of the first awakening of the rational
mind, only to vanish thereafter except in rare and precious
instances.
Rousseau's thought thus evolved from two principles:
identification with another, even the most removed
"other" of all others including creatures of the animal
world; and the rejection of identification with oneself,
that is to say the rejection of everything which might
make the self seem "worthy". These two attitudes are
complementary, the second actually being the springboard
I	'"

Photos Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
EQUAL RIGHTS FOR ALL
"When one gazes on human society with detachment, it appears at first to reveal nothing but the
violence of the powerful and the oppression of the weak", wrote Rousseau in his Discourse on Ine¬
quality. Rousseau's ideas helped to form The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen,
in 1789, at the outset of the French Revolution. In this allegorical engraving of the period, a mother
shows the Declaration to her son while nearby lightning strikes and shatters special privileges.
for the first: I am not "me" but the weakest and humblest
of "others". Herein lies the true originality of the
Confessions.
As for the anthropologist, are his writings anything
else but confessions? Confessions first about himself, for
as I have pointed out, the discovery of himself is the
driving force of the anthropologist's calling as well as
of his work. And then in his work, confessions about his
own society which, through the medium of the anthro¬
pologist, has chosen other civilizations and societies
deliberately among those that appear to be the weakest
and the most humble of all, so as to ascertain to what
extent it itself is "unworthy". By unworthy, I mean that
it is in no way a privileged form of society but only one
of countless "others" that have succeeded each other in
the course of millenia, and which because of their diversity
and brief moment of duration offer added proof that as
a collective entity too man must first come to know
himself as "another" before he can hope to think in
terms of himself.
The Rousseauist revolution, as precursor and genesis of
the anthropological revolution, lies in the repudiation of
compulsory identifications either of a culture with its
own culture, or of an individual member of a culture with
a public figure or rôle which that culture seeks to impose
upon him.
In both cases the culture and the individual assert
their right to free identification, and this can only
be achieved beyond man, i.e. with all living and therefore
suffering creatures; and also before the public figure or
role, i.e. with a being as such and not one already shaped
and classified.
In this way the "I" and the "he", freed from the dis¬
tinction that only philosophy has sought to encourage, are
once again united and merged. With their original unity
thus restored at last, they can forge together the us
against the them, that is, against society antagonistic and
inimical to man, and which man is the more easily pre¬
pared to reject since Rousseau, by his own example, has
taught him how to escape the intolerable contradictions of
civilized life.
For though it is true that man has been expelled by
nature and that society continues to oppress him, he can
at least reverse the extremes of the dilemma to his own
advantage by seeking the society of nature in order to
meditate on the nature of society. This, it seems to me,
is the lasting message of the Social Contract, the Letters
on Botany and the Reveries...
But it is today, for all of us who have come to experience
Rousseau's prediction to his readers of "the terror of those
unfortunates who will live after you," that his thoughts
tower to their full height and reveal the broad sweep of
their horizons..
In this world more cruel to man perhaps than it has
ever been, charged with extermination in every form,
massacre and torture not always disavowed no doubt but
comfortably dismissed by us as no longer important since
they were confined to far-off people who we were told -.o
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

FATHER OF ANTHROPOLOGY (Cont'd)
The deadly effects of an illusion
suffered for our good or at any rate in our name In this
universe of ours become smaller, more drawn together as
our members steadily augment and with no fragment of
humanity left safe from insidious attack the anguish of
living in society weighs on us all.
It' is today, I repeat, because he put civilization on trial,
pointing a finger at its iniquities and abuses and denied
that these could possibly lead to the exercise of virtue in
man, that Rousseau can help us to shatter an illusion the
deadly effects of which we are now able alas to observe in
ourselves and on ourselves. For is it not because of the
myth of the exclusive dignity of human nature that
nature Itself suffered its first mutilation, to be followed
inevitably by other mutilations?
We began by severing man from nature and setting him
up as a sovereign kingdom apart. With this we thought
we had done away with the one characteristic that can
never be denied, namely that man is first of all a being
that is alive. And by closing our eyes to this common
feature the door was opened wide to every outrage and
abuse.
Never in the course of the past four centuries
has western man been in a better position to
realize that by arrogating to himself the right to raise a
wall dividing mankind from the beast in nature, and
appropriating to himself all the qualities he denied the
latter, he was setting in motion an infernal cycle. For
this same wall was to be pulled steadily tighter, serving to
set some men apart from other men and to justify in the
minds of an ever-shrinking minority their claim to being
the only civilization of men. Such a civilization, based
as it was on the principle and notion of self-conceit, was
corrupt from the very start.
Only Rousseau raised his voice against this type of
egotism. In the footnote to the Discourse previously
quoted Rousseau recounts that, from the clumsy descrip¬
tions made by travellers, he preferred to recognize the
great apes of Africa and Asia as men of an unknown race
rather than run the risk of denying human nature to
creatures who might possess it.
And the first error would indeed have been less serious
than the second since respect for others springs spon¬
taneously and naturally in man, long before reasoning and
its sophistries come into play. Rousseau saw the proof
of this native response in man's "innate abhorrence to
witness the suffering of his fellows." From this we are
Inescapably led to look upon every creature that suffers
as a fellow being and hence entitled to the inalienable
right to pity.
For the only hope that each of us can have that we
shall not be treated one day as beasts by our fellow men
is for all our fellow men, we first amongst them, to look
upon ourselves at once as suffering beings, nurturing
within us that faculty for pity which in nature replaces
"laws, morals and virtue," and without which, as we are
now coming to realize, there can be no law, no morals and
no virtue in society.
Thus, far from presenting itself to us as a nostalgic
return to the past, identification with all forms of life,
beginning with the most humble, proposes to humanity
today through the voice of Rousseau the principle of all
collective wisdom and all collective action. This principle,
in a world where overcrowding makes mutual respect more
difficult and therefore that much more necessary, Is the
only one which can permit men to live together and build
a harmonious future.
14 It may well be that this teaching was already contained
in the great religions of the Far East. But in the tra
ditions of the west where, ever since antiquity, it was
thought that one could play a double game and tamper
with the evidence that man was a living and a suffering
being, no different from all other beings before secondary
factors distinguished him from them, who else but Jean-
Jacques Rousseau has made this message available to us?
"I have a violent aversion," Rousseau wrote in his
fourth letter to Monsieur de Malesherbes, "to social
orders that dominate others. I hate the Great, I hate
their condition." Does not this assertion apply first to
man who has sought to dominate other living creatures
and maintain a separate state, thereby giving the least
honourable of men freedom to do the same to other men
and to take advantage of a notion as disgraceful in this
latter instance as it was in the earlier broad context.
In a cultivated society there can be no excuse for the
only really inexpiable crime of man, that of considering
himself abidingly or momentarily superior, or treating
men as objects, be it for reasons of race, culture, conquest,
service, or merely expediency.
We know that in the life of Rousseau there was one
minute perhaps one second which, tenuous though it
was, he prized above any other. That is why towards the
end of his life it was this moment which obsessed him
most and which he took pains to describe at length in his
last work, returning constantly to it in the course of his
country walks. Yet. it was no more than his simply
regaining consciousness after a fall which caused him to
faint. But the feeling of being alive is of all others a
"priceless feeling" no doubt because it is so rare and so
uncertain:
"It seemed to me that I filled with my own slender
existence all the objects I perceived... I had no distinct
notion of my individuality... in all my being I felt a
delightful calm to which, whenever I recall it, I can find
nothing comparable in the full range of known pleasures."
This famous passage in the second Promenade was
echoed in the seventh with an added explanation of what
it meant to him: "I feel ecstasies, ineffable delights in
losing myself as it were, in the system of beings, in identi¬
fying myself with the whole of nature."
TJL r
his primeval identification which is denied
man in the state of society and which, having
forgotten its essential virtue, man can no longer feel
except by chance or by haphazard circumstance, takes us
to the heart of Rousseau's work. And if we accord it a
place apart among the great creations of man's genius it
is because Rousseau not only discovered in identification
the true principle of the sciences of man and the only
possible foundation for morality, but because he also
rekindled in us Its ardent flame. For two centuries it has
burned and will continue to burn, firing the crucible in
which the union of beings is taking place notwithstanding
those sociologists and philosophers who in their pride are
everywhere intent on rendering Incompatible the self and
the other, my society and other societies, nature and
culture, the emotional and the rational, humanity and life.
Claude Lévi-Strauss is professor of social anthropology at the
College de France in Paris. The above article is an abridged
version of his address last year to a commemorative gathering
organized by the Workers' University and the Faculty of Letters of
the University of Geneva in homage to Rousseau. The complete
text has now appeared in "Jean-Jacques Rousseau" (Collection
Langages) published by Editions de la Baconnière, Neuchâtel,
Switzerland.
All reproduction rights reserved.

TEACHING
BASED ON RESPECT
Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
Rousseau's ideas on the education of children made a vivid impression on his contemporaries.
Instead of the harsh, rigid education of the time which treated children like adults, Rousseau
proposed a method of teaching based on respect for the child and an appreciation of his sensi¬
tivities. In 1 779, one year after Rousseau's death, a monument to the author of Ém//e was erected 15
in Geneva. It showed the new type of teacher guiding a child, and his former chains decked in
a garland of roses. The evils of the old educational system are shown on a broken medallion.
