How many books are published in the
world each year ?
What are the chief vernacular lan¬
guages spoken in Africa ?
I am 15 years old. Which books on
space science should I read?
Who said : " The foundation of every
state is the education of its youth " ?
What will the library of tomorrow look like ? A peek at what
it may be one day was allowed visitors at the ' Library 21"
exhibition at the Seattle World's Fair last year. The chief
keynote was electronics and automation revolutionizing
methods of storing, retrieving and communicating know¬
ledge to future library users. Visitors saw how specially
"programmed" computers (right) can already provide
The machine replies,
up-to-the-minute information on different countries, supply
printed excerpts from the writings of the world's great
novelists, thinkers and scientists, and offer specially "tail¬
ored" bibliographies on subjects ranging from the arts to
space science according to the individual's age, education
and degree of interest. The transparent spheres, below, tell
the story of communication with three-dimensional models
depicting cave painting, the development of writing,
papermaking, printing, the telescope, and other wonders
from among some of the newer media in the field of education.
Pan American

THE LIBRARY OF THE FUTURE
by J. H. Shera
an, In his long struggle up from savagery, has
undergone many experiences and evolved
many Ideas which would be important to our own quest
for a better life If we could but retrieve them from the
past. But, because we do not yet possess efficient means
of access to the store of recorded human knowledge, we
have rediscovered that which was already knownre¬
invented the wheel, many times.
Worse, we have probably re-invented "square wheels,"
without knowing, or even suspecting, that they had long
ago been rejected. A degree of prodigality in research
may be unavoidable, and if properly controlled perhaps
even desirable. But, contrary to popular lore, ignorance is
not characteristic of a state of bliss and what we do not
know can hurt us.
As early as 1937, Frederick P. Keppel, then president
of the Carnegie Corporation of New York, sought an Ima¬
ginary solution to the problem of Improving man's
recourse to the records of the human adventure by pro¬
jecting himself into the library world of 1958, of which
his imaginary librarian said:
"I blush to think how many years we watched the
so-called business machines juggle with pay rolls and
bank books before It occurred to us that they might be
adapted to dealing with library cards with equal dex¬
terity. Indexing has become an entirely new art. The
modern Index is no longer bound up in the volume, but
remains on cards, and the modern version of the old
Hollerith machines will sort out and photograph
anything that the dial tells it. . . we librarians must
keep up with all these applications of science, and
I admit it takes a fair share of our time to do so."
The almost uncanny accuracy of Keppel's prophetic
vision will have been quite apparent to visitors to the
"Library 21" exhibit at last year's World's Fair in Seattle,
Washington, U.S.A. There, on the shores of Puget Sound,
a computer, manned by professional librarians and tech¬
nical assistants provided inquirers with short annotated
bibliographies on selected subjects tailored to the
education, age, and language capability of the indivi
dual patron. The computer was also stored with selected
texts from the "Great Books of the Western World." to
provide the visitor with quotations on appropriate subjects
from the great classical authors.
In reality the Seattle exhibition was far less dramatic
than the real developments that have actually taken
place during the quarter of a century that ha« followed
Keppel's prophetic words. Moreover, the Importance of
these innovations is not to be interpreted solely In terms
of the machine, for automation Is only the outward mani¬
festation of the Intellectual revolution that Is taking place
In llbrarianship today.
The most Important phrase in Keppel's statement does
not relate to the gadgets that he hypothesized, but to the
assertion that "indexing has become an entirely new
art." The bases of that art. Keppel might have added,
are the semantic relationships among ideas, concepts,
and words, and only Incidentally the innovations In elec¬
tronic circuitry.
One should not minimize the Importance of the
machine, for the machine has made a fundamental con¬
tribution in redirecting and refocussing the thinking of
librarians concerning the intellectual processes which the
management and efficient utilization of recorded know¬
ledge involves. But the machine is still an instrument
and nowhere is Its Instrumentality more apparent than
in its role as a library catalyst.
Traditionally, library procedures and methods have
derived from ad hoc assumptions concerning the nature
of books and the ways in which they are used. Such
library classifications as those of Dewey, the Library of
Congress, and the Brussels Institute are based upon the
implicit assumption that books resemble biological speci¬
mens which can be arranged in a hierarchical order of
genus and species according to a major characteristic of
their intellectual content. Similarly, the subject entrieg¬
ln the card catalogue are terms which are assumed to be ..
not only meaningful descriptors of the content of books "
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

Electronics invades
the world of books
but also the terms which the library user would associate
with the subject of his search.
But because the standard library classifications and the
subject catalogues have worked reasonably well, in some
Instances surprisingly well, librarians did not much con¬
cern themselves with research Into the underlying theory
of Information storage and retrieval until the decade of
the 1950's brought an unexpected proliferation in recorded
knowledge that far surpassed the capabilities of con¬
ventional library and bibliographic instruments.
Simultaneously with these new demands upon the
library came the rise. In other areas of intellectual endea¬
vour, of automation, and librarians turned in hasty
desperation to the machine as a potential source of sal¬
vation. Tw.o early twentieth-century inventions, the Hol¬
lerith punched card and the micro-photograph or micro¬
film, seemed to hold the greatest promise, and much expe¬
rimentation was begun in adapting these, in a variety of
ways, to the storage and retrieval of recorded Informa¬
tion.
Subsequently magnetic tape was added to the arsenal
of the automated library. But despite the engineering
skill lavished upon other devices, results fell far short of
expectations because these mechanisms were not logi¬
cally derived from an understanding of the Intellectual
process that takes place when the library patron searches
a library file.
This charge of failure does not imply condemnation.
Ill-considered as some of these experiments were they
represented a necessary stage In the development of
man's progress in improving library procedures. Every
social innovation must shake itself free from a morass
of misconceptions, false starts, and exaggerated hopes.
Moreover, automation has already proved- Itself, perhaps
in more ways than most people realize, as an effective
means for facilitating certain types of bibliographic and
indexing operations.
The preparation of concordances, which formerly was
regarded as the work of a lifetime, can, through the use
of punched-card or magnetic tape equipment, now be
accomplished in months. A number of libraries are using
similar equipment for the reproduction of catalogues and
specialized bibliographies thus greatly extending the use¬
fulness of their respective collections.
he punched paper tape typewriter, such as the
Flexowriter, with a print-out speed of more
than six hundred pages an hour, offers possibilities for
improving library and bibliographic operations that are
only beginning to be fully realized. The Key Word in
Context (KWIC) system now being used successfully by
Chemical Abstracts Service for the superficial indexing of
chemical literature employs high-speed computers to
facilitate Its operations.
The indexing and abstracting methods devised at
Western Reserve University have been fully automated
and are In dally use in an information retrieval service
offered by the American Society for Metals. And, on a
much less sophisticated level, libraries had, even before
the outbreak of the Second World War, begun to employ
limited automation In their acquisition and other busi¬
ness routines, as well as for the circulation records of
their books.
Today, these limited uses of electronic and mechanical
devices no longer seem strange or out-of-place In the
library, and the time Is doubtless not far distant when
much more Intricate mechanisms for the performance of
much more complex library and bibliographic operations
will be accepted by librarians and general public alike as
standard library equipment. We should remind ourselves
that not so very many decades have passed since the first
library schools, before the typewriter became prevalent,
regularly offered courses in a form of penmanship known
as "the library hand."
In a world transformed by automation what, then, will
be the form of the library of the future? Obviously the
applications of automation to librarianship are so new
BOOKS ARE STILL
BASIC. The "Library
of the Future" (general
view right) designed
by the American Li¬
brary Association, by
no means neglected
books. Books and
other printed materials
will continue to re¬
main basic to all edu¬
cation in the next cen¬
tury. The library was
a prototype of six or
seven core libraries
which will serve vast
areas of America in the
next 100 years. These
libraries will be linked
together so that every
important document,
book and pamphlet
will be available to
every library user no
matter where he lives.
and imperfectly understood that prognostication is dan¬
gerous. One can certainly say conservatively, however,
that these new electronic mechanisms that simulate man's
mental processes should give us new Insights Into the
operations of the human mind and hence a better under¬
standing of the ways in which the human being seeks
out, acquires, and utilizes knowledge.
One also seems on solid ground in saying that machines
are not likely to replace librarians any more than com¬
puters replaced mathematicians. On the contrary, these
new devices will not only provide the librarian with
means for improving the services he can render, but also
will increase his understanding and appreciation of his
role in society.
Finally, one can say with some confidence that the book
is very far from becoming obsolete. To be sure, techni¬
ques for its miniaturization will doubtless become even
more prevalent than they are today, and for purposes of
storage the book in its traditional form does display cer¬
tain marked disadvantages. But for use the book is so
admirably adapted to the ends it serves that man has not
been able to improve upon It since the parchment codex
evolved from the papyrus scroll. The book is here to stay,
and library architecture Is not likely soon to deviate from
a form making possible efficient shelving of books.
To those who are punch-drunk from the impact of
scientific innovation, the library of the future is apt to be
envisaged as a phantasmagoria of flashing lights, spinning
tapes, and rattling teletypes. To be sure, rapid progress
in facsimile transmission, mechanized character recog¬
nition, data processing, and trans-world communication
will doubtless leave their mark upon the library, and one
may properly expect to find In the library of the future
a variety of electronic and other devices that today would
have appeared to many as being out of place.
But the most striking characteristic of the library of
the future will be not so much its physical form, as the
intellectual activity that will take place within its walls,
and this may be traced back at least as far as the great
library established by the Ptolemies in Alexandria at the
mouth of the Nile.

ValllcWorld'a fj¡r
The library of the future, then, should be a true infor¬
mation centre a collection of graphic records of every
variety, assembled and used to the ultimate limits of Its
resources by a community of scholars educated both In one
of the traditional academic disciplines and in the new
science of librarianshlp and proficient in the scholarship
of their new profession.
This is a new concept of librarianshlp only in its
insistence upon the librarian as scholar and its emphasis
upon the new tools which modern science will provide for
improving the efficiency of his work. But before these
tools can be designed and fabricated, and before tha
Intellectual and functional dimensions of the library of
the future can be identified and described, much important
research into the physical and psychological nature of the
library process must be completed.
Research in libraries has, from the beginning, been one
of the major reasons for the creation of the Institution,
but research in librarianshlp is of such recent origin that
its importance Is not yet fully comprehended even among
librarians. Librarianshlp as the proper subject of orga¬
nized research must have brought to bear upon it the
work of many disciplines in the physical, biological, and
social sciences If it is to be rescued from suffocation by
its very riches.
But however much the profile of the library may
change under the impact of this research, the library as
a service agency will remain, though the concept of that
service may well undergo dramatic alteration In the tran¬
sition from a passive organization to one that reaches out
to the patron without waiting for his initiative.
In this the new media of communication can play a
very Important role, not only In bringing to the patron
the required information in a variety of new forms, but
also in expediting inter-library co-ordination by forging
ever more strongly the bonds of co-operation that will
eventually make available the total intellectual resources
of a nation at any one point of need.
Architecturally, the library of tomorrow must be func¬
tional rather than monumental a form In which change
can be made quickly and economically In anticipation of
rapid obsolescence. We do not build for the future by
architecturally crystallizing or ossifying the present;
change is the only constant. When the responsibilities of
the librarian were regarded as primarily custodial, and
preservation was generally accepted as hLs first concern,
the library as mausoleum was archltectually appropriate.
With the twentieth century came a new and more
dynamic concept of library service. The library as a gothlc
cathedral expired with James Gamble Rogers' great ana¬
chronistic outcry at Yale. The new functionallsm dic¬
tates modular constructionan empty shell with a mini¬
mum of bearing walls and fixed partitions. In fact, the
library of the future may not be a single building, but a
complex of Interrelated structures which provide not
only for the acquisition, utilization, and dissemination of
traditional library materials, but also are true "Informa¬
tion banks," dedicated to the fullest possible use of
recorded human knowledge In whatever form. Already
Johns Hopkins University is planning a new library
building that will Include a computing center for mecha¬
nized literature searching.
There is no limit to the potentialities of the library of
tomorrow except the boundaries of the human imagina¬
tion and our willingness to work. No longer Is the library
a social embellishment for the perpetuation of local or
personal prestige. It is essential to the survival of
society for the simple and obvious reason that our culture
has become so complex and Interdependent within and
among its constituent parts that It cannot survive without
constant intellectual nourishment.
Knowledge, then, is the life-blood oí our civilization, and
the library of the future may well be regarded as the
instrument by which its continuing circulation of know¬

ledge Is maintained. What goes on, then, in the library
of the future may or may not be outwardly spectacular
but It will probably Influence substantially the course of
the human adventure.
Dr. Jesse H. Shera is Dean of the School of Library
Science at Western Reserve University, Cleveland, U.S.A.
13
