HOW YOU CAN HELP THE FIGHT AGA
NEXT month a "World Freedom from
Hunger Week" will mark the mid¬
point of the "Freedom from Hunger
Campaign" (1960-65) led by the U.N.
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
with the support of the United Nations
and its Specialized Agencies. The pur¬
pose of this world-wide campaign is, in
the words of Dr. B. R. Sen, Director-
General of FAO, "to inform and educate
the public about the challenge which
faces mankind and to act as a forum
where the aspects of hunger, poverty
and economic stagnation can be discuss¬
ed and remedies found, and as a base
and a starting point for action projects
to solve these problems."
"World Freedom from Hunger Week"
centering on the equinoctial date of
Thursday, March 21, symbol of spring
and sowing in the Northern Hemisphere
and of harvesting and thanksgiving in the
Southern will be a major opportunity
for public participation in the Campaign.
While the Campaign covers every
possible approach to the problem of
hunger (see the special July-August 1962
issue of The Unesco Courier) action
is chiefly concentrated in four areas:
information and education, fund-raising,
research programmes and action projects.
To help the Campaign, Unesco is
carrying out a broad educational and
information programme which has two
goals:
1 In the more fortunate countries to
bring about a basic understanding of the
problem of hunger and what can be
done about it.
' In the less developed countries, to
give the people knowledge that will
enable them to increase food production,
improve diets and in general achieve a
higher standard of living.
The Freedom from Hunger Campaign
has also become a natural addition to
Unesco's Gift Coupon Programme
which, in the past ten years, has combin¬
ed education and exchange of information
among peoples around the world with
fund-raising that has made possible the
purchase of more than one million dollars
for educational and scientific equipment.
UNESCO is now inviting individual
people and organizations in some 18
donor countries (see box page 25) to
contribute directly to action projects
which enable people of other countries
to improve food production. Unesco
Gift Coupons can be used to buy equip¬
ment and supplies for virtually any type
of activity under the Freedom from
Hunger Campaign. The following,
however, are the main projects:
WATER SUPPLY EQUIPMENT: In¬
expensive well-digging equipment, wind¬
lasses and buckets can spell the
difference between a good living and
mere subsistence in many cases where
water lies only a few feet underground.
fARM TOOLS: In vast, underdeveloped
regions the only farm tool known is the
short-handled hoe. A small investment
can provide breaking ploughs, spades,
forks, shovels and rakes, with a resulting
boost to -agricultural production.
BETTER SEED: The saying, "Good seed
doesn't cost it pays", reflects the fact
that the use of better seed varieties is
a cheap and effective way of increasing
productivity.
SCHOOL AND HOME GARDENS:
Purchase of tools and seeds at small
cost, matched by local labour produces
extra food supplies and guides young
people and families to better diets.
NUTRITION AND HOMECRAFT CEN¬
TRES: Poor diet is often caused as much
by ignorance as by poverty. For teaching
families to make better use of their
resources, the purchase of kitchen equip¬
ment and training aids can pay large
dividends.
MOBILE VETERINARY LABORATORIES:
These have vital roles in identifying and
controlling costly livestock diseases and
serving as instruction centres.
POULTRY RAISING: In many areas
shortage of proteins can be best met by
increasing egg and poultry production.
Unesco Gift Coupons can provide the
necessary equipment.
FISH PONDS AND FISHING EQUIP¬
MENT: An important source of protein
food, fish ponds can often be operated
simultaneously with some other type of
food production.
AGRICULTURAL EDUCATION: Books,
supplies and equipment are needed to
help transmit knowledge from one gener-

INST HUNGER
ation to the next and thereby perpetuate
the effects of the Campaign.
Like other Unesco Gift Coupon
projects, the one designed to support
the Freedom from Hunger Campaign
stresses direct "people-to-people" relation¬
ships. Both to donors and beneficiaries,
the contacts through Unesco Gift Cou¬
pons have brought new knowledge and
real friendship for the people of other
nations.
Three years ago the students at The
Queen Elizabeth School for Girls near
London raised £400 for Unesco Gift
Coupons to equip a home economics
classroom in an Arab refugee camp in
Jericho, afterwards raising another £300
to bring a teacher to England for addition¬
al training.
Recently the girls of the same school
became the first group in the world to
contribute to the Unesco Gift Coupon
Programme for the Freedom from Hunger
Campaign. The Gift Coupons they bought
have been sent to schools in Burma to
buy seeds, fertilizer and garden tools.
Writing to Unesco, these English girls
recalled the friendships they had made
with Arab refugee children and added:
"We now look forward to doing the
same thing in Burma and we are glad to
take part in the Freedom from Hunger
Campaign. We much enjoy our own
gardens here in England, and we like to
think that others will learn to use their
land more creatively and to enjoy more
fully its products and their riches."
