INDEX OF PROSPERITY
(Scientific & Technical Potential)
by Victor A. Kovda
Ocience is the most dynamic cultural force in the modern world. The
^impact of science has revolutionized habits of dress, speech, travel and
communication, cities and villages. At a deeper level it has affected philo¬
sophy through its new concepts of causality. And by making human want
technologically obsolete it has brought into relief the moral responsibility
of its use for constructive rather than destructive ends. A country without
scientists and engineers cannot be in the main stream of modern life.
A developing country can begin to meet its most imme¬
diate economical needs by importing scientists from
abroad, but it will never be really independent until It
has created its own national pool of highly trained scien¬
tists and engineers, and its own scientific institutions.
The economic progress out of which the cultural well-
being of a country will grow depends to a great extent
upon natural resources : climate and topography, flora and
fauna, soil and water, and mineral riches. Therefore the
very first requirement is scientific knowledge of a country's
natural environment and its resources. A detailed know¬
ledge of geographical conditions and energy sources, for
example, must precede economic and industrial planning.
This scientific knowledge can be obtained only through
a series of systematic studies and surveys of natural
resources. This is a task of paramount Importance be¬
cause it can provide both the basis for the elaboration, of
economically profitable schemes of exploitation and for
rational plans of conservation.
The number and type of resources having economic
importance are very variable, depending on the natural
history of the territory and of the continent where the
country is located. It is characteristic for natural re¬
sources to be distributed very irregularly. Thus we find
a concentration of important mineral deposits in one
country and a total absence of the same type of deposits
in a neighbouring country.
The experience of the scientifically advanced countries
shows that no country is really "poor In natural resour¬
ces" In the absolute sense. The absence of one resource
can be compensated for by the presence of another no
less valuable, but this obviously requires the development
of human resources, of the Individuals within the country
who are capable of directing both studies and development
because they have the scientific knowledge to do so.
One of the most Important of the new concepts which
Unesco Is now using Is that of a country's scientific and
technical potential or S.T.P. S.T.P. Is the totality of a
country's resources for formulating and solving problems
of national, regional and International importance in the
field of science and the application of science.
In determining a nation's S.T.P. six factors have to be
considered:
The number of scientists and engineers. We have
suggested that an index should be established showing the
number of scientists per million population. The more
developed countries have from 500 to 4,000 scientists per
million population. If we take as a target for the scien¬
tifically less developed an average of 1,000 scientists per
million population, then a country with a population of
5 million should have 5,000 scientists; one with a popula¬
tion of 30 million should have 30,000 scientists; a continent
with a population of 200 million should have 200,000
scientists.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
19

ENGINEERS
FOR IRAN'S
NEW INDUSTRIES
Future engineers for Iran's new industries are seen
here on the grounds of the Teheran Polytechnic during
a break in classes. Left, a brunette Iranian teacher
explains the operation of textile machinery to students.
Far right, a Unesco expert in a practical course on
textile engineering. The Polytechnic was set up with
Unesco and U.N. Special Fund aid. Unesco has
provided specialists in building construction and in
textile, electrical and mechanical engineering. It has
awarded fellowships to Iranians in these fields and has
supplied large quantities of equipment. The Poly¬
technic has four Institutes where special emphasis is
placed on practical skills not only in workshop and
laboratory work, but in actual training within industry.
S.T.P. (Cont'd)
inimum target : 1,000 scientists
per million population
20
Judging from the experience of the most developed
industrial countries, the number of engineers should be
from five to ten times as great. The United States, with
a population of 185 million, has 1,000 scientists per million
population and 4,000 engineers per million population.
The Soviet Union, with a population of 200 million, has
1,800 scientists and 20,000 engineers and agronomists per
million population. France, with a population of 46,000,000
had (in 1955) 360 scientists and 2,608 engineers per million
population.
These figures can be used by any country to estimate its
ultimate needs for scientists and engineers. But to
achieve this proportion will take one or two generations.
The number and equipment of national research insti¬
tutes. The next index of a country's S.T.P. is the number,
equipment and system of organization of national research
institutes, universities and laboratories. We are studying
this question and propose to publish monographs on the
organization of science in a number of typical countries,
such as Belgium, Czechoslovakia and Norway. Talks are
also taking place with India and the Ukraine. The more
numerous and the better equipped a country's scientific
institutes are the greater is that country's S.T.P.
It is also important to know whether a country has
research centres in mathematics, physics, chemistry,
mining and geology, chemical technology, economics and
statistics.
National production of scientific apparatus, measuring
instruments and special equipment. This index illustrates
a country's capacity constantly to renew and improve the
scientific apparatus and equipment needed for research.
Scientific equipment becomes obsolete approximately every
ten to fifteen years, and has to be replaced by new, more
improved types. Today, production of scientific apparatus
and precision instruments is mainly concentrated in
twelve to fifteen of the most developed countries.
At the present stage of scientific development, it is very
important that a country should be able, if not to produce,
at least to repair and service the technical equipment it
requires, for example, isotopes, electronic computers, tele¬
vision, and so on.
Network of scientific documentation centres. Scientific
libraries, microfilm libraries, map collections, scientific
museums, translation and bibliographical services are a
revealing index of a country's S.T.P.
The range and number of national scientific publica¬
tions. Periodicals, textbooks and works of scientific
popularization are another important element of a coun¬
try's scientific planning and research programmes.
Scientific vocabulary. The existence or lack of a
national scientific vocabulary, of a scientific terminology,
and of appropriate concepts in the national language are
another important index of a country's S.T.P.
A nation's level of literacy, the general level of educa¬
tion, and the extent to which education is compulsory
should also be taken into account. This does not mean
that all these factors are necessarily of equal importance
or incontrovertible, especially since it is not quantity so
much as quality which is the decisive factor. Unesco
will intensify research in this field, and in particular will
attempt to determine the absolute and relative importance
of all these factors, which constitute a nation's S.T.P.
A national scientific policy may be defined as a system
of measures taken by a government to carry out a long-
term (fifteen to twenty-five years) programme for science
and its applications aimed at achieving the maximum
socio-economic and cultural effects for the benefit of its
people. In this sense a national scientific policy becomes
an integral part of the government's economic policy.
Many of the countries which have recently attained
independence are endeavouring to establish a network of
scientific establishments, to set up a guiding scientific

Photos Unesco-Paul Almasy
body in the government, and to assign a regular part of
the budget to training scientists and to scientific research.
Unesco's Department of Natural Sciences is conducting
extensive studies of the existing situation with regard to
national scientific policies. Of Unesco's 113 Member
States, twenty-five do not now have any central bodies to
guide or co-ordinate the activities of scientific establish¬
ments. About thirty have relatively ineffective national
centres or councils responsible for the planning and
development of science.
n increasing number of requests are being re¬
ceived from the governments of Unesco
Member States for assistance in preparing legislation for
the establishment of national scientific councils, centres
or academies. For instance, at the time of the opening
of the Geneva Conference, the Parliament and President
of the Republic of Lebanon approved a law (prepared
with the help of Unesco) establishing a national council
for the direction of science in that country.
We feel that assistance to governments in working out
national scientific policy and scientific organization will
be one of Unesco's most Important tasks during the next
few years. We are already helping several governments
to prepare appropriate legislation and programmes, as in
the case of Lebanon.
The size of State expenditure on national scientific Ins¬
titutions is an equally important element of State policy
in the field of science. Every government should deter¬
mine the total financial outlay on science and Its
apportionment among basic, technical and social sciences.
The size of expenditure and its allocation depend, of
course, on the historical, social and natural conditions in
each particular country.
Economically and scientifically advanced countries
allocate from 1 to 5 percent of their annual national
income to development of science. European Industrializ¬
ed countries allocate on an average 2.5 per cent of the
national income. Some large countries which have
recently achieved Independence spend about 0.25 per cent
of the national income on science, but most of the Inde¬
pendent countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America
spend less.
Available statistics obviously do not show the full
picture. Further research and improved methods of
collection, processing and also evaluation of the available
figures are necessary. But even now It is safe to say that
the less developed countries do not spend enough on
science. Much greater eilorts are required of the
countries themselves and of the International organiza¬
tions of the United Nations family.
The third basic element of national policy In the field
of science is the laying down of the main lines of scientific
research, the planned creation of scientific Institutions on
a long-term basis, the establishment of priorities and time
limits, having regard to the economic and natural condi¬
tions of the country and Its Individual regions. This is
particularly Important in the case of large multinational
States with vast territories and a heterogeneous popula¬
tion.
The assessment of immediate and long-term require¬
ments as regards the training of scientific staff and
teachers is the further Important element of State pol¬
icy In the field of science. The growth and development
of science are inseparable from the creative activity of
the scientist. The talents and working capacity of the
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
21

S.T.P. (Cont'd^
The head and eyes of science
22
scientist are precious qualities which must first be recog¬
nized and brought out in a young man or woman and
then developed and trained.
Plans for the training of scientists and university
professors must always be prepared and carried out well
ahead of current needs and in anticipation of future
needs. It is necessary, for example, to allow for the
inevitable elimination of some students and scientific
workers in the initial stages. The Increasing need for
scientific staff follows a geometrical progression, and this
too must be met.
Of 100 boys and girls in schools, only ten to fifteen will
attend a university. Of 100 university students only ten
to fifteen are likely to become scientists if they are given
the opportunity. But of 100 scientists perhaps only two
or three will be innovators of outstanding merit and
significance in science.
If a student is to grow into a true and creative scientist,
he will need fifteen to twenty and sometimes twenty-five
years for education and training and also to learn how to
work as an individual researcher.
As part of its national policy in science and technology,
each country must decide what proportion of theoretical
scientists and technical experts it wishes to have in
various branches and special subjects. Each country,
however, will always require good mathematicians, phy¬
sicists, chemists, geologists, geographers, biologists and
technical experts.
The Department of Natural Sciences of Unesco, together
with international associations of scientists is preparing
optimum types of scientific curricula, and suggestions for
laboratory equipment and educational experiments to
assist less-developed countries in establishing faculties
of science and in training scientists in the basic branches
of learning.

Is the most ultra-modern equipment (automation, elec¬
tronics, radio-isotopes, television, etc.) really needed for
industrializing the less-developed countries and for
developing their economy and science? Unesco has
studied this question and has concluded that these things
really are essential. The economic reconstruction of the
newly-independent countries will have to be completed
rapidly in the life-time of one or at the most two genera¬
tions. They must now bridge the gap separating them
from economically developed nations. Thus, Unesco
believes that the development of industry, transport, agri¬
culture and forestry should be based on economically
viable foundations which are scientifically and technically
the most advanced and also adapted to local conditions.
This view is shared by many Unesco Member States ; for
example India, whose Government has co-operated with
Unesco in establishing a first-class polytechnic institute
in Bombay; or Turkey, where a Middle East Technical
University is being established by Unesco and the Turkish
Government with the assistance of the United Nations
Special Fund. Institutes of the same kind and highly
developed scientific centres are being established co¬
operatively by national governments and Unesco. True,
this process is only just beginning. We shall have to
establish these centres not only by ones and twos but by
dozens, and in the future perhaps by hundreds.
The next question is whether or not there should be
any functional division between scientific research and
the application of scientific discoveries. What I have in
mind here is not economic Investment, nor the practical
aspects of Industrializationplanning for industrialization
and executing these plans. Obviously these are not
matters for Unesco. What I am thinking about is the
indivisibility of research, the training of a scientist or
an engineer, and the practical application of science In
the national economy.
It often happens that the application of science leads
to new theoretical discoveries or to new general theories.
It is the role of the scientist himself to suggest the best
possible ways of applying scientific discoveries in practice.
If we separate theory from practical application, science
will have lost its brain and eyes. If we separate reasoned
application from scientific theory, then the theory will
lose all meaning.
Victor A. Kovda is director of the Unesco Department of
Natural Sciences. A soil scientist, he is a corresponding
member of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences.
23
