ISHI THE LAST OF
by Alfred Metraux
A wild man at the
limit of exhaustion
and fear. This was
how the last survivor
of the Yahi Indians
appeared to the peo¬
ple of a small Cali¬
fornia town who saw
him for the first
time on the morning
of August 29, 1911.
His hair was burned
off close to his head
as a sign of mourn¬
ing according to the
Indian custom and he
was naked except for
a ragged scrap of
ancient canvas which
he wore around his
shoulders. He was
later given the name
Ishihis own Yahi
Indian word for
manby Professor
Alfred Kroeber, the
American ethnologist.
tVER since the 16th Century, "noble savages"
with their unsophisticated common sense and
carefree simplicity of nature have charmed and
fascinated Europeans and Inspired philosophers and
poets to sing their praises. Montaigne has recounted
his conversations with three Tuplnamba Indians from
Brazil, in whose remarks he found much wisdom. London
society In the seventeenth century became wildly
enthusiastic over a Tahitian named Omal. And, in
addition to these real-life persons, there have been many
fictitious "noble savages" of literature who showed up
"civilized" man and whose qualities were a living
reproach to the corrupt society of their day.
Mrs. Alfred L. Kroeber, the widow of the famous
American anthropologist, has just written an admirable
book (1). about another "noble savage," the Indian, Ishi,
whose memory was still very much alive some twenty
years ago in the University of California. People who had
known Ishi spoke of him to me with affection and respect,
and this book helps us to understand why they were so
deeply moved.
The "noble savages" mentioned in literature readily
accepted to visit the white man's world and were
Introduced to It under the protection of explorers or of
kindly travellers. Ishi, the last of them, made a
lonely and painful entry Into our civilization.
One night In the summer of 1911, a butcher In a small
town in California was woken up by the furious barking
of his dogs. He went outside and found near his house
a "wild man" leaning against a wall, quite clearly in the
last stages of exhaustion. The sheriff was called, and
after handcuffing the strange creature, he took him off
to the county gaol where, as an extra precaution, he
locked him up in the cell reserved for dangerous lunatics.
In California, where the original masters of the soil had
been forgotten after having been wiped out, the discovery
of a naked savage was greeted by the newspapers as an
extraordinary event. Prison turned, out to be a refuge for
Ishi, protecting him from the indiscreet curiosity of the
crowds who came to stare at this survivor from prehistory.
It is curious to note that Ishi did not retain any
unpleasant memories of his first contact with white men.
The prison had impressed him as a fine house and he was
grateful for the food he had been given and the way in
which he had been treated. Ishi had, in fact, been
expecting to be killed. He could not imagine any other
fate at the hands of the white men who had massacred
his own people.
The strange capture of a naked Indian in a small
California town was the last episode in a drama which
had begun half a century before. California, rich in
edible plants, had once been the home of one of the
densest Indian populations in Northern America. The
annexing of this territory by the United States, and the
Gold Rush, brought thousands of Immigrants from Europe
swarming into these happier climes.
Of the many trails opened up by the white men's
wagons, there was one which led through the wooded
valleys inhabited by the small tribe of the Yahi, belonging
to the Yana group. There were some two or three
hundred members of the tribe, and they put up a fierce
resistance to the invaders.' They fought with the courage
of despair, for what could they possibly do against these
hordes of well-armed men who felt nothing but contempt
for the natives? Towards 1872, when Ishi must have been
about ten years old, the Yahls had been virtually wiped off
the ethnical map of America. There was barely a
handful of them left.
10
(1) "Ishi in Ttoo Worlds" by Theodora Kroeber, Uni¬
versity of California Press, 1961 ($ 5,95).
he remnants of the Yahi tribe preferred a
wandering life In the forests of the Cali-
fornlan mountains to the advantages of submission.
Hidden in the canyons, their few families constituted
"the smallest free nation in the world, which by an
unexampled fortitude and stubbornness of character
succeeded in holding out against the tide of civilization
twenty-five years longer even than Geronimo's famous
band of Apaches and for almost thirty-five years after the
Sioux and their allies defeated Custer." During this
period, the Yahi became something of a mythical people.
The settlers who had taken over their territory had heard
about them, but never saw anything of them save,
perhaps, a wisp of smoke from one of their fires rising
above the trees.
It Is difficult to imagine the existence of a dozen Indians
who have chosen to live like hunted animals rather than
give themselves up to subjection. They- were forever on

THE YANAS A PRIMITIVE INDIAN
BETWEEN TWO WORLDS
Ishi as he was in 1914. Tne man from the Stone Age was only able to make a slow adaptation to
the Steel Age. Bui he himself had lessons to teach the men of the 20th Century. He showed
his new friends the ways of life, techniques and customs of a people who had disappeared forever.
the move, taking the utmost precautions to- conceal every
trace of their passage and living only on the animals they
managed to kill or the fruit and herbs they gathered.
Gradually, fatigue, age and Illness took their toll of the
fugitives. By 1906, Ishi, his aged mother, his sister and
an old man were the only survivors of the tribe.
One day, a group of surveyors took their camp by
surprise. They found Ishi's mother who, being paralysed,
had been unable to flee. The white men were, cruel
enough to carry off the food and the few objects she had
without leaving anything in return. Ishi's sister and
the old man never come back. His mother died a few
days later. Ishi was alone. For five years he lived a
solitary life in the forests of his territory. When he was
discovered on the outskirts of one of the white men's
villages, he had made up his mind to return to the com¬
munity of men, even though they might be his worst
enemies.
Professor Kroeber had made a life study of the Call-
fornian Indians, and his attention was attracted by the
newspaper reports of the capture of a "wild man." He
telegraphed the sheriff, asking him to receive his col¬
league, Professor Waterman. The latter went to the
prison equipped with vocabularies of the Indian
languages of the Callfornlan district, and read lists of
these words to Ishi. He listened patiently, but his face did
not betray the slightest sign of comprehension.
Waterman was beginning to be discouraged and was
about to give up his attempt to communicate with the
"savage" when he pronounced the word "slwlnl," at the
same time touching the wood of the bed on which the
Indian was sitting. Ishi's face suddenly lit up. He re¬
peated the word. The two men, realizing the Importance
of the Incident, went on striking the wood as hard as
they could, shouting "Slwini! Slwlnl!" The mystery had,
to some extent, been solved. The "wild man" had been
Identified as being a member of the Yahi tribe, for a long
time considered extinct. Ishi was no longer a prisoner
of his language. He could now communicate, after a
fashion, with a white man. He was no longer alone, and
his "hunted animal" look disappeared.
What was to be done with this "savage" who could
no longer be kept in goal? The sheriff consented to his
prisoner's transfer to the University of California. By
11
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ISHI (Cont'd;
'I have been alone for such a long time'
agreeing to look after Ishi, the professors of this Uni¬
versity were taking on a difficult task. Ishi had come out
of the prehistoric past. He seemed to be just over fifty
years old. Would he be able to adapt himself to the
Industrial civilization of the twentieth century? He was
the last survivor of the Stone Age in the United States.
Late in life, he would have to advance, not through
hundreds, but through thousands of years.
His first ordeal was the train. During his nomadic life*
Ishi had seen this puffing monster from the distance and
his mother had told him that it was a demon with a black
face. Now he must not only approach it, but give himself
up to it. With true Indian courage, Ishi betrayed no fear,
and without hesitation climbed up into his compartment.
During the whole of the trip, he remained absolutely
impassive and did not look at anybody.
12
here were other wonders in store for him at
San Francisco the ferry, the trams, and later,
the cinema and aeroplanes. He showed no emotion or
fear when confronted with these novelties. The strict
Indian etiquette which he Invariably observed, forbade
him to do so. Later, when he was able to communicate
with his friends, he told them of his impressions.
The height of the buildings in San Francisco did not
surprise him at all. They were smaller than the cliffs in
his own country. He was only slightly surprised by aero¬
planes, and their flight seemed to him to be much less
controlled than that of the eagles in his mountains. Of
all the white man's inventions, it was the tramcars,
with their noise and their swift gliding motion, which
struck him as being worthy of admiration. He soon got
to know how to use them, distinguishing them by their
letters and their numbers.
He quickly adapted himself to the white man's way of
living. Shortly after his arrival at San Francisco, he
was invited to lunch. His remarkable powers of obser¬
vation and his sense of etiquette prevented him from
making any mistakes. He was appointed janitorial
assistant at the Museum and was paid by cheque every
month. To cash his cheques, he had to learn how to
endorse them; he did so very quickly.
On being questioned about his knowledge of arithmetic,
he said he could not count beyond ten. Kroeber was very
surprised, therefore, to see Ishi one day arranging the
silver dollars he had saved in equal piles, and being able
to tell him exactly how many coins there were over
eighty in all. Like many "primitives," Ishi found it
pointless to reel off the names of figures without
associating them with particular objects.
Like all "primitives" who have lived in our towns, Ishi
was disconcerted by the number of people who lived
there. When he saw the San Francisco crowds for the
first time, he kept on saying "Many white men! Many
white men!" In this his attitude was in no way different
from that of an Indian Chief from Brazil whom I knew

and who, on his return from Rio de Janeiro, said, "There
are more white people than ants we are done for!"
Faithful to the customs of his tribe, Ishi refused to
reveal his name. To those whose were impolite enough
to ask him what it was, he would reply, "I have been
alone for such a long time that I have forgotten." It
was Kroeber who gave him the name of "Ishi" which in
Yana means "man," since he had to have some form of
legal status.
Ishi's discovery of modern civilization might easily have
been no more than a casual news item, simply showing
that a man from prehistory could adapt himself to the
modern world within a few months. His stay among men
of the twentieth century was, in fact, of primordial
Interest to science.
H e was sole heir to the language, the traditions
I and the history of a human society which had
disappeared forever. Either out of natural kindness, or
gratitude, or even perhaps because he realized that he
was helping to perpetuate the memory of his people, Ishi
tried, as far as he could, to pass on his knowledge to the
ethnographers and linguists who questioned him. He took
particular pleasure in teaching his friends the techniques
from prehistory which had made it possible for him and
his people to survive for so many years.
Before an admiring public, he used to carve flint arrow¬
heads, make fire from two pieces of wood, and make bows
and arrows in the way that had been handed down from
his ancestors. His greatest exploit was the expedition on
which he took his friends through the valleys In which
he had lived with the last of the Yahi and where he had
eventually spent a number of years wandering on his
own. His former enemies, the farmers, gave him a
hearty welcome, and Ishi felt rather ashamed of having
raided their barns in the past. This Journey under
Ishi's guidance gave his companions Insight into the
misery and pleasures of the rough existence led by pre¬
historic Indians.
It was a unique experience for the ethnologists, and
they learnt to see nature through the eyes of a Neolithic
hunter. As Ishi went further and further Into the woods
which he knew so well, old memories came surging up
into his mind. He described to his companions many
Incidents from his youth In the very places In which
they had occurred.
But gradually, the pleasure of finding himself back In
his familiar surroundings gave way to a strange Impa¬
tience to be gone. No doubt the terrible experiences of
the bad days had come crowding In on the happy memo¬
ries of his youth. It was with an eager step that he
climbed up Into the train which was to carry him away
from the lands of his ancestors.
Ishi had an iron constitution, but he had not been
Immunized against the white man's Illnesses, and In
particular, against what, for him, was the most deadly of
these tuberculosis. In spite of the best medical care, it
proved impossible to rid him of the devastating effects of
disease which he contracted during the fourth year of
his stay among the white people. When his friends judged
that his end was near, respecting the Indian tradition
according to which a man should die in his own house,
they had him taken to the Ethnological Museum, his
"home."
Ishi died stoically, without a word of complaint, like the
members of his race. His friends, the ethnologists, felt
that It was their duty to deal with his body as his family
would have done, and accordingly burnt it, together with
his bow. his arrows and his shells. Inscribed on the urn 13
which contains his ashes are the words: "Ishi, the last
Yana Indian. 1916."
