ATATURK & THE EMAN
by Afet Afetinan
& Ara Guler, Istanbul
20

CIPATION OF WOMEN
Forty years ago a sweeping social revolution under the leadership and impelling
drive of Kemal Ataturk gave birth to modern Turkey. The spectacular changos
in the status of Turkish women which it brought have since becomo a symbol
and a goal to inspire those working for the emancipation of women in many
other countries. Below we publish extracts from the text of a booklet. "Tho
Emancipation of the Turkish Woman," published by Unesco last year. Its author,
Dr. Afet Afetinan, a Turkish historian, played a leading role in Turkoy's social
evolution and worked in close collaboration with President Ataturk, whoso
memory is being celebrated this year, a quarter of a century after his death.
URKisH women of the Ottoman era (14th to
20th centuries), especially those in the cities,
spent their lives In the complete seclusion of the harem.
Their occupations consisted mainly of doing or supervising
the housework, looking after the children or embroidering.
Their social life was restricted to family gatherings.
In one of her letters, Lady Montagu, wife of an English
ambassador, wrote (1717-18): "The main things women
do is go visiting neighbours, go to Turkish baths, spend
lavishly and create new costume designs." She also told
her friends in England that she liked the costumes worn
by Turkish women and that she herself possessed some.
Lady Montagu, of course, meant the costumes worn
by city women Indoors. The clothes worn outdoors
reflected the kind of secluded life led by Moslem Turkish
women. Their faces were veiled and they wore a loose
wrap known as a charshaf. A variation of this costume
was the combination of the feradje (something like a
loose-fitting overcoat) and the yashmak (a veil which left
the eyes uncovered and which was worn especially by the
CONT'D ON NEXT PAO.E
Unosco-W. Mubbell
IMAGES OF YESTERDAY
AND TODAY. Kneeling in
front of a mosque wall which
bears the name of Allah (left),
these Turkish women have
veiled their faces with their
loose wrap, or charshaf. Until
the start of the 19th century it
was forbidden for Turkish
women to appear in public
places and they had no part
in the social and cultural life
of the country. It was only
in 1923 when a democratic
regime was created in Turkey
that they attained the rights
enjoyed by women in other
modern states. Right, in this
secondary school at Ankara,
girls nowadays sit alongside
boys in a geometry class.
21

ATATURK (Cont'd)
From harem to university
women of the palace). At a later date the wives of high
officials and other women who from time to time visited
the palace, either as private guests or on State occasions,
were compelled to wear the feradje and yashmak.
This type of costume was generally worn throughout the
Moslem world but only at a later date and there is nothing
to suggest that women were compelled to adopt It in the
early stages of Islam.
The Levant Herald (England) of August 15, 1881 report¬
ed: "The officers of police are instructed to keep a strict
look-out, and to make a report whenever they observe a
woman daring to wear the thin veil under circumstances
In which it ls not sanctioned by the regulations. The
report will state the name of the offending lady and the
particulars of the breach of rule and will be submitted to
the Minister of Police. Moslem ladies are also forbidden
to drive or walk round the places of Beyazlt, Shahzade-
Bashl and Aksarai and to walk In the Great Bazaar and
to sit down in shops.
"Moslem ladies are also strictly forbidden to gather
together in groups in any public places and if the police
observe any group, it will be their duty to invite them to
EQUAL RIGHTS. In Turkey the past 40 years have
been marked by rapid and far-reaching improvements
in the status accorded to women. Today they are
found in virtually every profession. Below, a young
nurse helps a doctor to vaccinate school-children.
WHO
22
disperse. This invitation will be addressed to the oldest
lady in the group, or to the servants in attendance, at the
discretion of the officer. The latter part of the regula¬
tions Is devoted to prescribing the manner in which men
shall behave to ladies in public. Any man who permits
himself to speak to a woman or to make signs to her will
be punished under Article 202 of the criminal code."
These rules, however, were not strictly applied at all
times. There were even times when women enjoyed a
measure of freedom. During the "Tulip Period," which
coincides with the second half of the eighteenth century,
women wearing light coloured feradjes attended open-air
festivities and entertainments, as is shown by paintings
and writings of that period.
From the fourteenth century until early in the twentieth
century (1918), Turkish women were subjects of a
Moslem Empire which spread over three continents
Asia, Europe and Africaand covered about six million
square kilometres.
But while the theocratic Ottoman State was extending
its boundaries, the social position of women deteriorated.
The expansion of the Ottoman Empire brought it In
contact with the influence of Persia and Byzantium, and
the old Turkish customs were slowly forgotten. During
this period new differences of status between the sexes
increased. The harem life of Persia and Byzantium was
introduced into the Turkish palace. In the fifteenth
century, on orders from the Sultan, the palace was divided
into the harem (women's section) and selamlik (men's
section).
The viziers and beys were not slow In Introducing this
system into their homes, and soon harem life and poly¬
gamy spread among a certain class of people and became
an accepted custom.
'olygamy was practised in Arabia long before
Islam and led to such a deterioration of family
life that the limitation of the number of wives to four
was considered to be an important reform. The Islamic
stipulation that men and women are equally responsible
for the honour of the family was also regarded as an
advance in Arabia, the birthplace of Islam.
Thus men and women alike were expected to abide by
the rules of morality and to be faithful to their spouses;
but all the rules and teachings of Islam could not bring
about the desired equality between the sexes even though
the laws of Islam, in general, honoured women more and
conceded them more rights than did the old Arabic, and
perhaps even the Roman laws.
The Islamic family laws adopted by the Ottomans were
concerned with marriage, inheritance and minorities. As
regards marriage, women had no say In choosing their
husbands who were selected by the parents of the girl or
an older member of her family. Engagement was not
recognized in law and, if it took place at all, It was by
private arrangement between the two families. The
husband had the right to divorce his wife whenever he
wished merely by announcing to her, orally or in writing,
"I divorce thee."
What was the situation of the slave woman of the
Ottoman period who filled the harem of the palace? They
were brought from the Caucasus and other parts of the
empire. The leading figure in the palace harem was the
sultan's mother; next came the mothers of the sultan's
children ; in addition to their wives the sultans could keep
as many odalisques and slaves as they wished.
Occasionally the sultan would give some of these women
their freedom.
Although female slaves in the Ottoman period were

SYMBOL OF WOMEN'S
SECLUSION. The Turkish
woman in this 19th century
photo wears a yashmak or
veil, which hides the face,
but leaves the eyes uncov¬
ered, and which women
were always obliged to
wear in public. In 1922
the first women students
who enrolled at the Faculty
of Medicine in Istanbul
wore their veils when
attending lectures with
men. They continued to
do so until 1925 when
Kemal Ataturk urged adop¬
tion of European dress.
Ata Guler collodion
treated like chattels, they were also given rights whereby
they could acquire their freedom and become members
of free society, and children of parents who had won their
freedom were also regarded as free citizens. Slavery and
the slave trade were abolished by a decree of 1854.
The role of country-woman in all the parts of the
empire was that of the producer. In farming women
supplied a great proportion of the labour and they also
played their part in the economy of the home. Though
polygamy was also practised in the country and men
sometimes married as many as four wives it was generally
for economic reasons. Country women did not dress like
the city women When outdoors. Open-air Ufe set them
working alongside men and therefore they did not hide
their faces behind veils or yashmaks. They only avoided
a man and covered their faces if he was a stranger.
In the 19th century there was a movement towards
western ways of life which led to considerable changes in
education, art and science, as well as an evolution In
social life. As a result, some progressive ideas had
already been implanted in women's minds by the end of
the century.
Already before 1869 the Government decided to open
primary and secondary schools for girls, but because the
teachers In such schools would necessarily be male and
because girls of 11-13 years of age were considered as
having reached an age when they should be segregated
from men, public opinion would not tolerate the idea. In
1870 a school was opened in Istanbul to train women
teachers for the primary and secondary girls' schools.
Although initially most of the teachers In this school
were men, by 1900 women were in the majority and hence
the number of women with a modern education likewise
increased.
The years 1908-18 were marked by two developments:
enrolment In girls' schools progressively Increased, and
certain men even ventured to go out in the company of
their wives. The fact that Sadrasam (Prime Minister)
Fuat Pasha consented to sit with his wife In the lounge
of an hotel caused much comment.
A new social situation was created in Turkey when the
Ottoman Empire entered the First World War. As men
were called up for the army women had to be appointed
to fill vacancies in the offices. During the war the
first faculty for girls attached to ttie University of
Istanbul was opened (1914). In 1921 the Arts Faculty
agreed to co-educatlonal attendance at lectures.
The passive resistance with which women, from the
CONTD ON NEXT PAGE
23

Sabah
Revolutionary changes
in language & writing
When the fabric of the theocratic and feudal Ottoman Empire with its out¬
dated structures and institutions collapsed after the First World War, Kemal
Ataturk transformed Turkey into a secular state. The greatest obstacle to
development was illiteracy (over 90%) so he decided to reorganize the
educational system and to make use of Latin script (in 1928) because it
lent itself more readily than Arabic characters to a rendering of the Turkish
language in writing. Innumerable borrowings from Arabic and Persian
had produced a literary language which was almost unintelligible to the
majority of the population. Before launching a nationwide educational
programme, Ataturk decided to rid the Turkish language of these foreign
words. Today the spoken and written forms of the language are identical.
Ataturk established a number of cultural institutions, including The Turkish
Historical Society and the Turkish Language Society. He stimulated and
actively supported the historical and archaeological research in Anatolia
which has revealed to the world the existence of hitherto unknown civiliza¬
tions. Left, a portrait of Ataturk (1881-1938). Right, Ataturk visiting a
Turkish school at the time of the country's change over to the Latin script.
ATATURK (Cont'd)
Educate women to educate a nation
beginning of the twentieth century, opposed veiling and
the witholdlng of the right to go out freely, to ride in
the same carriage as their husbands and to sit next to
them, eventually triumphed over the fanaticism of
public opinion.
Until the end of the First World War, men and women
were separated from each other on public transport by
partitions. On boats sailing the Bosphorus and crossing
from Istanbul to the islands, women were obliged to stay
in closed cabins below decks. When women were finally
permitted to remain on deck, a woman author described
her feelings at being able to watch the sea in the open
air during that one-hour trip with such zest that anyone
would have imagined that she was crossing the ocean for
the first time.
There were many changes in the status of women
between 1918-23, largely brought about by the historical
events of the time.
In 1918, the Ottoman Empire signed the Treaty of
Mondros as one of the defeated powers, losing all rights
over her Asian territories (Arabia, Syria, Palestine, Leba¬
non, Iraq). In 1920, the last government of the Ottoman
Empire signed the Treaty of Sèvres, agreeing to the
dismemberment of Turkey, and every part of the country
now faced the possibility of occupation.
While the Sultan and his government accepted these
terms the nation itself did not and turned its mind to the
Idea of liberation. To preserve the unity of the country
it was necessary to bring together all the local forces.
With this in mind, Mustafa Kemal (Ataturk) assumed
the leadership of the nation and his first actions as leader
were to refuse to recognize the International treaties
entered into by the Sultan and his government and to
launch resistance against the occupying powers. In the
beginning this resistance took the form of guerilla fighting,
24 but on April 23, 1920, Kemal formed a government and
a regular army and attacked the forces of the occupying
powers.
In 1922 Anatolia was cleared of occuping troops and
with the Treaty of Lausanne in 1923 the boundaries of the
new Turkey were established. The same year, on October
29, a democracy was instituted with Ankara as the new
capital. Thus monarchy in Turkey came to an end.
In the democratic State which was created in 1923,
Turkish woman had at last attained the rights enjoyed
by women in other modern states.
The constitution of democratic Turkey made elementary
education for boys and girls compulsory, but because of
the shortage of teachers and school buildings its applica¬
tion remains largely theoretical. Turkey's high percentage
of illiteracy Is thus likely to remain so for some time.
All faculties of the Istanbul University started opening
their doors to girl students from 1921 and many teacher-
training schools, lycées, and other institutes were opened
for the benefit of girls. In addition, many of the existing
schools introduced co-education. In 1928, the adoption of
the Latin alphabet made learning much easier and as a
result there was an immediate increase in the number of
persons able to read and write.


O|nce women began to study in colleges and
,^.' universities many of them entered a variety
of professions and trades. But this was not always an
easy matter, as was seen in the case of the medical pro¬
fession. When young women wished to study law or
the arts no obstacles were placed in their way. But
when they showed interest in becoming doctors of medi¬
cine, public opinion was aroused and even educated
parents were reluctant to accept the idea. Articles were
published in the newspapers, claiming that women were
not likely to succed as doctors.
However, a small minority approved and supported
women in their struggle. Encouraged by this support,

Educational Film Centre
seven girl students enrolled at the faculty of medicine of
Istanbul University in September 1922. Because, in terms
of dress, women were still bound by the old customs these
first women medical students wore their veils while
attending lectures with men and continued to do so until
1925, when Kemal Ataturk urged the adoption of European
dress.
The first women medical students completed their stu¬
dies in 1927 and, after a year's interneship, received their
diplomas as fully qualified doctors. These and other
women doctors who had studied in Europe or America
worked only as general practitioners. When some of them
wanted to become specialists, however, most of their male
colleagues declared that despite their attainments as
students, women would not be successful as practising
doctors. In time, the difficulties were overcome and
women who have specialized in different branches of
medicine have once again proved their capabilities.
Today, women are found in virtually every profession.
The engineer who supervised the building of the Ataturk
Memorial Mausoleum in Ankara, for instance, was a
woman, Sabiha Guneyman. The chief architect of the
Evkaf (religious trusts) in Istanbul is also a woman,
Cahide Tamar. The famous Rumell Fort In Istanbul was
restored by three women architects.
Teaching was the first profession open to women in
Turkey and the number of women who have taken up
teaching in primary and secondary schools, lycées and
universities is still much higher than in other professions.
So far, there is only a small number of women professors,
although there are a good many lecturers and assistant
lecturers. Those holding top positions in government
departments are still far from numerous.
On the stage, women have likewise distinguished them¬
selves, especially when it is remembered that until a
quarter of a century or so ago they were kept strictly
within the confines of their homes. It had always been
considered against the principles of Islam for women to
act. Aflfe Hanlm was nearly Imprisoned in 1921 for
contravening this principle. Women had to struggle for
their rights in this field just as in so many others.
The first woman Joined the Turkish bar In Ankara Jn
1928. Since then the number has Increased considerably
and today, in addition, there are many women Judges,
commissioners of oaths, legal advisers and lecturers at
the law schools.
Today, in Turkey, men and women are equal in the eyes
of the law. The many social reforms Introduced during
the presidency of Kemal Ataturk (1923-38) always took
account of women's position; many legal rights and duties
were freely conceded to them.
In 1926 the Turkish Government introduced a new set
of civil laws along the lines of the Swiss Civil Code. Tills
gave Turkish women all the rights customary In modern
communities.
The Turkish Civil Code, in terms of civil rights, did
away with all the legal differences between men and
women. It made women the equals of men, except that
women were subject to certain restrictions aimed at
securing permanency in marriage.
The prohibition of polygamy was one of the fundamental
features of this code, which also raised the marriageable
age for girls to 18, laid down certain pre-marrlage forma¬
lities, and required that marriage ceremonies should take
place before the municipal authorities in the presence of
witnesses, and also that a marriage should be recorded
both In the register and on the Identity cards of both
parties.
In April 1930, parliament passed the Municipal Laws Bill
giving women the right to vote and to stand in municipal
elections. The next step was to give women the right to
stand for parliament. President Ataturk was in favour
of this and often tried to induce members of the govern¬
ment to accept his views. In the constitution then In
force, mention of franchise was always accompanied by
the words "every Turkish male." On December 11, 1934
the words "and female" were added to this phrase.
Thus, Turkish women managed within a quarter of a
century to overcome a fanatical opposition and thereby
set an example to other women of the Moslem world.
ince they were given the right to vote both as

1 a result of the action of political parties and
their own desire to carry out their duties as citizens, a
high percentage of women have participated in elections.
For example, in 1954 out of 5,366,024 women voters (the
total number of voters was 10,287,733), 4,741,304 used their
right to vote.
In spite of all the legislation enacted for their benefit,
however, Turkish women In general have not yet achieved
the social and intellectual standing that could be desired.
In the country as in the town, they must be educated so
that they realize the meaning of all the rights conceded
to them by law.
On this subject, Professor Sadl Irmak wrote in 1962:
"There are four factors that undermine our efforts to
bring about equality for women: Ignorance, bad traditions,
wrong interpretation of religious rules, male selfish¬
ness ..." Professor Irmak analyses all these elements
and emphasizes the effect of illiteracy, declaring: "we
must educate women so that they, in turn, can educate
our nation." It ls essential that women of Turkey should
realize the meaning of their rights and duties before
exercising them.
The man responsible for the reforms in Turkey was
Kemal Ataturk, who believed in preparing both the
people around him and also public opinion before
introducing anything new. Ataturk wanted his people
to progress and to prosper according to the most 25
enlightened ideas and the principles of modern civilization.
