WORLD PROGRAMME (Cont'd)
Prospects of communication satellites
essential to a clear-sighted planning of education itself,
but because they provide young nations with the means
to proceed with their development clearly and rationally,
and the international community in general with ways to
grapple with some of the major problems of the modern
world."
The Conference decided to support the establishment in
Vienna of a co-ordination centre for social science research
and documentation, where specialists from countries of
different social and economic systems will collaborate. At
the regional level, Unesco will aid the Latin American
Social Science Faculty at Santiago, Chile, the Latin
American Research Centre at Rio de 'Janeiro and the
Research Centre on Social and Economic Development in
Southern Asia at New Delhi.
u nesco will also carry out a major study of main
	 trends in social science research similar to
the remarkable survey that was made of world scientific
trends and technological research (*) which could
provide a new basis for and give fresh impulse to the
branches of the social sciences in question.
Unesco's programme in the field of mass communication
for 1963-1964 will have three main objectives: (1) to pro¬
mote the free flow in information and the development of
the means and techniques of mass communication; (2)
to develop the use of these media and techniques in the
service of education at all levels; (3) to stimulate their
use in furthering international understanding.
A Unesco World Enquiry carried out during the past
four years at the request of the United Nations has shown
that about 70% of the world's populationsome 2,000
million peoplestill lack adequate Information facilities.
In various ways Unesco is to help developing countries
to set up or to expand their newspapers, news agencies,
radio broadcasting services and, where applicable, educa¬
tional television services. Unesco's Department of Mass
Communication in addition will assist countries to make
wider use of modern information techniques at all levels of
education, as well as already established methods such as
filmstrips, slides and tape recordings.
After discussions on the free flow of information, the
Conference noted "the lightning progress made during the
past two years in the launching and peaceful utilization
of artificial earth satellites" and- considered that "these
marvellous achievements of science and technology, and
those which may be expected in the near future, open ur»
boundless prospects for the free flow of information with
peaceful aims, the education of young people and adults,
the universal dissemination of knowledge... and cultural
exchanges between countries." It authorized Unesco's
Director-General "to study the consequences which the
use of new techniques of communication on a world
scale... are likely to have."
One of the consequences in question will be the
_ need to re-allocate the radio frequency spec¬
trum to make provision for the use of appropriate fre¬
quencies in the communication satellite service. A special
conference of the InternationalTelecommunications Union
(ITU) will open in Geneva next October to allocate fre¬
quency bands for space radio communication purposes. A
subsequent meeting of specialists, to be held at Unesco's
H.Q. in Paris, will make further studies aimed at achieving
a common programme concerning Unesco member states
and international organizations, and will also put forward
new recommendations for Unesco's programme in 1965-
1966.
Unesco's programme of international exchanges will
also be devoted to international communications but in a
different form. Unesco's exchange service will, in addition
to publishing "Study Abroad" and "Vacations Abroad,"
32
(*) "Current Trends in Scientific Research" by Pierre Auger
(See The Unesco Courier, April 1962).
also bring out a new volume, "Handbook for International
Exchanges" which is designed as a standard work of
reference in the field of exchange. The Exchange Service
will also administer some 1,500 Unesco fellowships in
1963-1964.
Finally, the Conference underlined the role of cultural
activities, alone capable of preparing the way for a
humanism in which universality and diversity are reconcil¬
ed. Philosophy and the humanistic sciences are called
upon to advance knowledge of different cultures and
civilizations and to go thoroughly tato the cultural aspects
of present-day world problems. Unesco offers a frame¬
work for and a bridge between the studies and research
of thinkers and scholars. The constructive exchanges
thus encouraged open the way to broad new perspectives.
A share for everyone in cultural life one of the rights
laid down in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
is a condition of social progress. The man in the street
will have increased opportunities to appreciate the results
of Unesco's work, whether through the popularization of
treasures of art (world art albums and pocket art books),
of the cinema (aid to art and cultural films), of literature
(series of translations of classical and modern works from
East and West), or of music (records in a Musical Antho¬
logy of the Orient).
During the next two years, the major project on the
mutual appreciation of Eastern and Western cultural
values will aim mainly at the establishment or strengthen¬
ing of research and teaching institutes capable of ensuring
permanent future exchanges between large cultural
regions.
'roblems relating to the protection of the
world's cultural heritage remain principally
centered on the specific case of the Nubian monuments.
Thanks to Unesco's intervention, major arch
excavations of vital historical significance have been
carried out and a large number of monuments have been
taken to places of safety or protected where they stand.
But there is still a question mark over the fate of the
temples of Abu Simbel. The Conference refused to
guarantee a loan of $30,500,000 to finance the lifting of
these rock temples and instead, issued a new appeal for
voluntary contributions to governments and to public or
private institutions. An executive committee of represen¬
tatives from 15 countries is to meet before March 31 to
study the results of this appeal.
In the words of Professor de Berredo Carneiro, "Unesco
has given itself the task of promoting mutual understand¬
ing among the peoples, of giving a powerful stimulus to
education and the dissemination of culture and of assist¬
ing in the maintenance and advancement of knowledge."
Yet all these actions must be indissociably linked With an
ideal which is written in its Constitution: the maintenance
of peace. Thus another of Unesco's permanent functions
is to encourage the adoption by governments of laws and
practices essential to peace and intellectual progress.
Two recommendations of this kind were adopted. The
first, concerned with technical and vocational education,
stresses the need to develop this form of education accord¬
ing to common principles covering the organization,
orientation, staffs and methods of schools for training,
engineers, technicians and skilled workers. The second
aims at guaranteeing the protection of rural and urban
landscapes which, despite their esthetic value, "are in
danger of being disfigured by building development and
land speculation."
These, in brief, are the main achievements of the 12th
session of the General Conference in preparation for the
two years ahead. The whole forms the programme of
Unesco which has set out to establish a system of co¬
operation and social harmony on rational foundations for,
as Professor de Berredo Carneiro reminded the General
Conference, "Without a far-reaching reform of opinions
and moral codes through education, the social sciences
and the development of culture, it will be impossible to
control the disturbances which increasingly affect Inter¬
national life."
