Detail of "A strolling theatre and various
acts on a raft during a night festival."
Early in the 18th century, Vebhi, a well-known poet
compiled a Surname, or festival book, for the Sultan
Ahmed III. Many copies were made of the Surname-i
Vehbi, the best known being that illustrated by the
Istanbul painter, Levni. These three reproductions are
taken from this copy which has 1 37 miniatures. Below,
"The march past of the mehter (military bandV

LIFE OF COURT & PEOPLE
IN ANCIENT TURKISH ART
Detail of "Dances and
before the Sultan."
^Phe splendid achievements of Turkey in the fields
of architecture, carpet weaving, pottery and
tile-making have been universally recognized. Yet
of all the schools of painting which existed in the
Near and Middle East during the Islamic period that
of Turkey is least known. Orîe of the reasons is that
very little of this art ever left Turkey and even in
Turkey itself it remained almost inaccessible, being
housed in the palace libraries of the sultans. Only
since the establishment of the Republic under Ataturk
have manuscripts and paintings become more readily
available. Some remarkable examples of this little-
known art have now been published in colour in a
Unesco World Art Series Album: "Turkey, Ancient
Miniatures." As these show, the Turkish miniaturist
can be distinguished from his better-known counter¬
part of the Iranian school by his choice of subject
matter. He prefers the market place swarming with
people rather than a fairy-like garden of some Prince
Charming. Though a "courtly style" of painting existed
and was used to depict incidents in the lives of the
great sultans, even this was latterly combined, in the
same painting with the "popular style" which showed
episodes in everyday life and crowds with their noise
and gossip, and which even went as far as the gro¬
tesque. This documentary approach makes many
a Turkish painting a valuable historical record. A
great number of such records are found in the "Festival
Books," "Books of Travel," "Itineraries" and "Books
of Diplomatic Missions" so profusely illustrated by
Turkish artists. On this page we present a few of the
32 full-page colour illustrations of works dating
from the 13th to the 18th centuries presented in the
album of Turkish art published by the New York
Graphic Society by arrangement with Unesco. Printed
in Italy, this volume is priced at SI 8.00 or equivalent.

*'rf
The three drawings on this
page are by Mehmed Siyah
Kalem, a remarkable 15th cen¬
tury artist whose works figure
in The Album of the Conqueror
three volumes of drawings,
miniatures and specimens
of handwriting by Chinese,
Uighur, Seljuk and Ottoman
masters of the 14th and
15th centuries. Siyah Kalem
never depicts the settled life of
the towns. His subjects tra¬
vellers and animals chiefly
come from the highways, and he
may well have been the painter
of a nomad people. Above,
"Strolling medicine-men."
Right, detail of "Huntingscene."
Below, "Horse training."
