SCIENTISTS ABROAD
by Alan J. A. Elliott
bout one third of all fellowships and scholar¬
ships offered for study abroad are awarded In
the fields of science and technology. This has been
revealed by successive analyses of the offers listed in
Study Abroad, Unesco's international handbook on
fellowships, scholarships and educational exchange.
The thirteenth edition of Study Abroad, which gave
information on awards available in 1962 and 1963, listed
over 130,000 individual opportunities. Of these about
10% were for the study of mathematics and natural
science. And about 20% were for the study of applied
sciences and technology, Including engineering, medicine
and agriculture. For the sake of comparison, about 14%
of awards were offered in the social sciences, and nearly
16% in humanities, liberal arts, linguistics, literature and
history.
This means that at least 40,000 scientists and techno¬
logists received awards for study abroad during the aca¬
demic year 1962 alone. In practice the figure may be
considerably higher, because 25-30% of the offers made In
Study Abroad do not specify a field of study. Although
the actual allocation of awards is not known with any
great accuracy it would be safe to say that at least a
quarter of these awards, amounting to about 10,000 were
also made to scientists.
Actual examples of fellowship programmes listed
in Study Abroad are extremely varied. They include
the programmes of the Food and Agriculture Organiza¬
tion, Unesco, the World Health Organization, and other
organizations of the United Nations system. There are
also the programmes of other intergovernmental organiza¬
tions such as the European Organization for Nuclear
Research and the International Computation Centre.
Non-governmental organizations such as the Inter¬
national Union against Cancer and the International
Astronomical Union contribute their share. Among the
national chapters some very important programmes are
listed, for example those of the French Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), the United Kingdom
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR),
the United States National Research Council and the
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences.
O|n the other end of the scale there are many
programmes of limited size and more
specialized aims. For instance, Rutgers University, New
Jersey (USA), gives one fellowship a year to a young
Italian microbiologist. The A.F. Regnell Botanical Dona¬
tion permits the Swedish Royal Academy of Science to
award, at Irregular intervals, fellowships to Swedes for
study of botany in Brazil or other "intertropical
countries."
In between these two extremes are a large number of
programmes involving many thousands of individual
awards directed in general towards the promotion of
economic development. Most of these programmes are
government-sponsored, accounting for about 50% of all
fellowships offered.
It is not always easy, though, to identify the proportion
devoted to science and technology. The Government of
India offers four "Union Territories Overseas Scholar¬
ships" for "any branch of science, engineering, technology
or medicine." But the Government of Libya offers 258
State Scholarships for study of "teacher training, agri¬
culture, engineering and other fields" In Europe, the U.S.A.
and the United Arab Republic. And among countries
offering technical assistance, the U.S. Government, In one
of Its many programmes, makes approximately 1,900
awards for which the subject of study Ls "generally
unrestricted" to "nationals of most countries having
United States diplomatic or consular posts." It is
reasonably certain, however, that a high proportion of
such awards ls made In science or technology.
The fellowship programmes of the U.SS.R. on the other
hand, although fewer in number, make more .specific
mention of "science, agriculture and medicine" as fields
of study.
When attention Ls turned to the number
of scientists studying abroad, regardless of
whether or not they are receiving fellowships. It Ls found
once again that they represent a large proportion of all
foreign students. Unesco's tenth annual survey of foreign
students enrolled in higher education showed a total, In
all fields, of over 250,000 In the academic year 1900-1001.
In a very general way, the overall situation can be viewed
from two main viewpoints. One Ls the tradition that
science, and for that matter all academic learning and
research, cannot be restricted to any one nation, and that
as long as there have been universities, students and
teachers have gone abroad to follow their vocations.
The other of much more recent origin concerns the
great need for training scientists and technologists from
countries undergoing rapid economic development. This
second part of the problem Is by far the more urgent
for practical, present-day purposes; but as It cannot be
seen In entire Isolation a word needs to be said about the
more general problem of scientific exchanges.
In a sense, the phenomenon of scientists studying abroad
Is only part of the broader problem of the international
exchange of scientific Information. While It would be
wrong to Infer that all scientists who go abroad do so for
purely professional purposesthere ls probably as high a
proportion of "educational tourists" among scientists as
in any other discipline it can be assumed that most of
them are prompted by the need to acquire knowledge and
experience that they cannot obtain at home.
It may be that Institutions for scientific study do not
even exist In their own countries; or perhaps they have
been unable to obtain places in suitable institutions. With
respect to the more specialized branches of post-graduate
study or research, a student may feel the need to work
with a particular teacher abroad. Very few countries
are entirely self-sufficient in facilities for scientific re¬
search. And even those that are. or nearly so, have a
strong tradition of exchanging knowledge with workers in
the same fields abroad.
But study abroad ls not the only way of exchanging
scientific Information. From some points of view It is a
very Ineffective way. For the problem nowadays ls not
so much one of encouraging scientists to meet each other,
but of providing them with a means of access to the very
large quantities of articles and papers on a enormous
range of subjects appearing In the scientific journals of cc
the world. bi
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SCIENTISTS ABROAD (Cont'd)
50,000 science fellowships a year
Fellowships for study abroad are by no means
the only way of promoting personal contacts. An
Increasingly important phenomenon is the large number
of congresses, conferences and meetings that take place
every year. The facilities of air travel, and the financial
support of governments and industrial concerns, has made
It possible for larger numbers of scientists than ever
before to meet each other. At least half a million go
abroad every year for such purposes.
This, then, is the general background of international
scientific relations against which the problems of study
abroad must be seen. But when one turns to the particu¬
lar problems which face countries in the process of rapid
enonomlc development a completely new set of factors
has to be taken into account. In the past and even
today some of the greatest scientific developments have
been achieved without a very clear definition of goals. In
fact, the research scientist often produces his best results
through being allowed a maximum freedom of action.
Nowadays the drive towards economic and social
development demands a very careful statement of
objectives. This tendency affects the whole world, but
It Is particularly drastic in countries which can least afford
the luxury of wasted effort.
In two-thirds of the countries of the world, in which
many millions Uve on the borderlines of undernourish¬
ment, there is the greatest need for economy of effort
and the careful development of human resources. Offers
of outside assistance are not lacking, but programmes of
technical co-operation cannot achieve the results expected
of them unless they are carefully planned and co¬
ordinated. The development of science and technology
is obviously one of the first and foremost needs.
But inevitably projects in the fields must find themselves
In competition with other types of projects. Moreover,
scientific personnel must be of high intelligence and
ability. So there is competition for human resources just
when the most desirable prizes may seem to lie in politics
or diplomacy rather than In further academic study.
Further than that, there is competition between basic
sciences on one hand and technology on the other. If
there are not enough scientists it simply means that not
much research will be done. If there are not enough
technologists there will be no factories or railways. And
beyond that there is competition between the different
sciences and different technologies. And so on.
Where does study abroad fit into this picture?
The answer to this is complicated by the fact
that whatever its role may have been in the past there
must now be a careful assessment of plans for the future.
Two major considerations must be taken into account.
The first is derived from the well-known situation in
which exceptionally large numbers of science students
who go abroad never return home. And of those that
do there is much dissatisfaction owing to Inability to find
employment suitable to the experience acquired abroad.
The second consideration depends on an assessment of
where the most serious obstacles to scientific development
lie. For the present and immediate future some of the
most serious problems He in general education at the
primary and secondary levels, rather than in the specific
training of scientists. But in many countries the heart
of the problem can be pinpointed as lying in science
teaching in secondary schools. And this is not a problem
which can be solved by massive programmes for study
abroad by scientists.
It is clear that In future there must be a careful selec¬
tion in fact, rather more careful than has hitherto been
the case of objectives to which funds will be devoted for
study abroad. This must begin with an assessment of
the number of qualified scientists who can be produced
eg by domestic training institutions, and decisions as to how
these institutions will be developed or supplemented in
the future.
To a great extent plans for study abroad must be
designed to fill the gaps. Some countries may still have
to send relatively large numbers of science students abroad
for university degrees, simply because of a present lack
of university places. Others may be able to pinpoint their
needs to a few specialized post-graduate subjects in which
they do not possess and in which they may probably not
find it worthwhile to possess fully developed research
facilities. But above all, the scientist must be assured
of worthwhile and remunerative work on his return.
Wherever possible, fellowships for study abroad In
scientific or technological fields should be planned so as
to achieve very much more effective results than at
present. It is worth noting that in Unesco's fellowship
programmes, in which science is given a very high priority,
only about one-quarter of the thousand or so awards made
each year are In scientific subjects per se. A high propor¬
tion of Unesco fellowships as a whole are for thé develop¬
ment of general education.
MONG the science fellowships awarded by
Unesco there are many examples of the ways
in which study programmes are carefully elaborated in
relation to clearly-defined needs. One of its programmes,
which is operated in collaboration with the International
Brain Research Organization, provides for about 30
fellowships through which interdisciplinary studies
concerning the brain can be promoted. Fellows may
specialize in neuroanatomy, neurochemistry, neurophar¬
macology or other relevant fields. Plans are being made
for a fellow from Japan, for example, who has already
been studying at the University of California, to do re¬
search on the topic of "Brain Mapping in Birds" at the
University of Tübingen.
Another type of fellowship can be found in connexion
with projects under the United Nations Special Fund.
Whereas the brain research fellowships are intended to
promote research at a very advanced level, Special Fund
fellowships are designed to give the necessary qualifica¬
tions to scientists or technologists who will be employed
on clearly-defined projects after their return home. Five
fellowships of this type, for mathematical study and
hydraulic engineering, are being awarded, for example, to
candidates from Vietnam and Cambodia in connexion
with preliminary studies for the gigantic project of
controlling the Mekong River, which flows through.
Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam, by a series of dams
and barrages.
A different example of a Special Fund project can be
found in the Japanese International Institute of Seismo¬
logy and Earthquake Engineering. Fellowships for atten¬
dance at the Institute by candidates from seismic zones
elsewhere in the world are awarded by both the Govern¬
ment of Japan and by Unesco.
But an important part of this broader picture is the
increasing realization that the application of science and
technology for the purposes of economic development is
not a one-way process in which the more highly indus¬
trialized nations transmit their knowledge and experience
to those less advanced. The real key to the problem lies
in the creation of institutions in less developed countries
which can absorb and utilize experience gained elsewhere.
Once these institutions have begun to take root they
are often in a position to contribute to development
outside their own frontiers. In scientific matters, as
much as any others, much of the success of this process
must depend on the sympathetic relationships which can
be established between institutions in different countries.
As often as not these relationships are of a non-govern¬
mental or private nature.
There are many examples of fruitful results from the
"pairing" or twinning of universities. The personal
contacts established through study abroad on this basis
can have far more meaning than when such a system
does not exist. In this and similar ways there lie the
greatest possibilities of not only assisting developing
countries in their more urgent needs, but also of bringing
them, to the advantage of all, to the status of full
participants in the worldwide scientific community.
u
z
<
Z
a:
<
