MONG the many civilizations whose remains are
^scattered through the New World few have so
Intrigued archaeologists as that which once flourished on
the island of Marajo at the mouth of the Amazon. We do
not know who were its artisans; it was the work of men
who had vanished before Europeans landed on the coast
of Brazil.
The existence of this centre of civilization in so unex¬
pected a place had already inspired the most venturesome
theories In the 19th century. What, indeed, has not
been written on the subject? Egyptians, Phoenicians and
even Vikings were all named in turn to explain the con¬
trast between these remains of a people which had
reached a relatively advanced level of civilization and the
wretchedness of the local physical and human environ¬
ment. There was something paradoxical in the fact that
an art which was both original and refined should be
found in a part of the continent which one might imagine
had always been the stronghold of barbaric tribes.
Moreover, there was nothing about this alluvial land
below the Equator to favour its development as an artistic
centre. Depending on the season, the large island is
turned into lakes and swamps or into dusty plains. When
the streams are in spate, natural or artificial hills emerge
here and there from the water and provide a refuge for
men and animals. These are conditions barely suited to
primitive groups engaged in rudimentary farming com¬
bined 'with fishing and hunting. Such, indeed, was the
way of life of the tribes which the Portuguese found there
in the 17th century and which they promptly set about
exterminating.
Yet part of the island was once occupied by a seden¬
tary people who knew how to make the best use of their
land. Their villages were built on slopes which today are
littered with shards of pottery. Their burial-grounds are
also filled with pottery fragments and objects made of
clay, and from these we have able to reconstruct in part
the culture of a people whose very name Is unknown.
The "Marajoaras," as we may call them for con
venience, certainly possessed relatively complex social and
political structures : the works they carried out mark them
as a disciplined people governed by chiefs or by an aristo¬
cracy. It would be difficult to explain how they built arti¬
ficial hills 25 feet high, some 400 feet long and 130 feet
wide unless there were some common determination and
leadership. Isolated communities like those of the pres¬
ent-day Indians could never have achieved such a feat.
That the ancient Marajo society had a hierarchic char¬
acter may be inferred from the lavishness of certain
tombs which archaeologists have uncovered in the burial-
grounds side-by-side with more modest graves.
The island of Marajo contains only a small quantity of
An island as large as
Denmark, Marajo stands
between the Amazon and
Para rivers, almost touch¬
ing the Equator. One of
the most important regions
for cattle raising in all
northern Brazil, its herds
number well over 600,000
head. Its ranchers are
skilled riders, using horses
and also the saddle oxen
(left) which offer greater
security as mounts in
periods of heavy rains that
transform the flat coun¬
tryside into lakes and
swamps. The Marajo cow¬
boy rides barefoot and,
only placing his big toe
in the stirrup can dismount
with speed and agility.
© Marcel Gautherot,
Rio de Janeiro

THE UNSOLVED
MYSTERY
OF MARAJO
by Alfred Metraux
rock. Thus, ceramics are almost the sole relics left by this
mysterious people. Like the Sumenans and the Babylo¬
nians, they delighted in making clay versions of many
objects whose prototypes were normally fashioned of some
other material. For example, terra cotta cylinders seem
to have been used as ornaments for the lips and ears.
Terra cotta seats have been found which are identical in
form with those which the Indians carve from wooden
logs. Finally, excavations have turned up great numbers
of triangular plates, slightly convex and perforated at the
ends. Their shape, the signs of wear they show and their
proximity to female skeletons have led to their being
identified as a tanga, or slip. They bear some resemblance
to those triangular pieces of bark which are the sole
garment worn by the women of certain tribes of the
Amazon.
All we know of the religious beliefs of this people are
their funeral rites. They either cremated the dead or
preserved their bones in urns. Statuettes of crouching
women have been found in the tombs and may have some
ritual significance. The style of Marajo pottery is essen¬
tially geometric and is also distinguished by the use of
various decorative techniques modelling, Champlevé ena¬
mel and painting. Certain vases are decorated with
reliefs showing men and animals. There are burial urns
on which paintings and reliefs embody the rough image
of human beings whose eyes are often marked with an
oblique stroke which gives a sad expression to the face
as though the artist had sought to suggest mourning and
ATLANTIC OCEAN
Island of Marajo
grief. Only actual Illustrations give a proper Idea of the
richness and varied arrangements of the motifs they used.
What is known of the origins of this civilization?
Scholars have sought in vain for any reference to this
mysterious people in the old chronicles and documents
dealing with the exploration and conquest of the Amazon.
None of them has anything to say on the subject. The
mystery would therefore have remained absolute had It
not been for the work of two American ethnographers,
Clifford Evans and Betty Meggers.
Despite all the obstacles with which the bush and the
swamps confronted them, they carried out a scries of
excavations in the island of Marajo. They were able to
establish that the civilization of the "Marajoaras" had
been preceded by three other archaeological phases of
a much more primitive kind, the first comprising a people
of hunters and fishermen. There is no link whatever
between these ancient phases (which In many respects are
little different from those of today's Amazon Indians)
and the most culturally advanced one.
I ne day, which the two archaeologists place In
the Xllth century, a mysterious people
emerged at the mouth of the Amazon, bringing with
them an artistic tradition which was already fully formed.
The Invaders established themselves In the plains of the
large island and lived in villages built on the heights of
artificial hills.
Far from prospering In their new home, they gradually
declined. The pottery on the mast recent sites is less
finished and less beautiful than in the older deposits. The
objects connected with burials grow poorer and more uni¬
form, which suggests that with the general decadence
there came a levelling out of the social classes.
Finally, at a period which was probably not long before
the discovery of America, the Marajo civilization came to
an end as if those who had created it were no longer capa¬
ble of preserving it. The people seem to have succumbed
to forces the nature of which is still wrapped in mystery,
since excavations have revealed no trace whatever of wars
or invasions.
The Marajo civilization Is therefore a late one. It was
Introduced already formed by emigrants who, cut off from
their original home, were unable to develop or even to
preserve it. Once these facts were established It then
remained to discover the birthplace of the unknown ~.
people who settled on the edge of the Atlantic.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

MARAJO (Cont'd)
3000-mile migration
along the Amazon
Comparative studies which it would take too long to
describe here convinced Evans and Meggers that their
research should be directed towards the Andean region
and more especially in Colombia. Scattered finds along
the Amazon seemed to mark the route followed by the
"Marajoaras" and it was in the hope of finding fresh
traces of this migration that they recently carried out
excavations on the banks of the Rio Napo, one of the tri¬
butaries of the Amazon, which has always been a means
of access from the Andes to the Amazonas.
he eleven archaeological sites which they
explored fully confirmed the theory which
had led them there. The ancestors of the "Marajo peo¬
ple" had travelled down the Napo and had stayed there
for sometime. The pottery which was discovered there
was frequently identical with that of the Marajo. The
Napo had therefore been one of the stages in the
migration which started in Colombia and ended at the
mouth of the Amazon, some 3,000 miles further on.
The unknown tribe which crossed the continent did so
relatively quickly for the layer of archaeological deposits
of the Napo is not particularly thick and corresponds to
a relatively short occupation. It is probable that the
bearers of the new civilization also stopped during their
journey on the Middle Amazon since pottery was
discovered in the Manaos area which in shape and orna¬
mentation resembled both Napo and Marajo pottery.
But the actual birthplace of Marajo civilization which
must lie somewhere in Colombia has not yet been dis¬
covered. Similarities between various Colombian cultures
and those of the Amazon have been recognized but the
Ceramics, like the pottery vessels shown here (above
and below), are almost the only relics left by a mys¬
terious people who once lived on the island of Marajo.
Their pottery bears geometric designs and is richly
decorated with modelling, enamel work and painting.
Musée de l'Homme. Paris
32
archaeologists have not so far been able to identify the
area where those elements typical of the Marajo civiliza¬
tion might have originated. In archaeological terms,
Colombia still happens to be a little-known country.
According to Evans and Meggers, the decline and then
the disappearance of the Marajo civilization was solely
due to economic causes. Like all the tropical tribes, the
Marajoaras practised shifting cultivation on burnt-out
land with the result that the soil was exhausted within a
few centuries. The time eventually came when the
Marajo people were no longer able to produce enough
food for their fairly dense population. With the decline in
numbers, the specialized craftsmanship which had encou¬
raged the development of pottery and other industries
could no longer survive. The fate of the Marajo people is
somewhat similar to that of the Maya empire which
likewise came to a sudden end. Today, the economic
explanation of the death of tropical civilizations is
contested. Hence the problem is far from resolved and
we are forced to admit that without that explanation
the mystery remains intact.
This ¡s one of the last articles that Dr. Alfred Métrauxsentto
The Unesco Courier. A regular contributor to this maga¬
zine since its foundation in 1948, Dr. Métraux died in
April of this year. Anthro¬
pologist and writer, he won
international repute for his
expedition to Easter Island
and others amongst the
South American Indians, and
for his work on behalf of
racial equality. Three of his
most noted books are "Eas¬
ter Island " (1 941 ); "Haitian
Voodoo" (1959) and "The
Incas" (1962). The series
of books on race which
Unesco published over the
past twelve years were pre¬
pared under his editorship.
