BIRTH OF GLASS
FROM a very early date the Egyptian potter had,
as a side-line to his ordinary business, prac¬
tised the making of vessels in glazed frit.
Glaze had been known at the beginning of the
Dynastic Age and was applied to small objects cut
out of steatite or moulded in frit (or siliceous paste)
and soon vases were made in the same way; the tech¬
nique spread quickly, and beads of glazed frit occur
fairly freely in Sumer in the Early Dynastic period.
The glaze, was, of course, glass, and about a
dozen objects (nearly all small beads) made of real
glass can be assigned to relatively early times in
Egypt to the Eleventh and Twelfth Dynasties and in
Mesopotamia to about 2100 BC and on the whole
it seems that Mesopotamia may here have been
the first in the field, especially as an example of
glass from Eridu is a fair-sized lump, unshaped, a
piece of the manufacturer's raw material.
But shortly before 1600 B.C. the discovery was
made that slender rods of coloured glass, half-
melted, could be twisted round a core into the
form of a bottle, then re-heated so that the rods
should coalesce, and then polished; during the second
stage the soft surface could be "combed" so as
to produce waves in the rods, thus variegating the
pattern at the craftsman's pleasure; the result was
a little polychrome vase, lustrous and semi-translucent,
unlike anything else known and certain to command
a high price.
THE earliest examples of such come from Syria,
to which country the invention may be credited,
but by the beginning of the Eighteenth Dynasty
the Egyptians had taken it over and were making
vases finer in quality than the Syrians had ever made.
The same technique was used for manufacturing
beads, large balls with polychrome inlay in the
form of "eyes" or rosettes.
These gaily attractive ornaments, easily portable
and not too fragile, were ideal objects of trade
with the peoples of less civilized or of barbarous
lands, and they were exported widely, westwards
to Italy and across the European continent, to come
to light again ¡n graves in Britain, while the eastern
trade took them to China and to Indonesia "eye-
beads" from Loyang (the Chou capital) are proved
by spectrographs analysis to be identical with others
from Qau in Egypt.
The Chinese imitated such imported beads with
great success so much so that the polychrome
beads made in South China are only to be distin¬
guished from the foreign examples by their marked
barium content, whereas the Egyptian and Syrian
glass contains no trace of barium, and also by the
presence of lead, which in the west is not found
in glass until shortly before the Christian era.
The facts seem to show that lead glass "flint
glass" as It is often called was a Chinese invention;
it is an invention that has had far-reaching results
in glass manufacture, but it was due to experiments
prompted by the beads of silica-soda-lime glass
coming from the Middle East.
SIR LEONARD WOOLLEY
Part //, Chapter IV (Tech¬
niques, Arts and Crafts)
18

|\Vä
$
¿3
t-rf
î>i
S
J:s
* -j
r I
fcí
This remarkable group of statues was produced by artists
from one of the world's oldest civilizations Sumer
which developed in the Tigris-Euphrates valley as early
as 3,500 B. C. The statues are those of worshippers, stand¬
ing upright with their hands clasped before their hearts
in the attitude of prayer. Their long skirts are simple
Oriental Institute, University of Chicago
sheaths, the upper part of the body together with the arms
is schematized in a curiously geometrical fashion, but
the heads, however grotesque they may appear, are indi¬
vidual and full of expression. One figure (on right) dif¬
ferent from all the others shows a naked man kneeling.
Here the treatment of the body is life-like and sensitive.
19
