THE HIDDEN FACE OF THE CINEMA Pt
AN AUDIENCE
OF 12,000,000,000
by Paul Léglise
The article below is the third in a series describing lesser-
known aspects of the cinema industry and based on a
world-wide survey by Paul Léglise. In previous articles
the author analyzedthe complex operations of production
and distribution. Here he discusses the problems of film
presentation, the impact of an ever-expanding television
industry on films, and the important roles played by
film libraries and film clubs in the world of the cinema.
DRIVE-IN CINEMAS. There are no parking prob¬
lems for these cinema-goers in the United States.
They take their cars right inside a huge open-air
enclosure, a "drive-In" cinema, and watch the show
projected on a vast screen without having to leave
their vehicles. There are over 5,000 U. S. "drive-
ins" and the vogue is spreading to other countries.
We-have followed the path of films from the
production studios through the channels of
distribution and now find them in the hands of the
exhibitors who will present them to the public a vast
public, the 12,000 million people who pay for admission
to cinemas each year.
Leaving aside, for the moment, the audiences at
specialized film shows, let us take a closer look at the
normal, commercial cinemas. The figures are striking.
Europe tops the list (1960 figures) with 110,000 cinemas
and 35 million seats. Then comes America with 40,000
cinemas and 14 million seats, followed by Asia with 20,000
cinemas and eight million seats. Africa has 3,000 cinemas
and two million seats. World box-office receipts in 1960
totalled 3,000 million dollars.
These totals are certainly Impressive and yet a definite
drop in cinema attendance has been observed. There is
no need to look far for one of the major causes of this
drain on the cinema public. It is the result of the vast
expansion of television. However, when a certain level of
saturation has been reached the situation should become
stabilized, if this has not already become apparent in
some countries.
Even so. this declining spiral cannot be ignored. It has
been particularly obvious In the United Kingdom where
over a five year period box-office receipts dropped by one
halffrom £1,182 million in 1955 to £580 million in 1960.
In the Federal Republic of Germany, the number of
spectators fell from 817 million in 1956 to 620 million in
1960 with a 15% reduction In receipts. Similar trends
were observed in Belgium (from 110 million spectators
in 1955 to 90 million in 1960), the Netherlands (from 70
26 million in 1956 to 55 million in 1960), Austria (from 122
to 110 million) and In Canada (from receipts of 160 million
dollars In 1953 to 60 million in 1959).
In France it looked at one time as though this decline
might halt and the situation become stabilized. In 1959
there were 354 million spectators and receipts of 595
million new francs; in 1960, 354 million spectators,
representing 662 million new francs. The following year,
however, there was a' decline 326 million spectators and
receipts of 644 million new francs which thus extended
the downward trend noted since 1957 and amounting to a
drop of 85 million spectators.
The United States (where television developed earlier
and on a larger scale than elsewhere) experienced a
decrease in film-going up to 1957, since when a proportion
of the lost ground is apparently being recovered: from
2,000 million spectators (1957) to 2,228 million (1960) with
receipts rising from $1,110 million dollars to $1,370 million.
This world-wide evolution and fluctuation in film-going
is not only due to the growth of television, but to many
other factors whose detailed analysis is the province of
economic and sociological studies. In particular a
comparison between these statistics and the pyramid of
age-groups in each country would provide interesting and
revealing conclusions.
Nevertheless the decisive effect of the cinema-television
rivalry is clearly apparent. Yet the evolution favourable
to the cinema in the United States shows us that by
adapting cinematographic art and industry to the new
economic conditions created by this competition, by
emphasizing the advantages of the large (cinema) screen
over the small (TV) screen, the cinema can manage to
keep its public until a period of more constructive co¬
operation comes in sight.
Screens are being blown up in size, the format of films
themselves Is being increased from 35 mm. to 70 mm. so
as to improve the technical quality of the image, stere-
phonic sound fills cinemas from all sides. We are today

close to the cinematographic visions of Aldous Huxley,
and Abel Gance, the French pioneer of filming techniques
Is now revealed as a true prophet of the seventh art thirty
years ahead of his time.
To overcome the present crisis the cinema must change
radically, break with routine and present its spectacles
in new ways. Some idea of what is already being done can
be gathered from a U.S. Trade Department report. This
reveals that In the U.S.A. films were screened In 12,300
cinemas in 1961 and also in 5,000 "drive-Ins": open-air
cinemas where the film is projected on a vast screen
watched by patrons sitting in their cars.
Drive-ins account for 25% of total cinema receipts in
the United States. In Canada, while the number of
ordinary 35 mm. cinemas declined in one year from 1,451
to 1,383 (at the end of 1961), drive-ins increased by four
and numbered 236 at the same date.
Among other film projection innovations, a striking
advance was made by "Cinerama" which operated In 30
cinemas In the United States and in 24 abroad by the
end of 1961 and which planned to have a total of 60
cinemas so equipped in the United States and 40 abroad
by the end of 1962. The Soviet "Kinopanorama" is acquir¬
ing new cinemas and is also extending abroad, and in
Czechoslovakia, "Polyecran" has begun to develop.
Because of these new forms of film presentation we
have to be extra cautious when dealing with statistics,
especially when compiling lists of cinemas which do not
have either the same capacity or the same number of
programmes. There is no common measure between
"Theatroramas," drive-ins and country cinemas. Even
the ordinary cinema cannot be calculated In district units.
Even in countries which are clnematographically well-
equipped the distribution and screening of films raises
many serious problems. When we learn that since 1929
money spent on entertainment only accounts for 2% of
consumer Income In the United States wc may well wonder
what new and greater difficulties we can expect to find
In countries now In the throes of development.
Unesco has undertaken a large-scale survey of the
present state of Information media In the underdeveloped
countries. What do we understand by "underdeveloped?"
According to a United Nations definition, a country Is
underdeveloped when the average per-caplta Income Is
less than 300 dollars per year.
In 1961, Unesco submitted a report to the Human Rights
Commission and the Economic and Social Council of the
United Nations (See The Unesco Courier, June 1902) on
the problems Involved In granting technical assistance to
underdeveloped countries to help them expand their in¬
formation media (press, radio, cinema and television). In
addition, regional meetings on the same problems have
already been held In Bangkok (I960) for South East Asia,
at Santiago, Chile (1961) for Latin America and In ParLs
(1962) for Africa.
The basic goal for all these countries In the field of
Information Is to make sure that for every 100 Inhabitants
there are at least ten copies of dally papers, five radio
sets, two cinema seats and two television sets. The fact
that 70% of the world's population does not have access
to even this strict minimum of Information resources
bring the Immensity of the task Into true perspective.
Even so, these criteria are somewhat summary and only
partially convey the facts of the problem. They fall to
take Into account, for example, the situation with regard
to population distribution and do not reveal the possibili¬
ties opened up by the travelling cinema thanks to
specially-equipped trucks. They do make possible,
however, a tentative approach to the problem.
According to information collected by Unesco In 1961,
CONT'D ON PAGE 30
27

THE WONDERS OF NA
) Haroun Tazieff A.T.P. Transpress, Paris
28
The cinema camera roves the world
and explores nature's every dimension:
in space, high in the air, on mountains
and volcanoes, beneath the oceans and
within the microscope (see page 30).
From the striking images it captures
have come many exciting and successful
films, both feature-length and shorts.
Testaments to human skill and daring,
they carry the cinema-goer into places
he could otherwise never hope to see.
Above left, the well-known volcano-
logist and geologist, Haroun Tazieff,
seated on the brink of the crater of
Sakura-Sima, an active Japanese volcano,
shoots scenes for his film, "Volcanoes".
Above, parachutist Jacques Dubourg
has fixed cameras to each side of his
helmet. Thus equipped he will film
every phase of his leap into space and
descent. Left, an underwater camera¬
man in action during the production
of Jacques Cousteau's film, "The Silent
World", a full-length documentary on
the discovery of the world under the
waters. Right, while shooting climbing
scenes for his film on mountaineering,
"Les Etoiles du Midi", Marcel Ichac has
installed his camera on a sheer wall
of rock in the French Alps. Here the
exploits of the cameraman in action
rival those of the actor-mountaineers.
I Les Requins Associés, Paris.

TURE FILMED BY THE CAMERAMAN
O Martel Ichac
F -4* p
». / .4 . ..-
29

CINEMA (Cont'd)
Ingmar Bergman
first 'discovered' by
a film club in Uruguay
27 Asian countries had a total of 7,673 cinemas (equipped
for 16 mm. or 35 mm. screening) with a total seating
capacity of just over 5,200,000 (.7% per inhabitant). The
average annual cinema attendance per inhabitant was 2,8
times. In Latin America the picture was brighter with
12,847 cinemas having a capacity of seven million seats
(3.5% per inhabitant). Annual attendance here was 4.9
times per inhabitant. In the African countries covered
by the survey there were 2,400 cinemas with 1,300,000 seats
(0.5% per Inhabitant) and the average annual attendance
was less than once In most countries).
Thanks to Unesco's studies and surveys, the U.N. Eco¬
nomic and Social Council will be able to draw up a balance
sheet of the material, financial and professional needs as
well as the resources available to meet them. The aim is
to launch a development programme under which the
advice of specialists will be made available, scholarships
granted, seminars arranged and equipment and installa¬
tions supplied where they are most needed.
Let us turn for a moment to the type of pro¬
gramme offered In the commercial cinemas.
Generally It is made up of a feature-length film, a short
and a newsreel. Short films and newsreels are sometimes
a compulsory part of the programme. In Brazil, for
example, a decree dating from 1946 makes the inclusion
of a newsreel and. a documentary or other short film
obligatory.
In India, every cinema is obliged, under the terms of
Its licence to operate, to Include in each programme up
to 2,000 feet of film, approved by the Films Advisory
Board as documentary, scientific or cultural films or as
dealing with matters of current interest. Thus, 50% of
all Indian cinemas receive a documentary each week on
the basis of a rental not exceeding 1% of average net
receipts, and the other 50% a newsreel on the samé terms.
Elsewhere, such films are sometimes provided free of
charge. Some cinemas offer a complete programme of
newsreels and shorts, as for example, the "Cinébrefs" in
Switzerland, or solely of shorts, as in some Czechoslovak
cinemas.
While short films are generally obtained through the
normal distributors, the newsreel circuits are mostly
Independent. The production firm Itself distributes films
of 10-12 minutes average duration. In most cases there
is a weekly edition but the rate of issue .may be less
frequent. Copies of newsreels are only used for from
four to six weeks and this necessitates a large number of
copies and a very rapid amortization.
In the field of the specialist cinema there has been a
great expansion of "re-run" programmes composed of film
"classics." And alongside this movement another trend
is currently taking shape the growth of art or experi¬
mental cinemas. The programmes offered by these
cinemas Include recent films of the kind that is not expect¬
ed to meet with a large commecial success if exploited
through normal channels. Foreign films are shown in the
original version with subtitles.
The managers of such cinemas belong to an Interna¬
tional Federation of Art and Experimental Cinemas which
already has members In many countries including Austria,
Belgium, France, the German Federal Republic, Italy,
Japan, the Netherlands, Switzerland and the United
Kingdom. The existence of 80 cinemas of this kind in
the German Federal Republic, 50 in France and 20 or so
in Japan all point to the significance of this movement
which is becoming a real force internationally.
In France the movement has already received official
recognition through a law which enables cinemas to seek
classification within an "art and experimental" category
30 on the basis of their having projected films meeting speci¬
fic criteria for over one year. Films covered by this law
Include those of obviously high quality, but which have
By speeding up or slowing down images photographed
or projected it is possible to add to a film new characte¬
ristics of the kind that are often indispensable for scientific
.and educational documentaries. By giving time an elastic
dimension we are able to analyze very rapid or very slow
FILM OF
A GROWING
EMBRYO
Photos © H. A. Traber,
Wild Heerbrugg A. G.
not met with the success they deserve, research films,
films showing life in countries whose films are rarely
distributed In France and programmes entirely devoted to
short films. Cinemas recognized under this law enjoy tax
concessions and are released from some of the regulations
that normally apply to cinemas in France.
Another form of specialized commercial exhibiting is
the recreational cinema for young people. These pro¬
grammes are not presented In special cinemas but are
merely shows suited to or reserved for young people.
Programmes classed as suitable for juvenile audiences are,
in fact, ordinary programmes open to anyone. However,
some countries have decided on various measures to en¬
courage the showing of these types of films: tax
concessions (Finland, the German Federal Republic, Gua¬
temala, Norway, Denmark, India) or bonuses to the
exhibitor (Italy, Argentine).
So far we have been considering the 12,000 million
spectators who make up the cinema industry's normal
clientele. There is also another film public whose numbers
can never be calculated, even approximatively. A vigo¬
rous and ever-expanding sector which caters to a variety
of tastes, it comprises first and foremost the film clubs.
These film clubs show and discuss films which stand out
in the history of the cinema or more recent productions
which have not met with success on the normal cinema
circuits. They help to establish cinematographic values
and to clarify and formulate the doctrines of a continually-
evolving cinema. It was, for example, the Ciné-Club del
Uruguay, which first "discovered" the artistic skill of
Ingmar Bergman through the screening of his film,
"Sommarlek."
The history of these clubs goes back to about 1920.
Since then they have spread throughout the world in
France under the influence of Louis Delluc, just as in
Brazil where, as long ago as 1917, a group of young people
gathered under the guidance of the critic Pedro Lima, and
the historian Adhemar Gonzaga. Today they are grouped
in an International Film Club Federation which includes
representatives from countries in every continent.
There are also many cultural associations, often peri-
school and post school, which attempt to satisfy the
demands of a public eager to learn more about the cinema
as a form of artistic expression. Within this category we
find a wide variety of film presentations of a basically

processes. An example of the second kind is shown
here, taken from a microcinematographic film made by
H. A. Traber of Zurich. These photos illustrate several
phases in the development of the egg cell of an Alpine
triton (a member of the newt family). Covering a period
of one week they reveal how the newly-fertilized egg (1)
evolves into an embryonic form (7) on which there /s a
budding tail (on right) and the eyeballs (left). The combined
powers of microscope and camera now make it pos¬
sible to witness secret aspects of the beginnings of life.
educational type. In the Soviet Union, for example,
documentary and popular science films are screened free
in clubs and cultural centres, In factory workshops during
work-breaks, in schools, public places and parks, and even
in the courtyards of residential buildings. It has been
estimated that as many as 300,000 people benefit from
such sessions every day.
In Japan, about 100 private firms distribute films of this
kind as also do two national film libraries which between
them dispose of 10,000 prints. In addition 642 regional or
local film libraries have 33,000 copies available for distribu¬
tion. In 1958, 24,000 projectors for 16 mm. sound films
were being used to screen educational films.
When we add to these figures others relating to the
activities of 5,000 film libraries in the U.S. which distribute
films for the 600,000 projectors owned by film clubs, univer¬
sities and the huge range of associations In this country,
we get some idea of the immensity of the world public
which sees film shows in the non-commercial sector.
I N this field of the cinema a major place Is filled
I by educational films. These have their place In
a wider context of audio-visual media used in education.
Films are used to make a specific contribution and
cannot always replace wall-charts, filmstrlps or school
television.
In Italy, for example, 8,000 projectors for 16 mm. films
are available In the schools and thus create a potential
audience of six million students. To supply this nation¬
wide network, ten thousand copies comprising one
thousand film titles are in circulation under the co-ordina¬
tion of the "National Centre for Audio-Visual Aids" which
operates through 92 provincial film libraries.
Another rapidly expanding area of distribution Is that
of the Industrial film. Where formerly these films were
simply loaned by the firms that had ordered them, there
is now a well-organized network of screenings for a large
public Interested in such questions.
Scientific and art films nowadays constitute other major
specialized distribution networks. In Brussels, an Inter¬
national scientific film library has been set up, and It was
also in Brussels, in July 1958, that a symposium of mu
seum, film and TV specialists arranged by Unesco, empha¬
sized the need: "to encourage museums at a certain level
to equip themselves with projection rooms for 35 mm.
sound films and museums at all levels to acquire 16 mm.
sound projection equipment." Films should unquestion¬
ably become an Instrument at the service of museums,
both for documentation and analysis.
So far we have dealt with the planning of a film. Its
actual production and subsequent distribution. What
happens to a film when it has done the job for which it
was designed? What happens to It when It has earned
the expected financial return and covered production
costs?
Generally speaking film rights run for seven to ten years
with the possibility of renewal. Sometimes when a film
has won great commercial success, another producer may
purchase the rights for the purpose of a re-make of the
same story. In this case, copies of the old film are
destroyed.
Copies of a film are also destroyed when its exhibiting
life comes to an end. The chances are that the negatives
will be allowed to deteriorate. Sometimes a film has a
recognized artistic value and thus Is considered to be of
historic Interest. In this case the rights are renewed and
the film is "revived" In re-run cinemas or film clubs.
This raises another problem. How to preserve copies
of the best films and, whenever possible, the basic elements
needed to print new copies? Newsreel companies are.
fortunately, scrupulously careful In maintaining their
archives and these constitute an invaluable historical
record of events both great and small. Other films are
generally conserved In depository film libraries which are
the real "museums" ot the film world. More often than
not these are the creation of pioneers to whom future
generations will be grateful.
National authorities should take a greater interest in
this problem and. as In the case of books, they should
require duty copies of films to be deposited. Unesco and
the International Film and Television Council are working
Jointly on this question, for which rapid and effective
solutions should be found.
Museums, libraries and other repositories have been 31
given an honoured status in the modern world. Film
archives deserve a place of equal Importance.
