FOR THOSE IN PERIL
ON THE SEA
by David Woodward
a
i üRiNc the years 1960 and 1961 nearly 200 ships,
totalling more than three quarters of a million
gross tons, were lost at sea. The exact figures were
114 ships of 418,195 tons in 1960 and 78 ships of 355,362
tons In 1961. But while details are available for ships of
a certain size only vessels over 500 tons are Included In
the figures given above it ls quite impossible to obtain
precise figures for small craft or the loss of life by
drowning.
The most nearly authoritative guesses speak of about
200,000 lives lost annually In every kind of drowning acci¬
dent from a collision between passenger liners in the
North Atlantic to the destruction of scores of tiny fishing
vessels and their crews by a typhoon in the Far East.
Accidents at sea are thus so numerous that the dead go
unnumbered. The sea is still cruel and there are times
when even the best-found, best-handled ship is at its
mercy.
To prevent folly or greed from jeopardizing ships and
the lives of seafarers, regulations have existed since Noah
limited the passenger capacity of the Ark. The Greeks
and Romans established regular laws. Emerging from the
Middle Ages, 600 years ago, the English and the French
made laws to regulate the traffic by sea; already in the
Twelfth Century, the Crusaders, using mostly Italian ships,
had marked on the sides of their craft a cross, the arms
of which Indicated the maximum depth to which the ship
might be loaded. The mark of the Crusaders made its
way with the flow of trade to the Baltic and within a
hundred years it had been adopted by the merchants of
Vlsby on the Swedish island of Gotland.
This use of a load line was of course on the same prin¬
ciple as the famous Plimsoll line adopted by British
shipping in 1876 after a tremendous battle in Parliament.
Plimsoll himself was by no means careful of the accuracy
of the charges which he flung about the House of Com¬
mons. But fundamentally, he was right. Many men were
being sent to sea in overloaded or inadequate ships for
the sake of gain; such ships were too often disaster-prone
in bad weather. When Britain stipulated that her ships
should not be overloaded, the British Government also
laid down that foreign ships using British ports should
conform to the same regulations.
The problem of safety at sea had become especially
grave by the nineteenth century because of the great
development in world trade and because Iron steamships
could sustain greater hazards than wooden sailing ships.
However, for centuries before the Industrial Revolution,
the training of sea captains, pilots and seamen had been
an object of concern to the principal maritime powers.
Henry the Navigator of Portugal had, perhaps, first of all,
This is how a German
artist, Willy Stcewer,
visualized the nightmare
of April 15, 1912, as
panic-stricken survivors
struggled to get away
from the rapidly-sink¬
ing "Titanic" after it
crashed head-on into an
iceberg. Only 711 people
were saved. The death
toll was 1,517. This
tragedy eventually
brought about measures
to promote safety at sea,
including the setting up
of iceberg patrols and
stringent regulations
about the proper num¬
ber and proper equip¬
ment of lifeboats to be
carried by all vessels.
© UPI
tried to systematize these matters ; the Emperor Charles V
had followed his example, and Henry VIII of England
founded the establishment known as the Brethren of Tri¬
nity House which, to this day, controls lights and pilotage
matters in British waters. In France and the Low Coun¬
tries, similar arrangements date from the sixteenth
century.
Nevertheless, much more than that was needed for the
training of seafarers in the first half of the nineteenth
century. The Foreign Office in London, through its
consuls abroad, began a long agitation to raise the
standards of conduct and technical proficiency In the
British merchant service not only for humanitarian
reasons but for economic ones as well. The consul at Riga
reported in 1843:
"Foreign shipmasters are generally a more respectable
and sober class of men than the British. I have always
been convinced... that British shipowners... are great

losers írom the serious delays occasioned while on the
voyage and discharging and taking in cargoes, growing out
of the incapacity of their shipmasters and their intem¬
perate habits. I have had occasion to remark... that
American vessels, in particular, will make three voyages to
two of a British vessel, in this way having an Immense
advantage over their competitor" (1).
Developments in the field of trade and in naval con¬
struction had brought increased problems to the seafarer,
but at the end of the nineteenth century developments In
telecommunications more than redressed the balance.
Nevertheless, when radio telegraphy was first Introduced,
it began in a state of confusion. Ships and shore stations
were often fitted with different types of equipment
operated by different companies. Competition became so
keen that the employees of one radio company would not
handle the traffic of another; sometimes they would even
jam rival signals or broadcast abuse of each other. It
took two big International conferences held at Berlin In
1903 and 1906 to bring some order to the situation and to
secure an acceptable agreement between the various
countries.
A little later, in 1909, came the first use of wireless tele¬
graphy to summon aid to a vessel in distress, when the
White Star liner Republic was sunk in collision off
Nantucket. A young man who was the ship's radio opera¬
tor made history and a name for himself by sticking to
his post and summoning aid which was brought by ships
of five different nationalities. These immediate replies to
the Republic's distress signals were an extension of the
unwritten law of the sea whereby a response must be
given to appeals for help. There is also a material side,
since the first ship to answer effectively an appeal for
help may be able to earn her owners and crew very con¬
siderable sums for salvage.
(1) Seafarers and Their Ships, London, H.M.S.O., 1955, p. 22. 5
CONT'D ON NEXT PACE

PERIL ON THE SEA (Cont'd)
Lessons of the Titanic'
The original radio distress call had been the letters
CQDCome Quick Dangerbut by 1912, this had been
changed by international agreement to SOS not because
those letters stand for anything, but because the com¬
bination of three dots, three dashes, three dots in Morse
code was judged to be especially ear-catching. The signal
is sent "SOSOSOS..." while a lesser degree of emergency
is signified by the letters "TTT." Much later, with the
over advent of radio telephony, the phrase "May Day"
(from the French m'aidez) was used for a spoken, as
opposed to a Morse appeal for help.
Three years after the loss of the Republic came the
sinking of the Titanic, perhaps the greatest peacetime sea
disaster in history.
Even after fifty years crowded with terrible events, the
story of this disaster still has power to horrify. In 1912,
when the nations had experienced no world war for
almost a hundred years, it came as a blow so shocking
that it made men doubt the whole order in which they
lived.
Briefly, four vital factors had caused the disaster and
the enormous loss of life which accompanied it. They
were :
The failure of the iceberg warning measures.
Insufficient life boats to hold all the passengers and
crew.
Poor water-tight compartmentation, so that the ship
flooded easily, and
Confusion over radio traffic, which hampered recep¬
tion of the Titanic's SOS.
A conference of the principal sea-faring powers was
convened in London during the winter of 1913-14 to deal
with these points on an international basis. Although the
agreements were never officially ratified, because of the
outbreak of World War I, they did bit by bit come off the
conference table and begin to shape the lives of those
who worked or travelled by sea.
First and foremost of these agreements was the for¬
mation of the North Atlantic Ice Patrol. This was set up
by the United States Coast Guard with international
financial support and functions to this day, using ships
and aircraft to spot dangerous icebergs.
The Titanic's boats held only 1,178 people, and the ship
had on board at the time over 2,200 people. In fact owing
to the difficulty of loading and handling the boats, not
more than 700 actually found places in the boats, and
1,517 people lost their lives, hundreds of them not
drowned, but found next morning floating in their life
jackets, frozen to death in the icy waters.
Accordingly, "boats for all" became a popular slogan,
and the 1913-14 conference laid great stress on these
being provided in the future perhaps too much stress,
because there are many occasions upon which a ship sinks
so fast that there is no time to complete the launching
of boats, and extra life rafts would be more valuable than
boats.
Regulations were also proposed by the Conference to

o upi
Improve the standard of water-tight compartmentation,
and also to diminish confusion over radio messages
warnings of Icebergs had failed to reach the Titanic's cap¬
tain, and his SOS went unheeded by a ship within sight
of the lights of the stricken liner, because her radio
operator had gone to bed.
At the conclusion of World War I and with the creation
of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) In Gen¬
eva, another approach was made to the question of safety
of life at sea. The ILO's principal preoccupation was
with working conditions and hours, but their immediate
relevance to safety may be seen when efficiency ls con¬
sidered in terms of a well-fed, well-rested and healthy
crew compared with one which ls not.
Crowded forecastles, where men sleep In damp straw,
eat badly-cooked mixtures of food from a single dish,
after it has been carried from the galley across an open
half-deck, where there ls a struggle to dry soaked clothing
and as hard a struggle to get sufficient fresh water, are
not quite a thing of the past. But the picture is certainly
brighter than It was thirty years ago and International
action can take much credit for the Improvements that
have been made.
While the conference room has thus been productive
of reform at its own tempo over the past four decades, the
laboratory and the electrical workshop have within the
past 15 years or so provided a series of revolutions of their
own in the field of maritime safety. At the end of both
world wars, international co-operation at sea on a large
scale was necessary to sweep the hundreds of thousands
of mines laid by both sides.
In between 1914 and 1918 some 240.000 mines were laid,
while that figure was nearly doubled in the Second World
War. The mines were most thickly strewn In European
waters and in the three years after V-E-day, 1,900 mine¬
sweepers took three years to sweep safe channels of some
125,000 miles. In theory, these mines become useless after
a period of years, but no chances can be taken. After all,
live mines from the Russo-Japanese war of 1904-5 were
still being reported in the 1930's.
Some wartime developments for detecting ships and air¬
craft have resulted in entirely new devices which have
revolutionized navigation, especially in dangerous waters.
Nor is there any sign of this process of change being com¬
plete future developments. It would seem, will be just
as far-reaching as those which have occurred since 1945.
Radar and Its refinements have combined to offer solu¬
tions to a great many of the mariner's safety problems,
although they have In turn set problems of their own.
Briefly, radar's supersonic electrical impulses, reflected
off objects which they strike above the surface of the sea,
reveal the presence In fog or darkness of rocks, other
ships or other obstacles. At the same time, the electric
Impulses of asdic or sonar can reveal the depth of the
sea and the presence of submerged obstacles.
These new sciences are still in their Infancy. Refine¬
ments of radar are now being developed whereby stations 7
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

PERIL ON THE SEA (Cont'd)
World network for
safety at sea
ashore and on board a ship, working together in coastal
waters, can indicate a ship's position as a tiny disc of
light on her own chart. Experts point out, however, that
these and other devices are only aids to navigation, and
that the first line of defence against disaster is the mari¬
ner himself, his eyes and his brain.
The precision of such developments is such that the
suggestion has now been put forward that In crowded
waters and fog the seaman's worst enemy the move¬
ments of ships should be controlled from the shore in the
same manner that the landings and take-offs of aircraft
are controlled from the ground. The traditional indepen¬
dence of ship-masters is likely to give this proposal a
discouraging reception but as traffic grows, it may be
necessary to Impose it, nevertheless. It Is at any rate
a far cry from the fog-horn hitherto the only aid to
safety and navigation in thick weather.
A similar measure of control which has been proposed
is the introduction of a kind of one-way traffic system
In the Straits of Dover, whereby west-bound ships use
one channel and east-bound ships another. The Straits
are still the busiest sea lane in the world, with 750 ships
passing every day.
usis
Tiny white specks in the sea
are actually massive icebergs
those in the centre are excep¬
tionally large onesthat have
"calved" from 'the glacier seen
in this aerial photograph taken
off the east coast of Green¬
land. These ice-islands become
deadly serious maritime hazards
when they drift southwards into
the Atlantic shipping lanes. But
ships and aircraft of the North
Atlantic Ice Patrol are on the
watch and warn shipping of
the presence of the icebergs.
Somewhere at sea a ship is in
distress. Out goes an SOS and
other ships change course to
bring help. Here a U.S. Coast¬
guard patrol boat picks up sur¬
vivors of a vessel lost in a hur¬
ricane. To reach the ship¬
wreck it braved waves 60 feet
high and winds of 90 m.p.h.

© French Polar Expeditions Paul-EmMe Victor
IMCO, to which this proposal has been referred, Is the
Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization
which was set up in London in 1959 as the maritime
agency of the United Nations. In Its first four years of
existence, more than 50 nations with most of the world's
shipping, have become members. One of its main tasks
ls to place the international work on safety of life at
sea on a permanent basis, which was hitherto the task
of international conferences summoned from time to
time at sporadic intervals. The first such conference was
that already mentioned after the Titanic disaster in
1914-15; two more followed In 1929 and 1948.
However, IMCO's concern is not only with the safety
of life at sea; the agency also deals with discriminatory
actions and restrictive practices in the field of shipping,
organizes the exchange of information between govern¬
ments and considers any maritime question that may be
referred to it by the United Nations or by any of the
other specialized agencies.
In May and June 1960, IMCO held a conference in
London on the safety of life at sea, at which fifty-four
nations were represented. This meeting thrashed out the
technical aspects and drew up a new Convention which
included up-to-date provisions on the use of radar and
modern types of life-saving equipment. The safety of
nuclear-powered ships, signalling, fire-fighting, electrical
equipment and collision regulations were all included in
the final Convention. The measures adopted represented
another step forward to reduce the risks run by sea¬
farers.
But in the struggle with the sea there can be no final
victory. Vigilance, courage and ingenuity are always
required. International regulation and electronic inven¬
tion can strengthen these qualities, but are no substi¬
tutes for them. A note of the grim reality which lies
behind IMCO's work was provided recently by that
organization's request to the World Health Organization
to set up an expert committee to investigate the contro¬
versial problem of whether shipwrecked mariners should,
in an emergency, drink sea water. The experts unani¬
mously decided against such a remedy, despite recent
claims that this is one way in which the castaway can
prolong his life.
David Woodward is a documentary writer-producer
the British Broadcasting Corporation, London.
for
