R. Perret, Courtesy of the Musée de l'Homme, Pans
There was a rich artistic flowering among the Palaeolithic, or Old Stone Age, peoples whe produced
works of art that can rival anything that has been achieved in the last ten thousand yean. Paliolitluc
paintings and engravings on the walls of caves and cave shelters have been found In great numbers
in parts of Europe and Africa. Above, the Masked Hunter, an African rock painting from the Sahara

THE DAWN OF ART
i T has been said that Palaeolithic art can claim
'to be the most improbable event in history,
and fundamentally it is as impossible to explain why it
occurred as any of the other sudden upsurges of creative
genius in the arts that, happily for us, have marked the
course of our human existence. The tides of the human
psyche ebbing and flowing in society remain largely
mysterious. Yet at a rather more superficial level there
are explanations and interpretations to be made. On the
one hand there are the permissive factors. While material
prosperity can never be the cause of artistic genius, a
society cannot support its artists without an economic
margin.
Thus there is no doubt that the abundance of game to
be hunted in south-west Europe in late Pleistocene times
made a necessary foundation for the development of
Palaeolithic art. Although the artists were probably
themselves hunters, it seems very likely, particularly as
skill and professionalism grew, that in exchange for their
artistic services to the community they only had to hunt
part-time and were supplied with food while at work in
the caves.
On the other hand there are the uses of art meaning
its uses to society and not the satisfaction It gives to its
creators. A healthy artistic tradition Is seldom without
some more or less practical function, and in primitive
societies where there Is no recognized division between
intellectual, practical and religious activities, art always
must be an Integral part of everyday life.
There'is long-standing dispute between those who have
wished to see cave-palntlng and Its related forms as an
activity undertaken for its own sake, for self-expression
and the creation of beauty and those who see it as a
purely practical activity undertaken to secure good
hunting. This conflict is entirely in the minds of the
disputants. Even in the twentieth century, when life is
lived so much in watertight compartments, no one even
thinks of asking whether the painters of easel pictures u
CONT'D ON HEXT PAGE

HISTORY OF MANKIND (Cont'd)
A Stone Age art unsurpassed
work for self-expression or because they intend to sell
their canvasses. To try to separate art and magic and
religion in the unified life of early man shows the folly
of the over-analytical mind.
here is no doubt at all that cave art had its
maglco-rellglous function. In particular it
served that form of it known as sympathetic magic, which
depends upon a belief that similarity or relationship Is
identity, and that anything down to an Image or related
part of a thing will affect the thing itself. It is an idea
which has constantly recurred even in civilized life. Pota¬
toes, when first introduced into Europe, were thought to
cause leprosy because the appearance of some of the tubers
suggested the disease.
It is well known that in modern Europe and America
people still make Images of their enemies and stick them
with pins to secure their death, and this practice makes
an exact analogy to one aspect of the Palaeolithic
hunters' magic.
A considerable number of paintings have spears or darts
drawn or scratched on the animals' flanks. There are
many instances at Lascaux. At Niaux there is a famous
example in which three little pits, naturally formed, have
been enclosed by the outline of a bison, and each
furnished with a dart to give the semblance of wounds...
If one form of sympathetic magic was used to ensure
successful kills, another was to cause an increase of Ufe.
Some of the painted beasts are undoubtedly intended to
be gravid, while the careful representation of bull and
cow bison at the Tue d'Audoubert, and the signs of rites
having been celebrated in the cave, is very suggestive of
¿ fertility magic. That this conception went far beyond
sympathetic magic to form the basis of a fertility reUgion
with a great history before it in Eurasia is shown
unequivocally by the Venuses and other crystallizations of
the mother goddess concept ....
A third type of evidence for the close association of
cave art with magico-religious activities is that provided
by the various drawings of men with animal disguises and
possibly of beings that are part man, part beast, part
divinity like the great Sorcerer of Les Trois Frères himself.
Indeed this cave as a whole proclaims its ritual use as
obviously as any chapel. Passages deep in the rock lead
into a small chamber with walls thickly netted with
engravings of many kinds- of animals, including the
strange group of a man with bison head and other animal
attributes dancing behind two weird hybrid beasts,
apparently in a state of sexual excitement. From this
chamber a tunnel with further engravings curves upwards
to give access to a window opening into a chamber some
twelve feet above the floor, a place where an officiating
medicine man could appear with dramatic effect and
dominate participants gathered below him. It is
extraordinarily stirring, then, to find that the antlered,
phallic, hypnoticaUy staring figure of the Sorcerer has
been painted and engraved on the rock face just beside
this opening.
This magical element in cave art must have had less
force in the home art. It is quite likely that when deer,
mammoth and ibex were carved on spear-throwers, it
was beUeved that these Images might help to make them
effective against the animals represented.
OI N the other hand no one can doubt that the
carving was done partly for the pleasure of
doing and regarding it, for it is pre-eminently decorative.
StiU more is this true of such Uttle carved objects as the
fish palette from the Grotte de Rey and the bone

silhouettes of animals and even the superb horse head
from Mas d'Azil and the horse from Espelugues, Lourdes.
What conceivable purpose other than decoration can the
artist at La Mouthe have had when he engraved an ibex
on his lamp?
There is no doubt that cave art, and to a lesser extent
the home art as well, served the animal cult, part magical
and part truly religious, that underlay the lives of these
hunting peoples. The status of the individual and the
life of the tribe was wholly dependent on the multiplica¬
tion of the game herds and success in hunting them, and
a/t responded to the urgency of these two great needs.
Utilitarian in themselves, they cannot be s parated from
a religious impulse towards a form of co: munion with
animals and nature, a "participation myst.que."
And in this religious aspect we rediscover PalseoUthlc
art as genuine imaginative expression, its creators as true
artists. Just as mediaeval painters could work entirely in
the service of the Christian Church, just as modern
painters work to sell their canvasses to furnish houses and
galleries, so too (and indeed much more consistently)
could the painters of the last glaciation work in the
service of hunting and fertility magic and still remain
artiste.
From that time to this there have been great numbers
of primitive peoples living throughout the world, yet none
has had a representational art to approach theirs. Peoples
who, like some of the AustraUans, make strikingly
effective pictures in connexion with hunting magic lack
their realism and technical skill. More often no attempt
at realistic representation is made, and symbohc designs
or enactments supply the identification needed for
sympathetic magic. A visual identity between the image
and the object has never been considered necessary.
Yet in the whole range of Palaeolithic material only one
example is known with anything of the inartistic and
grisly character often found among the properties of the
primitive magic worker . . . that is the dummy bear with
the real head that had been set up in the sanctum at
Montespan.
All the rest may have been Intended for magical usages,
but was at the same time a true art, and an art In what
we have come to call the humane tradition. In fact it
comes closer to Chinese drawing and painting than to
any other, and the Chinese were inspired by a mystical
conception of the relationship between man and nature.
The art Itself makes It abundantly clear that the Stone-
Age artists knew an intense self-identification with the
animals they portrayed. Perhaps with a strengthening
self-consciousness due in part to the development of fully
expressive language, a factor which would also have
heightened their Image-making powers, these people felt
a need to re-affirm their participation in nature.
modern poet has said that "the poetic image
ishows the artist seeking to express unity with
all that Is and has been," and this was true of the first
artist as of the latest. Various attempts have been made
to suggest that the cave-painters used dead beasts as
their models, or that the sight of shadows suggested the
idea of painting shapes on the cave wall. Such ideas are
entirely misleading. Anyone with any understanding of
the creative process must know that the artiste working
in these fastnesses so remote from the outer world carried
with them intense and emotionally charged Images of the
animals on which their Uves were centred.
The creative act, as in all true art, had already taken
place In the imagination; the pigments, the gravers, served
only to give it material expression. With all utilitarian
magical functions apart, this element of communion
with their animal subjects made the activity of these
artiste at one with the religious life of their societies.
- JACQUETTA HAWKES
Part I Chapter VII (Art it Religion)
13
