Mexican farmers learn some new agricultural methods that
improve yield and quality of Indian corn crops. Combined
efforts of the Mexican government and international organi¬
zations have been giving a large boost to Mexico's agricultural
output. Wheat harvests alone have doubled in the past decade.
:; *%£?& ¿«PR %^^^7i 5rm
wwm^^
i Paul Almasy, Paris

THE INDIVISIBILITY
OF WORLD PROSPERITY
THE ANATOMY
OF UNDERDEVELOPMENT
(Pt 4) *
In many of today's underdeveloped
countries, economic development
involves the rapid and simulta¬
neous carrying out of so many
nation-wide activities that often
only governments are competent
to provide the necessary initial
impulse and over-all supervision.
Even governments, however, lack
some of the means required for
this immense task. Technical assis¬
tance on a vast international scale
¡sthe subject of this, the concluding
article in a series based on a new
study produced by the United Na¬
tions under the title "Aspects of
Economic Development: The Back¬
ground to Freedom from Hunger."
(*) See The Unesco Courier, July-August, Sep¬
tember and November 1962.
fOR the first time in history, men, wherever they
live, are learning to think of the resources and
welfare of the human race as something of concern to
all. For the first time, the peoples of the world are
beginning to share their vast experience and accumulated
knowledge. The existence of the international secretariats
is itself evidence of a new outlook.
Here, a body of specialists in many fields, recruited
from the most diverse backgrounds and working under
an oath of objectivity, is available to assist and advise
governments in the formulation and execution of their
economic and social policies. This change in human
attitudes is still no more than tentative, but the English
historian, Sir Arnold Toynbee, has described it as perhaps
the most significant mark of our times.
Just as individual firms, industrialists and others in the
underdeveloped countries are turning to their governments
for help, so governments are turning to the world
community of nations. There are many ways, direct and
indirect, in which the international organizations can
make such help available to them. Certain forms
of direct assistance, namely technical and pre-investment
assistance and the financing of economic development may
first be briefly examined.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
27

WORLD PROSPERITY (Cont'd)
Man's greatest common enterprise
The governments of countries undergoing economic
development can seek technical assistance from a variety
of sources, such as the United States International Co¬
operation Administration, the British Commonwealth
Colombo Plan, the U.S.S.R. foreign aid programme or the
bilateral aid programmes of France, the Federal Republic
of Germany, the Netherlands, Norway and other countries.
The larger foreign aid programmes operate on an
impressive scale. Thus, the United States allocates for
economic, as distinct from military, assistance over $2,000
million per year. The British Commonwealth Colombo
Plan disbursed approximately $3,500 million in the period
1950-1957.
The equivalent of over $8,000 million is aid to be devoted
each year by the industrialized countries as a whole to
various forms of economic assistance. This figure Includes
about US $1,600 million from private investment, of which
over $1,000 million comes from Western Europe.
Substantial assistance Is given in various forms by such
countries as the United Kingdom, France and the
Netherlands to colonies or former colonies. The French
outlay on such assistance, not counting Algeria, is said
to amount to 1,2 percent of the national income, which
is claimed as a record.
The governments of underdeveloped countries also turn
for help to the United Nations and the related inter¬
governmental agencies, for all of which technical assis¬
tance has become an extremely important activity. It is
with technical assistance provided by the United Nations
and those agencies that we are concerned here, although
its annual volume so far represents only a fraction of that
supplied bilaterally.
he U.N. Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance was launched in 1950, since the
assistance given by the United Nations and the Specialized
Agencies out of their regular budgets was proving much
too modest for the needs. This Expanded Programme is
paid for by voluntary contributions made annually by
governments, members of the United Nations or Spe¬
cialized Agencies. It is co-ordinated by the Technical
Assistance Board (T.A.B.), which consists of representa¬
tives of the United Nations and of the eight intergovern¬
mental agencies which also participate in the programme.
The organizations participating in the Expanded Pro¬
gramme are the United Nations, the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the International Labour Organization,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Na¬
tions, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the International Civil Aviation
Organization, the World Health Organization, the Inter¬
national' Telecommunications, Union and the World
Meteorological Organization.
Each of these participating organizations works within
a specific field. Economic development as such is one of
the responsibilities of the United Nations, although the
term is so broad that all the activities of the participating
agencies are in some degree associated with economic
development programmes. United Nations technical
assistance is closely integrated with the work of the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs.
Early each year, T.A.B. notifies governments of the
approximate sum which is expected to be available to each
under the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance
in all fields during the next year, and asks for an official
28 list of requests for experts and fellowships to be drawn
up in order of priority. Technical assistance is given on
the basis of such requests. Each year, the report of T.A.B.
to the Technical Assistance Committee of the Economic
and Social Council reviews the work of the previous twelve
months and critically appraises progress and trends.
Under the Expanded Programme, experts in a great
variety of fields are made available to governments re¬
questing their services, and fellowships are awarded for
nationals of the economically underdeveloped countries to
study the most recent techniques which have been
developed abroad. In certain cases, limited amounts of
equipment may be made available, primarily for demons¬
tration purposes.
t any moment, there are over a thousand
k experts . serving on foreign missions for the
T.A.B. and other technical assistance programmes organ¬
ized by the U.N. family. Since 1950, about 10,000 of them
have been sent out from 83 countries and territories and,
in the same period, some 20,000 fellows from 149 countries
and territories, have studied abroad a multilateral
pooling of skills such as has never before been attempted.
Every problem of economic development has at some
time been the subject of a request for expert advice or
for fellowship study. Technical assistance given under
the T.A.B. programme ranges from advice given directly
to a Prime Minister on long-range economic planning in
all fields to technical guidance on some defect revealed in
the manufacture of a spare part. The advice of the
"older" countries is continually being placed at the
disposal of those with less experience.
Even countries which are comparatively new to indus¬
trialization are often asked, under the United Nations
programme, to make some of their few experts available
to help others which are about to grapple with the
obstacles we have been studying. It has been found that
their special knowledge of the obstacles and difficulties
renders their advice particularly valuable and makes them
quickly able to assess needs.
At the 1958 General Assembly session, a United Nations
Special Fund was established "as a constructive advance
in United Nations assistance to the less developed
countries." Special Fund assistance differs from tradi¬
tional U.N. technical assistance in several important
respects. For one thing, it concentrates on relatively more
expensive projects. The average gross cost of the first
205 projects approved was somewhat more than $2 million,
with the Special Fund contributing $850,000 to each, and
the recipient Government the remainder.
hURTHER, the projects not only involve bigger
teams of experts but also a much higher
equipment component. This ranges from the provision
of an airplane for forestry inventories to supplying rigs
and diamond drills to find ground-water.
Finally, the projects are designed to have the widest
possible impact on the economic and social development
of the countries, particularly by facilitating new capital
investment. Thus the Special Fund provides a kind of
technical assistance in depth, assistance specially geared
to make substantial investment feasible and more effec¬
tive.
This "pre-investment" assistance falls into four
principal categories: .
surveys of needs for skilled manpower and of natural
resources, for instance mineral and geological sur¬
veys, water power, hydraulic and meteorological

Unesco-Almasy
In those tropical countries which are "sun-rich" but poor
in conventional fuels like oil and coal, solar energy
may one day become a widely-used source of power to
run pumps, refrigerating plants and to purify brackish
water, for example. Research is now being stepped up.
Above, a solarimeter at the Solar Energy Laboratory,
University of Dakar, in the Senegal Republic, is used
to measure solar radiation that is diffused by the sky.
surveys, other land and water use surveys, and fishing
surveys ;
applied research, such as agricultural, fishery,
veterinary, forestry and industrial research;
training, especially of teachers and extension
workers, in such fields as agriculture, forestry, ani¬
mal health and fishing, in industry, engineering,
transport and communications and for secondary
school teachers; and
training and advisory services in economic planning
and public administration.
Mr. Paul G. Hoffman, formerly head of the United States
"Marshall Plan" for European post-war recovery, is
Managing Director of the Special Fund. He is responsible
to a Governing Council of eighteen States elected by the
Economic and Social Council. Half of the members are
industrially advanced nations, and half low-income
countries. Requests for Special Fund assistance are
submitted by governments to the Managing Director, who
recommends to the Governing Council for its approval
only those considered to meet the criteria of the Special
Fund and to offer promise of early results.
The objective is always to speed up the integrated
technical, economic and social development of the less
developed countries. The implementation of each project
thus far approved has been entrusted to the services of the
United Nations or one of its specialized agencies.
Today's underdeveloped countries face formidable
obstacles in the struggle to increase the earning power of
their people. Often there is no mercantile class ready to
become the entrepreneurs of a new historical phase, and
in many lands the educated classes show active distaste
for the industrial or commercial life. Inadequate know¬
ledge of the prospects before a new industry is an added
deterrent to those who have capital. The mass of the
people is far too poor to have money for investment or
for the purchase of manufactured goods.
Land reform and other social changes may be an essen¬
tial preliminaty to any substantial increase In the
earnings of the people. New attitudes of mind which
machinery and industrialization require on the part of
masses of men are also a conspicuous need. At the same
time, care must be taken to preserve, as far as possible,
those social and other values of the non-industrialized
culture which might otherwise be needlessly sacrificed in
the helter-skelter of change.
In these circumstances, governments have come to play
an important role in economic development, for In all the
countries concerned, development involves tasksecono¬
mic, educational and social of a magnitude which calls
for some degree of central planning and co-ordination.
But, while the role of national governments may be vital,
governments themselves require international help in
carrying out these huge tasks.
H ELP is given by the United Nations, the spe-
l cialized agencies and the International Bank
through technical and pre-investment assistance, through
international loans and through the machinery for regular
consultation and for specialized publications provided by
the international organizations. These publications have
established themselves as a unique source of information
on economic and social development.
Side by side with numerous bilateral programmes of
technical aid, the United Nations and the specialized
agencies are assisting governments on request by providing
them with internationally recruited experts and with
fellowships for their own nationals to study abroad.
Not the least important aspect of economic development
is the remarkable opportunity it is giving for International
discussion and exchange of knowledge. For the first time,
technical assistance and related activities are making it
possible to bring the entire world's experience and skills
to bear upon each individual country's problems. While
the international organizations are using economic deve¬
lopment, as the Charter requires, to help raise living
standards, they are also finding In it a means to further
world co-operation and to promote the friendship of
nations.
N evertheless, despite all that has been done to
publicize economic development programmes,
there is not yet sufficient understanding of the vast issues
which they involve for man's future. The urgency of the
need for increased assistance is not yet grasped by the
mass of the people, and even by many public figures, in
the industrialized countries from which that assistance
must chiefly come.
Nor are the nature and duration of the effort which
will be called for in the less developed countries them¬
selves always fully understood by their citizens, any more
than the profound changes of attitude that will sometimes
be required before living standards can be made to rise.
The economic state of any society is the result still more
of the psychological state of its members than of its
geographical situation or natural resources.
We are engaged upon perhaps the greatest enterprise
which man has yet undertaken in common. We cannot
yet be sure of success, and we know that the effort will be
exacting and very long. But the energy and persistency
with which we pursue this effort must be the measure of
our high ambition. (End.)
29
