THE HIDDEN FACE OF THE CINEMA (4)
CENSORSHIP
A double-edged weapon
by Paul Léglise
In a series of articles based on a world survey of the cinema, (See
The Unesco Courier, Dec. 1962 and Jan. and Feb. 1963) Paul Léglise
dealt with some of the lesser-known aspects of what might be termed
the "private life" of the cinema industry, from production to distribu¬
tion and presentation. But films have also a collective life, control¬
led by institutions and laws. Here, M. Léglise discusses censorship
problems and the growing importance of films for young people.
Doll actors fight a duel
for love of a lady in a
puppet film version of
Shakespeare's "A Mid¬
summer Night's Dream",
produced by the Czech
puppeteer Jiri Trnka.
Filmexport, Prague
film is a collective work subect to precise
i economic imperatives and made to satisfy
cultural needs. Because of these characteristics it
demands the creation in every country of an institution
to co-ordinate, promote, control, guide and arbitrate the
affairs of the national cinema industry.
The actual forms taken- by such institutions can vary
greatly. In one country the nationalization of industries
puts authority into the hands of the State. In another,
professional organizations join forces to create an organ¬
ization which handles the general problems of the cinema
industry. Under other arrangements some affairs remain
in the hands of the State while others are dealt with by
the film-makers themselves.
Already in the early days of the cinema, film makers
formed associations not only to look after their pro¬
fessional Interests, but also to co-ordinate and syste¬
matize techniques and working methods. Soon they were
joined by other groups whose prime interest was in the
cultural problems of the cinema.
Today all these organizations have an important func¬
tion in every country, representing the interests of the
cinema industry in its relations with the public authori¬
ties. Sometimes a professional organization takes over the
affairs of the industry in its own country and becomes
responsible for negotiations with those of other countries.
The United States is a typical example of this "self
government in business."
Other groups concerned with the cultural problems of
the cinema in turn affiliate themselves with international
bodies having similar aims, such as the International
Federation of Film Societies, the International Scientific
Film Association, the International Centre of Films for
28 Children, the International Committee for Film Education
and Culture, the International Experimental and Art Film
Theatres Confederation, the International Council for
Educational Films, the International Art Film Federation,
the International Catholic Film Office, the International
Amateur Film Union, the International Animated Film
Association and so on.
Among the laws that affect the, cinema industry cer¬
tainly the most controversial are those relating to cen¬
sorship. A subject which constantly preoccupies film
makers, censorship is the cinema problem that comes
up for discussion most often of all. It is one that can be
argued about endlessly. Sometimes it Is simply referred
to as "control," either to distinguish it from official
censorship in which direct power is held and exercised
by a government, or simply for euphemistic reasons which,
In any case, deceive no one.
Every country provides for the maintenance of law,
order and public decency in the general body of its laws
and it thus seems somewhat pointless to introduce special
legislation applying only to films. Justification for censor¬
ship, however, has been based on the immense influence
which films have on the public and this has led to abusive
or haphazard application to films of laws relating to public
order and morality.
The cinema industry needs protection against the con¬
fused and incoherent use of such laws on a local level,
and a national censorship of films thus offers a safeguard
against such excesses.
It thus comes as no surprise to find the cinema industry
itself demanding that a system of censorship be set up or
even deciding to establish one under its own responsibility.
The purpose here is to prevent the blocking of commercial
distribution through contradictory censorship decisions
that may easily vary between different areas of the same
country and even between one city and another. A central
censorship authority is, in fact, an economic necessity.
"The kind of censorship does not matter," wrote a French
film-maker in 1919, "as long as it is a centralized one."

This need for a centralized control is amply illustrated
by the case of the United States. Although the Tariff Act
forbids the importation of any film that incites people to
subversion or acts against the government of the United
States and proscribes the entry of anything immoral or
obscene, there is no federal censorship.
Some local authorities, however, possess wide dis¬
cretionary powers. Five States Kansas, Maryland, New
York, Pennsylvania and Virginia have established censor¬
ship systems, and in several others censorship even
operates on the municipal level.
Faced by such a lack of legislative uniformity, it is
hardly surprising that the Motion Picture Producers and
Distributors of America decided to set up a Production
Code intended for general application and seeking to
establish some measure of uniformity in an otherwise
confused mass of criteria. The Code, in fact, represents
the unifying force in the organization of the American
film industry. Its creation only serves to emphasise its
necessity, for economic reasons alone, to the film industry.
All the American producers and the importers of pro¬
ductions from abroad can submit their films to the Pro¬
duction Code Administration (PCA) for approval.
Scenarios of U.S. films submitted for PCA approval are
examined carefully and in controversial cases PCA mem¬
bers may decide to watch the shooting of certain scenes.
In any case, PCA approval is given only to completed
films. Where films have not been submitted for approval,
is nothing to prevent their being shown in
specialized cinemas, but the normal channels of distribu¬
tion for the commercial circuits are to all intents barred
to them. Though the PCA mark of approval has no actual
legal value it is a significant fact that films bearing it are
exempted from municipal censorship in many cities. This
alone would seem to justify its existence.
Similar kinds of- systems are found in some other
countries: The British Board of Film Censors (United
Kingdom), the Freiwillige Selbskontrolle der Filmwirt¬
schaft (German Federal Republic) and the Administra¬
tion Commission of Motion Picture Code of Ethics (Japan),
to name but three.
In Great Britain the British Board of Film Censors
delivers three types of certificates to approved films: "U,"
meaning suitable for general release; "A," more suitable
for adult than juvenile audiences, and "X," for adult
audiences only.
In the German Federal Republic there is close collabo¬
ration between the authorities and the FSK (the organ¬
ization named above). There is actually no censorship in
the Republic although a 1957 law requires authorization
for the screening of films to audiences of young people in
three age categories: less than 12, 16 and 18 years of age.
All the States of the Republic have agreed to abide by the
decisions of the self-created voluntary censorship service
of the country's cinema industry.
All these self-censorship institutions operate on the basis
of a production code which defines the kinds of scenes
regarded as improper: certain aspects of crime and bru¬
tality, vulgarity in dialogue, indecent or obscene passages
and things likely to give offence to national sentiments or
religious beliefs.
In the United Kingdom there is no written code. The
British Board of Film Censors prefers to judge each film
on its individual merits and to take all aspects of the
work Into account.
In cases where institutions of this kind do not exist or
where film censorship authority is not vested exclusively
in the municipal authorities as it is in the case of Bolivia
and Ecuador, for example what other systems do we find
in operation: full freedom or rigorous control? The
answer: widely varying degrees of censorship extending
between two extremes.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
29

1 1 Zy u..
A Unesco-
Hungarian
co-production
on the history
of numbers
In prehistoric times, the extent of the
cave man's conception of numbers was
"one", "two" and "many". One day he
began to realize that "two" is always
"two" no matter what it describes...
... and he then made the second basic
discovery: the representation of ideas
by symbols. Now he has started to
keep a record of his hunting bag by
means of notches he cuts in his club.
3 1 S ( *
0
9 -lo
ïïîï
fiMM i*» »O -J
In Egypt, arithmetic was used for land
measuring, construction and book-keep¬
ing. Here ancient Egyptians show how
to calculate proportions of a right-
angled triangle with a knotted cord.
By the position of the numerical symbols
they used, the Babylonians develop
their number system. The same symbol,
by a use of repetition, can be employed
to signify 1 or 60 or 60 x 60, and so on.
Wise men of India meet to decide on
numerological symbols. They agree on
numbers running from 1 to 9 (basis of
our present numbers). But something
is missing. At last they find it: the zero.
i\>\
^RABl^
AL6ORIÏM0Ï
ALGfJEA
From India, Arab men of learning bor¬
rowed the numerical symbols (now
completed by the zero). One of them
was soon to give a striking new im¬
petus to the science of mathematics.
This man was AI Khowarizmi. One of
his works entitled "Al-jebr w'al muqa-
balah" has given us the word "algebra".
The term "Logarithm" is said to be a
distortion of this Arab author's name.
Moving across North Africa, algebra
eventually reached Spain. Soon it be
came ah intrinsic part of mathematics
that were taught in Spain's universities
whose fame spread throughout Europe.
CINEMA (Cont'd;
Freedom but not licence
30
The first of these extremes Is In the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, where not only film production but also any com¬
merce in films is strictly prohibited. Only diplomatic
missions and a few foreign organizations are allowed to
screen films ' and these performances must be strictly
private.
The other extreme Is the Republic of Argentina. Article
22 of an Argentine law passed in 1957 declares that anyone
interfering with the freedom of expression of the cinema
in any way whatsoever, applying censorship or preventing
the free movement and screening of films is liable to a
prison sentence of from one to six months.
Does this prohibition of censorship by law mean that
no control whatever exists in Argentina? No! For
freedom does not mean licence to do anything one
pleases.
An Argentine decree of 1961 has somewhat reduced the
scope of the earlier law. The new text specifies a number
of things whose presentation on the screen can give rise
to legal action: offences against decency, things offensive
to religious beliefs or to other races or foreign countries;
vindications of crime, dishonesty, immorality or violence.
Despite these far-reaching modifications, Article 22 of the
original Argentine law is still in force. Control of films is
now therefore guaranteed and carried out under the
powers of judicial authority.
One aspect of the censorship problem the admission of
children to certain film shows still preoccupies many
authorities and even the Argentine Republic has decided

ur cave man has learned his first lesson
arithmetic: "two" and "two" make
ur. He has already started down the
>ad of abstract ideas. Then one day
i slips and falls flat in a muddy pool.
Furious and dripping with water he
goes to wipe his muddy hands on a rock.
His misfortune is really a blessing in
disguise for it gives him the means to
make a new and important discovery.
Gazing at his finger marks on the rock
he counts: "One handfive fingers ;
two handsten fingers". Man's ten fing¬
ers thus became the basis for the foun¬
dation of the decimal system of today.
These drawings are reproduced
from a Hungarofilm-Unesco co-
production entitled "1, 2, 3..." in
which animated cartoon techniques
give charm and humour to thé
history of mathematics (in capsule
form) and show the contributions
of Orient and Occident to Its
evolution. This colour film was
made by a team of Hungarian ani¬
mators, Gyula Macskassy and Gyorgy
Varnai. Films by Gyula Macskassy
received the best cartoon awards
at the Karlovy Vary Festival in
1960 and the 1961 Cannes Festival.
Unesco photos
2 J-£~c
The Greeks showed genius in analyzing
many fundamental ideas of mathema¬
tics. Here Pythagorus demonstrates his
now famous theorem on the squares
of the sides of a right-angled triangle.
Roman numerals were hardly designed
for simple and rapid calculations and
the Romans were obliged to make use
of the abacus, a simple calculating mach¬
ine, consisting of beads sliding on wires.
t/NIVE
1-0
&)
I=1-Z.
W®'
Students, monks, and scholars came
to be initiated in this new branch of
science "from the Orient." AI Khowa-
rizmi's "Algebra" was widely translated
by medieval scholars and won renown.
The science of numbers spread like wild¬
fire across Europe where each succeed¬
ing generation of scholars and scientists
carried it one step further towards its
present-day breadth and complexity.
A universal legacy, mathematics is a
science in itself and the to.ol of all other
sciences. It is also a vast and interna¬
tional language in which scientists of
all lands can speak and be understood.
not to leave Its solution to an application of general laws,
even when these have been specially amended. The 1957
law in Argentina was modified in this connexion later the
same year. The new text stipulates that the National
Institute of Cinematography must issue a prior certificate
of approval to Argentine and foreign productions, and
empowers It to classify films as being unsuitable for young
people under the age of 18. Local authorities have the
right to prohibit the admission of minors to the perfor¬
mances of such films.
The moral protection of youth is, in fact, another reason
offered for the maintenance of censorship. Conjointly
with the threat of repressive action by local authorities,
this new principle, today written into the laws of most
countries, often raises a barrier to another long-estab¬
lished principle: freedom of expression.
Belgium has found a way out of this dilemma with a
solution that is both original and ingenious. It has no
general censorship to block the free movement of films,
but admission to cinemas is forbidden to young people
under the age of 16. A control commission has been set
up with a mandate that is clear and precise: it gives
approval for certain films to be shown to children and
thus attenuates the stringency of general censorship.
Another system long in use is a governmental author¬
ization given on the advice and judgment of a special
commission composed of educationalists, psychologists,
doctors, magistrates and other competent authorities.
The universal and controversial problem of censorship
is one with which countries with socialist economies have
also to come to grips. In Poland, for example, a decree
of 1945 (modified in 1952 and 1953) created a central office
for the control of the press, publications and entertain¬
ments. Its purpose is to prevent the diffusion of any
written, auditory or visual matter considered to be
against the interests of the State or infringing law or
morality. A Ministry of Education committee views each
film and decides at what age children may see it.
As the production and the distribution of films in a
Socialist country are both nationalized activities, it is a
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
31

CINEMA (Cont'd )
A growing industry: films for the young
normal and general rule for a control to be effected
through the choice of subject matter for films or of films
themselves in cases where they are imported.
It is all too easy to criticise and poke fun at film cen¬
sorship. But its roots are deeply and tenaciously
engrained and it would be idle to hope for their eli¬
mination in the near future. Far better to admit, even
unwillingly, that there is still some justification for
censorship.
The acceptance of this fact in no way prevents us
from denouncing and exposing the abuses of censorship
or its hypocritical use, so as to prevent its extension
beyond admissible bounds. Nor is this attitude likely to
prejudice in any way a progressive advance to the day
when everyone will regard films in the same way as all
other major forms of expression, subject solely to the
general laws of a country and answerable, if need should
arise, to a court of justice.
In bridging the gap that still separates us from such
a happy state of affairs, an important role will fall to
the educational and cultural aspects of the cinema. This
movement has, in fact, already begun and most govern¬
ments have shown that they are ready to take positive
action by using the cinema for educational and cultural
goals.
There exists, no doubt, a certain long-standing mistrust
on the part of some authorities and a disparity between
needs and resources, but it is certain that national
authorities everywhere are giving increasing attention to
the possibilities of educational films. In many cases a
special service attached to the ministry of education
takes charge of film production and distribution and
supplies equipment. Two examples are the Cinemato¬
graphic Service of the Belgian Ministry of Education
and the National Pedagogical Institute in France. Not
all such 'institutions are governmental in origin.
Frequently an autonomous institution produces films and
other audio-visual materials for educational use and
trains special staff in their uses .
In this field valuable international co-ordination is ef¬
fected by the International Council for Educational Films
founded in 1952 and now grouping 23 countries which
encourages exchanges, and acts as a catalyzing agency
by stimulating co-productions between different countries.
Other specialized organizations encourage action on a
regional basis. One of these is the Latin American Ins¬
titute for Educational Films, set up by the Mexican
Government in collaboration with Unesco. It arranges
reciprocal exchanges, the training of staff and the pro¬
duction and distribution of films in Latin America.
Apart from its role in the educational film field, govern¬
ment action often extends into the production and dis¬
tribution of cultural and scientific films, especially short
length ones. Sometimes a special body is set up to act
as co-ordlnator for the film activities of all its country's
ministeries and to negotiate with private film companies
on behalf of the State. Examples of this kind include
France's National Cinematographic Centre, Britain's
Central Office of Information and the Information Film
Section in the Republic of South Africa.
IIn France the funds allocated by the State for
the production and distribution of short-length
cultural films an activity co-ordinated by the National
Cinematographic Centre annually amount to 10 million
francs. In the United Kingdom, the Central Office of
Information is each year responsible for the production
of some 50 films destined for both commercial and non¬
commercial channels, a further 100 for overseas TV
transmission and also short films for TV and newsreel use.
Another Increasing trend today is the setting up of
official agencies responsible for film production on behalf
of the State. These include the National Film Board of
Canada, the Dansk Kulturfilm and Ministeruerhes Film-
ydvag in Denmark, the Aengencia Nacional in Brazil
oo Spain's No-Do, Morocco's Cinematographic Centre and
National Film Units in Australia, India, New Zealand
and Malaya.
These organizations do not necessarily hold the exclu¬
sive monopoly of film orders for the state. They are
generally concerned with news-film production and,
depending on which country they are in, have a more or
less indirect share in the production of other kinds of
films, either using their own technical staffs or calling
on private film companies to do the work.
India's Films Division, for instance, produces a news-
film and several documentaries each week. The Canadian
National Film Board each year distributes its productions
(1960-1961 figures) in over 70 countries.
Similar organizations equipped to prepare and produce
educational, scientific and cultural films exist in the
countries with socialist economies. In the Soviet Union,
popular science films are produced in studios at Moscow,
Leningrad, Sverdlovsk, Kiev, Tbilissi, Minsk and Tash¬
kent. In Czechoslovakia, documentary films are produced
in Prague, popular science and educational films in Brno
and Prague, and children's films in Gottwaldow.
Annual production of short films, documentaries and
popular science films in the Soviet Union is about 750.
In 1959, 377 similar films were produced in Czechoslo¬
vakia, whose Gottwaldow studios produce between 80 and
100 films for children each year.
This global production of cultural films finds some
outlet through normal cinema channels, but it is chiefly
distributed through specialized "non-commercial" cir¬
cuits.
B:.EFORE leaving the subject of cultural films
'mention should be made of developments in
the production of films for young people. In an earlier
reference to censorship, we emphasized how a growing
concern for the moral protection of youth was being
written into the laws of many countries to an extent
where it threatened to nullify the long-standing principle
of freedom of expression.
However, negative action with regard to films is today
being offset by positive measures which encourage the
development of films especially designed for juvenile
audiences. These include subsidies, special reduced prices,
bonuses, the waiving of taxes and the creation of
specialized production studios and distribution channels.
Under the impulse of the International Centre of Films
for Children in Brussels, measures are now being worked
out to encourage international co-productions and film
exchanges. Though, this is a long-term project some of
its positive results can already be seen.
The International Centre of Films for Children was
created under the sponsorship of Unesco and its members
include international organizations and national groups
which are working to develop the movement for chil¬
dren's films in their respective countries. Priority is
given to international film exchanges, but the Centre is
also working to bring about a greater freedom of circula¬
tion for films intended for juvenile spectators.
Mention is made of these activities in this context to
show how some groups and organizations are demonstrat¬
ing convincingly that outdated and negative forms of
censorship can be counteracted, and are recognizing the
positive role that the cinema can fill for teen-agers.
Delegates to a conference on the development of infor¬
mation media in Latin America, held in Santiago de
Chile in 1961, noted that in the field of films for youth
there existed "a regrettable apathy, often resulting from
a shortage of funds but chiefly due to an absence of
organizations working to highlight the need for this kind
of film and to encourage its production."
If these facts are evident in Latin America, they are
also reflected in the situation existing in most other parts
of the world. Thus we must look to the International
Centre in Brussels for a lead In stimulating the creation
in all parts of the world of national centres whose aim is
to work for this worthwhile cause.
