300,000 EARTH
by E. M. Fournier d'Albe
Carl Mydans, Courtesy Life Magazine © 1963. Time Inc.
26
fisiTORS to a famous selsmological observatory
in Australia are sometimes told a strange and
sad story:
Some years after the end of the First World War, an
eminent Japanese scientist was visiting Australia and
was taken to see this observatory. The director received
him with due ceremony, and then led him down to the
underground vaults where, in the darkness, the seismo¬
graphs were keeping their constant watch. The director
switched on the light in the vault. In those days, the
recordings were made mechanically, by thin steel pens
on smoked paper; (now It is more common to record on
photographic paper by means of a light beam reflected
from a galvanometer, and the vault has to be kept in
permanent darkness).
The visitor from Japan could see three instruments,
each one standing on a concrete pillar about a metre
high. In a corner, a large clock was ticking in a compli¬
cated manner. The director showed him that in each
Instrument there was a heavy weight suspended on
strong springs; this weight, by its inertia, would set the
pen of the instrument moving whenever the slight tre¬
mors from a distant earthquake reached the observatory.
In one of the seismographs, the weight was suspended
in such a way that it could move vertically up and down;
in the other two, it could only move horizontally, in the
East-West direction in one instrument and in the North-
South direction in the other.
The visitor was examining the latter, when quite
suddenly the pen began to swing slowly from side to side,
leaving a wavy trace on the black surface of the record¬
ing paper, where before there had been only a series of
straight lines.
"That's a bit of luck," said the director, "It's working
specially for you. It Isn't often one sees an earthquake
actually being recorded."
The pens of all three instruments were now moving,
but the movement on the North-South instrument was
slightly greater than that on the East-West one.
"These are the compression waves, or P-waves for
short," said the director. "If you would like to wait a
few minutes, we shall perhaps see the arrival of the
S-waves the transverse, or shear, waves. Then we shall
have an idea of how far away this earthquake has
occurred."
A few minutes later, the director exclaimed "Here
they come!" The visitor could hardly see any difference
in the movement of the pens, but the director pointed
out to him that now the movement on the East-West
instrument was greater than that on the North-South
one.
"It's quite a long way off, probably to the north of us,"
said the director. "But it's a big one! Let's go up to
the office. I'll look up the travel-time tables and give you
a rough estimate of the distance. You see, the P-waves
travel faster than the S-waves, so that the time-lag in
the arrival of the latter gives an indication of how far
away the earthquake is. But I can only give you a rough
estimate, of course. To locate an earthquake accurately,
one has to combine the readings of a large number of
observatories."
It did not take the director long to work out the dis¬
tance: "About 10,000 kilometres, I should think. That
probably means Japan or the Aleutians."
In fact, It was Japan, for this tremor was recorded on
September 1, 1923, the date of the Great Kanto Earth-
CONT'D ON PAGE 28

QUAKES A YEAR
LAST INSTANTS. This remarkable photograph of a swaying building only seconds before it
collapsed was taken when an earthquake struck the Japaneso city of Fukui in 1948. Earthquakes
are known to be concentrated in two chief belts. Some 80% occur along the rim of tho Pacific
Ocean; another 15% take place in a band extending from North Africa through Southern Europe,
the Alps and Asia Minor to India and Burma, then joining the Circum-Pacific belt in Indonesia.
27

300.000 EARTHQUAKES (Cont'd)
Mapping the
danger zones
quake which ravaged Tokio. It was not until later that
the director learned that five members of his visitor's
family had been killed in this earthquake.
It has been estimated that over 300,000 earthquakes
occur each year, but relatively few are strong enough to
be felt by the population in general. Nevertheless, since
the beginning of this century earthquakes have, on an
average, killed over 15,000 persons and caused hundreds
of millions of dollars worth of damage each year. Some
countries such as China and Japan, Chile and Peru, Italy,
Greece, Turkey and Iran, have suffered far more heavily
than others.
In fact, earthquakes tend to occur repeatedly in certain
well-defined zones stretching around the world. The
first of these Is the Circum-Pacific zone, which extends
all round the shores of the Pacific Ocean from Chile to
New Zealand. The second is the Mediterranean-Alpine
zone, which stretches from Morocco in the West, through
the Mediterranean and along the mountain chains of the
Caucasus, the Hindu Kush, the Karakoram and the
Himalaya into China, Burma and Indonesia.
In order to see how the geography of earthquakes has
been discovered, we must go back to the seismological
observatories and find out what happens to the data
recorded by the instruments there.
There are now over four hundred observatories
installed in different parts of the world, many with
instruments far exceeding in sensitivity those which the
visitor from Japan saw in 1923. But, however sensitive
the instruments employed, it is still impossible for one
single observatory to locate an earthquake. In order to
do this, the data from many observatories have to be
collected and analyzed together. This is done at two
national and two International centres.
When an earthquake occurs, observatories which
have recorded it send immediately, by telegram
or airmail, their readings of the P and S-wave arrival times
to the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey in Wash¬
ington, or to the Institute of Earth Sciences in Moscow,
or to both. These centres then make what is called a preli¬
minary determination of the earthquake epicentre (that
is to say, the point on the earth's surface vertically above
the focus of the earthquake, which may have occurred
tens or even hundreds of kilometres below the surface.)
With this preliminary determination to help them, the
staff at each observatory examine their records again
and make a more complete analysis of them for inclu¬
sion in the observatory bulletin which is usually published
once a month. This bulletin is sent to other observa¬
tories, in exchange for theirs, but It also goes to two
International centres: the Bureau Central International
de Séismologie in Strasbourg (France) ; and the office
of the "International Seismological Summary" in -Kew
(England).
The first of these centres makes an accurate determi¬
nation of the earthquake epicentre and depth, using the
data from as many observatories as possible. Nowadays,
this Bureau's Annual Bulletin runs to over 2,000 pages
and may contain data on over 60,000 earthquakes
recorded each year (of course, only a few of these are
strong enough to be felt or to cause damage.) The
International Seismological- Summary makes a more
detailed analysis of certain selected earthquakes, and the
results of its work are used mainly in research on the
interior of the earth.
From the study of this immense volume of data, the
pattern of distribution of earthquakes over the earth has
now emerged quite clearly, and some insight has been
gained into their causes which are probably linked with
28 the slow convective movement of material in the earth's
mantle. From the practical point of view, even more
interesting results come from the study of the distri-
WORLD'S
m
SEISMOGRAPH
bution of earthquakes within certain limited regions,
such as Southern Europe, Central Asia or California.
When the selsmicity and the geology of a region are
studied together, there sometimes emerges a detailed
pattern of earthquake activity which is not only of scien¬
tific interest, because of the Üght it sheds on the mecha¬
nisms involved, but is also of great practical value,
because it permits a delimitation of the zones in which
earthquakes are liable to occur. Sometimes, a few kilo¬
metres or tens of kilometres will make an appreciable
difference to the maximum intensity of earthquakes that
can be expected.
This knowledge ls extremely useful, and it may even
in some cases determine the choice of site for a dam, a
power station, a factory, or a new town. More often,
however, . other factors have overriding importance and
building must go ahead in certain places regardless of
the earthquake danger. This is where the specialist in
earthquake engineering comes in.
The 1923 earthquake in Tokyo, with which we began
this article, is famous for the fact that a number of large
buildings, which by rights should surely have been des¬
troyed, actually withstood the shock and suffered very
little damage. They survived because they had in fact
been designed to do so, but this was the first time that
a public demonstration had been given so clearly that-

awA*(5>Jí>j»¿
B»;î
To a brilliant Chinese mathema¬
tician, astronomer and geogra¬
pher, named Chang Heng (A.D.
78 to A.D. 139) goes the credit
for producing the ancestor of
all seismographs. His "earth¬
quake weathercock" (left) was
fitted in an ornamented bronze
vessel. Inside (reconstruction,
top right) was a kind of pendu¬
lum connected to eight mobile
arms. At the end of each arm a
crank operated the jaws of a
dragon head. Earthquake shocks
vibrated the mechanism and caus¬
ed the dragon's jaws facing the
direction of the shock to open,
dropping a ball into the mouth
of one of eight toads placed
around the instrument. Other
seismographic instruments were
used in China in the 6th century
and in Persia in the 13th, but the
first modern seismograph, was
only set up in 1703 by the French
scientist, Jean de Hautefeuille.
From Volume III "Science end Civilization In
China" by Prof. Joseph Needham, ' Cam¬
bridge University Press.
buildings, if properly designed and constructed, need not
necessarily collapse and kill their occupants during a
severe earthquake.
Since 1923, research in the design of earthquake-resis¬
tant construction has made further progress, particu¬
larly in Japan and the United States. The general prin¬
ciples behind successful design appear to be firstly, to
hold the building together as a single structural unit, and
secondly, to design it in such a way that its natural
frequency of vibration does not correspond to the fre¬
quencies of the earthquake waves. Different building
materials demand different techniques, but it is probably
now true to say, in general, that if people are killed in
earthquakes it ls not by the earthquakes themselves but
rather by inadequate building.
"Everybody talks about the weather," said Mark Twain,
"but nobody does anything about it." In one sense,
there is not much one can do about earthquakes: there
is certainly no means of stopping them. However, a lot
ls being done to make them less dangerous. Although we
are still very far from being able to forecast when
earthquakes will occur, the patient accumulation of
observations is making it possible to define more accura¬
tely the zones where the danger exists. Within these
zones, the risk to human life and property can be greatly
reduced by the proper application to the design and
construction of buildings of principles which are already
well established.
So long as people still die in earthquakes, research and
education in seismology and earthquake engineering must
continue with all speed. The network of seismological
observatories must be Improved, the accurate mapping of
earthquake danger zones must be extended to cover the
whole world, adequate design and construction of build¬
ings must be ensured and young scientists and engineers
must be trained to become specialists In these subjects.
Seismology ls, par excellence, an international science,
for earthquakes are no respecters of national boundaries.
The saving of human life ls everyone's concern. These
are two reasons why Unesco has become Involved In seis¬
mology. Its Job is not only to make easier the collabo¬
ration of scientists and engineers from different coun¬
tries, but also to speed the flow of knowledge and skills
from the great research centres to those people, In all
countries, who have the responsibility for putting this
knowledge to good effect.
dr. E. M. FOURMER d'albe is programme specialist in seismo¬
logy and geophysics for Unesco's Department of Natural Sciences.
He has carried out long-term missions for Unesco in Mexico and oq
in Pakistan, where he helped to set up a geophysical observatory
in the earthquake-prone region of Quetta.

EMERGENCY QUAKE SERVICE
Unesco plans to set up a 24-hour seven-day-a-week earthquake service at
its headquarters in Paris which will be able to call upon experienced seismo¬
logists and earthquake engineers to arrive on the site of major earthquakes as
quickly as feasible anywhere in the world and wherever possible at least within
72 hours of their occurence. Special arrangements are being made with the
leading seismological centres in the U.S.S.R., U.S.A. and other countries to
inform the Unesco Earthquake Service of all major quakes.
Is is important that seismologists and earthquake engineers arrive on the
spot as soon as possible after a big shock. At the request of the respective
Governments, Unesco sent experts to Iran, Libia and Yugoslavia very soon
after the recent earthquakes in those countries to make on-the-spot studies
and to advise local authorities on protection measures to be taken against
possible future earth tremors.
^*>
30
Years of disaster
During the first quarter of the 20th
century, half a million people were
killed by five major earthquakes San
Francisco (1906),' Messina (1908),
Arezzano (1915), Kansu (1920) and
Tokyo (1923). In the next twenty-five
years, records kept by the Interna¬
tional Bureau of Seismology at Stras¬
bourg showed that on an average
14,000 people were killed annually.
Peak years were 1927 (76,615 deaths),
1932 (78,202) and 1939 (61,082).
China is the country which has suffer¬
ed most from earthquakes. It expe¬
riences shocks of great intensity in
areas especially prone to landslides.
World-wide survey
The study of earthquakes a field
in which progress depends on interna¬
tional co-operation is a major feature
of Unesco's science programme today.
A broad picture of the present
status of seismology in different coun¬
tries has been obtained through a
series of Seismological Survey Mis¬
sions sent out between June 1961 and
May 1963 by Unesco in consultation
with the International Union of Geo¬
desy and Geophysics, and personally
led by the president of the Interna¬
tional Union, Professor V.V. Beloussov
or by Prof. J. P. Rothé, Secretary-
General of The International Seis¬
mological Association. The first of
the missions visited 15 countries
in South-East Asia, the second
toured seismic regions of Latin
America, the third went to countries
of the Mediterranean and Middle East
regions and the fourth made stud¬
ies in Africa. The aim of these
missions was to examine the state of
seismological and geophysical obser¬
vatory networks, the progress made
in locating and mapping seismic zones,
the application of special regulations
concerning earthquake-resistant de¬
sign for buildings and, finally, the
resources available for training specia¬
lists in seismology, seismo-geology
and earthquake engineering. Next
year Unesco will convene an intergov¬
ernmental meeting to study the gene¬
ral ' development of seismology and
earthquake engineering.
Volcanoes to watch
Following a series of eruptions by
Mount Agung on the island of Bali
early this year, when 1 ,460 people
were killed and 53,700 hectares of
paddy fields devastated, Unesco sent
a team of experts to the island. These
experts have recommended that a per¬
manent vulcanological observatory be
set up on Mount Agung and ultra¬
sensitive seismic recording instru
ments installed to keep watch over
this earthquake-prone area. Similar
observatories are needed to keep an
eye (and an ear) on the rest of Indo¬
nesia's 127 active volcanoes.
More seismologists
A map of the epicentres of the
main earthquakes shows that the most
severely-stricken regions are very
often in territories now in the throes
of economic development. Large
scale engineering works are being
undertaken, factories are being built
and cities. are expanding. All this
progress may be wiped out in a few
minutes if construction sites are badly
chosen or if proper measures of pro¬
tection are not taken in advance. Yet
these are the countries with the few¬
est specialists in seismic matters.
The United Nations Special Fund,
acting through Unesco, has offered
67 fellowships for study at the Inter¬
national Institute of Seismology and
Earthquake Engineering set up with
Unesco's help last year in Tokyo.
The right materials
Certain building materials lend
themselves better than others for
earthquake-resisting construction. It
has been shown that masonry walls
reinforced with concrete slabs, rein¬
forced concrete frames and steel
frames are most likely to resist earth¬
quakes. However more research is
needed into possible uses of local
materials (wood, bricks, mud walls,
etc.). Poor construction (excessively
heavy roofs, facades not anchored to
the foundations, weak timbers) is often
the real reason a building collapses.
Price of security
Contrary to popular belief, the
design and construction of earthquake-
resisting buildings (except very tall
ones) are easily met at relatively little
extra cost. But it is wiser to eliminate
parapets, cornices, balconies and
similar decorative elements which are
often responsible for casualties. To
make the tall buildings in business
sections of large cities earthquake
resistant does involve additional cost,
but this is relatively small in relation
of the total cost of construction, and
the protection and security obtained.
Measuring from space
Earth satellites in orbit, already
used to study the shape of the planet,
make it possible to measure great
distances with a hitherto unattain¬
able accuracy. Scientists now hope
that it will thus be possible to obtain
confirmation or invalidation of the
theory of continental drift (see page 7).
