by May Hall Thompson
HE classical definition of sound relates the phenome¬
non exclusively to the response of a "hearing" mecha¬
nism such as the ear. As such, sound is the sensation received
through the organs of hearing from vibrations transmitted by any
vibrating area in contact with the air.
But in physics sound is generally taken to relate to alternations
in air pressure (or that of water or of other fluids) over a wide
band of the spectrum. Thus, there are waves of such low fre¬
quency that we do not ordinarily think of them as sound at all but
only as cyclic pressure waves of air of such long wave lengths
that they can be detected only by sensitive instruments operating
somewhat in the manner of a barometer.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
21

Unesco-Mercier
THE EARTH'S
BRITTLE CRUST
Movements of the earth's
crust under the ocean are
shown in this plate from
the Unesco colour film-
strip, "The Sea". From the
waters emerge atolls and
the Islands formed by vol¬
canic activity. Beneath lie
huge undersea mountain
ranges and between them
is a vast rift in the earth's
crust. It was the opening
up of a "fault" of this
kind that caused the des¬
tructive earthquake in
Chile in 1960. Scientists
were able to map the fault
action from recordings of
terrestial vibrations the
strange music of the earth
hidden from man's ear.
VIBRATING
PATTERNS
Intricate circular wave
systems flow out through
water into which two
probes have been set
vibrating on the same fre¬
quency. As the effect of
the vibrations diminishes
the patterns become less
complex. The same effect
is produced by the
fundamental free oscilla¬
tions of the earth.
MUSIC OF THE EARTH (Cont'd)
Sixteen octaves below mans perception
22
Such knowledge is not new, and "ultra-sound," or sound
frequencies five or six octaves above the human
sound perception threshold, has been made use of in
industry, as is well known. By producing the right
number of vibrations to accomplish a particular job,
sound, or rather ultra-sound, can be used in various
industrial processes. Supersonic waves can sterilize food,
pasteurize milk, emulsify paint, clean castings, and so on.
But the use of sound that is not sound has recently
brought to light another possibilitythat of exploring the
earth's interior structure. From the new methods now
used precise and detailed information can be obtained on
the details of the earth's Inner density and elasticity, on
the length of major earthquake faults, and the degree of
the "ringing" of the earth. So while most of our attention
recently has been turned to Outer Space, scientists have
actually been learning more about the earth's interior (1).
Scientists, especially geophysists, have discussed and
studied the vibrations of the earth for more than three-
quarters of a century, but until recently little was known
about these phenomena. Nevertheless science was able to
evolve some theories and to define the related problems.
Scientists believed there were free oscillations of the earth,
unrelated to normal earthquake waves about which much
had already been learned.
By studies of the passage of earthquake waves through
the earth, some knowledge of the density and elasticity of
the earth's crust, mantle, and core had been gained. But
scientists believed the earth had vibrations of its own.
They believed the earth played music that might be
"heard" if only the means of detecting it could be devised.
And if it could be heard, they wondered what would be
the pitch, or the musical term for frequency, of the result-
inc oscillations?
Some scientists began working on new instruments,
electronic digital computers called extensometers and
gravimeters. The extensometer records oscillations in the
horizontal direction and the gravimeter in the vertical.
The extensometer, an extremely sensitive seismograph
capable of recording very slow oscillations, was designed
by Dr. Hugo Benioff, seismology professor at the Cali¬
fornia Institute of Technology Seismologlcal Laboratory.
Seismographs pick up normal earthquake waves that go
around the earth but disappear quickly. The new
computers were sensitive enough to detect a squeeze or
stretch of one-sixteenth of an inch in the earth between
Pasadena, California and New York.
One of Benloff's extensometers was located near
Isabella Dam in California's Kern County and two of
them at Nana, Peru. It was already known that certain
shock waves, when passing through molten matter, act
differently from when moving through solids. But among
the things scientists also want to learn about the earth's
interior is how much of it is molten and how much of
it Is solid; how deep the roots of mountains go into the

USIS
earth; and how the course and severity of earthquakes
can be accurately predicted.
If earth's music could be recorded and studied, more
and more answers to these problems could be obtained.
And then in 1960 the tremendous Chilean earthquake
struck, and its massive jolt served as the striking hammer
on the bell of the earth and set the earth ringing loudly
enough for its vibrations to be picked up on the instru¬
ments. Sound that is not sound was "heard" at last! And
through it more was learned about our ringing earth.
It was learned that the earth has two fundamental
frequencies of vibration, one with a period of 53.1 minutes
and the other with a period of 54.7 minutes. This double
pitch is due to the fact that the earth Is spinning on its
axis. If it were not spinning it would have only one
fundamental pitch whose frequency would be somewhere
between the two.
The earth's overtones, or the secondary tones produced
by the Independent vibrations of a part of the vibrating
body itself, go to frequencies as high as one vibration
every 3.7 minutes. The torsional vibrations, or the twist¬
ing and turning vibrations caused by internal stress, are
42.3 minutes In length. The overtones die down a little
faster than the fundamental vibrations. After about one
hundred oscillations, the overtones were down to one-
third of their original strength. The fundamental oscilla¬
tions lasted even longer in the earth's core than near the
surface because the core is a better bell.
Yes, there is a music of the earth that can never be
heard by the normal ear unless a recording of it Is arti¬
ficially speeded up and played back, for the frequency of
the vibrations is little less than one per hour. Sound
that man can hear travels about 344 metres (1130 feet)
a second in air under normal conditions. The lowest
audible tone man hears naturally is four octaves below
Middle C, while the Globe's music Is about 20 octaves
below. But the music Is there sound that Is not sound, as
we normally speak of It, yet now known and heard by
certain scientists.
This discovery led to further progress. Analysis of the
oscillations enabled the scientists to map the fault action
that resulted In the Chilean earthquake, a fault of about
600 miles beginning near the town of Concepción and
extending southward, mostly under the sea.
More facts about the elasticity and the density of the
earth through the crust, mantle and core were also learned
and no doubt the future will bring us still greater
knowledge. At present It takes great earthquakes, such
as the Chilean one, to set the earth ringing loudly enough
for its vibrations, to be detected. Smaller earth tremors
may produce similar effects but so far scientists have not
been able to "hear" them. Who knows, however, what
the future will tell us about the inside of our planet?
Perhaps it will prove almost as interesting as Outer
Space.
(1) See "Probing the Interior of the Earth," The Unesco
Courier, Oct. 1963.
23
