é ft
Jr. «
p' F
!.T|
LASE
100 MILLION MESSAGES
ON A BEAM OF LIGHT
¿y ßruno Friedman
Bell Telephone Laboratories. New York
Lasers produce a visible light beam one million times more intense than thought of tho same colour emitted
by the sun and offer great promise in many fields. Here a scientist checks a helium-neon gaseous laser.
0|ur modern technology, all aspects of our
highly technical civilization, may be poised for
a forward surge that is unimaginable in scope. All this
is based on the re-stimulation of an old science, the
science of light, by a new device, the "optical maser" or
"laser". So new is this device that is first prototype
was put Into operation less than three years ago.
A laser does this: it produces a narrow beam of light,
which is "monochromatic" of a single, sharply defined
colour or wave lengthrand "coherent", that is, with all
the light waves marching in regular order, like the waves
of a smoothly running sea. Light with these characteris¬
tics has never before been available to man. Being avail¬
able now, it opens the way to major developments in com¬
munications, radar, surgery, power transmission without
lines, and so on. All the possibilities have not even yet
been imagined.
These possibilities are particularly amazing in the field
of communications. A single laser-produced light beam
has inherently the ability to carry all the information
transmitted by all the television stations, radio stations,
teletypewriters, and telephone lines in the world, op¬
erating at the same time. Developing the technical means
to use this amazing message-carrying ability is a major
problem facing scientists; but the first steps have already
been taken. Television pictures and voice messages have
already been experimentally carried on light beams.
Light for communications will come Just In time. The
entire radio spectrum Is already vastly crowded. More¬
over, the demand for additional communications channels
will multiply many times during the next decades.
Lasers were theoretically predicted In the United States
in late 1958 by Dr. C. H. Townes of Columbia University
and Dr. A. L. Schalow of Bell Telephone Laboratories. The
first operating laser, built in 1960 by Dr. T.H. Malman of
the Hughes Aircraft Corporation, was followed rapidly
by others.
The essentials of a laser are simplicity itself. The first
and best-known one, the ruby laser, consists of a synthetic
ruby rod. less than a centimetre in diameter and 10-40 cm.
long. This is surrounded by a tubular lamp, wound around
It In the form of a spiral. Lighting up the tubular lamp
causes a narrow pencil of bright red light to emerge from
one end of the rod. This is the laser beam and It is a
million times more intense than light of the same colour
emitted by the sun. It is visible to the naked eye 40 kilo¬
metres away.
But what happens to the atoms within the ruby rod Is
even more significant. In the planetary model of the atom
electrons revolve in orbits around the atom's central
nucleus. These orbiting electrons can shift to hlgher-
CONT'D ON PAGE 17
15

Right, sparks fly as red
light from a ruby laser
drills a tiny hole clean
through a steel plate 3 mm.
or 1/8 inch thick. (Enlarg¬
ed detail is shown on
front cover). Laser beams
have also been used to
drill holes in diamonds
which are the hardest
substances known to
man. Left, a vital part of
an early model of the
helium-neon gaseous la¬
ser. Laser beams may one
day be used to carry vast
numbers of simultaneous
telephone conversations
and also TV programmes.
Photos : Bell Telephone Laboratories. New York
16
r
Above, a cutaway drawing
shows the "heart" of a ruby
laser a synthetic ruby rod
surrounded by a spiral lamp.
Light from the lamp stimu¬
lates the atoms of the ruby.
These store up light and
then suddenly release it, pro¬
ducing "coherent" light, that
is, of waves that are all
synchronized and travel in al¬
most perfectly parallel beams.
Laboratoire Central de Télécommunications. Paris - A. Papillon
Left, a newly-made synthetic crys¬
tal being withdrawn from an elec¬
tric furnace. It will be used in the
place of a synthetic ruby in laser
experiments. Most laser light is
deep red, but scientists hope to
produce other colours such as
blue-green which could be used,
for example, to throw probing
beams into the sea's depths. Ex¬
periments are now being carried
out with a laser using a fluor¬
escent liquid instead of a ruby.

LASERS (Cont'd)
m »^^^^.^m_J.^H mmT *
wSfmW
5 T^ *t mMé
fl
Laboratoire Central do Telecommunications. Paris - A. Papillon
A revolution in communications
energy orbits, farther away from the nucleus, by absorbing
light. They can also shift back again to their original
orbits, in this case emitting light. The light they absorb
and the light they emit are both of a very specific colour,
though not the same colour.
The ruby is composed of aluminium oxide (alumina) plus
a very small sprinkling of chromium atoms. It is the elec¬
trons in the chromium atoms which do the shifting of
orbits. From the light of mixed colours produced by the
tubular lamp they absorb green light and go to higher-
energy orbits. Some of these higher energy electrons now
spontaneously drop back to their original orbits, emitting
red light. This released red light stimulates other elec¬
trons, which are still in their higher-energy orbits, to fall
back to their original orbits, also emitting red light.
It Is this stimulated release of light which gives the
laser its name, made up of the first letters of the words
"light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation."
The laser-produced light has the very important charac¬
teristic of "coherence." This means that the waves com¬
posing the light flow In completely regular sequence, like
smoothly running ocean waves. Radio waves have this
coherence. Such regular waves can serve as information
or message carriers. Thus, at the transmitter, the com¬
plete regularity of the carrier waves can be varied electro¬
nically, the variations representing a television picture
or a voice. At the receiver, the variations from complete
regularity of the carrier waves are noted. These varia¬
tions are then transformed back into reproductions of the
original voice or picture.
Coherent light has inherently such great message-
carrying capacity that theoretically millions of messages,
such as television pictures or telephone conversations,
could be imposed on it, rather than merely one message.
This follows from a simple rule: the information capacity
of a carrier is proportional to Its vibration frequency.
Since the frequency of light is something like a hundred
million times as great as that of radio waves, its capacity
for carrying information is correspondingly great.
A laser beam, already extremely narrow, can be con¬
verged even more by lenses. In 1962, scientists of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Raytheon
Corporation sent a beam through a telescope so that it
emerged through the small end to the moon. Here it
made a spot of light only 3 km. in diameter. Laser beams
have also been converged to a fine, hot point by micro¬
scope lenses, making an ultra-fine scalpel to painlessly
remove a tumour from the retina of a human eye.
The original ruby laser emits light In very brief pulses.
For communications purposes a continuous beam will be
required. Such laser beams have already been produced
from gases and from various solid materials. These pro¬
duce light of various frequencies, in the infra-red as well
as in the visible range.
Opening one's Imagination to to-morrow can suggest
remarkable things from laser light. For example, Imagine
a system of communications satellites orbiting the earth.
Properly distributed, Just a few such satellites could relay
all the messages radio, television, cable, telephone
passing between all the continents of the globe, trans¬
mitted on very few light beams.
This fine picture has Haws. For one thing, the extreme
narrowness of the light beams creates problems In aiming
at and hitting a small target. However, electronic com¬
puters will doubtless be able to handle this problem.
More difficult to handle Is the Interference of clouds,
mist, fog, and smoke. This difficulty may be met to some
degree by using Infra-red light, which penetrates clouds
and mist more readily than visible light; also, by locating
light-projecting stations In arid regions, with good year-
round weather conditions; and by having auxiliary stand¬
by stations for times when the main stations are closed
due to bad weather.
Another possibility Is to send the laser beams along the
ground through wave guides, which are simply pipes
enclosing a vacuum. Repeater stations located on the
wave guides at Intervals, say, every 100 km., will amplify
the partially faded light beam and re-transmit It to the
next repeater station.
It is easy to imagine such wave guides running across
continents, with a single beam In the guide serving as the
equivalent to hundreds of thousands of telephone cables.
Laser light may be used for communications with colo¬
nies on the moon or on planets or with men in spacecraft
or between spacecraft. But the problems of aiming and
getting sufficient power output from a laser must be met,
for adequately powerful continuous-beam lasers do not yet
exist. It may also be noted that the tightness of the laser
beam has certain other characteristics. It will be impossi¬
ble, for example, either to Intercept messages or to Jam
transmissions.
Bruno Friedman ij an American science writer. A former
research chemist, he is now editor of "Technological Digest",
published by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development, in Paris.
17

LASERS (Cont'd)
A REVOLUTION
IN SURGERY
These remarkable pictures show how light
from a ruby laser helps scientists at France's
National Blood Transfusion Centre in Paris to
study body cells. Right, the equipment they
use: a closed-circuit TV installation, a ruby
laser and a powerful microscope. Photos
below show the amazing precision they
obtain from the "coherent" light which can
be used by a surgeon as a micro-scalpel.
(1) Red blood corpuscles placed under the
microscope are photographed by the TV
camera and their image is relayed to the
screen shown on right. A spot of normal light
is used to "zero in" on one of the corpuscles.
(2) A flash of laser light lasting about one-
thousandth of a second then scores a bulls-
eye on the corpuscle. (3) As soon as it is hit
the corpuscle changes colour and begins to
dissolve. Dark patch is the point of impact
and appears to be coagulated haemoglobin.
CSF, Paris - Georges Bru

^^
J
o
:o
& mm»
19
