This narrow lane running between gardens and courtyards was typical of
old Bangkok before modern roads were driven through it. It is now a
metropolis of over one million people and with its many transformations has
come a wave of social changes. Today Thai women are taking advantage
of the new standards of equality of opportunity for both sexes and the new
economic order. Education has given them access to positions of influence
in a more specialized society. Freed from home-centered workwomen nowa¬
days often engage in petty trade, home industry or salaried office positions.

THAILAND
'I AM NO LONGER
THE HIND LEGS
OF AN ELEPHANT'
by Pramuan Dickinson
When I asked my parents' approval of my deci¬
sion to get married, my mother said: "If your
grandmother were still alive she would be shocked by
this." This was because I had decided to marry a young
man from a place far from our community, and our hemi¬
sphere In Canada. It was so unusual that a strong
protest was to be expected, at least at first. "But the
world has been changed a great deal," said my father,
"how can one resist such a great change?"
My father was right. The world has been changing a
great deal from my grandmother's days to our present
time. My grandmother married a man from the same
community, but whom she had never met before. My
mother became a little acquainted with my father before
they married, but he came from a place In Central Thai¬
land far from her community. This was something of a
shock because my father spoke a different dialect and no-
one in the family had ever heard of the village he
came from.
When my parents married, one part of the country
seemed almost like a foreign country to another. A wild
mountainous jungle between the north-east and central
districts made it very difficult for people to travel back
and forth. It used to take my grandfather two months to
cross by elephants. Now, on a modern highway, one can
cross within two hours by car.
In my grandmother's day it was unusual for women,
especially unmarried girls, to travel very far from home.
My grandmother, like all girls of her age, was educated at
home only. She was taught by her mother to work In the
household cooking, spinning, weaving and sewing. My
grandmother did not learn to read and write because It
was thought not proper for girls to do so.
My grandmother had nine children altogether. The
first, a boy, was sent to study with the monks when he was
about 12 years old. My mother was the second child. My
grandmother did not object to her daughters learning to
read and write at all. Therefore my uncle was encouraged
to teach his younger sisters in his spare time from the
monastery.
When my grandmother's fifth child was about 10 years
old, a school for girls was set up in the community, and
she was sent to it. My mother was too old to go, so she
continued to study at home until she married my father
who helped her to learn both reading and writing.
In my generation education was compulsory up to the
fourth grade. But most parents who could afford It liked
their children, boys and girls alike, to continue up to the
end of secondary school which was available in the home
town, and if possible to have further study In Bangkok.
CONT'D ON PAGE 21
17

WOMEN OF THAILAND (Cont'd)
Reading and writing now proper for girls
Boys still had a better chance because they could stay at
monasteries in Bangkok. Only rich people could afford to
send their daughters to expensive boarding schools, but
every year the government granted some scholarships to
both boys and girls to study In the field of education.
This was the only chance for girls of poor families to go
to school in Bangkok, and only provided that they were
very bright.
At present it is quite different. ' Girls have many more
opportunities for education. They may now choose careers
as teachers, doctors, lawyers, and many other professions.
When I was of school age, my father decided to take
over the running of a mine of precious stones in the
wilderness of the jungle. There was no school at the
mine, which was at least one week's journey by elephants
from the nearest town, so my parents decided to leave
me with my grandmother.
I stayed there for some years. Then the time came
when I had to leave for further study in Bangkok. I was
sent to a well-known boarding school for girls. I was
the first girl of the family to come out of the home to
a school so far away. I was to go even further later on
when I was given a Unesco fellowship to study at the
University of Toronto, in Canada, where I met the man
who became my husband.
Looking back at the family history, I can see a tremen¬
dous change in the expectations about women's roles in
the family. My grandmother used to tell me how she was
selected as a wife. One day as she was weaving, an elderly
The fish pond at the college farm attached to the
Ubol teacher training college. Here, students
destined for schools in rural areas learn agriculture,
animal husbandry, poultry and fish raising as part
of a programme in community development.
Graduate teachers report wide village acceptance
of changes in agricultural practices as, for example.
Photos Unesco- tne rais'n9 °' vegetables and even cotton and jute
R.Greenoügh crops outside the present rice-growing season.
"x? &<%>
lady whom she knew dropped by and watched her closely
as she worked. It dawned on my grandmother that the
lady had a son who was Just at the right age to get
married. He had entered the monkhood for one period
of the Buddhist Lent, and was now accepted as being a
mature man who was ready to "have family." It was
the mother's duty to look for a suitable wife for her son.
If she had someone in mind, she would make a thorough
check as to whether the girl was good at home-making,
especially cooking, weaving and spinningthe handicrafts
expected of her. My grandmother was right. A few days
later, her mother told her that the lady had asked for
her to be married to her son.
I told my grandmother that I would have been angry
because nobody seemed to care what the girl herself might
feel, and also that the girl should have the right to select
her husband. My grandmother laughed and said:
"Grandchild, we girls at that time did not bother very
much talking or even thinking about 'rights' as you do
now, but we were still very happy. There Is an old saying,
'A woman Is the hind legs of an elephant.' That means
that you are to be the follower only, and I had done my
duty as a good follower. That's all."
I did not know my grandfather, who died very
young. He alone worked outside the home.
He gave all the money he earned to my grandmother
who kept the budget, ran the household, looked after the
children and made cloth for the whole family. Besides
being the place to live In, the home was a school and a
small factory In Itself. It was the only place for a
woman to work.
In my mother's day, the majority of women still stayed
at home. Very few had Independent careers. Wage-
earners were almost all men. There was only one woman
in the local town who had a job as a teacher. Another
woman, a nurse, worked in Bangkok.
At present, it is not unusual for women to earn their
own living. Most young wives and mothers take Jobs
outside their homes. All my female cousins of my age
are now wage-earners. Families have become smaller
than those in my mother's day. Most families can no
longer take in all the distant relatives as dependents In
the household. In most cases where mothers work,
servants must be hired to help In the home.
My grandmother always quoted the old saying: "Your
husband is a shading umbrella to protect your head. He
makes you look pleasant and respectable to all eyes.
Therefore, obey him." At present, some wives might say:
"But the world has changed a great deal, man and wife
must be mutually dependent toward each other, there Is
no such thing as absolute obedience on the wife's part
now."
Within three generations, roles expected of men and
women, boys and girls, have been tremendously modified
by the great change of the world. And the rate of change
has increased rapidly. I believe there was little difference
between the social life of my grandmother and her own
mother. But in the case of my mother and myself, one
can see a big gap between the two generations, and the
change is still going on very rapidly.
By the time my own children are grown up, what will
they think of their great-grandmother's days?
PRAMUAN Dickinson is the young Thai wife a Canadian.
She met her husband while studying at the University of
Toronto under a Unesco fellowship. She now lives in
Bangkok where she holds a research post in the Thailand-
Unesco Institute for the Study of Child Development
(See article, page 18).
21
