CASE OF MISSING IDENTITY
by William
C. Kvaraceus
Nothing in the world troubles the adolescent as much as
the question of his own identity: how he sees himself
and how he feels the rest of the world sees him. He is strug¬
gling for "ego mastery." An American psychoanalyst. Dr. Erik
H. Erikson, has written: "...Identity consciousness means preoc¬
cupation between the self-image or images and one's appearance
in the eyes of others. The vanity and sensitivity of adolescents
belong here and also the apparent callousness to suggestions and
their lack of shame in the face of criticism... Adolescents, at
one time or another, for varying periods and with varying
intensity, suddenly decide to try and be exactly what some of
their elders do not want them to be... Young people, in extreme
conditions, may eventually find a greater sense of identity in
being withdrawn or in being delinquent than in anything else
society has to offer them."
1 Í I
»
IWWf^l
Carlton Film Export-From the film, "David and Lisa'

WORLD
SIDE STORY e
In our last issue we be¬
gan publication of a series
of articles on juvenile de¬
linquency. They present
the findings of a special
inquiry carried out for
Unesco by William C. Kva¬
raceus, Director of Youth
Studies at the Lincoln Fi-
lene Center for Citizenship
and Public Affairs of Tufts
University, Medford,
U.S.A. In this article the
author discusses the psy¬
chological aspects of soc¬
ial inadaptation and the
effects of new kinds of
relationships between
children and adults now
being brought about by
modern life.
Even a negative identity and more than one habitual
delinquent child has described himself as "plain mean"
can be satisfying. It can also be an expression of rebellion
on the part of the youngsters. Furthermore a youngster
may feel it Is better to have a negative self than no self
at all. For a negative Identity serves to ward off If not
entirely eradicate some of the doubts and confusion
about himself and how the world sees him.
Whether or not we accept the viewpoint and it ls not
exclusively a psychoanalytical theory that the child's
relationships with his parents may eventually result In
the kind of aggressions that we have labelled as delin¬
quency, there is little to be gained by denouncing the
faulty or inadequate family.
Parents who have failed their children are often persons
who have failed themselves and do not know It. In many
instances, particularly in certain milieux where there is
a higher degree of "broken" homes, parents have not
consciously decided to ignore or abuse their children.
Sometimes they are too busy trying to make a living,
sometimes they are helpless and cannot exert the right
control and very often they are ignorant of what they
might achieve as parents because no experience or rela¬
tionship in their own childhood gives them a good exam¬
ple or even a measurement.
It has been said that parents in a slum area do not
experience as many pleasures of family life as people In
a more prosperous stratum. They often have almost
nothing to share with their children except meals. But,
as a psychiatrist from a hospital in New York City once
said in referring to such families, "After all, who are these
parents in 'bad' homes? Poor, unhappy people them¬
selves."
But the most deficient parents are not necessarily always
among those who live in wretched buildings or in newly
erected standardized housing projects for low-income
groups. Juvenile delinquency appears to have Increased
in middle-class homes as well, and these are generally
richer, often calmer and more controlled. Hence there is
a growing belief that parents of both groups have much
less control or influence over their children than earlier
generations of parents.
The Inference ls not that parents care less about their
children or are too lazy or indifferent to give them gui¬
dance and discipline. One possible reason for the growing
lack of control is that many adults realize they can no
longer serve as the hero-models for their children.
A man born forty years ago, for example, has already
seen undreamed-of changes in his world; his son's future
will yield even more. The father's experiences and Judge¬
ment even his ideals may not be as meaningful and
crucial as they would be in more stable or predictable
times. If children can no longer look to their parents as
up-to-date models, no one knows it better than the adults.
Young people usually want and need parental models
either to Imitate or reject. When the parents are passive,
it ls impossible for the children to emulate them or rebel
against them. Few children might actively complain about
the increasing tolerance and permissiveness of their
parents but their behaviour often reflects their own Inner
confusion.
The possessive, domineering mother or the tyrannical
father are scarcely preferable, but one of the difficulties
undoubtedly affecting youngsters today ls that their
parents can no longer provide emotional yardsticks and
ideals for a future that ls more unpredictable than ever
before. When there are no clear boundaries in a child's
life, when the "rules" are never defined, when neither his
father nor his mother represent certain values and certain
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WORLD SIDE STORY (Cont'd)
The need to be
'somebody'
commitments to life, It becomes harder for the child to
discover a true Image of himself and to set limits of
behaviour.
The inspector of Copenhagen's Child Welfare Directo¬
rate, N. H. Villen, has written of some parents: "they have
totally failed to offer their children any kind of guidance
suitable to their future life. One could illustrate this by
saying that adolescents are in no better position than a
human being from a primitive community who suddenly
finds himself transplanted into a highly Industrialized
society. It is easy to Imagine his feeling of helplessness
when faced with the Innumerable possibilities of choice
for which he was quite unprepared."
Mr. Villen also emphasized that children and young
people must be given the opportunity to experience the
feeling of being "somebody" who counts, of playing a
"role," of being of Importance.
Regardless of his nationality or his background, a child
may turn desperately to delinquency as an answer to his
problems. But delinquency ls not the inevitable behaviour
for an unhappy child seeking some form of reassurance.
The same child may relieve his own fears and anxieties
through neurotic behaviour. And although neurotic beha¬
viour and Juvenile delinquency sometimes overlap, they
are not Identical and not synonymous.
Juvenile delinquency in any form cannot be diagnosed
simply and solely as psychological maladjustment arising
from family disruptions. However, this can be one of the
many complex factors which Influence a child.
I NE of the hopeful, and yet one the puzzling,
aspects of trying to understand and help the
Juvenile delinquent are the many theories about the forces
that propel children. Not all of what the specialists say
may relieve us; some theories overlap while other theories
contradict each other. It is as though we were being
led to many windows and given a choice of many views,
each different and each revealing only one angle. But
only by seeing the problem of delinquency from these
different angles can we hope to discover new aspects that
might otherwise have escaped us. The teacher, the Judge
in a juvenile court, the anthropologist, the sociologist,
the psychologist, the social worker can all lead us to
different windows and ask us to look out.
We have considered the Interior forces that may shape
a child so crucially at the beginning of his life, but there
ls also the outside world which begins to intrude upon his
thoughts and feelings when he is very young. The family
may be the centre of gravity for a child but he Is never
immune to the world around him. There are many social
factors that touch upon a child's life and leave a deep
Imprint.
For example, a young person who grows up in a deprived
area learns certain kinds of behaviour as naturally and
normally as the middle-class boy learns exactly the oppo¬
site. It has even been suggested that the child of the
slums has a "tradition" to follow. A middle-class child
might be taught to fear poor marks in school, fighting,
cursing, and being rude to his teacher. But the slum child,
conversely, might fear doing well in school and being
friendly with his teacher, for this would set him apart
from the other children and possibly evoke their anger or
ridicule. He may even have been taught at home that
school ls a waste of time.
The middle-class child ls often taught, and put under
pressure, to divert all his ambitions Into getting good
marks and If he has strong aggressions he will often subli¬
mate them in achieving the goals his parents and society
hold dear. The slum child, all too often, learns that the
CONT'D ON PAGE 8
Deprived of a family and a proper home, this young Tunisian,
Abdallah, was living as best he could in a shanty town when
a social worker took him to a "children's village". On his
arrival (right) he is shown a model of the village which has
been set up in a former military camp. Bathed and dressed
in new clothes (above) Abdallah visits his dormitory. Soon
he finds his place in one of the groups of this little community
and joins in games and sports with the other boys (below)

Photos © Yvan Dalain
HANDS
ACROSS
THE SLUM
Eight years ago the Tunisian Government
launched a large scale operation to care
for and rehabilitate children and adoles¬
cents who were without homes and
families and who, through poverty, the
disappearance of patriarchial traditions
and the lure to young people of life in
the cities, were living by all kinds of
dubious means. A series of "children's
villages" was created whose aim was
not only to provide a roof, food and
education, but also to restore the
children's confidence in themselves.
Though they were not necessarily young
delinquents, these children had become
used the uncontrolled freedom of life in
the streets. But thanks to the kind of
re-education that makes use of co-opera¬
tion rather than compulsion, they have
gradually been taught to accept the
normal standards of community life. Thus,
in their villages, at work and at play in their
small groups, these young "outcasts"
learn the advantages of freely accepted
discipline: security, friendship and a
sense of being part of the community.
Inthechildren's village, Abdallah helps 7
to prepare a sports ground. Soon
he will learn to adopt the team
spirit and find real friendships.

WORLD SIDE STORY (Cont'd)
The lure of juvenile gangs
best way to express his aggressions ls with his fists, for he
has a completely different frame of reference.
It cannot be assumed that all deprived areas are Jungles
of violence or that a child cannot survive life in this sort
of neighbourhood without giving and taking many
beatings. What ls clearly shown In many scientific
research projects is that while deprived areas are never
the one and only cause for delinquency, they can provide
a different set of traditions which are unfamiliar to
outsiders.
The values a child learns from the social structure
surrounding him direct his behaviour and no matter how
dangerous these values are, they almost constitute a
legacy. The child may eventually replace or reject these
values, but he can rarely ignore them. Many children who
are exposed to values which almost encourage delinquency
do not automatically become delinquents. Others prove
more vulnerable.
HE community is the first world a child con¬
fronts. As he grows older, he may clearly see
the boundaries. The child who lives in an underprivileged
neighbourhood may often resent the limits that he feels
society has imposed. Because of his background and the
limitations of his life, he may become aggressive because
he ls frustrated. "Frustration aggressions," from the
sociologist's point of view, can mean being deprived of
legitimate means to achieve desired goals.
This may be illustrated through hundreds of case histor¬
ies. One example could be the boy who knows he will
never make enough money to buy the car he wants. It
may mean the child who knows that it is impossible for
him to attend college he may not even set this up as a
goal but what he resents is knowing and feeling that it is
a totally unrealistic ambition.
These are frustrations that society creates and they can
often be as disturbing as the frustrations that are
emotionally aroused by a lack of inner security. Both
types of frustrations, which so often lead to an explosion,
can result in behaviour that is defiant and destructive.
Sociologists and anthropologists, as well as many other
people, have clearly defined the difficulty which adoles¬
cents in a changing society especially male adolescents
must face In making the transition from behaving as a
child to behaving as an adult. In modern life, but depend¬
ing very much on the particular culture, the child Is
supposed to become emancipated from his parents' power.
But the exact time, the manner and the nature of such
emancipation ls uncertain and thus may become a source
of anger or dispute within the family.
Formerly, in India, China, Japan or Ireland, for exam¬
ple, the authority of the parent, for better or for worse,
continued until death. The end of a child's adolescence
did not mean a change in this authority. There was little
conflict: parents made all the decisions during their life¬
time and children abided by them.
Some primitive societies provide for the transition from
childhood to adulthood by puberty rites. Once an ado¬
lescent in such a culture has undergone this ceremony he
ls entitled to assume the status of manhood. His life has
been divided for him. Before the rite, he was a child,
after it, a man. Perhaps the child remains emotionally
confused but he has a far clearer idea of what is expected
of him.
Today, even in societies that once specified the moment
of manhood very precisely, there is no such distinct
passage. The role of the adolescent is ambiguous and
8 confused. The origin of the storm and stress in growing
up can often be found in each culture's definition of child¬
hood, adulthood or manhood. In many parts of the world,
the definition of manhood has become less and less clear.
The old Images of a man as a warrior and protector, the
sole provider of food and shelter, and the infallible father,
have become blurred.
We do not always agree on what "masculinity" means,
so it ls inevitable that many children, groping towards
manhood, reflect our confusion.
There are many ambivalences in the daily life of the
adolescent. Too often there is a confusing discrepancy
between what adults instruct him to do and what the
youngster himself sees them do. In one Instance, he may
be punished or threatened for telling a lie; at the same
time he is very much aware that his parents practise
small deceits themselves, and sometimes triumphantly,
as in the case of evading taxes or traffic fines. To the
child, therefore, it may often seem that there ls no real
right and wrong, only a great difference in what adults
can get away with and children cannot.
Sociologists, anthropologists and educators have traced
many complex problems in human behaviour to Intense
Industrialization and the resulting growth of big cities
or urbanization. There is a frightening freedom for people
who live in big cities, divorced from the traditional values
and familiar standards that shaped their lives. Very
often, they are anonymous and alone, cut off from the
familiar smaller society from which they came.
The word anomie, a condition first defined by the French
sociologist Emile Durkheim, means simply "without
norms" and refers to the breakdown in the traditional
order, to the default In "norms" and regulations based
on past authority. It has also been interpreted as meaning
the particular dilemma which occurs when people feel
there ought to be guidance and it Is lacking or when the
individual must cope with conflicting demands that cannot
be satisfied simultaneously.
Very often people who move to a big city, and even
those who have lived there for a long time, find themselves
living In a curious limbo. Sometimes, newcomers to a city
neighbourhood discover they are in the midst of a confu¬
sing, formless new culture which requires that they change
radically or else stick together and risk being identified as
an unwelcomed minority open to hostility or even attack.
The young are particularly vulnerable to anomie and in
many instances the juvenile gang is a comfort, a solution
and an escape. The gang at least offers a sense of
"belonging" and a set of meaningful values when nothing
else does.
SIDE from anomie, it has been pointed out
kvery often that an industrialized society, for
all its obvious benefits, brings hazards into our lives that
we often do not suspect or recognize. Sociologists have
made many studies of the type of work that consists
only of pressing buttons and pulling levers or switches,
throughout the entire working day, year after year. The
assembly line hardly offers a man a sense of joy or fulfill¬
ment In his work. He has no commitment, no sense of
achievement, no pride in craftsmanship and no sense of
social purpose. A farmer, a cabinet maker or a tailor
need not envy him.
For a young boy who can look forward only to many
years of this sort of monotony, delinquency can often
serve as the best and most exciting sort of protest against
a dreary and unacceptable future. The child who feels
this way might not even believe that an education could
prepare him for a more genuine or meaningful life. But
traditional formal education has become meaningless and
abstract to many pupils throughout the world.
A sociologist defined this feeling as follows: "Now with
formal learning available for nearly everyone, the rela¬
tion between schooling and future work ls at best indirect,
and at worst, completely incomprehensible. What do

Dalmas. Paris Through industrialization and the resulting growth of big cities many people today find them¬
selves divorced from their traditional values and familiar standards, and living in a curious limbo.
By banding together with other teen-agers, many young people find a sense of "belonging"
and a set of values however wrong some of these may be by normal community standards.
algebra, history and ancient languages have to do with
labour on the assembly line, salesmanship or the duties
of a housewife?"
Some children do understand that schooling can develop
them in many ways that will help them In their future
employment, but other youngsters cannot find any
meaningful link.
The creation of cities may often make life more bearable
for many people in some ways while depriving them in
different respects. An outstanding example of what may
happen when people are suddenly deprived of their tra¬
ditions is brought out in a report from one African coun¬
try that states: "An important factor in producing
'criminal behaviour' is culture conflict. This discontinuity
is seen in the movements of hundreds of thousands of
Bantus from their villages to the cities, where a new set
of physical and personal associations surround the
Individual. There is a breakdown In primary controls that
follows detriballzation with the introduction of cash
economy, accelerated mobility, personal anonymity and
leisure-time pursuits. Unaccustomed to making such com¬
plex decisions, the African commits some infractions as
he loses his way in the maze of laws and regulations."
When normal values and traditions break down, and
cannot be so easily replaced, let alone retained, it is often
the adolescents who feel the most stress. It has been said
that the social problem of one generation is a psycho¬
logical problem for the next.
In Japan, the taiyozuku are not the children of refugees
or the very poor, they have not been physically displaced
or asked to make the drastic adjustments that must face
many Africans. But their behaviour shows how much
they, too, are victims of change. Children of the wealthy
upper-class echelon, they frequently find little meaning in
life and no purpose except for their short-lived, impulsive
and often malicious pleasures. Much as their European
or American counterparts, they live for the moment.
One possible factor In their behaviour is the history of
Japan since the end of the Second World War. Here is a
country that has absorbed such a melange of Western
ideas and influences with so much speed that the revered
and stable concepts of behaviour have been threatened
and, in many families, discarded, even if not willingly.
Because there has been an unusual upheaval in Japan
and an upheaval of a very complex nature one of the
consequences ls the phenomena of Juvenile delinquency,
In a country where it was little known before. In the case
of societies undergoing modernization, It is often the rate
the degree of acceleration of these changes much more
than the changes themselves that has to be taken Into
account.
Understanding and appreciating the viewpoints of the
specialists on the subject of Juvenile delinquency, can lead
us to many conclusions. One should always be kept In
mind: delinquency is not one type of behaviour exclusively,
but rather a range of many types. There ls not one cause
for It but rather a sequence of interlocking factors in the
child's life that can provoke it. Different factors some¬
times can result In the same type of delinquent behaviour;
on the other hand, different kinds of delinquent beha¬
viour are often caused by the same factors.
The full report of the inquiry by Professor William
C. Kvaraceus will be published in a forthcoming Unesco 9
study "Juvenile Delinquency: A Problem for the Modern
World."
