PEOPLES OF THE DELTAS
A see-saw battle
between river and sea
by Adriaan Volker f
44
he delta of a river ls the last gift to man of
the watercourse on Its way to the sea The
classic example, of course, ls Lower Egypt, but the des¬
cription also applies to many other delta areas which
range among the most productive and most densely
populated parts of the world.
In the delta the river drops the sediments, silt and
sandthe products of erosionthat It has been carrying
all along its course from the mountains to the sea or to
the lake Into which it flows. The slope that provides
the driving force for the flow of the water and the sedi¬
ments flattens out when approaching the coastal area,
the river's velocity decreases and to carry the flow from
upstream still further. It must split up into a number
of branches or distributaries.
At the point where this happens, the apex, the deltaic
and final reach of the river begins. In this reach the
velocity decreases still further and the flow ls finally
backed up by the sea water. Unable to carry the sedi¬
ments any further, the river starts building up land.
Thus, as the land area expands at the expense of the
sea's domain some of the soil lost by erosion is recovered
and restored to man.
But the sea fights back. Tidal currents and storm
surges remove some of the sediments deposited in the
delta and carry them to great depths.
A continuous struggle goes on in a delta between the
river and the sea, and when Man Intervenes to utilize
the land, he too must face the destructive power of the
tidal waters.
Not all rivers build up deltas on reaching the sea.
When the forces of the sea prevail because of strong
tides, great depths and the impact of the waves, or
when the delta area is rapidly subsiding, a single
estuary ls formed over which the sea is master.
Although favourable conditions for delta formation are
found in shallow lakes without tides and waves, the
largest deltas have been formed along the coast of
oceans, seas and inland seas for It is here that the
largest rivers emerge.
When a river reaches its delta the scenery changes,
the horizon widens, land and water mingle, the river
becomes less turbulent and near, the sea it ls dominated
by the slow breathing rhythm of the tides. The Greek
astronomer and geographer, Pytheas, who visited nor¬
thern Europe in the 4th century B.C., described the
delta of the River Rhine as the "Sea-Lung," which he
said was "somewhere in the north where ice, water and
air minglewithout doubt the end of the earth." And
(as a man from the Mediterranean), he was struck by
the much greater rise and fall of the North Sea tides.
Even the atmosphere changes In the delta; the light
which is filtered and reflected from all sides becomes
more diffuse. The special qualities of light found In
deltas Inspired and Influenced the Dutch school of
painters.
/
Monsoon floods in¬
vade a Cambodian
village whose houses
are raised on stilts.
The floods, which
irrigate the rice fields,
are welcomed, for the
people have learned
to adapt their lives
to flood conditions.
Farmers become
fishermen and every¬
one travels by boat.
© Rapho
Claude Ghioneaud.
-
&
Delta areas are blessed with many natural advanta¬
ges which encourage man to make use of them. All the
water from the river basin reaches the delta situated
at its lowest point, and water is therefore relatively
abundant. The fine-grained soils are fertile and deep
and floods bring a constant supply of new sediments.
The high underground-water table provides a natural
supply for crops.
Only in arid climates may the underground-water table
not be high enough during the whole year. The
remedy, irrigation, is relatively easy to apply because
of the flatness of the land and Its low elevation with
respect to river water levels. The dense network of
river branches and creeks provides an excellent and
safe communication system.
In the early stages of human settlement men made
their homes on the natural ridges or levees along the
river branches and creeks where the land is higher
than in the central part of the delta areas and
affords a certain degree of natural protection against
floods. In some deltas this stage was followed by the
dredging of a network of canals to open up the area.
Once again farm houses were built along these new
watercourses and thus the characteristic type of settle¬
ment In the deltas is one of ribbon development.
Soon the need was felt to control the flood waters
from the river. Embankments were thrown up along
certain reaches of the river branches, thus providing

ér
'3
!1
*
«^
partial flood protection and leaving other areas open
as ways of escape and release for the highest floods.
To extend the flood protection system, dikes were
built encircling the low-lying areas so as to exclude the
flood waters completely. As this hampered the natural
drainage of excess rainwater, it became necessary to
install a drainage system with sluices equipped with
movable gates, drainage canals, ditches, etc.
In the deltas in semi-arid zones, Irrigation was in¬
troduced at an early stage. Classic examples are the
delta of the Nile and the internal deltas of the Euphra¬
tes and Tigris and the Indus which became sites of
early civilizations.
The natural advantages of deltas were "recognized in
an early stage of history but it was soon realized that
to gain the full benefit of these advantages certain
technical problems would have to be solved.
First there is the problem of floods. Deltas are in¬
vaded by floods from two sides: from the rivers and
from the sea. To a certain extent the river floods are
beneficial. They supply the land with fresh sediments
thereby improving the soil structure and raising the
land elevation. The river flood ls the main agent in
building up the delta. The flooding of the land does
not necessarily preclude use of the land for farming.
All depends on the nature of the floods, the climate and
the adaptability of man "to live with the floods."
The large and densely populated deltas of the River
Mekong in Viet-Nam, the River Chao Phya In Thailand
and, to a certain extent, the River Irrawaddy In Burma,
which are flooded annually, show that the land can
be used for agriculture and human settlement.
But two conditions must be met. Firstly, the floods
must be gentle ones, I.e. where the water level rises
slowly, remains at about its maximum for quite a long
period, and then slowly recedes. Secondly, the climate
should allow a crop of rice to be raised during the
flood season.
Rice ls the only profitable crop that can grow In
rising water, providing that the rate of rise is small.
Rice still grows in water several metres deep and is
salt tolerant. Hence It ls the most suitable crop for
deltas In the humid tropical zone which, lacking flood
protection works, are exposed to inundation.
The most Interesting example of intensive use being
made of a deltaic area which is flooded regularly ls
the delta of the River Chao Phya. Here a crop of
rice is raised during the wet monsoon from May until
November. Since rainfall during that period is not
usually adequate to meet the crop needs the additional
water supply by flooding is an absolute necessity. The
gently rising flood waters are beneficial and if they
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
45

HARNESSING THE MEKONG
THE Mekong, seventh longest river in
the world, descends from the snows
of the High Tibet plateau and flows
for 2,500 miles before reaching the South
China Sea. During its journey it crosses
six countries Mainland China, Burma,
Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and Viet-Nam.
A few small dams have been built on its
tributaries in Thailand and some channels
cut for irrigation, drainage or navigation,
but nowhere is the main channel crossed
by a bridge; nowhere is It curbed by a
dam. Most of the water flows from source
to sea without being used by man. Today
the Mekong is the scene of a historic inter¬
national project in river development.
Under the auspices of the United Nations,
14 countries have begun to help the peo¬
ples of Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and Viet-
Nam to make use of the abundant waters
of the lower Mekong. Because none of
the four countries nor even all of them
together have the technical or financial
resources for such a huge project, the
United Nations helped them to set up a
committee to study the Lower Mekong
Basin, whose present population of 20 mil¬
lion is expected to double within 25 years.
Two major cities of southeast Asia Sai-
gon-Cholon and Bangkok, each with a
population of one million are outside the
basin. Except for the 500,000 people in
the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh, and
the 100,000 in the Laotian capital, Vien¬
tiane, the population of the basin is largely
rural. Rice-growing, the basic activity of
the majority, is dependent on the monsoon
cycle. The water management plan will
make possible flood control and increased
irrigation, and thus the cultivation of a
second annual rice crop over large areas.
A number of dams are planned: in the
Pamong gorges, 20 miles from Vientiane;
at Khemarat, near the confluence with the
Unations
River Mune; at the falls of Khone and at
Sambor. Finally, a dam built on the Tonle
Sap river between Cambodia's Great Lake
and the Mekong will increase the lake's
capacity as a flood reservoir. The Mekong
will become a year-round deep water
channel right up to Vientiane 1,000 miles
from the sea. Unesco is supervising the
preparation of a mathematical model show¬
ing the Basin's present hydraulic charac¬
teristics and how they will be modified.
DELTA BASIN (Cont'd)
Floods that bring fertility
46
fall to occur the crop suffers damage by drought.
People in the Chao Phya delta have got accustomed to
the cycle of the floods and have learned how to live
with it.
Things are very different when the floods are of the
flash type or when the climate ls unsuitable for rice-
growing. Flash floods, appearing suddenly and causing
rapid variations of the water level, are destructive.
In such cases little use can be made of the land areas
In the delta unless a system of flood protection works,
such as embankments, has been made. Thus in the
delta of the Red River in North Viet-Nam, where flash
floods occur, dikes have been built to protect the land.
This system of flood protection may be more than two
thousand years old. However, in the delta of the River
Mekong in Viet-Nam, where the flood waters rise and
fall slowly, there are no dikes.
Although a good crop of rice can be raised under
conditions of natural flooding, the yields remain rela¬
tively modest. To obtain the high productivity level
of the paddy fields in Japan, China, Spain, and Italy,
for example, adequate water control is an absolute
necessity, and this naturally entails flood protection,
drainage and irrigation.
The menace of floods from the sea is even more
serious than that from rivers. During storm surges
the sea level may raise several metres above the
normal, and If the dikes fail vast areas become deeply
Inundated with salt water. Sea floods are unpredictable
and always destructive. Thousands of casualties were
reported during storm surges or typhoons which hit the
coastal and deltaic areas of Holland in 1953, Japan in
1959, Germany in 1962 and East Pakistan in 1960 and
in 1963. Considerable damage by loss of property, loss
of crops and sallnlzation of the soil occurred.
The history of the deltas is marked by a succession of
flood disasters. Man however has not abandoned his
land but has fought back, strengthening his systems of
defence against the possible return of similar or even
greater floods. Thus the storm flood disaster of 1953
in the Netherlands led to the execution of the Delta
Plan aiming at the enclosure of tidal estuaries of the
River Rhine (see page 48). Similar works were carried
out in Japan in the area of Nagoya after the 1959 floods.
Not all deltas are exposed to storm surges from the
sea. In the deltas of the River Irrawaddy in Burma
and the River Chao Phya in Thailand flooding of the
coastal strip only occurs during exceptionally high tides
and few protective works are needed.
Even if the land is well protected against direct inva¬
sion by the sea a secondary problem may arise through
the infiltration of salt water into the river branches and
the land areas of the delta. The sea water penetrates
into the open estuaries and, being heavier than fresh
water, it creeps over the bottom of the river in an
upstream direction. It mixes to some extent with the
fresh water on top, making the river water brackish
over a considerable distance from its mouth and thus
unsuitable for irrigation or drinking.
This happens especially in the dry season when the
river flow which normally halts the saline water is at
its weakest. The saline water also enters the subsoil
and even at shallow depths the underground water may
become quite brackish. This underground water may seep
out and ooze to the surface, contaminating water in the
ditches and canals. In developed delta areas consi¬
derable amounts of salt are admitted when ships
coming from the sea enter locks. Another source of
salt pollution is the waste water from mining and
chemical industries.
Thus the protection of fresh water supplies in the
coastal zone of a delta is nowadays a major problem.
It is a latent menace, less spectacular but no less serious
than the more obvious and direct attacks of the sea.
Early settlements in deltas were usually above the
limits of the salt water Intrusion, but with increasing
population pressure and need for more arable land and
with the construction of harbours close to the coastline,
use has to be made of areas exposed to penetration by
salty waters.

Left, a Cambodian
technician using a
surveying instrument
during preparatory
studies for the Lower
Mekong River Basin
Project. Right, flood
level markers on the
banks of the Mekong.
Unesco - Mandin
The most drastic and effective measure to halt the
salt water invasion ls to dam off the estuaries and tidal
inlets. In the enclosing dam, sluices with movable gates
are provided. These remain closed during high tides
and storm surges and are opened to evacuate the flood
waters of the river. Projects of this type have been
carried out on a large scale in Japan and in the
Netherlands. The enclosed water areas of the estuaries
turn into fresh water reservoirs, the coastline is shor¬
tened, the drainage and irrigation facilities of the
adjacent areas are improved, etc.
Thus deltas offer a never-ending challenge to their
Inhabitants: each interference with the natural process
of flooding and sedimentation provokes repercussions
leading to further action by man.
Many deltas have undergone considerable develop¬
ment. The most ancient example ls that of the River
Nile. The deltas of the River Po in Italy, the Red River
in northern Viet-Nam and the Yellow River in the
mainland of China are other examples of highly pro¬
ductive regions.
VICTORY FOR
THE RIVER
The development of deltas
can make striking changes
in the outlines on a map.
These four drawings show
the effects of the progres¬
sive silting up of the Persian
Gulf by sediments brought
down the Tigris and the
Euphrates: A. 3000 B.C.;
B. 2000 B.C.; C. Roman
epoch ; D. present day.
The delta areas of many smaller rivers In Japan' and
the delta area of the River Rhine in the Netherlands
have become industrialized areas where the largest ports
of the world are found. Other deltas are relatively pro¬
ductive, but still In the first stage of technical develop¬
ment.
Their further development calls for the use of specia¬
list knowledge of problems In the fields of hydraulic
and agricultural engineering, soil science, agronomy,
coastal engineering, geo-hydrology, etc. The problems
of the deltas are of a rather special nature and there
are still too few experts In these fields.
The United Nations Economic Commission for Asia
and the Far East (ECAFE) at Bangkok took the initia¬
tive at a conference In 1960 to promote the technical and
economic development of the many large deltas In that
region. A general Inventory of the area and a survey of
the many problems Involved were made by a mission
of experts from Japan and the Netherlands who had on-
the-spot discussions with the local authorities. The
results of this study were discussed during a symposium
at Bangkok In 1963 which was focused on the "flood
control, reclamation, utilization and development" of
delta areas in the ECAFE region.
The general scientific aspects of deltas In the humid
tropical zone were discussed in a symposium organized
by Unesco In March 1964 and held at Dacca (East Pa¬
kistan). This symposium covered a wider field than
the ECAFE meeting without entering into the technical
questions of engineering and economics which were the
main topics of the Bangkok meeting.
Research into the various hydrological problems of
delta, estuarine and coastal areas Is also one of the
Items of Unesco's Hydrological Decade for International
collaboration in the field of hydrology.
From "A History of Land Use in Arid Regions",
edited by L Dudley Stamp and published
by Unesco. 1961.
Adriaan Volker is senior engineer in charge of the Service
for Water Management in the Netherlands. He is presi¬
dent of the International Association of Scientific Hydro¬
logy and a member of the International Commission for
the Protection of the River Rhine Against Pollution. He
has written many studies on lake hydrology, ground water,
salinity and water management.
47
