Radio Times. Hufton Picture
ROBERT KOCH'S
GREAT DISCOVERY
In 1882, the German scientist, Robert Koch,
succeeded in identifying for the first time
the agent of tuberculosis : a slender rod be¬
tween three and four thousandths of a milli¬
metre in length. Then Koch succeeded in
producing cultures of the bacillus and in
transmitting tuberculosis to animals. He
demonstrated conclusively that the bacillus
was the specific organism of tuberculosis,
Koch later identified the comma bacillus
that is responsible for cholera. In 1905 he
was awarded the Nobel prize for medicine.
Left, a London slum, as the well-
known artist, Gustav Doré, de¬
picted it in 1874. Tuberculosis
raged everywhere in 19th-cen¬
tury Europe. Towns became
overcrowded and slums prolife¬
rated as people poured into the
first industrial cities. At the
beginning of the 19th century
one death in four was due to
tuberculosis. Tuberculosis was not
a new disease; it had been well
known in the ancient world, but
probably reached its worst period
in Europe during the 18th century.

March 24, 1882
A MOMENTOUS LOOK
INTO THE MICROSCOPE
uberculosis was known and studied by the physicians of
the ancient world. Four thousand years ago the famous
Code of Hammurabbl, King of Babylonia, mentions "the wasting
disease." An Egyptian papyrus written in 1,600 B.C. gives the first
description of chest diseases. Excavations in one area of Egypt have
unearthed so many bodies with tuberculous lesions that some special¬
ists believe it was the site of a large sanatorium.
The disease, In fact, goes back much further still, as we may Judge
by the skeleton of a young man found In a neolithic burial ground
near Heidelberg: Its fourth and fifth dorsal vertebrae were fused
together showing that tuberculosis of the spine was already afflicting
prehistoric man some 6,000 years ago.
Tuberculosis was described clinically by Hippocrates, "the father
of medicine" (about 460-370 B.C.), who called It "phthisis" (from a
Greek verb meaning "to dry up"), and it was known either by this
name or as "consumption," until the 19th century.
Remedies for the disease were described by Galen (about 130-200
A.D.), another famous name in ancient medicine. Avlcenna (930-
1034), "prince of physicians" and author of "The Canon of Medi¬
cine," considered that the disease evolved in three stages, and
another doctor, Ferrari of Pavla, wrote a "Treatise on Phthisis."
The painter Botticelli lost his favourite model, Slmonetta Catarina
Vespucci, a beautiful Florentine, carried off by phthisis at the age of
16. He made a tender portrayal of her hollow cheeks, frail neck and
sloping shoulders.
The typical Romantic of the 19th century was emaciated, had
flushed cheeks, and died spitting blood at the age of 30. This was
the period when George Sand and the consumptive Chopin fled from
Majorca, and a Barcelona hotel-keeper demanded compensation for
the musician's bed after the police had ordered it to be burnt. The
disease inspired Byron, who declared that he would like to be carried
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

TUBERCULOSIS (Cont'd)
Two allies:
poverty and war
10
off by a consumption so that all the ladles would say how interesting
he looked while dying.
Edgar Allan Poe was haunted by the memory of his wife, Virginia,
who died of consumption at the age of 24. Dumas wrote in his
memoirs that "everyone was consumptive and especially the poets
it was good form to spit blood from sheer emotion." Marie Bashkirt-
seff, the famous nineteenth century painter, noted: "... I never stop
coughing, but miraculously it does not make me ugly on the
contrary, It gives me a languid air that is most becoming."
Tuberculosis as the disease was beginning to be called raged
everywhere In 19th century Europe. Towns became overcrowded and
slums proliferated as people poured Into the first industrial cities.
Children of 13 did the work of adults. Towards the middle of the
century, the death-rate from the disease was as high as 500 per
100,000 in some places. Tuberculosis had become a social disease.
It was to remain one as long as there was no improvement in econo¬
mic and social conditions, declining only when the social benefits of
industrialization and technical progress ultimately began to be felt.
In times of war, however, tuberculosis found allies in stress, mal¬
nutrition, and poor housing conditions and at once renewed its
attacks.
FTER 270 unsuccessful attempts, a German scientist called
i Robert Koch succeeded In identifying the agent of tuber¬
culosis: a slender rod between three-and four-thousandths of a milli¬
metre in length.
When he discovered the bacillus that bears his name, Robert Koch
was 39 years old.
Koch began to be interested in bacteria when a country doctor in
Silesia, but did not remain in the provinces for long once his brilliant
researches on the anthrax bacillus had brought him to the notice of
his contemporaries, the scientists Cohn and Cohnheim.
"Koch will again astonish us with his discoveries," one of them
predicted. And both his sponsors used their influence to secure him
a post with the Imperial Health Office in Berlin. Koch brought with
him the microscope his wife had given him for his 28th birthday.
Day after day he sought the best medium for the culture of
microbes, and perfected the techniques for studying them. He showed
the same persistence in his attempts to isolate the bacillus of tuber¬
culosis, which was then the most widespread disease in the western
world.
He spent most of his time shut up in his laboratory at the Charity
Hospital, Berlin. The door was closed to everybody except his co¬
workers and his wife. His only other companions were the. guinea-
pigs, rabbits, and mice needed for his experiments.
He finally succeeded in isolating the bacillus, a micro-organism
that was not only hard to cultivate, but hard to see. It was particu¬
larly difficult to stain, since the colouring matter had to be left to
act for a period of 12-24 hours. He therefore borrowed a technique
from the dyers, that of using alkali with the dye. Added to methy¬
lene blue, the alkali acted as a mordant enabling the dye to penetrate
the bacillus.
At last the great day came. On March 24 1882, in a crowded room
at the headquarters of the Berlin Phthisiological Society, the young
man with the pointed beard addressed some 80 fellow-scientists.
Robert Koch explained his discovery in a matter-of-fact way, as if
he were presenting some routine paper. He told them all about the
culture technique, the bacillus, and the characteristics of the lesions.
Microscopes stood waiting on the desk in front of him. One by one
the audience came up, peered into them, and saw the slender rods
for themselves. There was a dead silence. Not a single voice was
raised in opposition to Koch's findings. From that moment everyone
knew that the origin and propagation of tuberculosis were no longer
a mystery. It was not a hereditary, but a communicable, disease.
