Sir Edmund Hillary's latest
conquest in the Himalayas
THE HIGHEST SCHOOL
IN THE WORLD
by R. J. Spector
12
MEN OF EVEREST. The Sherpa,
Tenzing Norkay (left) photographed by
Sir Edmund Hillary (below) on the summit
of Mt. Everest at the moment of their
victory over the world's highest mountain,
on May 29, 1953. Tenzing carries the
flags of the United Nations, Nepal, India
and Gt. Britain. Above, a Buddhist shrine
in the Sherpa country silhouetted againsta
towering background of Himalayan peaks.
V
¿* IfcA^WA .

v
M. Peissel
Photos © The Mount
Everest Foundation

Some of the Sherpa villages on the flanks of the Himalayas
near the foot of Mt. Everest now have schools for the
first time thanks to the efforts of Sir Edmund Hillary, the
New Zealand mountaineer, who (with the Sherpa, Tenzing
Norkay) was the first to set foot on the summit of Everest
in 1953. Since 1961 Sir Edmund has been seeking new conquests
in the Himalayan mountain lands of northeastern Nepal. But
this time his assault is not so much on the grim forces of
nature as on ignorance.
L!
Inspired by his long experience and appre¬
ciation of the qualities of the engaging and
hardy Sherpa people of this Sola Khombu
region, without whom none of the Himalayan
expeditions from 1920 onwards could have
been conceived, let alone accomplished, Sir
Edmund's primary Interest has become focus¬
ed on the mountain folk themselves rather
than on the giant Himalayan peaks.
Soon after Sir Edmund had led a search
for the Yeti, the "Abominable Snowman"
(whom he judges, Incidentally, to be a com
posite figment of Imagination) he asked his
Sherpa helpers, "In order to show gratitude
In terms more meaningful than money",
what they would best like to have. Their
unanimous reply, "A school for our chil¬
dren," sparked off his new venture. A few
months later the village from which most of
his Sherpas came, Khumjung perched 13,000
feet up on the flank of the sacred mountain
Khomb'Ilathe "God of Khombu," which
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
13

HIGHEST SCHOOL (Cont'd)
A class for Sherpas, fathers & sons
man must never climb and only fifteen miles
from the foot of Everest, was able to boast of
having the region's first school.
The two-room prefabricated structure,
donated by The Indian Aluminium Company,
was flown In sections by the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the expedition's
Mlngbo airstrip, a hard day's Sherpa-march
from Khumjung, and assembled by Hillary
and his team-mates assisted by the Sherpas.
A teacher was recruited in Darjeellng, Just
beyond Nepal's eastern frontier with India,
and after an official blessing by the head lama
of the neighbouring Thyangboche monastery
the school was soon a flourishing concern.
In 1963, It was followed by two more schools
set up by Hillary In the villages of Pangboche
and ThamI with the approval of the Nepalese
Government and with money derived from
book rights, lecture tours and donations from
private sponsors.
Between them, the three schools, which
follow the official curriculum, now have about
170 pupils, with ages ranging from six to
twenty-six (for some of the parents also
attend). Many more children would be only
too happy to Join in, for enthusiasm for learn¬
ing runs high, but the parents cannot spare
them from farm work, and quite .often will
select a favourite son to receive these coveted
benefits, although the better-off families may
send a couple of sons, or even a daughter.
But a higher economic level would elimi¬
nate the need for child labour, and Sir
Edmund's basic aim is to raise that level, and
health standards also. However, he feels
that little can be done in that direction until
there Is a general ability to read and write.
At the moment, about one in ten of the
Sherpa men, through having worked In Dar¬
jeellng and elsewhere, can read and write a
little; but among their womenfolk, the Sher-
panis, illiteracy Is total. Sir Edmund there¬
fore plans this year (In conjunction with an
attempt to scale the 21,700 feet high Mount
Thamserku) to set up another three schools
In the regional "capital" Namche Bazar
and in the villages of Chaunrlkarka and
Junbesi.
In the meantime, Sir Edmund has already
helped to Install a plastic pipeline to provide
Khumjung village with water; and he intends
to build a new airstrip (at 9,500 feet) to faci¬
litate the administration of the schools as
well as the delivery of supplies. In the
absence of roads and railways supplies depend
on human porterage which may take weeks
or months along the rugged upland trails.
But the prime necessity, he feels, Is medical
and agricultural aid. One of the scourges is
smallpox, and Sir Edmund this year plans to
set up a temporary medical clinic with a view
to something more permanent in the future.
He is also anxious to find some means of
ensuring food supplies for the villages (the
potato crop, on which the Sherpa mainly
subsist, was gravely damaged this year by
frost).
One of the main problems is the training of
teachers for work in the Sherpa schools. Sir
Edmund has so far managed to recruit five
teachers from Darjeellng and has also
arranged to have some of the most gifted of
the pupils train for teaching at Nepali-type
schools in Darjeeling or Kalimpong. The task
of providing teacher training in Nepal has
been carefully studied by Unesco in a report
on "Primary Teacher Training In Asia," pre¬
pared by Dr. E.A. Pires for the Unesco Regio¬
nal Office for Education in Asia (Bangkok).
Dr. Pires noted that only 1,500 out of 4,600
teachers in Nepal had received training.
Teacher training is now being provided by
14
HIMALAYAN SCHOOLHOUSE. Above, Sir Edmund Hillary at work on a swing at the Pangboche school,
one of those opened for the Sherpa people by his "Himalayan Schoolhouse Expedition ". Above right, in another
of the schools, at Khumjung, children and parents watch a display of Tibetan acrobatic dancing. Below left,
young Sherpas in the Khumjung school. Below right, hardy Sherpa mountaineers from the Sola Khombu region.
I J

Photos Himalayan Schoolhouse Expedition
© The Mount Everest
Foundation
training units (four more scheduled to be
added) travelling from one selected locality
to another.
Another study, by a joint mission sent to
Nepal by Unesco and the United Nations
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far
East (ECAFE) to assist the Government to
prepare an overall plan of educational de¬
velopment Integrated with national economic
development plans found that the people of
Nepal were among the most under-privileged
In the world in respect of social services.
They live on a marginal subsistence basis,
with an annual average income of about
370 rupees (less than $50) and are 94%
illiterate. And one of the decisive reasons for
Nepal's economic underdevelopment, the re¬
port concluded, is its under-educated people,
70% of whom live in tiny villages averaging
225 inhabitants.
Even after an intensive effort of educa¬
tional development between 1951 and 1961,
only 15.8% of all children of primary school
age were attending school (the proportion for
the Sherpa region being Infinitely smaller).
The 1964 target is 21.2%. For all these
children teachers have to be found; and the
report recommended a better distribution of
trained teachers throughout the country.
The problem is to train Nepalese teachers
who will be prepared to work in the least
privileged parts of the country, Including the
land of the Sherpas, and to provide children
with the sort of education that will not detach
them from their surroundings and send
them to the town to swell the ranks of the
semi-educated unemployed. The Unesco/
ECAFE report refers to "over-education" and
the danger of "desertion of the rural areas
and saturation of the large centres by primary
school graduates seeking jobs which do not
exist or demanding secondary and higher
education opportunities which the Nepalese
economy Is not at this time able to afford."
Sir Edmund is also strongly of the opinion
that Instead of "over-educating" the Sherpas
and thus Initiating a drift to the towns where
they will be non-productive, it would be more ^5
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

HIGHEST SCHOOL (Cont'd)
Aland
of gaiety
and courage
appropriate to fit them to cope more effecti¬
vely with their harsh environment and main¬
tain their links with their community a view
which is likewise upheld by another famous
traveller to Nepal, Ella Maillart.
In her "Land of the Sherpas" she wrote :
"It Is in their own homes that the Sherpas
must be Judged, and not as they exist on the
outskirts of Darjeellng, uprooted, living as
best as they can, often without work, badly
housed and In Ill-health, victims of the uni¬
versal vicious circle of over-population... In
their high valleys the Sherpas are at home
In their own world."
As to the outstanding qualities of the Sher¬
pas, "living In their own world" all are
agreed. Sir Edmund, like everyone who has
worked with them, has nothing but praise for
their gaiety, adaptability and Intelligence.
W.H. Murray, who was deputy-leader of the
1951 Everest reconnaissance in which Hillary
took part, describes the Sherpa, in his "Story
of Everest," as a "free and independent man,
full of resource in his own way of life . and
schooled from earliest youth in self-reliance."
While only a minority of Sherpas can read
and write, he adds, their way of Ufe "develops
In most of them a keen Intelligence". Above
all, they can laugh... they are, indeed, the
happiest people I have ever met."
Such are the people for whom Sir Edmund
Hillary has been so devotedly working.
Within five years, the Nepalese Government
Is due to take over the schools founded by
him. In the meantime, assisted by his sole
staff, Lady Hillary (who in 1963 Journeyed to
Khombu valley to present the first school
prizes ever awarded here), he is pursuing his
"Expedition Schoolhouse" and the related
schemes with the same slngleheartedness that
took him to the "roof of the world."
Recently passing through Bangkok In the
course of his promotion efforts. Sir Edmund
visited ECAFE and the Unesco Regional
Office, whose staff assembled to hear him give
an account of what he described as "the most
satisfactory project of our Himalayan adven¬
ture."
Unesco Is now studying the possibility of
supporting this educational venture through
its Gift Coupon Scheme. Anyone wishing to
give assistance to Sir Edmund's project may
wish to contact the Unesco Gift Coupon
Office, Place de Fontenoy, Paris.
R. J. Spector is publications officer at the
*g Unesco Regional Office for Education in Asia
(Bangkok, Thailand). He has been on the
staff of Unesco since 1957.

Seven centuries ago the Sherpa people crossed
the plateau of Tibet and settled on the slopes
of the Himalayas in what is now northeastern
Nepal. They hewed roads like giant stairways
from the solid rock, threw bridges across
rushing torrents, and built villages and mona¬
steries. Left, two monks sound their 15-foot
trumpets at the monastery of Thami. In
Buddhist monasteries and scattered over the
countryside, innumerable prayer-wheels turn
endlessly in the mountain wind (above right).
BUDDHIST BOOKS & PRAYER-WHEELS
Buddhist monks in the Himalayan monasteries are skilled printers and make
books with high quality paper produced by long-established Sherpa paper mills.
Below, books are wrapped in silk and protected by wooden covers. Left, Sherpa
children try vainly to turn a giant prayer mill containing hundreds of religious books. Photo* < M. Peissel
1
