© UPI - Al Ahiam

NEW
NILE
The first stage in the building of Egypt's
High Dam at Aswan was completed on
May 14 by the opening of a huge diversion
canal. Here, courage and ingenuity combine to
meet problems created by today's population
"explosion". Two centuries ago Egypt's popu¬
lation numbered two and a half millions. To¬
day it is 27 millions and by 1972 will have grown
to 36 millions. For thousands of years the peo¬
ples of the Nile Valley were at the mercy of the
river's whims; starvation or prosperity were
entirely dependent on the vagaries of rainfall
in the highlands of Ethiopia. The building of the
first Aswan dam at the turn of the century and
its enlargement in 1912 and 1933 were really
no more than provisional measures. Now, for
the first time in its history, the Nile is being
completely harnessed for man's use. When
completed the dam will span a distance of over
3,900 yards, and its waters will create the world's
second largest man-made lake (after the Kariba
Dam in Rhodesia) some 30Ó miles in length. The
new dam will make possible a 30 % increase
in agricultural production, the production of
10,000 million kilowatt hours of electricity
per year to give new impulse to industry, and
will ensure complete protection against serious
flooding. The dam is due to be completed
by 1967 and the hydro-electric equipment should
be functioning by 1969. Egypt has undertaken
this huge task with financial aid amounting
to 1,300 million roubles from the Soviet Union
which also supplied equipment and 1,800 en¬
gineers and technicians. Newly-built villages
are now replacing those due to disappear under
the waters of the new dam. Thanks to an inter¬
national campaign launched by Unesco, funds
have been collected for the biggest archacelo-
gical operation of all time including the safe¬
guarding of the temples, at Abu Simbel. The
progress of this campaign and the rescue of
Nubia's monuments have been described in The
Unesco Courier, particularly in two special
issues (Feb. 1960 and Oct. 1961). Another spe¬
cial number devoted to Nubia is being planned.

DIVERTING
THE WORLD'S
LONGEST RIVER
Photos on left were taken before and after
tho opening of tho diversion canal on tho
Nile, the world's longest river, during con¬
struction of the High Dam at Aswan. Tho
flow of the Nile (from left to right) has been
checked by a mainstream coffer dam (seen
on left). While tho diversion canal was being
dug the waters of tho Nile wero halted by
a sand dam (arrowed in photo far left).
When an explosive charge broko open this
sand dam on May 14, 1964, the torrent of
waters began to flow in a new bed (photo
left). From hero they will pass through six
tunnels in which hydro-electric turbines
will be installed. Tho day tho Nile waters
were sent along their new course.there wero
wildly enthusiastic scenes (below) as
technicians and workers hailed tho end of
the first phase in a gigantic engineering feat.
O Tass - V. Dudan
