Even in the mo« arid deserts palm trees sometimes
survive (as in this striking. air view of the Sahara)
by drawing nourishment from underground water.
But there is always the threat that they may be
buried by sand dupes displaced by desert winds.
c EmH Brunne». Bi .vitmland
14

UNDERGROUND WATER
-A WASTED TREASURE
by Vladimir N. Kunin
^* LTHOUGH the tremendous world increase in the use
of water has taken scientists by surprise, they are
confident that future water needs can be fully met. With wider
recognition of the fact that water is a world priority problem, science
should have no difficulty in quickly making up for lost time.
Apart from the water reserves in the world's rivers, lakes and
seas, there is an almost untapped source underground water. Ray¬
mond L Nace, a leading American hydrologist, has estimated that
the first half-mile of the earth's crust contains about one million
cubic miles of water. It would take the annual flow of all the
earth's rivers 132 years to fill such a reservoir! Modern science
should learn to use this wealth of underground water to the full.
The great civilizations of the ancient East among them Assyria,
Babylon, Egypt, and Khorezm in central Asia all evolved in desert
regions where people had to make the best use of very little water.
These civilizations grew up in the basins of big rivers. But these
same big rivers as well as their tributaries rise in places far
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WASTED TREASURE (Cont'd)
Tools of today's water detective
radio and aerial photography
removed from the deserts; they are "strangers" to the
places where they bring the greatest benefit. By using
local water man has also farmed desert and semi-arid
areas in places far beyond the areas watered by these
"stranger" rivers. I am sure that if a proper study
were made of all the traditional methods employed by
the desert peoples to obtain and make use of water, and
If modern science and engineering were applied to per¬
fect these methods, many water supply difficulties would
be overcome. This would give temporary relief until
such times as cheap ways of pumping underground water
and of demlnerallzing and purifying surface waters (and
of using them several times over) are Introduced.
The underground waters in some of the Transcaspian
deserts for instance are all highly mineralized; yet from
far-off times man has successfully bred livestock in these
deserts. He solved his problem in two ways: by artificially
creating fresh subsoil water and by giving cattle and
sheep saline water to drink.
Fresh subsoil water formed by the Infiltration of rain
from the catchment basin has been utilized since ancient
days. At the end of the nineteenth century engineers
began to use a method of regulating water resources by
the artificial replenishment of subsoil waters. Desert
peoples, however, had actually been using similar methods
for centuries.
Such techniques, of course, are only practicable when
there are sufficient rains, an extensive catchment basin,
a high run-off from the surface and suitable geological
conditions for the accumulation of subsoil waters. An
annual rainfall of 80 mm., of which half should be
concentrated in two or three months, has been found
sufficient.
Even in a desert with clayish soil the run-off only
accounts for between l/10th and l/5th of the
of the total rainfall. However, the. use of synthetic
substances to form artificial drainage areas should pro¬
duce a higher rate of run-off. Other methods to assist
'PIPELINES'
FROM
THE PAST
Long lines of giant "mole hills" running cross the countryside in Iran (below) mark the route
of underground galleries called "kanats" (also spelt "qanat" and "ghanat"). Pockets of water
that collect underground at the foot of the mountains are tapped and flow along these tunnels,,
sometimes for many miles, to crop-growing areas. The "mole hills" mark the site of vertical
shafts through which earth was excavated during tunnelling operations, and which now provide
ventilation. Kanats were first developed in Iran some 3,000 years ago and their immense net¬
work made possible the economic prosperity on which the power of the Persian Empires of
antiquity was founded. Without the kanats, cities like Teheran, Tabriz and Chiraz would probably
never have existed. Today more than 30,000 kanats are still used in Iran, mostly for irrigation.
Michel Bâtisse
16
V ?*

ft
Weil- - I Vadosa Watet* _«0*í>í¿*íC2<*£Ía
Casing - - *4[£ "t. |
pewatered"4Sround Wa,et< t - -
^FÍocharge _ |-£
Beneath most land areas of the world there is a zone where the pores
of rocks and sediments are completely saturated with water. Hydrologists
call this "ground water", and the upper limit of the saturated zone is called
the "water table". They are now studying how to detect and make
use of the deep layers of water and also how to avoid exhausting them.
Drawing © "Natural History", January 1964
LEGENDS OF THE SPRINGS
The peoples of the ancient world
saw no particular relationship be¬
tween rain or storms and the under¬
ground water in wells and hill-side
springs. "The waters of the ocean
penetrate deep into the earth under
wind-pressure and rise to feed the
springs thanks to gravity, which com¬
presses the rocks", said the Greek
philosopher and astronomer. Thaïes
of Miletus, in the 7th century B.C.
Plato also thought that water reaching
the surface came originally from the
ocean, through a deep abyss descend¬
ing to the centre of the earth. "My
observations", said Seneca, "show that
rainfall cannot explain the formation
of springs, for it can penetrate only a
little way into the ground whereas
it is evident that springs sometimes
originate at great depths... rain is never
sufficiently strong or continuous to
sink more than ten feet into the
ground." It was only in the 16th cen¬
tury that science began to offer expla¬
nations moreakin to present-day views.
the replenishment of subsoil waters will also have to be
used until anti-evaporation substances that effectively
retain fresh water have been devised. These substances
will be most effective if used In small basins where there
is no disturbance of the water.
Because rainwater provides only a minimum water
supply the desert herdsmen have had to train their stock
to drink salt water. Some valuable animals camels and
caracul sheep, for Instance drink water with a salt
content of from 10 to 12 or even from 15 to. 16 grammes
per litre, gain weight regularly and breed normally.
There is no reason why similar uses should not be made
of such water in other areas.
RECENTLY much has been written about the
use of heavily saline water for irrigation; and
many international symposia have been devoted to this
Important problem. It is even proposed to use water with
as much salinity as seawater (35 grammes per litre) to irri¬
gate farmlands. In my opinion, attention should first
be paid to the development of reliable methods for the
irrigation of a variety of crops using water with a salt
content of 10 to 15 grammes per litre. This would be of
great economic value and would bring new life to very
extensive regions.
Desert dwellers get water from great depths by digging
wells. I once saw a well 880 feet deep made by a man
who could neither read nor write. In the desert and
arid regions wells over 300 feet deep are not a rarity.
One of the most remarkable devices for getting water in
the desert is the underground tunnel or gallery known by
different names klariz, kanat, fogghza, etc. in different
lands. But whatever the name, the principle Is always
the same.
Iran offers the best examples of the kanat technique.
It is hardly likely that anybody has ever counted all the
existing tunnels, but there are said to be some 30,000.
Many thousands of communities, large and small, In an
area stretching from North-West Africa to the eastern
extremes of Central Asia, rely on kanat water for all
their needs, expeclally for irrigation. The total length
of these tunnels ls probably over 300,000 miles. Even
if this figure is not entirely accurate, the wealth of
tunnels shows what a gigantic and laborious task was
performed by the people of these arid regions in their
search for water.
In the kanat or kiariz technique the water ls collected
underground in hilly areas and is brought through long
tunnels by the force of gravity until it reaches ground
level In lower-lying areas. The extensive networks of
kanat tunnels in places where nothing on the surface
reveals the presence of ground water are a tribute to
the creative genius of the desert peoples. Today, In
regions where electricity is too scarce to be used for
raising water, the kanat would certainly prove its worth.
Kanats can also be combined with drilled wells to
Increase the water Intake.
THE search for fresh ground water in the
deserts is of first-rate Importance and
although initial prospecting costs are high they are usually
justified by the results. Western Turkmenistan for Ins¬
tance, a big industrial area with oil wells, railways, towns
and ports, relies entirely on subsoil water drawn from the
"waterless desert". This still-developing area will continue
its economic expansion with the help of underground
water.
In the desert regions of the U.S.S.R. a new method of
locating fresh water has been developed. This is a
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
17

WASTED TREASURE (Cont'd)
Fantastic reservoirs
of the lower depths
variation of the already widely-employed radio-pros¬
pecting technique of geophysics. Radio waves reflected
from the surface of the underground water (the angle of
reflection varying according to its salinity) are picked
up by an aircraft flying overhead. Engineers are thus
able to find concentrations of underground water and
assess the water resources of wide areas rapidly and
effectively. There are great possibilities for further deve¬
lopment in this technique.
It ls obvious that economical ways of assessing the
amount of underground water contained in such aquifers
must now be found. The various electrical prospecting
methods now being used reduce well drilling to a mini¬
mum, but these methods can only be used to locate
water concentrations relatively close to the surface.
Desert geographical conditions have a direct influence
on many characteristics of the upper layers of under¬
ground waters, especially their high salinity; but they
probably have no effect at greater depths. Thus in the
desert, as elsewhere, there may be both fresh and mine¬
ralized waters at great depths.
If the desert is close to a mountainous region in which
rainfall ls plentiful In an otherwise arid zone, the moun¬
tains with their bare slopes and sparse vegetation will
supply water to replenish the underground waters of the
desert lowlands. Some examples are the huge artesian
basins adjoining the Tian Shan mountains in Central
Asia, the Altai mountains of southern Siberia and Mon¬
golia, and the Atlas Mountains in Morocco.
-
: .
18
I F local water resources are to be used for the
development will depend on our learning far more about
the lower geological strata than we know today.
Until 1940, engineers considered that detailed topo¬
graphical and geological charts were indispensable as
guides to the test drilling that precedes more compre¬
hensive studies and the actual construction of water-
raising installations. To produce such charts takes a
great deal of time and money and today simpler methods
may be used.
Aerial photographs enable scientists to divide the
earth's surface into its natural divisions and determine
the most likely distribution of the upper layers of under¬
ground water. The general distribution pattern of deeper
waters may be gauged from geological structure charts
similar to those used by oil prospectors.
The oilman first looks for geological structures where
oil is likely to accumulate and when he has found them
he begins looking for the oil itself. Using the same
technique the water prospector will probably meet with
greater success, for there ls water in all permeable rocks.
Charts of this type can be compiled from regional seismic
and gravimetric data. More precise information can
then be obtained by any of the various electrical
CONT'D ON PAGE 20
*^i. :
i«?
l

WASTED TREASURE (Cont'd)
Water galore if we're wise
20
prospecting methods; if this plan is used the amount of
test drilling ls greatly reduced and the data obtained
shows the filtration properties of the area selected and
the degree of salinity of the water.
Some major problems, however, still remain. How
much water is available ? What Indications are there to
warrant further large-scale prospecting and an assess¬
ment of quality? This aspect of the work is the most
difficult and the most expensive; it is here that science
must provide new methods of investigation that will
radically change the situation.
We possess simple and cheap methods of estimating
atmospheric precipitation and surface run-off. It Is
not difficult, for Instance, to calculate the approximate
rainfall over an area with a given geological structure,
and to assess the amount of water that has escaped
beyond the boundaries of that area. We cannot, however,
say how much of the water has gone to replenish under¬
ground water because we have no cheap and reliable
methods of measuring infiltration and evaporation over
large (or even small) areas.
THE present gap between scientific knowledge
and the needs of man should soon be closed.
We shall then be able to use the balance method (the
ratio of water runoff to rainfall) to assess the amount
of water in each geological zone that goes to replenish
underground water. Thus we shall have more precise
knowledge about the water resources on which prospect¬
ing and other search methods should be used. Scientists
maintain that the water-balance method can become a
universal technique of assessing water resources. But this
method will only become the cheapest and most rapid

if an extensive network of observation stations is set up,
well equipped with automatic apparatus. The forth¬
coming International Hydrological Decade should help
solve this problem.
There is a saying "Great oaks from little acorns grow".
Care of water is one of the little things that can prevent
a great disaster; in the arid areas the upper level of
underground water ls often polluted through the wells,
and if the flow of water from artesian wells is not regu¬
lated by stopcocks much of the water is wasted.
In terms of waste, the chief water user, irrigation, is
also the chief water waster. In many countries a huge
amount of water from main canals and Irrigation systems
is used unproductively; more ls wasted in the fields and
reservoirs. The greater part of this lost water flows to
the underground waters and raises their level, producing
secondary mineralization and bogs. Thus, not only is
fresh water lost; it reappears as an enemy. The uni¬
versal introduction of scientific principles and technical
improvements into irrigation are an essential condition
for the conservation of surface and underground waters
in those areas where water is scarce.
Man need have no fear of a water shortage. All that
ls needed to ensure practically unlimited supplies of water
is a wise and rational approach to the problem and to
the use of all types of water resources. The long-term
prospects for water seem promising. They undoubt¬
edly will be if we are able to use most of the water
circulating in the land part of the globe and to reduce
the amount of fresh water flowing into the ocean. The
evaporation from the surface of the ocean will not be
noticeably reduced and the total rainfall on the land
surface will remain at approximately its present level.
Fresh-water resources will thus be considerably increased.
Vladimir N. Kunin, a leading Soviet specialist in hydro-
logical problems of the arid zones, is a member of the
Unesco Advisory Committee on Arid Zone Research.
Since 1937 he has worked at the Geographical Institute
of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences in Moscow, and
has contributed many papers to the Academy's publica¬
tions. He has made intensive research into water
resource problems of the central Asian deserts.
21
