RETURN
TO THE
LAND OF KUSH
by Rex Keating
WHEN in the spring of this year I stepped off the
plane at Wadi Haifa, exactly two years had gone
by since last I set foot in Sudanese Nubia. Only two
years, yet in that short time the vitality that for so long
has given shape and substance to the Nubian concept
of life had ebbed. From the banks of the Nile deserted
villages stared out at me like empty eye sockets. The
characteristic sound of the sakieh wheels half screech,
half groan lifting life-giving water on to the land was
absent.
Already the desert was moving in and sand choked
the irrigation ditches. The strips of cultivation on islands
and riverbank alike were yellowing and withered, their
frugal harvests ungathered. For the Nubians their exodus
had begun. This ancient people, calm of mien, independent
Colour page, opposite
A total of 169 frescoes has been brought to light by the Polish
Archaeological Mission in Nubia in the cathedral buried beneath
the sands at Faras. They are as brightly coloured as when they
were painted in the 7th century A.D. (see page 17). Above left,
detail of The Nativity (7 * 4.30 metres) depicting The Three Kings.
Below: Head of a woman. (Details of frescoes from Faras).
Right : Egyptian funerary mask with pectoral decoration (1750 B.C.)
discovered at Mirgissa in Sudanese Nubia. These masks which
are made of plaster with a backing of cloth have a great variety
of colours and decorative forms. (See page 2.)
Bottom left: Removal of a wooden coffin from the necropolis
at Mirgissa 3,500 years after its burial.
Bottom right: Funerary statuettes of granite and marble from
Mirgissa. They date back almost 4,000 years.
Photos © André Vila - French Archaeological Mission
of mind was leaving the beloved home land, for a settlement
prepared for them 900 miles away, in east Sudan.
Their former dwellings of mud-brick, cool, spacious
and wholly satisfying to the eye, products of the very
soil of Nubia and perfectly adapted to meet the rigours
of its climate, soon will be transformed by the embrace
of the Nile into so many shapeless heaps of silt. The
charming little riverside hotel at Wadi Haifa, well-remem¬
bered by travellers journeying between the Sudan and
Egypt, and known latterly to the legions of foreign tourists
eager for a last glimpse at the doomed monuments and
works of the past, will retain for a while a watery sem¬
blance of its identity, built as it is of stone. Also of stone,
the railhead buildings, docks and warehouses and, possibly
the mosque and the house in which Kitchener planned the
strategy of the River War campaign, will likewise survive
below water long after the shops and houses of the little
town have disintegrated.
Contrasting sharply with the absence of life in Nubian
village and cultivation was the increase in archaeological
activity. Little groups of archaeologists seemed to be
everywhere measuring, surveying, digging or emerging
from one or other of the countless graves they have
excavated.
As an example, the average number of archaeologists
and other specialists from the four countries of the Scan¬
dinavian Joint Expedition has been twenty. In four highly
successful seasons of survey and digging on the east
bank of the Nile they have excavated everything ceme¬
teries, settlements and churches recovering in the pro¬
cess a multitude of objects of museum standard. The
1961-2 season had produced a rich harvest of C-group
remains enabling the Scandinavians to demonstrate how 27
the culture of this remarkable African people had been
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

LAND OF KUSH (Cont'd)
The valley of lost rivers
totally absorbed by that of neighbouring Egypt by 1500 B.C.
The origins of the C-group, however, have yet to be
discovered.
The season of 1962-63 had enabled the Scandinavians
to turn back the clock of history even further, to well before
2000 B.C., with the finding of stratified settlements that
yielded valuable information on early Nubia, with data
on the palaeolithic inhabitants of the area, ranging through
neolithic to the A-group people forerunners of the C-group.
During this season alone, the expedition cleared and
recorded some two thousand burials, from A-group to
early Christian a time spectrum of forty-five centuries. It
was from an A-group grave of a woman that there came
two unique figurines of unburnt clay, one of a mature female,
the other of a young girl just emerging from childhood; they
are masterpieces of prehistoric art.
Another remarkable and inexplicable A-group interment
was that of a man who had buried with him a mineralogical
collection of all the many types of stones of the neigh¬
bourhood ochres, amethyst, chert, quartz, granite, etc.
This was at Abka and I was taken to a desolate valley
nearby which to me was as moving as it was impressive.
The valley was filled with black granite boulders smoothed
by countless floods and across their polished surfaces
marched animals by the thousand, carved with immense
labour on the iron-hard stone by ancient man. There
were rows of cattle, giraffe, elephant, hippopotamus and
other large animals long since extinct in this part of Africa
and among them human figures, usually in hunting scenes.
The oldest of the carvings, a series of abstract shapes,
has been dated to approximately 8000 B.C.. In all, the
Scandinavians located and recorded in this one valley close
on 3,000 groups of pictographs.
Throughout the four seasons of excavation the Scan¬
dinavians have been concerned to find in Nubia cultural
links between ancient Egypt and the Mediterranean cultures
and the civilizations of inner Africa. The leader of the
expedition, Professor T. Säwe-Söderberg, believes that
such links may well be found in the as yet unexplored
MYSTERIOUS CLAY
FIGURES. These re¬
markable figurines of
unburnt clay (right),
depicting, a mature wo¬
man and a young girl,
came from the grave
of a woman in Sudanese
Nubia. They date back
5,000 years to the time
of. the "A-people", as
archaeologists term the
original inhabitants of
Nubia. The Scandina¬
vian Joint Expedition
which found these figu¬
rines is one of the
many archaeological
groups working in Su¬
danese Nubia. By lo¬
cating and excavating
settlements, churches
and thousands of tombs
it has helped to shed
new light on the history
of early man in Nubia.
Photos © Rex Keating
stretch of the Nile between Semna and the Dal Cataract
(the extreme limit of the area to be flooded) and south
of there to Kerma. It is good to know that the first step
is now being taken in the form of a preliminary ground
survey of this crucial reach of the Nile. The Unesco Mis¬
sion to Sudanese Nubia is conducting the survey but It
is, of course, no more than a reconnaissance; the excava¬
tion of the sites located will, one must hope, be under¬
taken by expeditions from abroad.
A few days in Nubia were enough for me to notice a
marked change in the pattern of archaeology there. Two
ROCK ART GALLERY. In
a deserted valley near Abka
in Sudanese Nubia thousands
of animals including giraffe,
elephant and ostrich today
extinct in this part of Africa
march across the polished
surfaces of the great, black
granite boulders (photos left
and right). They were carved
on the iron-hard stone by
early man. Some 3,000 groups
of these carvings were recently
recorded in a single valley.
Further north in Egyptian Nu¬
bia similar rock drawings have
been found by the Austrian
Archaeological Mission.
Among those ascribed to the
"A-Group" people of 5,000
years ago one (right above)
showsan animal seizing its prey.
Photos © Rex Keating

t
X
years before, the emphasis had been on classical archa¬
eology; now it seemed to have shifted to pre-history and
palaeontology with teams from two large U.S. expeditions
very much in evidence on both sides of the Nile.
Professor Shiner, leader of the expedition of the Museum
of New Mexico, told me that they were concentrating on
the excavation of prehistoric sites located during their
surveys of the two previous seasons. Some twenty spe¬
cialists in five separate groups were at work and he rec¬
koned they would have cleared around two hundred sites
by the time they left Nubia this year.
Geological evidence indicated that the river Nile of
today ¡s a relatively new stream less than 50,000 years
old, and that before the Nile cut its present bed through
the sandstone, several great rivers flowed across the
plateau. And along these streams lived the makers
of the stone artifacts that prehistorians term "tools". The
abundance of artifacts suggests that prehistoric man found
this part of Africa a most congenial place in which to
live with a climate very different from that of today. Habi¬
tation sites have been found 20 miles out In the desert;
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
Drawing, Austrian Archaeological Mission
29

LAND OF KUSH (Cont'd)
A mighty walled city
emerges from the sand
nowadays no man could survive more than a few hundred
yards from the river.
Apparently about 10,000 years ago an enormous increase
in rainfall resulted in a Nile discharge at least three times
that of the present day. Elephant, giraffe, hippopotamus
and other large fauna proliferated, which would account
for the numberless pictographs of these large animals
found everywhere in Nubia. Then around 3000 B.C. a
steadily decreasing rainfall brought about a corresponding
desiccation of the landscape until Nubia became what
we see today an arid wilderness of sand and rock, enfold¬
ing pockets of cultivated soil and palm trees.
Professor Shiner was enthusiastic about the richness
of the prehistoric sites: "In America we have a relatively
late development in the history of man. To the best of our
knowledge man has been in the New World only a very
short time, and characteristically we think of a very early
civilization as being something from not more than ten
or fifteen thousand years ago. In Nubia, ten or fifteen
thousand years is just scratching the surface. On the
earliest sites in America we might dig for a month and
find a dozen tools. An extremely rich site might produce
fifty tools. Here in Nubia we find hundreds in a day...
the quantities are absolutely enormous."
Dr. Papworth, of the University of Colorado's Mission
to Nubia, spoke of how the twenty or so specialists of
the expedition were working in the fields of palaeontology
and physical anthropology. He enthused, like Professor
Shiner, over the prehistoric remains: "...never before have
I literally walked through fields of handaxes."
commands wonderful views of the Second Cataract and
its myriad islands. It stands on a precipitous cliff and
immediately below is a sandy plain extending to the river's
edge.
It was in this plain that the French archaeologists found
a complex of fortified walls, towers and bastions completely
buried in sand, which had preserved them so well that
walls stood all of thirty feet high enclosing staircases and
rooms with roofs intact. Subsequently the fortifications
were found to extend along the river bank for fully a kilo¬
metre to the north. In the course of digging, a town
of the Middle Kingdom period was revealed, laid out with
military precision and with each house enclosed by curious
undulating walls. So vast is the site that when the 1963-64
season came to an end, the sandy plain to the south was
still unexplored.
Now, more than ever, Mirgissa poses the question: why
the stupendous display of military strength? In the remains
of the temple inside the upper fortress the French Mission
has found the answer, or so Professor Vercoutter believes.
In a shrine dedicated to Hathor they came across a small
wooden stele bearing the word "Iken". Iken was the
entrepot of ancient Egypt in Nubia, where the caravans
and ships bearing the gold of Nubia and the rich produce
of the lands of the south came to store and tranship their
cargoes for eventual on-carriage to Egypt. According to
a stele of Senusret Ml found at Semna, the king orders
the fortress garrison there to prevent any Nubians going
north except to Iken for trading purposes. The whereabouts
of Iken have long been disputed. At last, the immensely
strong military defences may be explained.
N:I O doubt eyebrows will be raised among the
more conservative of field archaeologists at the
action of the Colorado expedition in bringing the world
of statistics and information processing to Nubia. For the
study of human skeletal material, Dr. Papworth and a col¬
league have developed a punchcard system whereby a single
skeleton can be broken down into some 52,000 different
"attribute combinations."
Such data, programmed and fed into a computer, makes
possible instant comparison between populations. A sam¬
ple of some 500 skeletons of various periods has been
collected for processing in this way and it is hoped that
new light will be thrown on the origins and migrations
of the peoples of Nubia over the millenia.
Probably the most significant finds in the field of pre¬
history have been the discovery of palaeolithic "houses"
by the New Mexico expedition and a palaeolithic cemetery
by the expedition of Colorado. In the latter fossil hominid
skeletons were buried in association with palaeolithic
tools.
Far and away the most spectacular excavation now going
on in Sudanese Nubia is at Mirgissa where the French
Archaeological Mission led by Professor J. Vercoutter has
been making remarkable discoveries in and around the
Egyptian Middle Kingdom fortress, (circa 2000 B.C). It
30 is gigantic, and literally millions of mud-bricks, strengthened
with wooden beams by the thousand, went into its construc¬
tion. High above the west bank of the Nile, the fortress
ROYAL SON OF KUSH. Since 1961, the Argentine has
sent several teams of archaeologists to work in Sudanese
Nubia. In collaboration with French archaeologists, these
teams cleared the temple of Aksha, and dismantled parts of
it including important reliefs, which have been taken to
Khartoum. The Argentine Mission, led by Professor
A. Rosenwasser, made significant discoveries during 1962-
63: five chapels raised by the Pharaoh Seti I, father of
Rameses II, and a fragment (below) of the door leading to
a chapel dedicated by the Nubian viceroy, Heqanakht to
Rameses II. The viceroy is seen here in ceremonial dress.
Above him is inscribed : "Heqanakht, Royal Son of Kush".
A. Rosenwasser

Rex Keating This year, thirty-five centuries after it was built, the temple of the fortress of Semna West (Suda¬
nese Nubia) was dismantled stone by stone. It will be reconstructed with other rescued temples
in the gardens of a new museum at Khartoum, capital of the Sudan. Here, huge blocks of stone,
some weighing three tons, are dragged along a "railway" of planks to a raft on tho Nile.
North of the fortress the excavators found a roadway
of wooden poles rather like the sleepers of a railroad. The
poles were about 40 centimetres apart and overlaid with
a skin of silt. This seems to have been a slipway for the
"dragging" of ships round the edge of the dangerous rapids
nearby; indeed footprints of sailors who pulled the vessels
along the slippery mud surface 4,000 years ago were clearly
visible. This "dragging" operation is often referred to in
ancient texts but never explained. The slipway extends
for two kilometres and may be even longer. Here is a
discovery of the first importance and if other rapids in
the "Belly of Stone", as this part of the Second Cataract
is named, were to be examined, similar slipways would
probably be unearthed.
Other important discoveries at Mirgissa have been a
cache of some 3,000 fragments of "execration texts" bearing
the names of many of the tribes regarded by the Egyptians
as enemies, and an unplundered cemetery of the "Kerma"
culture. The graves yielded examples of the beautiful
Kerma pottery and many other funerary objects. Kerma is
well over 100 miles to the south and its African culture had
important links with Egypt. This cemetery marks the most
northerly point of penetration by the Kerma people yet
discovered.
Out of the desert, two kilometres to the west of the
upper fortress is the pharaonic cemetery. Unplundered
tombs have yielded a wealth of fine objects of the Egyptian
Middle and New Kingdom periods. Many bodies of both
sexes were found and, curiously, there seems to have
been a predominence of elderly persons. There were
no children in the cemetery but in the upper fortress some
thirty large pottery jars were uncovered, each containing
a still-born child.
The French Mission plans to continue work at Mirgissa
for another two seasons, if the flood waters permit. Is
it too much to hope that they may yet uncover the ware¬
houses of this ancient transit fort ? For the historian Mir¬
gissa could prove of inestimable value if thoroughly
excavated. But to clear thoroughly so complex a site
covering many hundreds of acres, would require several
seasons of work by an expedition far larger than the
present one, which seldom has had more than four on the
scientific strength. Despite the sterling efforts of the
French Mission, Mirgissa bids fair to become a major
casualty of the High Dam.
Some ten miles north of Mirgissa lies that other great
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
31

LAND OF KUSH (Cont'd)
Down mahogany rails
to a pontoon raft
Egyptian fortress, Buhen, where the Egypt Explorations
Society's expedition under Professor W. B. Emery has this
year brought to an end eight seasons of excavation. The
first thing I noticed at Buhen was the absence of the temple
of Queen Hatshepsut which had dominated the fortress.
This 18th Dynasty stone temple, the finest in Sudanese
Nubia, now lies in neatly packed crates at Khartoum, where
I had seen it a few days earlier.
Last season's work was devoted to the clearance of the
earlier Middle Kingdom temple which lay beneath Hatshep-
sut's. Unfortunately the 18th Dynasty builders used stone
foundations of enormous size which they drove down
through the mud-brick structure built some 500 years before
their day and largely destroyed it. Nevertheless, Professor
Emery's excavations have been very satisfactory in revealing
detailed information about building methods used at that
time.
With a perimeter over a mile in length, the fort and Its
associated military town have been totally cleared and
measured; with the completion of eight years of work a
new chapter in the history of ancient Egyptian architecture,
in particular military architecture, has been written. The
labour of publication will be formidable, Involving close on a
hundred plans, elevations and drawings.
I ,
:r-\-
-« -i- i 1
EL- Z-f
arp^^r
:.
T/-»
32
HE Egyptian Old Kingdom town discovered on
the outskirts of Buhen in 1961 has been cleared
but was found to be badly denuded. Nevertheless, clay
sealings firmly dated the place to the middle of the 4th Dy¬
nasty and it may have been founded even earlier although
proof is lacking. Historically, this town is an outstanding¬
ly Important discovery since it pushes back the date of the
Egyptian occupation of Nubia by some 300 years, to the
age of Cheops and the Great Pyramid. It reveals, too,
the establishment at this early date of a major industry
copper smelting far from the Egyptian homeland in what
was considered hostile territory by the early Egyptians.
The large copper deposits which once fed the furnaces
cannot be far from Buhen, but unfortunately, they have not
been traced.
Semna, during the Middle Kingdom period, was the
southernmost limit of Egyptian influence. There on each
bank of the Nile the Egyptians built a fortress and in those
two fortresses five centuries later the Pharaoh Thutmose III
raised stone temples. For three days in the fortress of
Semna West I watched the absorbing spectacle of a Ger¬
man architect supervising the dismantling of the temple
in precisely the reverse order of its construction thirty-five
centuries before.
The interior of the temple had been filled -with rubble
and outside more rubble extended to roof level. The roof
blocks, each weighing up to three tons, were moved first
and dragged down the rubble slope by a gang of some
forty men. Then the level of the rubble was lowered and
the next course of stones removed. And so on down
to the foundations.
From the temple roof a double line of mahogany planks
ran down between the rocks to the bank of the river half
' .
-» *
Above, a vast scroll written in Coptic, found with
its counterpart in Arabic in the burial chamber of a
14th century bishop at Kasr Ibrim. These important
documents authorized the bishop's enthronement in
Nubia in 1372 A.D. Right, the burial place beneath
the cathedral at Kasr Ibrim with the bishop's clothing
among which the two 16 ft. scrolls were found.
CONT'D ON PAGE 34

LAND OF KUSH (Cont'd)
Something unforeseen happened
and the villagers never came back.
a kilometre away. As each block, chemically treated,
wrapped in muslin and bandaged in cotton waste, was
lowered down the slope, it was eased into the crate made to
hold it and pushed on a metal-shod sled and down the
mahogany rails to the river where a pontoon raft constructed
on the site from fifty oil drums and beams of mahogany,
received it. The raft, secured to a wire hauser, was pulled
across the fast running Nile to the east bank where the
stones were off-loaded to await the trucks that would
carry them on the next stage of the journey to Khartoum.
The temple in the sister fortress of Semna East is slightly
smaller and when he dismantled it some weeks after my
visit, the architect, Mr. F. Hinkel, found intact about fifteen
foundation deposits and, unexpectedly, inscribed stones
of another temple dating from two reigns earlier. The cost
of dismantling these two temples was borne by the govern¬
ments of Belgium and the Netherlands.
In the gardens of the new museum now nearing completion
In Khartoum, a stretch of water will simulate the river Nile
and around it will rise the reconstructed temples of Semna
and Buhen orientated as they were in Nubia. Also around
the lake will be placed fragments of other Nubian temples,
including reliefs from the temple of. Aksha, pillars from
churches and various inscribed stones and rock carvings.
On the island of Meinart is a large mound long believed
to conceal yet another Middle Kingdom fortress. However,
Dr. W. Adams, head of the Unesco Mission to Sudanese
Nubia, has shown otherwise. His excavations have
revealed an extensive Christian settlement. The mound
is important because the stratification is exceptionally
good; at the time of my visit no less than eleven distinct
Christian occupation levels had been exposed, with signs
of pre-Christian structures beneath.
LEVEL five revealed one of those tantalizing
little mysteries that will never be solved. It
seems that the entire population of the village at that time
abandoned it, but at their leisure. Moreover they intended
to return because they left behind in the houses all their
household goods. But something unforeseen happened
and they never did come back. The sand drifted in cover¬
ing the floors and concealing everything left by the former
owners. And when the village was re-occupied the new¬
comers left the sand-covered floors undisturbed, merely
laying new floors of mud plaster on the top. So it came
about that a thousand years or so later, Dr. Adams received
a rich haul of early Christian domestic objects in excellent
shape.
Dr. Adams explained that the archaeological survey
for which the Unesco Mission had responsibility, was
completed by the end of the third season. It covered the
west bank of the Nile, including islands, from Faras at the
Egyptian frontier, south to Gemai a distance of fifty miles.
Three hundred and fifty sites were discovered of which
270 were partly excavated by the Mission. Now the
Unesco Mission is surveying south of Gemai to the Dal
Cataract which is 100 miles inside Sudanese Nubia and the
34 extreme limit of the flood.
And so to Faras and the Polish Archaeological Mission.
This centre of Christian culture in Nubia has continued to
produce spectacular evidence of its great past. In the
cathedral 160 or so frescoes have been uncovered, most
of them brilliantly coloured. Of these, about eighty are
sufficiently well preserved for exhibition and have been
removed from the walls of the building for despatch to
Khartoum ; several of these, notably the Nativity scene and
the Youths in the Fiery Furnace, are magnificent, measuring
four by six and a half and three and a half by three metres,
respectively.
I NSCRIPTIONS and graffitti recorded in the
cathedral of Pachoras, to give it its ancient
name, number around 500. Near the cathedral, a second
church has been discovered together with several buildings,
of which two were bishops' palaces, tombs of bishops and
a nearly complete list of the bishops of Pachorus containing
27 names. At Faras there are Meroitic and Pharaonic
remains including, very possibly, a fortress of the Middle
Kingdom, all unexcavated. Faras, indeed, is one of the
richest sites in Nubia and it is tragic that time has now
run out; being so far north and only just above the present
level of the Nile, Faras will be one of the first sites to
be inundated.
In May of this year the engineers finally blocked the
Nile at the High Dam. From now on the river flowing through
Nubia will steadily deepen. For Nubia the end is in sight.
Low lying places like Buhen and Faras will be the first
to go under, but for prehistoric remains up on the Nile
terraces and sites like Mirgissa and Semna on the higher
levels, there is still time for the rescue operation to continue.
Particularly is this true of the unexcavated area south of
Gemai to the Dal Cataract.
The conditions of work will not be easy. According to
Dr. T. H. Thabit, Commissioner for Antiquities in the Sudan,
with the closing of the railhead and abandonment of Wadi
Haifa, a centre further south for the supply of food and
other necessities for those expeditions that elect to
continue working in Sudanese Nubia will be needed. A
plan to cover transport and other essential facilities is now
under consideration in Khartoum.
Less than five years have passed since Unesco launched
the international campaign to save Nubia's ancient
monuments and sites. Never before has an entire region
been archaeologically investigated on so grand a scale
and with a thoroughness that only the application of modern
field techniques can command. The results have been
fruitful to an outstanding degree.
Meanwhile the Nubian chapter of man's history is not
quite closed. Several missions plan to continue digging.
Others will surely follow their example.
REX KEATING of Unesco radio has visited Nubia four times on
behalf of Unesco since the start of the International Campaign. He
returned again a few months ago to gather material for the above
article and for a new series of ten radio programmes, "The Sands
of Nubia", which will shortly be given world-wide distribution. He
is the author of "Nubian Twilight" published in 1962.

One of the most grace¬
ful objects excavated in
Nubia was this copper
mirror found by the
Oriental Institute of the
University of Chicago
in an18th-Dynasty tomb
at Qustul south of Abu
Simbel. Its handle is for¬
med by the figure of a
young girl holding two
delicately curved papy¬
rus leaves. The mirror
may have been the
workmanship of crafts¬
men from Thebes. Be¬
low, statue of the famous
Nubian prince, Heka
Nefa of Miam, who was
a contemporary of
Tutankhamon. The dis¬
covery of his long-
sought tomb at Toshke
(south of Kasr Ibrim) by
a joint expedition of the
Universities of Yale and
Pennsylvania is one of
the major contributions
to the Campaign by
American archaeologi¬
cal expeditions to Nubia.
Pennsylvania-Yale
Archaeological Expedition
Expedition of the Oriental
Institute of Chicago
