
Cl
About 97 % of the world's water
is in the oceans. Over two-thirds
of the fresh water reserves- are
frozen up in glaciers and, above
all, in the polar icecaps. If the
Antarctic icecap melted it would
produce enough water to feed all
the world's rivers for about 800
years. The earth's land areas are
dotted with hundreds of thou¬
sands of lakes which contain 100
times more fresh water than all
the rivers and streams combined.
This gigantic cliff of solid ice is
a section of the Lituya glacier
on the Pacific, coast of Alaska.
© Bradford Washburn. Boston


WATER
THE WORLD
by Luna B. Leopold
he earth, Including Its oceans and atmo¬
sphere, ls a giant distillation system whose
operation brings about the distribution of Iresh water
throughout the world, from the frozen wastes of polar
regions to the burning- equatorial deserts. Stated In the
simplest terms, distillation, condensation and liquid flow
are the elemental processes which, on a grand scale,
distribute and circulate throughout the world the water
which ls essential for all Ufe.
Water in liquid form absorbs heat energy, chiefly from
the sun, and the absorbed energy changes the water from
liquid to gaseous form. Transported in the atmosphere,
the vapour later meets cooler conditions and condenses
as precipitation, some of which replenishes the water in
land areas.
Because water is continually being transformed from
liquid to vapour and back to liquid again, the whole
sequence of events ends where It began. That ls, the
condensed moisture in the form of precipitation runs
Into or off the surface of the earth, and a part of It
collects in rivers which flow to the ocean. The events
together form what is called the hydrological cycle.
The cycle cannot be stopped, fortunately, owing to
the fact that the energy which streams constantly to the
earth from the sun is inexhaustible. I say fortunately
because, were this cycle to stop, there would no longer be
that essential renewal of water as rain and snow to
maintain rivers and soil moisture and to grow the plants
and sustain animals on the continents. Indeed, were the
cycle to be stopped for some cosmic reason, all water
would finally come to rest in the oceans, and life could
continue only in the marine realm.
Though man is not able to alter the global cycle mat¬
erially, he may interrupt it locally by managing water to
serve his needs. That part of the cycle from which man
may take water contains but a small part of the world's
total. Of the water which ls precipitated as rain or snow
in the land areas, somewhat more than two-thirds is
returned to the atmosphere as water vapour through
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
11

WATER IN THE WORLD (Cont'd)
Antarctic ice = world's
river flow for 800 years
evaporation and transpiration by plants. These processes,
then, have first call on precipitated water and their
demands must be met before any runoff can occur in
rivers.
Considering how Important ls the water in rivers,
lakes and ground-water reservoirs, it is surprising how
little of the total water of the world is in forms and
places from which man may draw it with relative ease
to meet his needs. In the present state of technology
and water economics, the amount of water which can be
drawn from salty sources such as the ocean ls insigni¬
ficant compared with man's total need. Yet the reservoir
of salty water constituting the oceans is by far the major
portion of water on the earth. The oceans of the world
contain 97% of all the water in the globe. The next
largest Item in the water budget is also essentially
unusable by man: more than two per cent of the world's
water frozen up in glaciers and icecaps (see chart below).
The amount of water in the icecaps is large compared
with that In rivers. If the Antarctic icecap were melted,
the amount of water freed would, if supplied at a uni¬
form rate, feed the Mississippi River for 50,000 years.
It could provide the flow of all the rivers in the world
for about 800 years.
Rivers constitute for mankind as a whole the principal
source of water. Yet, surprisingly enough, this principal
source contains at any one moment only about one
hundredth of one percent of the water on the globe.
Being such a small percentage, it ls therefore under¬
standable that the surface water varies In availability
owing to the exigencies of day-to-day and month-to-
month weather and the large differences in climatic
character from place to place on the continents.
Because water is essential for man's existence, ways of.
providing him with what he needs have been discovered
and rediscovered by successive generations and under a
great variety of environmental conditions. Many civili¬
zations and certainly many cultures have derived their
particular stamp and character from the conditions of
life within which local water supplies had to be derived.
Man has shown great versatility in finding ways of
WORLD'S ESTIMATED WATER SUPPLY
12
LOCATION
Water volume
(cubic miles)
% of total
water
30 000
25 000
300
16 000
1 000 000
1 000 000
0.009
Saline lakes and Inland seas.
Average in rivers and streams
Soil moisture and near-
surface ground water ....
Ground water within depth
0.008
0.0001
0.005
0.31
Ground water-deep lying... 0.31
Total liquid water in land
2 070 000
7 000 000
3 100
317 000 000
0.635
2.15
0.001
97,2
(From Raymond L. Nace, United States Geological Survey)
making use of water as it occurred in its great circle
through the hydrologie ring.
Modern water problems, in fact, seem tó be merely
variants of the age-old difficulties that mankind has
faced again and again. The water problems in the
modern world are largely problems In learning to manage
a variable resource. This is exactly the problem faced
by ancient civilizations when man first began to build
small dams for the diversion of water in surface channels,
when he learned to dig wells, and more recently when he
developed the centrifugal pump and iron pipe.
Consider again the statement that the water most
easily available to man is an extremely small part of
the total water on the earth. The ease of withdrawal is
of course influenced by the amounts from which with¬
drawal is to be made, and these amounts are highly
variable. The resource would be much more variable-
than it actually is were it not for the effect of the porous
soil which acts as a simple but universal natural regu¬
lating reservoir.
Storage of any commodity tends to even out the Varia¬
tions of supply and to provide a more uniform output.
Winter storage of water ls one way to reduce seasonal
variations and to make the supply sufficiently uniform
to last during periods of deficient rainfall. Storage, there¬
fore, is the key both in the natural environment and in
man's hydraulic works, to decrease the variability of the
inflow. Outflow from a storage reservoir can be uniform
even though inflow to the reservoir is very erratic.
Water flows in river channels even during long rainless
periods because the precipitation from previous storms
has been temporarily stored in the ground and is now
being slowly released. Thus streamflow ls less erratic
than precipitation because of the storage provided by
the porous earth.

THE WATER
CYCLE
All water comes from the
ocean and is returned to it
in a continuous hydrolo¬
gical cycle. Subcycles, or
short circuits, occur on land
where water evaporates or
is transpired by vegetation.
The water vapour contained
in the atmosphere amounts
to less than a one hundred
thousandth part of the
waters of the globe. A
single cabbage may with¬
draw and transpire one
quart of water daily, and a
quite ordinary tree as much
as 50 gallons. The immense
reserve of underground
water (3.600 times the
volume of the water flow¬
ing in all the world's
rivers) in the first half mile
of the earth's crust shares
in this cycle of water
movement by flowing into
rivers, lakes and the sea.
Drawing iÇ) "Natural History".
January 1904
But man still has much to learn about using the natu¬
ral storage provided by nature. An example of how large
is one part of this natural storage is the amount of
water in the ground. Water stored naturally in the
ground within the upper half mile of the earth's surface
amounts to about a million cubic miles of water. This
Is some 3,000 times larger than the amount of water in
the rivers of the world at any given moment in time.
It is also 20 times larger than the amount of water in
all the fresh water and saline lakes and inland seas in
the world.
By far the largest amount of usable water at present
not used by man is underground. Compared with this
stored ground water, the amount which can be stored by
dams on rivers is small indeed. The difficulty is that
ground water, lying unseen, is not as easily surveyed or
estimated, and usually requires considerable technical
knowledge and modern equipment to exploit on a large
scale.
Moreover, because ground water ls a stored reserve, its
exploitation may under certain circumstances lead to its
exhaustion. Or exploitation may lead to lowering of the
ground water levels to such a depth that further exploi¬
tation becomes too costly. This might be described as
economic exhaustion.
One of the great needs, therefore, is to learn how to
put water underground Into the natural storage reser¬
voirs provided by porous rocks and gravel, in large quan¬
tity and economically. If this were done, one could with¬
draw the water again by pumping during times of shor¬
tage and would avoid the losses by evaporation which
may be important in surface reservoirs.
Furthermore, the storage space available underground
In porous materials is nearly everywhere very much lar
ger than the space even in the largest man-made surface
reservoir. But we have not yet learned how to use the
underground storage In the most practical ways.
In summary, there is much more water on the earth
than man can use, but most of it is salty and relatively
little ls actually available for human use. The small
amount available ls variable In time and space and these
variabilities are the cause of water problems.
The principal approach to eliminating variability is
storage and the natural storage provided by rocks and
unconsolidated materials just beneath the earth's surface
exceed by far the surface storage facilities man has built
or could build even In the most advanced countries.
Advanced technologies allow withdrawal of ground
water faster than it can be replenished by natural
recharge. Overdraft on water in one place relative to
another may worsen water problems by increasing the
geographic variability of usable water, as is described in
other articles in this Issue of The Unesco Courler. The
International Hydrological Decade ls an attempt by
Unesco to attract world attention to the Importance of
learning more about water on the earth. It is hoped
that the results of such improved knowledge on the
occurrence of water and the processes involved will
improve man's ability generally to utilize this resource
better and more efficiently for the good of mankind.
Luna B. Leopold is chief hydrologist of the U.S. Geological
Survey, Dept. of the Interior, Washington, for which he
directs studies on river measurements, ground water and
water quality. He has written many studies on hydro-
logical problems and his most recent work, "Fluvial Pro¬
cesses in Geomorphology" was written in co-authorship
with M.G. Wolman and John P. Miller.
13
