30
Group of mourning
Apostles (top of page)
is a detail from a fresco/
"The Dormition of the
Virgin", painted by an
unknown 12th-century
artist in the little church
of Asinou, Cyprus. Left,
St Andrew, a detail
from the same group.
© Unesco

"The Donors", from the
church of St. Mamas at
Louveras, dates from
1465, at which time
there was an extensive
revival in Cyprus of
painting in the Byzan¬
tine tradition, though
with a local character.
© Unesco

A new Unesco art album
CYPRUS Byzantine frescoes
and mosaics
CYPRUS
Mediterranean
The Island of Cyprus has been an inde¬
pendent republic since August 16, 1960.
One hundred and forty miles long by sixty
miles wide, it has nearly 600,000 Inhabitants,
of whom 100,000 live in Nicosia, the capital.
The majority of its population comprises two
main groups: people of Greek and Turk¬
ish descent. Although chiefty agricultural,
Cyprus has important mining deposits, parti¬
cularly of gypsum and copper. Situated at
a Mediterranean cross-roads used by many
great civilizations of antiquity, Cyprus
became a melting pot in which artistic tra¬
ditions from Mesopotamia, Phoenicia, Greece
and Rome flowed and mingled. Cyprus is
the only United Nations member state
whose own outline an island silhouette in
gold appears as an emblem on its flag.
I t was not until 1931 that a systematic survey of paintings
and mosaics In Cyprus revealed the full extent of the
Island's artistic heritage. Carried out under the direction of the
Byzantine Museum In Athens, it paved the way for a restoration and
preservation campaign that ls still in progress.
The mosaics and frescoes In the churches of Cyprus are not merely
works of great beauty; they are the record of an artistic development
closely linked with historical events on the island.
Down the centuries Cyprus has known many rulers and been subject¬
ed to many Influences. On the division of the Roman Empire It
became a Byzantine province. From the 7th century onwards It
experienced Arab Invasions, and Byzantine authority was not restored
until 965 A.D. From the 13th to the early 16th century the island
was ruled first by the French dynasty of the Luslgnans and. from
1489, by the Republic of Venice. It fell to the Ottoman Empire in
1571. Social upheavals and new cultural patterns all left some
Imprint on the art of Cyprus, but never managed to efface Its original
Byzantine characteristics.
The Island was slow to recover from the effects of the Arab Inva¬
sions. Mosaic decoration, In fact, never revived, but the art of
fresco painting came to Ufe once more and developed vigorously
throughout mediaeval times. One of the Island's medlseval monu¬
ments is the Hermitage of St Neophytus. Here, near Paphos, this
cave-dwelling Cyprlot recluse lived for half a century from 1159 A.D.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
31

CYPRUS
(Cont'd)
Citizens of Jerusalem (left)
greet Jesus as he rides
into the city, detail of one
of a series of 13th-century
paintings in the Church of
St.Heracleidius at Kalopa-
nagiotis, Cyprus. Below,
the Archangel Michael,
detail of a 12th century
work, "The Anastasis", a
fresco painted in the
monastery of St. Neophy-
tus, near Paphos, Cyprus.
© Unesco
32
Little-known
masterpieces of art
Among the frescoes on the walls of his cell is one signed by Theo¬
dore Apseudes, one of the earliest Byzantine painters known by
name.
As long as Cyprus, under Luslgnan rule, remained linked to the
Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, the Cypriot painters were subjected
to the influence of their Latin overlords. Later, with the Venetian
regime, orthodox church decoration increasingly absorbed Renais¬
sance elements. But the Cypriot fresco painters always preserved
much of the Byzantine style of which, in its purest form, Cyprus
possesses such fine examples.
A new album In the Unesco World Art Series, "Cyprus: Byzantine
Mosaics and Frescoes" has been devoted to these still little-known
masterpieces of art; 32 full-page colour reproductions present works
executed between the 6th and the 15th centuries. This album, the
20th in the Series, is published by the New York Graphic Society by
arrangement with Unesco. Printed in Italy by Amilcare Plzzi, Mi¬
lan, the album is priced at $18.00 or equivalent.
