WHAT MAKES
THE
ATHLETE RUN?
by Roger G. Bannister
The following article is
abridged from the ad¬
dress entitled " The
meaning of Athletic Per¬
formance" given by Dr.
Roger G. Bannister at
the recent international
conference called in
Paris by the International
Council of Sport and
Physical Education. An
English track middle-
distance runner, Roger
Bannister was the first
athlete in the world to
run one mile in under
four minutes (in 1954).
A medical doctor, he
is the author of "First
Four Minutes" publish¬
ed in 1955. Right, an
action shot of Roger
Bannister on the track.
POLE VAU LTER Dave
Tork (above) set up a
new world record in
1962 when he cleared
a height of 4.92 metres.
This photo of Tork dur¬
ing a trial jump shows
him at the Instant he
swings over the bar.
10

Photos O Associated Piosj
HI ow ls it possible to describe the meaning of
what we enjoy, whether it be Mozart, Cézanne
or sport? One would need to be a sociologist and philoso¬
pher as well as a doctor to do justice to this subject. At
the centre is the problem of a mind-body relationship,
and considering our relative ignorance about the workings
both of the body and the mind, it ls hardly surprising
that the relationship between the two of them should
stretch us to our limits of comprehension.
I can still remember quite vividly a time when as a
child I ran barefoot along damp, firm sand by the sea¬
shore. The air there had a special quality, as if it had
a life of Its own. The sound of breakers on the shore
shut out all others, and I was startled and almost
frightened by the tremendous excitement a few steps
could create. It was an intense moment of discovery of
a source of power and beauty that one previously hardly
dreamt existed.
Now a scientist may attempt an objective explanation
of all this. The sense of exercise is an extra sense, or
perhaps a subtle combination of all the others. It is one
which many ignore; although the Englishman has always
had the reputation abroad for playing games with an
intensity he seldom devotes to real life.
When we exercise, small electrical impulses pass all the
time between our contracting muscles, our moving Joints
and our brains. The pattern of the electrical disturbance
in the brain ls presumably a source of pleasure, because,
like that caused by music. It has some interplay with
rhythms inherent in our own nervous systems. But no
explanation ls satisfying that does not take account of
subtler feelings. I think the scientific attempt ls just
about as successful as trying to describe a rose to someone
who has never seen one.
For an athlete the mystery of this simple situation
always remains. He cannot explain it further, or If he
could, he probably would not run well any more. He
would not need to. The paradox is as simple as that.
It ls now some years since I competed in any track race,
and so perhaps now I can make a little more sense out
of it all. Like life, the problems of sport and a sporting
career only make sense In retrospect. What significance
does sport have for the individual? I think, early on,
adolescence can often be a time of conflict and bewilder¬
ment, and these years can be weathered more successfully
if a boy develops some demanding activity that tests to
the limit his body as well as his mind.
Each adolescent has to And this demanding activity
for himself. It may be mountain-climbing, running or
sailing, or it may be something quite different. It may not
even be sport at all. But by absorption in this pursuit,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
11

ATHLETE (Cont'd)
Where the losers
are also
the winners
12
he forgets himself and it Alls the void between the child
and the man. And later, when he finds a career or some
other loves, he will be surprised at the extent to which
he has grown. By then, he is no longer in a position to
make the sacrifices which he previously hardly noticed.
The meaning of games as opposed to simple physical
exertion is an even more difficult problem. Our satisfac¬
tion from games is a complex one. We enjoy struggling
to get the best out of ourselves, whether we play games of
skill requiring quickness of eye and deftness of touch, or
games of effort and endurance like athletics. There is a
desire to find in sport a companionship with kindred
people. Friendships which are formed under this
baptism of fire, if I can use that phrase, have a curious
permanence. I know that I have found all these things.
The sportsman can certainly enjoy his sport even if
he has no prospect of becoming a champion. In fact, It
may be thought of in the sense that an unsuccessful
sportsman Is perhaps the truest sportsman of all, because
his love of sport ls for Its own sake and untarnished by
any thought of success.
But the formative influence of sport on character does
not end there. Sooner or later in sport, the serious striver
after some sort of excellence will meet a situation that is
almost too big for him to master. Such situations occur
in ordinary life, and can often be dodged. We can play
hide-and-seek with reality, avoiding facing the truth
about ourselves; but In sport we cannot do this. It shakes
our roots with Its confusing pattern of success and failure.
As a result, sport leads to the most remarkable self-
discovery, of limitations as well as of abilities. This
discovery is partly physical one learns, for example, that
feeling tired does not mean that one ls reaching the limit
of exhaustion. But mainly the discovery is mental and
brought about by the stresses which sport imposes. The
self-discovery ls most rapid if we set out on the early
stages of this journey alone.
In time we learn how far from being self-sufficient we
are, we realize the value of co-operation and assistance
from others. But unless we start out alone, we never learn
the questions others can best answer and those which we
must answer for ourselves.
o many of us, action may not come easily.
We can allow ourselves to be blown along
like leaves in a wind, or on the other hand, we can try
to impose our own will on external events. For all of
us there comes sometime a moment when we are called
upon to face the metaphorical equivalent of a starting
pistol. Trying to bring the finishing tape nearer us, which
we sometimes may do in later life, is the alternative and
direct contrast to what the athlete is attempting to do,
attempting to reach a rather idealistic goal more swiftly.
These are my reasons for reiterating in a modern
context Baron de Coubertln's views of the educational
necessity of sport, as he conceived it, on a universal scale.
There ls no section of any community that cannot benefit,
except the most socially Impoverished one, and even under
these circumstances the prospect of international competi¬
tion may act as a spur to enlightenment and progress.
Physical deformity is not a barrier, as Dr. Guttmann has
shown by his Olympic Games for men and women who
have lost the power and use of their legs, so-called para¬
plegics, giving the Games the name "the Para-Olympics."
Sport is a vital part of maturity too. There may be
deeper reasons for its satisfaction that we hardly dare
y
.4. ' »"'I, ' ¡C
Svenska Turisttrafikforbundet
i'Pfl
ii
pppno
Í«. ,,.., Hi. m « ,i t '
SNAKE OF SKIERS. Last year a record number of 3,886
skiers took part in Sweden's Vasa Ski Race, an annual
commemoration of an Incident in the country's struggle
for Independence led by Gustav Vasa in 1521. Right, skiers
from seven nations set off on this 55-mile race while a
mass of others (top of photo) wait their turn. The record
time for the course (4 hours, 45 minutes, 10 seconds) was
set up in 1 961 . Above, the ramp of the ski jump at Ornskol-
dsvik in Sweden is so close to the town that this skier seems
to be gliding over the roofs. Skl-ing is said to have originated
In Scandinavia and from being simply a means of transport
has now become one of the most popular of winter sports.
admit to ourselves; some reasons that lie locked away In
the more primitive part of our minds. Thoreau once
commented "'the majority of men lead lives of quiet
desperation." We may strap-hang in the morning
travelling to work to reach our polished world of desk-top
size, or we may tighten endlessly nuts on a new motor¬
car, but we all of us must still seek instinctively some of
the freedom our far-off ancestors knew.
The meaning of physical exertion to the Individual ls
difficult to disentangle from its sociological meaning. The
need for adventure may at first have been satisfied by the
struggle for survival. But now that natural dangers have
been mainly conquered, we all of us seek further trials.
And unless men find them, is it not possible that they
may rebel with some form of shocking violence? Is It not
possible that a drift towards crime may be the result of
the thwarting of these impulses? Breathes there a man
with soul so dead that he has lost the urge to impress on
the world some indelible mark of his personality?
In sport man finds a trial for life which is more active
than a game of chess, more exciting than digging his
garden. We have used machines to conquer land, sea
and air. Athletes realize that if this quest for speed ls
worthwhile, it might as well take place too on the
running-track. There we can still feel our bodies have a
skill and energy of their own, apart from the man-made
CONT'D ON PAGE 14

13
© Associated Piess

ATHLETE (Cont'd)
For the favourite
the heat is always on
machines which they spend their time driving. There
we can fight a pitched battle against the claustrophobia
of our time. The new Don Quixote can tilt a vaulter's
fifteen-foot pole at the crazy windmill of modern life, or
defiantly hurl his fifteen-pound shot.
I believe that a collective restlessness, even violence can
safely extinguish Itself In the games we play. Sport
provides an alternative to the drag of passive leisure. It
provides an outlet for the craving for freedom, an outlet
which will become more Important, the more restricted,
artificial and mechanized our society becomes.
And of all sports, I think, athletics has great advantages.
You can do it in your own time, whether you work during
the day or night. You can choose your own event among
the many which suit dliferent physiques, the long and
thin, the broad and strong. While most ball games
demand great natural aptitude, this, I think, is less im¬
portant than industry and perseverance. Except in terms
of energy and effort, athletics costs no more than a pair
of running-shoes, and no one can say you may not run
faster than this or jump higher than that. The track is
yours and there is no limit.
io far I have talked about the meaning of
'physical exertion and of competition as a
form of self-trial. The excellence of the performance in
absolute standards ls hardly relevant to its value in
character building. It is a relative matter, the victory
being over self and previous performance or over fellow-
competitors of comparable standard rather than against
an arbitrary standard or a record. What is it like to
have the excitement of competitive struggle grafted on
the natural freedom found in movementto champion
the cause of club or country and to have their honour
as well as your own at stake?
What effect does the roar of a crowd of 50,000 people
in a stadium have, crying out for more effort and identify¬
ing themselves with each runner's success or failure?
What does it mean to wait weeks or months for a race
which may last only a few minutes or even seconds to
travel thousands of miles for a few seconds of supreme
exertion. For me, and I think for all athletes, the Olympic
Games have a special place on a plane apart from all
other races, all other competitions, national or inter¬
national. In past, this stems from the authenticity of the
games and from their roots in prehistory.
The ancient Olympic Games, historians have suggested,
emerged from a primitive anxiety lest with winter the
earth might never come to life again. With soil bare
HIGH JUMPER. Va¬
léry Brumel seems to be
floating effortlessly over
the bar as he Clears a
height of 2.27 metres in
the vast Lenin Stadium
at Loujinki, Moscow.
Brumel is world cham¬
pion with a record break¬
ing jump of 2.28 metres.
and food scarce, who could give an assurance that another
year would bring a fresh harvest? The saviour of the
harvest was the person with the magic of victory in him,
the athlete born of Zeus the Sky God. And, for a time,
the simple foot race was the way to choose this man.
Later the search broadened for the man who embodied the
Roman word "virtus," goodness or excellence.
The modern Olympic Games have still tended to pro¬
duce a champion of champions a Numi, a Zatopek, an
Elliot a modern hero, not altogether shorn of magic,
emerging as a symbol of the Games. Wé still need him
as a reminder that both body and mind can fuse in this
highest athletic achievement.
14
INFIRMITY NO HANDICAP
Physical infirmity is not necessarily an insuperable barrier to sporting activity.
Sportsmen and sportswomen, so incapacitated by accidents or serious illness that
any possibility of their entering competitions seemed out of the question, have
regained their physical powers and even improved on their previous performances.
An example of this was seen at the 1952 Olympic Games in Helsinki where a silver
medal for equitation was awarded to a woman rider, Lis Hartel, who eight years
before had suffered a serious attack of polio. It took her years to re-educate the
muscles of her paralyzed legs. Ignoring advice she had herself lifted on to her
horse to recommence her training. Her participation in the Olympics was in every
sense a challenge to adversity and her success was an example and an encourage¬
ment to all physically infirm people. Another example of courage in the face of
physical handicaps are the "Para-Olympics", the sporting events which have been
organized for paraplegics those who have lost the power and use of their legs.
R. Caloz

APN
For a moment I want to consider what Olympic competi¬
tion itself means to athletes who are taking part, and to
do this, I divide Olympic athletes, arbitrarily, but I hope
not unkindly, into three groups. The first, those who have
barely secured a place in their national team and are
certain to be outclassed; secondly, those who have a
sporting chance of a medal, and thirdly the favourites for
victory.
The first group with no chance of a medal are, strange
to say, in a way to be envied, for to him whom least, in
a relative sense, has been given, least is expected. Not
that they are indifferent athletes far from It, they have
fought hard to win a place in their team. Though they
are free to experience the Olympic competition, these
athletes perhaps do not savour the real quintessence of
the Olympics.
he athlete with a chance of a medal is happily
placed. He is in a position of strength; he has
nothing to lose and everything to gain. He can respect
and know close rivals. He has suspense, climax and
reactions and will never forget the experience. The public
at large hears about the risks, the international skirmishes
and silly nonsenses. It never hears of the unspoken
understanding that exists between such athletes whose
skill as craftsmen can compel a mutual respect no matter
what their eccentricities of character or disparity in
politics. This has been said often but it can be said again.
At the apex of the pyramid comes the favourite. His
public and press expect a gold medal through him. But it
ls a matter of simple arithmetic that most favourites will
return home without one. I think a favourite who does
not win knows as much as anyone about Olympic spirit.
A favourite for an Olympic title needs stoicism and self-
confidence to bear his burden lightly and shed humour and
good advice over a team that may look to him for
leadership. Perhaps it ls understandable If his joviality
on departure seems a little forced, his llght-heartcdness
a piece of play-acting as he waves from the aeroplane
steps.
In the short space of two weeks his experience is going
to be stretched to the limit of what is tolerable. He will
reveal to himself and perhaps to others unsuspected
weaknesses, but perhaps discover too a new secret
strength. For once in his life he ls utterly alone. This
situation is all Important, immediate and irrevocable. A
lifetime's intensity seems to be packed into a few
moments. The favourite, win or lose, can never be the
same again. And likely as not it may help him to do
something else better.
By the time he has reached this point, if he happens
to be a track middle-distance runner, he will already have
come tantallzlngly close to achieving a mastery over
himself which it Is the aim of every athlete to achieve.
He will have learnt to channel his whole energy, mental
and physical into a few moments. He will perhaps have
mastered the art of finding in himself more than he has
got.
This, like the knack of riding a bicycle, involves a mental
trick. The secret is to lose for a moment one's sense of
proportion. This process, in the greatest athlete, un¬
leashes a will to win that remains locked away in his
rivals. The presence, or absence, of this Is one factor
that sets the razor's edge between victory and defeat.
The other ls some mystical fortune that smiles on a victor
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
15

ATHLETE (Cont'd)
The athlete who is paid
is no less a sportsman
and which makes those who were defeated curiously
happy for the victor.
For a moment now I want to turn to another aspect of
sport which has I think changed considerably since de
Coubertin's day. This is the extent to which sportsmen
should be encouraged or permitted to risk their Uves.
Qualities of decision and boldness are necessary in all
sports, but boldness can easily become recklessness, even
ruthlessness, and this change spells disaster.
ODAY In some sports risk seems to me to have
overshadowed skill. Eighty-three people were
killed at Le Mans In 1955. A few days before his death
in the Mille Mlglia, the Marquis of Portago summed up his
racing philosophy: "Racing is a vice and as such extre¬
mely hard to give up. One can be at the top one second
but all it requires ls a very small error and one ls very
embrassingly dead the next."
I think such sportsmen are terrified by what they do,
but their fear, Instead of paralysing them, galvanizes them
to fresh action, as sometimes occurs on the battlefield.
Climbing accidents present another problem. A few years
ago, two French students were stranded near Chamonix.
Sixteen climbers risked their lives in rescue attempts
costing more than £150,000.
In searching for a definition of legitimate risk in sport,
certain distinctions must be made. In many sports there
is near criminal negligence by braggarts who underrate
the dangers of fast driving on unknown roads or swim¬
ming beyond warning flags. In Britain there are more
than 3,000 people a year killed In car accidents and 1,000
are drowned. People try to climb mountains equipped
with a bar of chocolate and an orange, or sail tiny craft
they cannot manage. This is folly not sport and should be
condemned.
There is an unhealthy element among spectators in
many of these sports too that is disturbing. In motor-
racing, how many spectators are attracted as much by
the morbid anticipation of disaster as by the skill of the
driver. On a different scale, a small boy once expressed
his profound disappointment after the finish of one of my
races. "He's no good today, he hasn't even fainted," he
said. Was it morbid interest or merely ignorance that led
a woman spectator at Melbourne to exclaim on seeing the
Olympic marathon runners stagger home "the final of this
should be worth watching?"
Having said all this about unnecessary risks, let me
confess that I have respect for sportsmen who, having
16
Although American colo¬
nists played a kind of
baseball as early as 1762,
it is only just over 1 20 years
since It became a popular
game with a standard set
of rules. Today It draws
enthusiastic crowds in
Cuba as well as Japan.
Though swimming is a
sport as old as the most
ancient records of history,
it was not one of the events
in the ancient Greek Olym¬
pic Games, though it was
included in the first Olym¬
pic Games of modern times
in 1896. It has been said
that all living creatures ex¬
cept men and monkeys can
swim by Instinct. Men,
however, have learned as
an art what they lacked by
instinct and have developed
many ways of swimming,
including the backstroke
(left). Olympic events
Include free style, back,
breast and butterfly strokes.
APN

J** -
USIS
excluded danger as much as possible, nevertheless risk
their lives in an attempt to extend the boundaries of
human achievement. No one but a fool risks his life
lightly, but thinking men with daring, even if they do not
always advance our practical knowledge of machines or
nature, raise the standard of individual vigour and enter¬
prise upon which the survival of mankind as a species
depends.
The factors which lead a man to stake his skill against .
his life must include factors which are far beyond his own
self-interest. Thoughtful courage cannot and should not
be eliminated from life, and those of us with children must
accept that they will be the better for having faced
danger, and we must if necessary be prepared to see them
do so.
The last decade has covered a strange period in the
history of sport. It has been the emergence of the new
professionalism, not only in the sense of direct and indi¬
rect payment for sports, but also in devoting unlimited
time and energy to sport, to the total exclusion of any
other career which Borotra has rightly deplored.
very country seeks to enhance national près-,
i tige by physical achievements. It may be in'
establishing new jet plane records of speed or altitude,
penetrating the depths of the sea, or scaling the world's
highest mountains. Too few questions seem to be asked
about the means and the motives, provided the end of
national glory is achieved.
Running, less than any other branch of track and field
athletics, perhaps less than any other sport refuses to be
distorted to fit into a pattern of this kind. Eighteen years
ago, when Zatopek first ran 60 quarter miles in 60 seconds
in a single training session, I wondered whether it was still
possible to be an international athlete any more and do
anything except training. But odd as it may seem, no one
has yet proved to my satisfaction that middle-distance
running cannot still be an activity upon which It ls neither
necessary nor desirable to spend unlimited time and
energy.
Fitting sport into the rest of life until one's work
becomes too demanding this is both the burden and Joy
of the old-fashioned amateur, a path which any athlete
is still free to choose, however difficult or rare it may be.
The athlete who chooses to be paid for sport ls no less
truly a sportsman. He too has a choice and often
exchanges some short-term advantages for many long-
term problems. I think it ls our duty to see that he
realizes this.
I think sport will survive the ethical and administrative
problems that now beset it. And the reason is this. Sport
has an individual basis and an Individual meaning, and
is not a national or moral affair. We run not because our
country needs fame, nor yet because we think it ls doing
us good, but because we enjoy it and cannot help our¬
selves. It gives each of us the chance to release a power
that might otherwise remain locked away Inside ourselves.
I am sure that this urge to struggle lies latent in
everyone, and the more restricted our lives become in
other ways, the more necessary it will be to find some
outlet for this craving for freedom. No one can say
"You must not run faster than this or jump higher than
that." The sportsman is consciously or unconsciously
seeking the deep satisfaction, the sense of personal
dignity which comes when body and mind are fully co¬
ordinated and they have achieved mastery over them¬
selves.
For a young man there are still few fields in which such
perfection can be approached and with such momentary 17
If transient finality. For the athlete the human spirit
Is indeed Indomitable.
