VIET-NAM TWENTY YEARS
OF CHANGE AND TURMOIL
22
by Le Kwang Kim
I am thoroughly bored with this -essay on
Voltaire! I have no desire this evening to
emulate his caustic wit. Saigon, in this stormy May
weather is oppressive; in the hot and humid air the body
is damp with sweat and the mind is Incapable of effort.
Nevertheless, I must finish my essay or else I know what
I shall hear from the professor on the subject of the
usefulness of higher education for girls, on their proper
place in the home, on the quality of their intelligence . . ."
When these words were written in May 1940, girls who
wanted to continue their education beyond the primary
stage had to study at the mens' college. Thus every
year four or five courageous or foolhardy young women
adventured on the road to a bachelor's degree. It was
Indeed an adventure. The powerful and inflexible Confu¬
cian tradition forbade any companionship, any familiarity
between the sexes. They never exchanged a word except
on occasions of urgent necessity.
Nowadays, after 20 years, if I meet one of my former
classmates, bald, stout, married, the father of a family,
we cannot help laughing when we recall the past. How
things have changed since the morning when our group
of girls, wrapped In a haughty and dignified silence, arri¬
ved for the first time at Petrus Ky College, and made our
way along the corridors, following the red arrows which
would direct us, as .we supposed, to the lecture room, but
which in fact, to our great confusion, led to the lavatories!
At 18, like most of my companions, I wore my long,
straight, black hair in a heavy knot at the back of my
neck. Out of doors I wore silk trousers black or white
according to whether or not It was rainingbeneath a
flowing high-necked tunic. A wide conical hat of plaited
palm-leaves protected my complexion for, paradoxically
enough, while Europeans get themselves tanned and
CONT'D ON PAGE 24

© Paul Almasy. Paris
HARVESTS GATHERED IN. Viet-
Nam is a country of huge rice fields
which at harvest time spread a golden
carpet as far as the eye can see.
Here, the harvested grains are dried
on trays which look for all the world
like giant water lilies covering a lake.
In the countryside a woman's life is
still bound to the incessant and
arduous round of farming work;
in the towns the status of women
has been significantly improved by
social changes that have taken place.
GIRL WITH A GUITAR. Whereas
they once remained at home, directly
under the authority of their fathers or
their husbands, the women of Viet-
Nam, like most of the others in the
New Asia, are now finding places for
themselves in a wide variety of occu¬
pations. The young woman seen
here playing the "pipa", a form of
guitar, is a professional musician.
Unesco Courier Archives
23

WOMEN OF VIET-NAM (Cont'd)
'With these earrings I thee wed'
bronzed by the sun till their skins are amber-coloured, we
who are naturally brown-skinned endeavour by every
means, including face creams and large hats to preserve
a clear complexion. My lacquered wooden shoes clattered
at every step. I rode to my classes every morning in a
rickshaw which, by my mother's orders, conveyed me four
times a day to and from my home. Mothers in those
days exercised a strict supervision over their daughters.
In 1940, Viet-Nam, together with Cambodia and Laos,
were part of French Indo-Chlna. It comprised Tonkin
In the north and Annam in the centre, both French Pro¬
tectorates, and Cochin China, a French colony, in the
south. As citizens of Cochin China we learned French
and were educated in the French manner like young girls
In France, although at home we lived according to the
Confucian traditions and oriental customs of Viet-Nam.
This circumstance may make it easier for women of other
countries to understand our reactions and behaviour,
which sometimes might surprise them.
Now on that May evening, while I was struggling with
my essay, I heard my father coming upstairs. Good
heavens, what could I have done to displease him? When¬
ever he came up to my room it was to scold or lecture me
reminding me of a young girl's duties to her parents
and her family. This might go on for hours for my
father, like every self-respecting, well-educated man,
was never In a hurry.
In these circumstances there could be no thought of my
essay; as usual I should have to listen, sitting motionless
with downcast eyes, looking as docile as possible. In
Viet-Nam, filial piety is the first and fundamental prin¬
ciple engraved on our hearts.
My father came in and sat down on the large couch of
polished wood, without mattress or pillows on which we
Paul Almasy, Paris
24

Left, two young women of Viet-Nam the one in a "cycle cab" with a child on her knees; the other
on a bicycle in the traditional female costume of wide-legged trousers and split tunicwait for the traffic
lights to change at a Saigon street intersection. Today, many women of Viet-Nam are entering the
teaching profession. The one shown above is giving a lesson in child care to pupils of a village school.
Unosco-Piorre Pittol
used to sleep, our heads resting on those oblong, wicker-
work blocks which though very pretty with their brightly
coloured covers, were very hard and most uncomfortable.
He looked at me over his spectacles and quietly said:
"Tomorrow you will take your books back to the libra¬
rian at the college and give this letter to the vice-
principal before giving up your studies. Your mother and
I with the approval of your grandparents, have arranged
a marriage for you with the sixteenth son of Madame H.
The young man is one of the most eligible matches In the
country. They are Catholics and have asked that you
should become one, and therefore you will do so. It is
of no importance since, as a girl, you would not have to
be responsible for the cult of the ancestors. Your brother
will undertake this honourable duty. The day after
tomorrow you will attend Instruction at the Cathedral of
Saigon."
TíHus speedily, clearly and without discussion,
the two most important decisions of my
life my conversion and my marriage were taken by my
parents.
Do not be surprised that, a girl of 18, educated in
Western culture for many years, should submit with such
meekness to decisions of great moment affecting her
personal life so closely. In Viet-Nam the family ruled
everything, decided everything, but also took all respon¬
sibility for the consequences and supported all its members
in any trouble... I could not, therefore, live my own life
as an independent and responsible person.
In the turmoil of the months before my marriage I
was scarcely able to apprehend the change which had
taken place in my life, to question or to understand the
real significance of events. One thing struck me, however,
the presence beside me of the man with whom I was
soon to share my life. As he had not been able to get the
bishop's permission to take part, he merely stood respect¬
fully by while, on the day of our bethrothal, I carried
out alone the customary prostrations before the altar
of my ancestors, presenting my future husband to them.
After the ceremony he asked me affectionately If I was
pleased with the jewels his mother had given me. These
were a pair of earrings the traditional betrothal gift, like
the ring in the West with a pendant and bracelet to
match.
The southern part of Viet-Nam, before the second world
war, was a country of huge rice-fields, which at harvest
time spread a golden carpet as far as the eye could see.
Small hamlets or trim peaceful villages lay In the
shade of clumps of trees or green bamboos. A luxuriant,
fertile and prosperous land! That was why Its children
were gentle, amiable, and smiling; too gentle, Indeed, to
be energetic or pugnacious, too amiable to be firm and
decisive, too cheerful to be sober and ambitious.
The Chinese, who ruled us for a thousand years, were
not far wrong when they called our country "Annam"
the peaceful South. The easy Ufe, the bland Confucian
ethic, the tropical heat all these conspired to make us
what we were in those tranquil and peaceful days. But
one Is never sufficiently distrustful of still waters.
These same Annamites (as we were called), good,
generous and peaceable, suddenly exploded, as witness-
the events of 1945, when the people of Viet-Nam rose
with incredible violence and put an end to eighty years
of French rule.
This was the classic story of the Insurrection of a
dependent territory against foreign domination, with
guerillas, massacres, bloodshed and martyrs. It was also
the awakening of a people. Finally, it was the prelude
to a shock which affected every member of the community
CONT'D ON PAGE 27
25

Some of the hundreds of junks in the "floating city" at Cholon, for long an industrial and commer¬
cial centre linked with the port of Saigon. These boats, moored along a watercourse known as
26 the "Chinese Channel", serve as homes, shops, storehouses and workshops. Cholon was
founded towards the end of the 18th century by hardworking and enterprising Chinese immi¬
grants, and has retained intact the traditional culture and character of a typically Chinese city.
Paul Almasy, Paris

WOMEN OF VIET-NAM (Cont'd)
Achieving the 'golden mean' of Confucius
without exception and rocked the very foundations of
society.
The family shrank to Its simplest expression father,
mother and children. Individuals generally, and women
in particular, no longer protected within the framework
of the Great Family, began to measure their capacity
to cope with life. As a result, there was a frantic rush
to secure diplomas and enter professions. The young
girl's future had indeed changed; marriage still was to
be hoped for, but was no longer the one and only end.
For me personally the 1945 revolution was a harsh
ordeal. I was then a widow with a 2-year-old son and,
without a profession, without an income. I had to take
refuge with my parents who, when our property had
been destroyed by fire, had gone to live in a small house
they owned In the capital.
las, old age and the sorrow caused by the
.destruction of his possessions took toll of my
father's delicate health and in due course he died, leaving
my mother, seventeen years my senior, and my young
brother of 13. He was at the awkward age and had never
submitted to discipline, except from my father, who had
devoted himself to training him to be the future guardian
of the cult of the ancestors.
I spent three years of my life In this atmosphere of
mourning, insecurity and increasing disintegration, while
my mother continually bewailed the cruelty of fate, the
heartlessness of friends, and the outlook of post-war
society; to the end of her life she never succeeded in
adapting herself to the changing world.
All this was too much for me at the age of 22. Never¬
theless our troubles quickly matured me. When I consi¬
dered my brother, my child and my mother, I realized
that if I did not quickly take action, if I did not decide
to be "the man of the household", we would soon find
ourselves adrift.
What does a person do who has to support a woman
not equipped for the battle of life, to educate a boy,
to bring up a baby? She works. So be it, I would work.
But a rapid assessment of my capacities clearly showed
that I could achieve very little by that means, and who
would help me to carry out my heavy responsibilities?
To marry again was out of the question; it was not
considered fitting for a woman to marry twice. Was my
reluctance to marry due to a desire to show myself worthy
of my mother-in-law, that Indomitable woman, who
though widowed, was bringing up her children alone?
No, I think rather, though I was unaware of it at the
time, that the fact of being able at last to take my life
and my future into my own hands, having no longer
either father or husband in authority over me, liberated
me from my bonds, so that I intended to preserve my
new-found freedom at all costs.
I was, so to speak, intoxicated with sense of
being no longer a minor, no longer under
tutelage, being able at last to make decisions for mysef.
I experienced to some extent the feelings of a person who,
having just learnt to drive, takes the steering wheel of his
new car. It was the exhilaration of emancipation. It was,
however, a time of groping, of feeling one's way, the
discovery of life, of reality, for until then I had lived only
at second hand.
It was not without pain and suffering but for me it
was a time of great enrichment. Soon I realized that
in order to fight one must be armed, and well armed, and
that in every field my weapons were inadequate. 'To
educate two boys one must oneself be educated, and I
had not learned nearly enough; therefore, It was here
that I had to begin.
I managed to collect enough money to enable me to
go abroad and begin my studies again, at the same time
supervising those of my brother and my son. Through
this close contact with Europe I became, without noticing
It, and in spite of myself, progressively Westernized; this
was Inevitable.- The culture I had partially acquired,
now freed from the inhibiting influence of the family,
gradually developed and took root In me, soon permeating
me entirely.
I became completely adult, In the Western meaning
of the term; making decisions for myself, assuming
responsibilities, engaging In undertakings, discussing,
persuading, settling questions, becoming dally more sure
of myself and of my capacities and my potentialities;
already I was able to manage my two boys with some
competence and authority. This went on for seven years,
at the end of which I believed myself to be trained for
life. Having taken my degree, I returned to Viet-Nam
with my son.
In Asia, although the rhythm varied In different
countries, in general changes took place with the sudden¬
ness of revolution. In Viet-Nam particularly the speed of
change was stupefying. By reason of its geographical
situation the pivotal point of an Asia suddenly risen
to Importance Viet-Nam Is at the exact centre of the
South East Asian countries. Her capital, which had been
French when I left, had when I returned become cosmo¬
politan.
Nevertheless, cutting across all the penetration by
different civilizations, and the wider opening towards the
West, there was a persistent and definite return to the
traditions of the past, as if the people, alarmed by so
many new things and new Influences, were conscious of
a need to rediscover themselves.
I EEPLY influenced, In spite of ourselves, by
Western culture, we now found ourselves In a
completely different, environment, divided between two
opposing trends. Readjustment was not altogether com¬
fortable. It is impossible to define the effect on one's
mind of the passage from an organized society to a society
In course of organizing Itself as ours Is today while In
spite of everything It is still part of ourselves. One Is
conscious of being at once strong and weak, at home and
at the same time foreign, doubtful and also assured.
It took months for us to adjust ourselves to the pace
of the new Viet-Nam. After having learned to advance,
we learned to retreat, which we thought useless but which,
nevertheless, Is necessary. It Is only when one has learned
to move in both directions, that one really knows how to
drive.
It has taken me several years to achieve that delicate
balance "the golden mean" of Confucius between the
frenzied urge towards Westernization and the simulta¬
neous need to cling passionately to the old traditions,
both of which are characteristic of Viet-Nam today. This
gives me a sense of fulfilment and satisfaction which one
can only experience when one's personality has become
finally Integrated. It Is a strength and a stimulus to feel
that one has at least achieved stability In a changing
world.
le KWANc Kim is actively associated with women's
movements in Viet-Nam and in other Asian countries and
in particular with civic and social welfare projects. A 27
trained pharmacist, she has travelled widely and now
lives in Cholon (.Saigon).
