' .
ABU BAKR
MUHAMMAD
(AL RAZI)
864-925
A UTHOR of one the greastest medi¬
cal encyclopaedias in the Arabic tongue,
AI Razl, a Persian physician, enjoyed an
uncontested authority in medical matters
until the 17th century. His treatises on
medicine won wide fame in medieval
times and were translated into Latin. A
mathematician and philosopher, he had
a bold and searching mind. In physics
he argued against the Aristotelian theo¬
ries held by certain Muslim scholars of
his day and in chemistry he rejected all
supernatural and symbolistic explanations
that were advanced at that time.
JAGIELLONIAN
UNIVERSITY
CRACOW
J Founded in 1364
HIS year one of Europe's oldest and
most distinguished centres of higher
education, the Jagiellonian University, at
Cracow, Poland, celebrates the 600th
anniversary of its foundation by King
Casimir the Great (above). The university
is named after the 14th century Jagiello¬
nian dynasty which enlarged and endowed
it. During the 15th and 16th centuries as
many as 40,000 students attended its
classes, including the future astronomer
Copernicus (from 1492 to 1494). Its
greatest expansion dates from the past
century and it now has five faculties.

GREAT MEN
=VA=i
On this page we present thumb-nail sketches of a
few of the great men and great events whose anni¬
versaries are celebrated around the world this year.
GEORGE
WASHINGTON
CARVER
1864-1943
« Negro plant chemist, George Wash¬
ington Carver, is one of the famous
names In American scientific agriculture.
In a simple laboratory and working
mostly with home-made equipment, he
discovered how to make hundreds of
new products from a few plant3. From
the peanut he made more than 300 pro¬
ducts, ranging from instant "coffee"
and salad oil to soap and Ink. He
conjured 100 more from the eweet po¬
tato, including flour and shoeblacklng.
He also succeeded in making marble
from wood shavings, dyes from clay
and gum from cotton stalks. The 6on of
slave parents, Carver gained a repu¬
tation as a "plant doctor" while still a
child. He earned his way through
school and college and eventually
headed the department of Agriculture ot
Tuskegee Institute, Alabama, where he
spent a total of 46 years. His research
and discoveries 8t Tuskegee brought
him international fame. Carver pur-
suaded the farmers of Alabama to grow
peanuts, pecans and sweet potatoes In
place of cotton. Since then a single
year's peanut crop from the southern
states of the U.S.A. has brought In as
much as $60 million. Carver was a
talented musician and also won Inter¬
national recognition as a painter. In
1940 he gave his life savings towards
setting up a foundation for research In
agricultural chemistry.
CARL OLUF
JENSEN
1864-1934
A precursor of modern cancer research,
this Danish bacteriologist and vete¬
rinary surgeon, born at Copenha¬
gen on March 18, 1864, was the
first scientist to prove that cancerous
tumours could be transferred from affect¬
ed mice to healthy ones by skin grafts.
His discovery gave an entirely new direc¬
tion to research on malignant tumours.
Dr. Jensen devoted much of his life to
the study of contagious diseases in ani¬
mals and did major work on the functions
of the thyroid gland.
RICHARD
STRAUSS
1864-1949
T HE early performances of the sympho¬
nic poems and even the operas which
Richard Strauss, the German composer,
produced between 1880 and 1895 shocked
many of his contemporaries. His striking
musical innovations were regarded as
exaggeratedly modernistic. But time and
growing familiarity with these works have
brought them well-deserved acclaim. Rich¬
ard Strauss who was born on Jjne 11,
1864, is now regarded as one of the
world's major composers and his songs
rank him as one of the great lyric masters.
MIKHAIL
LERMONTOV
1814-1841
BORN 150 years ago on October 3,
1814, Lermontov ranks second after Push¬
kin among the great poets of Russia. It
was Pushkin's death In a duel in 1837
that sparked the young army officer's lite¬
rary career and provoked his first angry
poem against Czar Nicolas I. Exiled twice
for his exposure of social injustice, he
died in a duel at the age of 27. His
novel, "A Hero of Our Times" is justly
considered a masterpiece of world litera¬
ture. Tolstoy, Turgenev, Dostoievsky and
others revered him as a teacher and model.
JOSE G.
ARTIGAS
1764-1850
BORN in Montevideo in June, 1764, José
G. Artigas can rightly be considered as
the father of Uruguayan democracy. In
1810 he joined in the struggle to free the
countries of South America from Spanish
domination. Foremost among his thoughts
was the education of his people. "After
bread," he said, "education Is the people's
first need." Artigas, who kept up a regu¬
lar correspondence with George Wash¬
ington, died in voluntary exile in Paraguay
at the ¡ige of 86.
MIGUEL
DE UNAMUNO
1864-1936
B ORN in Bilbao of Basque descent on
September 29, 1864, Miguel de Una-
muno is one of the great names of
Spanish letters He belonged to the
famous generation of 1898", a writers'
group of "angry young men" which in¬
cluded Azorin. Pío Baroja, Valle Inclán
and Blasco Ibañez. Philosopher, essayist
poet and novelist he wrote on an aston¬
ishingly broad range of subjects. His
philosophical essays "The Tragic Sense
of Life", "The Agony of Christianity", and
"The Life of Don Quixote and Sancho"
brought him international fame. /
Christian philosopher, he was a man of
extraordinary erudition (he was profes¬
sor of Greek at Spain's oldest and most
venerable university, the University of
Salamanca, and later its rector). All his
life he was an individualist and strugg¬
led against dogmatism and intellectual
fetters, fearlessly taking stand on all
public questions. One critic called him
"an oak tree with an owl's head." His
diatribes against the government cost
him his post and he spent two years in
exile. All of Unamuno's works are per¬
meated by an everrecurring themehis
anguish over life and death and man's
longing for immortality. It was this that
drew him to Kierkegaard, his favourite
author, and he learned Danish so as to
read him in the original. Like Kierke¬
gaard, much of modern existentialism
is foreshadowed in Unamuno's writings.
