THE ECONOMIC IMPACT
OF DISARMAMENT
EALIZATION that the disarmament issue is as
important as the survival of humanity itself is
now world-wide. In this age of rapid change we may
indeed one day see the negotiation of a multilateral disar¬
mament agreement. Nations will then have to make
economic adjustments of considerable size. Thousands of
millions of dollars are involved. Giant industries and
millions of job-holders have a stake in the outcome.
Millions of men in arms will have major accommodations
to make.
In its report on the long-term consequences of disar¬
mament, the U.N. has concluded that "all the problems and
difficulties of transition connected with disarmament could
be met by appropriate national and international measures".
Disarmament would raise both general problems of
maintaining the over-all level of economic activity and
employment and specific problems in so far as manpower
or productive capacity might require adaptation to non-
military needs.
In the economic life of all countries, shifts in the pattern
of demand and in the allocation of productive resources are
continually occurring. The reallocation of productive
resources which would accompany disarmament is in many
respects merely a special case of the phenomenon of
economic growth.
The post-war conversion was a much larger one and
involved a more rapid transfer of resources than total
disarmament would require at present. During the last
years of the war, the world devoted about one half of its
resources to destruction. The real military expenditure and
the number of people in uniform were about four times as
high as today. Nevertheless, huge armies were quickly
demobilized without a significant rise in unemployment in
most countries, and the pace of recovery, particularly of
industrial output, was impressively rapid.
URING the post-war conversion, the major
concern of economic policy was to restrain,
rather than to 'maintain, over-all demand. In adopting a
programme of general and complete disarmament, however,
it would be important to maintain a high general level of
domestic demand for goods and services and thereby to
support satisfactory levels of output and employment.
Much attention has already been given in the industria¬
lized private enterprise economies to the methods by which
total effective demand can be maintained.
Monetary and fiscal policy could be used to offset the
effect of a shortfall in total demand that might result from
22 a decline in government expenditure. Bearing in mind,
however, that a substantial part of military expenditure
would probably be replaced by other government expen
diture in most countries, it may be concluded that the
maintenance of effective demand in the face of disarma¬
ment should not prove difficult.
For many developing countries, the effect of disarmament
upon the industrial countries' demands for primary pro¬
ducts, and thus on the export earnings of the primary
producing countries, would be of great importance. So
would the methods of dealing with the liquidation of stra¬
tegic stockpiles.
In the centrally planned economies, the maintenance of
effective demand while reducing military expenditure would
be simply a matter of efficiency of planning techniques.
Since decisions concerning the production of military out¬
put as well as of investment and consumer goods are co¬
ordinated through the national economic plan, the substitu¬
tion of one type of expenditure for another does not raise
any basic problems, and in consequence, effective demand
could be readily maintained. The principal problems of con¬
version would then concern the physical adaptation of
plants producing armaments to the production of goods for
civilian use.
ET even with the successful maintenance of
total effective demand during a period of
disarmament, significant problems of adjustment would
remain in specific sectors and areas of the economy.
Part of the personnel released by the armed forces and the
armaments industry would have to be trained or retrained
so as to permit absorption into peacetime occupations.
Some plant and equipment would have to be converted.
Productive capacity might contract in some industries, and
might have to be expanded in others. Where the manu¬
facture of armaments has been concentrated in particular
regions, it would be necessary either to shift resources out
of those regions to other areas of growing demand, or
alternatively to undertake schemes of redevelopment.
Steps would have to be taken to modify the direction of
research and of technological development.
The resources now supplying military requirements could
be adapted to peacetime needs partly by shifts within
industries and plants. For instance, there might be a shift
from tanks to tractors, from military to civilian aircraft,
from naval vessels to merchant ships, or from electronic
equipment for military purposes to television sets. This
might be a relatively easy procedure, in many cases
involving little more than changes in designs, retooling,
and minor adaptations of skills, particularly in plants and
enterprises which already produce both military and civi¬
lian goods.
Shifts between industries might call for a more complex
form of conversion requiring the output of some industries
to be completely stopped or sharply curtailed and that of
others to be correspondingly expanded. In some countries,

*
:'^l
fö
ÏÏ
km
Và\ -
"iS^-T,
I «SB
I i-J*»
rllikJL
IS«
w
/
1.4i
1
fils
"Hi
M
HL «
i - '
Til
J 4 'til
41 .1 ^
J «
M
-, ii' j
»' i '.
-*i* '
.ittft
"il
' Kit
S»*'«»
_lil
Ml
ill
'¿??Z~'
»V-
1 liftaffTLîL'a;
:-3:v =ra i .
r-¿,»
i*:.
E^
M
*rjî? ;
<%H
^ y
I
M . '
Paul Almasy
A
the total output of aircraft, ships and boats would have to
be reduced since civilian demand for such products would
not fully offset the fall in military demand. On the other
hand, a considerable expansion of output in the cement,
brick, glass and building industries might be required should
there be a shift in expenditure in favour of civilian cons¬
truction. Shifts between industries would necessitate acqui¬
sition of different types of skill by the working force as
well as new investment in plant and equipment.
Disarmament would allow each country to raise the rate
of investment and to adapt productive capacity more ade¬
quately to the needs of the population and to the require
ments of economic growth, both in the private enterprise
and the centrally planned economies.
Hypothetical studies on the assumption that military
expenditure is replaced wholly by increases in expenditure
on other kinds of goods and services suggest that in the
event of very rapid disarmament some 6 or 7 per cent
(including the armed forces) of the total labour force in the
United States (about 4.5 million persons) in employment
in 1958 would have to change their employment from one
industry group to another or find civilian instead of military 23
employment.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

DISARMAMENT (Cont'd)
Refrigerators, cycles
& washing machines
in place of arms
Developing countries generally have been meeting their
requirements for military goods and services by imports,
so that their disarmament would release foreign exchange
rather than industrial workers. It would also free members
of the forces with many useful skills and training. Some of
these would be absorbed by the growing labour market;
others could be usefully employed in the development of
social capital by construction of minor irrigation works,
feeder-roads and other community development projects,
which would help to mitigate the already acute problem of
underdevelopment.
In some of the semi-industrialized countries, however,
the newly started basic industries which manufacture
chemical fertilizers, heavy machine tools, heavy vehicles,
aircraft and electronic equipment, have been serving both
military and civilian needs. In the event of disarmament
these industries could concentrate, without any transitional
difficulty, on the manufacture of capital goods so urgently
needed for both consumer goods industries and capital
goods Industries. Transport capacity, particularly vehicles,
released from military uses, would supplement the inade¬
quate transport facilities available In the present, stage of
their development.
I N the centrally planned economies, productive
I capacity is usually fully utilized. Thus it
would be necessary to convert plants producing military
equipment to production of durable consumer goods and
of such investment goods as can be produced in them
with only minor retooling. Such conversion could be
achieved rapidly. Many plants producing military equip¬
ment produce also certain goods for civilian purposes.
In Poland, for instance, plants which manufacture military
equipment also account for about 50 per cent of the
national output of motor cycles and scooters, 80 per cent
of the sewing machines, 70 per cent of the washing ma¬
chines and 30 per cent of the refrigerators produced in
the country.
Some special problems would arise with regard to re¬
employment and training of manpower and reorientation of
scientific research. While most members of the armed
forces have received training that would fit them easily for
civilian life, a special effort would have to be made to find
suitable employment for the rest. Some of them might be
called on to serve in various capacities in the international
. organs to be set up for control of disarmament.
The demobilization of the non-professional members of
the armed forces would involve a much larger number of
persons. But most of these men have been drawn from
civilian life where they were previously engaged in non-
military occupations. In many cases, however, they have
acquired new technical skills while in military service. In
24 most of the underdeveloped countries, the regular armed
forces possess a much higher level of industrial and tech¬
nical skills than the civilian population; this would tend to
ILO
DEMOBILIZING MEN
AND INDUSTRIES
After the Second World War
huge munitions plants were
converted to peacetime uses
and many millions of men
were demobilized with a
minimum of friction and dis-
give them a relatively greater chance of being absorbed
into civilian employment, particularly in an expanding
economy.
In some countries, which are faced with shortages of
manpower, the availability of a larger labour force could
indeed contribute to an acceleration of the rate of economic
growth. Moreover, the financial resources released by
disarmament should make it possible to arrange for termi¬
nation pay and special allowances for various types of
training. The Government of the United States carried
out, after the Second World War, a large programme for
education, training and job placement for demobilized army
personnel. Nearly eight million veterans took advantage of
the training programme.
In industries depending heavily on military orders, many
of the employees possess a level of skill that should find
gainful employment in other branches of production, so
long as over-all effective demand is rising. Moreover,
where some form of retraining or additional training would

location in terms of outputand
re-employment The conver¬
sion problems of 1945 were
far larger and more complex
than those which disarma¬
ment would present today.
be needed for employment, it could be acquired through
the facilities for apprenticeship and on-the-job training
often provided by individual firms or plants for their new
labour force. Even so, there might be some cases which
would require special assistance to encourage the adapta¬
tion of skills to new jobs.
Owing to the concentration of military output in a few
Industries, termination of military contracts would bear
specially upon the activities of particular enterprises. To
facilitate readjustment, attempts should be made to diver¬
sify the structure of employment by developing new
industries where possible; adequate relocation allowances
should be provided to facilitate the movement of those who
are mobile to areas where the labour market is expanding;
and adequate relief should be granted to those whose
attachment to the locality is too deep or whose age is too
advanced to contemplate moving to other areas. The costs
of such measures would be very small in relation to the
resources that disarmament would release.
The magnitude of the task of shifting scientific and tech¬
nical personnel to non-military fields of research would
differ from country to country, but no reduction in the
actual employment of scientific and technical personnel
need be feared, because the demand for civilian research
would increase rapidly. Indeed, one of the main reasons
why scientific research is still far from adequately applied
in many civilian fields is the fact that highly qualified per¬
sonnel have been scarce, and have been pre-empted by
military demands.
A more adequate supply of specialists would make it
possible to open up new fields of inquiry, hitherto virtually
neglected, as well as to devote larger resources to existing
lines of scientific investigation in both the developed and
developing countries. The scope for peaceful research in
the physical, chemical, biological and human sciences is 25
unlimited, and the potential benefits to the whole of huma¬
nity incalculable.
