HYDRAULIC
CIVILIZATIONS
by '
Pedro Armillas
GODDESS OF THE WATERS. This
kneeling statue is Chalchiuhtlicue, Aztec
goddess of the waters, and a feminine
counterpart of Tlaloc, god of the rains.
She wears a breast-plate composed of
four rows of green stones and a head¬
dress of sea shellssymbols of water.
he oldest civilizations of the worldancient Egyptian,
Sumerian, and Harappan arose on arid lands made
productive by great rivers whose floods moistened the parched
ground and enriched the soil with deposits of silt; these centres of
higher culture were situated in the Nile River valley, the alluvial
lands between the lower courses of the Euphrates and the Tigris, and
the area watered by the Indus River and its tributaries in Punjab
and Sind.
Other old, independent growths of civilization took place either in
desert zones where conditions made the collection of underground
moisture or irrigation by diversion of surface streams a prerequisite
for agricultureor In areas where the vagaries of rainfall extreme
variability from year to year, frequent droughts or delays in the start
of the rainy seasonbrought the threat of crop failure and
consequent disaster to the people.
An example of the first of these cases is the ancient Peruvian
civilization which, long before the Incas, attained its zenith on the
riverine oases scattered along the Pacific coast; the second conditions
prevail over most of China, and especially In the Huangho basin
where Chinese civilization first blossomed, and also over the central
Mexican Plateau which was the homeland of a civilization already
old when the Aztecs arose to imperial power.
The evolution of civilization is marked by profound changes in
economic relations and the structure of society, which in their turn
have created new forms of political organization.
Our knowledge of the early stages of development of the ancient
civilizations Is admittedly very sketchy. Recorded historythe
keeping of annals and writing of chronicles is one of the con¬
sequences of the expansion of intellectual horizons that goes hand-
in-hand with the birth of civilization. Thus, the beginnings of the
social processes that led to the transformation can only be dimly
perceived in the twilight of the past or else must be inferred from
archaeological discoveries.
N
60
Jevertheless, in the examples we are concerned with here,
in some cases these social processes certainly were, and
In others, may well have been, closely linked with the wide-scale use
of labour for. land Improvement (land reclamation and soil conserva¬
tion) and increased food-production through intensive cultivation.
Any doubts about this are due to lack of knowledge concerning the
early stages of civilization in the Indus River Valley and in central
Mexico.
In arid lands or in areas afflicted by recurrent droughts or subject
to catastrophic floods by the same rivers that brought them life,
people were forced to undertake two kinds of water-works:
productive (reservoirs, irrigation canals) and protective (dikes).
They did so to produce sufficient food for large and stable populations,
to obtain the surpluses needed to support the superstructure of
civilization, and also to avert the calamity of a total loss of harvests.
Potentially fertile but swampy alluvial lands were also reclaimed
by means of drainage ditches or artificial gardens floating on shallow
waters (chinampas In the lakes of central Mexico and gardens of the
same type in the Vale of Kashmir). All this has been done since
remote times to enlarge the areas available for farming.
Although small-scale Irrigation does not necessarily produce radical
changes in farming communitiesas evidenced, for example, by the

-
.

archaeological record on irrigation and society among the prehistoric
Hohokam people of southern Arizona (although here the failure to
grow can be explained by the very limited water supply)it certainly
has potential effects on social and political development.
Firstly, it creates landholdings with different levels of productivity,
and thus tends to promote private ownership of improved land and
the accumulation of wealth. Secondly, when a number of com¬
munities become dependent on the flow of the same stream, inter-
communal competition eventually requires the establishment of
supra-communal' authority to allocate water-rights and to mediate
in conflicts.
An agricultural economy depending on small Irrigation works may
lead to the establishment of feudal societies, as happened in China
during the Chou Dynasty (from 1100 to 250 B.C.) or in ancient Japan.
Large scale water-works, on the other hand, require mass-
mobilization of the labour force; hence, such projects presuppose the
existence of a political machine with power to demand service from
the people.
The building of extensive canal networks in ancient Sumer
(southern Mesopotamia) certainly post-dates the establishment of
dynastic states and may well have taken place no earlier than the

rise of empires. There is no available evidence that state hydraulic
enterprises existed In Pharaonlc Egypt during the Old Kingdom
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
EARLIEST WATER
WHEEL. A "noria" on
the River Orentes in Syria,
a rare existing example of
the earliest machines used
to draw power from the
waters of rivers. It car¬
ries water to an aque¬
duct built by the Romans
to irrigate nearby fields.
Photos © Musée da I'Hommo. Paris
61

HYDRAULIC CIVILIZATIONS (Cont'd)
OF RIVER
BONDAGE
© Pierre Verger
INCA WATER-WORKS. In the steep
valleys near the ancient Inca capital at
Cuzco, in Peru, many sections of massive
aqueducts, 50 to 70 feet high, still exist.
The Incas built them to carry away water
from a network of drainage canals, often
hundreds of miles long, in a region
where it rains heavily for half the year.
ROMAN AQUEDUCT. No fewer than
30 cities of Roman Gaul were supplied
by aqueducts. The most massive of
all, (below) which carried water to Nimes,
still stands astride the River Gard, a
tributary of the Rhone, in southern
France. It was built in 20 B.C. (the
time of Augustus Caesar). It is 880 feet
long and rises 157 feet above the valley.
Paul Almasy. Paris
period; the first recorded undertaking of this kind was the linkage of
the Nile to the Fayum depression, so as to use Lake Moerls as a
reservoir to regulate the floods, under the Twelfth Dynasty. In
ancient China, historians agree that construction of large-scale
water-works did not begin until the Period of the Warring States
(481-255 B.C.), when Chinese civilization was already one thousand
years old.
To understand the processes Involved in the growth of hydraulic
societies it ls worthwhile to note that the development of water-
control in China at that time ls linked to the technical revolution
brought about by the appearance of Iron tools, the use of oxen to pull
the plough, and the increasing practice of manuring the fields to
sustain fertility.
The greater productivity of agricultural labour led to the dis¬
integration of the feudal system and stimulated the growth of private
land ownership; the breakdown of feudal bonds left a mass of former
peasant-serfs liable to be drafted for the construction of public
works. At the end of this period of development, the opening of the
Chengkuo Canal in 246 B.C. brought prosperity to central Shensi and
gave the King of Ch'in power to subjugate the rival feudal states,
thus achieving imperial unification of the country.
¡ overnment management of large scale water-works led to
l the development of a bureaucracy and the dependence of
the subject classes upon it. The term "hydraulic civilizations"
refers specifically to those states whose social structures were shaped
by these forces.
The Increase of water-control and the development of hydraulic
societies appear to be reciprocal processes and the fact has long been
recognized. The connexion between farmers' dependence on water¬
works and the structure of society was remarked on by Pedro de
Cleza de Leon, one of the Spanish conquistadores of the northern
Andean region of South America. Cleza noted the contrast, on the
one hand, between the submissiveness of the civilized Peruvian
Indians, long used to obeying masters and paying taxes, and the easy
downfall of the powerful Inca Empire and on the other, the rebellious
character of the uncivilized tribes of Colombia who long resisted
colonization. The reason for this, writes Cleza in his description
of these peoples (first printed at Seville in 1553) is that the Colombian
tribes never had centralized political organization, were unused to .
servitude and depended on rainfarming. When harried by the
Spaniards, they easily escaped to the bush where new clearings
allowed them to raise their crops and live free from outside inter¬
ference.
On the desert Peruvian coast, the chronicler continues, men were
bound by nature to the riverine oases, and agriculture depended on
the state-controlled irrigation systems. Restrictive geographical
conditions also prevailed in the Andean highlands, where, the crops
grown on terraced mountainsides relied on water conveyed by
elaborate systems of aqueducts; hence, the Indians could not rebel
without risking their means of livelihood.
Another example ls ancient China where public hydraulic enter¬
prises undertaken at the closing of the feudal era played a paramount
role in creating economic bases for political domination. These in
turn led to imperial unification. Chinese historians of the ensuing
period (Han dynasty) were thus well aware of the relationships
between state-power and water-control. Some perceptive observations
on this subject are found in the Book of the Earlier Han (Ch'ien-han
Shu) which was given its final form by the Chinese historian, Pan
Ku, who lived from 32 A.D. to 92 A.D.
Modern theoretical analysis of ' hydraulic civilizations owes Its
beginning to students of society and culture, and since the early
1930's, some distinguished researchers have produced studies
analyzing the structure of these communities, describing the
processes of their development, and explaining their role in social
evolution.
Pedro Armillas, Mexican historian, archceologist and ethnologist, is a
leading specialist in the pre-Columbian history of the Americas. He
is now working for the Anthropological Museum of Michigan, U.S.A.,
for whom he has carried out numerous archceological excavations in
Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador.

m
Paul Almasy. Paris
Like an ancient frieze brought to life, a camel train cros¬
ses the River Zayendeh at Shahristan, near Ispahan, in
Iran. This striking brick and stone bridge dates from
the 11th century, Mohammedan era (17th cent. A. D.).
63
