A painting of the Kalabsha temple as it was depicted
in November, 1838 by the English artist, David Roberts
(1796-1864) who travelled through Egypt and Nubia
painting and sketching many ancient monuments.

MOVING A TEMP
AS A CATHEDRAL
by H. Stock and K. G. Siegler
I
38
MAGINE being asked to dis¬
mantle a medieval cathedral,
one hundred and twenty metres long
by seventy metres wide, and to
reconstruct it thirty kilometres away.
This was the problem that faced
German archaeologists, engineers and
technicians when they were commis¬
sioned to move, not a cathedral, but an
equally massive structure the Nubian
temple of Kalabsha and to recon¬
struct it thirty kilometres to the north.
Kalabsha, Nubia's largest free-stand¬
ing sanctuary, would otherwise have
been engulfed in the waters of the
Aswan High Dam.
The temple was given its present
form when restored by one of the
Ptolemies and later rebuilt by the
Emperor Augustus (30 B.C.-14 A.D.).
It consists of a pylon of impressive
size, an open peristyle court, a hall of
pillars and an inner chamber. An
outer wall encloses the temple build¬
ings and on the eastern side a jetty of
hewn stone leads to the Nile.
In the southwestern corner of the
outer wall, partly hewn from the solid
rock, is the "birth house" of the
goddess Isis. Built into the massive
girdle wall, twelve feet thick, which
encloses the temple area is a staircase
which leads to the roof and from there
to a small chapel dedicated to Osiris.
To the north of this once sacred place
are the quarries from which the building
material was brought a smooth, fine¬
grained, light-coloured stone still in an
excellent state of preservation except
where damaged by man.
Most of the pictorial decoration in
this noble, well-proportioned structure
is on the inner walls of the sanctuary,
on the entrance facade and the rear
wall and also on the outer shrines
of the hypostyle hall. Kalabsha's
finest artistic treasure is a represent¬
ation of Augustus Caesar in the ritual
dress of the Egyptian Pharaohs, sacri¬
ficing to Isis, Osiris, Horus and the
Nubian god Mandulis, on the western
outer wall of the sanctuary.
From its original site at a height of
110 metres above sea level the Kalab¬
sha temple has now been moved to a
new location also on the west bank of
the Nile and thirty kilometres to the
north. The work of dismantling
created some formidable problems.
One thousand six hundred huge blocks
of sandstone, some of them weighing
up to twenty tons, had to be lifted one
by one and carefully placed on boats
moored near the temple.
After being off-loaded near the new
site the blocks were moved on heavy
lorries to a storage area and marked
with identification numbers and sym
bols. Before the entire operation
began a detailed inventory was made
of the temple area by the Documen¬
tation Centre on Ancient Egypt, in
Cairo, and by the German archaeo¬
logists and technicians.
Operations lasted from September
1961 until the late autumn of 1963. As
many as 450 workers were employed
on the site, and in the summer of 1962
the work went on in two shifts for
twenty hours a day, in shade tempera¬
tures averaging from forty-five to
fifty-two degrees centigrade.
There were also other problems to
be overcome. In the autumn of 1961
GIANT JIG SAW PUZZLE. Piles of stones, some weighing up to 20 tons,
stretch almost as far as the eye can see. They are from the temple of Kalabsha
in storage after it was dismantled in 1962. Marked with identification num¬
bers they have been placed near the site where Kalabsha has risen again.
© K. G. Siegler

LE AS BIG
work was held up for several months
by the flooding of the Nile. And before
the stones could be landed near the
temple's new site a special harbour
had to be built as well as a road to
give access to the high ground on
which the stones were stored. Twelve
thousand cubic metres of rock were
removed with explosives to prepare
the new building site.
It is difficult to imagine the effect of
such conditions on the small team of
technicians and architects and on the
local workers who laboured under the
burning sun at Kalabsha. In spite of
the stifling heat, which barely abates
even at night, few dared ignore the
dangers of waterborne diseases such
as bilharziasis to risk a swim in the
Nile.
Not one of these men will forget
the lonely, rugged landscape, ochre-
coloured and denuded of vegetation,
or the mighty river, the life-blood of
Egypt, that flows through it. Nor will
they forget the torrid nights and the
starry brilliance of the Nubian sky.
The basic aim of the operation was
to save the Kalabsha temple, though
it was also hoped to discover new
facts about the history of the sanctuary
and the surrounding area, and in any
case to learn more about the ancient
building techniques. These hopes have
been fully realized, since this is the
first time in history that an ancient
building of such size has been dis¬
mantled stone by stone and re-erected
on an entirely new site.
The operation revealed all the
problems and technical difficulties en¬
countered by the architects, builders
and stone masons of 2,000 years ago.
It was possible to see how they trans¬
ported, measured and worked the stone
and where they made mistakes and
tried to correct them. Even the archi¬
tectural planning that went into the
temple was revealed in detail.
The poor state of preservation of
certain parts of the great edifice
created some new problems when
iO Rex Ksating
AN OASIS OF TEMPLES. The site on which the reconstructed temple of
Kalabsha now stands will be transformed into an island by the rising waters
of the Aswan High Dam. As other temples are rebuilt here it will become
an island oasis for some of Nubia's precious monuments. Above, the colonna¬
ded forecourt of Kalabsha, a temple dedicated to Madulis, the Nubian sun
god. Kalabsha is a superb example of Egyptian art of the Roman period.
reconstruction began. In 1907 the
Italian architect, Barsanti, had carried
out admirable and painstaking work
to protect the temple from further
deterioration, but serious damage had
already occurred. Many pillars and
capitals, beams and ceilings had
collapsed. Holes had been torn in the
reliefs by those in search of plunder.
These wounds were now healed by
restoration work and the closing up of
the ugly holes that pierced the walls.
The greatest problem of all was
posed by the ceilings of the sanctuary
and the hypostyle halls which had al¬
most completely collapsed. Most of
these ceilings were made of immense
blocks of stone, some seven metres
long, whose transport and storage
must have been tremendous problems
for the original builders.
It was finally decided to restore the
ceilings in the sanctuary, and this
was done with prefabricated rein¬
forced concrete beams covered with a
light coating of plaster. This plaster
finish was encircled with narrow groves
to identify it as a modem addition to
the original structure.
Thus, in the half light of the inner
rooms, the precious reliefs are effec
tively protected from further damage
by the elements. Visitors to the tem¬
ple will see them as they appeared in
the past, magical and mysterious, and
illuminated solely by the sparse rays
of light that penetrate the tiny antique
window slits and the few openings in
the ceilings copied from the original
building.
Soon the great old Kalabsha temple,
newly rebuilt and consolidated, will be
handed over to the people of the Uni¬
ted Arab Republic by the government
of the Federal Republic of Germany in
fulfilment of its pledge to Unesco a
symbol of international co-operation
in the preservation of a priceless cultu¬
ral heritage.
HANNS STOCKand KARLGEORG
SIEGLER carried out studies on the pro¬
blems of dismantling, removing and recon¬
structing the temple of Kalabsha at the request
of the Institute ofArchaeology of the Federal
Republic of Germany. Prof. Stock is an
archaeologist; Dr. Siegler is an architect
who specializes in antiquities. They are the
authors of "Kalabsha The Great Nubian 30
Temple and the Story of Its Rescue."
recently published in German by F. A.
Brockhaus. Wiesbaden. Fed Rep. of Germany.
