w^^ y eyes watched the clock. The hands pointed
I f I to seven minutes past nine... I heard a loud
whistle and then a steadily Increasing whine; the hull
of the huge ship shuddered as slowly, very, very slowly,
It rose from the launching pad. The struggle between
the rocket and terrestrial gravitation had begun. The
whine was actually no louder than the one you hear in
the cockpit of a jet fighter but in it were countless musical
notes and timbres that no composer has ever written
down and that no human voice and no musical instru¬
ment have yet produced. The giant rocket motors were
creating the music of the future..."
That is Yuri Gagarin's description of the take-off of
spaceship Vostok I as it was boosted into orbit in outer
space.
During the past five years dozens of artificial earth
satellites have been put into orbit, automatic interplane¬
tary stations have been launched in the direction of the
Moon, Venus and Mars, and the first flights have beeri
made In outer space by eleven men and one woman.
All these flights by manned and unmanned space
vehicles would never have been successfully accomplished
without complex and thorough planning and an astrono¬
mical number of calculations by thousands of engineers,
chemists, mathematicians and other specialists.
A spaceship ls boosted into an orbit around the earth
by a powerful multi-stage rocket, each of the stages
being Itself an Independent rocket. The multi-stage
system has many advantages over a single-stage rocket
which wastes some of Its energy since it has to boost not
only itself and the ship it carries but also continue to
carry fuel containers that once they have been emptied
become useless ballast. The most suitable type would
be a huge one-stage rocket that casts off the containers
as the fuel ls used up, but technical difficulties have so
far prevented the design of such a rocket. The one which
comes closest to it is the multi-stage rocket used by the
U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A. It consists of a series of rockets
placed one behind the other; each of them is discarded
when the fuel is exhausted, either automatically or by
a signal sent from the ground.
On the initial stage of its journey the rocket rises verti¬
cally from the pad; then its direction gradually changes
in accordance with a pre-set programme. After a flight
that may last from eight to fifteen minutes the rocket
attains a velocity of about eight kilometres a second; by
this time its flight position is practically horizontal and
thus parallel to the earth's surface.
Bousting a space vehicle into orbit involves loss
' of energy In overcoming the force of gravity.
Average velocity losses at this stage amount to two or
three kilometres a second. For a rocket-carried vehicle
to be put into orbit, therefore, it must develop a speed
which, in the absence of an atmosphere and of gravity,
would be ten or eleven kilometres a second. The power
the rocket must develop to reach this velocity naturally
depends on the weight of the vehicle it is to put into orbit.
For instance. Spaceship Vostok I weighed 4,725 kilogram¬
mes and was put into orbit by rocket motors that deve¬
loped 20,000,000 h.p. ten times the capacity of the Boulder
(Hoover) Power Station In the U.S.A. and three times
that of the Bratsk Power Station in Siberia.
Once the carrier rocket has reached the computed velo¬
city its last stage Is automatically detached from the
spaceship. The ship is now in free fall and from then
on becomes a celestial body whose motion is determined
by the laws of celestial mechanics. It is then said to be
"in orbit."
For a space vehicle to remain in orbit around the earth
it must travel at "orbital velocity" (or "first cosmic velo-
24 city" as Russian engineers term it) which is the minimum
speed at which a body may move without being pulled
back to earth by the force of gravity. Theoretically this

COUNTD
FOR SP
FLIGHT
by Evgeny P. Aksenov,
Evgeny Grebenikov
and
Vladimir Dyomin
THREE, TWO, ONE, ZERO... The Soviet
spaceship, Vostok 1, leaves the launching
pad in this shot which comes from the film,
"The First Voyage Towards the Stars."
APN
velocity is 7,909 metres per second, computed at the earth's
surface. If the programme requires a circular orbit, the
speed of the vehicle will be constant and will depend on
the altitude, as' orbital velocity varies inversely with
altitude.
We know from the laws of celestial mechanics that the
greater the radius of the orbit along which a body travels,
the lower its velocity will be. At the same distance from
the earth as the moon (an average of 384,000 kilometres)
a body in circular orbit would only need to travel at one
kilometre a second. Thus the time taken for each orbit
increases as the distance from the earth's centre increases.
At an altitude of 500 kilometres above the earth the
orbit takes 90 minutes but an orbit equal to that of the
distance of the moon would take roughly a month. If
the velocity of a body moving in space exceeds the orbital
velocity but does not reach the velocity of escape (which
Russians engineers call the "second cosmic velocity," and
which is approximately 11,200 metres a second at the
earth's surface), it will move in an elliptical orbit.
Spaceship Vostok I, launched by the U.S.S.R. on April 12,
1961, had an elliptical orbit with its lowest altitude (peri¬
gee) at 181 kilometres and its greatest (apogee) at 327 kilo¬
metres from the earth. One orbit was made in 89.1 min¬
utes. From these data the velocity of the spaceship is
found to be 7,837 metres per second at the perigee and
7,688 metres per second at the apogee. In other words,
engineers can now design rockets that travel at speeds
seven or eight times greater than the muzzle velocity of a
big gun.
Does the orbit of a space vehicle change as It encircles
the earth a number of times? Many factors do, in fact,
affect the variability of the flight paths, the chief among
them being the shape of the earth. Our planet is not a
true sphere but an oblate spheroid, the equatorial radius
being 18 kilometres longer than the polar radius; its mass
ls not homogeneous since densities are unevenly distri¬
buted and gravitational pull, therefore, is not uniform.
The atmosphere still offers a noticable resistance to
the motion of a body, even at altitudes of between 250 and

OWN
300 kilometres where the density of the atmosphere ls no
greater than that of the "vacuum" of a good radio valve.
The continued effect of even such a rarefied atmosphere
causes some changes in the dimensions of the orbit the
ship at such heights loses about two kilometres in altitude
on each orbit so that after circling the earth 80 to
100 times it is brought back into denser layers of the
atmosphere.
Probably the most important factor in the successful
boosting of a space vehicle into orbit (and still more so
for its landing in a pre-determined area) is the exact
observance of the planned flight programme. Mathema¬
tical accuracy must be nothing less than prodigious. The
slightest deviation of the vehicle in flight from the para¬
meters in the programme would lead to errors that cannot
be corrected in outer space a rocket aimed at the moon,
for instance, might shoot past it, or a spaceship re-entering
the atmosphere at too high a velocity might burn up.
LL automatic devices carried by the vehicle
Lmust function perfectly. The following exam¬
ple shows the degree of accuracy required. A satellite Is
to be boosted into an orbit elliptical in shape with a peri¬
gee at 6,640 kilometres and an apogee of 7,140 kilometres
from the earth. If the velocity differs only by 10 metres
per second due to the malfunctioning of the rocket
motors that is, by only twelve hundreths of one per cent
of the velocity there will be a difference of 39 kilometres
in altitude at the apogee.
If, at the time the last stage burns out, the vehicle
differs by one degree from the computed direction, the
perigee will be 25 kilometres less and the apogee 25 kilo¬
metres greater than programmed; this would bring about
vastly different flight conditions and might shift the orbit
from a perfectly safe region into a radioactive zone or
Into the denser layers of the atmosphere.
The many artificial earth satellites that have been
launched by the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A. have enabled
engineers to design high precision systems of piloting
and delicate control devices that ensured the successful
flights of the first spacemen. These pioneers of space
flights are: Yuri Gagarin, Herman Tltov, Adrian Nlco-
layev, Pavel Popovlch, Valéry Bykovsky and Valentina
Tereshkova (the first space woman) in the U.S.S.R.; Alan
Shepard, Virgil Grlssom, John Glenn, Scott Carpenter,
Walter Schlrra and Gordon Cooper in the U.S.A.
When a spaceship returns to earth It has to be brought
out of orbit and to do this means that Its speed must be
reduced. The methods evolved for this purpose are a
combined application of the laws of celestial mechanics and
the aerodynamics of a body moving at supersonic speeds.
As the vehicle descends it enters the denser layers of the
atmosphere that act as an "air brake". The orbital velo¬
city is reduced by a system of braking rockets (retro-
rockets) whose action combines with the effective use of
atmospheric resistance.
The retrorockets have a thrust opposing the direction
In which the vehicle ls moving; the moment they arc
switched on, therefore, the spaceship must be oriented
so that the rocket nozzles point in the direction of flight.
Re-entry at an altitude of eighty to a hundred kilometres
and at a velocity many times greater than that of sound,
subjects the vehicle to tremendous stresses.
There are two possible types of landinghard and soft.
The rocket ship sent from the U.S.S.R. to the moon in
September 1959 made a "hard" landingIt made contact
with the lunar surface at such a high velocity that it
was destroyed by the impact. Even a hard landing
involves many intricate calculations and must be made
with steering, stabilizing and orienting devices of great
reliability. A matter of a few metres deviation at the
beginning of the vehicle's flight, or a slight variation in
its speed could be fatal and the vessel would never reach
the planet at which it was aimed.
The landings of spaceships with cosmonauts on board
launched since 1961 are examples of "soft" landings. ,_
Most difficult of all is the soft landing of a space vehicle Z5
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SPACE FLIGHT (Cont'd)
A shower of meteorites
in a pre-determlned area which depends on the retro-
rockets being switched on at an exact moment with the
vehicle in exactly the right position.
The distance travelled by the vehicle during descent ls
very great. Yuri Gagarin's spaceship continued in flight
for half an hour after the "brakes" had been applied;
the U.S. vehicle. Friendshlp-7, landed in the Atlantic
Ocean after the "brakes" had been put on over the
Western seaboard of America. The actual position of the
vehicle and its exact velocity at the time the decelerating
process is put into operation must be determined with
absolute precision. An error of one metre per second
in computing the velocity or of one kilometre in computing
the altitude, would land the vehicle dozens of kilometres
from the appointed spot.
I
26
n the days before the first Sputniks were laun¬
ched, the possibility of encountering meteo¬
rites was considered one of the greatest potential obsta¬
cles to space flight. As ls well known, the earth (or rather
Its atmosphere) is under constant bombardment by a
"cosmic shower", consisting of various-sized particles of
matter coming from outer space.
American scientists have estimated that something like
30,000 meteorites with a diameter of one centimetre enter
the atmosphere daily. The shower of meteorites of one
millimetre in diameter is estimated at 75,000,000 a day
while the smallest particles of all, those less than
0,005 mm., arrive dally in such quantities that It would
require an elghteen-flgure number to express them.
Thus it seems not only probable but absolutely inevitable
for a spaceship to encounter meteorites on its journey.
These generalized figures, however, do not present a true
picture. Calculations have shown that a spaceship in
flight might meet a meteorite with a diameter of half a
millimetre once in fifteen years and one half a centimetre
in size about once in 25.000 years. Although It is theo¬
retically possible for a space vehicle to meet a dangerous
meteorite, this probability Is about as great as that of
someone on earth being struck on the head by one.
Despite the unlikelihood of the danger, spaceships are
nevertheless equipped with "shock absorbers" against
meteorites.
Before a manned flight could be attempted, the intensity
of cosmic, ultra-violet and corpuscular radiation had to
be studied so as to estimate the degree of danger from
them. Cosmic rays possess very great penetrative powers.
If the walls of the pilot's capsule were thin, cosmic rays
would penetrate and produce secondary radiation that
would be harmful to the man inside.
he nature of solar radiation in outer space is
also different from that experienced on earth;
a space flight is made outside the terrestrial atmosphere
that forms man's natural protective screen from the sun
by absorbing most of its ultra-violet rays. Studies of
different kinds of radiation made by artificial earth
satellites put into orbit by the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A.
have given engineers enough data to design space vehi¬
cles with structural features best calculated to protect
them from harmful radiation effects.
It must be said, however, that the existing rockets are
unfit as yet to protect the spacemen from radiation of
high Intensity and thus the proper choice of space routes
Is still of vital importance.
Rocket flights into outer space enabled the American
scientist James A. Van Allen and the Soviet scientist
S. N. Vernov to study areas close to the earth in which
high-energy particles abound. These regions form several
radiation belts in circumterrestrial space at various dis¬
tances from the earth. Though deadly to man, these
belts, are not, however, continuous, but contain "holes"
over the earth's North and South Poles.
The particles In these radiation belts are of such high
energy that effective protection from them would add
tremendously to the weight of a space vehicle trying to
penetrate them. It has not yet been found practicable
to design such a ship and manned flights have been
confined to orbits between the nearest radiation belt and
the earth. Manned flights to other planets will have to
follow a trajectory that leaves the earth close to one of
the poles.
Another danger that existed has now been overcome by
space vehicle designers. We know that our atmosphere
ls a reliable shield that protects us from meteorites they
burn up or disintegrate when they crash into the atmo¬
sphere at high velocities. A space vehicle could also
become a "meteoric body" if its re-entry were made at
too high a speed; the vehicle's mass is relatively small
and the resistance of the atmosphere could easily
destroy it.
The mechanism of atmospheric resistance is this: any
body moving in the atmosphere pushes particles of air
before it. This "push" is transmitted by molecules of air
from particle to particle, thus providing a signal of the
moving body's approach a signal which travels uniformly
at the speed of sound.
If the body ls moving at a subsonic velocity, the signal
spreads more rapidly than the body moves. Waves like
those caused by throwing a stone in a pond spread
through the atmosphere ahead of the moving body ; they
consist of alternating condensed and rarefied layers
of air.
These rapidly spreading waves provide the air particles
with what might be described as a "warning signal"
about the moving body so that they open up a path for
It as it approaches and flow round it. The body moves
forward, meeting little resistance. Though this descrip¬
tion is somewhat simplified, it comes close to reality when
the body concerned is streamlined.
When a body moves at supersonic velocities an
entirely different situation is created. In this
case the signal announcing its approach is delayed
because the body moves faster than the waves can spread.
A region of densely compressed air forms a cushion in
front of the moving body. On a space vehicle's re-entry
an Impact wave forms ahead of it and the air cushion
builds up between the wave and the vehicle.
The compression of the air brings about a tremendous
increase in the pressure and temperature of the atmo¬
spheric gases. If the velocity of the vehicle is twice that
of sound the temperature reaches 250° C, and if it is six
times that of sound the temperature will rise to 1,800° C.
Describing his re-entry into the atmosphere, Her¬
man Titov spoke of "a mass of fire of the brightest
colours seething round the ship." The kinetic energy of
the rapidly moving body Is expended on the formation of
the impact wave and on heating the air cushion in other
words, it loses velocity. The heat generated in the air
cushion is only partly dispersed in the surrounding
atmosphere, most of it is used to heat up the vehicle.
A spaceship, therefore, must be provided with a protective
shell and the velocity of its entry into the denser layers
of the atmosphere must not exceed a certain limit.
Such is the overall picture, greatly simplified, of the
flight of our present spaceships, the first vehicles to open
up a path into outer space. Spaceships will not retain their
present form, they will be improved and developed as
science and technology progress. It may well be that
spaceships will soon be as different from those we know
today as modern motor cars differ from their prototypes
of the late nineteenth century.
The authors of this article Evgeny Grebenikov and
Vladimir Dyomin, of the Patrice Lumumba University,
Moscow, and Evgeny Aksenov of the Sternberg Astrono¬
mical Institute, Moscow are all specialists in physics and
mathematics.

RETURN FROM SPACE. Soviet technicians recover capsules containing live animals parachuted
from research rockets after their re-entry into the earth's atmosphere. Thanks to tho giant parachutes
used for these operations the animals come down to a soft landing after their flight into outer spaco.
APN pholos
4 m
il
, i¿ -
.'.K'V
i
..-: «
*ffvfí*J^>?^ "ffT ''f «
27
>W<
.. ./<
