The Aswan High Dam
KEY TO A NATION'S FUTURE
by Taher Abu Wafa
Under-Secretary of State
Ministry of the Aswan High Dam
N:I EARLY forty million people live in the Nile basin,
twenty-seven million of them within the frontiers
of Egypt. They are the people whose lives are most closely
bound up with the waters of the Nile. Over ninety-nine
per cent of these twenty-seven million people have their
homes along the banks of the river in an area covering
35,000 square kilometres. Thus, with an average of 770
people per square kilometre, this tract of the Nile Valley
has the highest population density of any country in the
world.
At the end of the 18th century the population of Egypt
numbered between two and a half and three million and
by the middle of the 19th century it had risen to four and
three quarter million. Since then it has grown rapidly and
is now increasing at an alarmingly high rate. In the fifty
years ending in 1952 Egypt's population actually doubled,
although its national revenue only increased by seventeen
per cent. The solution to this crucial problem was to create
a balanced growth between population and production.
The construction of the High Aswan Dam, the "Sadd-el-
Aali" was undertaken as a broad approach to the problem
of supplying this fast-multiplying population with sufficient
food and fibres for textile production. It was also conceived
as a bold, direct approach to control of the Nile's water
resources for agricultural expansion, the production of
cheap hydroelectric power, protection against flooding and
the improvement of irrigation and draining conditions as
well as for the development of fish resources and
recreational facilities.
Five thousand years ago Egypt claims to have had the
world's oldest dam, one hundred and ten metres long by
twelve metres high, which was built near Cairo to store
water for drinking and irrigation. And basin Irrigation,
introduced on the Nile about 3300 B.C., still plays a major
role In Egyptian farming.
Under this ancient irrigation system dikes are built to
divide the land into basins of from 1,000 to 40,000 acres and
flood waters are then let into the compartments to a depth
of from one to two metres. Forty to sixty days later when
the river has fallen, these lands are drained and crops are
grown with the help of the moisture that remains in the
soil. Some 700,000 acres of Egyptian land are still watered
by this proved system of irrigation, although only one crop
can be produced annually.
During the past century much as been done to conserve
the waters of the Nile for irrigation.. But even today some
of each annual flood flows to waste into the Mediterranean.
This may not amount to much in the years of low floods,
but in peak flood years it can total as much as 100,000 million
cubic metres of water.
The original Aswan Dam was built in 1902 to store some
of the excess flood water so as to supplement the discharge
of the Nile when its level dropped. The wall of this dam
was raised in 1912 and again in 1933, thereby doubling
the storage capacity. A new dam was also built at Gebel
40 Awlia, near Khartoum, in 1937.
With the construction of the new High Dam, seven
kilometres upstream from the existing dam, it will now be
possible to control the whole volume of the river and to
store all the surplus water. Rising one hundred and eleven
metres above the river bed, the dam will be far wider than
the Nile, which at this point is five hundred and fifty
metres from bank to bank. The crest of the High Dam will
extend for 3,600 metres and its base will be nine hundred
and eighty metres wide.
The water impounded behind the dam wall will create
the world's second largest man-made lake. Extending three
hundred and fifty kilometres in the Sudan, it will have an
average width of ten kilometres and a total capacity of
one hundred and fifty-six thousand million cubic metres.
The vast reserve of water will be put to many uses. It
will become possible:
To supply enough irrigation water to develop 1.9 million
acres, thus Increasing the present area of crop-growing
land by about twenty-five per cent;
To meet the full irrigation needs of existing and new
development areas, even in years when the river level
is at its lowest, and thereby increase crop yields;
To increase rice-growing areas to one million acres per
year. In the past twenty years the size of these areas has
varied from 373,000 acres (1953) to 875,000 acres (1947);
To create better drainage conditions thanks to a lower
and more stable water table and a more even distribution of
water In the river and the canals throughout the year;
To put an end to fluctuations in the flow and level of
water in the river and canals which today interfere with
navigation.
Once water levels become more or less stabilized as a
result of the High Dam, the tonnage carried by inland
waterways is expected to increase by between twenty
and thirty per cent.
INCE early times the people of Egypt have been
'subjected to the dangers of the Nile in flood.
They have lived under the protection of embankments built
along the river from Aswan to Cairo (about 900 kilometres)
and along the two branches in the delta (a further 200 kilo¬
metres to the sea). But these embankments were the only
means of flood control and when they were burst
open by the waters the result was a major disaster with
heavy loss of life and widespread damage to crops and
property.
Fortunately no serious breach has been made in the
Nile's banks in the past seventy years and except for the
floods of 1946 and 1954 there has been no really dangerous
inundation during the last half century. Today a serious
flood would create unprecedented havoc because of the
greatly increased area of cultivation, the expansion of indus¬
try and the tremendous rise in population.
To be completely effective any flood protection scheme
on the Nile must keep the volume of water passing down
the branches of the river to the sea below the safe margin

Paul Almasy. Paris The construction ot the Aswan High Dam makes possible a tremendous expansion of
industry and agriculture throughout an entire region. Its waters will irrigate vast tracts
of land and its electricity will feed new industries and allow the expansion of existing
ones such as the Kima fertilizer factory, near Aswan, (above) which has an annual
production of 565,000 tons. More electric power is badly needed: the Kima factory
alone today consumes 78 % of the electricity produced by the existing Aswan dam.
of six hundred and seventy million cubic metres a day. The
High Dam has been designed to give this protection.
The construction of the dam is also a major step towards
the full utilization of the vast potential energy in the waters
of the Nile. To produce electricity for industrial develop¬
ment, twelve generating turbine units with a total capacity
of two million one hundred thousand kilowatts are being
Installed. When completed in 1971 the power station will
have a potential energy of about nine thousand million
kilowatt-hours. By 1972, when more water accumulates in
the new reservoir, power production should reach a maxi¬
mum capacity of ten thousand million kilowatt-hours per
year.
Even if, as presently estimated, the population increases
to thirty-six million by 1972, the High Dam should make
possible an increase of electric power consumption to about
four hundred kilowatt-hours per head of population about
two and a half times the present level. This will permit
the creation of new industries and the expansion of existing
ones. It will also stimulate the development of public
utilities and will greatly facilitate irrigation and drainage
through pumping. It may also make possible the electrifi¬
cation of some of the national railroads.
The total cost of construction in the High Dam project,
including the power station, transmission lines from Aswan
to Cairo, irrigation projects, reclamation of lands, roads and
other public utilities in newly-reclaimed areas, is estimated
at £E415 million (one £E equals $2.78).
To finance the project, loan agreements were made with
the U.S.S.R. which is making available a total of 113,200,000
Egyptian pounds. This sum will cover costs connected
with Soviet technical assistance and the supply of the main
construction equipment as well as other permanent equip¬
ment for the spillway structure, power station and electric
transmission lines.
It has been calculated that the project will bring a total
increase in national income of £E 235 million. The new
dam is not the highest or the largest ever built, but in terms 41
of the benefits that it will bring it can rightly be claimed as
one of the world's great pioneer projects.
