Susanne. London
MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAMER. "Sleep that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye. Steal me a while from mine
12 own company". A figure from" A Midsummer Night's Dream" slumbers in a London workshop where Gargantuan
models of Shakespearean characters have been made for an exhibition in Stratford-on-Avon on the life and work of
the Bard focal point of 1964's world-wide commemorations of Shakespeare's fourth centenary. (See page 18)

SIGNATURE OF WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
i)

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
YEAR FOUR HUNDRED
Wfj&
THIS year the world is paying a 400th birthday tribute to William
Shakespeare. No one is certain on which day in April 1564 the
great English poet and dramatist was born. The register of the parish church
at Stratford-on-Avon, his birthplace, only records the date of his baptism
(April 26). Tradition and sentiment, however, have united to proclaim that he
was born on April 23. This was also the date on which he died in Stratford
52 years later in 1616.
What little is known of Shakespeare's life is based on official records,
contemporary allusions and various traditions. As far as we know no attempt
was made to record the facts of his life until 1662. And Shakespeare himself
paid so little attention to posterity that he did not even bother to get his own
plays into print (his collected plays published in a volume called the First
Folio did not appear until seven years after his death).
The son of a prosperous glove-maker, Shakespeare married when he was
18 and had three children. Between 1584, when his twin children were born in
Stratford, and 1592 when he was acting and writing plays in London, there is
no definite evidence of what happened to him. From 1594 to the end of his
London career he was a member of a dramatic company which was given the
title of The King's Men, under the patronage of James I. Most scholars attribute
38 plays to his authorship, and he left 154 sonnets, which were published
in 1609.
Thousands of books have been written about Shakespeare and his works
more than about any other world literary figureand he has probably also
inspired more controversy than any other man of letters.
To commemorate Shakespeare's 4th centenary. The Unesco Courier has
chosen to give its readers a look at some of the lesser-known aspects of the
Shakespearean periodthe London in which he lived and worked (the real
background to his activities as an actor-playwright) and the London theatre 13
audiences who came to watch him act and to applaud his plays.

L U íiii
mir i üi-
BIRTHPLACE OF THE BARD. Stratford-on-Avon (above left) some 90 miles
north of London is Shakespeare's birthplace and where he now lies buried
in the church by the River Avon. Above right, Falstaff, one of a group of
statues of Shakespearean characters near the Stratford Memorial Theatre.
18
WORLD RENDEZVOUS
IN STRATFORD
Photo reportage © Susanne, London. Text by M. Trajtenberg
Figures created
for the Shake¬
speare Exhibition
by Jean Hugo, a
great-grandson of
the famed French
poet and novelist,
Victor Hugo. Jean
Hugo is one of
the international
group of painters,
sculptors, design¬
ers and musicians
who shared in mak¬
ing the exhibition.
CHIEF attraction in Shakespeare's 400th anniversary celebra¬
tions in England this year is the exhibition that opens in
Stratford-on-Avon, on April 23. Conceived by writer and
art critic Richard Buckle and created by an international group
of 30 young artists and technicians, the exhibition employs
all the arts and a complex range of techniques to evoke the
life and work of William Shakespeare against a background of
Elizabethan and Jacobean England. Its 17 sections comprise
four main groups (winter, in Stratford ; spring, symbolizing the
Bard's progress to London ; summer in the English capital, with
its days of glory at the Globe Theatre ; and autumn, once again
in Stratford, to where Shakespeare retired and where he died
in 1616). Most of the scenes have been called "happenings"
because of the artifices of lighting, music, sounds and speech
which seem to give living movement to figures, paintings
and reconstituted scenes. Research (the monumental work of
Sir Edmund Chambers) and artistic fantasy (the analysis of
poetic images in every major Shakesperean work, that writer
Caroline Spurgeon calls "The Imagery of Shakespeare") have
also contributed. Some 10,000 visitors are expected daily.

Everything about Stratford, from its shops to
its Memorial Theatre recalls the story and evokes
the image of the town's most famous son.
Left, giant "beefeaters" (the famous guards of the Tower of London) in their
Tudor uniforms tower over a chaos of screens, drawings, wire and welding
equipment in a theatrical workshop improvised in a disused London ballroom.
Here, Stratford's exhibition took shape. Above, made of and garbed in fibre
glass and plastic (replacing stuffs, brocade and silks) this half-com¬
pleted Lady of Windsor symbolizes pomp and pride at the Elizabethan court.
19
