ELEVEN
CENTURIES OF
THE CYRILLIC
ALPHABET
Unesco recently commemorated the 11th centenary of the Slavonic
or Cyrillic alphabet. It was in 863 A.D. that Cyril- the Greek
missionary (whose real name was Constantino and his brother Methodius left
Constantinople to go among the people of Moravia in Central Europe, to preach
to them In their own Slavonic tongue which had no alphabet.
The Slavs invaded the Balkans as early as the 6th century and settled around
Salonika and on the Aegean coast, where Slav was spoken as much as Greek.
As the Slavonic tongue had not split up into the various distinct languages that
are spoken today, Cyril's Aegean coast dialect was easily understood by the Mora¬
vian Slavs who were already partly converted to Christianity.
Cyril, one of the most brilliant minds of his time, trained by the great masters
of Byzantium, combined the qualities of theologian, diplomat, teacher and scho¬
lar. He brought the Slavs an alphabet of his own invention, different both from
the Greek and the Latin. This was a completely new alphabet which made it
possible to write down very precisely the ancient Slavonic tongue with its com¬
plicated phonetical structure that could not be recorded accurately by any other
alphabet of the period. The writing invented by Cyril was called "Glagolitic"
from the Slavonic expression "glagol," meaning "word."
Despite objections by the Germano-Latin clergy for whom the only valid lan¬
guages were Greek, Latin and Hebrew, Cyril persevered in his task. On his death
The inscription on this stone is written in Old Slavonic and dates
from the 11th or 12th century A.D. Discovered recently at Tulcea, Ruma¬
nia, it shows how the Cyrillic alphabet spread rapidly to other lands
after it was finally evolved in Bulgaria at the end of the 10th century.
Bucharest Museum of Antiquities
Cyrillic letters being carried in procession
through the streets of Sofia, the capital
of Bulgaria. Every year since the 19th
century the Bulgarians have celebrated
B.SVI
«yvi-cwAByirti- tRa S- i
Í HO KP* AAA -HPfl
A*¿.»U YfTRl.pT«
BhAtTLHHK'hBSKH
YAK WMiAAK M
f»A HA ¿-a ;*£tf£
EfATAtRDHrs-
HOfthCt /WkVAA-íi-K.tNÍ
/. ii«
Historical Museum, Moscow
Page from an early 12th century gospel
in Cyrillic characters. The Bulgarians

the Festival of Cyril and Methodius who
produced the first Slavonic alphabet
in the 9th century. (Banner on the right
bears the images of the two brothers.
C'AHi.K££f -K-MCTk/'AA /
T'AIK C HC Ñ A AAP H BA^AK
& At Nil H Ore B-fcKAA
rpKpAiiy«A-: ******
Httyk- ¿oABy- mk'&k
'Ai Ht KP * AAA- H
TAK* MICA /AfíP
T^AAAAAfCATA
M*AA*T'ANAYH
MAfÄ-OfAC Al /Á
«0AA AN H AAAS'IÎ-
ChdîPAA-HAHKKT.'
»T-t-ANÍBAAÉRArH
HO
AAA
gave Hellenic forms to the characters
of Cyril's original Slav alphabet.
Willy Preghfir, Tribourg
in 869 A.D., his brother, Methodius, carried on the work, training new disciples
and teaching the people in their own language, until his own death in 885 A.D.
The disciples of Cyril and Methodius were then accused of heresy and driven
from Moravia. But another Slav country, Bulgaria, opened its doors to them.
In Bulgaria the only written language was Greek. The Bulgarinas now
received the new alphabet brought from Moravia and adopted it after making
some modifications. The curved and rounded forms of the Glagolltic script were
replaced by the clear and simple Greek ones. In other words, while retaining
Cyril's script as a phonetic alphabet fully representing the sounds of the Slavonic
language, they systematically Hellenized the characters.
Thus, around 940 A.D.80 years after the creation of Glagolltic, the first Slav
alphabet there appeared a new, entirely reconstructed version, the Cyrillic
alphabet. Bulgarian literature of the ninth century is the direct offspring of
the work of Cyril and Methodius. Ancient Bulgarian inscriptionslike the Mostlc
Inscription discovered in eastern Bulgaria ten years ago illustrate the form of
the Cyrillic being used in the 10th century.
Cyrillic writing, however, was to expand enormously. After taking root in
Bulgaria and Macedonia it spread to Serbia, Bosnia and above all to Russia after
the Russian conversion to Christianity in 988. in Rumania Cyrillic characters
were replaced by the Roman Alphabet In the 19th century.
With only slight modifications to adapt it to modern Slavonic languages, Cyrillic
has retained the form in which it was originally created in the 10th century.
In Russia It was simplified early In the 18th century on the orders of Peter the
Great. Cyrillic characters were also further simplified after the Russian Revo¬
lution in 1917.
Cyrillic, in forms which vary slightly between different languages, is now
used over a vast area. Since the Soviet Union decided on its general application
It has been employed for a variety of non-Slavonic languages spoken In the25
U.S.S.R., Including Flnno-Ugrlan, Turkic and Mongolian, and it has travelled
across Siberia to the Pacific coast.
