María Montessori
A VISION OF MANKIND
TRANSFORMED
by Maria Remiddi
II n 1947, two years after the end of the Second
World War, great interest was awakened in
Rome by the announcement that Maria Montessori was
to give a talk there on "Education and Peace." For
although Maria Montessori had studied in Rome (she held
degrees In medicine, biology, philosophy and education)
and her first research into the psychological development
of small children had been carried out there, she had
pursued the rest of her career in foreign countries, open¬
ing schools in England, the United States of America,
Spain, Denmark, India and the Netherlands. At last she
was coming back to Rome, a dignified old lady dressed in
black, with a halo of white hair. She had a very quiet
voice and spoke so simply that no one could fail to follow
her arguments.
She said there was no need to unite the world, for it
was united already. In order to develop a peaceable
disposition in young children, we must give them their
place in this new united, unified world where everyone
works for the benefit of his neighbour. For in the world
of today nothing comes to us direct from nature in the
old, simple way; men must work to bring it to us.
She pointed out that this applied not only to houses,
tables, chairs, books, but that even a fruit, which seems
the most direct and genuine of nature's gifts, comes to us
only because men have tended the tree it grew upon,
plucked it and brought it to market.
She went on to say that nothing was easier than to
make little children aware of the human kindness which
is constantly being expressed in work, for every child
meets with such kindness in everyday life. Unconscious
kindness, perhaps, but kindness all the same. It helps
people a great deal if they realize they have this kindness
within them.
Maria Montessori never wrote out her lectures or lessons,
16
Maria Montessori gave
her entire life to education.
She worked tirelessly to
develop teaching methods
and materials that have
since been incorporated
into many current educa¬
tional systems. Left,
towards the end of her
life, the distinguished Ita¬
lian educator greets an
Indian teacher at a Mon¬
tessori Congress. Right,
freedom of expression, as
displayed here by a young
classroom artist from
Czechoslovakia, is one
of the main principles
of the Montessori method.
Publifoto, Rome

(Q Jan Lukas. Pragus
and spoke without notes. When I went to ask her if
I might have a copy of what she had said, she looked
surprised and told me she had not got one. So I hurried
home and wrote down everything I could remember. She
read my notes afterwards and agreed that they were her
words.
Even so, they gave only a pale reflection of her ideas.
She had begun to take an interest in young children in
the early years of this century, when she was working at
the psychiatric clinic of the University of Rome and had
been instructed to study the behaviour of a group of
feeble-minded children.
S¡-he had already received a thorough scientific
'training for this type of research from Giu¬
seppe Sergi, the anthropologist, who had founded the first
Institute of Experimental Psychology at the University of
Rome; and she was also familiar with the work of Pro¬
fessor Cesare Lombroso, the celebrated authority on
criminal psychology. On completing her studies she
turned to research, gradually deepening her insight into
the physical and psychical substratum underlying abnor¬
mality and her understanding of the educational methods
by which behaviour could be improved.
To acquaint herself with what was being done elsewhere
In the field of remedial education, she went abroad,
spending some time in England and then in France. In
the latter country the investigations carried out by Itard
and Séguin interested her particularly. J.E. Marie Gaspard
Itard (1774-1838) was a physician who had devoted him¬
self to the education of deaf children.
After her return to Rome, Maria Montessori continued
her study of mentally defective children, improved her
methods of training, and invented the teaching materials
that bear her name a set of objects (Interlocking puzzles,
cubes, cylinders, laces, coloured Implements, figures,
letters) designed to stimulate dormant sensory perception.
Finally she opened a school to train teachers for the diffi¬
cult task of preparing feeble-minded children to play
their part in normal life.
Meanwhile, however, she had become Increasingly
absorbed by another question. "If," she asked herself,
"after all this scientific research and study of educational
methods, we can now Improve the lot of the mentally defi¬
cient child, what results should we obtain if we gave
equally close attention to normal children, on whom the
future of the human race depends?" She decided that the
methods of scientific research must now be applied to the
psychology of normal children, and that in order to obtain
reliable data the children must be in surroundings where
they could behave spontaneously and naturally.
An opportunity to put this plan Into practice occurred
when the city of Rome began to build large blocks of
low-rent flats In slum dLstricts, each provided with a Casa
dei bambini (a kind of crèche), and Maria Montessori was
asked to organize and manage these. This was in 1906.
In these nursery schools the children were given the Mon¬
tessori teaching materials to stimulate their sense of
touch, hearing and observation; and most important of
all, they had teachers who, though always on the watch,
left them free to behave just as they wished.
And to the amazement of these teachers and of Mon¬
tessori herself this led to the gradual emergence of a
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
17

MARIA MONTESSORI (Cont'd)
A search for
peace and
a better world
18
new type of child, who could concentrate on one occupa¬
tion for a long time, who was thoughtful, pursuing its
psychological development and building up its own per¬
sonality in this quiet and peacefully experimental atmo¬
sphere; who was placid and naturally polite a completely
unaggressive child.
Was it her discovery of the unaggressive child that led
Montessori to the conclusion that man was really Intended
for work and peace, not for battle and destruction? Or
was it her wish to guide mankind along the paths of peace
that prompted her search for the methods and surround¬
ings which would produce peaceful men? We shall never
know; but from this time on she devoted herself mainly
to the search for "the better man" who is to be found in
every child that comes Into the world.
She noted at this period that "The child's unsatisfied
demands leave their mark on the grown man in the form
of a conflict, a perpetual struggle that awaits man at birth
and continues throughout his development the conflict
between the adult and the child, between the strong and
the weak, and one might even add, between the blind and
the sighted. The adult gets the better of the child, with
the result that the grown man always carries the scars of
these battles; something has been destroyed In him, and
the price of his victory has been a painful adjustment."
And it grieved her deeply to realize that during the process
"the finest psychic qualities of the individual are lost for¬
ever."
When Maria Montessori gave her first public
lecture on the theme of education for peace
in 1932, at Nice, at a Congress of the International Bureau
of Education she was almost dismayed by her realization
of the novelty of this idea. Rather than make a frontal
attack on the subject, she therefore chose an imaginative,
persuasive approach.
She went back through history some twenty centuries
and spoke at some length on the mysteriously recurring
plague which took, over the years, a toll of millions and
millions of lives. This had continued until men of learn¬
ing, scrutinizing the invisible universe, discovered the
microbe that was responsible for the scourge, and halted
its reproductive process by drawing up certain vital rules
of hygiene and Inducing society to adopt them. As a
result, modern man is physically healthier than his
ancestors.
Having thus built up a proper basis for comparisons,
Maria Montessori carried her argument further: "War Is
like plague," she said, "and it leaves us bewildered. But
just as a new physical constitution was needed to defeat
plague, so we need a new spiritual constitution to help
us put an end to war.
"A child is required to be obedient, both at home and
at school; as this demand for obedience Is not based on
any Inner conviction, and makes no appeal to reason or
justice, it merely produces men who are submissive to
blind forces. The form of punishment, so frequent in
schools, which consists in holding up the offender to
public obloquy putting him, as it were, in the pillory
gives children a senseless, irrational fear of public opinion,
even when that opinion is manifestly unjust and mistaken.
"%r ifm
. ° --¡3 1
GEOGRAPHY IS FUN for
the younger children in this
school in Pueblos, Colorado,
U.S.A., when it can be learn¬
ed while playing games
on a giant map painted on
the school playground. Les¬
son-games on this 35-foot-
wide map of the U.S.A. are a
feature of the programme.
Unesco - Sholomovitch
USIS
CONT'D ON PAGE 20

NURSERY SCHOOL
HOUSEKEEPERS
Children in this Paris
nursery school learn
how to wash the baby,
a 6-lb. doll that "eats"
and sleeps. The 300
three - to - six - year - olds
in this school receive
housekeeping and child-
care lessons as part of
training for adult life.
One of the principles on
which Maria Montes¬
sori based her system of
teaching was that chil¬
dren should be shown
how to do such practical
things as sweeping,
cleaning and washing.
YOUNG SCULP¬
TORS, pondering over
their figures of men and
animals, belong to the
children's art school in
Komsomolsk on the Ri¬
ver Amur, a city founded
32 years ago and now
one of the most impor¬
tant industrial centres
of the Soviet Far East.
19
Unesco - Giselle Freund

MARIA MONTESSORI (Cont'd)
In the steps of Jean-Jacques Rousseau
"Adjustment to these circumstances, and to many
others of a similar nature, which help to create a per¬
manent inferiority complex, breeds and encourages a
spirit of devotion, almost of Idolatry, directed towards the
'leaders', the authorities who, for such repressed per¬
sonalities, are a reincarnation of parents and teachers
the figures the child was taught to regard as perfect and
Infallible. In this Way, discipline becomes almost a form
of slavery."
But, declared Maria Montessori, there was another way
In which schools could be regarded as the breeding-ground
of war, inasmuch as Instead of developing the child's
sociability, they discouraged it. Five years later she
stressed this point again: "Education in its present form
encourages the child's sense of isolation and his pursuit
of his own interests," she said. "Children are taught not to
help one another, not to prompt those who do not know
something, to think of nothing but their own advancement,
to aim solely at winning prizes in competition with their
companions. And these pathetic egotists, mentally wearied
as experimental psychology reveals them to be, then go
out Into the world, where they live side by side like grains
of sand In the desert every one cut off from his neigh¬
bour, and all sterile. If a gale arises, this human dust,
with no spiritual essence to give it life, will be swept away
In a death-dealing whirlwind."
The death-dealing whirlwind was just appearing on the
horizon; for this was in 1937.
At the Vlth International Montessori Congress, at
Copenhagen, the founder declared that the words
"Educate for Peace" should henceforth ring out like a
command. As she spoke there was a new note of distress
in her voice. At the opening meeting she praised Den¬
mark, "great and generous in offering hospitality to world
peace," and expressed her satisfaction that Belgium,
Catalonia, Chile, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, France, Greece,
Haiti, Latvia, Mexico, Rumania, the U.S.S.R., the Swiss
Canton of Ticino and the United States had responded
to her invitation by sending official representatives to the
Congress. She spoke of education for peace, of peaceful
children, of peace as the true destiny of mankind,
throughout that week in August, from the first meeting of
the Congress to the last.
The Second World War confirmed her belief that her
methods should be applied as widely as possible. As soon
as it was over she began again to address teachers in her
assured way, putting her ideas to them clearly and con¬
vincingly.
And so she worked on, tirelessly, to the age of 81.
It might well be asked: "What was so original about
Maria Montessorl's ideas?" She undoubtedly follows in
the great tradition of Rousseau, who declared that the
child is basically good, but is spoilt by society. But
whereas in Rousseau this belief sprang from poetical
intuition, in her it was the outcome of a precise, scientific
study of the hundreds of young children she had the
opportunity to observe.
It is true that while she was engaged in research and
experiment other investigators in different parts of the
world were working on the same lines and reaching simi¬
lar conclusions. But she alone was guided by this ardent
vision of mankind transformed ; and she alone pointed out
that nothing but an educational system which, instead of
crushing the child, fostered his psychical energies, could
produce men with the moral qualities required to control
the tremendous scientific advances they themselves had
brought about.
Unesco-Tamagawa Gakuen, Tokyo
20
AS A TEAM. Smil¬
ing group of young¬
sters from a Tokyo
school set off for a
day of outdoor acti¬
vities of the kind
advocated by Maria
Montessori as a po¬
sitive means of de¬
veloping the child's
sociability. "Edu¬
cation", she said,
"too often encou¬
rages the child's
sense of isolation
and also his pursuit
of his own interests. "
