THE BATTLE OF TUNISIA
I n Tunis, one morning In January 1959 an all-
I out war was declared on tuberculosis. It all
started when the authorities of the small town of Ksar
Ellal, near Sousse, found that the number of sick was
increasing daily among the 10,000 inhabitants of the com¬
mune, most of whom were weavers.
An SOS went out by letter and telegram to the Govern¬
ment Public Health Office. A health team was sent
to investigate.
When the X-ray vans arrived in Ksar Ellal they were
besieged. In record time 5,000 people were examined.
The results were alarming: a tuberculosis prevalence of
8%, or more than ten times present-day figures in Europe.
In some of the weavers' families at Ksar Ellal, tubercu¬
losis had existed for generations. Not through heredity,
of course, but simply because it was inevitable in such
overcrowded living conditions and dusty working en¬
vironment that sick parents should pass the disease on
to healthy children in their daily contacts. And if tuber
culosis prevalence was 8% at Ksar Ellal, what, the Health
Office wondered, would it be elsewhere?
With the aid of technical advisers from WHO, it was
decided to launch a nation-wide campaign against tuber¬
culosis. The Government offered completely free treat¬
ment to all tuberculosis sufferers, and earmarked a special
budget of 95,000 dinars (£80,000) for the campaign. The
Governorate of Sousse (460,000 people) was chosen as the
starting place because it had the next largest population
to Tunis itself.
Wherever they went, the teams worked according to
three basic principles: case-finding, supervised treatment,
and protection through BCG vaccination. Lorries laden
with X-ray equipment set out along the dusty roads,
while the organizers scoured the countryside in small cars.
The teams were warmly welcomed everywhere. In the
Governorate of Sousse alone, almost 95% of the popula-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

TUBERCULOSIS (Cont'd)
Tunisia's health authorities began their anti-tuberculosis campaign in the province of Sousse
most heavily populated area after Tunis itself. The campaign will move south to^ cover
areas around Kairoun and Gafsa, near where this photo was taken during the annual "sheep
festival " in April. Here, villagers watch local rider performing a traditional mounted "fantasia".
Passport to health
tlon turned out. There was no need for posters. But to
ensure full coverage, it was decided to carry out a census
by family. This took up precious time, but only when it
was completed could the real work begin. Once the
administrative controls had been carried out, the pace
quickened.
Here, as throughout this hard-fought campaign, vacci¬
nators and caseflnders worked side by side. Radiological
examinations for everyone over five years of age. Next,
please! A tuberculin test was administered to all the
under- twenties. Next, please! Those who had been
given the test came back three days later BCG vaccina¬
tion for the negative reactors. For all suspects there were
medical examinations followed by INH (isoniazid)
treatment for the mild cases, and hospital for the more
serious ones. When everyone had been examined in the
village or district, the diagnostic teams packed up and
went off to start the same work elsewhere, returning
three months later to check up on the sick.
The work went on without a break; the teams relayed
each other from sunrise to sunset. All sorts of problems
arose. Some were relatively simple like the transport of
equipment . and its maintenance. Hermetically sealed
thermos containers of wood, cork, and zinc were rigged
up on the spot to protect tuberculin and BCG which
quickly deteriorate under the blazing sun. Trained
technicians were needed to maintain and repair the 11 X-
ray microphotography machines and the generators.
A radiological engineer sent by WHO to co-ordinate this
work has already trained 13 Tunisian operators. Others
now being trained will shortly form the nucleus of a
central technical service being set up by the Tunisian
Government.
To carry out their ambitious programme, the Tunisian
teams have had to adapt themselves to the most unexpected
situations. In Moknine and Kalas Kebira towns deeply
attached to religious traditions radiophotography had to
be carried out at night, sometimes until two in the morn¬
ing, because women were not permitted out of doors
before sunset. During Ramadan, worried heads of
families were afraid that the tuberculin-test injection
might break the fast, and the religious authorities had to
be brought in to convince them that it is permissible.
Elsewhere, the census ran up against other unforeseen
difficulties. At Gabes, with its 400,000 palm trees, the
oasis encircles the town in a vast pincer-movement. There
it was found that four sheikdoms overlapped. After end¬
less working sessions the exact boundaries were defined,
thus permitting a census of the inhabitants, which was
carried out street by street in the town, and hut by hut in
the oasis. The absence of surnames did not make matters
any easier when making sure that everyone, without
exception, was called for examination, but that no one
was called twice.
But problems of case-finding were nothing compared to
those of treatment. One difficulty has been the distances
to be covered. The assistants sanitaires ("health assis¬
tants") travel by car from sheikdom to sheikdom,
distributing INH tablets, checking the progress of treat¬
ment, encouraging those who seem to be faltering.

Health workers measure mothers and
children (right) and take identity
photos (below) for records and the
eventual issue of a family health card.
The operation was carried out jointly
by the Tunisian Health Ministry and
UNICEF. Since 1959, BCG vacci¬
nation against tuberculosis has been
compulsory for all Tunisians under 20,
and children are not allowed in school
unless they have been vaccinated.
Photos © Paul Almasy. Paris
At regular intervals the population Is asked to gather at
control centres. The crowd thronging round the doors is
sometimes too large to handle easily. At first there may
be about 400 people waiting, but soon these may increase
to 600, 700, or even 1,000. Then the health team has to
organize and process them as best it can.
To conquer tuberculosis in Tunisia also means to build
new houses. Parents, children, uncles, aunts, and grand¬
parents are frequently crowded into a living-space of 15
square metres. Even then the palm-covered huts of the
farm labourers at the Gabes oasis are certainly preferable
to thé caves of Old Matmatta, 15 km to the south. Here
the steppe country is broken up into fantastic canyons;
the soil grows progressively stonier and the water scarcer.
But the people who are living In holes in the mountain
will soon be evacuated. They will be resettled some
15,000 or 20,000 of themIn the town of New Matmatta,
which has been specially built for them near a dam In the
plain, 10 km away. New Matmatta has something even
better than new houses a fountain with running water all
day long. Here water is vital. When you turn your back
on Gabes, the desert is quite near, just at the end of the
road, its presence indicated by the spectacular sunsets.
The campaign organizers are constantly haunted by
this problem: how can someone who earns a bare living
be ' expected to go to hospital when it means leaving his
family in even more tragic poverty ? If he Is a farm
labourer he may earn 6 dinars a month, plus 2 kilos of
semolina 6 dinars a month when a loaf costs 50 mllllmes,
a kilo of fish 400 mllllmes, and meat is 600 or 700 mllllmes
a kilo (about one-tenth of his monthly Income).
An effort Is being made to solve this problem. Special
committees have been formed to co-ordinate the work and
share out the resources. All the needy are aided, all
patients with active tuberculosis who earn less than 180
dinars (£150) a year receive a monthly ration of flour,
corn, maize, millet, powdered mille, beans, and cheese a
total of 16 kilos per patient per month, plus 8 kilos for
each dependent child.
Thus, between July and September 1963, 336 tons of food
were distributed to tuberculosis patients and their chil¬
dren. Today these food supplies serve as an Incentive for
the patients, for if it Is found that they are not following
the prescribed treatment regularly, the extra rations are
cut off.
Short-term hospitalization can have a dual effect. The
patient Is encouraged in healthy habits and he gains In
self-respect. He undergoes a sort of transformation. He
will also have become accustomed to taking his INH
tablets at a set time. For these patients the hospital Is
a kind of school. The normal period of hospitalization
is two months, but with difficult cases It is extended, the
date of discharge being postponed as long as possible.
Tunisia is the only North African country without a
sanatorium. As for the hospitals, the Tunisians have
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE


TUBERCULOSIS (Cont'd)
Door-to-door
medical check-up
made an enormous effort, providing 1,500 new beds at
1,000 dinars a bed over the last 15 years. As a result, the
country's hospitals now have some 2,300 beds reserved for
these patients.
The first Tunisian medical faculty has just opened its
doors. It Is anticipated that it will be able to admit 70
students a year, most of them on State scholarships. That
there is an urgent need for trained personnel is confirmed
by the results of the anti-tuberculosis campaign in the
Sousse Governorate.
At the time of the census, there was a population of
460,395. Of these, 419,661 were examined, and 341,630 X-
rayed. The number of cases detected was 22,812, includ¬
ing 10,700 active cases (this means a tuberculosis preva¬
lence of 2.6 per cent.). Of these cases 8,800 have now
been "stabilized" or cured. But how many new cases
have occurred since? How many will occur In future and
need treatment?
A pilot experiment directed by a joint WHO Tunisian
Government commission preceded the antituberculosis
campaign. Its object was to study the use of drugs to
protect currently healthy persons from tuberculosis. The
test zone was the Djebel Lahmar, a community on the
outskirts of Tunis. Here some 25,000 people live in one-
storey mud dwellings, usually with five or six rooms group¬
ed round a courtyard, and one family to each room. The
windows are small, ventilation is poor, and sanitary
facilities are rudimentary.
he Inhabitants are nevertheless concerned
about their health, and responded willingly
when the Sheik asked all of them, except the under-twos
and those already vaccinated with BCG, to take part In
this study of the prophylactic value of INH.
The procedure was the same as in the antituberculosis
campaign. A house-to-house census was carried out. As
there was no civil registration, serial numbers were paint¬
ed on the walls.. Then the population (24,505 persons,
according to the census) was divided into two groups.
Those in the first group were given INH tablets, while
those in the second group served as controls. (Naturally
actual tuberculosis sufferers in both groups were given
curative treatment.)
The people were required to take the INH tablets
regularly for one year. All were supervised at regular
Intervals by health assistants. However, in a surprise
check-up, it was found that four-fifths of those examined
had not taken their medicine on that particular day.
To improve the supervision of non-hospitalized patients,
the medical assistants are now carrying out more of
these surprise check-ups, visiting a number of houses each
day. It may thus be possible to prevent patients from
stopping the treatment because they cannot be bothered
to make the effort. Both Tunisian experts and WHO
advisers consider that the main hope lies in continuity
of action. After the campaign in Sousse, it will be the
turn of Kairouan, and Gabes. But a campaign is a
transitory thing and some provision must be made for
the years to come.
There is another way the protection of the young.
This has Government support: a law passed in 1959 made
BCG vaccination compulsory for everyone under 20 with
a negative tuberculin test, and its application in progress¬
ing with the development of the campaign. Mothers now
know that they cannot send their children to school unless
their Family Health Card shows that they have been
vaccinated. Soon, throughout Tunisia, this little docu¬
ment will be a veritable "passport to health."
