The photos shown here may seem
to many adults as typical of the attire
of the juvenile delinquent. Formidable
as it may be with its trappings of
chains, horseshoes, cowboy boots,
photos of "pop" singers, kerchiefs
knotted above the knee, etc.to
the psychologist and youth guidance
specialists such eccentricities are not
necessarily signs of delinquent inten¬
tions. The specialists admit, however,
that gangs, of boys (and even girls)
do form a major element in the over¬
all pattern of juvenile delinquency.
Photos © Comet, Zurich

IS THERE A SOLUTION
FOR DELINQUENCY?
by William C. Kvaraceus
(elinquent behaviour is not a twenty- four hour
malady that attacks a child like some virus
disease. Since a child does not become delinquent
overnight but as the result of a long and Intricate series
of reactions, any realistic plan to help that child will not
be easy to formulate. Any person, or any community,
hoping to change a specific delinquency problem must
accept the fact that It is a long process, often one of
discouragement and delay. It is expensive In terms of
money, time and effort. It need hardly be pointed out,
however, that the results of delinquency are twice as
costly.
What emerges clearly from many studies, reports and
surveys is that delinquent behaviour must be the concern
of the entire community, not just dismissed as a problem
to be handled by local schools, churches, police courts or
professional agencies.
Unfortunately even the most honest and earnest
attempts to curtail delinquency may fail without two
essentials: funds and facts. Any operation should have
as its .foundation a validated theoretical frame of refe¬
rence about the causes of delinquency. The community
should have available facts on the local youth situation
and there must be individual facts on the individual child
who shows a tendency towards delinquency or who has
already broken the law.
Such measures as curfews, restricting movie attendance
or closing a dance-hall, are irrelevant to the real problem
and, for the most part, accomplish little.
We know that there are many forces which decisively
affect the growth, the development and the ultimate
behaviour of the child. Among these are the home, the
school, the church and church organizations, health and
welfare groups and recreation organizations for young
people.
One of the most crucial forces, If we consider simply
the number of years during which it exerts an Influence
over the child, is the school. The school cannot solve the
problem of delinquency alone or even attempt to prevent
It single-handedly. However, Its role should always be
considered as a vital part of a well-planned community
programme.
Together with the home, the school provides the basic
learning experience for all children. Admittedly the
school cannot ever completely compensate for the lack of
a decent home or wise and loving parents. But it can
CONT'D ON NIEXT PAGE
29

WORLD SIDE STORY (Cont'd)
When the school 'fails' the child
do much to make the child aware of his own basic values
and teach him how to develop them.
This is precisely what does not happen in the case of
the Juvenile delinquent. The records of many schools
show with monotous regularity that these youngsters
establish habits of failure and inferiority in their school
years. Therefore, the question that must concern the
community and the school why do children fall? Is not
easy to answer. The reasons for a child's failure vary
with each pupil. The teacher often faces real limitations
in trying to discover them. He is not always able to visit
the child's home, he Is not a psychologist, a health spe¬
cialist or a case worker.
Many educators believe that far too many schools adhere
too rigidly to a curriculum that is not appropriate for nor
of value to every pupil. After all, they point out, good
schools begin with youngsters who are already quite
different from each other and enable each to develop
according to his talents. The school programme which
provides only a narrow, one-track academic curriculum
that squeezes out overyone but the students aiming for
higher education Is denying equal opportunity to all
youngsters by such an exclusive focus on traditional
academic objectives and prestige.
I
30
F we agree that the child who might become a
good mechanic Is not to be considered inferior
to the child with an Interest in medicine then we must
also acknowledge that a single school should accommodate
and benefit both of them. Pouring all students into a
single academic mould causes many children who might be
vulnerable to delinquency to come a good deal closer to it.
The authorities and the community should consider setting
up different types of school experiences for children who
cannot benefit by a standard academic education or for
those children who, for different reasons, cannot hold
their own in the regular classroom.
In trying to relate the problems of delinquents with
their problems at school, some educators have asserted
that an Inability to read is frequently a strong factor in
their failure. Certainly the child who cannot read ade¬
quately will only be confronted with such a rapid
succession of tensions and frustrations in any classroom
that It is not surprising if school becomes a place to be
feared or despised. Vandalism of school property is a
protest; escape is\the only solution. Such a pupil may
resort to truancy or drop out when he reaches the legal
age.
If the school curriculum is a realistic one, there will
be remedial help available, but first the child must want
to improve. If a pupil has been humiliated too often, he
may never make the necessary effort. The school that
expels a child, or fails him year after year, is more or
less urging that student to get out when he is least
prepared to build his own life. If the school must reject
a pupil, then every effort should be made to find what
other help can be offered to that child by other commu¬
nity agencies and organizations.
But it must be pointed out that in many cities of the
world the problem of juvenile delinquency and the role
of the school is eclipsed by more urgent considerations.
It is not always a question of improving schools for some
countries, but of creating them. There is a bitter humour
in the suggestion that a teacher should do something
about a child's emotional problems when many teachers
In Asia and Africa face a classroom each morning
knowing that some children are sick and ill-fed.
It Is sufficiently tragic that each year more than three
million children are deprived of the right to education
but It is no less depressing to learn that many schools fail
to make their pupils feel that education Is a personal and
Interesting experience. These schools work hard but the
return from their work, if not the quality, is Inadequate.
While there are many children of the world who wish for
education, it can hardly be denied that there Is also an
Impressive number who want to escape It. And a high
During a day of violence
and vandalism at the
English seaside town of
Margate earlier this year
police arrested about 40
teenagers, members of rival
juvenile gangs from London
who style themselves the
" Mods " (short - haired,
suede-booted and jacketed)
and the "Rockers" (who
wear black leather jackets
and fringed cowboy hats).
Here, "Mods" chase a
group of "Rockers" across
the sands. Holiday makers,
watching the scene, were
obliged to dodge salvos
of milk bottles and broken
legs from deck chairs as the
rival gangs fought a series
of battles, broke shop win¬
dows and ransacked cafes.
proportion of these children who dread school become
involved in some form of delinquency.
Any school will make its maximum contribution to delin¬
quency prevention and control by becoming a better
school. It cannot achieve this alone. Ideally the school
should have some link with the health, welfare and
recreation agencies that exist In a community. For even
if a teacher is aware that a child is 111 or needs glasses,
she cannot provide medicine and a pair of glasses if the
family fails to do so. If a teacher is aware that a child
is disturbed or damaged by emotional problems, she can
only recommed a source of help. If a youngster has no
place to go and nothing to do except loiter on a street
corner, without outside help the most concerned and
conscientious teacher cannot create a better world for
him after he leaves the class.
I elinquents, for a variety of reasons, frequently
do not have an accepting or reassuring re¬
lationship with their parents. They can rarely discuss
any problems with an older member of the household.
They are not encouraged to share their own lives or
emotions with their families and this, in itself, is a
damaging restriction for a child. Any education pro¬
gramme or any counselling that the community makes
available to parents, providing it is wisely presented, can
often be a turning point. .
Some city communities have established neighbourhood
centres where Informal educational activities are conduct¬
ed. These activities include parent discussion groups.
Through these neighbourhood centres, people of all back¬
grounds who have a natural ability for different kinds of
leadership can be found and involved in committee and
recreational work. The basic premise of any education
programme is that citizens should be educated to help
themselves.
Little scientific data exists to show exactly what preven¬
tive procedures have been effective. If we think of
prevention as referring both to the forestalling of delin¬
quent behaviour and also to the reduction In Its frequency
and seriousness, then there are only meagre signals to

A
*
guide us in certain directions. The very concept of delin¬
quency prevention is still a vague, experimental one.
As in the case of prevention, the control and the. reha¬
bilitation of a juvenile delinquent often begins with the
community. In highly industrialized countries, many
communities have a number of services established for
the benefit of all children and all youth.
These existing facilities are rarely the result of any prior
overall community planning and forethought. All too
often, they operate as separate little islands weakening
their value by the very distances between them. It is one
of the most urgent responsibilities of any community
programme that attempts to prevent, let alone control,
delinquency to know what these resources are, how they
function, how they can be improved if necessary and in
what manner they can most efficiently work together.
It is defeating, for example, for a social caseworker to
try to help a delinquent when his teacher, the policeman
on the corner and the people in the neighbourhood coun¬
teract her efforts, when the poverty of the family com¬
pounds the problem, and when she cannot procure for the
child the treatment he many need. There should be a
continuity and a high degree of co-ordination among the
services offered by a community, a close co-operation
between private and government agencies if their existence
is to make sense. No hope exists for the delinquent unless
guidance personnel, psychologists, psychiatrists and
psychiatric social workers are easily and quickly accessible
to the individual child through the school and the
community.
Depending on the nature of the offence, a delinquent
often is put in custody of a detention centre until his
hearing comes up in court. This may be days or weeks.
Many detention centres begin the punishment, for they
resemble gaols and the "detained" are given an all too
clear understanding of prison life. Other juvenile delin¬
quents throughout the world are even confined in a local
gaol and their cases are reviewed In the same courtroom
where criminals stand and are sentenced.
The exceptionally lucky delinquent may be referred to
a court which has a number of services at its disposal: a
(O Associated Press
decent and well-staffed detention centre, clinical resources
for child study, a highly-qualified professional probation
staff and an effective liaison with other child welfare
agencies. But It is a question of contrasts. Vast differen¬
ces exist not only between nations but often there are
extreme variations between courts In the same country
or province.
The establishment of special Juvenile courts with
trained judges and special legislation and practices Is
encouraging; many experiences and research studies have
proved the value of handling the Juvenile delinquent in
special courts and special institutions.
In the last fifty years probation and juvenile courts have
spread to many European countries, and have come to
rank among the most Important measures of treatment
and rehabilitation of the Juvenile delinquent. Probation
has been defined as "a method of dealing with specially
selected offenders ... it consists of the conditional suspen¬
sion of punishment while the offender Is placed under
personal supervision and is given individual guidance and
treatment."
^ometimes, possible methods of prevention,
control and even rehabilitation tend to overlap.
Police chiefs have often been heard to protest that many
youth workers act and talk as though the police had no
duties or responsibilities except to Juveniles. And yet the
importance of the police In a community with delinquency
can hardly be overstated since they often represent the
first official contact between the young offender and the
law.
The policeman or juvenile officer is the one who must
frequently decide whether to let the child off with a
reprimand or to refer him to a juvenile court or some
other agency set up to deal with such children. The
police also supervise the areas where youth gather to play
public dance-halls, movie houses, public parks, street
corners. How much the policeman understands about
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
31

WORLD SIDE STORY (Cont'd)
Success for the local police
© Magnum-Wayne Miller
In many places where special juven¬
ile courts have been set up to deal
with the juvenile delinquent, with
trained judges and auxiliary services
a decent and well staffed detention
centre, clinical resources for child
study, a highly-qualified probation
staff and an effective liaison with
other child welfare agencies en¬
couraging results have been obtained.
delinquency can clearly be measured in his attitude
towards them, which should be neither too vengeful nor,
of course, too indifferent.
In several countries the evolution of the work of the
police has given rise to more definite forms of action of
a preventive nature. In Denmark, the Copenhagen police
run four leisure-time clubs for boys in the 10 to 16 age
group who come from poor quarters of the city and who
have no adequate supervision in their homes. The police
have also organized and maintained a club for young
people over 18 years of age. All these clubs are devoted
to sports and gymnastics.
In Liverpool, England, a city police programme known
as the Liverpool City Police Juvenile Liaison Scheme has
been developed since 1949. Its object is to deal with
youngsters under 17 years of age who manifest some
behaviour disorders or who have already committed petty
offences. The children are referred to the Juvenile Liai¬
son Officer through normal police channels. The liaison
officer visits the child and parents often. He tries to
advise and assists them in various ways.
What is most significant about the Liverpool plan Is that
it improves the relations between the police and the
public in general. Police officers are presented not merely
as awe-inspiring law-enforcing agents, but in the
unexpected role of a protector of children and adviser to
parents. It Is claimed that this special operation was a
contributing factor in diminishing the figures of juvenile
delinquency in Liverpool, a city with the unhappy distinc¬
tion of once having the highest delinquency rate in
England.
A
32
Nother police training programme, that con¬
centrates not only on deterring delinquency
but coping with it and helping the delinquent personally,
is provided by the Delinquency Control Institute at the
University of Southern California, United States of
America. The training programme lasts twelve weeks and
the course provides the officers with an excellent
background for work with children in their own
community. They return to their jobs with an Increased
ability to understand the reasons behind delinquent
behaviour.
In highly developed countries, the community that
attempts to cope with the individual problems of the
delinquent without having the resources of a child gui¬
dance clinic close at hand places some severe, perhaps
Insuperable, limitations on its programmes. The work of
the child guidance clinic is related to the study, diagnosis
and treatment of troubled children.
All case studies involve an elaborate inquiry into the
home and family of the delinquent but through the case
study approach it is hoped to uncover the numerous
factors which relate significantly to misbehaviour and
which can finally be synthetized and analysed within a
scientifically supported frame of reference.
To sum up: where there is a strong will to help the
delinquent and when this is tied firmly to a sound know¬
ledge of the meaning and implications of the delinquent
act, there will emerge a promising pattern for delinquency
control and prevention.
One of the most obvious reasons for our concern with
Juvenile delinquency is the fear of continued adult crime.
It has been pointed out in one country that a very large
number of men in prison began their criminal careers
before they were thirteen years of age.
Therefore, we must look in two directions at the same
time: Immediate action and help for today's delinquents
and the often neglected long road of research to give us
validated methods for detecting and helping minors whose
behaviour may lead to delinquency. At the same time we
need to learn why certain children bend in the direction
of delinquent behaviour. -
Such research might seem to exclude the layman. It
will be done by professionals and be interpreted by pro¬
fessionals. But this need not discourage any person from
doing his own type of research through reading. Too
often one's knowledge of delinquency is confined to what
one reads hastily in the newspapers or sees in the films
where a delinquent often appears as the stereotyped
villain in a second-rate plot.
Our own judgement about his crime Is sometimes
inflamed by a dramatic denunciation in the Press. But
the delinquent needs neither our indignation nor our
sentimentality. He needs, most of all, to achieve what so
many adults have never attained: the knowledge of what
he is and what, with help, he could become.
