THE OF KIZHY
An open-air museum of architectural monuments in wood has been
set up at Kizhy on an island of Lake Onega in northern U.S.S.R. As its
centrepiece it has the famous ensemble shown below: the 22 cupola
Church of the Transfiguration (right) built in 1714 (Peter the Great is said
to have drawn up its plans); the 10-cupola Church of the Intercession
built in 1764 (left) and between them a belfry built in 1874. The Church
of the Transfiguration is solid timberwork and does not contain a single
nail (detail in photo right). Restoration of this church, which was seriously
damaged during the Second World War, was completed last year.
Photos c A.P.N.

THE NEW SCIENCE
OF ART CONSERVATION
by Harold J. Plenderleith
I T is not easy to explain in simple terms what
is meant by the conservation of a monument.
Broadly, a monument may be made of any material and
it may be of any size, but a simple generally accepted
classification recognises two main types, the fixed object
and the portable object.
The temple, the statue and the totem pole are examples
that have to withstand the action of wind and rain, heat and
cold. Old ships such as the Vasa (raised from the sea bed
in Stockholm harbour; see "Unesco Courier," July-August
1960) or the Victory (preserved at Portsmouth, England),
provide special problems concerned with the control of
humidity, prevention from shrinkage and protection from
insect attack. Mural paintings, on the other hand, are
normally sheltered from extremes of temperature, but may
be invaded by capillary moisture and attacked by mould.
The portable objects within the category of monuments
are legion, comprising bygones as diverse as swords and
accoutrements, musical instruments, vestments and incuna-
bulae, the contents, in fact, of our museums, picture galler¬
ies, libraries and archives. A new science has developed
in the conservation of all these things. We are emerging
from the dark ages when medicine men applied secret
(1) For further reading, see "Archaeology and the Microscope", by L. Bieck;
London. Lutterworth Press. 1963.
nostrums and a gullible public was content to shirk its
responsibility and leave its priceless cultural heritage in
the hands of the soi-disant restorer.
The name "restorer" for the want of a better one, still
clings, but the connotation has changed beyond recogni¬
tion, for the modern practitioner is ideally a highly skilled
technician with basic training in physics and chemistry and
biology. He is organized, probably a member of the pro¬
fessional association, the International Institute for Conser¬
vation. He preserves a complete documentation of all
his work, publishes his results and discusses them in confe¬
rences held at regular intervals by the International Council
of Museums not only with his fellow restorers, but with
museum scientists and historians of art. Science in our
generation is at last working in the service of monuments
and of museums in no spirit of arrogance, but in full
co-operation with the art critic and the archaeologist (1).
It is tempting to digress and discuss the cause of this
awakening, but one need only consider the great improve¬
ments in the sensitivity of scientific equipment and the end¬
less variety of modern synthetic materials waiting to be
exploited in a knowlegeable way, in order to realize that
today, more than ever before, science, rightly applied, can
be the handmaid of the arts.
Synthetic materials have been developed to such an
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

ART CONSERVATION (Cont'd)
Art treasures on
the operating table
extent that they no longer need claim to be substitutes for
natural products, for they often provide improved pro¬
perties that are novel and of great utility. Modern synthetic
materials include the detergents and the wetting agents and
the waxes that are actually soluble in water, and very
useful as leather dressings, synthetic fibres, synthetic adhe-
sives and the very interesting compound called "soluble
nylon" that can be used as an impregnating medium on
tempera painting for consolidating a powdery surface
without imparting any residual shine. It can also be used
to consolidate pottery from salty deserts whilst the salts
are being washed from it and is readily removed afterwards
if desired.
It is now often possible by soft X-rays to record through
a painting the original crayon sketch made by the artist
on his canvas. Only a few years ago this would have been
regarded as miraculous. It is also possible to remove
a fresco from the wall and leave behind the mural painter's
original sinopia drawing, thus exposing for the art critic
a stimulating new world of interest.
In Moscow, certain painted icons have been found to be
built up in a series of strata on one and the same wooden
panel, and a special technique has been evolved whereby
it is possible to recover the lower and older ones without
losing those above. Pictures can be transferred from
worm-eaten panels and mounted on sound ones, and in
other cases rotting canvases are replaced by new ones.
In fact, the most delicate material and most complex struc¬
tures can be saved by the skill of the modern restorer.
I:N the field of archaeology, the mechanism of
I metallic corrosion, a universal cause of
deterioration, is now well understood and means have
been devised to remove it or, at option, to arrest its
advance without necessarily destroying the aesthetic
character of the piece. There is hope, therefore, that
many of the world's monumental treasures that are
threatened by exposure to atmospheres polluted by indus¬
trial fumes may be saved objects universally acclaimed
such as the splendid gilt bronze horses of St Marks,
Venice, or the lion and griffon of Perugia whereas,
in the absence of these recent advances in the service
of conservation, their years were numbered. The threat
will remain, however, as long as we are content to breathe
air that is polluted with sulphur compounds. The cumula¬
tion action on metals is as devastating as it is on the
human subjectl
. An altogether new field has been opened up by the phy¬
sicist in the application of his methods, of non-destructive
testing, and these have already made notable contributions
to the conservation of monuments. An example that Im¬
mediately comes to mind of modern science in action is
the discovery and excavation of an Etruscan tomb.
First the scientist applies his stethoscope to mother
earth. The detection equipment of the Lerici Foundation
in Italy, famous for its discoveries of Etruscan tombs (see
"Unesco Courier," Feb. 1957) can be compared with a ste¬
thoscope in sensitivity. When the scientist detects a discon¬
tinuity beneath the surface he can pin-point the centre
of a subterranean chamber and fix his instruments with
such care that on drilling vertically and inserting a special
tubular periscope with appropriate lighting, he has a
complete view of the interior. All that has been done to
make this possible is to drill a little hole in the ground
10 cm. in diameter.
That, however, is no more than the beginning. He has
located the tomb. He now proceeds to insert a small
CONT'D ON PAGE 10
An injection
for immortality
A wooden statue, its hands
clasped in prayer, is given
an injection against a sick¬
ness that would otherwise
have reduced it to powder.
Something like 80 % of
works of art in wood are
infested by insects which
thrive on a diet of dry, old
wood rich in starches and
sugar. They live and proli¬
ferate in the wood, boring
out innumerable tunnels in
the process. Today special
chemicals are injected
which seep throughout the
infested object, kill the
invader insects and prevent
reinf estation. Objects
which have been seriously
weakened by wood-boring
insects can be consolidated
by deep injections of plastic
solutions or emulsions.
Sarcophagi from Egypt and,
thousands of sculptures in
all parts of the world have
been cured by these tech¬
niques, as have celebrated
"invalids" such as the mag¬
nificent woodwork in
Westminster Abbey, Lon¬
don and the famed sculp¬
tures in the opera house of
the Château of Versailles.
© Solvay, Paris

*!*âr
m ">*-* i
SI-
9

ART CONSERVATION (Cont'd)
Detecting the 'heartbeat' of a tomb
camera into the tube and he takes a series of six colour
photographs, rotating the camera through 60° between each.
When these photographs are laid out in orderly succession,
there is a complete record of the paintings that commonly
adorn the walls, of any bas-reliefs and of grave goods, etc.
Here is the monument disclosed for study yet without a
sod being turned. A decision has now to be taken and
an important deduction made. Is the tomb worthy of the
time, care and cost, necessary for its scientific excavation?
If not, it can be sealed and concealed and we are the
richer for the documentation that has already been obtained.
If, however, it is decided to excavate, the photographs
will show how to go about it for they will disclose the
position of the entrance door: the location of the entrance
passage can be deduced, and instead of breaking in
through walls or ceiling, as would have happened in pre¬
vious generations, the excavation can be so conducted as
to avoid all damage by entering the tomb from the side by
its own passage and doorway. But this is not the end. The
monument will be destroyed unless humidities are main¬
tained, at least until the mural paintings can be removed
and conditioned to the drier environment above ground.
We have learnt much from our wartime experience of fire
and pestilence and, not least, that the slow decay of sus¬
ceptible material by exposure to damp can be quite as
destructive as the damage from detonations of high
explosives.
A picture may disappear from a wall eaten up by mould
growths, leaving only a nondescript stain. But even here
science may have the last word. I know of paper bearing
invisible drawings having been nursed into shape and
successfully doctored by chemicals so that the drawings
were actually brought back to life again. Things that
are invisible to the naked eye can be photographically
recorded by using the methods of ultra-violet fluorescence,
and, as is known in every police laboratory, there are
several methods by which it may be possible to recover
and decipher on charred or burnt documents writings or
drawings when the ink seems to have been completely
burnt away.
The Italians are past masters at what might be called
preservation medicine and surgery. This is born of a na¬
tural facility in the studio and laboratory and the untold
wealth of their cultural heritage which demands incessant
attention. For it is not true that a monument having
survived from antiquity, will necessarily go on surviving.
Nature is always in a condition of change and the change
may be either sudden, as when an object is excavated,
or slow and relentless, as when a building is allowed to
fall into neglect.
FIRST come the rains, then growths appear of
moss, lichens or algae, and the mortar is loosen¬
ed. Ivy grows over the ruin, attacks the structure with its
penetrating suckers. Humus is formed, plants root them¬
selves, the level of the surrounding earth rises and capillary
moisture weakens the foundations so that the building
becomes derelict and in this condition it is liable to be used
as an all-too-convenient source of stone for adjacent build¬
ing or agricultural purposes.
How different is the picture when the aids of science are
involved. -The modern architect and chemist knows how
to exclude moisture, prevent or destroy damaging organic
growths without contaminating the stone, introduce a
hidden armature of ferro-concrete, grout the walls with
an approved cement, and, if the foundations are unsatis¬
factory or unstable hydrologically, there are simple means
10 by which consolidation is possible using the methods of
electro-osmosis as applied, for example, in Warsaw by
Cebertowicz to prevent the Church of St. Anna from des
truction due to the movement of the clay slope on which it
rested. The clay was consolidated, the movement was
arrested and a rock-like basis for the structure provided
by the electro-deposition of calcium silicate.
Great advances have been made in methods of condi¬
tioning the air of museums and galleries to give constant
figures of temperature and relative humidity and to remove
dust and noxious contaminents. At least one war-time
repository was constructed in an underground mine where,
beforehand, the dew-point had been continuously exceeded
and mushrooms were farmed commercially! Control meth¬
ods were put into operation with the result that this mine,
though far below the surface of the ground, became the
perfect store room for the most sensitive materials archi¬
ves, textiles, books and even salt-laden Egyptian stele and
other monuments: no single object suffered damage.
BUT major problems remain. How can one hope
to deal with a monument carved in crumbling
laterite exposed in a monsoon climate to alternatives of
fierce heat and torrential rains? We do not know, but we
can do some calculated guess-work which, in the scientific
field, is often the precursor of the pilot-experiment that leads
to an eventual solution. Not long ago waterlogged wood
was considered to be practically beyond redemption. Now,
the position is much brighter, thanks to a concerted attack
by museum scientists working in several countries, e.g. in
Poland, at the pre-Slav village of Biskopin which is gra¬
dually being recovered from its watery grave, on iron-age
settlements in Switzerland and on the frail but interesting
timbers from mines and from wells in the United Kingdom,
Each country has something to contribute. National mu¬
seums take pride in the quality of their conservation work
and friendly exchange of information in all such matters is
a feature of the present generation.
The conservation of monuments is of world importance,
so much so, that an intergovernmental organization exists
for the study of the preservation and restoration of cultural
property, the so-called "Rome Centre" and this serves all
nations with up-to-date information regarding methods and
equipment and materials and helps with the training of
young curators and museum technicians.
Its activities are known in many countries throughout the
world. It has worked in collaboration with Unesco for
the protection of the Buddhist temples of South Korea
from destruction and staining by water and lichen growths,
etc., and on Pakistan's Mohenjo Daro, being seriously
damaged by salt crystallizations. It has also worked on
Indian cave paintings darkened by shellac, on the painted
tholos of Kasanluk in Bulgaria, whose colours were flaking
off in layers, and on the Mayan site of Bonampak in
Mexico, where wonderful frescoes have miraculously sur¬
vived in the heart of the rain forests. Work has also been
done in Morocco, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt and on many Middle
East sites, and on medieval gold crosses in Vienna. Biblical
scrolls have been studied, dissected and made available
to scholars.
Patiently, continuously, this labour of conservation goes
on, a constructive service to preserve for posterity the
monuments of the past that have served through the ages
as a solace and an inspiration to mankind and will continue
to do so in generations to come.
HAROLD J. PLENDERLEITH is director of the International
Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural
Property set up by Unesco in Rome. Before becoming the first
director of the Rome Centre in 1959. he was professor of chemi¬
stry at the Royal Academy of Arts. London, and Keeper of the
Research Laboratory at the British Museum. His best known work
is "The Conservation of Antiquities and Works of Art" (Oxford
University Press. London, Toronto. New York, 1957).
