© Monuments Historiques, Paris


THIEF-PROOFING
OUR ART MUSEUMS
by Richard LeBlanc
4
It was a quiet afternoon. The citizens of Florence strolled
in the streets of their lovely city. And art-lovers flocked to
the Uffizi museum to view the rich collection of Italian
Renaissance paintings. But drama struck that day in one
of the modern art rooms. To the consternation of the
crowd collected around a painting of Morandi, the picture
suddenly fell from the wall with a crash. Upon inspection,
the authorities were dumbfounded to find scrawled on the
back of the canvas: "Thank you. I have always liked
Morandi." And the date of the theft was added. For theft
it was; the painting that had been hanging for weeks in that
spot was a reproduction.
And the newspapers had another headline.
I T is generally agreed that one of the happier
explosions taking place today is the increasing
interest in matters cultural. Symphony orchestras are
playing to full houses, theatres are enjoying long runs, and
museums are reporting ever-increasing crowds. Critical
publications have subscription lists almost as long as the
popular reviews Even the commercial cinema has done its
part with film biographies of artists and musicians.
However, there is another side to the coin. Too many
people have become too well aware of an artist's work
through the headlines: ANOTHER PAINTING STOLEN;
POLICE HUNT ART THIEF; RANSOM DEMANDED FOR
FAMOUS CANVAS. Too many who had never heard of

This "Adoration of the Shepherds" weighs 100 lbs (45 kg). It was stolen from the Basilica
in Saint-Denis, near Paris, one night in December 1963. A 17th Century altar front in gilt
vermeil, it measures 9 ft 1 0 ins by 2 ft 5 ins (3 m by 75 cm) . This splendid work is still missing.
Goya before, have been able to discourse learnedly on
the value of his "Duke of Wellington" since the painting
was stolen from the National Gallery in London in 1961.
And there are those who insist that the Louvre's "Mona
Lisa" by Leonardo is the more interesting (though hardly
on purely aesthetic grounds) for having been the victim of
a sensational theft just over fifty years ago.
Art is very much in the news, then. But the real irony
behind this boom is the danger to a museum's art treasures,
a danger which lies in direct proportion to the rise in
public interest. As countries make a greater effort to
display more works to a wider public, the shortcomings
of the museums become dramatically evident. Too few
of them increase the size of their staffs adequately, still
fewer the quality. A large European museum recently
opened 28 new rooms of art treasures, but not one extra
guard was hired to oversee and protect the new material.
This, of course necessitated a greater dispersion of the
existing guards.
This inadequacy in buildings and protective systems is
reflected in the increase in art theft as an industry. It is
said that in the United States alone three or four art -
objects are stolen every day from museums.
The problems of a museum are greatly increased by the
soaring value of works of art. If a painting by a modern
artist can sell for as much as $50,000, its attraction to a
thief is obvious.
Most stolen paintings are recovered, however. In one
six-week period of 1961, 65 canvases were stolen besides
the aforementioned Goya in both England and France.
All but one have been restored to their places of origin.
Some thieves are apparently unaware that police organi¬
zations the world over are given all details of a major
art theft and go to work immediately. Other thieves, who
have done their homework, realize that it is nearly
impossible to sell a recognized work. The normal proce¬
dure in such a case is to demand a ransom for the
picture a ransom which is all too frequently paid. Still
other criminals, more timorous perhaps, merely abandon
their treasures in the face of so much pressure.
Of course, in the case of other art objects, different
procedures can be used. Jewellery obviously lends itself
to the diamond cutter's art and can be reduced to readily
saleable cut stones. And sculptures can be and often
are, melted down, even if only to recover the intrinsic value
of the metal itself.
There are known cases where whole paintings have
been carefully cut up into smaller sections either for
attempted resale as a verifiable piece of a famous work
or merely for sale to the type of person who would rather
have a section of a celebrated painting than nothing at all.
Tapestries fall into the same melancholy category and
are frequently dismembered for piecemeal resale to the
unscrupulous.
The team that makes life so miserable for art thieves is
the International Criminal Police Organization known as
Interpol. It is Interpol that distributes reports on such thefts
to every major police force in the world, giving all the
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THIEF-PROOFING MUSEUMS (Cont'd)
Security expensive ?... Not the morning after
pertinent data that may lead to recovery of the object.
This process has proved particularly effective in blocking
resales, since most pictures are taken for disposal to
countries other than those they were stolen from.
But Interpol is also aware of the high value of an ounce
of prevention; how, much simpler it would be if the thief
never managed to get away with that canvas.
To this end the International Council of Museums (ICOM)
has been working with Interpol since 1957. The Council, an
organization subsidized by Unesco, has given special
attention to the protection of museums against thefts. In
January of 1957 it asked Interpol to undertake a study that
would emphasize the preventive aspect, rather than
recovery, and would stress the combinations of human
beings and mechanical devices that might best discourage
any attempt at theft, or at least catch the thief before he
could leave the premises.
The results of this study have been published by Unesco*
in the quarterly magazine "Museum." The article was
written by Mr. André Noblecourt, chairman of the ICOM
Sub-Committee on Security in Museums and a technical
adviser on security to the museums of France.
Between the Interpol report and Mr. Noblecourt's article,
countries the world over were approached and asked to
contribute to the sum of knowledge on the subject. The
response was heartening. The presidents of national
committees of ICOM submitted reports of their own which
were collated in the final documentation.
The sixth ICOM General Conference, held in The Hague,
in July 1962, devoted considerable attention to the problem,
and the President of the ICOM Commission for Security
delivered a paper summarizing the progress made to date.
But the findings of these studies were often shocking.
NUMBER of countries reported using no pro-
. tective devices whatsoever to guard their art
treasures. Others listed inadequate or outdated methods
which would present no real problem to a determined
thief.
One of the most reassuring replies came from a museum
in Vienna. A system of thirty signals is activated if any
of the guards fail to report on a pre-arranged schedule.
When the alarms sound the main doors close automatically,
and local and federal police receive a "theft signal" by
means of a direct-contact cable. However, the museum
is forced to admit that the whole system is so expensive
to operate that it is only used to protect the most valuable
items. As the British point out, rather plaintively, "There
are no alarm systems which combine high efficiency with
low cost." The protection systems in the Louvre alone
cost over $45,000.
The consensus of museum experts Is that devices using
electromagnetic fields are the most effective. Instruments
such as television, radar and even infra-red detectors for
night-time can give the kind of spatial coverage which
protects large areas of the establishment by keeping them
constantly In view. The ¡mages from such fields can be
* "Museum" Vol. XVII No. 4, 1964.
led to a central observation post, thereby simplifying the
staff's job.
A museum in Columbia, South Carolina, which has
delicate devices attached to every one of its pictures,
reports that the paintings in one of its galleries are
"touched" 85 times every day. These are not thieves
but merely art lovers who cannot resist personal contact
with a canvas which attracts them strongly in the same
way that one Rembrandt lover has always wanted to pick
off that tiny point of white pigment that sits on the very
end of the master's nose in the self-portrait which hangs
in London's National Gallery.
The experts agree that a combination of systems is
preferable, since a single device could be studied and
overcome by a painstaking criminal or gang. It is also
pointed out that all systems dependent on electrical power
should have their own source of supply, since any interrup¬
tion in the regular current would put them out of action.
An important consideration in any system should be the
dispersion of the warning signal. Almost all authorities
are agreed that in addition to the resident guard unit, the
signal should go automatically to the police preferably
at a federal, as well as local, level.
HE mechanical techniques used in the protec¬
tion of works of art are often obvious. Armour
plating, pickproof locks, unbreakable laminated glass all
are in standard use, although rarely remarked by the
museumgoer.
Few visitors to a museum are aware that they are
constantly under surveillance through one-way glass strips
which are often disguised as decorative elements In the
gallery. But it is the "space-age" devices which are the
more exciting.
An enterprising thief, who had otherwise avoided the
devices elsewhere in the building, might find himself
caught out by a special microphone which can be so
adjusted as to "ignore" all other sounds except the noises
peculiar to his tools saws, hand-drills, blowtorches.
Certain instruments can be positioned so as to emit
a continuous ultra-sonic wave. When a would-be thief
breaks this wave, the resultant interruption activates an
electric cell which signals the fact to the guards.
Most of the rugs in museums are wired. At closing
time, the current Is turned on and anybody who steps on
the rug from that moment on closes a contact, sets off
an alarm bell and floodlights the room.
The professional burglar who feels that he is on to an
easy thing in exercising his craft in the realm of art, may
find that as his blowtorch starts to cut through a steel
plate he has caused a heat-sensitive detector to react.
One of the most effective follow-up devices, in this case,
is to have a charge of explosive set off by the detector,
designed to throw the thief Into a panic.
Close cousins to the ultrasonic devices are photo¬
electric beams, usually used in the daytime, and infra-red
instruments for the night. All work on the principle of
a field of waves which reacts to interruption.
Television cameras are highly practical aids to the
modern museum. Either fixed or "movable they can cover
CONT'D ON PAGE 10

THIEF-PROOFING MUSEUMS (Cont'd)
Qualified guards & electronic traps
10
a wide field, can be realigned from a distance by remote
control, and enable a single man to watch an entire floor.
Even more useful for purposes of identification after a
theft, are photographic cameras which are set to film a
forced entry automatically. Used mostly in night work,
the cameras may be hidden and the criminal may not even
be aware that he is being "recorded" for Interpol.
Any and all of these systems have, normally, both
manual and automatic settings. They may serve to alert
the guard force by alarms, lights, or the direct vision of
a watching employee. They may also set off flares and
smoke bombs to further confuse a thief.
It is natural that museum authorities are loath to divulge
the types of devices they use. Even the makers of the
instruments keep details of their manufacture a closely
guarded secret and vary the designs frequently. Obviously,
if a thorough criminal could find out what systems a given
museum used, and could also study the devices them¬
selves, his work would be enormously simplified. Secrecy
about the entire subject is imperative as anyone who has
tried to discuss it with a museum security officer will know.
Museums, however, have every facility for finding out
about protective equipment. Detailed and attractively
designed catalogues are published by all the leading manu¬
facturers of anti-theft devices, and each offers to send
around an expert to advise a museum which equipment
to use for its particular needs.
But as the Interpol-Unesco report stresses, "Mechanical
devices alone are insufficient. The human being must be
there." Bells', smoke, dye sheet steel none serve any
purpose if the responsible museum staff cannot catch
the thief. And if the men responsible are sufficiently well
trained, the theft itself may never take place.
HE careful selection of able men (whose back¬
grounds can be checked) is an absolute requi-
l'errrv.t tor any museum. The quality of the personnel using
all these modern mechanical devices must be at least as
high as the devices themselves.
The guards or watchmen must be thoroughly familiar with
the layout of the museum. They must know of the presence
of all security devices and how to operate them. Their
patrols should normally be made at irregular intervals and
they should follow different routes.
In at least one New York museum the guards hired are
sworn into the regular police force and have all the powers
and responsibilities that go with such a position. In the
museum, there are a few of these security men whose job
it is to mingle with the art-viewers, pass through the galleries
with them, and even occasionally sit down with the crowds
to rest their weary feet but never their eyes.
According to Joseph Chapman, formerly with the United
States Federal Bureau of Investigation and currently an
international art "detective," the training of personnel
should be systematic, covering the areas of direct physical
intervention, warning procedures, and crowd control. He
points out that in 1964 a trio of thieves was able to take
the "Star of India" sapphire from its showcase in New
York's Museum of Natural History because the staff had
never been told of the existence of a contact alarm attached
to the case and had therefore not turned it on.
Mr. Chapman estimates that 40% of museum thefts are
the work of men who have secreted themselves in the
building while it was being closed down. They had thereby
eliminated their first problem that of entry but the fact
that they could do so is an indictment of the care taken
by the guards in their final-closing inspection.
A well trained staff must be constantly on the alert for
what is not visible, as well as for that which is. In one
provincial museum in France, a sketchbook of Cézanne
had lain open at the same page for some time before it
was discovered that an enterprising thief had cut out all
the pages from behind the two that were visible.
LLIED to this alertness is the need for a staff to
know exactly what the museum does contain, so
that a theft can be spotted as soon as possible or, if worst
comes to worst, an accurate description of the missing
object can be broadcast. Most museums keep multiple
records of all possessions. This precaution led to the
downfall of one dishonest employee of an American museum
in 1963. He carefully took all the records he could find on
the objects he had stolen, but was unaware of a further
set of records kept in a different place. This was enough
to trip him up.
Museum authorities in India suggest that in addition
to the normal records kept, a photographic file of every
picture should be made, preferably more than one of
each, and each file should be kept in a different locality
including a safe place outside the museum itself.
Overall responsibility for the security in a museum should
rest in the hands of one man, Mr. Chapman stresses.
Division of the load results in duplication of effort, and
greatly increases the risk of a "hole" In the system which
each person believes the other is responsible for.
Mr. Noblecourt has this to say on the financial aspect
of the problem : "... the need for (staff) quality involves
extremely careful selection. In order to obtain the services
of a picked staff who meet these criteria, it Is important
to make the posts well paid enough to attract and retain
good men. All those involved are agreed upon the
principle, but the same is not true of its application in
practice.
"Some foundations or private institutions which are
administered with an eye to profitability do not regard
money devoted to ensuring the protection of the collections
as unproductive ; the guards are therefore decently paid...
"We have thought it necessary to emphasize the primary
importance of the quality of the human factor, for however
efficacious material equipment may be, it must always
be borne in mind that the value of a fortress is measured
by the value of its defenders."
The sine qua non of the problem is the attitude of the
authorities toward their responsibilities. With more than
220 million people visiting some 12,000 museums throughout
the world, the problem has achieved vast proportions ; the
range of protective devices is impressive but they are
expensive. Yet, as Mr. Noblecourt concludes, "Security
is a field in which facts must be faced..."
