BOMBAY INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
This text originally appeared in the chapter,
"The India of the Engineer" in the booklet
"Web of Progress: Unesco at Work in Science
and Technology" , recently published by Unesco.

CONVERSATIONS
Unesco - Paul Almasy
I
ALKING to some of the key men of the Bombay
Technological Institute at Powai offers a fasci¬
nating insight into the technological awakening of India.
They are all young in their thirties or early forties and
virtually none of them come from families of engineers.
They represent a startling change in the intellectual values
of an entire society. Each of them has his own reasons
for working at Powai.
Take Dr. Rudrapal Singh, the head of the institute's
physics department. In his family, his is the first generation
to go to a university. He worked through his master's
degree at the University of Allahabad and then took his
Ph.D. in theoretical physics at Washington State Univer¬
sity in the United States. After doing research on solid
state physics in Canada he returned to Allahabad but
came to Powai in 1958 because of a "better scientific
environment."
To a physicist, the presence of the Indian Atomic Energy
Commission and the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
a few miles away is as important as the presence of Bom¬
bay's industries to the engineer. Dr. Singh was also
drawn to the institute because it enabled him to carry
A woman assistant in the physics laboratory of
the Bombay Institute of technology explains the
operation of electrical apparatus to students.
Below, practical workshop experience for MissTejas-
wini Saraf, training to be a researcher in electronics.
For two years she was the only woman student
Unesco « Jâïk Una

ON AN INDIAN CAMPUS
by
Daniel
Behrman
Student hostels (upper
right of photo) at the
Bombay Institute are set
around a vast sports field
with a gymnasium and
stands. Athletic events,
volley-ball and hockey are
among the most popular
sports. Here, students play
in a cricket match arranged
by the institute sports club.
Unesco - Paul Almasy
out one of his most cherished ideas: the creation of
"interaction between scientists and engineers." He had
received offers to do research work in the United States
but, he told me: "Here, you are building. You may be doing
less work yourself, but the future generations you train
will do it."
I heard the same remark in another context from Pro¬
fessor J. T. Panikar, a civil engineer from Quilon in South
India. "I am not building big dams myself," he told me,
"but some of my students will." Professor Panikar
earned his bachelor's degree in engineering from the Uni¬
versity of Trivandrum and then worked as a civil engineer
for the Kerala Electricity Commission. But he was looking
for a challenge and, In 1953, he won a French Government
fellowship to study construction techniques at the Ecole
Nationale Supérieure in Toulouse. There he turned to
fluid mechanics. He won his doctor's degree at Toulouse,
came to the Bombay institute In its earliest days and work¬
ed on the construction of its buildings.
Dr. Rangiah Bedford came from Madras State. After
earning his degree in electrical engineering from Guindy
College of Engineering in Madras, he taught at the Univer¬
sity of Illinois as a visiting assistant professor, but he
returned to India because of an opportunity to help set up
the electrical engineering department of the Bombay Insti¬
tute of Technology.
Another electrical engineer, Mr, Boddapatl Ravindranath,
did his undergraduate work at Hindu University in Benares
but camo to tho Powai Institute because he sought scope
for research and o possibility for study abroad. The possi
bility materialized in September 1960, when he was given
a Unesco fellowship to study electrical power systems at
the Moscow Power Institute, returning to Powai in early
1963. He adapted himself quickly to the Russian language
and also adapted himself to the Russian system of oral
examinations which has been carried over to some extent
in Powai.
France, the United States, the U.S.S.R., England ... all
the rivers of technology flow into Powai. Professor Ca-
dambi Balakrishnan teaches a course in electrical engin¬
eering materials using Russian and Indian equipment and
a textbook from the University of Minnesota.
One of the youngest of the top men at Powai is Dr. K. C.
Mukherji who, at thirty-three, is the professor in charge of
electrical engineering. After completing his undergraduate
work he joined the Damodar Valley Corporation the Indian
counterpart of America's Tennessee Valley Authority as
an assistant engineer, but he v/on a scholarship to England
where he worked first in industry and then earned his Ph.D.
in 1956 at the University of London. He, too, v/as a
research engineer for a large British firm but he returned
home in 1958 to join the Bombay Institute of Technology
because he felt it was a creative job.
Only ten years ago, Dr. Mukherji likes to remind you, a
graduate of an Indian engineering college could hope to go
into industry only as an unpaid apprentice engineer. Today,
the shoe is on the other foot Representatives of industry,
both public and private, interview likely candidates on cam¬
pus before graduation. The students at Powai are very
much in demand and they know it.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
35

^T
Li f m
Photos Unesco:W. Hubbell
BOMBAY
INSTITUTE (Cont'd)
Since 1951 India has created five regional institutes of technology. The first of these, covering eastern India,
was opened at Kharagpur near Calcutta with aid from the U.S.A. and U.K. and U.N.:Unesco technical aid.
Engineers sent by Unesco helped to set up a number of courses, including production technology. Left, learn¬
ing to use equipment in the geology laboratory. Right, the main entrance and institute buildings at Kharagpur.
The best form of foreign aid is education
36
Arvind Paranjpe, who is a fifth-year mechanical engin¬
eering student from Bombay, described his day. He gets up
at 7, has his breakfast at 7.30 and then goes to lectures
from 8.30 to 11.30. After a break for lunch until 1, he has
tutorials from 1 to 2 and then laboratory work from 2 to 5.
There is another break for tea and games until dinner at
7.30. He averages two hours of work at night. He would
like to try for a fellowship for study in the United States
and then come back to work in industry. "I must come
back," he said. "We must depend more on ourselves. We
can't go on having foreign help and experts all the time."
Mr. Paranjpe had studied science for two years at another
school where students always resorted to "guidebooks"
before taking an exam. He found that the competitive
entrance exam for the Indian Institute of Technology did not
fit any of the guidebooks. "They were more interested in
fundamentals rather than how much you had been able to
memorize," he said.
Research in electronics is the goal of Miss Tejaswini
Saraf, a third year student from Bombay, now one of a num¬
ber of women studying at Powai after having spent two
years there as the only one. She explained to me that
she had found an early vocation for engineering when she
started to tinker with the radio set in her home. Her first
week as the only girl in Powai was "awkward" but she
encountered no problems at all . . . not even in shop courses
where she did blacksmith work, welding and fitting along¬
side the boys.
Research also looms far above anything else in the life of
S. Ramani, a post-graduate student from Madras who came
to Powai because it was the only institute in India offering
a course in computer technology. He told me: "Research
appeals to me. I don't want to do work that is meaningless.
I don't want to be a slave to a machine. With an engin¬
eering degree here, I will have no financial problems. I've
never been used to much money; that doesn't bother me."
Every day, he travels to the Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research to work on the computer there, taking three buses
in a two hour trip each way. He spends his weekends in
the institute's library on the campus. "Three years ago," he
said, "I didn't imagine that I would get this opportunity.
There were 200 candidates for 20 seats in post-graduate
electrical engineering . . . and only four seats in computer
technology."
The director of the Bombay Institute of Technology, Bri¬
gadier S.K. Bose, has himself become, in a way, an end-
product of the institute, for he was sent to Nigeria on a one
month mission by Unesco to serve as consultant for the
establishment of an engineering college there with the aid
of the United Nations Special Fund.
Brigadier Bose is ubiquitous on the campus in his ancient
sedan. He teaches a class in highway engineering so as
not to lose touch with students. Under the institute's tuto¬
rial system, each staff member is responsible for five or six
students and these tutors meet regularly with the director
to discuss student problems. The creation of an espn't de
corps in this brand-new school is one of these problems
and Brigadier Bose has even found time to select the
institute's song based on a poem by Tagore.
He lives for the future. Eventually, he foresees a student
body of 6,000 at Powai, and its buildings have been care¬
fully sited to allow room for growth.
"The best form of foreign aid is education," he told me,
"but it is a long-term affair and you can see the results
only after a generation. Foreign aid should come from a
number of origins. Here, for example, you cannot simply
transplant the Ecole Polytechnique or the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. We can expedite, but we cannot
squeeze in too much. An evolution of a hundred years
cannot be carried out in five ... but perhaps in twenty-five."
