YOUTH
WITH
A PURPOSE
by René Maheu
Director-General of Unesco
u NESCO has a special duty to accord a
maximum of attention to young people, for as
an institution dedicated in its entirety to the forging of
a new spirit in the relations between men its work would
signify little if the youth of the world failed to grasp its
purpose and to associate themselves fully with its goals.
The problems facing the young people of today are a
matter of worldwide concern and indeed urgency. Of
course it can be said that to some extent all the charac¬
teristics of present-day youth, their attitudes and psycho¬
logy and behaviour, their tremendous pent-up energy which
can overflow into generous altruism or blinding violence,
are not so very different from the character of any younger
generation.
But never does youth offer as faithful a picture of its
true spirit or show its virtues so strikingly or its faults so
glaringly, never are the talents of youth so richly exploited
or youth's love of risk put to greater test than when the
world itself is in a state of rejuvenation as it obviously
is today. And it is this surge and momentum in all the
manifestations of youth today, intensified by the throbbing,
accelerated rejuvenescence of the world itself that is, in
my opinion, the key ponderable of our time.
The statisticians inform us that young people under
25 years of age make up more than half the total popu¬
lation of most of the developing countries. These young
nations which have now emerged on to the stage of history
are youthful not only because their emancipation is so
recent. Intrinsically, they are far more youthful by virtue
of the fact that the development and leadership of these
nations is_ in the hands of the rising new generations.
As for the so-called developed countries, where the
infrastructure of society is well established and the nations
are in a much better position to absorb their rising popul¬
ations, it is inevitable I mean mathematically inevitable
that the young people will be called upon to assume an
increasing role in national growth and expansion since as
is well known technical knowledge is advancing with such
giant steps that yesterday's technology is often out of
date by today.
While it may not be exactly true to say that adolescence c
is the age for artists, even if one has pop singers in 3
mind, it is quite certain that an engineer of 35 must pick
up his studies where he once left them off (assuming of

YOUTH WITH A PURPOSE (Cont'd)
Destined to become the cause of history
course that he made the mistake of not going on with
them) if he is not to find himself out of step with deve¬
lopments in his field.
Let us not forget that our technologic civilization is a
civilization of the young and that it is destined to become
even more so every day. Young people now know more
and even understand more than their elders (I am not
saying that their judgement is better) for the very good
reason that invention and newness are becoming increas¬
ingly the underlying basis, the why and wherefore of
everything we do, if not everything we think at least in
so far as the economic sectors of society are concerned.
Whereas in times gone by tradition and our heritage from
the past represented the mainspring of our knowledge,
our force and action, nowadays it is the present moment
with its most recent innovations, and even projections into
the future, that dictate what portion of our past ic useful
or indeed meaningful to us. It is as if time had sudden¬
ly changed its course, and effect had become cause.
It looks as if youth is destined more than ever before to
become the cause of History.
It goes without saying that all young people are not
alike. They form no homogeneous group and their
behaviour is as varied as the multifarious situations they
live in. By definition youth is a subject of .controversy,
for youth itself is a mosaic of controversies.
Irrespective of what opinions we may hold about the
younger generation of today, I think everyone will agree
that governments can no longer afford to ignore the
millions of youth who are now erupting into the life of
all nations. Nor can governments ignore the need, or
the urgency in certain cases, for erecting new educational
structures to serve not as ramparts for maintaining the
status quo but as wide thoroughfares capable of integrating
all young people into the communities of the future.
But the changes that are taking place in our technical,
economic and social patterns of living are occurring with
such amazing speed and on so staggering a scale that
even modernized, newly equipped school systems can no
longer cope with the educational needs of present-day
youth. Little wonder then that out-of-school education
is coming to be looked upon as of increasingly paramount
importance for the young.
Admittedly there is an urgent need for more schools,
more trained teachers and regular revision of the
curriculum. These are basic to everything. But I trust
it will offend no one if the former teacher in me remarks
that it is in the nature of lower and higher educational
systems to change very slowly.
That is why I firmly believe that in our rapidly evolving
world it should be supplemented and constantly revitalized
by a different type of education, where rules and
regulations are as relaxed as possible, where recourse
to textbooks, examinations and diplomas is cut down to
a minimum, and where virtually no attempt is made to
impose on youngsters the rigid patterns of regular school
programmes and classroom procedure. In a word, a form
of education open to everybody and which provokes and
encourages initiative and experimentation.
This, as I see it, is the fundamental aim and purpose
of out-of-school education. It can be of help to young
people who have never had a chance to get an education,
or to those who have been to school for only a very brief
period and have forgotten almost everything they learned;
it can be of help to youngsters who, once they have left
school, want to pursue their training and education, or
to those who while still continuing their studies need a
more open life and environment than the school can offer
to broaden their horizons and prove themselves in the
face of true-life experience.
6

Out-of-school education thus offers youth a wide choice
of conditions and methods. By its very nature it is
dynamic and in permanent evolution, not unlike the younger
generations it has been devised to serve and the world
they live in. In recent years it has undergone profound
modifications: there have been important changes in youth
movements, new youth groups and institutions are being
created, and it would be interesting to study these along
with the role that adults play in them as well as the
influence that the press, radio and television have on
them. Government youth services have sprung up
everywhere and many have become Ministries for Youth.
This too is a phenomenon well worth studying, for with
these new youth ministries out-of-school education for
young people has attained official status and has become
a government affair. To some this is an excellent
development; to others it is likely to stifle initiative and
discourage voluntary youth aid. Be that as it may, the
subject is certainly too important to be ignored.
I do not endorse the idea that we adults should speak
in youth's name. This is a vain pretension and an absurd
illusion. We should do our utmost to understand the
younger generations and let them know our deep concern
for their problems. But we should avoid pressuring and
manoeuvering them into becoming involved in our terrible
disputes and controversies.
By this I am not implying disapproval of the idea of
engagement, of youth's involvement in the current affairs
of the day. Becoming involved is part and parcel of
youth's nature. Youth is characterized by its impatience
to take part in history. And nothing, it seems to me, is
more natural than that this should start on the ideological
level, for are not ideas the main road on which the
motorcar of youth is tested and run in?
Let there be no talk then of our ignoring the enthusiasm
of youth, even if we do feel that it sometimes results in
premature decisions. What really counts is that this
enthusiasm be free and spontaneous and that the decisions
reached be logical and clear-headed.
We have no intention of trying to mould youth into a
mirror-image of adults, of taking advantage of their faith
and fervour to serve adult interests and passions, or of
crushing their spirit under the weight of our technical
superiority. Our purpose instead must be to help the
younger generations to be themselves so that youth's
eternal promise of regenerating the world is never lost.
Is helping youth really so difficult? I do not think so.
I am not one to believe that a misunderstanding between
the different generations is really inevitable, nor that
revolt is the necessary way to enter adult life. On the
contrary, I am convinced that young people naturally, look
to us for some decisive gesture that will unlock for them
the secret of their own selves and of the world around
them.
Are we so removed from that enchanted age that we
have forgotten it? - For hundreds and thousands of years
the same situation has been repeated with every
generation. Each generation expects the older one to
usher in a world that is not a prison. By prison I mean
a barred destiny, a world without love.
Ruthless entanglement of ancestral feuds, blind walls
of ignorance, misunderstanding and prejudice, bottomless
pits of collective egoism where men founder, without
realizing it, ramparts of fear and hatred extending to infinity
like the reflections in parallel mirrors, sinister battlements
of distorted truth behind which crouch the extremist beliefs
in the inevitable division of man, turning neighbour into
stranger and reducing human beings to the level of
animals. If that is the heritage we propose to leave to
our children, it is quite understandable, indeed it is both
desirable and necessary that they reject it with horror.
But is this the world we are going to leave behind us?
This question, which is the only one that really matters,
is the one we invariably come back to whenever we turn
our attention to the problem of youth. For what we call
the problems of youth- are after all no more than our own
responsibility as adults.
Passages from an address by Mr. René Maheu, Director-General
of Unesco, at the opening of the International Conference on
Youth, in Grenoble (France), on August 23, 1964.
S^
Rapho, Paris
