AN
EXPLOSION
OF VITALITY
by Pierre François
I
8
F today's teen-agers could take time out to
think a little about the past, if they felt they
still needed ancient heroes to inspire their thoughts and
fancies, then I have no doubt that they would pick as their
models men like Columbus, Copernicus, Galileo and
Erasmus.
Though they may not exactly realize it, this age of ours
is not unlike a new Renaissance. Accepted attitudes and
traditional ways are being openly challenged everywhere,
voyages of discovery are uncovering the still hidden secrets
of our planet, the horizons of man and of the universe itself
are being pushed back steadily, and we can behold a new
flowering of scientific and spiritual vitality.
Young people are indeed fortunate that we have returned
to an era in which everything can be called in question
and everything begun anew. Their voices are now heard
loud and clear echoing across the land: before their
onslaught the walls of the most venerated universities shake
and tremble; young composers are revolutionizing our
concepts of music and of music notation itself; and the most
hallowed tenets of philosophy, politics, ideology and religion
are being stormed by the rising generations.
With the new technical means at our disposal our
world is being studied as never before, and the transfor¬
mations we have wrought on earth excite the keenest
interest and inquiry. It is not just for sport that so many
young speleologists risk their lives to explore deep under¬
ground caves, nor is it mere escapism that prompts youths
from Genoa, or anywhere else for that matter, to go off
in search of a new world.
The Copernican system of the heavens has in a sense
also assumed new relevance today. In just a few decades
mankind has come to realize above all the new genera¬
tions that reached the age of twenty since 1945 that no
single individual or nation can remain fixed and immobile
in the centre of the world, and that all are drawn into
a universal process of struggle and progress.
Thus the Danish boy in his ultra-modern Copenhagen
classroom is now deeply conscious that the problems and
sufferings of an Asian boy or girl directly affect him as
well; adolescents from the United States, the Soviet Union,
Nigeria, Peru, Great Britain and a host of other countries
are all joining hands to help, build new roads and erect
new schools; from every side one finds a growing desire
on the part of youth for communication with others and
common action.
As we see how youth is surpassing itself in every field
of human endeavour one is tempted to say, for more
reasons than one, that the sky is no longer the limit.
There is certainly a parallel to be drawn between the many
records broken at the Tokyo Olympics, which an athlete
of ancient Greece would have considered impossible and
unbelievable, and the recent "walks in space" by Leonov
and White, which early balloon pioneers would have looked
upon as equally unbelievable and impossible.
And up to not so very long ago it was rarely possible
for persons in government to attain to high positions of
responsibility and leadership except after many years of
service and experience. Today's youth is impatient with
these old ways, and despite the grumblings of old-timers
have pushed their way to the top in virtually every branch
of public and private activity.
In literature, too, an analogous situation now obtains.
Most novels about youth have been the work of older
writers who have had to rely on memory to describe the
ways of adolescents. Now, youngsters (a surprising number
are girls) are turning out graphic, best-selling accounts of
the contemporary teen-age scene almost as soon as the
ink is dry on their graduation certificates. Similarly, the
current craze for very young "beat" singers has spelled
disaster for many a veteran singing star of variety stage and
TV screen.
HOSE who consider pop music decadent or
unworthy of serious consideration, will find a
better case in point in the scientific laboratory. It is said
that scientific research is made for those who have not
been preconditioned by the theories and technology of
yesteryear, and that after 35 a mathematician, for example,
has passed the prime of creativity. It might be interesting
to draw up a list of all Nobel prize winners in science
during the past twenty years along with their age. No
doubt it would show that while many of them became
famous after forty, their most creative work was accom¬
plished in their early and late twenties.
Agriculture is another sector of a nation's economy which
needs new ideas and technical skills as never before. Here
too, young people have moved to the forefront, and with
energy and determination have taken the leadership of
movements working for social and technological agrarian
reform.
The newly independent countries are sometimes referred
to as the "young" nations partly, I suppose, because of
the young (but by no means tender) age of their govern¬
ment officials, cabinet ministers, administration executives,
ambassadors etc. The signs of youth are everywhere evi¬
dent in the more industrially advanced countries too. Thus,
the Yugoslav parliament reserves a number of seats for
representatives of youth. The Soviet youth organizations,

Paul Almasy. Paris On' top of the world, or so it seems to these teen-agers taking a skyscraper's-eye view of
New York. The start of holidays sets off an exodus of city youngsters bound for the
countryside in search of fresh air and exercise. Along with this mass departure there is a counter-
invasion of groups from small towns and villages all eager to see the sights of the big city.
Komsomol, occupy a prominent place in public life. And
the success and popularity of President Kennedy was
certainly attributable, at least in part, to his youthful
appearance and youthful personality.
The fact that so many young people now occupy front-
rank positions in public life could be explained by the
increasing demands of our ever-changing society, but it
would not hold true for long if those involved did not live
up to expectations or were unequipped to meet their heavy
responsibilities.
Actually, the younger generations are a much-maligned
group. By and large they are far more serious-minded
than is commonly thought and prepare the ground for their
future with more assiduity than is imagined. Here "youth
activities" carried on outside the school and the family
home have an important part to play. It is indeed a pity
that superficial observers see in them nothing more than
games and idle pastimes.
Exact figures are lacking as to the number of persons
presently engaged in youth activities, but random surveys
would indicate that from forty to sixty per cent of the
teen-age population in the developed countries devote a
considerable part of their spare time to pursuits that
require varying degrees of effort leading to personal
improvement. Such pursuits are promoted not only by
national youth organizations and sports federations with
their huge memberships but by countless local clubs
which are of special significance in that they operate inde¬
pendently and, on the whole, allow youngsters a freer
hand in running and managing their own affairs.
In the developing countries the percentage of membership
in youth groups is much smaller because of a lack of
trained personnel and equipment, but the reservoir of
young people is such that this gap will certainly be closed Q
within the next few years or so.
A West Indian friend recently talked to me of the explo-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

10
AN EXPLOSION OF VITALITY (Cont'd)
Exodus to forest
mountain & seashore
sion of teen-age vitality in his country and youth's passion
for exploring and testing everything new in all domains of
human experience. With such an abundance and variety
of activities being carried out on all five continents it is
embarrassing to single out some projects in preference
to others. Luckily, teen-agers themselves have come to our
rescue by expressing their views on those they like best.
A recent survey carried out in the Washington metropo¬
litan area by the Health and Welfare Council of the National
Capital Area in the United States showed that outdoor
activities were far and away the most popular amongst
teen-agers. By this they did not mean that they actually
practised such activities themselves but that they preferred
them to all others. According to the poll, U.S. youths
spend most of their free time as spectators watching
things television as a rule but would much rather do
something else if they had the chance.
This same trend is no doubt to be found in all the
industrialized countries of Europe as well as in Japan, and
it points to a deep-felt need for fresh air and outdoor
activity.
The advantages of sports as one of the best remedies
against the pressures and constrictions of modern life are
now universally recognized. Sports clubs do in fact boast
a much greater membership than do other youth organiza¬
tions. Interesting to note is the recent trend away from
the so-called "pure" sports, such as athletics, towards
the more "utilitarian" forms which help to enhance outdoor
pleasure and holiday-time relaxation.
Thus, while membership in sports federations generally
has increased by about twenty per cent in some countries
in the past few years, certain sports such as ski-ing and
swimming have topped 100 per cent, and others like moun¬
tain climbing and sailing have been gaining steadily in
popularity. Even horseback riding is losing its exclusive
snob appeal and is fast becoming a popular sport.
O great is our modern need for physical
exercise, fresh air and communion with nature
that the briefest holiday spell becomes the signal for
an exodus to forest, mountain and seashore by large
segments of the population. We know how devastating
this rush can be when adolescents fail to find, at resorts
destined for quiet adult tourists, the installations and
wherewithal which their energies seem to need.
Youth organizations, often with public. or private help,
have spared no pains to see to it that children and teen¬
agers alike are given the best possible vacation opportu¬
nities. The lakeside summer camp in the state of Connec¬
ticut which offers facilities for swimming, hiking, canoeing,
nature study, photography, guitar playing and uninhibited
singing sessions, is only one of a galaxy of similar camps
to be found all over the United States and parts of Canada
today.
In like manner, the shores of the Black Sea, Lake Baikal
and other parts of the Soviet Union swarm each summer
with thousands of young Pioneers enjoying the scenery and
the fresh air, or busy on much the same type of fruitful
exercises as their Américain counterparts.
In the United Kingdom, two organizations, in particular,
Rapho. Paris
The Outward Bound and The Duke of Edinburgh Award,
have been most instrumental in developing a series of pro¬
grammes designed to answer youth's keen desire for adven¬
ture and a healthy physical workout. Hiking, mountain
climbing, boating and sailing, and life-saving exercises are
all becoming increasingly popular, with Britain's bracing
climate to help.
France's efforts on behalf of youth are often cited as an
outstanding example. Thanks to the combined action of
various youth organizations and the Ministry for Youth
and Sports, some 800,000 youngsters have been received
in more than 800 open-air centres set up outside industrial
towns and areas. Every year one million boys and girls are
taken to the countryside, the seashore or the mountains as
part of the famous "Colonies de vacances" movement, and
some 45,000 youths are taught mountain climbing and
42,000 sailing in specially created centres.
The first out-of-doors youth movements, however, were
pioneered many years ago by various groups, especially
Scouting and Youth Hostels. These saw that the roman¬
ticism of adolescence was both a healthy and a desirable
sign well worth cultivating. They worked out our modern
techniques of camping life and gave the first real impetus
to tourism of the "rough it" type. The Young Men's and
Young Women's Christian Associations were also in the
forefront of this movement, especially in sports.

The pleasures of a day in the open air with gay companions these
teen-agers are all agreed that this is really something to sing about.
All of these groups have been highly successful during
the past decades and their work is now catching on in the
developing countries too. Thanks to scouting, boys and
girls in the Philippines, Tunisia and Kenya (the full list
would include every nation on earth) can now study the
riches and rigours of mother nature at first hand and in all
her infinite variety.
The youth hostel movement, which first took root in
Germany years ago, has now spread to every country of the
globe, and recently completed a network of hostels in
Pakistan extending into the foothills of the Himalayan
range. The Y.M.C.A., too, has ¡ust worked out plans for a
vast chain of holiday camps stretching across the sub-conti¬
nent of India.
It is impossible of course to mention all the achievements
and trimphs of youth groups today; but one thing is clear:
everywhere, from the frozen reaches of Iceland to the
burning plains of Ceylon, young people are determined
to free themselves, both in body and in spirit, from the
rigidities and strictures imposed by modern as well as
traditional societies.
In both modern and traditional societies youth also faces
a wide range of complex cultural problems. The teen-aget
who lives in a modern community like Munich or in a more
traditional one like Bamako or Bangkok or Belem must
deal with the problem of how to adapt traditions to modern
modes of thinking and expression. In other words, how
to blend the most ancient sources of a nation's wisdom
into the blood stream of contemporary world culture.
Here again we find a striking parallel with the period of
the Renaissance. As Leopold S. Senghor, President of the
Republic of Senegal, put it in an address to the youth
of his country: "You must stay within the framework of the
collective consciousness for this will develop and sharpen
your genius."
Of all the cultural activities indulged in by youth, music
certainly comes first. This no doubt is due to the fact
that music offers teen-agers the best means of following
the development of human expression across the span of
time and of appreciating its boundless diversity across the
length and breadth of our planet.
Then, too and this is perhaps most important of all
young people find that music (especially modern music)
expresses their state of mind perfectly, ranging as it does
from feelings of tenderness all the way to violence, and
reflecting the feverish rhythm of their lives.
One movement, called the Jeunesses Musicales, has been
particularly effective in introducing teen-agers to the great
masterpieces of music. It has been even more effective,
no doubt, in giving young musicians a chance to practise
and perform in concerts together.
One sequence from a recent film on a Jeunesses Musi¬
cales camp in Canada shows a quartet giving a magnificent
performance in a forest clearing, and an orchestra made
up of musicians all under twenty executing an allegro under
the baton of their teen-age maestro, while the seasoned
conductor looks on.
HEN, of course, there are the cinema clubs
all over the world which give teen-agers a
chance to learn from other teen-agers how to interpret
and understand the moving frames of pictures, just as
others are taught to analyse the scripts.
I^ere again there is a tendency to switch from the study
of film appreciation to actual film production. This is
certainly the best way for youngsters to learn the art and
technique of film making, and also an excellent means of
discovering and appreciating the world around us.
Not long ago, for instance, the students of the Hosei
Cinema Club in Japan spent twelve days shooting a film
on a Japanese village at work. Belgian experiments have
shown that even the youngest teen-agers are capable of mak¬
ing films, and many have indeed been produced in various
countries. One outstanding example is a 16mm. film entitled
"Wednesday Afternoon" produced by six boys and two girls
between the ages of eleven and fourteen.
If such creative arts as painting and sculpture do not
yet occupy the place they deserve in youth circles, handi¬
crafts, and especially canework and pottery, are very
popular.
These activities and to a greater extent the theatre, danc¬
ing and singing are now taking on extraordinary importance
for youth in Africa and Asia as well as Latin America. It
is through the arts that respect for true national cultures
can be reborn and remoulded, and the crushing effect of
years of foreign influence counteracted. The young gene¬
ration is thus proving to be the chief agent for cultural
development, which is as necessary for a nation as economic
and social development.
Time and again, youth has also turned out to be the
new organizer of community life. Yugoslavia is an admirable
case in point. Yugoslav youngsters have arranged local,
regional and national festivals; they have introduced new
types of entertainment of high quality, and have sparked
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
II

12
AN EXPLOSION OF VITALITY (Cont'd)
Dedicated to the
pursuit of knowledge
interest in forms of music, dancing and theatre which are
a far cry from the run-of-the-mill folklore performances one
is accustomed to.
What is most striking when we watch these performances,
which demonstrate the artistic vitality of youth in all its
diversity, is the high quality of the productions themselves.
This is sufficient commentary on the taste and intelligence,
the attention and zeal young people give to their work.
We are a long way, indeed, from the amateurish bungling
of not many years ago. What magnificent, heart-warming
spectacles the great youth festivals of today have become!
Is there any better way for young people to compare and
admire the contributions of different countries to the
world's common heritage? We should not be surprised
therefore that they are optimistic about man's future yet
are fiercely determined to prevent it from being wiped out.
HERE are other ways for young people to get
a clearer and more accurate idea of all that
man has achieved. Most of them search eagerly for every
kind of knowledge that can lead to better understanding
of a world now launched into the age of atomic energy
and space exploration. We can no longer doubt this after
glancing through the magazines and periodicals of youth
organizations and seeing the range of activities and interests
they encompass, from agrarian reform and the peaceful
uses of the atom to the latest jazz recordings. The
congresses and study groups of these organizations mostly
of an international order which fill the universities at
vacation times are assemblies which give youth an oppor¬
tunity to hear about and to discuss some of the major
problems of our time.
We have only to take a look at the daily life of almost
any community to find young people setting up clubs dedi¬
cated to the pursuit of knowledge. Sometimes they have
to make do with improvised meeting places, maybe even
the shed housing the local fire-fighting equipment, though
more often nowadays their club rooms are modern and
well-equipped.
It would, of course, be impossible to present here a com¬
plete picture of all the activities within the scope and interest
of youth clubs, but we can at least single out those currently
enjoying the greatest popularity.
In a world where roles of science and technology are
increasingly preponderant it is hardly surprising that young¬
sters want to learn all they can about these subjects, and
that more and more are attracted by scientific and technical
courses. No one will be astonished to hear that there are
science clubs in big cities such as Moscow, Pittsburg, Mar¬
seilles and Yokohama; more surprising and encouraging
is the fact that places like Douala and Dakar in Africa now
also have active science clubs.
Young botanists poring over dusty collections of dried
plants have become almost "prehistoric" figures. In their
place youthful aerospace technicians launch rockets which
carry mice to heights of 3,000 metres or more, confidently
make in-flight measurements of altitudes attained, and of
trajectories and speeds of acceleration, and at the same
time study the reactions of the living organisms used in the
experiments. This is the actual programme of a club in
Bordeaux, France, whose members also include young
CONT'D ON PAGE 14
A GLOBAL NETWORK
OF YOOTH HOSTELS
Unesco photos
Since 1960 Thailand's youth hostel move¬
ment has expanded rapidly. At holiday
times the hostels are popular meeting
places for Thai boys and girls. Above,
lending a hand with kitchen chores. Right,
putting up tents. Thailand's hostels record¬
ed over 2,000 overnight stays by visitors
from abroad in 1963 and 1964. The Unesco
Gift Coupon Scheme has helped Thai hostels.

Far left, two young Canadian hikers on
their way to Stockholm's floating youth
hostel. This port of call for youth hostel¬
lers visiting the Swedish capital is a grace¬
ful three-masted vessel, the " Af Chap¬
man " (left) anchored across the harbour
from the Royal Palace. Below, dinner on
deck with a view across the harbour.
The " Af Chapman " holds 130 people.
I N 1907, a young German
school-teacher in the Ruhr
was making plans to get children away
from the smoke and noise of the city
and to let them taste the healthy
pleasures of the open countryside.
Outings don't cost much when you set
off on foot carrying a rucksack. But
what about accommodation? The teach¬
er, Richard Schirrmann, solved the
problem by turning his little school at
Altena into a dormitory at holiday
times. Four years later he arranged
part of an old castle as a place for
meetings and relaxation. It became
the world's first youth hostel a
modest start of a great adventure.
Today a network of youth hostels
covers 62 countries in all five conti¬
nents.
By 1930 there were already 2,000
hostels in Germany, and two years
later the first international meeting of
youth hostel organizers from 1 1 Eu
ropean countries was held in Ams¬
terdam.
The hostels which Richard Schirr¬
mann had intended for school children
quickly opened their doors to young
people of all ages and social groups,
to students and workers of all coun¬
tries. Unanimous agreement at the
Amsterdam meeting established a prin¬
ciple later to be incorporated in the
statutes of the International Youth
Hostel Federation that there should
be no barriers raised nor distinctions
drawn for reasons of race, religion,
colour or class.
After 1945 youth hostels were
opened in African and Asian countries.
From India to Japan and from Egypt to
Thailand, more and more youth hostels
applied to join the International Fede¬
ration (created in 1946). The world
total of individual members increases
all the time; it rose from 1,609,000 in
1963 to 1,670,000 in 1964.
The number of beds available is also
growing: from 245,700 in 1963 to
250,000 in 1964. In India there is still
only one youth hosteller per 148,000
inhabitants, but in Austria the ratio is
one to 47, and in Sweden one to 67.
This summer the 18th International
Youth Hostellers' Rally is being held
in Cracow, Poland. Here members
will meet hostellers from all parts of
the world and enjoy a programme of
singing, folk-dancing and camp-fire
celebrations.
13

AN EXPLOSION OF VITALITY (Cont'd)
Uniting beneath the emblem of Unesco
meteorologists and aerial photographers. Other clubs
which now span the world carry out projects ranging from
chemistry and natural history to physics and biology.
These young amateur scientists are always eager to meet
their counterparts in other countries and to compare ideas
and carry out joint projects. The Fourth International Scien¬
tific Camp for Youth held in the Hautes Fagnes, Belgium,
was a typical enterprise of this kind. Young people from
eight countries followed concentrated research programmes
that included archaeological excavations, geomorphology,
human geography, studies of local plants and investigations
of living creatures in rivers and streams.
England's Scientific Fortnights, which are held periodic¬
ally, have proved outstandingly successful. Young people
lucky enough to take part hear talks by top-level scientists,
visit ultra-modern laboratories and exchange experiences
and ideas.
The "Science Service" in the U.S.A., which has greatly
expanded in recent years, is another organization that stimu¬
lates the interest and participation of youth in scientific
activities. It supplies them with simple and inexpensive
equipment, and has a subscription service which provides a
monthly package of experimental materials for carrying out
a specially-designed educational programme. Youngsters
are even shown how to manufacture nylon. One sees the
results of such initiatives at the fascinating U.S. "science
fairs" where young people display the practical results of
their work and give original demonstrations.
Two aspects of these activities are noteworthy. Firstly
they enable young people to work closely with their teachers
or with scientists of standing. It is by no means rare for
leading scientists to actually collaborate with the young¬
sters, and this is especially true of the U.S.S.R. where the
Pioneer youth centres have all kinds of workshops and
laboratories. Coupled with this the clubs often help young
people to make up their minds about choosing science as a
career and to have a clear idea which branch to enter.
In other words all clubs of this type play a significant part
in guiding young people to a career and provide them with
pre-vocational training. Yugoslavia's voluntary work team
organization does not offer laboratory facilities, but as its
members build roads and railways they also learn how to
drive trucks and to dismantle and repair engines.
I
14
F we were to try to mention even a part of all
the efforts now being made by youth organiza¬
tions to provide vocational training where indeed would
we stop on our round-the-world tour? The list is far too
long. Why choose the school work-sites of Senegal in
preference to those of the Singapore Labour Brigade?
Why select the young farmers' clubs in the Indian state of
Mysore rather than the 4H Clubs of Minnesota in the
United States? Why refer to a young miners' group in
Japan instead of a young German metal-workers' group in
the Ruhr? Are the secretarial courses of the Young
Women's Christian Association more deserving of attention
than the agricultural training groups for young Catholic
women in Latin America?
Like the Young Pioneers Centre in Accra, where Ghana's
future mechanics, radio-electricians, refrigeration engineers
and bridge builders are learning and working, all these
groups deserve equal mention for the work they are doing.
So let us turn to Europe and visit one of the Unesco Clubs
somewhere in the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Spain
or France (though we could also visit one in Japan, Argen¬
tina or Madagascar if we so wished).
First of all, what is a Unesco Club and why are hundreds
of the clubs now active in nearly a score of countries? The
answer is that all over the world young people would like
to learn about and to understand the ideas, the work and
the ways of life of people in other countries; they also
want to know about their own countries' problems and
about major world problems. All these young people can
come together beneath the emblem of Unesco.
In any of the clubs we might visit in Europe we would
probably find young people listening to a university pro¬
fessor talking about the economic, social and political prob¬
lems of Ceylon, or perhaps a writer describing a recent
visit to Africa, or even one of their club members speaking
about racialism. On another day they may be receiving
a visit from Iranian students or arranging to set off for
Finland, and preparing to record the visit on colour slides
so that it will help contribute to international understanding
when later shown to their local community. Some may
even be planning to produce a little book on Finnish life
and customs that can be sold to raise money for Unesco
Gift Coupons.
TUDY groups and international relations clubs
'as well as sections of the Students International
United Nations Movement which exist in many countries
pursue programmes no less active and valuable. In Nigeria,
for instance, the U.N. Association publishes a periodical
which is now read by young people all over Africa; from
the United Kingdom association members have gone out
to the developing countries to render worth-while services.
How true it is that the spontaneous, warm-hearted desire
of youth to help others can only develop and be put to
practical use when combined with the power of knowledge
and practical skills.
The urge to help, the acquisition of knowledge and skills,
an early maturity and a consciousness of their personal
involvement with a changing world all prompt certain young
people to take an active part in community affairs. It is
often said that those who are indifferent or who are ready
to accept things as they are by far outnumber the dynamic
spearhead of active youth. Others accuse young people
who seek an active place in community life of confusing
action with agitation. Whether they denounce youth for
its apathy or for its agitation, both kinds of critics seem to
forget that these shortcomings are more often than not
provoked by the situation in which young people find them¬
selves and conditions under which they live.
In the developing countries many young people are con¬
demned to idleness; elsewhere outmoded traditions allow
illiterate fathers to dominate their educated children and
also keep engineers of 1920 vintage in authority over impa¬
tient, go-ahead technicians of 1965. Even where liberal
attitudes help to reduce the resistance of "the man in au¬
thority", and a clearer view of things sharpens adult ideas
on what is right for the community, the doors to public life
are still but barely open to the younger generation. Yet as
we have already seen, many have nevertheless managed to
thrust their way in.
Youth movements, in any case, are in no way relaxing their
efforts to equip their members for places in civic and social
life. The valuable feature of movements like the Boy
Scouts, the Junior Red Cross, the Young Co-operators and
the Workcamp Volunteers is that they involve young people
in techniques required in community life and in giving

service to others. The activities of associations such as
the young workers' or young farmers' groups or the stu¬
dent unions are nowadays increasingly associated with
trade union matters.
What is especially striking is that as they are confronted
with a fast-developing world and new and demanding tasks,
all these youth organizations are tending to expand the
scope of their work and to associate more closely with
each other: educational movements now concern themselves
with politics, political groups launch recreational and
cultural programmes; students are one day defending their
rights and demanding university reforms and the next,
staging a play or going out to help refurbish dilapidated
homes in a slum area.
Young people are nowadays much more inclined than
hitherto to join forces and to send their representatives
to meet in co-ordination committees or youth councils.
They are, of course, looking after their own affairs, but
they are also prepared to go much further and to intervene
in national affairs if they feel that the immediate or long-
term interests of youth are at stake. In many cases they
have official relations with local and national authorities,
and outcries that once rose unheeded in the wilderness
have become the moderate and reasoned voices of
consultation.
Better still, they may even administer certain activities
within their sphere of interest in co-operation with the
authorities. Under a co-management system in France,
for instance, youth groups and administrative bodies are
equally represented on the organization that arranges travel
abroad and voluntary work camps. Equally important work
is done by the World University Service organization.
Grouped in its national branches, students, professors and
administrators are responsible for setting up and operating
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
*
>
Jorge A. Gayoso, Buenos Aires
To find outlets for their high spirits and surging vitality, teen- jj
agers seek the kind of diversions that offer movement, speed
and novelty. Above, an amusement park in Buenos Aires, Argentina.

AN EXPLOSION OF VITALITY (Cont'd)
Not unlike a new Renaissance
16
university housing complexes and restaurants, student wel¬
fare centres and sanatoria and for the co-operative publi¬
cation of mimeographed lectures and manuals.
This sampling of some relatively well-developed civic
and social institutions should not lead us to overlook the
many transformations now taking place in newly-developing
countries, right down to villages in the bush. One could
quote thousands of examples of changes similar to those
brought about by the agricultural youth group in the Akoupé
region of the Ivory Coast. There, the young people suggest¬
ed to the village chieftains that the traditional period of
mourning should be reduced, and also proposed changes
in the dowry system and the system of matrilinear inheri¬
tance. Lively but courteous discussions finally convinced
the village elders that the requests were reasonable and
the local customs were changed accordingly.
There are those who view the ebullience of modern
youth with alarm. But we have no reason to regret the
passing of the old civic lessons which taught rigid obedience
to existing laws. Young people have now affirmed that
they want a dynamic civic code, not a static one. And
they will be ready to serve their country and its institutions
to the extent that they are allowed to share in developing
those institutions.
The services which young people render to the community
are described elsewhere in this issue. But one example
which should perhaps be mentioned here is the Junior Red
Cross. All over the world its members give first aid,
brighten up houses and clean schools, help to improve
diets and build public baths, wage war against mosquitoes
and make sandals to protect people against hookworm.
And to round out this picture of the civic and social work
done by young people, a place of honour should go to
the Scouts of Nigeria who, in co-operation with a team
from the World Health Organization and the International
Children's Fund, have been on health patrols all over
their country. They have been trained to recognize the
symptoms of diseases like scabies and smallpox, and in
three years they have examined 140,000 cases and vaccinat¬
ed 86% of the people against smallpox.
S we have already seen, a significantly large
proportion of young people is deeply interested
in knowing more about the ways of life, the customs and
cultures of other countries and about international events,
trends and problems. The ways they have found to
integrate themselves with the movement for international
friendship that now spans the world are widely know: pen
friendships and an exchange of materials of all kinds,
travel abroad, international meetings and assemblies,
invitations to youngsters from other countries to spend
holidays with them, international voluntary workcamps,
voluntary aid campaigns and so on.
It is chiefly because of material obstacles that such
activities are still limited to a relatively small though
constantly increasing number of young people. Many
others would or could readily join in. We realize this
when we look a little more closely at the more or less
basic and more or less conscious reasons which urge young
people to cross frontiers, to build friendships with young¬
sters of other countries and other races, and to act as
ambassadors of international co-operation.
To these youngsters, newspapers, films, radio and tele¬
vision are like travel folders, beckoning them to make
new discoveries and to enjoy new experiences, though
these are folders of a far more appealing kind than the
ones issued by tourist agencies. It is these sources, far
more than schoolbooks, which stir their imagination and
fill them with intriguing ideas about the world. And this
leads them to take up studies and discussions and to set
off on real or imaginary journeys.
Some people will maintain that this is mere escapism,
and there is no denying that many young people are only
too happy to find a reasonable pretext for turning their
backs on everyday existence and escaping from their
immediate responsibilities. But it is no less certain that
this is a natural human trait and though it should be
guarded against there is no great cause to worry when it
is inspired by the right cause.
EXPLORING even more deeply, we may uncover
other motives. And one of them may well be
the keen curiosity felt by all young people as they
contemplate a world undergoing revolutionary transforma¬
tions, an age, which as I said at the start, is not unlike a
new Renaissance. The things that amaze one always
stand out more sharply against an alien background than
when seen in familiar surroundings.
But as they discover the exciting new world of today,
the young see things which shock them. How is it, they
ask, if man possesses powers approaching the mira¬
culous, that hunger, poverty and ignorance still prevail
over vast areas of the globe? They demand that something
be done; they no longer believe that such ills are incurable.
They have no reasons for resignation since they know
that technological resources exist and that international
aid is constantly expanding. That is why they believe in
international co-operation and why they insist with vigour
and confidence in playing their part.
When the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization
appealed to youth to join forces in helping the developing
countries and in working for the eradication of hunger
and sickness throughout the world, there was an immediate
and spontaneous reaction from youth organizations in most
countries. Here indeed was a striking example of youth's
confidence and vigour. These young people saw that it was
not a question of collecting money or food, but rather of
providing their comrades in the developing countries with
the specialist advice and equipment that are needed to
transform standards of living.
In a world so rich in resources and so full of opportunities,
youth believes that everything possible must be done to
ensure the peaceful progress of mankind and the pre¬
servation of its achievements from senseless annihilation.
This is why so many young people today are crusading for
international understanding and the peaceful settlement of
differences throughout the world.
We have tried to show that a great many young people
those, in fact, who will one day conduct their countries'
affairs are already carrying out all kinds of responsible
and worthwhile tasks. They deserve our entire trust and
confidence. We have also tried to convey the feelings
of thousands upon thousands of youngsters calm and
thoughtful, eager and energetic alike who declare impa¬
tiently: "We too want to play our part..."
PIERRE FRANÇOIS is head of Unesco's Division of Youth Activi¬
ties. An agronomist, he has been actively associated with the
work of French youth organizations for the past thirty years. He
was formerly chairman of the French Youth Council.
