THE GREAT ASIAN HIGHWAY
by M. S. Ahmad
ir *
I
A great highway network, often following the caravan routes ol
antiquity, will soon span the continent of Asia from Turkey and
Iraq to Singapore and Saigon. Known as the Great Asian
Highway it is being built by the international co-operation of
some 20 countries working within the framework of the United
Nations. When completed it will offer the motorist an opportunity
for new contact with the people of Asia by driving across
35,000 miles (55,000 kms.) of international roads.
:.«

Left, motor-lorries and far¬
mers 'carts share this asphal¬
ted section of the Asian
Highway crossing Afgha¬
nistan, but in a mountain
pass close to the Pakistan
frontier (right) a signpost
directs motor-traffic one
way and sends camels and
horses on a separate track.
Photos © Paul Almasy. Paris
HE story of man can be told in the language
of travel: travel of people and travel of goods.
In Asia, the movements of peoples and the development
of caravan routes have been decisively influenced by geo¬
graphy. To penetrate the Himalayan ranges to the north
of India the pioneers of the trade routes naturally sought
out the mountain passes (most of which are still in use)
and followed the rivers. Whenever possible, caravan routes
"were preferred to the sea, where travellers faced greater
hazards both from piracy and storms.
Around 300 B.C. the ancient route that connected Hama-
dan (ancient Ecbatan) in Iran with the then rich valleys
of Mekran and of Luni in India passed through towns in
which one of the very early civilizations that of Mohenjo-
daro and others existed (see page 27).
The great silk route for example started from Sian
(capital of the Hans of China) passed through Turkestan,
Rhea and Hamadan, and proceeded to Europe either
through Asia Minor or with a slight detour through Baghdad,
Mosul and Antioch. From this city a branch route led to
Egypt through Damascus.
The account of world travellers such as Ibn-i-Hakhal,
Fa Hien, I Tsiang, Chang Kun, Ibn-i-Batuta and Marco
Polo give an idea of the then existing caravan routes and
their conditions.
Chang Kun's mission to Yu-Chi was carried out during
138-125 B.C. Fa Hien, the Chinese Buddhist pilgrim who tra¬
velled in India during 399-414 A.D., arrived by the land route
but returned to China via Java. Yuan-Chwang travelled
extensively early in the seventh century A.D., entering
India from the north west through Peshawar.
The Romans in the period 266 B.C.- 476 A.D. built roads
which extended over three continents. During the By¬
zantine Empire caravan trade with the East flourished.
The Imperial power at Baghdad gave the Moslem world
good roadways along which lay serais or inns with pro
vision made for relays of mounts for traders, pilgrims and
official couriers.
These roads constituted the great trade routes between
the East and the West. Through these international land
communications the Asian countries established contacts
with the outside world for trade and commerce. Without
these roads progress of civilization in the regions would
have taken much longer.
Unfortunately, because of political developments and
the shifting of natural frontiers, many of the land routes
in Asia fell into disuse. Although attempts were made from
time to time to restore and develop these communications
not much was achieved because efforts were not co¬
ordinated and resources were inadequate.
Europe and America meanwhile continued to develop
their international highways. The Pan American Highway,
an 18,000 mile (28,960 km) network from Alaska to the
tip of South America, is a unique example of an inter¬
national highway in the true sense of the word.
During the last decade road traffic throughout the world
has increased at a breath-taking speed. Much attention
is now being paid in all countries to the improvement of
highways and methods of construction. Europe and Ame¬
rica have made great progress in the development of their
highways. Many international highways have been built
and many studies made to achieve uniformity in road
design and to ease customs formalities. Progress in Asian
countries has been much slower.
However, governments are aware of the need to improve
transport systems, and fully appreciate the important role
international highways could play for economic, social and
cultural development. This goes particularly for land¬
locked countries such as Afghanistan, Laos and Nepal.
The fact remains that Asia had no international highways
to speak of.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
13

TURKEY

THE ASIAN HIGHWAY NETWORK
- Road at present not motorable
Priority route.
Distance in kilometres.
IRAQ
Other routes.
SAUDI ARABIA
NORTH
VIET-NAM
Priority route A-1 of the Asian Highway, 6,600 miles (10,590 km) long,
will run from Bazargan (on the Turkish frontier) to Saigon (Republic of Viet¬
nam) passing through Teheran (Iran), Kabul (Afghanistan), Islamabad (West
Pakistan), Delhi (India), Calcutta (India), Dacca (East Pakistan), Golaghat
(India), Mandalay (Burma), Aranyapradet (Thailand) and Phnom Penh (Cam¬
bodia).
Priority route A-2, 7,700 miles (12,350 km) long, will run from the Iraqi
border to the eastern extremity of Java (Indonesia) passing through Teheran
and Isfahan (Iran), Rohri and Lahore (West Pakistan), Delhi (India), Kathmandu
(Nepal), Dacca (East Pakistan), Rangoon (Burma), Bangkok (Thailand), Kuala
Lumpur (Malaysia). A ferry boat will link Singapore (Malaysia) with Djakarta
(Indonesia).
The network will be completed by link roads. The countries concerned
have given high priority to developing these roads which will join up the
sections of the Asian Highway.
The boundaries and names on this map
do not imply official endorsement
or acceptance by the United Nations.
UNITED NATIONS MAP
14
THE ASIAN HIGHWAY (Cont'd)
The idea of linking Asian countries through a network
of international highways was born in November, 1958 at
the Highways Sub-Committee of ECAFE, the United Nations
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East. The
proposal was to establish an international highway system
linking existing main roads all the way between Viet-Nam
and Iran, and then bringing them up to a minimum stan¬
dard. For this purpose five standards were laid
down, and the countries were required to conform to the
lowest, this minimum standard to be raised as and when
traffic had increased sufficiently and funds became available.
The Asian Highway will be reminiscent of the ancient
caravan routes between Europe, the Middle East and Africa,
and will produce great economic advantages. It will pro¬
vide movement within each country and facilitate overland
international trade; many of Asia's traditional commodities
such as rice, rubber, cotton, timber, fuel and minerals,
which now move between countries by circuitous sea routes,
could be moved more economically by road and be inde¬
pendent of rising ocean freight rates.
Besides developing trade, the Asian Highway will sti¬
mulate tourist traffic within Asia and enable lower income
groups to enjoy the wonders of this great continent. Tour¬
ists will be able to journey by road to places of historical
interest and visit the many pilgrim centres, now almost
inaccessible except at very great expense. The opening
of the international road will be welcomed by millions of
Buddhist, Hindu and Moslem pilgrims.
The Asian Highway will also open new vistas for the
hundreds of thousands of small villages in the densely
populated areas of the region.
Road transport will continue to provide a major means
of inland transport. It provides direct and indirect em¬
ployment and thus contributes to economic and social
advance. When eventually completed, the Asian Highway
system will serve an area of about 2è million square
miles (6i million sq. kms) with a population of over
700 million people.
Gaps forming a very small percentage of the total length
in the Asian Highway will have to be filled, major bridges
built and many routes upgraded. That will cost money.
It may be asked: "Will the immediate gain justify the heavy
Investment?"
Well, to begin with, it is not intended to raise all the
roads of the Asian Highway to a high International stan¬
dard immediately, and a fairly modest standard has been
laid down as the initial minimum. Governments, of course,
will consider carefully whether long-range advantages out¬
weigh foreseeable returns. In the case of land-locked
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
15


"^L-> I 'S.
/-^
mh
-
>-
¿**
&?£
JETir
~-3--
United Nations
THE ASIAN HIGHWAY (Cont'd)
HIGHEST TUNNEL. The highest road tunnel
in the world is now being completed in Afgha¬
nistan. It will carry the Asian Highway
through the Hindu Kush range at an altitude
of 10,000 feet (3,200 m.). Left, construction
of the approach road to the Salang tunnel,
8,200 feet (2,750 m.) long, that will shorten
the existing road by 120 miles (190 km.).
V
AT
LONGEST BRIDGE. Bridge completely span¬
ning the horizon is Asia's longest 10,000
feet (3,300 m.). It has been built across the
River Sone in India about 375 miles (600 km.)
from Calcutta. Seven major bridges will be
built for the Asian Highway in East Pakistan.
A road system for a whole continent
16
Afghanistan, Laos and Nepal, the terrain and economic
conditions are such that only an international highway sys¬
tem can provide cheap and adequate access to neighbouring
countries and the ports for external trade.
What progress has been made since 1959? The existing
routes in all the countries to be included in the Asian
Highway system have been agreed upon together with
construction standards. These provide for a staged
development, with standards being improved as traffic
increases.
A highway traffic code governing the conduct of inter¬
national traffic has been drafted and a uniform system of
road signs agreed upon. To concert national efforts, a
co-ordinating body composed of representatives from
each of the countries involved has been established under
ECAFE.
The sub-standard sections of the Asian Highway in Iran,
Afghanistan, Pakistan, India and Indonesia have been
surveyed by United Nations teams, and the data already
collected have formed the basis for an estimate of costs
for the sections covered.
An application has been submitted to the United Nations
Special Fund to provide the funds for an economic and
engineering survey of existing gaps in the Highway, includ¬
ing studies of economic and engineering feasibilities in
Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan. The Special Fund has
engaged a firm of consulting engineers to assess the request
for pre-investment surveys, and its report has been sub¬
mitted.
What progress has been made in the construction and
improvement of the priority routes of the Asian Highway?
It is gratifying to note the enthusiasm and zeal with which
governments are trying to implement the project. The
roads of the Asian Highway have to a large extent been
included in national high priority road programmes. For
instance, thanks to extensive road repairs and the rebuilding
of bridges, it is now possible to motor from Bangkok to
Siemreap (Angkor Wat) in Cambodia in a day.
'ONSIDERABLE road work is also in progress
'in other parts of the road between Choomporn
and Panga in Thailand, and it will then be possible to drive
through from Thailand to Malaysia. In the north, a bridge
has been jointly financed and built over the Messai river on
the Thai-Burnese frontier.
In India, the work on the missing links between Silchar
and Imphal is progressing satisfactorily.
In East Pakistan, intensive road construction activities,
particularly on routes included in the international network,
are under way.
In Nepal, road building activities are being vigorously
pushed through and the standard of the road between
Kathmandu and Rexol is being raised. Surveys are being
conducted for building a road between Tanakpur and Gal-
galia, towards Sivok.

' 'í
v V".v.ví:.^v -;:- . EBfe
United Nations
fill
2#
SMARTEST VEHICLE. Colourfully-
decorated motor lorries, like this one
in Pakistan, are a common sight on the
roads of Asia. The custom of smarten¬
ing up carriages with ornate designs
and symbols also exists in the Middle
East, and is a centuries-old practice
in Sicily as regards ordinary carts. Paul Almasy, Paris
In West Pakistan, the road improvement programme is
being resolutely pursued.
In Afghanistan, the road between Kabul and Torkham
(Afghanistan-Pakistan frontier) has been asphalted; the road
between Kabul and Kandahar on the priority route is
being built as an asphalt road; while the road between
Kandahar and Herat is being concreted.
In Iran, the road section from Bazargan to Takestan
via Tabriz and Zanjan is under construction. It is to be
completed as a first-class paved road within the next two
years and will then link on to the roads in Turkey and
Europe, joining the Teheran-Sari section. A road from
Sari to Shahpassand is under construction and will be
completed within the next two years. The section between
Shahpassand and Ghouchan is already a good gravel road.
From Ghouchan to Toos, the road is fair, and will be raised
to a higher standard within the next few years. From Toos
to Sang-Bast via Mashad there is a good black-top road,
but the last section from Sang-Bast to Taibat is in poor
condition. This is to be improved within the next three
years.
Another priority route runs from the Iran-Iraq frontier
at Khosravi to the Middle Eastern Highway network at
Mijaveh via Isfahan, Kerman and Zahidan. The section
between Khosravi to Hamadan has been recently built
as a first-class paved road; from Hamadan to Saveh, the
road te a good gravel one; from Saveh to Teheran runs
a firs.t-class paved road and the road from Teheran to
Isfahan via Ghom will shortly be complete'd as a good
tarmac road. The road from Isfahan to Kerman via Yazd
is to be improved to a good gravel road within the next
four years. The remaining section from Kerman to
Mirjaveh (Iran-Pakistan frontier) is to be surveyed, with
an economic appraisal of the project.
However, even though all this progress has been commen¬
dable, much work remains to be done owing to technical
and financial difficulties, and some gaps have still to be
filled. The total length of the missing links in the priority
route A-1 (Turkey to Viet Nam) is approximately 260 miles
(419 kms.) and in A-2 (Iraq to Singapore and Indonesia)
870 miles (1,397 kms.) while sections in A-1 and A-2 requir¬
ing improvement come to 5,470 miles (8.790 kms.). These
are small gaps, considering that the total length of A-1
route is 6,600 miles (10,590 kms.) and that of A-2 route
7.700 miles ( 12,350 kms.).
The Asian Highway project is undoubtedly a grand
concept, and it has created great expectations as its mat¬
erialization will be of great help in building an edifice of
human brotherhood and peace, besides serving economic,
social and cultural purposes. Four years is not a long
period for the fulfilment of this international road network,
and substantial strides have already been made. Never¬
theless, this progress will have to be sustained and
everything done to hasten the day when streams of cars
and trucks will flow along the roads linking the various
capitals, trading posts, cultural and historical sites of the
regions.
It will be some years before the Asian Highway is
finished, but the plans have to be made now and work taken
in hand according to the economic requirements and
resources of each country.
17
M.S. AHMAD is chief of the Transport and Communications Divi¬
sion of the U.N. Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East.
