A century ago a Moravian monk discovered one of nature's
great secrets-the mechanism of heredity. All his life he
sought to have his ideas accepted but he died disheartened,
unknown and unrecognized. Today, the world salutes an extra¬
ordinary genius who was the father of the science of genetics.
EXACTLY one century ago this year, the
Austrian monk Johann Mendel Brother Gregor
in the Augustinian Order submitted to the Natural History
Society of Brunn a paper entitled "Experiments in Plant
Hybridization."
Mendel's paper, which he communicated in two parts,
on February 8 and March 8, 1 865, is one of the most astonish¬
ing masterpieces ever conceived by the mind of man. In
some fifty pages, in which the author consigned the fruits
of eight years of patient research, a new science and an
entirely fresh approach to biology was revealed. Mendel
was not, as is sometimes said, a precursor of genetics; he
was its veritable founder. All the essentials of the modern
science of heredity, all those aspects of it which continue
to evolve and develop along the most divergent paths,
were already contained explicitly or implicitly In that
memorable paper. Not a single line of it has become
dated, for it reports only faultless experiments and presents
hypotheses the future was to confirm.
Mendel's life was simple and obscure. Born in Hei-
zendorf, Moravia on July 22, 1822 the year of Louis Pas¬
teur's birth Johann Mendel came of a peasant family. In
his eleventh year he entered a school in Leipnik, then, after
attending, a school in Troppau and reading at the Uni¬
versity of Vienna, he decided on a monastic life. In 1843,
he was admitted as a novice at the Augustinian Monastery
of Brunn (today Brno in Czechoslovakia), where he took
orders in 1847.
Although he held no university degrees Mendel was
to teach natural history and elementary physics at Brunn.
Twice he sat for the examination which would have qualified
him for a higher post, but without success.
I
16
N 1856, he began experimenting in the cloister
garden with hybridization of the common pea.
His aim was at first a modest one: to bring about artificial
fertilization of ornamental plants with a view to obtaining
new colours. But as he proceeded with his crossings and
extended and varied his experimental material, his ambition
grew; he realized that he had raised the whole problem of
heredity and that he would have to elucidate it if he
were to understand his findings.
These findings impressed him by their regularity, their
clarity and their constancy, all expressed with mathematical
precision. Certain hypotheses became apparent and these
called for verification through further experiments. Finally,
after bringing about thousands of artifical fertilizations and
examining tens of thousands of seeds, Mendel believed
that he was in a position to formulate general conclusions,
equivalent to laws, and these he set forth in his paper
of 1865. Alas, the very magnitude and remarkable ori¬
ginality of his work was to render it incomprehensible to
his contemporaries. Despite all his efforts to bring it
to the attention of the specialists, he received no encour¬
agement from them and finally abandoned his research.
Elected abbot in 1868, Mendel died in 1884.
Thirty-five years elapsed before Mendel's work was rescu¬
ed from oblivion and it might have remained forever buried
had it not been briefly mentioned in a work on plant hy¬
bridization by the German botanist Wilhelm Focke.
Early in 1900 a Dutch botanist, Hugo de Vries, published
two papers on the hybridization of various plants and in one,
which appeared in Germany, he indicated that his disco¬
veries had in all their essentials been put forward long
before by a monk named Mendel, but in a paper so rarely
mentioned that De Vries did not learn of its existence
until his own work was to all intents completed.
In April of the same year, it was a German botanist,
Carl Correns, who reached findings in every way similar
to Mendel's. He, too, thought he had made an original
discovery.
Finally, in June 1900, an Austrian botanist, Erich Tscher-
mak, corroborated Mendel's observations, which came to
his knowledge only after he had completed his own.
HREE scientists remaking, almost at the same
time and independently of each other, the disco¬
very an obscure monk had already made, unknown to the
world; an astounding paper buried in the annals of a modest
local scientific society; an amateur botanist of genius who
in his cloister garden had outdistanced the prominent
scientists of his day here were facts to stir the imagination
and the emotions.
Mendelism, thus rediscovered, was straightway to meet
with an enthusiastic response and arouse exceptional in¬
terest all over the world. Confirmation was forthcoming
from all sides: the laws of hybridization immediately dub¬
bed Mendel's laws were to be extended to the animal
kingdom by Bateson in England, by Lucien Cuénot in
France.
Why was Mendel's revelation so important?
Mendel was certainly not the first to investigate the phe¬
nomena of heredity. Before him many observations had
been made concerning the transmission of organic charac¬
ters in plants, in animals, in the human species. Even
the .experimental study of heredity had been undertaken
by scientists such as Köhlreuter, Wichura, Lecoq, Sageret,
Goss and Seton, Naudin and others. But none of these
studies had produced anything clear or decisive. The re¬
sults of cross-fertilization or cross-breeding were always un¬
predictable to the investigator. It was as if the pheno¬
menon of heredity was essentially freakish, or at least too
complex to lend itself to exhaustive analysis.

JOHANN
GREGOR
MENDEL
by Jean Rostand
of the Académie Française
Not so with Mendel. For his cross-fertilizations he had
had the foresight to choose very stable varieties of peas
with constant, clear-cut differences in their characteristics
differences in the form (wrinkled or round) or the colour
(green or yellow) of the ripe seed, in the form of the ripe
pod, in the colour of the ripe pod, in the colour of the
unripe pod, in the length of the stems, etc. Then after long
experimentation and examination of the findings, he was
able to predict precisely what would happen when two
peas differing in one or several unit-characters were
crossed.
To take a simple example, he was able to predict that
cross-fertilization of two peas differing in unit-characters A
and a would produce peas having only unit-character A;
and that if the hybrids of that first generation were then
intercrossed, unit-character a would reappear in the follow¬
ing generation, which would have an average ratio of
three plants with unit-character A to one plant with unit-
character a.
What is more, Mendel's work not only enabled the ex¬
perimenter to predict in itself a valuable advance. The
ratios he discovered were of profound significance, reveal¬
ing as they did the interplay of hidden and previously un-
thought of mechanisms. For in order to explain the results
of cross-fertilization or cross-breeding, it had to be assum¬
ed that the unit-characters of the parents separated or
segregated from each other in the reproduction cells
of the hybrids and, furthermore, that they segregated in¬
dependently. This led to the idea of discontinuity of
the hereditary basis, which then appeared as made up of
separable elements, more or less similar to atoms in
chemistry.
Finally, the behaviour of the Mendelian units today
Czechoslovak official photo
known as "genes" paralleled in striking fashion that of
the particles, or chromosomes, of which a definite number,
constant for each species, Is found in the cell nucleus of
all living things.
Mendelism led directly to the chromosome theory of
heredity intuitively elaborated by the German biologist
August Weisman at the end of the last century.
Henceforth, Mendelism and the chromosome theory were
to evolve in concert, lending each other enlightenment and
support, while all research continually confirmed the expe¬
rimental findings obtained from cross-fertilization or cross¬
breeding.
It was thanks to such collaboration that the school of
Thomas Hunt Morgan, a U.S. winner of the 1933 Nobel
Prize in Physiology and Medicine was able to carry out
on the fruit-fly (Drosophila melanogaster) its great work
one of the finest achievements of modern biology which
made it possible not merely to locate a great number of
genes in one or the other of this insect's four chromo¬
somes, but also to fix their exact position within each chro¬
mosome.
Now, the cytological stage has in turn been superseded.
We have reached the chemical stage and the gene is at
present regarded as a large molecule of deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA).
Where does Mendelism stand today?
The universality of Mendel's laws must first be noted.
As the biologist, Robert Matthey puts it, "The Mendelian -j -i
universe can no longer be reduced, as might have been 1 1
supposed in 1900, to a garden with leguminous plants pro¬
ducing green or yellow, wrinkled or round seeds; it em-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

* *
18
JOHANN MENDEL (Cont'd)
braces within its laws the whole world of living things
from virus to man."
It should also be made clear that direct evidence of
the segregation of the genes during the formation of the
reproduction cells has been forthcoming.
Mendelism, besides underlying most of the disciplines
concerned with organic individuality, mutation and evolution,
the fine structure of chromosomes and the chemistry of
genes, in so far as genetics stemmed from it, has direct
applications in various fields, notably in human genetics.
It is the basis on which doctors can warn against the
unfortunate consequences of certain marriages and point
out the disadvantages of consanguinity.
If ever a negative eugenics is introduced to eliminate or
reduce certain hereditary diseases or defects in our species,
the data obtained by Mendelism will have to be taken into
account.
One of its best known applications is the genetics of
blood. Since we know how the Rhesus factor is trans¬
mitted we have been able to develop suitable treatment
to avert the risks to a baby when the Rhesus factors in
the blood of the parents differ and are thus incompatible.
Need it be added that a knowledge of the genetics of
blood is of value in some cases of disputed paternity?
Although it can never be proved by blood alone that a
man is the father of a particular child, it is quite often
possible to prove that the child could not be his.
Knowledge of Mendel's laws has rendered and still
renders great services to agriculture and stock-breeding.
By their judicious application racial characters can be
manipulated at will and several desirable characters from
different lines combined in a single race. In this way,
the sturdiness and resistance of cereals have been in¬
creased and the production of meat, wool, milk, eggs, etc.,

i -
Two remarkable animal oddities
spotted by an aerial cameraman
in the Rukwa Valley, a huge
animal reserve in southwestern
Tanzania. Left, a spotted
zebra runs with the normally
marked members of the herd.
Right, an albino giraffe. There
have been reports of albino
giraffe from other parts of Africa,
but spotted zebra are far more
rare. But, since these pictures
were taken, a game officer has
reported that the Rukwa Valley
zebra has foaled and that
the zebra colt too ¡s spotted.
Photos © Birnback Publishing
Service, New York
; ffc
has been improved both quantitatively and qualitatively.
In discussing Mendelism, it is impossible to overlook
the offensive to which it was subjected around 1948
along with Morganism by Soviet biologists of the Michurin
school grouped around the botanist Lysenko.
In the name of a certain dogmatism they anathematized
Mendel's views, which they denounced as reactionary, bour¬
geois, idealistic, conventional, etc. Ironic references were
made to the garden pea man and the monkish theory. . .
The same ones that execrated Mendel maintained that
wheat can produce rye and that life appears spontaneously
in the yolk of an eggl
This was a painful period for science which we should
remember if only not to forget the level of absurdity highly
esteemed and educated men can sink to when they yield to
doctrinal fanaticism.
Mendelism has been established once and for all in bio¬
logical thinking and nothing will oust it, for it expresses
a considerable part of the real basis of life itself. It
colours willy-nilly our manner of observing experimenting,
reasoning and thinking. The fame of Mendel, as of Darwin
and Pasteur, is not at the mercy of changing opinion.
As long as there are biologists on the earth, they will
honour the memory of the obscure monk in Brunn who,
richer in genius than in knowledge, was the first to shed
light on one of the greatest phenomena of nature.
JEAN ROSTAND, the French biologist and scientific writer, is known
throughout the world for his research on heredity and genetics, based
on three decades of experimentation with frogs and toads. He has a n
written over 40 books on his fields of research as well as on scientific I jj
thought, philosophy and pure science. A member of the French
Academy, he was awarded the Kalinga Unesco Prize for the popu¬
larization of science in 1959.
