WORLD CONGRESS
THE first World Congress of Ministers of Education on the
Eradication of Illiteracy, which ended September 19 in Teheran,
addressed a unanimous appeal to the United Nations, its
specialized agencies (particularly Unesco), regional bodies, non¬
governmental organizations and public and private foundations to
help finance a movement to eradicate illiteracy which currently
blights 44 per cent of the world's adult population.
Among the most important points stressed in over 80 recom¬
mendations adopted by the 88 countries attending, were the fol¬
lowing:
Firstly, delegates from both industrial and developing countries
have recognized that illiteracy is truly a world problem. Delegates
from the more advanced countries have offered aid mainly for
training teachers specialized in literacy techniques.
Secondly, the need to integrate literacy fully into economic
development has now been unanimously accepted. This does not
mean, as several delegates observed, that education should be
regarded as important solely in economic terms. It is also the
leaven of cultural and intellectual growth and a means to make
every person aware of his rights and duties as a citizen.
Thirdly, delegates agreed that the conflict between schooling
for children and adult literacy is actually a false dilemma. In fact,
both are necessary, the former being a long-term investment and
the latter a short-term investment with immediate impact on nation¬
al development. This is why adult literacy must be integrated
into national economic planning to the same extent as the develop¬
ment of the educational system as a whole.
The congress gave its full backing to Unesco's experimental
literacy programme and particularly to pilot projects for which
financial help has been requested from the United Nations Special
Fund. Some delegates asked that this programme be extended
and the number of pilot projects increased.
Mr. René Maheu, Unesco Director-General, declared that Special
Fund's proposals were realistic and could be handled by the
mssmmsmustxi^

SPURS FIGHT AGAINST ILLITERACY
Unesco secretariat. At the same time, he asked the Special Fund
to consider the possibility of increasing its effort for literacy.
He made it clear, however, that the problem of financing mass
literacy work will depend upon the extent to which nations concern¬
ed succeed in integrating literacy campaigns into their develop¬
ment plans. Each country, he said, must come to a sovereign deci¬
sion concerning the relative importance it wishes to give literacy in
these plans. In this way, the financing of literacy should become
part of the general financing of development.
In this context the congress also asked the U.N. and its
agencies to exert their influence on all responsible leaders to:
1) ensure that literacy is an integral and essential part of every
development plan in countries where illiteracy is a problem;
2) increase, as far as possible, the national and international
resources devoted to the fight against illiteracy;
3) make possible the provision of additional resources for de¬
velopment in general and literacy in particular as further funds
become available following a reduction in military expenditures;
4) harness fully all information media to progagate the new
concept of adult literacy.
ERTAIN developing countries expressed their intention
to increase funds devoted to literacy. Others stated
they had already reached a maximum figure which could not be
increased without running the risk of seriously disturbing their
national economy.
The congress also agreed that large-scale but spasmodic attacks
on illiteracy, despite the enthusiasm they may have aroused, have
not prevented thousands of adults from lapsing back into illiteracy.
This is why delegates placed a priority on functional literacy
conceived in conjunction with vocational training. In this .respect,
as many of them explained, every country cannot adopt the same
strategy: this must vary depending upon social and economic
structures, traditions and overall national goals.
Concerning public opinion, the congress stressed the need to
bring home to illiterates the reasons behind any literacy drive.
Strategy alone cannot make such a drive succeed, warned
Mr. Maheu, if it is not galvanized by public opinion. "It would
be impossible to carry out a large-scale campaign without mobilizing
public opinion," he said.
In discussing literacy methods, delegates from several countries
where many languages still have no written alphabets announced
they have recently been able to devise alphabets for these lan¬
guages. Others, on the contrary, appealed to linguistic institutes
for help in finding solutions.
During the closing session of the congress, Prime Minister Amir
Abbas Hoveyda of Iran announced that an annual prize will be
placed at Unesco's disposal to reward a person, or institution,
making a contribution in the field of literacy. Then Mr. Maheu
stressed the importance of the congress which marked decisive
progress in a field of ideas important to Unesco. Equally impor¬
tant, he added, was the remarkable unanimity with which delegates
adopted a strategy for national and international action. He stated:
"From their deliberations has emerged a new concept for concerted
means for large-scale action. Illiteracy can be wiped out in a
relatively short time if all those who seek to further progress in
developing countries will aid literacy as an integral part of deve¬
lopment. This is true for bilateral programmes, it is also true
for international programmes."
The congress, convened by Unesco upon the initiative of the
Shah of Iran, was opened by the Shah on September 8. "The
existence of an enormous mass of illiterates [is] the root cause
of the inequality which splits mankind into two separate segments,"
the Shah declared in opening the congress, adding, "it is a
constant menace to social peace [and] to peace itself." The Shah
then proposed that all nations help finance literacy by making
small deductions from their military budgets.
31
