THE
GREAT
3to s.
REVOLUTION
by
Walter
Lippmann
u^^
*" rP*Mm
^V^^^^S
L **A\
% 2
9

To mark International Co-operation Year 1965, eminent
men from different parts of the world were invited this
year by Secretary- G enera/ U Thant to speak at the
United Nations Headquartors on some of the great
problems of our time. Here we present the text of the
address delivered by Walter Lippmann, the American
journalist and commentator, author of some 25 books
mostly on international affairs, and twice winner
of the coveted Pulitzer Prize for Journalism. For
another text in this same series see page 25.
I AM naturally beset with memories and
emotions, for I am old enough to have seen the
beginnings of the League of Nations. Indeed, as a young
man and as a journalist and as a subordinate official,
I followed as closely as I could the evolution of that first
attempt in this century to organize a universal society.
I saw it founder in the upheaval which led to the Second
World War. But I saw something else. In the darkest
days of that war, there was an almost universal assumption
that, when the fierce Insurrection had been defeated, the
interrupted task of organizing the universal society could
and must be resumed.
I hope I have learned something from this experience.
This is my only excuse for addressing you in this place.
Thus, for one thing, I have learned to think of the two
attempts to organize the universal society as a single and
continuous chapter in the history of mankind. It cannot
be an accident, it cannot be mere coincidence, that the two
attempts have occurred so closely together in this century.
There have been many wars in other centuries, great
wars for the hegemony of the world, poisonous civil wars,
bloody national wars, savage wars of religion. But in
these long and violent centuries, only an occasional
Utopian thinker dared even to conceive the construction
of an organized international society. Even when men
dared to dream, their dreams were limited. For they never
entertained the idea that an international society could and
must be universal, embracing all the continents on the
globe and all peoples of the human race.
The concept
of a universal society
ET, in our time, that Utopian idea has become
part of the political calculation of the practical
statesmen in all the governments. They took it seriously,
though perhaps not with full comprehension, after the First
World War. They took it seriously during the Second
World War, again not realizing what universalism would
mean when there were as many nations as are now repre¬
sented in the General Assembly. Now, statesmen must
take universalism seriously.
I ask myself why the idea of a universal society has
become a practical consideration in this century and only
in this century.
I think there is an answer to this question. I think, too,
that the answer will help us to understand why the first
attempt, that of the League of Nations, failed, and why
the second attempt, this attempt of the United Nations
today, is threatened, and what must be done to prevent
it from failing. I put it in this way because we can do
ourselves no good by proceeding on a false optimism.
A universal society is inevitable. But there is no certainty
that this, our second attempt at a universal society, will
be the last attempt. What I have to say does, I believe,
offer hope for the future. But it is hope only for those
who are induced by it to make a far greater effort for
peace than the governments concerned today have as yet
begun to make.
The old regime
of mankind
I ask your indulgence if I go back to the original
question, which is why in this century, and in
this century alone, there is a general assumption that it is
possible and necessary to organize a universal society.
The feeling that it is possible proceeds from the fact that
modern war has become a universal calamity, that therefore
a universal society is necessary, and that necessity is the
mother of invention.
The great historical fact is that this century has wit¬
nessed the consummation of a phase in human evolution
that began in the eighteenth century. In these two cen¬
turies there has been proceeding at an ever-increasing
tempo the dissolution of the ancestral order in which men
have lived and have acquired their habits, and the dis¬
appearance of the old régimes which were built on this
ancestral order.
The old régime of mankind consisted of a hierarchical
society, bound together by usage and custom and presided
over by royal and imperial authority. Obedience was a
duty which must not be questioned and a habit which must
not be broken. In this ancestral order, wars between the
royal and imperial authorities were normal, and the intervals
of peace lasted only as long as the balance of power among
them remained stable.
This ancestral order was struck its first and fatal blow
in the eighteenth century. In almost all of the Western
Hemisphere, the imperial and colonial system was over¬
thrown and destroyed between 1775 and 1820. Elsewhere
it survived, though it was being eroded from within. It
survived until the beginning of the twentieth century.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
21

The First World War destroyed the imperial system in

central and eastern Europe and In the Middle Eastin the
Europe of the Hohenzollerns, the Hapsburgs, the Roma¬
novs, and of the Ottoman rulers. It left behind, and
apparently Intact, the imperial system in Asia and Africa.
After the First World War, the liquidation of the old
régime produced a vacuum of governments in the great
region between the Rhine River and Vladivostok, between
the North Sea and the Persian Gulf. There were no
legitimate successor governments in this great region and
in these lands when the League of Nations was founded.
Now, it ¡s a fact of human experience that men cannot
endure for long being governed by a power that they do
not accept as legitimate. There was, therefore, a fierce
turbulence produced by fanatical upstart tyrannies, strug¬
gling for survival and for domination.
The League of Nations presided over an immense revo¬
lutionary struggle. It could not control that struggle. It
could not compose that struggle. The failure of the League
of Nations has much to teach us today. The primary and
supreme lesson is that it failed because it could not make
peace and nobody else was able to make peace. In the
creation of a universal society, it is not enough to have
a covenant to which all swear allegiance. It is not enough
to set up machinery of consultation, concilation, mediation
and arbitration which is available to all. There must be
also a basic situation that is acceptable to all who might
have the power to disturb it.
The universal society must have a foundation, and that
foundation can be made up only of peace settlements
which are accepted by all the nations capable of over¬
throwing the settlement. A universal society can do much
to keep the peace if, and only if, first of all peace has
been made. For if peace has not been made by the belli¬
gerents, the foundations of a universal society are insecure.
The history of this cruel and bloody century is one of
recurring cycles of war and revolution. In this cycle the
old régimes and the old landmarks are swept away and
old habits uprooted, and new wars are engendered in the
disorder which ensues. The Second World War carried
much further what the First World War had begun. It
liquidated the feeble, interim successor régimes which
existed in the unpacified regions of Europe and the Middle
East. The Second World War demolished the imperial
system In India, in Indo-China, in Indonesia. In Africa, it
demolished the colonial system from the Mediterranean
down to Angola, South Rhodesia and the Union of South
Africa.
I
The lesson of the
League of Nations
22
F the lesson of the League of Nations teaches
us that peace settlements must be the found¬
ation of the universal society, then the world we look out
upon offers us no reason for complacency and for self-
congratulation.
After the two world wars and the revolutions which
followed them, there is still no peace settlement in Central
Europe, there Is still no peace settlement in Eastern Asia.
There are only the armistice lines of the Second World
War which divide Korea, which divide the Japanese islands,
which divide China, which divide Indo-China. There is
no peace settlement in Africa, no peace which under the
aegis of the United Nations could then be kept in order.
The future of the United Nations is bound up with the
agonies and the hopes of a great historical process. This
process is the dissolution of the ancestral order of power
and authority under which mankind has been accustomed
to live. An anarchy of emptiness has followed this dissolu¬
tion. Amidst violence and frustration and disappointment,
we are living through the attempts to create in this vacuum
a new and acceptable order.
During the past two centuries, almost every government
on earth has been altered radically by revolution: for the
old principle that a legitimate authority derives from tra¬
dition and is carried on by usage and custom, there has
been put in its place the modern and revolutionary principle
that legitimate government rests on the consent of the
governed and that this consent comes from their freedom
to choose and from their capacity to make a choice.
This fundamental revolution in human affairs is the
environment within which the United Nations works. We
can reach some measure of the depth and scope of this
revolution when we look about our world. The two great
wars have not yet been settled and concluded. Stable
governments have not yet been established in all the new
national states nor in all the older national states. We
must not be surprised, and indeed, perhaps we should not
even be downhearted, at realizing that the change from
government by tradition to government by consent is
perhaps the most unsettling change in the political history
of mankind.
The fact that amidst this accumulating disorder there
have been two attempts to organize a universal society is
evidence that man's hopes are wiser than his fears. For
there would be little reason to think that a world society
exists or is being created if we listen only to the official
statements and look only at the front pages of the news¬
papers. The official statements provide little more than
an overpowering dissonance and discord in which all the
issues are irreconcilable.
Practical politics
of preventing war
HE practical politics of preventing war in this
generation turn on the fact that as nuclear
science has produced weapons of annihilation, weapons
which in terms of human endurance are absolute weapons,
war between nuclear powers can no longer be an instru¬
ment of their national policy. This will still be the case even

© H.W. Silvester. Lioux-Vaucluse (France)
if, as is most probable, a considerable number of states
acquire nuclear weapons. For no nation can risk the use of
these weapons anywhere because, having those weapons,
it is subject itself to fearful retaliation. However, the acqui¬
sition of these weapons does not mean that a state has
added enormously to its power and influence. For in the
act of becoming a nuclear power, it has also made itself a
target, a target for the nuclear weapons of other states.
Therefore, the prospect of averting great war by mutual
deterrence is a reasonably good prospect. But that does
not mean that violence and disorder are disappearing from
the world. We know that they are not. For the technique
of war is changing. In the First World War we had the
massacre of conscript armies. This was succeeded in the
Second World War by attacks with fire bombs and nuclear
bombs on the civilian population in the cities. Nowadays,
wars are for the most part revolutionary wars, guerrilla
wars, little wars fought by small numbers of men with little
weapons and with terrorism and propaganda.
It Is difficult to imagine a treaty to put an end to revolu¬
tionary wars directed against unstable societies. Our
objective must be to contain these little wars, to Isolate
them, to immunize them, to neutralize them, so that they
do not inflame the rivalry of the great nuclear powers.
Is that all? No, I am sure it is not. For we must look
beneath the surface of the events of the day. When we
look beneath the surface, we shall see that there is under
way what we may call the Great Revolution, and it is upon
this Great Revolution that- we must rely to bring about
peace and stability on which eventually the universal
society can flourish.
What is the Great Revolution? It is a radical change in
the human condition. It ¡s a product of man's advancing
knowledge, his knowledge of how to control the material
conditions of his life on earth.
We are still only at the beginnings of this, the most
fundamental of all the revolutions and, in a sense, perhaps
the response to the revolutions which destroyed the ances¬
tral order and the old régime. The knowledge on which
this Great Revolution is based is a unique experience in
man's long history. Thus, already we know in theory and
in practice how to produce plenty in place of famine. That
marks a sharp break in the history of mankind. Fifty years
ago this knowledge did not exist. We know, too, how to
bring fresh water out of the ocean and to make the deserts
flourish. We know how to control conception and the wild
growth of population which threatens to nullify any pro¬
gress we make in improving the material conditions of life.
Therefore, we no longer have to be afraid that medicine
will save too many lives. We no longer have to rely on
epidemics and famine to keep the population from over¬
running the earth. We know that there need no longer be
any fear of a shortage of power anywhere on earth.
The conquest
of poverty
T the same time, we have at last begun to
Mearn how local and national and regional eco¬
nomies can be managed, how they can be brought under
human control and no longer left to the capricious play of
invisible forces. The art of managing the economy is
perhaps the youngest of all the arts. But as it Is perfected,
it is one of the most promising revolutions in the human
condition. For the sucessful management of the developed
economies should produce a rate of growth in the production
of wealth which can wipe out the material causes of social
conflict. At the same time, it should produce such ample
surplus that there will be quite sufficient capital available
to prime the pump in the less developed regions ot the
earth.
The modern age differs from all the ages that have gone
before in that the conquest of poverty has for the first time
become a rational object of policy for all states. This has
come about because of a conjuncture of discoveries and
inventions arising from new knowledge, from the sciences 09
and the arts which have to do with the conscious and deli-
berate regulation of human affairs the regulation of the
growth of population and the planning of its environment.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

24
THE GREAT REVOLUTION (Cont'd)
We are still a long way from the time when this knowledge
is perfected. We are even a long way from the time when
all governments will know how to use it. as it is being
perfected and will have the will to do so. We are still a
long way from the time when it will be the common sense
of all mankind. But undoubtedly the knowledge has begun
to exist, it has been applied, it is being tested and proved,
and we are dealing with something that exists, not with
something vaguely imagined.
The existence of this knowledge carries with It a certain
guarantee that it will not be lost and forgotten unless
civilization itself is destroyed. The knowledge is not the
secret of one man or of one country or of one ideology.
It is the common property of all men who wish to use it
and can learn to use it. Because this knowledge exists,
it will be applied. And being applied, it will by trial and
error be perfected more and more. Many of the superficial
revolutions in human history have come and gone and
been forgotten. But a revolution in man's knowledge of
the nature of things is, at least in modern times with
modern methods of keeping records, irreversible, and on
that thesis, I believe we can found our faith in the future.
Men have never before had reason to believe that the
conquest of poverty or the attainment of social peace ¡s a
possible and practical object of statesmanship. In this
half-century these objectives have in fact become just
that practical politics in the work-a-day world. The Great
Revolution is undercutting and undermining the dominant
ideological issues of this era. The Cold War will not be
settled by the victory of capitalism or of communism. On
the contrary, the Great Revolution will transcend the Cold
War because it will enable the pioneer societies to do
what neither capitalism nor communism has been able to
do for them, which is to move towards a standard of living
which is better than any that can be attained by a struggle
of classes.
The promise
of the Great Revolution
ND so, in conclusion, let me say that I have
Confidence in the future of the universal society
because it can now have a positive vocation, an affirmative
purpose, which can embrace and engage all the Interests
of men. This vocation and purpose is the conquest of
poverty and the making of social peace by carrying out the
promise of the Great Revolution.
From this vantage point we can look back over the half-
century during which there have been these two attempts
to organize an international society for the enforcement
of peace. Looking back, we can say that peace as such
has not been enough. Men will not make peace the
absence of struggle and conflict their paramount ¡deal.
For they have other Interests, some of which they cherish
more than life itself.
If the universal society is to live and flourish, It must
have some more interesting thing to do than to stand by,
and now and then to intervene in some quarrel when it
breaks out. Defence is a primary and indispensable func¬
tion of any organized society. But not defence alone. No
less indispensable is the promotion of the welfare of the
members of the society. This is true of all organized
governments, and it is true of the United Nations.
While the United Nations must do what it can to influence
the powers to make peace, while It must do what it can to
keep the peace, while it must rally its whole power and
influence to avert big war, it will not live by peace alone.
That is too grey an horizon. The horizon should be vivid
with splendour and hope. The masses of mankind from the
poorest to the richest are preoccupied above all else with
the problem of living with this Great Revolution which
brings the promise and the prospect of the fulfilment of
their hopes.
With these promises and these prospects of the Great
Revolution, the United Nations must Identify Itself.
A treaty without precedent in
modern diplomatic history, the
Antarctic Treaty, signed in
1959, made this vast ice¬
bound continent into an inter¬
national land of science where
nuclear explosions and any
kind of military activity are
prohibited (See The Unesco
Courier, Jan. 1962). Here, a
helicopter sets down on the
ice pack alongside a Japanese
observation ship taking part
in the large-scale Antarctic
research programma of the
International Geophysical Year.
Japanese Government photo

