More than 1,000 million
under-25's
What ¡s the proportion of young people among the world's popu¬
lation? Is this proportion the same in the developing and in the
industrialized countries? Do young people all over the world face
the same kind of problems? Because of the increasing role assu¬
med by youth in all sectors of modern life questions such as these
have now become of worldwide concern. Below, The Unesco Cou¬
rier puts a number of them to Mr. Acher Deleon, Director of Unes¬
co's Department of Adult Education and Youth Activities.
QUESTION. For some time past a good deal has been
said about the rise of the younger generation in the world
and its growing importance in national life. To what extent
does youth today represent a new force?
ANSWER. Statistics show that more than half of the
total world population is below the age of 25. In some
countries the proportion is even higher than 60%. In
short, the human race has never been so young.
But, it is very difficult to point to particular features
that are shared by all young people today, just as difficult
as to pick out trends that could apply to mankind as a
whole. The important fact that needs emphasizing is that
there has never been such a high percentage of young
people in the world's population.
A breakdown by regions of the five to 24 year age-
group shows that 900 million young people live in the
developing countries as against 200 million in Europe and
North America. Africa has 103 million young people, Latin
America 89 million, Asia 700 million, Europe 135 million
and North America 65 million.
This tremendous mass of youth, which creates a quite
new situation, is chiefly a result of a drop in infant mortality
and a rise in standards of living.
We need to remember that there is a far higher pro¬
portion of young people in the developing countries than
in the so-called developed countries. In my view the core
of the problem is the development of education, since the
number of young people requiring a basic general education
is increasing every day. Primary and higher education are
expanding all the time even though the results achieved
are still not satisfactory. Similarly the proportion of young
people in employment is also increasing all over the world.
Q. At first sight that sounds rather like a contradiction.
Wouldn't it be reasonable to suppose that the more young¬
sters there are in school, the more of them will be kept
out of economic life until they have finished studying?
A. The number of young people sharing in the econo¬
mic life of each country is increasing just the same. It
should be made clear though that the percentage of 10 to
14 year-olds who are economically active is much greater
in the developing countries than in the developed countries.
In other words, young people are working at an age when
they ought not to be.
Q. That's the real point. Doesn't the history of the
developed countries show that child labour has decreased
considerably in the last 100 years?
A. In the developing countries the proportion of chil¬
dren between the ages of 10 and 14 who work is six times
higher than in' the developed countries. That is a really
striking figure. The actual percentage is 31 in the develop¬
ing as against barely five in the developed, which means
that many children are obliged to go to work instead of
going to school. This is certainly a vital problem and it is
gradually being solved by the developing countries, for with
economic and social progress the proportion of. child labour
inevitably falls.
Not unnaturally this sometimes meets with opposition
from parents, for whom it means a drop in income, and
from employers who lose this lower-paid, and thus more
economical, child labour. On the other hand, adults, among
whom there are many unemployed in these countries, also
exert pressure in the other direction in defence of their
own interests.
Young people are now playing an increasing part in
social and political affairs. This seems to me a very impor¬
tant fact. We are in a period of transition in which it is
particularly necessary for youth to help in solving problems
since this provides an effective counterweight to the tra¬
ditionalism of certain countries.
Q. Even in the highly developed countries the propor¬
tion of young people who go on to higher education is still
extremely low, and this problem nearly always seems to be
linked to the quest/on of family means. Do you think this
is a general rule throughout the world or are these isolated
cases?
A. Unfortunately they are not isolated cases far from
it, in fact. Even so, things are improving. Or course the
solution won't be found as though one were waving a
magic wand by awarding scholarships, since the problem
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
51

OVER 1.000 MILLION UNDER-25'S (Cont'd)
Adapting society
to youth
is a psychological and social one. The kind of conditions
must be created that allow students of all levels of society
not only to attend universities but also to achieve good
results.
There is also another side to the question. It seems
to me that if so many problems concerning modern youth
have still not been solved, the reasons are not only
lack of determination and lack of means, but also because
of the fear that young people may one day turn against
established institutions. I think the young are the chief
sufferers from underdevelopment: they suffer perhaps more
than any other section of the community from a lack of
means. In some countries young people form the majority
of the unemployed. There are even countries with a very
high percentage of young people who have completed their
studies but have not found employment.
Fortunately, there is a new trend toward voluntary or
organized participation by young people in national develop¬
ment. And young people themselves are increasingly aware
of the part they can play.
Q. Doesn't this Increased awareness of their new role
sometimes lead young people into political activities which
bring conflict with adults and tend to complicate the
situation?
A. I agree that young people who become aware of
the role they can play do find themselves in opposition to
adults. But I wouldn't say this necessarily complicates the
situation. I would even say that in many cases it makes
the solution of problems easier.
Q. What about the apathy shown by young people
towards social and political problems that has been noted
in some countries?
A. Such apathy is dangerous because it shows a
lack of interest in the community. It is extremely serious
and it may even be a danger for economic and social
development since these young people will be the citizens
of tomorrow and therefore responsible for what goes on in
the world. And there are other problems to be solved. In
some countries young people have little protection. Even
when they are lucky enough not to be unemployed, they are
badly paid and live in difficult conditions. They are often
badly housed. Their opportunities for intellectual develop¬
ment and for vocational training are also very restricted.
That brings me to the sense of frustration felt by young
people. I think this problem is being given increasing
attention by politicians, scientists, sociologists, youth move¬
ments, governments and international organizations.
Q. Frustration has been called the root cause of juve¬
nile delinquency. Would you agree with this?
A. Yes, I think it is one of the chief causes of problems
that affect all young people today. Frustration, in very
different forms of course, is the basic cause not only of
delinquency, but also of social disequilibrium and malad¬
justment. The real problem is not the eradication of delin¬
quency, but the social adaptation of youth. And if there
is to be a healthy equilibrium, not only must youth become
adapted to society; society will also have to learn how
to adapt itself to youth.
ACHER DELEON has been director of Unesco's Department of
Adult Education and Youth Activities since 1963. Formerly Secretary
W) of the Central Council of Yugoslav Trade Unions, Mr Deleon
has been connected in his own country with the work of Unesco
since 1953, and has been a member of Unesco's International
Committee for the Advancement of Adult Education.

