MONUMENTS
IN PERIL
A WORLD CAMPAIGN TO PROTECT
OUR CULTURAL HERITAGE
Our December 1964 issue reviewed the results of
the International Campaign to Save the Monu¬
ments of Nubia. The present number is devoted to
the International Campaign for Monuments which
Unesco launched last June. The campaign's purpose
is to foster greater public and official awareness of
the need to safeguard our monuments and cultural
treasures of the past from the neglect and ravages
of time which often endanger them. Where these
monuments are in peril, Unesco's member states
have been called upon to take direct action for their
protection. It is hoped that this issue will help to
focus attention and interest on this important
cultural problem facing many countries today.
Carcassonne in Southwest France
appears today exactly as it did in medie¬
val times, thanks to a remarkable feat of
restoration in the 19th century which has
saved it for posterity. The ramparts were
themselves built on the ruins of earlier
walls raised by the Romans and Visigoths.
© Paul Almasy, Paris
wmiii i
.' * i . X
*> v II *
^^/#|#>*X«;¿
¡P * . ¡j -y-3 x v ' i-. «
I NE of man's distinctive features ¡s his habit of
leaving behind on the soil from which he wrests
his livelihood all sorts of remains which provide a record
of his history. As the centuries go by, most of them are
reduced to ruins, to piles of stone or brick, sometimes
even to a mere succession of layers like the layers of
sediment at the bottom of the sea.
Digging into the earth, we come across these remnants
of ancient civilizations a blackened area with its reminder
of a fire, a layer of silt that means a flood has passed that
way, or the traces of far-reaching geological events alternat¬
ing with layers in which the vestiges of vanished cultures
appear.
But from age to age, man reconstructs in order to meet
new needs. He may again use the old stones, grind marble
to dust and make lime of it, demolishing what he regards
as useless and rebuilding on the same foundations. When
a city is no longer in keeping with the political structure of
a people or drops in status through a monarch's whim, or
war or pestilence have taken their toll, its fate is neglect
and, unless newcomers unwittingly camp in its ruins, no
one cares any more about its origins or its history. That
has happened for thousands of years.
Nevertheless, some special buildings and places such as
sacred precincts, temples and the tombs of the mighty,
were designed to last forever and were generally respec¬
ted by those who came after; and certain public construc¬
tions, such as fortifications, could endure for centuries
without losing their utility. In any case, man instinctively
built, if not for eternity, at least for his descendants.
Knowing how brief his own span of life was, he speculated
on the continuity of his institutions. With great labour and
expense, a community would erect the palace of a reigning
dynasty, a city hall, a market, a theatre or a place for
games. In the course of time, a new religion might appro¬
priate the temples of its predecessor, a republic might take
over the residence of a fallen prince. But when piety grew
faint, the heroes were forgotten or the prince took up
residence elsewhere, then the public buildings were
abandoned.
Then, again, wars were as fatal as revolutions to these
constructions that came to be associated with a hostile
authority. From time immemorial, the enemies of a religion
have sacked its holy places, rebels have turned their fury
on all that glorified the rulers, and invaders have wished to
wipe out all trace of the greatness of the people they have
conquered. A change of dynasty or of regime, even a
change of taste, was enough to condemn great buildings
to neglect and even to demolition. Repairs or additions
were nearly always made in the style of the new era.
The restoration of a building, often revered solely on
account of its age, was mostly in the nature of a recon¬
struction under new forms that revealed the new architects'
lack of interest in the work of their predecessors. Not
until comparatively recently have Europeans begun to
regard ancient works as relics that have survived from a
glorious past.
At first, their interest was simply one aspect of the
universal curiosity of the age of the Renaissance, which
devoted the same energy to exploring lands and seas as
it did to the study of remote history, discovering, beyond

ir* ,
|ÜX**
íS» ;' »Î üí %4É
%í ' \ V
¿b^V%
the immediate past, the more exciting record of Greek
genius and Roman grandeur, precious relics of which still
survived. These relics were greeted with enthusiastic
admiration by the humanists who styled them "monuments"
In the sense in which the word is used today.
While literary monuments parchments and papyruses
were copied and published at that time and antique statues
were cleared of debris and set up in palaces and in gardens,
it must be admitted that many an architectural monument
even some of the most admired, which artists sought to
imitate or equal continued to be used as a quarry.
Furthermore, as old values inevitably collapsed, Europe
seeking its ideal in classical antiquity, broke with the Middle
Ages; the works of that period met with less and less under¬
standing and were often ruthlessly destroyed.
Not until the 18th century did Europe at last rediscover
its medieval past and, following the teaching of certain
enlightened spirits, learn to take an interest in the works
of all civilizations, in the monuments of all countries, of all
peoples and of all ages.
This interest was matched during the* same period by the
beginnings of scientific archaeology, thanks to which the
study of ancient relics replaced the "treasure hunt" of the
preceding centuries. The miraculous excavations of Pompeii
and Herculaneum and, later, the exploration of towns
that had been swallowed up by the desert or the jungle,
made it possible to resurrect vanished civilizations. Ruins
acquired some meaning; and castles and old dwellings,
churches and convents likewise took on a new significance.
By now we have reached the point when we can read the
full record of man's mastery over the earth in those monu¬
ments which reflect the spiritual aspirations or social Ideas
of their times, as also in the buildings and engineering
works which served to meet the needs of everyday life.
Walls, gates, aqueducts and canals, bridges and old roads;
the traces of industries which have died out, illustrating how
the elements were tamed by human ingenuity; every vestige
bearing the imprint of human thought, everything denoting
the triumph of man over nature, seems worthy of our
interest.
Even in the case of buildings whose purpose was strictly
utilitarian, some concern for elegance can usually be
detected in the handling of practical problems, while there
is likewise an underlying harmony of proportions, a rhythm,
an interplay of line and colour, and dimensions which reflect
and harmonize with a given site and environment, all pro¬
ducing a lasting impression which will be a source of
pleasure and satisfaction to builder and spectator alike.
This pleasure is still felt, even after many generations, even
if we know nothing of the history or are ill prepared to
understand the artistic language of the time, for beauty
responds to a craving of our innermost being.
As we begin to appreciate these long-ignored treasures,
we become aware of their fragility and of the gravity of
the dangers which threaten them. An over-dry or humid
climate, sun or frost, sand or wind, vegetation or parasites
and, still worse, atmospheric pollution, will cause any
ancient building to crumble slowly unless it is constantly
cared for. Then, again, a monument may suffer from
excessive care or exaggerated renovations. Or it may
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

MONUMENTS IN PERIL (Cont'd)
deteriorate as the result of unfortunate changes in its
setting.
Man himself is still the most dangerous enemy of man's
creations not only man the warrior, the avenger, the van¬
dal, the iconoclast; the town planner, the engineer, the
builder, are just as much to be feared when, thinking only
in terms of practical efficiency, they confine their ambitions
to the task in hand" and take no care to check the harsh
dynamism of their age the economic pressures, the explo¬
sive growth of cities, the chaotic spread of suburbs and
industrialized areas. The example of dams and great
hydro-electric works submerging all cultural property, both
what is visible and what still lies hidden beneath the soil,
reflects in gravity and extent the whole problem of the
choice that has to be made between the heritage of the
past and the requirements of the future.
Between these two imperatives a compromise must at all
costs be found. The saving of the monuments of Nubia,
following an appeal made by Unesco, proves that it is
feasible, even on an international scale. And it is at the
international level that the protection of monuments against
the dangers of wholesale destruction must be sought, since
the maintenance of world peace is obviously a prerequisite
for their conservation, now that no building from the past
can withstand the effects of modern armaments.
NOTHER conclusion can be drawn from the
large-scale works of restoration which have
been carried out during recent decades, namely that we
now have the necessary technical means to protect,
repair, restore and, if necessary, even transfer any monu¬
ment. Moreover, in many countries monuments are
afforded special protection by legislation which regulates
and services which carry out all operations in this field.
This would appear to mean that we are equipped to
ensure the full conservation of the wealth of archaeolo¬
gical remains and other monuments in the world.
Would such conservation be likely to turn large parts
of the world into one gigantic museum? The cham¬
pions of the monuments, even the most stubborn, think so
extreme a solution unfeasible; they agree that the course
of technical progress cannot be reversed, and that in
certain cases it may require the sacrifice of buildings
associated with outmoded ways of working or of living. It is
also clear from experience that the dynamism of an era will
have the last word. Tremendous efforts are needed to save
even a limited number of monuments.
Even then, well-planned and conscientiously applied
legislation, good technical facilities and adequate financial
means are not enough. Monuments are certain to be pre¬
served only when ordinary citizens, realizing the value of
a given monument and knowing that with it something
irreparable will be lost, then combine of their own accord
to ensure that it will be preserved.
Monuments must be publicized and understood, and
friends be found for them, near and far. Thanks to the
extraordinary facilities for mass communication now avail¬
able, this can be done. The outline of a temple buried in the
depths of the desert becomes familiar to magazine readers,
cinema audiences and children at school. Tourists, once
they know about them, are only too eager to visit monuments
that lie along their route and offer an excuse for excursions,
even to out-of-the-way sites.
If the fate of a monument rests in the hands of an
6 effective administrative service, it will arouse interest far
beyond the circle of specialists and be a familiar image to
great numbers of people who will regard it with affection,
even if they are from other countries, some of them remote
indeed.
There is reason to hope, therefore, that this attitude will
become world-wide, fostering in all peoples an awareness
of their joint responsibility for monuments. In launching an
International Campaign for Monuments, Unesco seeks to
deepen this awareness and to facilitate the preservation of
the cultural heritage of mankind while at the same time
enhancing this heritage by making monuments an integral
part of the everyday life of peoples.
Admittedly, if we view the monuments of architecture in
relation to their restless environment, many obstacles to
that integration will become apparent. It often seems that
certain buildings especially those that no longer serve any
practical purpose are simply there in defiance of the
modernization in towns, as an obstacle to traffic and a
heavy financial burden. If, therefore, a monument is for¬
tunate enough still to serve its original purpose religious,
political or social it will be essential to see that it con¬
tinues to do so, even if some practical draw-backs are
involved; otherwise a use should be found for it, or it might
be adapted to some new purpose.
If it is to survive, it must, in one way or another, take
its place in ordinary life, help to mould the taste of the
younger generation, serve as a splendid illustration of an
historical period, remain or become a symbol, the emblem
of a town or a township, a familiar landmark in some rural
or urban area. It could serve as a starting point for town
planning, the justification for the maintenance or the crea¬
tion of a park, a place of rest in our feverish cities, bringing
to our distracted times a moment of quiet repose.
Most states, fortunately, are alive to the advantages of
doing this in the interests of tourists, and citizens as a whole
are not altogether indifferent to the resulting aesthetic,
cultural and practical benefits.
Nevertheless, it is impossible to make intelligent use of
a monument unless the responsible authorities, the town
planners and architects, and the owners of land and house
property come to agree that there is no common denomina¬
tor between the drawbacks entailed in the preservation of
a monument and the absolute gain derived from its beauty,
its human significance, and its spiritual aura.
I T is thus clear that, in the last analysis, the
question of the life or death of monuments
is one that closely concerns us and that the issue is
very clear-cut: either we assume in regard to the future
the responsibility for allowing a large part of these relics
of past civilizations to disappear, and thereby deprive
future generations of the opportunity of becoming acquaint¬
ed with the works handed down to us from the past,
by sacrificing them to the arrogant and intoxicating
adventure of a new world which will be the negation
of the old; or else we accept the principle of human
solidarity in time as in space and, adopting a new
approach, play our true historical role, knowing that we
live in an age in which it is no longer necessary to destroy
in order to create, which is perfectly capable of making
respect for what has been handed down from the past part
and parcel of its most daring plans for the future, and which
has the means of helping present-day man to commune
with the great works of his ancestors.
By adopting the second attitude, there can be no doubt
that we shall enhance the chances of seeing a more humane
civilization arise, in which the knowledge of the past will
find its place side by side with the discoveries by which
man hopes to better his future.
