TWO-THIRDS OF WORLD'S BOOKS
PRODUCED BY TWELVE COUNTRIES
\
APN
A book at least 49 pages
Until November 1964 there was no
uniform international definition of what
constitutes a book. The variety of criteria
used in different countries for defining a
book complicated the work of preparing
and interpreting publishing statistics. In
Italy, for example, a book was classed as
having at least 100 pages; India had no
stipulations on size. In November 1964,
the General Conference of Unesco unani¬
mously adopted a "Recommendation ' con¬
cerning the international standardization of
statistics relating to book production and
periodicals", which defines a book as "a
non-periodical printed publication of at least
49 pages, exclusive of the cover pages".
This recommendation classifies a pamphlet
as "a non-periodical publication of at least
five but not more than 48 pages, exclusive
of the cover pages", and also defines a
first edition, a re-edition, a reprint, a
translation and a title.
Publisher's windfall
A single best-seller, published in several
hundreds of thousands of copies and intelli¬
gently exploited, has often kept a publish¬
ing house going for several years, counter¬
balancing careless management, errors of
judgement and commercial blunders serious
enough to endanger the business.
Literature and languages
Twelve literary languages are each
commonly used by more than 50 million
people. In order of numerical importance
they are: Chinese, English, Russian, Hindi,
Spanish, German, Japanese, Bengali, Arabic,
French, Portuguese and Italian. The English
language area includes two great economic
powers, U.S.A. and U.K., and also takes
in the countries of the British Common¬
wealth. Like the English, the Spanish
group is widely dispersed, but the nations
comprising it are less economically deve¬
loped. The French group also has branches
extending overseas (Canada, Haiti, West
Indies and Africa), but its numerical impor¬
tance comes from France, Belgium and
Switzerland.
World book production
Total annual world production of titles
between 1960 and 1963 was as follows:
360,000; 375,000; 385,000 and 400,000. The
English, French, German and Spanish share
of this production totalled 34% In 1952
and about 36% in 1962. In the English-
language area, the U.S.A. is now replacing
the U.K. as the leading producer. The
sudden rise in U.S. production is largely
due to the mass publication of paperbacks.
Paperback sales in the U.S. had already
reached one million daily by 1960.
In 1962 production in the socialist countries
(not Including mainland China) almost exact¬
ly equalled the combined production of the
English, French, German and Spanish ling¬
uistic areas. It totalled some 125,000 titles
of world production.
Giants of publishing
Six countries produce more than
20,000 titles a year. By volume of produc¬
tion they are: U.S.S.R., mainland China,
Germany (figures for the Federal Republic
alone or including those of Eastern Ger¬
many), Japan and U.S.A. Six other coun¬
tries France, India, Spain, Italy, the
Netherlands and Czechoslovakia each
publish about 10,000 titles annually. Twelve
countries alone produce two-thirds of
the world's books. The 80,000 or so
volumes published in the U.S.S.R. are not
all books according to the 1964 Unesco
definition. Many Soviet titles are actually
counted several times, since the figure of
80,000 relates not only to books in the
Russian language, but to volumes in
93 languages (61 used by the peoples of
the U.S.S.R. and 32 foreign languages)
Yet even if only the works publish¬
ed in Russian and distributed through
normal commercial channels are counted,
Soviet production is still the highest of
any country in the world, with over
30.000 titles.
One man's book
India ranks as a leading book publisher
because it counts even short pamphlets
as books. It should actually be classed
much lower in world publishing. If Italy
had a less strict definition of books it
would be on the same footing as France in
terms of production, and the same is true
of Czechoslovakia. No details are available
on the classification of books in mainland
China.
Growing need for paper
In 1950, the English speaking countries
of America were consuming more than half
of the world's supply of printing paper. By
1960 this consumption had dropped to
43.2%. During the same period Europe
and Latin America remained at the same
level while the Pacific region basically
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
15

Australia and New Zealand showed a
slight advance.
The most spectacular progress was made
by the Afro-Asian countries: an increase of
242.5% for Africa and 512.3% for Asia.
In Asia this advance was not limited to
economically developed countries such as
Japan and mainland China, but also extend¬
ed over the whole of this vast area where
such countries as Burma, Cambodia, Iraq
and Israel increased their consumption of
printing and writing paper tenfold. The
outstanding case was Syria whose
consumption per head rose from .01 kilo¬
grammes per year in 1950 to 0.3 kilogram¬
mes in 1960. The same development is
taking place in Africa where paper
consumption in the newly-independent
countries rose from 6,000 tons in 1950 to
90,000 tons in 1960.
A rare book: the best-seller
Best-sellers are extremely rare and repre¬
sent barely two to three per cent of
successful books. The best-seller is deter¬
mined not by the number of copies sold
but by the type of sales pattern. A book
may be a best-seller with a sale of 50,000
just as easily as with one of three million.
Very few books have a long life. Out of
a hundred published, scarcely ten sell a
year later and ten times fewer twenty years
later.
Translation test
Books are first tried out in a certain
literary market, language area, ideological
bloc or State. When a book fails this test,
there is no longer any question of translat¬
ing it even though, in other countries
there may be an unsuspected public eager
to welcome it.
Books and world trade
The book trade occupies a relatively
minor place in international trade. The
world's chief book exporters are U.K.,
Netherlands, U.S.A., France, Switzerland
and the Federal Republic of Germany. In
none of these countries, however, do book
exports account for as much as one per
cent of global national exports. Yet the
volume of trading in books is continually
increasing. In terms of tonnage rather than
price, book exports have doubled in most
countries over the past ten years.
Costly transport
16
In "Trade Barriers to Knowledge",
published in Paris in 1956, Unesco review¬
ed the diversity of laws existing in 92 coun¬
tries. The Universal Postal Union has
urged its member countries to system¬
atically reduce postal rates for books
and to simplify customs and administrative
formalities generally. Great progress has
been made in this direction since 1952 and
some fifty states have acted on the Univer¬
sal Postal Union recommendations. Since
1953 airline companies in the International
Air Transport Association have applied the
tariff for periodicals and catalogues to
books.
But the transport of books is still costly.
Even in countries where books are class¬
ed as printed matter, the cost of sending
a volume of average size is 3 U.S. cents.
This sum may seem trivial for a single,
expensive book, but when bulk distribution
is involved it affects the retail price con¬
siderably.
Major exporters
Nine-tenths of U.S.S.R. book exports are
taken by the socialist countries. Just under
half of U.S. exports go to other English-
speaking countries, where they meet compe¬
tition from Great Britain. Excluding books
sent to other socialist countries, Soviet
exports are as follows: Western Europe,
41%; English-speaking America, 21%; Far
East, 16%; Latin America, 6%; Near East,
4%; Africa, 3%; miscellaneous, 7%.
Excluding books sent to English-language
areas, American book exports are as
follows: Far East, 33%; Latin America,
27%; Europe, 25%; Near East, 8%; Africa,
4%; miscellaneous, 8%.
The importance of these enormous dis¬
tribution channels increases yearly. One
of their chief advantages is their suitability
for distributing the functional type of book
in the developing countries. In nearly every
case technical reasons prevent the importer
countries from producing these types of
books at present.
Decade of changes
World book production as a whole
increased by some 40% between 1952 and
1962, but dropped in several countries.
Among middle-range producers whose
publishing declined were Belgium
(25% drop) and Italy (16%). Some coun¬
tries made spectacular advances. Mainland
China's production, increased tenfold in
six years. U.S. production rose by 85%
to rival Japan's for 4th world place; ten
years earlier the U.S.A. was sixth. The
new publishing status of English-speaking
America is confirmed by the rise of
Canada's production from 684 titles to
3,600 in ten years.
A barrier to books
One obstacle to the circulation of books
is the diversity of the world's languages.
Twelve main languages are spoken by more
than three-quarters of the world's popula¬
tion in the following proportions: Chinese,
25%; English, 11%; Russian, 8.3%; Hindi,
6.25%; Spanish, 6.25%; German, 3.75%;
Japanese, 3.75%; Bengali, 3%; Arabic,
2.7%; French, 2.7%; Portuguese, 2.5% and
Italian, 2.1%. Written languages present
a different picture. Using only eight lan¬
guages it is possible to communicate with
three-quarters of the people in the world:
This time the breakdown is: English, 18.1%;
Chinese, 16.9%; Russian, 15.9%; Spanish,
5.2%; German, 5%; Japanese, 5%; French,
3.2% and Italian, 2.4%.
Channel for free thought
The Netherlands has a long tradition of
publishing and bookselling. When absolute
monarchies were interfering with the flow
of ideas in the 17th and 18th centuries,
Dutch books kept open a channel for the
expression of free thought. Today the
Netherlands receives much from abroad
(16% of its book production relates to
translations) and exports a great deal.
Between 1946 and 1960, its book exports
rose from $1.3 million to $33 million. Out
of 7,893 titles published in 1960, 1,140
were in foreign languages.
