In a supermarket (left) a housewife interrupts grocery shopping to buy books. Right, mobile
shop brings new books to factory workers. Forerunner of press, radio, films and tele¬
vision, the book has now taken its place alongside these media of mass communication.

WANTED: A NEW DIALOGUE
BETWEEN AUTHORS & READERS
The impact of the mass circulation book is not merely
one of quantity. What we are witnessing today is
a complete transformation in ideas about books and
about the relationship between the author and his new
public. The problem of opening a "dialogue" between
author and reader is examined by Robert Escarpit in,
"La Révolution du Livre" (The Revolution in Books)
from which the following text is adapted. Professor
Escarpit's book will appear in English later this year.
HE writer has not yet found his place in the
contemporary community. The reason for this
is perhaps that the modern community is an enormous
mutual security structure designed to protect its members
from the hazards of nature in the raw and man's estate.
But there is no way of protecting writers as such. True,
they can be given the same social security as all other
citizens, old-age pensions, free medical care, and legal aid,
but they cannot be insured against their literary hazards.
We are now sufficiently well acquainted with the
mechanics of literary life to appreciate that the writer pro¬
poses and the public disposes and so it must be. Liter¬
ature is born out of this intercommunication, derives its
sustenance therefrom and develops because of it. But it
¡s a murderous system in the sense that, for every 'thousand
works conceived, ten come to birth and one to maturity.
The proportion can, of course, be improved by various
technical devices, notably by broadening the social bases
of intercommunication, by improving distribution channels,
by giving the reader better and more frequent opportunities
of expressing his considered judgement, but the hazards
cannot be eliminated nor even reduced to any significant
extent.
... A writer's success is not quite the same as a publi¬
sher's. It is not enough for a book to sell well and provide
a certain return. . How indeed could we calculate the
interest on an investment reckoned in terms of life, thought
and action? Whatever' his financial gains, the writer never
recovers his capital; he works without security. We can,
none the less, accept an economic definition of a writer's
success: it is the point at which the .sales of one of his
books enable him to live by his writing. This point, more¬
over, represents another aspect of success the point at
which a writer saturates his possible public.
There is too much talk nowadays of how reading should
be "guided" and readers "directed." These are dangerous 11
terms which, in any case, have nothing to do with the true
role of criticism, which is to bear witness rather than
to teach.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

A NEW DIALOGUE (Cont'd)
The snares of success
Nowadays, the critic can speak to the general public
on behalf of literature and can reach that public. He need
do no more than become an adapter or commentator. A
sensitive and straightforward analysis of a text is tremen¬
dously effective on the television screen. The interpreta¬
tion of a literary masterpiece on television or radio may
perhaps be a misconstruction of the work, but it is certainly
of the type of those that have been called creative miscon¬
structions. Film producers have always encouraged people
to see the film after reading the book. To read the
book after seeing the film is no less to be recommended
and in all probability more fruitful.
Any literary criticism suited to mass circulation literature
should be based on a knowledge of the literary behaviour
of the public at large, acquired from inside, and personal
experience of it. In the extreme case, it may even be
considered that the critic is not absolutely needed as an
intermediary. In the socialist countries, contacts between
writers and workers in various sectors are systematically
organized, being based on living as a community and
working as a team.
These methods are undoubtedly effective but it is diffi¬
cult to do without an organizer to establish a common
language and prevent misunderstandings. Here, perhaps, is
the new figure needed in our present age the cultural
leader who does not restrict himself to the facile resources
of image and sound but uses them in order to undertake,
with all the intellectual humility and team spirit required,
the difficult task of organizing communication between the
people at large and the individual.
The success of mass-circulation literature depends on
the existence of such exchanges. The meeting ground
will necessarily be non-literary precisely because the
exchanges must go beyond the limits of the cultivated
public. Even if a writer and a reader are physically and
intellectually very distant from one another, the sharing
of trade union, political, religious or even just sports activi¬
ties may make it possible to create the conditions required
for communication between them.
It is here that the literary prize, so often and unfairly
denounced, may take on a fresh significance. Such
attempts at making a responsible selection from a necess¬
arily anarchic output are useful and even vital in them-
I.EOXAIll) HKIiXSTKIVS YOINU PKIII'I.K'S CnXCKKTS
I.ir n-rtillnr ,n>i i;.r-:ni..
12
INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHERS
CONGRESS
Four subjects of special interest to Unescoobs¬
tacles to the free flow of books, international copy¬
right, educational publishing and books for deve¬
loping countries were among the topics discussed
by the 17th Triennial Congress of the International Pub¬
lishers Association, which was held in Washington D.C.
(U.S.A.) from May 30 to June 5. The theme of the
Congress was "The World and the Book : Publishing in
an Age of Change."
In a message to the Congress, the Director-General
of Unesco, M. René Maheu, reminded delegates that
the historic role of books as a vehicle for the communi¬
cation of ideas has been revolutionized by social and
technological change. "The acute shortage of books
which exists In the vast and populous developing regions
of the world is a matter of common concern," said Mr.
Maheu. "This poverty of reading material . . . constitutes
a formidable barrier to education and to social and
economic advancement generally. The General Confe¬
rence of Unesco, at its last session, called for a co¬
ordinated programme designed to increase the availa¬
bility of books in the developing countries ... I believe
that the International Publishers Association and Unesco
are uniquely equipped, in partnership, to provide the
impetus for this great enterprise."
Illustration from
"Leonard Bern¬
stein's Young Peo¬
ple's Concerts," a
U.S. book record¬
ing T.V. program¬
mes on music
for young people.
(Simon and Shus-
ter. New York.)
Illustration from "If
Apples Had Teeth,"
an amusing collec¬
tion of illustrated
"ifs" by Milton
and Shirley Gla¬
ser, published by
Alfred A. Knopf,
New York.
selves. They essentially imply an academy, for through
them a representative selection of cultivated people belong¬
ing to a certain social group clearly and firmly express the
preferences of that group. .
In various forms, the system operated very satisfactorily
for centuries, in fact so long as the cultivated group
remained relatively small and homogeneous. The diffi¬
culties began in the nineteenth century, and have steadily
increased up to the present, as new social groups took
their place in forming literary opinion, set up their own
academic standards and developed their own judgements.
One of the results of this increase in the number of acade¬
mies, whether avowedly such or not, is the present plethora
of literary prizes which deprives the selection of all its
value.
But there is something still more serious to be consi¬
dered. In an élite culture, values remain stable whereas,
in a mass culture, they are fluid and constantly called in
question since what is involved is a way of life rather than
a way of being. The academic accolade of the literary
prize is, in the literal sense of the word, a consecration.
It marks out the author as one entitled to the enduring
respect of his peers for certain merit which can never
again be depreciated, but it also places him irremediably

out of reach of the people as a whole by transforming him
into a celebrity.
This phenomenon of celebrity, very clearly recognized
by Carlyle as early as 1840, dates from the earliest large-
scale printings at the beginning of the nineteenth century,
one of the most spectacular examples at that time was
the Byron cult. By no means all the winners of the Prix
Goncourt or the Nobel Prizes in our own day receive
the hero worship from which Byron suffered and which
was almost comparable with that now extended towards
film stars, but the mere prestige of their award turns
them, as it were, into institutions, legends, totems or, at
best, shining examples. This is one of the swiftest forms
of that literary death which accompanies success and,
unless he has an exceptional determination to recreate
himself and maintain his independence, no writer can hope
to escape it.
With or without mass-circulation books, societies pos¬
sessing a long-established literary tradition will find it
difficult to preserve themselves from the academic reaction
and will long continue to treat their writers as intellectual
heroes, but the younger nations where literature is currently
emerging must beware of the snare of institutiona¬
lization. .
If they set up literary prizes and they would be wrong
to disdain this method of selecting and encouraging writers
they will have to ensure that these reflect broad currents
of opinion deriving from the inmost feelings of the people,
even perhaps before the intellect comes into play at all.
With all due respect, it may be asked whether those
mysterious groundswells which lift up to the heights of
glory this or that singer or musician, or even this or that
poet who has chosen the record as his medium, may not
be more effective and more authentic than the pondered
judgements of the experts. The ideal would be for the
two forms of evaluation to be in agreement but this is still,
for the time being, a vain hope.
We must, after all, face up to the facts. The present mu¬
tation in the world of books may prove successful but will
be neither complete nor final. We may talk of mass circu¬
lation but by no means all the "masses" are involved. Even
in the most advanced countries, only a fraction of those
able to read will take to reading during the present stage
that fraction which succeeds in gaining control of the
social structures required for that end.
In the developing countries and we must bear in mind
that the reading public in Asia represents a quarter of the
total population and in Africa one-eighth many other sta¬
ges and many other mutations will be needed before what¬
ever is to replace books as they now are (perhaps at no
very distant date) can ensure that the messages of infor¬
mation and culture circulate freely among all men.
But even then there will still be active and passive
readers. There will always be people who, through idleness,
timidity or inclination, will decline communication with the
writer. There will always be those who love books as
objects and will not dissociate the message of the binder
and the printer from that of the writer.
This is of no great importance. The main thing is to
ensure that active readers should be more and more num-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
Unesco - A. Tessore
THE FASCINATION OF STORY BOOKS. Children choose books from a mobile library
serving a Budapest suburb. -All over the world books for children and young people have
multiplied enormously in the past twenty years, and many are now illustrated by leading artists.
In the U.S.A. over 220,000 copies priced at less than S1.00 each were sold in 1964.

A NEW DIALOGUE (Cont'd)
To vanquish hunger
of the mind
14
erous and more and more receptive. There is no reason
why plastic values should not be integrated with the values
of action, intelligence and sensitivity, in fact with all those
values which give reading its place in human life. The
revolution in publishing is the most liberal of all revolutions.
All it asks is that there be neither prejudice nor inflexibi¬
lity. Fetishism or fanaticism attached to books are incom¬
patible with the generosity of books. Books are like bread.
Throughout the world, the production of grain and the basic
foodstuff derived from it was primitive man's great victory
over hunger. The result was that bread became something
almost holy, the symbol of liberating labour, survival and
communion. The instinctive reactions of many peoples
especially the French still embody this sort of innate res¬
pect for bread, which is obscurely enshrined in their collec¬
tive memory as a saviour.
Books are the object of the same sort of unacknowledged
veneration since they were the bread of the mind, the great
victory achieved by somewhat less primitive men over
ignorance and the slavery it means. A book which does
not last, an ephemeral book, a book which is an act and
not necessarily a lasting reality, a treasure to be preserved,
a possession for all time, is something which profoundly
shocks our instinctive feelings and may even disgust us.
T the same time, we are very well aware that
^the poor man's bread in the present day world
has ceased to be a symbol and has become a mere
metaphor, and a bad one at that. We know that the world's
hunger will not be overcome this time by the individual
magic of the ear or the loaf, but by a vast collective effort
bringing into play all the scientific, technical, and mechanical
resources of the advanced civilizations, by a profound and
systematic reform of social structures, by a concerted
world policy which will affect many other sectors besides
those of agriculture and food.
Nor can the great hunger of the mind be overcome in any
other way. The individual demands of writers, the refined
tastes of cultivated book lovers, should be given neither
more nor less weight in our plans for the future than the
majestic gesture of the sower or the gastronomy of Brillât-
Savarin in the discussions of the Food and Agriculture
Organization.
We must deny nothing, but nor must we interpose anything
between books and life, and especially not myths. We are
living in an age when great things are being done by teams
assisted by machines. We readily accept this for the arts
which have developed along with mass civilization, such as
radio, television and films, not to mention the theatre, where
there is direct contact with the audience and where the
principle has always been more or less accepted. We must
now go on to accept it in respect of books.
It goes without saying that the very nature of reading will
always necessitate a greater measure of solitude than other
forms of communication or artistic expression, but the soli¬
tude of the writer, like the solitude of the reader, is not
anti-social. It is only the means whereby each may find the
other. A man reading alone in his room often has more
companions than if he were watching a film with a thousand
other spectators in a cinema.
It is this inherent virtue of books which must be main¬
tained and developed. Dissemination, limitless and cease¬
lessly renewed communication among all men that is the
true function of the book. Once it ceases to fulfil it,
however fine its appearance and however noble its content,
it is merely so much waste paper, a soulless treasure.
A "bibliocopter" lands a new stock of books for a library in an isolated
village in the mountains of Soviet Turkestan, Central Asia. Today the
U.S.S.R. has some 400,000 public libraries of all kinds, from the huge Lenin
Library in Moscow down to local lending libraries in factories and farms.
