THE GULF STREAM
OF THE PACIFIC
by Konstantin Fedorov
On July 1, 1965, the first comprehensive multi-ship survey of the Kuroshio
Current in the Pacific Ocean began as part of the Co-operative Study of
the Kuroshio and Adjacent Regions undertaken by the Intergovernmental
Océanographie Commission of Unesco. It is planned to carry on this
work over several years. Thirty-six research vessels from six countries
have undertaken the first phase of this study from July to October, thus
embarking on another large-scale international océanographie expedition
aimed at unravelling the secrets of the worlds' oceans. Scientific explo¬
ration of this part of the ocean will undoubtedly increase the economic
benefits to countries bordering it. It will also serve to develop scientific
potential of the region by stimulating broader scientific interest and stronger
national support for the programme. Delegates from the 54 member states
of the Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission met recently at
Unesco's H.Q. tc examine the first results of the Kuroshio study.
OST people are familiar with the famous
'oceanic current called the Gulf Stream and may
know that as it drifts eastwards across the Atlantic it
transports enormous quantities of warm water, thus serving
as a sort of "hot water bottle" for the whole of Europe.
Fewer are aware, however, that the Gulf Stream and the
temperature contrast it creates in the North Atlantic greatly
facilitate the formation of the atmospheric disturbances
known as cyclones which are of such concern to European
meteorologists.
It is perhaps strange, but true nevertheless, that even less
people have heard of the Gulf Stream's sister current in the
Pacific called the Kuroshio which, in its part of the world,
plays a role in many ways and for some nations even more
significant than that of the Gulf Stream in the Atlantic
area. Of course, my Japanese colleagues might point out
that there is hardly a schoolboy in Japan who does not
know about the Kuroshio, and this is true since the whole
life of this country depends on this strong and warm
oceanic current.
We are familiar from childhood with rivers and quite
naturally think that every river should have its shores.
The Gulf Stream and the Kuroshio are rivers without shores
great rivers in great oceans.
They are by no means undiscernable on the vast and
deceptive uniformity of the oceanic surface. Kuroshio is a
Japanese word meaning "black current." Seen from an
aeroplane it manifests itself by a sudden change in the
water's colour from azure to deep cobalt blue, almost ultra¬
marine. An observant passenger on a steamer seeing
nn KONSTANTIN FEDOROV is secretary of the Intergovernmental
¿g Océanographie Commission and director of the Office of Oceano¬
graphy at Unesco. A Soviet oceanographer, he has taken part
in many océanographie expeditions in the Arctic, Baltic and Medi-
' terranean seas and the Pacific and Indian oceans.
Arrow on map shows the course of the Kuroshio
Current in the Pacific Ocean to the south of Japan's coast¬
line, where its speed sometimes reaches 8 ft. a second.
flocks of sea birds on the water's surface would immedia¬
tely recognise the northern edge of the Kuroshio for, first
and foremost, an ocean current means "life."
In 1957, during the International Geophysical Year, I was
with a group of scientists looking for the Kuroshio aboard
the U.S.S.R. research ship "Vityaz". We were sailing
south along 150°W and had already left behind those lati¬
tudes where, according to all the textbooks, the Kuroshio
should have been found. Its absence was intriguing to say
the least. To our relief we came across it later, displaced
southward by a few hundred miles. As in many other
cases, the birds and flying fish were our first informers.
This shift southward of the Kuroshio was one additional
proof In the steadily accumulating facts showing that the
striking similarity in appearance between great oceanic

Polychrome woodcut print of Mt.Fuji seen under the wavetops, executed by the great Japanese artist, Hokusai (1760-1849).
currents and ordinary rivers goes farther than simple poetic
metaphor. Like rivers on a plain, the Gulf Stream and
the Kuroshio are given to meandering through the oceans.
These meanders change their form and wander along the
stream in their own way, just as river meanders do, although
on a different time scale.
The speed of such an oceanic river as the Kuroshio is
quite amazing. While its average speed is slightly over one
metre per sec, its maximum speed south and east of
Japan sometimes attains as much as two and a half metres
per second which is comparable to the speed of many con¬
tinental rivers. This "river" is approximately 400 metres
(1,300 ft.) deep, 40 nautical miles wide, and transports an
average of about 50 million cubic metres of water per
second. To visualise this mass of water one would have
to join together about five thousand rivers as big as the
Volga.
Having read all these facts, the reader may think, "But
scientists seem to know quite a lot about the Kuroshio.
Why go to sea and study it, and even mobilize inter¬
national efforts for its scientific investigation?"
Well, at this point ends the poetic analogy between
rivers and oceanic currents. While we know for certain
that rivers flow down the slopes of continents, fed by
underground waters stored as a result of rainfall, nothing
as definite is known about oceanic currents except that
their major moving forces are the wind over the oceans
and dissimilarities in heat and salt distribution in oceanic
water.
Even this knowledge is not absolute, since any com¬
bination of these forces is possible and the forces of
friction and inertia, as well as the earth's rotation, also
affect oceanic currents in different and complicated ways,
making some of them strikingly similar (as the Gulf Stream
and the Kuroshio) and some of them totally different from
each other.
Again the reader might ask "Can currents in the
ocean be of different kinds?" They can, and to learn
their nature is a difficult task, still far from being solved.
It would perhaps be too technical to describe here what
we actually know with regard to the physical origin of the
so-called boundary currents such as the Kuroshio and the
Gulf Stream. So I will simply say that there already exists
a general hydrodynamical theory of boundary currents,
although the character of the complex interaction of the
forces mentioned above which can account for changes in
both transport and geographical position of the Kuroshio,
its meandering, and many other associated features is still
far from clear.
These changes are by no means insignificant. The
total transport of water, by the Kuroshio may deviate
by about 50% from the average figure of 50 million m3/sec
already mentioned. And no simple analogy with rivers,
which have a clearly seasonal cycle, is possible. Com¬
parison of the Kuroshio with the Gulf Stream, which would
involve looking closely at their similarities as well as their
differences, may help to throw some light on this problem.
Studying the dynamics of the Kuroshio could, of course,
be a purpose in itself, but it is not the only aim of the nn
Co-operative Study of the Kuroshio and Adjacent Regions "'
which started in July 1965 under the co-ordination of the
Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission. However,

GULF STREAM OF THE PACIFIC (cont'd)
The vagabond, bountiful stream
if we learn how to explain the behaviour of the Kuroshio,
we shall also learn how to predict it. As a consequence,
improved weather forecasting for the vast area influenced
by the Kuroshio and increased and predictable fishing
will become possible.
To ensure these benefits, complex studies of the Kuro¬
shio will need to be made covering all the appropriate
fields of knowledge, including meteorology, marine bio¬
logy and fisheries. Perhaps the greatest effort to be under¬
taken by the participating countries lies in the field of
fisheries research. But marine geophysics and marine
geology will not be neglected in view of the increasing
importance of mineral resources from the ocean.
I
38
have said that a current in the ocean means
"life". This implies that some parts of the
ocean may be more productive than others, just as are
different kinds of soils on the continents. The southern
edge of the Kuroshio, for example, marks a distinct boun¬
dary of a quite definite marine biological environment.
Numbers of commercially important species of fish, and
even whales, do not generally penetrate southward beyond
this boundary. Thus, this region of the Kuroshio offers local
fishermen a series of important fishing grounds which may
shift and change both in space and time.
To predict these changes careful studies will need to be
made of the influence of various environmental characteris¬
tics on fish behaviour through the whole reproduction cycle.
Thorough knowledge of changes in all the elements of
what is known as "food chains" in the ocean is also
very important. A programme of such studies for the
Kuroshio region, if written out in detail, would probably
occupy a thick volume in itself.
We have swung from a very theoretical interest in the
co-operative study of the Kuroshio to a very practical
approach to it. Between these two there is an enormous
number of scientific problems awaiting solution. Why, for
example, does an area of cold water form now and again
south of Japan between the main stream of the Kuroshio
and the coast and remain there for long periods, affecting
weather and fishing? Why does the Kuroshio penetrate the
East China Sea instead of following the Ryuku Islands chain
on their oceanward side? Why does the Kuroshio leave the
Japanese coast at approximately 35°N instead of following
it farther north?
Countless "whys" come to a scientist's mind when he
approaches a natural phenomenon of such magnitude as
the Kuroshio and, as his study proceeds, for every question
answered, ten new ones might appear.
Scientists look with expectation to the results which the
co-operative study of the Kuroshio will bring. New know¬
ledge is always exciting although perhaps quite a number
of years will pass before something really spectacular from
the layman's point of view will occur, either in terms of
scientific discovery or in terms of the application of this
new knowledge.
In this sense, the co-operative study of the Kuroshio
and the results which are expected have nothing in common
with those spectacular quasi-scientific projects reaching
us from the domain of science fiction where high oceanic
dams are built and warm waters of oceanic currents are
deflected to warm up countries suffering from the cold,
or to melt Arctic ice. It will be laborious work with slow
but sure progress a constant search for answers which
modern man dares to ask from nature.
International océanographie expeditions have become a
reality of our time since the International Geophysical Year
(1957-1958). It would perhaps be of interest to say a few
words as to how these expeditions are now being
organized.
Although the centre of the day-to-day co-ordinating
activities is' located in the secretariat of the Intergovern¬
mental Océanographie Commission in Unesco's headquar¬
ters, the soul and spirit of such an expedition is the inter¬
national co-ordinator appointed by the commission. He
must keep in constant touch with national co-ordinators of
participating countries and initiate important measures to
improve communications and the exchange of data and
information. He also serves as chairman of the international
co-ordination group which is the major planning mechanism
of an expedition.
Nor should one forget the data exchange system which
is a very essential element of the whole expedition and
which, in the case of the Kuroshio study, comprises not only
two World Data Centres (in Moscow and Washington)
but also a special Kuroshio Data Centre which has recently
been created in Japan.
The new international expedition has as its major
elements
: overall coverage of the whole vast system of the
Kuroshio by scientific observations from ships and shore
stations in different seasons,
continuous or regular (and frequent) observations in
selected areas representative in certain ways of the whole
system.
While the first approach will provide scientists with a
sort of "photographic picture" of the current, the second
will ensure liaison between successive "snapshots" and,
still more important, will enable scientists to study the
variability of the Kuroshio. When you realize that the
Kuroshio system spreads for thousands of kilometres, it is
easy to understand that, for a programme based upon the
above principles, many ships and many more scientists are
required. This explains the need for international co-opera¬
tion, for bringing together ships, scientists and experience.
Therefore, an international expedition is really the only
solution to this problem.
EIGHT years have passed since the International
Geophysical Year, and this year I was again
aboard a research vessel in the area where, in 1957,
"Vityaz" made its observations. This time the vessel was
"Atlantis II" of Woods Hole Océanographie Institution (USA)
one of the participants in the co-operative study of the
Kuroshio. Scientists aboard were aware of the work which
had been done there before by ships of other nations and
therefore the planning of new work proceeded on the basis
of knowledge already available. New instruments were
going down into the cobalt depths of the ocean, and from
these observations a new pattern was already emerging,
embodying in a single, coherent system the valuable infor¬
mation obtained from earlier research.
Aboard "Atlantis II", and no doubt also aboard many
vessels heading towards the open sea these days, there
was a feeling that the science of oceanography has
finally become truly international.
