Pierre Verger Two hundred underprivileged Peruvian communities are this year receiving practical help from
young volunteers in Peru's University Community Co-operation Movement who spend their
summer vacations in these villages. Above, a Peruvian village in the Andes mountain range.

Operation
'Community
Service'
by Eduardo Barclay
[ IX Peruvian university students, taking advantage
of the long summer vacation, have gone to
stay in a village hidden away in the Andes some 4,000
metres (13,000 feçt) above sea level. During the past
month they have been living the life of the villagers and
serving this community in the special fields of study they
chose on entering university.
Holding a class alongside an old well, two students
specializing in pedagogy teach elementary hygiene to the
children of the village school. Two others direct the work
and the first meetings of a new committee on agriculture
and stock-farming which was set up on their suggestion.
A future dentist is giving an aged woman, almost 100 years
old, her first dental care. The sixth student has gone to
a neighbouring community to plan co-operative activities
with other students doing similar work there.
These volunteers will be devoting an extra month,
besides the summer holidays, to work of this kind which
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
17

OPERATION 'COMMUNITY SERVICE' (Cont'd)
Coming to grips with realities
they organize and carry out without receiving any remu¬
neration. And they are by no means the only ones in Peru
to spend their leisure time in this way. Distributed among
150 villages, 800 university students are endeavouring to
introduce new ideas and practices in the villages and to
help the people raise their standard of living.
This movement of young volunteers is now universal
and its members can be found working enthusiastically
in other South American countries. In Peru it was launched
two years ago when an educated section of the population
young people, and therefore the most generous-minded
and idealistic turned to another social group the most
underprivileged members of the community with the idea
of making friendly and helpful contacts.
It was the students who took the initiative in trying to get
into direct touch with social realities, to discover for them¬
selves the most urgent needs of the people, and to do so
before the time-filling routine of their professional work
cut them off, in most cases, from the possibility of acquir¬
ing such experience.
Throughout almost all of Latin America, the university,
as an institution, has become separated from everyday
life. Except for their political views (which in any case are
nearly always coloured by world problems and events),
students in Latin America have been living on the fringe
of the social reality surrounding them. Many graduate
with distinction from their universities, but their ideas on
the role they may eventually have to play in the community
are far from clear.
In countries where economic and cultural inequalities have
existed for centuries, it is not just a gap which separates
the university from everyday life, but a gulf.
Yet to attain the level of industrially-developed nations
the top priority goal for the Latin American continent
such countries urgently need the services of professional
men and women and technicians of all kinds qualified to
contribute to every stage of development; no less urgent
is the need for auxiliary personnel to work in the most
isolated and neglected communities, mobilizing the energies
of the people, making them feel the need for progress and
convincing them that it can be achieved. Dynamic efforts
are required for such a task. The idea that universities
should give an impetus to this enterprise was one shared
by the Peruvian government.
Towards the end of 1963, President Belaunde called on
Peru's university students to spend two months of their
next vacation in the country's isolated villages, and to help
revive the ancient Peruvian tradition of co-operative public
works. A thousand students at once answered the presi¬
dent's appeal and their response brought into being the
new form of work movement called "Cooperación Popular
Universitaria" (University Community Co-operation).
In 1964 the volunteers who joined this movement went
out into 120 communities. This year, 200 villages were
visited by 1,200 students who were joined for the first
time by 15 European volunteers and by 15 members of the
U.S. Peace Corps.
Their work could hardly have been more varied. Ranging
from community organization to legal advice (especially on
land disputes) their occupations included talks on agricul¬
ture, animal care, hygiene, co-operatives, agrarian reform,
home economics and public administration; they gave
lessons in reading and writing, reviewed school work, orga¬
nized sports and cultural centres and opened libraries;
they helped to build roads, reservoirs, latrines, school
buildings and markets; some gave first aid or dental care;
others prepared plans for social and economic research.
All this work was geared to the particular needs and avail¬
able resources of each community.
To prepare them for the work of "community develop¬
ment", students were given training and guidance by the
Foundation for International Development. From the
volunteer workers, small villages learned that they must
try to solve their problems by their own efforts, and that
if certain resources are missing then it is up to them
to put pressure on the authorities to provide what is
needed. This first step on the road to progress, which
gives students and villagers the incentive to live and work
together, sums up the aim of the programme: to awaken
a community spirit and a determination to succeed.
One of the most worth-while results of the University
CONT'D ON PAGE 20
18
Direct contact with the life of small
communities gives Peruvian students
an entirely new view of the problems
of the villagers and especially those
of youth (left). New links and
friendships are formed each year
between the students and villagers.
Unesco - Cart

In all parts of Latin America youth
volunteer organizations are playing
an increasing part in literacy teaching
and co-operative community acti¬
vities. Right, volunteers at work on a
building site in Bolivia. Below,
members of Chile's National Union
of Students voluntary workcamps
preparing for an evening class on the
work of rural agricultural co-operatives.

OPERATION 'COMMUNITY SERVICE' (Cont'd)
'Come back
next year'
Community Co-operation programme is the practical expe¬
rience of real-life situations it offers to Peruvian students
as it does to those taking part in similar programmes
in other countries. This is just as important for these
young people, who need this experience before entering
professional life, as it is for the village people who need
to lose the feeling that they are isolated and neglected.
The influence on the students is strikingly revealed by
a comparison between their views as candidates for
the work and their changed ideas after spending two
months in the villages. Vague and high-flown concepts
about the future of their country have been replaced by
down-to-earth ideas about how they can use their profes¬
sional knowledge to contribute to national development.
The effect of these experiences is not only felt by the
individual students; it has made a collective impact through¬
out the universities. While the Catholic University has
been launching a literacy teaching programme and setting
up new work camps, the Peruvian University of Medical
and Biological Sciences has been exchanging ideas with
leaders of the University Community Co-operation pro¬
gramme regarding an "interne" period in the isolated
villages for newly-qualified doctors and surgeons.
Nor do the student-villager contacts, or "communeros"
as they are called, cease when the two-month visit is
over. During this association many strong human ties are
formed. Letters are exchanged and hundreds of demands
flow into the central office of the movement in Lima and
into its provincial branches, asking students to return on
their next vacation or requesting volunteer groups to add
new villages to their lists.
ODAY a third university programme is being
prepared in which two thousand volunteers will
take part. Apart from a few changes dictated by expe¬
rience, this new programme will follow the general lines of
the first one. Two years' experience have shown that it
takes more than a few months to consolidate the social
work undertaken by the University Community Co-operation
movement. The presence of students and professional men
in the villages and the work they do there needs to have
a more permanent form. It is planned to achieve this
continuity by transforming the work of the university move¬
ment into a continuing rural programme for volunteer
workers.
As a start fifty students will be sent to three localities
Puno, Sicuani and Urubamba in southern Peru where
their work will be co-ordinated by the provincial offices
of the movement. These students include twenty from
Europe, who have been taking part in the university sum¬
mer programme to familiarize themselves with local prob¬
lems, and twelve from the Peace Corps. All fifty students
have university degrees in one of the following subjects:
sociology, economics, social welfare, engineering, architec¬
ture, agronomy and pedagogy.
The sceptics who declared that this volunteer movement
could never be kept going have been disproved once and
for all. It is very much a going concern, carried forward
by the enthusiasm of volunteers for whom the initial
idea of co-operation between student and villager has
now become a vocation.
The massive tower of the Chateau de Guise (above) rises over more
than 40 acres of ruins, ancient walls and underground passages.
Below, a group of volunteer workers clears the entrance to one
of the passages. Right, the main entrance to the basement of the
chateau. A tunnel over 300 feet long, a cellar 190 feet in length,
23 cells and a number of guard rooms have been cleared of rubble.
20
EDUARDO BARCLAY helped to set up Peru's University Com¬
munity Co-operation Movement and is now one of its organizers.
He is a specialist in architecture and urban development. *& fvcK jfk

h
10,000 YOUNGSTERS
TO THE RESCUE
During the past ten years 1 0,000 young people students, apprentices
and workers from France and other countrieshave spent their
weekends helping to save an ancient chateau in the north of France.
Crumbling and abandoned, the 1,000-year old Chateau de Guise
seemed doomed to destruction. In 1 954, a young villager from Guise,
Maurice Duton, aged 25, decided to do something about rescuing
the chateau. Setting up a group he called "Le Club du Vieux Manoir"
(The Old Manor Club), he quickly recruited teams of volunteer
workers. Today the Chateau de Guise has regained its former
majestic appearance. Over 8,000 people visited it last year. But
Maurice Duton (right, with some of his young helpers) is still not
satisfied. He is already planning work for some years ahead to
complete the restoration. Last year for his efforts to save the ancient
Chateau de Guise he was awarded first prize in the "Masterpieces
in Peril" contest organized by the French Radio and Television.
Photos © La Vie Catholique Illustrée François Sautereau
