THE
STEP
TO
MAN
by John R. Piatt
Can science keep on expanding indefinitely? The Amer¬
ican biophysicist, John R. Piatt, doubts ¡t and sees our
present era of change converging to a limit that may
usher in the most extraordinary transformation of all a
new type of man and a world society reaching across
the solar system.
-Jmmê
Text copyright © Reproduction prohibited
HANGE, change, change, continual change.
This is the watchword of modern life. We have
not only adjusted to it, many of us have begun to revel in
it. Conservative scientists have predicted the end of
change at various times, but they have always been proved
wrong. It seems it must go on forever. In the last two
decades, the changes have been coming faster than ever
before. Planes have passed the speed of sound, bombs
have become incredible and then incredible squared, men
are in orbit, and here below, new countries have proliferated,
television has become universal, and every corner of the
world is in a state of ferment.
Yet it seems to me that the excitement of our changes
and emergencies has led us to look at them on too short
a time scale. Let us not view them through the eyes of
the newsman with this month's crisis or of the advertiser
selling this year's cars or even through the eyes of the
planner announcing development programmes for 15 years
ahead. Let us look at our changes under the aspect of
history. Grandparents are still alive who saw the coming
of the motorcar and the airplane. Let us look at least as
far ahead, to the time when our children will be grand¬
parents in the 21st century; or 100 or 500 years ahead of
that to a time, say, as far away as the Renaissance is
today.
I think anyone who does this will soon realize that most
of the dramatic changes that have characterized the
20th century, like those in travel and communications and
weapons, cannot possibly continue at the present rates for
anything like these lengths of time. It becomes obvious
that many of them must converge rather soon to various
JOHN R. PLATT, former professor of biophysics and physics at
the University of Chicago, is now associated director of the
. Mental Research Institute at the University of Michigan. The
/} present article is a chapter from his forthcoming book, "The Step
to Man' to be published next year by John Wiley and Sons,
New York, London and Sydney. His "The Excitement of Science"
appeared in 1962.
kinds of limits, so that these aspects of society must begin
to take on much more stable forms.
Should it surprise anyone that there might be an end to
structural change in society? A boy does not go on grow¬
ing forever. He finally reaches manhood and stops
though his mature- accomplishments are just beginning.
Likewise if a world once becomes unified, by communi¬
cation and travel and mutual danger, into one world,
the situation must level off. What more is there to do in
that direction?
Many of our important indices of technical achievement
have been shooting up exponentially for many years, very
much like the numbers in the biologists' colonies of bac¬
teria, that double in every generation as each cell divides
into two again. But such a curve of growth obviously can¬
not continue indefinitely in any field. The growth of the
bacterial colony slows up as it begins to exhaust its
nutrient. The exponential curve bends over and flattens
out into the more general "S-curve" or "logistic curve" of
growth.
Stevan Dedijer, of the University of Lund (Sweden) and
Derek DeSoIla Price of Yale University, in his book Little
Science, Big Science (Columbia Univ. Press, New York,
1963), have recently emphasized that research-and-develop-
ment expenditures in the United States are now slowing
up their rate of growth in just this way and are already
beginning to be "past the middle of the S-curve." The
reason is clear. Big research-and-development depends on
big money, and these expenditures are beginning to exhaust
their nutrient.
But I think this phenomenon of slowing up is now be¬
coming much more general. Many scientists seem to sup¬
pose that we are just at the beginning of a curve of indefi¬
nitely accelerating change. They point out that Laplace and
then Michelson long ago predicted the end of change in
physics and that they were wrong. But it is one. thing
to see a slowing up of intellectual returns in .certain areas,
and another thing to see that life is short and the world is
small and that there are physical and natural and econo-.
mic limits to everything.

jtByÈ
On a huge mural composition, 17 metres long by 3 metres high (55 ft. X 6 ft. 6 in.) the dist¬
inguished Swiss artist, Hans Erni, has depicted our modern civilization based on scientific and
technical progress. Its theme is the genius of man the planner and organizer and the entire
process of industrial creation. Here we present the composition, which continues on pages 6,
7 and 9. Erni shows us symbolically the machinery which the brain of man has created for his
needs : machines for writing and printing, computers and electronic equipment. This work in
colour, which was executed for the 1964 Swiss National Exhibition in Lausanne, has been repro¬
duced photographically on aluminium panels. It is now displayed in the Zurich Exhibition Hall.
I think it can be shown that many of our present changes
are already rushing rapidly toward such limits. And many
of our social adjustments to change are well on their way
to what might be called "steady-state forms" that could
accommodate orders of magnitude of further technical deve¬
lopment without much additional restructuring.
I suggest that it is time to consider a different view,
that we are not at the beginning of continually accelerating
change, but that we are in the middle of a unique transi¬
tional crisis, like adolescence, as we make the jump from
an undeveloped scientific and technological society to a
fully developed one. Who knows? we may be even be¬
ginning to be past the worst of the crisis, at least in coun¬
tries like the United States. The slowing down of growth
and the beginnings of our adjustment to it may become one
of the major social phenomena of the next 30 years. Do
you doubt this? Take a brisk excursion with me through
some of our important areas of change and see if it is
not so.
Consider for example what is happening at present in
certain technical fields, as typified, say, by the high-energy
accelerators of modern physics. DeSolla Price shows in
his book that for 35 years now, we have been increasing
the energies of our largest accelerators almost exponen¬
tially, as Fermi pointed out some, years ago. It is worth
quoting some of the numbers, although very approximate
figures will suffice for the points I want to make.
In the late 1920s, atomic particles could be accelerated
to roughly 500,000 electron volts of energy. Successive
inventions raised the limit to about 20 million electron volts
in the 1930s; to 500 million by about 1950, and to 30,000
million by the 1960s. Today, one machine under construction
is designed for 50,000 million electron volts. This is an
increase by a factor of 105 in energy in these 35 years,
or a multiplication of the energy by another factor of
10 in every seven years.
Can new inventions raise the energies by still another
factor of 105 in the next 35 years? Perhaps, but many doubt
it. The reason is money. At present there is talk of a
200,000 million-electron-volt accelerator which will cost far
over 100 million dollars; after that, of a billion (a million-
million) electron-volt machine. But this would be so large
that it might require international co-operation to finance,
and the work of thousands of physicists and engineers for
10 years to construct that is, a major fraction of all the
money and effort likely to be spent on physics in the whole
world in that period. There are protests from other scien¬
tists whose projects are equally in need of money.
Of course, this probable leveling-off of one expensive
field does not mean that the era of change is over, even
in physics. Other areas of exponential progress may
appear again and again. But this example shows us what
forms and limits, from now on, will shape them all. Re-
search-and-development is now a major social business, to
be planned for, to be encouraged more richly than ever,
to be put to immediate use when possible and to be
consciously limited to a fraction of the national resources
and the national budget that is probably not far above the
20,000 million dollars, or three percent, that is presently
being spent on it the United States. There is a plateau here,
an organizational steady state, that we have nearly reached
already.
Let us go on to consider another rapidly changing tech¬
nical field and one with more social impact, the field
of computing machines. In the last 20 years or so, the
10-place desk calculator has been surpassed first by John
von Neumann's ENIAC computer at the end of the war
and now by much faster and more sophisticated devices.
It is hard to give exact figures for the improvement in speed
and capacity of the machines in this period because the
principles of operation have changed drastically, but it
might be estimated as a factor of roughly 10\
In one instance that I know of, a brilliant student in the
early 1950s took two years on a desk computer to do a
quantum-mechanical calculation that was done five years
later on an electronic computer in 14 minutes. By now, thee
time required to do this calculation, once a machine has«
been programmed for it, is probably less than one minute.
Today the designers of solid-state and other advanced
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE STEP TO MAN (Cont'd)
Plateaux in science and communication
computers say that a further increase in speed and capa¬
city by a factor of 10 or 100 is in sight, but they do not
seem to expect another factor of 103 in the next 20 years.
When the information travels between the parts of a com¬
puter with the velocity of light, the natural limit to the speed
of operation has been reached, and this is a limit which
is no longer very far off.
It is true that we are probably on the verge of great deve¬
lopments in applying computers to pattern perception and
learning and to complex manipulating systems. But compu¬
ters are already an integral part of advanced science and
business and government. Machining and accounting and
management and strategy problems are increasingly being
turned over to them. It is therefore a little hard to see how
even a dramatic extension of their powers could make as
much further difference to our attitudes and ways of life as
their development up to the present level has already
made.
This may possibly be true even of the application of com¬
puters to automation, which is threatening to give us leisure
in the decade ahead. This is sure to produce in the long
run a great social restructuring; yet it is a restructuring
which is already well under way. The problems produced
by the elimination of labour are not the problems of the
30 hours a week, or 10 hours, or none, that a man
works. They are problems of coupling this to economic
distribution and to self-respect, and problems of idleness
and boredom in the 138 or 158 or 168 hours when he does
not work. They are not nearly as different from the present
situation as it is different from that of the last century;
and the time when we will be forced to find some sort of
solution to these problems is almost certainly within the
next decade or two. On the scale of history, are we not
almost there already?
Suppose we turn instead to the fields of communication
and travel. In communication, the coming of the telephone
and radio and of television, in the last 20 years now with
satellite relays across the oceans has taken us onto
a plateau that is obvious to anyone who thinks about it.
Once we can transmit sight and sound around the world
within two seconds whenever we want to, there is little
further to be done but to extend the networks.
It is not generally realized, however, that we are also
approaching an effective plateau in our speeds of travel.
I once had the idea that we ought to organize a Centen¬
ary Celebration in honour of the occasion when man first
traveled faster than the top speed of any animal or bird.
This important breakthrough in evolution must have occur¬
red about 100 years ago when the steam locomotive
first got up to 60 or 70 miles an hour.
Today millions of people fly at 600 miles an hour in com¬
mercial jets. Commercial supersonic transports for 2,000
miles an hour are on the drawing boards ; and experimental
rocket planes have passed 4,000 miles an hour.
How long can this acceleration of speed go on? This is
an easy question to answer, because it is finished. At
around 100 miles an hour, we give up land transport and
take to the air. At around 17,000 miles an hour, we give
up air travel because we are in orbit. And this step is
already behind us.
As a matter of fact, I think the full sociological conse¬
quences of high-speed transport are already implicit in
the jet-plane speeds we have today. Scarcely a hundred
years ago, going around the world meant months of sailing
around the Horn. Now civilians as well as armies can
reach almost any point on the globe in less than a day. Can
any further reduction in this time say to six hours by super¬
sonic transport, or to one hour by rocket ever make as
great a difference again? I think not. In most worldwide
plans and operations, travel time is no longer the most
significant variable.
Once horses had been tamed, men built their lives and
societies around them for thousands of years. Today the
United States is built around highspeed powered trans¬
portation. We have the automobile, the airplane, and the
Go-Kart. It is transport that shapes the layout of roads
and cities and airports and the structure and mobility of
youth and workers and families and business and govern¬
ment. Might not our accommodations to fast easy trahs-

i£ 2 IT i., . '
y i«wk*ui
portation, and our attitude of taking it for granted, go on
again almost unchanged for hundreds or thousands of
years?
I must confess that I fail to see how any new vehicle, no
matter how marvelous, could again have the revolutionary
effect that the railroad, the automobile, and the aeroplane
had when they displaced the horse and carriage. Once
more, regardless of future developments, in some important
sense we are there already.
It is more surprising to realize that this is also almost
true of space travel today, even though at the time I am writ¬
ing this, it has been just seven years since the first orbiting
satellite, Sputnik, was sent up. Dramatic order-of-magnitude
improvements, and manned missions to the moon and
planets, and wonderful decades or centuries of exploration
are still ahead. But the moon has already been photo¬
graphed from close range and the Mariner flights are
under way, sending back detailed data from Venus and
Mars. Rockets already have the speed needed for explor¬
ing the solar system, and the time required would not be
appreciably reduced by new plasma or nuclear rockets.
The unexpected result is that the level of accessibility of
the solar system that we can develop in the next 10 or 20
years may quite possibly represent its level of accessibility
for hundreds of years to come.
Or to come back to terrestrial matters, consider the explo¬
ration of our own globe. Just since 1953, men have
climbed the highest mountain and reached the bottom of
the deepest sea. They have lived on a floating island in
the Arctic and at the South Pole all year around with run¬
ning water and hot showers. Much more remains to be
done, especially in exploring the oceans and penetrating
the solid crust, but it is clear that the whole surface of the
earth has become ours to study and use as we wish.
When there is no farther to go, there is no farther to go.
We have stepped up onto that plateau as well.
What about our technical achievements having to do
with life and death?
I think the same imminent leveling-off can be seen here
also. As everyone knows, bombs have increased in power
from the 20-ton chemical "blockbuster" of the early 1940s
to the 20,000-ton atomic bomb at Hiroshima and then the
20-million-ton hydrogen weapons after 1953 an increase
by six orders of magnitude within a single decade. Today
the largest hydrogen bombs are equivalent to about 100 mil¬
lion tons of TNT, and there are so many of them so much
"overkill" that they could wipe out all life on the planet.
But the largest ones are already too large to have maximum
efficiency for surface destruction, and the use of a number
of smaller ones is computed to be more "effective" for mili¬
tary purposes. Will we make larger bombs in the future?
We can if we want to, but even for the most overwhelming
military purposes, we do not need to.
Even in the matter of the control of nuclear weapons,
I think we may be approaching some sort of limit. This
takes a little explanation. How dangerous can the situation
get? At the present time we are near the edge of a
precipice. Every year or two there is some major inter¬
national crisis where there is a serious probability of an
"accident" that could trigger a nuclear war and escalate
into nuclear catastrophe for the world. Korea, Suez, Berlin,
Quemoy, Cuba, Vietnam. Last week's crisis, whatever it was.
It is nuclear roulette, so to speak, where the probability
of a fatal shot may be small each time you pull the trigger,
but where, if you play the game long enough, it finally, cer¬
tainly, kills you. Dedicated men have worked very hard in
each of these confrontations to avoid a nuclear incident,
but we may not continue to be so lucky.
As a result, some have estimated that cur" half-life" under
these circumstances that is, the probable number of years
before these repeated confrontations add up to a 50-50
chance of destroying the human race forever may be only
about 10 to 20 years. Obviously this is not an objectively
testable number. Nevertheless the idea is clear. We see
that our boasted decreases in death rates and increases
in the length of individual human lives in this century are
spurious, as long as this nuclear danger is so uncontrolled.
This is the first time in the history of the human race that
babies all babies everywhere forever have had such a
slim chance of survival.
Then why do I say that we are near a limit in these
dangers? Just because this cannot continue. No one lives
very long walking on loose rocks at the edge of a precipice.
Either very soon, in 10 or 20 years, or in 30 or 40, we fall
over the nuclear precipice; or else very soon, before that
time runs out, we argue some sense into our collective
heads and move back from the danger.
Some people talk of another possibility, that we might
have a nuclear war with some people still surviving at
least this time by going underground, in shelters and 7
mines. But this, even if it could work, is only a temporary
and horrible postponement of the problem like falling
partway down the precipice and then getting up, battered,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE STEP TO MAN (Cont'd)
The cultural 'shock-front7 of history
to fall again. Do we come out of the shelters at last, to
bury and clean up and rebuild, only to have the survivors
going underground again with a resurgence of nuclear
powers in another 20 years or so? And then again 20 years
after that? Or do we stay underground for a thousand
years and hope we will mysteriously have learned how to
solve the problem of our competing nuclear threats after
that time?
This is obviously not an alternative at all. It is nothing
but a refusal to face the necessity for agreeing eventually
on a method of international nuclear control, a refusal to
see that no postponement in the shelters offers anything
but greater danger and difficulty.
I have gone into these alternatives here, simply to explain
the basis of my conclusion that within a few years the
situation will be over. Either we will be finished or half-
finished, trying to drag ourselves up again with none of the
problems solved or we will have drawn back from the
precipice by actually bargaining or paying for nuclear
restraints, with even the most difficult nations, so as to
give us all a longer half-life.
But if in this short time ahead we can find a way to
reduce these crises and probabilities by, say, a factor of 10,
then we might begin to have 100 or 200 years to think how
to reduce them further. And then we might begin to have
a chance of lasting 2,000 years or 20,000! hopefully,
say, as long as agriculture has lasted! I can only conclude
that if we live, and if we work to live, we are even now
within sight of a plateau and even a falling-off in the dimen¬
sion of terror. But time is running out, and it is the wisdom
and effort of men today, in this present generation, within
the very next few years, that will make this permanent
decision for us as to whether we live or die.
FINALLY, let us consider that other problem of
life and death, the population problem.
Julian Huxley once pointed out that the two major bio¬
logical inventions in historic times have been the control
of germ diseases, and artificial contraceptives. They date
from the work of Pasteur and of Goodyear just a hundred
years ago. It is these inventions and their successors that
are mainly responsible for our present population explosion
and for the hope of controlling it. They are the positive
and the negative feedbacks determining human numbers.
Today bacterial diseases are approaching extinction, and
virus diseases are coming under control. In the last
20 years, four of the last great killers, malaria, syphillis,
tuberculosis, and polio, have been essentially wiped out,
thanks to antibiotics and sulfa drugs and vaccines and DDT.
Cancer and circulatory diseases remain and let no one
belittle them! But most of mankind has already acquired
toward disease the Pasteurian attitude, one that we might
keep for a thousand years or forever, the attitude that we
can do something about disease and need not remain its
helpless victims.
The trouble is that this has led to an exponential growth
of population that looks overwhelming unless something is
done about it. And once more we discover that this present
age is the time of the transitional crisis. It is said that
Palaeolithic man doubled his numbers every 30,000 years.
Today the world population doubles every 30 or 40 years
roughly 1,000 times as fast.
This exponential growth is so steep that it cannot go on
for very long, on the scale of history. Today our population
is over 3,000 million. By the year 2000, with a 40-year
doubling time, it will be 6,000 million; by 2040, 12,000 million;
by 2080, 25,000 million; by 2120, 50,000 million. This is
almost 20 times our present numbers a horrible prospect
and close to the estimated limit of the earth's food supply,
even at the starvation level. But if the food supply is twice
or four times as great, it is only a matter of another 40 or
80 years. The problem is in the exponential character of the
growth, not in any particular numbers we put in.
We see that within an uncertainly of 50 years or so, the
time before the population growth slows up or levels off
from starvation is only a couple of long life-times, a time
no greater than the age of the United States. In fact, the
famine is beginning already, with the population going up
and the amount of food per capita now dropping steadily
year after year in several countries.
If the world wanted to level off its population at some
less extreme density before reaching universal starvation,
say at a density of no more than twice our present numbers,
we see that it would have to get agreements and apply
effective methods of control almost immediately, for it
would have to produce a leveling-off in less than 40 years.
The surprising thing is that this may now be technically
possible, because of the rapid development of cheaper and
simpler methods of birth control, such as oral contraceptives
and intrauterine coils, in the last decade.
The problem is orders of magnitude easier than was
believed even five years ago. The setting of birth rates
and growth rates for a country is ceasing to be a matter of
individual expense and resistance and is becoming a
question rather of public policy and persuasion and effort.
It is becoming a matter for conscious decision rather than
collective drift. The wide-spread acceptance of this attitude
in all countries and all religions is another plateau-step that
may be taken in the very near future.
I have taken pains to enumerate these many areas where
our civilization is beginning to be "past the middle of the
S-curve," just because it is not generally appreciated how
numerous and how central they are, or how convincing the
evidence is that there are limits in sight. I realize that pre¬
diction is uncertain and that my conclusions are novel, but
I think they are at least as plausible as the uncritical
assumption that changes like those of the 20th century will
go on forever. Marvelous developments lie ahead, parti¬
cularly in biology, but I do not think they will make as
radical a change in world society, as it is now being
restructured, as the changes of the last hundred years made
in 19th-century social systems.
If this is true, the present generation is the hinge of
history. It may be no accident that the approach to matura¬
tion in different fields shows a concurrent pattern. Our new
developments in power and communication and control all
support each other. And they are supporting and being
supported by the simultaneous changes in economic and
social and international structure.
I T is those aspects of technological change that
have been pressing humanity so rapidly toward
becoming a closely interconnected species, a species in
full possession of the world and its abundance and with
an adequate capacity for control and survival, that are
reaching toward mature and stable forms in this genera¬
tion. They are forms totally different from those of our
tribal warring past, but they might conceivably go on as
long as the old forms did, for hundreds or thousands of
years into the future. What is happening is that we are
in the midst of being compelled to reorganize the internal
structure and powers of the race into a mature human
integration that could be called manhood.
As a result, I think we may be now in the time of most
rapid change in the whole evolution of the human race,
either past or to come. It is a kind of cultural "shock-front",
like the shock-fronts that occur in aerodynamics when the
leading edge of an airplane wing moves faster than the
speed of sound and generates the sharp pressure wave

\tí&*
that causes the well-known sonic boom. The front edge of
this pressure wave is the shock-front. It is a thin region
where the low temperatures and pressures of the air ahead
of the plane change suddenly to the high temperatures and
pressures of the air immediately behind.
I think our present transitional crisis is a similar shock-
front for the human race, buffeting us about as sudden
changes in every direction come thick and fast. It is a
multiple shock-front, with each type of exponential change
reinforcing all the others. The Western world has en¬
countered this cultural shock-front first it is closer to the
airplane of history, so to speak but it would seem from
the speed of industrialization of Japan and Russia that the
rest of the world can be no more than 30 or 40 years behind.
Throughout the world, the farm and city ways of historic
man are being transformed rapidly to the ways of a high-
technology world society.
But the shock-front analogy is also an instructive way of
thinking about the times ahead. It suggests that after the
shock-front has passed, we will have reached larger powers
and interactions higher temperatures and pressures! but
that the buffeting of change will be reduced, and the times
will perhaps become .psychologically and socially calmer
than anything this generation or this century has known.
Life will go on being different, partly for the familiar
reason that we will go on having more population and
power, more communication and science, in every decade.
But it will also be different in a different way, because the
approach to a steady state is something rare in the history
of the world. We see that humanity is on the verge of a
new kind of life. 1 think an examination of the question of
what it will be like could be one of our most constructive
intellectual exercises today. It would show us how different
our present problems and solutions appear, when seen in
the perspective of the great changes and the different
structures just ahead. It would help us see what we must
do to make the changes less traumatic and to shape the
structures more intelligently.
The problem of arms control, for example, becomes a
different problem if it is seen as a temporary substitute for
other ways of keeping the peace in a disarmed world.
Innovations in education take on a different character when
seen as part of the total improvement in education that will
be needed for every child in the world in 50 years.
The need for philosophical integration of our new knowl¬
edge about the biological and intellectual and social nature
of man takes on great urgency when it is realized that this
is the substructure on which the social and political philoso¬
phy of our grandchildren's world must be built. Where are
our Montesquieu and Rousseau today? What have Freud
and the behaviourists taught us about irrationality and
educability that would help us design a good society and
a free and flexible society without the danger of recurrent
instability? Are many different good societies possible, and
can we choose among them or move at various times from
one to another?
These are problems for extensive debate, but even
without answering them it is easy to show that life in any
steady-state world must differ in many respects from ours.
One of the unexpected differences, for example, will be
the difference in age distributions and probably a related
difference in family patterns. Throughout history, children
have been a majority in most societies. The proportion of
children to total population was high because so many were
born who did not live to adulthood. It is estimated that at
most times and places, half the population has been under
age 15. Today in America, because of our post-war baby
boom, half the population is still under 20. This makes a
large "teen-age market" that many manufacturers are now
trying to reach.
But in a steady-state world no matter whether it has a
smaller population than ours or one many times larger the
same number of people would be born in every decade and
the same number would die in every decade. If our death
rate in early life continues to go down, there will then be
just as many people at age 40 or at age 60 as at age 10.
And If they all live to about 80, as it now seems they might,
then half of them will be over 40 and only one-fifth of them
will be children under 15. It will be very different from the
Indian village or the slum neighbourhood with children
everywhere underfoot. The curiosity and laughter of chil¬
dren will be scarce, and world will begin to be run, even,
more than it has been, by the old.
A strange world, for us. But it could be a good world, if
the old remain young in heart and vigour. They could use
their great excess of adult-power, prosperous and leisured,
to make the richest education for children that the world
has ever known. Perhaps childless adults will move in with
family groups, so they can share in the love and laughter
of the children and spend endless hours in teaching them, Q
in something like the old Hawaiian tradition. We may move
away from our small-family separateness and back toward
more tribal groupings as children become scarcer, and as
CONT'D ON PAGE 39

Illustration by Hans Erni,
from "Science",
the first of a series of eight volumes
composing an international compendium
of modern knowledge published by
the Macdonald Illustrated Library,
London, and Doubleday, New York.
Prepared by editorial
boards headed by such distinguished
scientists and scholars
as Sir Julian Huxley,
J. Bronowski, Sir Gerald Barry
and James Fisher,
the series has already been translated
into seven languages.
The artist and designer
is Hans Erni.
© Rathbone Books Ltd., London.

THE
STEP
TO
MAN
(Continued from page 9)
the reduction of the speed of change makes it easier for
the different generations to talk to each other again.
What will we do with our time in that leisured world?
Undoubtedly there will be still more travel and more vigour-
ous and daring outdoor recreation. Life will be dull other¬
wise. Perhaps thousands will climb Everest and millions will
ride dolphins. But I think the activities that will really begin
to bloom are the creative arts and education and science.
Not just Sunday painting, but Wednesday-Thursday-Friday-
Saturday-Sunday painting. Continual rebuilding of your own
home to your own taste, filling it with personal ingenuities
and bold designs, might become the fashionable thing to do.
And education and science may become activities for
everyone. Who kept up with the philosophers of the
French Enlightenment? The leisured classes of the drawing
rooms. Who did science, at first? Rich amateurs and
leisured clerics with an easy routine and the time to do
experiments. Already education and scientific research are
our fastest-growing industries. With pre-school enrichment
raising the level of intelligence, as some evidence now
indicates, perhaps increasing numbers will profit from
education all the way to the graduate level, and continuing
education for much of the population may become a lifelong
activity.
Likewise in science, many adults may fix up a laboratory
room in their houses, where they can work every day at
some scientific project, some study in crystallization or in
embryology or in teaching animals that could offer a life¬
time of unfolding discovery.
One other characteristic of a steady-state world that
deserves special mention is its requirement for a high
standard of social justice. If we survive at all, after this
great disturbing shock-front has faded into a phenomenon
of history, it can only be by working out a new attitude of
tolerance and mutual support for each other, between
coloured and white, between rich and poor, between
advanced nations and retarded ones. The unemployed, the
underprivileged, the underdeveloped, all the groups ne¬
glected 'or exploited by our present arrangements or con¬
demned to exclusion from our prosperity by the accident of
parentage or place of birth, form a perpetual seedbed for
spokesmen and would-be dictators whose juntas may take
over nuclear administration in the name of correcting these
wrongs.
Our failure to eradicate these evils depresses the
standard of living and shortens the probable "half-life" of
everyone. We are now realizing this, in the U.S. Congress
as well as in the councils of the world. What is fortunate
for us today is that our new understanding of the education¬
al and developmental basis of prosperity has made it
possible and profitable to cure these evils just at the instant
when our new weapons technology has made it absolutely
necessary to do so.
We can no longer afford poverty in the world if we ever
could. We can no longer afford ignorance or prejudice or
neglect. It is not so much that they are a sign of moral
wickedness as that they are a sign of incompetence in
design and administration. It is time to apply at least the
same standards of competence and satisfaction in running
the world that we apply in running a family or a business.
Any member of the world now not only deserves to be
shown, but must be shown, as surely as a member of a
rich man's family, how he can share in its abundance. Any
child in the world now not only deserves to have education,
but must have education, like a privileged child, for the full QQ
development of his potentialities from the age of one yearUJ
on up. It is necessary not only because we can afford it
but because we must afford it.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE STEP TO MAN (Cont'd)
A new knowledge and new biology
40
The world has now become too dangerous for anything
less than Utopia.
Will it all be static in this strange new world of the
steady state? The answer is no, nothing will be static.
What will begin to be steady is our acceptance of these
new ways of creative leisure and interaction as being the
most interesting and most satisfying ways of life. But all
our indices of flow, production, commerce, communication,
will be up from what they are now. The marvelous
accomplishments of a mature and integrated society will
be just beginning. And two fields, scientific knowledge and
biological technology, will surely go on changing and
developing indefinitely.
I see no end to the increase of knowledge. When scien¬
tific research has as many men and as much money every
year as society can afford, it will be adding even more
rapidly than now to our knowledge of nature and to the
ease with which we can control nature. And this world of
nature is infinite to us, for it includes the human brain
itself. After all the myriad galaxies of the astronomers are
charted as well as we want to chart them, we will still go
on studying the multimyriad complexities of the brain that
has measured them.
UR knowledge of nature will surely be used
increasingly for the improvement and variation
of our biological apparatus for living. If we can actually
set up a social structure that will enable us to live together
without killing ourselves, for a thousand years or a million
years a time as long as the time since man began it
will begin to give us the time we need to understand and
develop our full biological potentialities.
Things we now cut out of the human body by surgery
the appendix, the tonsils can they be eliminated from the
hereditary genes instead? Our eyes and ears that give out
when we are old, our hearts and arteries why not make
them better biologically from the beginning rather than by
doctoring after they begin to fail? We begin to see the
possibility of reshaping the human organism, as we have
been reshaping plant and animal organisms now for many
years, into a new form or into many new forms that will
begin to show the full potentialities of protoplasm and the
creative brain.
In such a time, man will cease to be at the mercy of the
evolutionary accidents that made his frame and his society
just as he has ceased to be at the mercy of the biological
accidents that made his diseases. It will be a time when
man can begin to plan what he wants man to be, as each
individual makes his personal plans today a time when
accident and drift will finally begin to be replaced by
conscious human values and decisions.
The accelerating powers and dangers and hammer-blow
stresses of these days make us anxious and afraid. But
I think it is clear that if we survive this shock-front, this
roaring waterfall of change, we could be within sight of
what Churchill once called the "sunlit uplands".
Various metaphors could be used to describe the situa¬
tion. In many ways, it is like a child learning to ride a
bicycle. There you were, up until that day, riding on the
three-wheeler where you couldn't hurt yourself very much.
But then you get the two-wheeler, and it seems terribly
scary, and perhaps you fall and skin a knee or an elbow.
But you get up again, and your father holds the handlebars,
running along beside you, and suddenly you are riding
alone.
At one instant you are incompetent, falling to one side
or the other and steering wrong, and the next instant it
comes right and you are in control, safe and balanced not
because you are fearful and slow but because you are
going faster than ever. Wobbling and weaving but neverthe
less choosing your own path and balancing safely at every
turn. So, I think, in 30 or 40 years, if we survive, the human
race will come through this time of wobbling conflict and
uncertainly and falling, and will suddenly be riding in its
own chosen direction, free, as only a co-ordinated and
confident organism can be.
To say it another way, it is like the time of adolescence,
when the teenager suddenly changes, with some thrashing
about, from the dependent child to the independent man.
Or it is like the moment of birth, full of pain and danger as
the baby in the womb is suddenly pushed through into a
new life where he must breathe alone and learn to walk and
talk and think. Or it is like the moment of metamorphosis
of the insect, when there is an incomprehensible swelling
and dizzy changes of shape and desire in the tight cocoon,
until suddenly it bursts open at the end of its own sharp
S-curve, its own era of change, to reveal an unimagined
transformation to a new free winged life.
This is the meaning of the leveling off of our S-curves.
We are now nearing the end of the era of change. We
have been isolated human beings, selfish, combative, igno¬
rant, helpless. But now for several hundred years the great
evolutionary hormones of knowledge and technology have
been pressing us, almost without our understanding it, into
power and prosperity and communication and interaction,
and into increasing tolerance and vision and choice and
planning pressing us, whether we like it or not, into a
single co-ordinated humankind.
The scattered and competing parts are being bound
together. Everywhere now we begin to see men and
nations beginning the deliberate design of development
with a growing confidence in the choice and creation of
their own future. The exponential changes have burst apart
our ancient attitudes and structures, and our failure to
adjust to this may yet kill us, but if we are wise and
energetic and understand our own nature and purposes
well enough to restructure and control these dangers,
mankind may emerge very quickly into co-ordinated forms
such as it has never known before. Our drastic changes
will not go on forever. They are converging to a limit.
It was implicit in the biological material all along, as surely
as the butterfly is implicit in the caterpillar. We have been
men. We are emerging into Man.
ET no analogy, not even that of metamorpho¬
sis, quite captures the suddenness and radi-
calness, the really complete restructuring, of the transfor¬
mation ahead. If the 2,000 million years of life are repre¬
sented by the 200-foot height of, say, the Rockefeller
Chapel at Chicago, the million years of man make a 1-inch
block on top of the chapel. The 20,000 years of agricul¬
ture make a thick postage stamp on top of that, and the
400 years of science make the ink on top of the postage
stamp.
Now, suddenly, we see what all this has been building up
to; and it is about to come within a single generation or
two that is, in the thickness of the film of moisture on top
of the ink on the postage stamp. In that short time we
will move, If we survive the strain, to a wealthy and powerful
and co-ordinated world society reaching across the solar
system, a society that might find out how to keep Itself
alive and evolving for thousands or millions or billions of
years, a time as long as all of evolution past. It is a tre¬
mendous prospect.
Hardly anyone has seen the enormous sweep and
restructuring and unity and future of it except perhaps
dreamers like H. G. Wells or Teilhard de Chardin. It is a
quantum jump. It is a new state of matter. The act of saving
ourselves, if it succeeds, will make us participants in the
most incredible event in evolution. It is the step to Man.
