I
MIî
An ancient Chinese char¬
acter meaning " different".
HE Unesco Courier is pleased to announce the publication
this month of The Ancient World, Volume II of the six-tome

History of Mankind, produced under the auspices of Unesco.
The Ancient World (published thus far in English) tells the story of
the momentous years between 1200 B.C. and 500 A.D. In this period
came the rise of the great civilizations of China and India and of
Greece and Rome, and the early years of Christianity.
To prepare this volume, the Unesco-sponsored International Commis¬
sion for a History of the Scientific and Cultural Development of
Mankind, called on Professor Luigi Pareti of the University of Naples.
Professor Pareti, who died shortly after completing the work, was
assisted by Professor Paolo Brezzi of the University of Naples, who
wrote on the origins of Christianity, and Professor Luciano Petech of
the University of Rome, who was responsible for the chapters on the
civilizations of India, the Far East and Central Asia.
Volume I of the History of Mankind, dealing with prehistory and the
beginnings of civilization, was the work of two archaeologists of
world-wide reputation: Jacquetta Hawkes and Sir Leonard Woolley
(see The Unesco Courier, June 1963). The Ancient World picks up
the threads of their story and follows mankind along the road of
progress and civilization. What it offers as it moves through the
centuries is a global view of man's positive achievements: the evolu¬
tion of language, art, transport, medicine, trade, architecture, science
and religion.
As Mr. René Maheu, Director-General of Unesco, writes in the fore-
ward to this volume: "The ambition to write a universal history is a
very old one indeed. Many have tried their hand at it . . . not without
merit, nor without success. However, this History of Mankind parts
company with its predecessors on several essential points. In the
first place it deliberately confines itself to shedding light on one of
mankind's many aspects, its cultural and scientific development In
doing so it departs from the traditional approaches to the study of
history which, as we know, attach decisive importance to the political,
economic and even military factors. It offers itself as a corrective
to the ordinary view of man's past."
The story of man which fills the 1,200 pages of this new three-part
volume of the History of Mankind thus presents history in a different
perspective. It takes the reader on a journey to the places of Antiquity,
including China, Persia, India, Eturia, Egypt and Carthage. It describes,
for example, what it was like to belong to one of the constantly
shifting populations of the Steppe civilization, how the alphabet was
first codified, how man began to compose music, write poetry and
create works of art, how trade and industries developed.
The Ancient World is a vast and colourful mosaic whose ensemble
reveals, most significantly of all, the contributions made by different
peoples and regions to the cultural rise of mankind during nearly
2,000 years of history:
Medicine as practised in Greece by Democedes, Diogenes and the
father of medicine, Hippocrates
The first production of pottery, glass and enamel
The houses and towns of the Romans, so well planned that many
still exist
Ingenious inventions like the device used by the Chinese to
measure earthquakes in the first century A.D.
The evolution of democratic ideas and institutions in Greece and
Rome
Indian, Chinese and Arabic contributions to mathematics and astro¬
nomy ... to name but a few.
To offer readers a preview of this latest volume in a series of histor¬
ical works that have been termed, "an international publishing ven¬
ture of unparalleled importance," The Unesco Courier presents on
the following pages passages selected from The Ancient World.
This work is published in the United Kingdom by George Allen and
Unwin Ltd., London (Price £6 6 0), and in the U.S.A. by Harper and
Row Inc., New York ($15.50).
