Polish Television

Words under
mask
by Seymour Fersh
WHY do men make mistakes?" asks Walter
Lippmann, the U.S. writer and political analyst,
and answers, "Because an important part of human
behaviour is reaction to the pictures in their heads. Human
behaviour takes place in relation to a pseudo-environment
a representation, which is not quite the same for any two
individuals. What they suppose to be not what is the
reality of things. This man-made, this cultural environment
which has its being in the minds of men, is interposed
between man as a biological organism and external reality."
The problem is one of bringing "pictures in the mind"
and "external reality" into truer alignment. The best way
though certainly not an infallible one is through first-hand
experiences, followed by audio-visual representations, and
lastly by words. It is through words, however, that most of
our "education" takes place and much is inevitably lost in
the telling as word descriptions are substituted for their Q
real-life counterparts. «*
Consider words such as poverty, underdeveloped, hot,
cold, democratic, progressive, backward, and the like.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

WORDS UNDER A MASK (Cont'd)
A mental etc../ that leaves the door open
10
Dictionaries carry definitions but people carry connotations
and it Is connotations which influence thinking and rule
behaviour. Moreover, connotations are not only personal,
they are also heavily cultural. A Frenchman, a Cambodian
and a Tunisian or an Englishman, an Indian and an American
may "understand" the words which each is using when
speaking French or English, but whether they will ever
"understand" the nuances the shades of delicate
differences in meaning is quite another matter.
Throughout history many writers In many cultures have
called attention to the fact that words misinform as well as
inform, but it was not until 1897 that a Frenchman, Michel
Breal, gave it the name "sémantique", or the science of
meaning. More recently, in the 1920's in the United States,
a movement called General Semantics, often referred to
as G. S., was pioneered by Alfred Korzybski and subs¬
equently popularized by researchers and writers, including
Stuart Chase, Wendell Johnson, S. I. Hayakawa, and Irving
Lee.
From these and other writers on the subject, we have
drawn a number of examples to illustrate the contribution
General Semantics can make to the study of other peoples
and ways of living different from our own. We do not claim
that greater attention to these and other General Semantics
assumptions and techniques will in itself eliminate all prob¬
lems of "meaning", but it should be incontestable that
descriptions of "things out there" can and must be conveyed
more precisely and with more accurate interpretation.
The nature of the world is one of dynamic flow "a mad
dance of electrons" in which no two things are identical,
no one thing remains the same and, as Heraclitus expressed
it over two thousand years ago, "one cannot step in the
same river twice".
The nature of man is that unlike other living things
he can "receive gifts from the dead" through the use
of his man-made language, but his internal experiences
are literally "unspeakable". Abstractions take place when
he tries to substitute words for reality.
HE nature of languages is like that of a map;
it is useful to the extent that- it describes the
territory accurately. Maps and territories are not the same,
however, nor are words and reality interchangeable, though
it is by no means uncommon for some people to react to
words as they would to a slap in the face. And, of course,
advertizers have long known that certain names appear to
have the magical effect of seemingly impregnating them¬
selves into a product. Who among us has not purchased
an item recently because the name rather than the sub¬
stance often untried appealed to our stream of conno¬
tations?
For example, South American (A) is not South American
(B) is not South American (C) is not South American (D),
etc. In other words, South American (teacher in Lima)
is not South American (rural area worker in Brazil), etc.
Although by convention we refer to the 150 million people
who live in an area called South America as "South
Americans", the truth is that no two "South Americans"
are identical including, of course, those who live in the
same country or even in the same household. Considered
in the same way, each of the estimated seventy-seven
thousand million people who have inhabited the earth
has been unique.
Statements which purport to talk about "a people"
as if they were one entity must obviously be qualified.
Questions such as "What do Africans think about Euro¬
peans?" are clearly unanswerable. Answerable questions
those which have some likelihood of being verified
are less dramatic and perhaps less satisfying, but that
is the nature of the problem. It is only by taking liberties
with language that we appear to be better informed than the
data permit. Similarly, it may readily be seen that terms
such as "Asian", "Moslem", "Oriental", and the like conceal
differences as well as reveal group affinities. (1).
Japan (1840) is not Japan (1945) is not Japan (1965) is
not Japan (1980), etc. Change is inevitable, though the rate
varies. One who forgets this is certain to be shocked when
confronted with the discrepancy between what he thinks (or
remembers) is true and what is so.
The same may be used to connote different "realities",
while similar events or experiences are sometimes called
by different names.
OR example, when someone says that it is hot,
the word "hot" is more likely to represent the
speaker's state of mind than it is to describe the current
temperature reading. "Cold wave" could mean anything
from 20 to 30 degrees below zero (F) in Alaska to 40 de¬
grees above zero in New Delhi where, incidentally, a conti¬
nuous string of days in the 90's in May would scarcely
qualify as a "heat wave".
Very often, the addition by the speaker of the words
"to me" and the addition by the listener of the words "to
you" help to identify so-called statements of fact as really
statements of opinion. Words whose meanings have become
meaningless from being used to carry too heavy and too
diversified loads of information should be set apart by
enclosing them with quotation marks to alert the reader.
Korzybski used to wiggle two fingers of each hand when
speaking to achieve the same effect.
Consider this plea from ancient China, entitled, "On the
Standard of Beauty":
"If a man sleeps in a damp place, he gets lumbago and
may die. But what about an eel? And living up a tree is
frightening and tiring to the nerves. But what about mon¬
keys? What habitat can be said to be absolutely right? Then
men eat flesh, deer eat grass, centipedes enjoy small
worms, owls and crows delight in mice. Whose is the
right taste, absolutely? Monkeys mate with apes, bucks
with does, eels consort with fishes, while men admire
great beauties such as Mao Chiang and Li Chi. Yet at
the sight of these women the fish plunged deep into the
water, birds flew from them aloft, and deer sped away.
Who shall say what is the right standard of beauty? In
my opinion, the doctrines of benevolence and righteousness
and the paths of right and wrong are inextricably confused.
How could I discriminate among them?" (2).
No matter how complete a listing or how comprehensive
an explanation, the possibility always remains open that
something more might be said about the matter under con¬
sideration. All descriptions are "open-ended" with the last
word unsaid. Completeness may be a goal, but like in¬
finity it eludes mortal grasp. Thus for example, an exami¬
nation of any culture or any country might include ref¬
erence to its history, its development, its achievements
and so on, but these would always be incomplete. No
matter how extensive the treatise, a mental "etc." should
be added to the last punctuation point. The practical
effect of this orientation is to leave the door open, albeit
a crack, for additional information which may be forth¬
coming.
This list of "devices" for applying General Semantics
can be extended almost indefinitely. Here are a few more
cautions to consider:
Let us try to use descriptive terms rather than those
expressing approval or disapproval. For example, the
(1) For other aspects of this subject we refer the reader to "Twisted
Images How Nations See Each Other". The Unesco Courier, June
1955 (now out of print).
(2) Through Asian Eyes, compiled by Baldoon Dhingra. Charles E.
Tuttle Company, Rutland, Vermont 1959.
CONT'D ON PAGE 12

WORDS UNDER A MASK (Cont'd)
When the eyes
don't have it
Here reflected in the many
little mirrors mounted on a
concave surface, the appear¬
ance of a single eye changes
according to the angle from
which it is viewed. The multi-
eyed disc thus appropriately
symbolizes the varied recep¬
tivity of different people to
realities and to the words which
are used to describe them.
USIS-Berenice Abbott
words "clean" and "unclean" are relative. The comment
that cow dung is used for fuel in many Afro-Asian villages
often provokes reactions of disgust from many urban
dwellers the world (1965) over. It may be instructive on
this point to quote from an American, writing about his
experience on the Great Plains of his country in 1879 when
buffalo and cow dung (he calls them "chips") were
commonly used for fuel:
"It was comical to see how gingerly our wives handled
these chips at first. They commenced by picking them
up between two sticks, or with a poker. Soon they used
a rag, and then a corner of their apron. Finally, growing
hardened, a washing after handling them was sufficient.
And now? Now it is out of the bread, into the chips and
back again and not even a dust of the hands."
Let us try to use phrases which indicate certain condi¬
tions which should be considered with a statement. For
example, awareness may be increased by using such
phrases as "in our culture", "from our point of view,"
"at that time," and the like.
12
ISCALCULATIONS often arise through the mis¬
taken notion that other cultures prize the same
values as one's own. Here, for example, is what Aldous
Huxley wrote following his first trip around the world in
1927:
"So the journey is over and I am back again where I
started, richer by much experience and poorer by many
exploded convictions, many perished certainties. For
convictions and certainties are too often the concomitants
of ignorance. Of knowledge and experience the fruit is
generally doubt. It is doubt that grows profounder as
knowledge more deeply burrows into the underlying mys¬
tery, that spreads in exact proportion as experience is
widened and the perceptions of the experiencing individual
are refined. . .
"...I set out on my travels knowing, or thinking that I
knew, how men should live, how be governed, how educated,
what they should believe. I knew which was the best
form of social organization and to what end societies had
been created. I had my views on every activity of life.
Now, on my return, I find myself without any of these
pleasing certainties. . .
"...The better you understand the significance of any
question, the more difficult it becomes to answer it. Those
who like to feel that they are always right and who attach
a high importance to their own opinions should stay at
home. When one is travelling, convictions are mislaid
as easily as spectacles, but unlike spectacles, they are
not easily replaced." (1).
Let us try to move in the direction of substituting more
precise words for vague ones. For example, it is often
said that "heavy rains" fall on India during the monsoon
season. The statement would carry more meaning if it
were pointed out, for example, that Allahabad, a city in
the Ganges Valley, and New York City both receive on
the average 40 inches of rain annually with the significant
difference that New York City gets from two to four
inches monthly whereas Allahabad is hit by some 37 inches
from June to October.
Let us become more alert to the ways in which
cultural conditioning shapes our value judgments. An
exercise in seeing one's own culture as it might be seen
by a stranger is a useful start. Consider, for example,
the following excerpt from an article called, "Body Ritual
Among the Nacirema":
"The focal point of the shrine is a box or chest which is
built into the wall. In this chest are kept the many charms
and magical potions without which no native believes he
could live. . .
"...The charm is not disposed of after it has served
its purpose, but is placed in the charm-box of the house¬
hold shrine. As these magical materials are specific for
certain ills, and the real or imagined maladies of the people
are many, the charm-box is usually full to overflowing.
The magical packets are so numerous that people forget
what their purposes were and fear to use them again.
"While the natives are very vague on this point, we can
only assume that the idea in retaining all the old magical
materials is that their presence in the charm-box, before
which the body rituals are conducted, will in some way
protect the worshipper." (2).
Here under discussion has been the medicine cabinet
in American (Nacirema spelled backward), or almost any
other western culture!
(1) Jesting Pilate, Aldous Huxley: New York, Harper, 1928. (2) Horace Miner in American Anthropologist, Vol. 58, No. 3, 1956.
CONT'D ON PAGE 32

Words under a mask
Let us become more suspicious of our own "wisdom."
Anatole France once said of a man, "He flattered
himself on being a man without prejudices; and this
pretension itself is a very great prejudice." In "The
Devil's Advocate: A Plea for Superstition," written in 1909,
Sir James G. Frazer argued that so-called superstitions
more often than not embody a realistic distillation of ex¬
perience whereby the unitiated and unwary may receive
tested guidance. Behind many "myths" are "truths" which
have helped people to rationalize and maintain social order
and organization.
Thus, for example, a "superstition" long held in some
local area that a certain marsh is "haunted" may seem
ridiculous at first but it may be a shorthand way of saying
that the number of people who enter it and the number
who emerge continually shows a marked discrepancy.
Until the cause of deaths in the marsh possibly malaria
is identified and dealt with, the local "respect" for the
area is based on more than mere superstition.
Of course, much of what has been pointed out here will
not come as a revelation. None of the ideas are new
and, under different names, many of the General Semantics
techniques have been used by intelligent people who
have never heard of the word "semantics", let alone been
exposed to the writings of Korzybski and others.
So much the better. Our concern is not so much with
(Cont'd from page 12)
how people distinguish between a "map" and the physical
territory which it describes, but that they do distinguish.
George Orwell writes, "What is above all needed is to
let the meaning choose the word, and not the other way
about. . . Probably it is better to put off using words as
long as possible and get one's meaning as clear as one
can through pictures and sensations."
No one is suggesting that all abstractions be distrusted.
"In demanding that people cease reacting to abstract
names as if they were realities-in-themselves," says
S. I. Hayakawa, "we are merely saying in another way,
'Stop acting like suckers'." And until we do give more
disciplined attention to words, we will continue to stockpile
symbols and labels while the "precious commodities"
which are being symbolized and labeled escape our
detection and comprehension. The argument-ending
gambit, "It is only a matter of semantics" must give way
to the more sophisticated recognition that the "real"
search for "meaning" often starts where words leave off.
SEYMOUR FERSH is Education Director of the Asia Society in New
York City. A former secondary school and college teacher, he went
to India as a Fulbright professor In 1958-59. He Is the author of
"The View from the White House: A Study of Presidential Addresses
to Congress" ,and of textbooks on India, his latest being "The Story
of India", published by McCormick-Mathers Publishing Company
Inc., Wichita, Kansas (1964), price 84 cents.
