Children now spend at least 24 hours a week
watching TV; a new Unesco survey examines
WHAT TV IS DOING
(¡man CHILDREN
by Wilbur Schramm
!*Éümu
i*
V . ^
\
i
I
i
1
m
r V - 1
Unesco-Paul Almasy. Paris

Television has now become a world-wide force after developing in the past fifteen
years more quickly than was ever expected. As it continues to spread at an amaz¬
ing pace, entering more and more into the lives of people on every continent, what
impact does it make, especially on the ideas and behaviour of children? During the
past decade the spotlight of research has been seeking out some of the answers
to this question. A guide to present knowledge on this subject, gathered and
analyzed in many countries, has now been compiled and published by Unesco in
the form of an international annotated bibliography, "The Effects of Television on
Children and Adolescents", edited by Wilbur Schramm (No. 43 in Reports and
Papers on Mass Communication; French and English versions; $1.00, 5/-, 3.50 F.)
Below Professor Schramm sums up the results of the world-wide research carried
out on this subject.
ESTIMATES from different countries indicate
that the average child of elementary school
and high school age (six to sixteen) devotes to television
from twelve to twenty-four hours a week. Elementary
school children spend, on the average, a little more time
viewing than do high school students.
In the United States, where the most extensive measure¬
ments of viewing by children of different ages have
been made, it is estimated that a child of three is already
averaging about forty-five minutes a day on television.
By the time, the child is in the first grade (age five or six),
he is spending about two hours a day in front of the televi¬
sion set. The time spent watching TV slowly increases
with age and with later bedtimes, until a peak is reached
at the age of twelve or thirteen when the average child is
viewing about three hours a day. During the high school
years (thirteen to sixteen), the viewing time decreases to
about two hours a day.
This curve is consistent with other evidence on the
subject, and the daily averages are not unlike those found
in England or Japan. In England, it was found that
children ten to eleven and thirteen to fourteen years old
averaged about 1.9 hours a day, which is a little less than the
American average for those ages. This may be because less
television and fewer station choices are available in Eng¬
land. German youth, fifteen to twenty years old, averaged
only seven to eight hours a week, or barely over an hour
a day. Its is not known whether this is a result of less tele¬
vision being available in Germany or of the age group
selected or because there is a real difference in television's
attractiveness to young people of different countries.
WHEREVER television becomes available for a
number of hours a day it dominates the leisure
time of children. Hilde Himmelweit, A.N. Oppenheim and
Pamela Vince in "Television and the Child," based on stu¬
dies made in England, have suggested several principles
that help to explain the changes television brings about in
leisure patterns. The activities most readily sacrificed are
those which satisfy the same needs as television, but less
effectively.
For example, younger children will go less often to the
cinema when they have television in their homes; they
will read fewer comic books, and read less magazine
fiction; they will spend less time on radio. These acti
vities meet about the same needs as television. But the
reading of newspapers and non-fiction books will hardly
be affected by television because these activities answer
different needs than does television. Similarly, the ado¬
lescent's cinema-going will be less affected than will the
younger child's, because for the adolescent the cinema
represents a valued social experience, whereas for the
younger child it represents television in a theatre.
HE impressive figure that emerges from the
studies of television and leisure time is the
enormous amount of time devoted to T.V. during childhood.
An average child six to sixteen years old in any of the
countries where more than a few hours of television is
available and where children's viewing time has been
measured in detail, can be counted on to spend between
500 and 1,000 hours a year in front of the picture tube.
This is a total of 6,000 to 12,000 hours during the twelve
school years. The larger of these figures is not far diffe¬
rent from the amount of time an average child spends in
school during those same years, taking into account vaca¬
tions and holidays.
Effect on Taste. Because children spend so much time
on television, chiefly on programmes not noted for their
cultural content, critics have wondered whether television
"demeans" children's taste for entertainment. The research
carried out has some interesting things to say on the
subject.
When children begin at an early age to watch television,
they usually start with children's programmes puppets,
animals, story-telling, children's songs, and so forth. Very
soon, however, they discover adult programmes, and come
to prefer them. Above all, they prefer the more violent
type of adult programme including the western, the adven¬
ture programme, and crime drama. The result is that, even
in the early elementary school years, they view more
adult programmes than children's programmes. This pref¬
erence for adult programmes has been reported from
every country where a choice is available and where
children's viewing has been studied. In the United States,
it has been noted that as much as two-thirds of children's
viewing was of programmes in which adults make up the
majority of the audience.
Children's taste patterns are fairly well structured by
the age of ten or eleven. A child who likes a given kind of
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
23

WHAT TV IS DOING (Cont'd)
Confusing worlds of
fantasy and reality
programme on television will be likely to enjoy correspond¬
ing material in popular magazines or in films.
The question has been raised whether children "see what
they like," or "like what they see." In other words, do
they come to enjoy violent programmes because no very
attractive alternatives are available or do the more violent
programmes fill so much of the air time because children
do not like programmes which critics would say are at
a higher "cultural level"? This question is by no means
settled, but the research does contain at least one interest¬
ing finding relating to it.
Dr. Himmelweit and her colleagues found that when only
one channel was available in England, and children had
only the choice of ceasing to view or viewing a programme
which they did not expect to find very interesting, they
often chose to see that programme and became interested
in it. Thus their tastes broaden and may be raised in
average level. However, when choices are available,
children tend to choose the type of programme which they
have previously found interesting and thus their tastes
are hardened and narrowed.
Learning from Television. Abundant evidence has now
accumulated that a good teacher can teach effectively by
television, though no one contends that all the useful acti¬
vities of education can be carried on by television.
There is real hope that instructional television may
"enrich" many classes, that it may furnish expert teaching
In fields where few experts are available (in the teaching
of foreign languages in elementary school), that it may
add new strength to home and extension teaching, and that
it may be useful in some of the developing countries
where teachers are in short supply.
Does home television cause a student to do better work
in school? This is a hard question to answer. But there
is little evidence that television helps children's school
performance or that children's grades are poorer when they
have television at home. Lower grades go with heavy
viewing but the viewing is not necessarily the basic cause
of the poor performance. The observation of most students
of children's television behaviour is that heavy viewing
tends to be a symptom of stresses or frustration or un¬
satisfactory human relationships. The same stresses or
unsatisfactory relationships might also reduce a child's
efficiency in school, and the frustration of failing to do
good work in school might result in heavier viewing.
24
OST of the debate, however, has centred not on
the effect of television on school grades or on
the effectiveness of instructional television, but rather on
the incidental learning which children derive from the two
hours or more a day they spend on entertainment television.
Does television broaden their horizons? Does it teach
them skills desirable or undesirable? Does it give them a
distorted view of the adult world?
The general conclusion, as summed up by Dr. Himmel¬
weit recently in a statement concerning the British film
inquiry, is disappointment that television does not teach
children more than it does. "Surely a medium with such
possibilities as television should be able to do more,"
she writes. "We should by now be able to point with
pride to a younger generation more curious, better inform¬
ed, more enterprising through having been able to' offer
them a window to the world. What is wrong? It seems
to me a devastating indictment that while ten-year-olds
still pick up some knowledge from television, by the time
Children's television programmes
often present themes and stories
which have attained well-estab¬
lished popularity through books
and the cinema. Youngsters wel¬
come a reunion with familiar
characters. In the case of French
children these include the mari¬
ners who figured in a television
programme based on Jules
Verne's well-known book. "The
Mysterious Island" (right). To
cater for the child's taste for
fantasy there is no lack of charm¬
ing and humorous programmes
spiced with music and poetry.
Far right, a shot from a Polish
programme, "Peterand theWolf",
based on Prokofiev's Music.
ORTF, France
they reach thirteen only the dull ones do so, and that the
television hold becomes less the more intelligent the
child. . . It must give even more cause for reflection to
realize that these children view almost exclusively pro¬
grammes designed for family and adult entertainment. Is it
perhaps that much of the evening's entertainment is at the
level of a ten to eleven-year-old?"
It was found in Canada that children in a television town
came to the first grade of school with vocabularies about
a year more advanced than children in a town without
television. Half a dozen years later, however, the differ¬
ences had disappeared, and the children with television
knew actually less about public affairs although more
about entertainment matters) than the children without
television. Here, as in other studies, it was found that
in the early school years the bright children seem to
learn more from television whereas after age twelve or thir¬
teen the slower children seem to use television more and
gain more from it while the brighter ones depend more and
more on print. However, there is also some evidence
that parents and teachers think the level of general know¬
ledge is increased by television.
Studies of television content, of course, vary in their
results from country to country but many of them point
out that television brings a child face to face with adult
problems long before he ordinarily would meet them, and
in some countries this tends to give him a view of adult
life that is distorted in terms of social class, desirable
occupations and violent ways of solving problems. To
what extent this television world view becomes a child's
real world view, affects his plans and expectations and
preparations, and controls his behaviour as an adult is
not yet fully known.
When Does Television Affect a Child's Outlook and
Values? Television has its maximum psychological effect
on children, according to one of the ablest writers on the
subject, when the values or viewpoints recur from pro¬
gramme to programme ; the values are presented in drama¬
tic form so that they evoke emotional reactions; they link
with the child's immediate needs and interests; the viewer
tends to be uncritical of and attached to, the medium; and
when a viewer, through his friends, parents, or immediate
environment, is not already supplied with a set of values
which would provide a standard against which to assess
the view offered on television.
Thus, in order to predict the effect of television one

'"«"
Polish Television
must know something about the television and something
about the child. A child with high aggression will probably
make special use of the aggressive materials he finds in
a television programme. Many children may learn from
a television crime programme how a holdup is committed,
but only a few children for example, some who have psy¬
chopathic tendencies or have fallen under the influence
of a criminal gang are likely ever to make use of this
information. For most children, television is a pleasing
experience, a relaxation of tensions and relief from pressing
problems; but to some it is a confusing experience be¬
cause they are unable entirely to separate the fantasy world
of television from the real world. Thus the same television
programme will not have the same effect on all children
any more than will the same child derive the same effect
from all programmes.
But there is one element in the relation of child to
programme which seems rather more important than any
of the others in determining what effect the programme has.
This is the extent to which the child can identify with one
or more of the characters in a programme.
Television and Delinquency. Most students of television
effects on children are unwilling to say that identification
or incidental learning from television plays any large part
in causing delinquency or crime. The roots of this crimi¬
nal behaviour lie far deeper than television; they reach
into the personality, the family experience, the relation¬
ships with others in the same age group as the delinquent
or criminal individual. At most, television can be merely
a contributory cause, and is likely to affect only the child
who is already maladjusted and delinquency-prone.
Television may contribute by teaching a criminal skill
which may be used when the individual decides to commit
a crime. It may trigger off an act of delinquency by
feeding a child's aggressive nature. Or it may encourage
delinquent behaviour by implanting an unreal idea of the
importance of violent behaviour in solving human prob¬
lems. But in any of these cases television by itself can¬
not make a normal, well-adjusted child into a delinquent.
This is the almost unanimous conclusion of research and
clinical investigation.
The Effect of Violence. Because so much of the enter¬
tainment a child sees on television is violent, special
attention has been paid by researchers to the possible
effect of all this violence. The original hypothesis was
that television violence might serve as a safety valve, by
means of which a child might rid himself vicariously of
pent-up aggressions. However, a series of experiments
have now come out with exactly the opposite result.
The typical method used in such experiments is to
frustate a group of children so that they develop a high
level of aggression. Then they are shown a film or a
television recording of a drama in which aggressive be¬
haviour plays a prominent part. (In different experiments,
the ending, the type of aggression, the . nature of the
character, and other elements of the story are varied.)
A similar group of children, who have not been frustrated,
are shown the same programme. Then, the members of
the two groups are given chances to express any aggres¬
sion they may have either by behaviour or in tests of some
type.
Invariably, there has been a great difference between
the experimental and the control group. The children
who were not frustrated (the control group) seem no more
aggressive than they were before seeing the picture. But
the children who were initially frustrated (the experimental
group) have not reduced their aggression; if anything, they
have built it up. They have in many cases found ways to
express it.
WE know that children with high levels of
aggression are especially attracted to violent
programmes on television. If television now feeds rather
than reduces children's aggressive tendencies and if it
gives them hints as to how to take out aggression with
fists, knives, or guns, then an opportunity may come to use
those weapons at a moment when they are angry. We
assume this does not happen often because social norms
teach them not to behave in such a way. But certainly
there is little to make us believe that violent programmes
on television reduce the likelihood of violence in real life.
Suppose an aggressive child regularly identifies with
a hero who himself uses violence to solve problems. For
example, French investigators found that delinquent boys
were very fond of a certain film hero who "fights. . . knows
how to treat women. . . overcomes all obstacles . . .respects
no moral code and frequently plays an ambiguous role;
one can never tell whether he is on the side of the police
or the side of the gangsters." Analysing the reactions of
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
25

WHAT TV IS DOING (Cont'd)
From escapism to learning
26
the boys they were studying, they concluded that such
a mass media experience as this is especially dangerous
for Juvenile delinquents or potential delinquents.
On the whole, the weight of the evidence is behind
one researcher's conclusion that "the heavy dosage of
violence in the mass media," although not a major deter¬
minant of crime or delinquency, "heightens the probability
that someone in the audience will behave aggressively
in a later situation."
Television and Maladjustment. One of the most im¬
portant topics in the literature of television research is
the relation of television experience to a child's social
adjustment and his mental health. This has not yet
been adequately examined because of the scarcity of
clinical studies, and only tentative conclusions are possible.
There is ample evidence, however, that television some¬
times frightens children, and of what kind of material is
most frightening. But children often like to be frightened
(witness the popularity of the roller-coasterl). And no
scholar contends that television is likely to have a harm¬
ful effect on the social adjustment or the mental health of
a child who enjoys warm and solid relationships at home
and with his friends and who has no foundation of mental
illness.
For this reason, parents have been advised that the
greatest defence they can raise against possible ¡II effects
of television is to make their children feel loved and
secure at home, and to help them to satisfactory relation¬
ships with friends of their own age. And so far as fright
is concerned, parents can help their children to avoid
programmes that are too frightening.
Dr. Lawrence Z. Freedman, a psychiatrist, points out that
most children in a reasonably stable environment, do not
confuse the make-believe world of television with the real
experiences of personal and family relationships. "Most
youngsters find the immediate personal relationships more
compelling and rewarding than the animated, pictorial sub¬
stitutes," he says. ". . . The intensity and psychic signifi¬
cance of the child's response to television is the reciprocal
of the satisfaction he gains in the milieu of his family,
school, and friends. One would predict that the less intelli¬
gent, the most disturbed youngsters, and those having the
poorest relationships with their families and peers would
be most likely to immerse themselves in televiewing as
escape and stimulus."
| OES television make children passive and with¬
drawn? There is no proof that it does, although
television clearly may contribute to passivity and withdrawal
when there is already a tendency present. As Dr. Freed¬
man points out, "when the automobile removed youngsters
from the surveillance of their homes, we were concerned
for their morals. Now television immobilizes them in the
living room and we deplore their passivity." Nor is there
any real evidence that television is good or bad for home
life. It keeps children more often at home. But watching
television in a group does not seem to make for a really
strong group relationship; each member of the family
reacts individually, more often than as part of a group,
to the television he sees. The conclusion is that television
is not likely either to ruin a healthy home relationship or
rescue an unhealthy one. And a reasonable corollary is
that the quality of a child's social relationships is more likely
to control his use of television, than vice versa.
In general, the evidence on physical effects is negative.
Television postpones average bedtimes a few minutes, but
seems to decrease sleeping time very little because children
who have stayed up later appear to go to sleep more
quickly. It is true that there are reports of children who are
frightened by evening television and unable to go to sleep,
and of children who are sleepy in school because they have
stayed up late at night to see a programme, but none of
the studies can find any evidence of widespread fatigue or
other physical effect related to television. Indeed, there is
some reason to think that standards of behaviour set by
the parents may have more to do than television with late
bedtimes, and that if these same homes did not have tele¬
vision the children might still stay up late for other pur¬
poses.
Nor is there any evidence that television, viewed properly,
has a bad effect on children's eyesight. Some specialists
say that reading is as likely as viewing to cause eyestrain,
and others that viewing is good "exercise" for the eyes.
In general ophthalmologists advise children to view tele¬
vision in a room where the television receiver is not the
only source of light, not to sit closer than six feet from the
screen and to sit with the screen at approximately eye level.
(The British ophthalmologists say, "eye level or slightly
below"; the Polish say, "eye level, or a bit higher.") Even
eye weariness resulting from protracted and improper
viewing can be overcome in a short period of rest, a Japa¬
nese study found.
WE are now rich in surveys, and except where a
country which has not had a large survey wants
a broad picture of the television behaviour of its children
in order to see how their behaviour is different from that
revealed by other surveys, there seems less need now for
survey than for experiment. Perhaps the most obvious
need is for additional close experimental and clinical studies
of the effect which a given kind of television has on a given
kind of child. It may be a long time before close, careful
studies like these answer all the questions posed, by the
effect of television on children, but without such studies we
shall never be able to say clearly and sharply what are
measuring and where our results apply. Whenever possi¬
ble these studies should be extended over a period of
years, so that we may begin to understand the cumulative
effects of television.
Another aspect of television which deserves more atten¬
tion is the problem of how to realize the potential of the
medium. Some disappointment has been expressed at the
fact that television has not completely fulfilled its potential
as a window on the world, that it has not given us a better
informed and more enquiring generation, and that Is has
merely provided the average child with two to .three hours
of daily entertainment.
Perhaps now we should study how to make the non-
entertainment, non-fictional programmes on television more
interesting, so that they will attract their share of viewers
and contribute their share of learning. And perhaps we
need to study how taste is formed, so that instead of
narrowing our children's taste around a certain level of
entertainment we can broaden their television interest and
encourage them to use television when possible as a
window on the world rather than as a momentary escape
from the stresses of growing up.
WILBUR SCHRAMM is Director of the Institute of Communication
Research at Stanford University, U.S.A. and the author of many books
on mass communications. He has been closely associated with Unesco
for a number of years as a consultant, researcher, writer and editor
and as an adviser to governments on Unesco's behalf. He Is the author
of a challenging new book, "Mass Media and National Development"
(The Role of Information in the Developing Countries) published Jointly
by Stanford University Press and Unesco In December 1964. In addition
to editing "The Effects of Television on Children and Adolescents"
on which the above text is based, Professor Schramm wrote, in colla¬
boration white Gerald F. Winfield, the special paper on "New Uses of
Mass Communication for the Promotion of Economic and Social Deve¬
lopment" as a contribution from Unesco to the 1953 U.N. Conference,
on the Application of Science and Technology for the Benefit of the
less Developed Areas, in Geneva.
