'THE WOODEN OX'
The world's first wheelbarrow
by Luciano Petech
Engraving of a man push¬
ing a wheelbarrow, by a
Chinese artist of the Han
Period (202 B.C.-220 A.D.).
I
28
N China engineering always remained on a
practical level, without any connotation of
theory. Some bits of early information are found in the
K'ao-kung-chi (artificers' record) chapter of the Chou-li:
the original was lost and the present one was compiled by
the prince of Ho-chien (d. 130 B.C.). The larger works of
mechanical engineering were as a rule connected with
the imperial workshops (mostly called shangfang); for the
rest engineering was a family and hereditary craft.
Most of our information on mechanical appliances refers
to mechanical toys, which were always much appreciated
in China. A very famous example of such devices was the
south-pointing carriage (chih-nan ch'ê), in which a figure
was made, by the use of cog-wheels, always to point south¬
ward; it certainly had nothing to do with the compass.
The "//-recording drum carriage" (chi-li-ku-ch'ê), a sort
of hodometer, is mentioned in the fourth century A.D. and
described in the Sung-shu. As perfected later, it beat
a drum at every // and sounded a gong at every ten /;; it
was a simple problem of reducing cog-wheels.
Among these toys there was one destined for a great
future, if only the Chinese had guessed its practical use
cardamic suspension. Only known to Europe since the
sixteenth century, it seems to be described in the Hsi-
ching tsa-chi of the sixth century, which attributes it. to Ting
Huan (c. A.D. 180); "a perfume burner for use among
cushions. . ., a contrivance of rings which could revolve
in all the four directions (i.e., the three directions of space),
so that the body of the burner remained constantly level
and could be placed among bedclothes and cushions."
In this connexion we may mention a piece of charla¬
tanry which shows an odd element of prophetic divination:
about 320 A.D. Ko Hung speaks of a flying machine on the
principle of the helicopter: "Some have, made flying cars
(fei-ch'ê) with wood from the inner part of the jujube tree,
using ox leather straps fastened to returning blades, so as
to set the machine in motion." More solid than these
dreams was the fact that an old Chinese toy, the kite,
Perched on scaffolding, workers in a salt mine are
busy removing the brine. This impression of a Han
period engraving on brick depicts one of the many
forms of mining in ancient China, ranging from
minerals and precious stones to salt. In the 6th century
B.C. the state sought a complete monopoly over mining.
Illustrations on these pages from " Dictionnaire archéologique
des techniques". Editions de l'Accueil, Paris. 1963.

¿g^f|jl
4L 'i MMN. jPP
JHpv&WI
FARMING 2000 YEARS AGO. Three
impressions made from stone engravings
depicting scenes from rural life and labour
during China's Han Period, when farming
techniques became finally established.
Above, ploughman at work with an ox.
Above right, kitchen chores. Beneath food
hung from the ceiling, housewives prépare
a fish and watch over the cooking pot. Right,
peasant farmers harvesting and threshing.
arrived in Europe at the end of the sixteenth century and
became the ancestor of modern aviation.
Of simple machines in everyday use, we find that some
of them were first manufactured in China. The folding
umbrella is one of them, and Wang Mang caused several to
be manufactured for magic purposes; some examples
have been found in the Lo-lang tombs in northern Korea.
The box-bellows (with double effect, like a double pump)
was a most efficient instrument, still widely used.
A humble but very useful contrivance was the wheel¬
barrow; the Chinese one, with the wheel in the centre of
the box, is much more practical than ours, because the
man merely pulls it and holds it in equilibrium, but carries
no part of its weight. It was first invented about 231 A.D.
by Chu-ko Liang, for logistic purposes; it was called wooden
ox (mu-niu).
Cog-wheels are first mentioned in the Han period, and we
possess a terracotta mould for a toothed bronze wheel of
that epoch. They are the necessary prerequisites for the
most typical Chinese hydraulic machine: the square-pallet
chain-pump (fan-ch'ê). It consists of an endless chain carry¬
ing a succession of pallets which, passing upward through
a trough, draw up water. It may lift water up to 16 feet
and can be worked by a treadmill, animal, or by a water-
mill. . ., the invention is attributed to the engineeer Pi Lan,
who died in 186 A.D. Water-mills, with both horizontal and
vertical axes, are found in China. They first appear in the
first century A.D., probably as an import from the West;
oddly, they were chiefly employed for driving bellows, and
seldom for grinding.
But engineering in China was fatally handicapped, in
comparison with the West, by the lack of knowledge of
some of the simple machines, such as the screw, and
also. of the crank (with the possible exception of the
winnowing fan) and so it could never go farther than
the so-called eotechnic stage.
Building enginerlng employed as its chief technique pisé
and raw bricks in wall building. Baked bricks took their
place during the Han period. The greatest and most
famous feat of Chinese engineering is, of course, the Great
Wall, which was formed in the years before 214 B.C. by
connecting already existing stretches of wall. Its main
purpose was administrative, fiscal, and, by making the
passage of masses of nomad cavalry difficult, also military.
The Chinese road network was started by the first empe¬
ror Shih-huang-ti, who in 220 B.C. caused two great postal
routes (ch'ih-tao) to be built, radiating from the capital
Ch'ang-an towards Ch'i and Yen to the east, and towards
the lower Huai to the south-east. They were planted with
trees and were paved with a sort of macadam; no traces of
them are left.
Several important roads were built under the Han dynasty.
We may mention the one from Ch'ang-an to Szechwan ;
it was built, or at least broadened, about 120 B.C., and
crossed a very rugged tract of country. About one-third of
its 430 miles consisted of wooden trestles over mountain
streams, or high up on the rocks. The general rule was
that road building was the concern of the central govern¬
ment; in practice the latter took care only of those roads
which were necessary for the transport of taxes in kind.
Suspension bridges are first mentioned in the famous
text of the Han-shu concerning the "Hanging Passages"
in the Hindu Kush. They are common in China, but it is
impossible to settle their chronology. The greatest rope-
bridge is that at An-lan in Szechwan: it has five spans,
the greatest of which is 200 feet, the total being over 700
feet. Perhaps it was originally built by Li Ping in the
third century B.C., but it is renewed every year.
The most notable innovation in Chinese agriculture of
this period was the "alternance field" (tai-t'len) technique,
introduced by Chao Kuo in the middle of the first century
A.D. It consisted in ploughing the furrow where in the
previous year the balk had been, coupled with a careful
weeding and lopping of the young plants. This procedure
was tried first in the imperial domains, where it resulted
in a double output per surface unit (mou); and then it was 00
officially introduced throughout the empire. It seems,
however, that its use did not last for more than a couple
of centuries (Vol. II Pt. 3).
