SCIENCE
by Francis Wattier
Thrills of exploration
Excitement of discovery
N ot all young people believe that the only tempo
for today is the rhythm of the electric guitar.
Millions of them are clamouring for opportunities to use the
spare time left after work or school for training and further
education.
At the start of what has been called the " leisure civili¬
zation," the vital educational role of science clubs and out-
of-school science associations is highlighted by a movement
whose momentum has now become irresistible.
The proof of this can be seen in achievements made
in this direction by most countries, often in response to
the enthusiastic demands of young people themselves.
Hundreds of thousands of younq Americans have already
joined over 25,000 science clubs. Over a million young peo¬
ple submit "science projects" to the state and regional fairs.
The winners in 1963 there were 411 representing
219 regions take part in the Grand Final of the U.S. Scien¬
ce Fair National, International.
In Belgium over 10,000 students in state or private insti¬
tutions have joined in the activities arranged by the Jeu¬
nesses Scientifiques de Belgique.
In the U.S.S.R., where a premium is put on scientific
and technical training, schoolchildren have 6,000 out-of-
school institutions at their disposal. Activities suited to
all ages and educational levels are provided.
A significant example is the mounting popularity among

Out-of-school science groups
for young people are now
being set up in many African
countries. Right, two members
of the Bingerville (Ivory Coast)
science club learn chemistry
the practical way, by experi¬
menting in the laboratory.
© Paul Almasy, Paris
Left, young girl finalist in the
national contest of U.S. science
clubs presents a subsonic
wind tunnel she has designed
and built. This working model
produces wind speeds of 40
to 50 miles per hour. Delicate
balances measure the effici¬
ency of wing sections that are
placed in the wind stream.
© Science Service, Washington
Soviet youth of the contest organized every two years on
the theme of recent advances in science and technology.
In 1926 there were 86 competitors; in 1962 there were
3,200,0001
Laboratory clubs are forging ahead in France. Some
science clubs already operate and others are now. being
set up in Africa (Cameroon, Senegal), in South America
(Argentina), in Asia (China, Pakistan). They have become
outstandingly popular in Japan where young people flock to
clubs in Tokyo and other cities.
In Poland and in Yugoslavia, the standard of the science
"olympiads" has improved considerably in recent times and
the number of competitors has increased.
These are but a few random examples many other coun¬
tries could be cited but they should suffice to show the
surge of interest in science club activities in all parts of
the world.
The movement cuts across national boundaries. It is
heartening to note the valuable contacts made by young
people on the occasion of big international scientific events
olympiads, science fairs, scientific camps and the London
International Science Fortnights, among other similar
examples. Such opportunities for international exchanges
are doubtless still too few and far between, but a start
has been made. The lucky few who benefit from them are
richer in other things than scientific knowledge. It becomes
clear too that young people with scientific interests can
form a chain of friendship around the world.
After all these efforts it is reassuring to those who
sustained them wholeheartedly, believing in the educational
value of out-of-school scientific activities, to read the follow¬
ing conclusions in the Final Report of the International
Conference on Youth held by Unesco at Grenoble, France,
in 1964: "The Conference has highlighted the fact that
the modern world and modern youth require out-of-school
education to be no longer the concern only of private insti¬
tutions, but to become ever more the major preoccupation
of all who are responsible for educating young people; that
in-school and out-of-school education for young people
have an equal right to be included in plans for general
development and to receive assistance from the material
resources of the nation."
This view is bound to gain currency.
So far I have tried to show the significance of this new
impulse which sends thousands of young people to join
science clubs where they already exist and to call for
their establishment elsewhere. I should also like to
describe briefly some of the activities of these clubs,
although it is obviously not possible to give an exhaustive
account of what is being done in all countries.
The Secretariat of the International Co-ordinating Commit¬
tee for the Presentation of Science and the Development
CONT'D ON PAGE 45
41

t* t^M \~-
Above, with an escort of the club members who built it, an experimental rocket
is carried to the launching site. Below, at the launching ramp the tail fins
and chamber containing the propellent are carefully fitted to the nose of rocket.
Photos Jacques Lebeau - National Association of Science Clubs. Paris
4 1 2 1 0
Will I Will I w
Young people the world over follow each
new achievement in the conquest of
space with passionate interest. In
many countries science clubs specializ¬
ing in space questions have been form¬
ed. In some those in the U.S.A.,
U.S.S.R., Great Britain, France, Sweden,
Italy and Japan, for instance members
carry out practical experiments to im¬
prove their knowledge of rocket-launch¬
ing techniques, tele-guided systems,
ballistic calculations and astronomy.
Chosen from many examples, these
pictures show a space-age science club
in action: the Astronautics Section of
the French Science Clubs Association
launching rockets built by members.
42
After a final check at the
launching ramp (right) the
rocket is fired. This is the
moment of recompense for
the embryo space engineers
who have worked for hun¬
dreds of hours preparing the
experiment. In the nose of
the rocket built by the club
members, delicate measur¬
ing instruments are installed
for the studies which are
part of each launching
project. The propellent is
provided by France's Natio¬
nal Space Research Centre.
Photos National Association of
Science Clubs, Paris

wsmrn

*
Digging up history with their hands
When Swiss engineers began to widen the canal
linking the Neuchatel and Morat lakes, they discov¬
ered the remains of a Roman bridge, 80 metres long
and seven and a half metres wide. A total of 300 ancient
wooden piles (above) was discovered. The site
obviously deserved to be searched minutely but time
was limited by the programme of work on the canal.
A Swiss archaeologist, Mrs. Hanni Schwab, called on
the help of young volunteers and soon found herself
heading a team of students and schoolchildren. Camping
beside the site and cooking their own meals (left),
the young volunteers enthusiastically got to work on
what quickly became the most interesting history
lesson of their lives. They spent the days carefully
sifting the soil and the evenings cleaning, labelling and
recording (right) a variety of 2,000-year-old objects
mosaic pieces, potsherds, buckles, arms and har¬
nesses that had come to light beneath their fingers.
(For an article on amateur archaeologists, see The
Unesco Courier, Sept. 1962.) photos © comet. Zurich
I

^v'v '-./Sag -f£&
SCIENCE : THRILLS OF EXPLORATION (Cont'd)
From archaeology
to astronautics
of Out-of-School Scientific Activities (*) is at present mak¬
ing an inventory of science clubs.
As part of this world survey, and at the request of
Unesco's Department of Adult Education and Youth Acti¬
vities and Division of Science Teaching, the Committee
sent questionnaires to all the Unesco National Commissions.
The first reports from this enquiry brought in details of
science programmes in Austria, Belgium, Canada, Ceylon,
China, Federal Republic of Germany, France, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Sweden,
Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States of America,
the U.S.S.R. and Yugoslavia.
Contacts have since been made with El Salvador, Guate¬
mala, Ivory Coast, Iran, Pakistan, Senegal and Spain.
Various activities are under way: there are sections spe¬
cializing in such subjects as physics, chemistry, biology
and films; science camps, usually dealing with natural
sciences; seminars on physics or chemistry; courses of
lectures; visits to industrial plants; publication programmes;
science fairs; science contests or olympiads.
I should like to describe two of these activities
laboratory clubs and science camps in which
I have participated and worked with young people and
which seem to me to be particularly effective.
In France, for example, "laboratory-clubs" have been set
up in many towns, including Metz, Toulouse, Dunkirk, Mar¬
seille, Bordeaux and Pau. Reporting on its work in 1963-
1964, the Bordeaux club described activities which it had
organized under. seven sections: chemistry, biology, geo¬
logy, rockets-astronautics, astronomy, photography and
electronics.
Leaders of this club all agree that the rocket-building
programme must have an educational aim. Working as a
group, the rockets-astronautics section analyzes and dis¬
cusses its programme down to the last detail. A high stan¬
dard of work is required since all the models produced
are prototypes every part of which has been designed and
tested by these young people.
Apart from the construction and testing of rockets, the
work enables members to acquire a great deal of
knowledge. They have to make mathematical calculations,
solve problems of physics, learn about rocket fuel mixtures,
and so on. No effort is spared to make these theoretical
and experimental preparations a stimulating mental exercise
and any fruitless tinkering is studiously avoided.
The French National Centre for Space Studies has shown
(*) The I.C.I, was set up following conferences organized by the
Council of Europe at Liège (Belgium) in 1960; and by the Unesco
Youth Institute at Gauting, Munich, in 1962. These conferences
discussed problems connected with the presentation of science and
the development of out-of-school activities in science. The Secre¬
tariat was set up in Brussels (147, Chaussée de Haecht) following
two meetings in the Belgian capital (in Nov. 1962 and Nov. 1963)
sponsored by the Belgian National Commission for Unesco.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
45

»--
<«ñhñ
\
OftO/f,
i
SCIENCE : THRILLS OF EXPLORATION (Cont'd)
Engaged in a quest of self-discovery
46
close interest in this work and says that the methods and
material are well suited to a programme designed to fami¬
liarize young people with the techniques of astronautics.
"Science Camps", set up by the French Association
Jeunes-Science since 1959, have been developed on an
even larger scale by the Belgian Jeunesses Scientifiques,
which has organized an international camp for natural
sciences every year since 1960. In July 1965, a marine bio¬
logy studies camp drew some 40 young people from nine
countries Belgium, Federal Republic of Germany, France,
Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, United Kingdom, United
States of America to Coq-sur-Mer (Belgium).
This year, too, the Council of Europe is offering six
fellowships three to adults concerned with out-of-school
scientific activities and three to young people from Italy,
Norway and Spain. It is hoped this will help to spread
the idea of science camps to other European countries,
with these six delegates acting as missionaries for the
cause.
Subjects covered by natural science camps include astro¬
nomy, botany, human geography, physical geography, geo
logy, meteorology and zoology. The predominant feature
of the camps is the sincere and keen friendship which
exists at all times between the members, between the
young and the not so young. All are inspired by the same
enthusiasm, the same belief in the value of the research
they are conducting.
S one "science camper" put it: "I was delighted
i to find how well we always got on together and
formed real bonds despite differences of nationality and
language." Another camper reported: "My main discovery
was the way we worked routine indoor work was replaced
by field work, which is far more productive. Then again,
the individualism and egoism so often found in second¬
ary schools gave way to team work. There was close
collaboration between the members of the group both in the
field and when the daily report was being written."
Doesn't this express the delight of young people who
have found their vocation, who are engaged in a quest

A PASTIME FOR EXPERTS
Photos r Holmes-Lebel, Paris
Anyone seeing the model aircraft of Tatsu Nakayama, a
young Japanese, skimming over the Bay of Tokyo might be
inclined to dismiss the flights as a pointless pastime.
But Tatsu's hobby demands ingenuity, skill and patience.
Like thousands of other youngsters he is a keen constructor
of scale model aircraft whose parts he designs and makes
himself. Finding the right design demands expert knowledge
of aerodynamics and many hours at the workbench. When
Tatsu began to devise power-driven models with unusual
shapes he spent many months in his little workshop (1)
before he managed to make one with a flying saucer shape
that performed well. Tatsu launches his flying saucer
(2, 3, 4) over the waters of Tokyo Bay during his test
flights, so that when it lands or crashes no damage is done
of self-discovery and self-appraisal helped by these inter¬
national contacts? And who are succeeding!
There is much more I would like to have written. As
it is my account is too incomplete to fully reflect the
immense possibilities of out-of-school scientific activities
for youth.
However, the world survey of science clubs being made
by the international committee in Brussels under the
sponsorship of Unesco should fill in the. gaps and reveal
the present trend of present-day out-of-school activities
in science.
Unesco is to publish a handbook on science clubs in
conjunction with the international committee on science
clubs. This will be a practical guide to the various pro¬
grammes being carried out in different parts of the world.
International contacts between young people must be
developed, firstly between neighbouring countries and then
on a global scale. Science and youth must help bring
the people of the world together, and one of the greatest
assets for this would be the creation of an International
Federation of Science Clubs, set up if possible with the
support of Unesco.
The setting up of an official body obviously does not
automatically solve all problems. But for such an
enthusiastic and vigorous movement, a co-ordinating centre
would be of great value both to the developing countries
and to those which are scientifically and technically well
equipped.
A Scientific Youth Week will be organized at the Uni¬
versal and International Canadian Exhibition to be held
in Montreal in 1967. This might indeed be an ideal
occasion for such an initiative.
I sincerely hope so. It would be a significant rendezvous
for young people from all parts of the world, confidently
aware that those of their age are ready to assume leadership
in scientific and technical research when their time comes.
FRANCIS WATTIER Is general secretary of the Co-ordinating
Committee for the Presentation of Science and the Development
of Out-of-School Scientific Activities in Brussels (Belgium).
47
