International co-operation in health began in
the last century under pressure from deadly
diseases that were causing suffering and
death all over the world. In 1965, Inter¬
national Co-operation Year, World Health
Day is being devoted to one of these dis¬
eases smallpox. World Health Day 1965
will serve to focus attention on the cam¬
paign to eradicate smallpox from the world
which was launched by the World Health
Organization in 1958. As Dr. M. G. Candau,
Director-General of WHO has declared :
"The complete eradication of smallpox
would not only rid the world of a disease
which at present is a constant menace but
would also provide an example of what true
international co-operation can achieve." In
the meantime the world will need to
maintain a constant alert against smallpox.
In the days of swift air travel smallpox
can be transmitted from continent to
continent within hours.- Information on
all reported cases goes to WHO in
Geneva which immediately operates a
world-wide warning system. These emer¬
gency warning messages are given
a priority over international cables.
WHO photos

Geneva : world headquarters
in the fight against smallpox
N MAPQ KWABJ BADBO. This text of an ur¬
gent telegram addressed to "Epidnations, Gen¬
eve", and written in "Codepid", a world code for messages
about quarantinable diseases, tells the WHO International
Quarantine Service that a case of smallpox has been
diagnosed in Aden on January 15. One man sick in a
hospital is news for the world when the disease is smallpox.
From Geneva, cables are sent to neighbouring countries
as well as to countries connected with Aden by airline ser¬
vices. The information also goes by short-wave radio to
all continents. It is picked up by national health adminis¬
trations, by port health officers, by ships at sea, by airplanes
In the sky. By radio teleprinter service it goes to European
countries and to North America. It is repeated in the
Weekly Epidemiological Record printed in Geneva and dis¬
tributed by airmail.
For the next days and weeks, special precautions will
be taken by health authorities all over' the world pas¬
sengers arriving from or having passed through Aden.
Incoming telegrams in Geneva about quarantinable
diseases number about 3,000 a year. From them an over¬
all picture of the world smallpox situation can be built up.
In 1963, over 100,000 cases of smallpox were recorded.
India reported over 60,000 cases; Indonesia almost 8,000;
and Pakistan, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Brazil
over 5,000 each. Between 1,000 and 2,000 cases occurred
in a number of African countries Zambia, Nigeria, Congo
(Brazzaville) and Mali. Large epidemics also broke out in
Tanzania, Nepal and Afghanistan. During the year some
40 other countries reported smallpox including, in the Am¬
ericas, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru. In Europe, smallpox
invaded Sweden, Poland, Germany, Hungary and Switzer¬
land.
But for the vigilance of health officers and their intensive
efforts to confine outbreaks, the number of cases would
be far, far larger, for smallpox can spread like wildfire.
Even before the typical smallpox rash appears, the infected
person is breathing out the smallpox virus.
Infected persons can travel and so spread the virus from
country to country, sometimes before they themselves have
begun to feel really ill. Last year, smallpox travelled by
aircraft from south-east Asia to Sweden, from India to Po¬
land, and from central Africa to Switzerland. It travelled
by ship from Calcutta to Suez, where the health services
successfully prevented it from spreading further.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
25

SMALLPOX (Cont'd)
million deaths in 17th-century Europe
26
The disease runs its course a matter of say three weeks.
Cases range from the almost unnoticeable to the very
severe. Patients die (there is as yet no specific treatment)
or recover, and their recovery is of course helped by good
hospital care. On most patients the disease leaves its mark
trie pitted pock-marked skin, which in countries where
the disease is rare may still today be regarded as a sign
of evil by ignorant and superstitious people. In severe
cases, the after-effects may be more serious eyesight
may be affected.
One of the dangerous facts about smallpox today is that
in countries normally free of the disease few doctors have
seen a case, and especially a modified case that is, a
person with partial immunity the diagnosis of which does
not occur to them.
Widespread vaccination and swift preventive measures
during epidemics have freed many countries of smallpox.
But the disease persists and flares up dangerously in parts
of Asia, in Africa and to a lesser extent in South America
areas where efficient health services covering the whole
population are only now being built up.
With the number of air passengers running to tens of
millions a year, outbreaks In the developed countries now-
almost invariably start with a case imported by air.
Smallpox ¡s a world disease in that susceptibility is
universal. It is a world disease also because every
country is concerned with it, whether to prevent it from
being imported, to limit its ravages, or to eradicate it.
As long as smallpox persists anywhere, protective meas¬
ures will be needed everywhere.
Unarmed against this terrible enemy in the past, man
could only submit to its horrors and bemoan his fate:
"Smallpox strikes everybody sooner or later. We are
powerless against Its might. There is no climate, no age,
no sex, no temperament that is secure . . .".
ROM the earliest times, smallpox ravaged Asia
and Africa. About 1122 B.C., under the Chou
dynasty in China, the disease was already known by the
name of "tai-tou", and literature mentions a very serious
epidemic of smallpox in China about 200 B.C.
About 312 A.D. Rome was attacked ; smallpox caused
an enormous number of deaths, and played its part in
accelerating the Empire's decline and fall by its paralyzing
effect on social and political life.
In 675 A.D. the disease is believed to have reached
Ireland where it was called "bolgach" or "galar breac,"
the spotted disease. Then it was the turn of Spain,
where smallpox was Imported by the Saracens. These
warriors after having conquered the country took the
disease into France and soon smallpox spread over the
rest of Europe.
However, of smallpox itself little was known, and it was
Abu Bakr el Razi Rhazes (865-925), the great Arab physi¬
cian (see Unesco Courier, Oct. 1964, p. 33), who first gave
an accurate description of the disease. Yet the great Rhazes
made one mistake: he was convinced that it was normal for
young infants to contract the disease; their blood, he
thought, was like new wine which must ferment.
Century after century the scourge gained ground. No
continent was spared. One of Cortes' negro slaves
carried the disease to the Americas about 1520, during
the early stages of the Spanish conquest. As a result'
three and a half million Mexicans died of the disease
and this helped to pave the way for the conquering
Spaniards. In all, about six million Indiansthat is, about
half the original population died of smallpox during the
Spanish penetration of America. During the conquest of
North America also, smallpox decimated tribes, villages
and towns; in 1633, the Indians of Massachussetts and
of Narragansett numbered about 40,000 but soon only a
few hundred remained.
In 1707, Iceland was ravaged by an epidemic during
which 18.000 of the country's 50,000 inhabitants died. In
the same year, 14,000 people succumbed to the disease
in Paris. In 1721, the "Sea Horse," one of His Britannic
Majesty's ships, dropped anchor in the port of Boston.
There was smallpox on board. Of the town's 11,000
inhabitants, 5,984 contracted the disease and 894 died
of it. Even the most inaccessible countries were not
spared : in 1730, there was a severe epidemic in Green¬
land among the Eskimos. In 1776 in the month of June,
5,500 men of Washington's army of 10,000 fell ill, most
of them with smallpox. Some historians go so far as to
assert that because of smallpox Canada remained part
of the British Empire. In 1770, in India, three million people
died of the disease.
HE disease was so common that the scars left
on the face of those who recovered were
regarded as normal so much so that in England the
absence of pock marks on the face was a distinguishing
feature by which an escaped criminal, for example, might
be recognized. In the market places, slaves with no signs
of having had smallpox were cheap, while those with large
and evident scars fetched high prices since they were
likely to survive longer. It was estimated that during the
seventeenth century more than sixty million Europeans
died of the disease.
In India, the mortality from smallpox was appalling:
500,000 persons succumbed in the years 1873-1874. At
about the same time, more than 44,000 persons died of
smallpox in England. In France the last serious epidemic
occurred during the Franco-Prussian war and ravaged the
defeated army : 200,000 soldiers were struck down by
the disease and more than 25,000 of them died ; at the
same time, there were 200,000 cases and 18,000 deaths
among the inhabitants of Paris. France at that time was
the most heavily infected country in Europe.
At Montreal in 1885 a railway employee contracted the
disease ; smallpox was not immediately diagnosed, and
it spread to 20,000 persons, of whom 3,164 died the
town's 190,000 inhabitants had been reluctant to accept
vaccination. In 1893-1897, Russia was ravaged by small¬
pox which claimed more than 275,000 victims. At about
the same time (1896-1900) there were more than
3,000 deaths from the disease in Egypt. In London, there
was a serious outbreak in 1901-1902, with 6,000 cases;
in order to reduce the risk of infection, the British autho¬
rities installed floating hospitals on barges and even used
old warships out of commission to house the sick. The
statisticians registered 36,000 deaths in Bengal from 1903
to 1907, and 54,000 cases in a single year at about the
same time In North America.
In a report submitted to the Health Section of the League
of Nations, Professor Tarassevich, of Moscow, cited some
impressive figures: in 1919 there were 102,000 cases of
smallpox in the U.S.S.R. ; 1920 cases ; 1921
cases; 1922 25,047 cases. The drop shown by the last
figure is explained by the resumption of systematic vac¬
cination.
Throughout the ages man sought some way to protect
himself. Some medical historians like to think that anti-
smallpox inoculation is as old as the disease itself. In
the remotest times, in fact, physicians noted that people
who had recovered from smallpox were protected In some
way against a new attack.
In China and India, it was observed that the disease
produced pustules of varying gravity. The idea arose of

:wt
WORLD-WIDE THREAT. No country is free from the threat of smallpox. If health authorities were not
constantly on the alert, smallpox could spread like wildfire. Under international sanitary regulations,
countries must notify cases to WHO within 24 hours. Here, infected areas are being recorded.
transferring a mild Infection to healthy persons in order
to protect them against a serious attack. The Chinese
method consisted in blowing powder made from the scabs
of pustules into the nostrils of the person to be immunized,
through a copper tube. In India, pus from mild smallpox
pustules was introduced into the skin of the elbow of the
person to be protected. In short, a kind of preventive
smallpox infection was applied. The practice it was known
in 1715. In 1716, Pastor Cotton Mather in Boston learned
from his negro slave, who came from the Fezzan, that
smallpox inoculation was widely practised in Africa. In
Europe generally, however, the method made but slow
progress.
In Turkey, at the beginning of the eighteenth century,
smallpox inoculation was being practised. Lady Mary
Wortley Montagu, the wife of the British Ambassador to
Turkey, got to know about this method of prevention.
Lady Mary, a determined woman, was quickly convinced
and did not hesitate to have her three-year-old son
inoculated. In a letter to one of her friends she gave
some interesting facts concerning the technique of the
operation:
"A propos of distempers, I am going to tell you a thing
that will make you wish yourself here. The smallpox, so
fatal, and so general amongst us, is here entirely harm¬
less, by the invention of ingrafting, which is the term they
give it. There is a set of old women, who make it their
business to perform the operation, every autumn in the
month of September, when the great heat is abated.
"People send to one another to know if any of their
family has a mind to have the smallpox; they make par¬
ties for this purpose, and when they are met (commonly
fifteen or sixteen together), the old woman comes with
a nutshell full of the matter of the best sort of small¬
pox, and asks what vein you please to have opened.
"She immediately rips open that you offer her, with a
large needle (which gives you no more pain than a com¬
mon scratch) and puts into the vein, as much matter as
can lie upon the head of her needle, and after that binds
up the little wound with a hollow bit of shell ; and in this
manner opens four or five veins . . .
"The children or young patients play together all the
rest of the day, and are in perfect health to the eighth.
Then the fever begins to seize them, and they keep their
beds two days, very seldom three. They have very rarely
above twenty or thirty pocks in their faces, which never
mark, and in eight days they are as well as before their
illness."
This was how smallpox inoculation was practised in
Constantinople. For adults also the effects were mild:
eight days' incubation, two to three days of malaise, and
no scars after recovery.
When she returned to England in 1718 Lady Mary's
one thought was to promote smallpox inoculation. In 1721,
she took a spectacular decision and had her daughter pub¬
licly inoculated in the presence of the Court physicians.
The successful operation caused such a sensation that
Caroline of Anspach, the Princess of Wales, who herself
had had smallpox at the age of three, became one of
Lady Montagu's most enthusiastic supporters.
It was decided in the same year to carry out an experi¬
ment on six condemned prisoners at Newgate. The
experiment began on August 9 and ended on August 31
with the release of all the prisoners, who were pardoned
and sent home after having undergone the inoculation
with success. Posterity is therefore indebted to Lady
Mary Wortley Montagu for her intelligent and courageous
action and she deserves recognition as the forerunner in
England of Edward Jenner in the fight against smallpox.
There is no doubt that inoculation was a step
in the right direction. Tf|e technique was simplified later ,
the arm-to-arm method of inoculation was introduced,
using persons suffering from a slight attack of the disease ;
but there was a considerable element of danger in this
operation and sometimes serious symptoms would follow
in the inoculated person. There was yet another factor:
every inoculated person was a potential new focus of infec¬
tion far. from being reduced, the disease was thus main¬
tained and even disseminated.
Only with the introduction of the Jenner method of vacci- *
nation was the way found to protect the individual as well
as the community.
