« *' * ' '
STONES
ALSO DIE
by René Sneyers
I N recent years every country has been made
increasingly aware of the grave deterioration
of the world's architectural legacy. There is frequent talk
of the "disease" of stone, a ruthless scourge which for
some time past has been attacking monuments and damag¬
ing them increasingly fast.
Everyone now knows that walls and statues which have
stood the test of time have been seriously damaged during
the last ten years, and among them are reported to be
famous works like the sculptures of Chartres cathedral
masterpieces of Gothic art.
What is this malady, the first appearance of which was
noted in London as long ago as 1620 when it was attributed
to the corrosive action of coal smoke? In 1646, Londoners
even presented a petition to Parliament asking for a ban
on the admission to London of coal from Newcastle, which
was considered particularly harmful.
One of the serious problems of towns and industrial
centres is the pollution of the air by smoke from the com¬
bustion of coal in homes and factories. This smoke con-
26 tains solid particles such as soot, and gaseous substances
such as sulphur dioxide and carbon dioxide. The sulphur
dioxide dissolved in water in fog, rain and snow turns
Into sulphurous acid and then into sulphuric acid, the corro¬
sive power of which is well known to everyone.
It has been estimated that the soot carried in smoke
represents as much as 6% of the weight of fuel consumed.
Soot also contains up to 5% of sulphuric acid, and polluted
air up to 5 mgr. of sulphur dioxide per cubic metre. As
each kilogramme of coal consumed releases about 20 gram¬
mes of sulphur dioxide, the million tons of coal burnt every
year in Greater Brussels, for example, discharges approxi¬
mately 20,000 tons of sulphur dioxide into the atmosphere
enough to transform 31,000 tons of limestone annually
into gypsum, the mineral from which plaster of Paris is
made.
Fortunately only a small part of these Impressively quan¬
tities of corrosive gas comes into contact with the lime¬
stone of our monuments, and most of it is washed away
by rain. In industrial areas, incidentally, rain distributes
from 13 to 27 tons of sulphuric acid on every square
mile each year.
The increasing consumption of heavy oil (diesel and fuel
oil) gradually aggravates the situation, because their yield
in sulphur dioxide is even greater than that of coal. In
the port of Los Angeles the 50,000 tons of petroleum pro¬
ducts consumed each day, a few years ago discharged

Ift
^r
^
"HJ1
:-".'&£
'. .'
*y-
rr>
»
5S^
fc>
.'
LASCAUX
under treatment
One of the world's most remarkable collections of
prehistoric art. the cave paintings of Lascaux, has
been closed to the public since April 1 963. Following
the discovery of the cave in 1940 thousands of
people have visited Lascaux to marvel at images
of horses, cattle, stags and ibex whose colours
had been preserved exactly as Palaeolithic man
painted them 18.000 years ago. Had more been
known about bio-chemical corrosive action that
can occur in underground sites when Lascaux
became a celebrated tourist attraction, certain
precautions would have been taken. As it was
doors were fitted at the entrance and this innovation
together with the movement of thousands of
people through the cave altered the atmospheric
conditions that had preserved the paintings intact,
causing microscopic plants and bacteria to pro¬
liferate and spread over the walls. Examinations
were made by a committee of scientists and
measures were taken to safeguard the paintings.
Left, one of the Lascaux paintings under examina¬
tion. This strange beast with the heavy body of
a hippopotamus and a feline type of head, has
curious horns which have earned it the name of
". unicorn ". Each wand points to the centre of a
"swarm" of tiny plants. All the growths were
removed before they could damage the colours. The
cave is now "convalescent," but conditions there are
still being studied attentively and Lascaux must for
the time being remain out of bounds to the public.
Photo f Or. J. Bauer. Faculté de Médecine. Marseille
400 tons of sulphur dioxide into the air. Urban centres are
thus producing sulphuric acid on an industrial scale.
On the calcareous stones of buildings in Western Europe,
on surfaces sheltered from the rain generally those facing
north or east as well as in corners where the stone Is not
washed by rainwater, a hard, impermeable incrustation
forms, rich in gypsum, which collects soot and dust. The
formation of this black crust of gypsum is the first stage
of decomposition.
The attack continues beneath the incrustation, and the
second stage of decomposition begins with the infiltration
of mineral salt solutions (gypsum), which by crystallization
of their salts then cause the stone to disintegrate. The
gypsum eventually overcomes the resistance of the lime¬
stone and breaks up the surface layer.
When the stone does not resist smoke it is said to be
"sulphatable". The crust becomes detached from the stone,
forms blisters or cankers, cracks, then scales off, exposing
to the elements a powdery surface which is easily eroded
by rain and wind.
The pollution of the atmosphere of our city and Industrial
centres is thus the general cause of the weathering of
limestone. Even so only part of the limestone used for
building In the polluted areas is affected. The causes are
therefore likely to be more complex, and to the undoubted
action of smoke must be added the action of water in cir¬
culation, the characteristics and quality of the stone and its
position in the building. Some exports put the blame for
disintegration on temperature variations of the crust which
under heat expands much more than the healthy underly¬
ing mass and the repeated strains caused by alternating
expansion and contraction finally split off the crust from the
stone beneath. Other scientists explain the formation of
sulphates by bacterial action. It is observed however that
healthy stones are found to be infested with bacteria, while
damaged stones have none.
The resistance of stones to the formation of sulphates
has been determined in practice by observation of their
behaviour in monuments. No treatment now known is
capable of arresting the formation of sulphates in lime¬
stone. Because stones exposed to rainfull are usually
clean and healthy, while dirt and disintegration are found
in spots which receive no rain, it is generally thought that
the surest way of prolonging the life of monuments is to
clean the stone with water, used in a gentle stream or a
fine spray.
Research is now being carried out on various methods of
treatment proposed by specialists and the industrial sector,
to determine the conditions under which these treatments
are applicable and whether a protective treatment after
cleaning is likely to extend the useful life of the cleaning
operation.
The extent of damage due to sulphate formation has now
rendered a decision urgent. But there is still no absolute
proof of the value of using protective agents on natural
stone. The best policy is to take steps to reduce the
damage caused by soot-laden smoke (dust removal and
washing), and where possible, to transplant factories, and
especially large generating stations, so that they may dis¬
charge their smoke elsewhere than in urban centres.
Strangely enough, sulphate cankers also form on stone
other than limestone, such as porous standstone. In this
case careful investigation always shows a high calcium
sulphate content in the crust, and this is found whenever
limestone is placed above sandstone. This "contamination"
also occurs on soft bricks placed under calcareous rocks;
CONT'D ON PAGE 30
27

STONES ALSO DIE (Cont'd)
The destructive salt of the earth
such bricks too show signs of corrosion cankers. Often
the calcium sulphate originates in the lime mortar or cement
used in bricklaying.
Stones are frequently contaminated by salts other than
calcium sulphate. These soluble salts from the soil alka¬
line and alkaline earth nitrates, sulphates and chlorides
are crystallized at the surface of the stone and the develop¬
ing crystals create enough force to destroy the stone's
cohesion and disintegrate it.
Unesco recently published a report on the preservation
of the important historic site of Mohenjo Daro, in Pakistan.
The ruins of this great city in the Indus valley, 4,000 years
old, were excavated between 1921 and 1930. Since the
beginning of the excavation the water level on the site has
risen by five metres as the result of the construction of
irrigation canals. This water with a high saline content has
impregnated the bricks the basic material of the ruins
which have become saturated with mineral salts. The
crystallization of these salts on the surface of the building
materials causes the latter to disintegrate so rapidly that
it is certain that in a few decades the ruins will have lost
all their meaning.
Systematic studies were made at Mohenjo Daro by three
experts: Dr. H. Plenderleith, Director of the International
Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration
of Cultural Property, in Rome, and two specialists from the
Netherlands, Mr. T. de Beaufort, an engineer specializing
In hydrology, and Dr. C. Voûte, a geologist specializing in
soil science. Their work is a model of the type of study
that can help to find satisfactory solutions to problems as
complex as the treatment of great archaeological sites.
Starting with the archaeological and human aspect the
experts dealt with the physical state of the city "in situ";
they analysed the building materials and identified the
harmful substances and structures and the rate of deterio¬
ration, and studied the movement of water and mineral
salts in the bricks and the effect of the salts on the bricks.
Analysis of the complex causes of deterioration, based
upon a mass of topographical, geological, meteorological
and hydrological data, made it possible to suggest possible
methods of treatment. The actual method will not be
decided upon until tests have been made for reducing the
underground water level and for extracting the saline
content by water sprinkling.
, ENERALLY speaking the movement of water in
' stones has a decisive influence upon their
survival, since it causes their weathering by sulphate forma¬
tion or saline inflorescence. Water, acts both as a solvent
and as a vehicle for the dissolved substances in the joints
and in the stones themselves.
For example, the softening of the shapes of Assyrian
sculptures in gypsum alabaster is due to the transformation
of limestones into water-soluble calcium bicarbonate.
Laterization is a typical alteration of inter-tropical regions;
the word is derived from "latérite," meaning "brick,"
designating the reddish soil of the damp tropical zone,
which in certain regions forms a sterile crust. Laterization
occurs in regions with heavy rainfall and a high mean
temperature. In time, most of the substances forming the
2Q stone disappear as solutions, leaving iron, silica and alu¬
mina and forming new iron and aluminium oxides.
Freezing in a humid environment is the chief factor in the
destruction of stone in cold countries and mountainous
areas. Everyone knows that a bottle full of water exposed
to frost will break because as the water freezes it expands
by 9%. Similarly, under certain conditions the water con¬
tained in the pores of building material can cause it to
split (by breaking or flaking). Hence the French expression,
"Il gèle à pierre fendre" (literally "It is freezing enough to
break stone") to describe a heavy frost.
It has been established that the pressure exerted by the
rapid freezing of water at -5° C is about 500 kilogrammes
per square centimetre. This pressure can break many types
of stone, because in this case the ice has not time to
extend into the empty pores or to the exterior. That is why
breaking due to frost is more often found in stone of aver¬
age porosity than in highly porous stone and in stone
saturated with water, that is, stone at the level of wet soil.
There may be considerable variations in temperature
between day and night, between sunny and shaded surfaces
and in material exposed to the sun and then cooled by rain¬
fall. As rock is a very bad heat conductor, tensions
capable of disrupting it may arise between the heart and
the skin of the building material. In marble, this pheno¬
menon sometimes produces curious deformations.
BUILDING materials can also be destroyed by
the transformation of some of the substances
in their composition. Thus marble and brick can be disinte¬
grated by changes in the iron pyrites they contain. On
coming into contact with moisture in the air, these pyrites
form ferrous sulphate and sulphuric acid, which decompose
the materials.
In humid tropical regions biological proliferation can
cause serious damage both through bacterial action and
through the solvent effect of acids produced by the lower
forms of vegetable life such as mosses and lichens.
The higher forms of vegetable life also destroy stone,
but their main action is mechanical, the swelling of roots
and trunks leading to the break up of buildings.
Animal excreta, particularly of birds and bats, often cause
considerable damage to monuments through the acids they
contain which have exactly the same effect as the sul-
phating produced by atmospheric pollution.
Dust-bearing winds blowing in arid zones cause serious
damage with very marked eroding characteristics. Protec¬
tion is provided by screens of vegetation or fences of plas¬
tic-covered metal similar to those used on airfields or to
the screen that protects the port of Marseilles against the
violent Mistral wind.
Thus weathering is caused by the combined action of the
elements (water, temperature, air) often associated with the
action of live organisms. Its extent depends not only on
the vulnerability of the mineralogical constituents of the
rock sandstone is more resistant to an industrial atmo¬
sphere than limestone but also on the actual structure of
the rock a coarse-grained rock weathers more quickly
than a fine-grained one. Where elements built up in layers,
such as mica, are present in the rock, water is able to
penetrate and liability to weathering increases.
Although the preservation of stonework has been studied
for more than a century the results of many experiments
have been so discouraging that it would be true to say no
progress has been made over the past hundred years. The
CONT'D ON PAGE 32

Photos © A.C.L Brussels Left, ravaged features of a 16th-century painted stone statue of the Virgin from
St. John's Hospital, Bruges, Belgium. Cracks and wrinkles have been caused by
each new coat of paint flaking off and also by progressive sulphating of stone.
Right, statue after it had undergone cleaning and restoration with paraffin wax.
STONES ALSO DIE (Cont'd)
only treatment which can be unreservedly recommended
for limestone affected by sulphating is to wash surfaces
that rain cannot reach with water.
As a general rule the best solution is to prevent or reduce
the causes of weathering. Since water is often at the root
of the trouble, efforts should be made to reduce its infil¬
tration by keeping roofs in good repair, by providing drain¬
age for the ground in proximity to the building, and apply¬
ing the appropriate traditional techniques for rendering
buildings waterproof or drying them out.
When restoration is being carried out, it is important,
despite a fashion which is becoming widespread, to bear
in mind the advantages of preserving the external and
internal coating on monuments, which have a considerable
protective effect. Moreover, these coatings, which are often
part of the original structures, should be respected merely
for historical reasons.
Increasingly rapid weathering and more frequent restora¬
tion of historical monuments are occurring at a time of
remarkable scientific and technical progress and Increas¬
ing public Interest in cultural property. People have come
to regard monuments and works of art as public property,
as something that concerns the man in the street no less
than the specialist. Hence it can be expected that the
32 authorities will plan to devote to preservation at least a
proportion of the funds they spend regularly on the res¬
toration of historical monuments.
Moreover in many parts of the world more and more
laboratories are being established for the preservation of
monuments. These institutions, collaborating with building
material specialists, will no doubt discover the proper
solutions for the grave problems which now confront us.
Unesco's Monuments Committee, the International
Council of Museums (ICOM) and the International Centre
for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural
Property, in Rome, have recently taken the initiative in com¬
missioning the Laboratories Committee of ICOM and
in particular the Institut Royal du Patrimoine Artistique in
Brussels to carry out a large scale international investi¬
gation into the weathering and preservation of stonework.
The first contacts have produced a study on the loca¬
lization and action of salts in limestone and sandstone used
for building purposes, which will be published this year.
A working group made up of specialists in the preservation
of stone materials has also been set up. In this way it
is hoped to sum up the present state of knowledge in the
particularly delicate sphere of preservation of the mate¬
rials from which historical monuments are constructed and
to slow down the inexorable process of deterioration of
these monuments.
RENE SNEYERS, Head of Laboratory at the Institut Royal du
Patrimoine Artistique In Brussels, is a specialist in the conservation
of stonework in ancient monuments.
