A continent
in quest of
a publishing
industry
A Unesco survey in Africa
by Clifford M. Fyle
I N many African countries the absence of a
sufficient number of readers is a major obstacle
to large-scale publishing, if not to publishing generally.
Total populations in general are small. Some ten coun¬
tries have between a quarter of a million and a million
inhabitants; seventeen countries have between one million
and five million and sixteen have populations of over five
million.
Thus while half of these countries might possibly sup¬
port a flourishing publishing industry on the strength of
their population, the rest will necessarily be limited to a
few publishers each. And in the six countries with no more
than 300,000 to 400,000 inhabitants even a single publisher
may be able to maintain only a struggling business.
But this visualizes a situation where everyone can read and
is therefore a potential user of books. This we know is far
from the case. The number of adult literates is small in
all African countries. The reading public consists largely
of the school population. In Sierra Leone less than 25%
of the potential school population between the ages of five
and twelve was attending school in 1962. And Sierra
Leone is not among the least advanced African countries
in education.
However, rapid strides are being made in educational
_- development, including the introduction of free or com-
¿Q pulsory primary education in some countries and the
expansion in others of the number of schools and univer¬
sities as well as improvement In the quality of education.
Such developments are bound to act as a stimulus to
publishing.
Mass literacy programmes, especially for adults, are
being launched and are making great headway. Ghana has a
programme for wiping out illiteracy within ten years and the
Sudan plans to make 200,000 people literate during the
next five years.
Many African countries therefore feel that lack of rea¬
dership is a temporary situation and that it has ceased
to be the chief obstacle to the development of publishing.
But high production costs and the shortage of proper
distribution outlets are still seen as serious problems.
The creation and growth of publishing industries in the
developing countries depend above all on national book
needs. A Unesco-sponsored inquiry into present obsta¬
cles to the production and flow of books in Africa revealed
a number of priority needs. Africa's greatest demand is
for children's books, books on all the basic and applied
sciences and on history and geography. More people are
studying languages, some interest is being shown in litera-

Tfce Mb&n
CAtíMT (
Africa has a great tradition of oral literature. Today
the rich imagery of its poems and stories is finding a
new form of expression in the pages of books. These
illustrations are taken from a collection of Yoruba chil¬
dren's poems entitled "The Moon Cannot Fight",
published by Mbari Publications, Ibadan, Nigeria.
Drawings r Mbari Publications. Ibadan
ture, but little in the arts, in philosophy and psychology.
Top priority is given to books that contribute to economic
development. But this situation is gradually changing as
a middle class emerges and is creating a market for non¬
functional books.
African countries depend largely on imported books.
Reports from twenty-five countries revealed that eight had
no publishing at all, fourteen imported their primary school
books and nineteen all their secondary school books.
On the face of it there is no reason why African countries
should not continue to rely on book imports, providing
freight charges can be kept to a minimum and an effective
distribution system is established. But studies have shown
that in planning for the free flow of information and know¬
ledge within and between countries, it is better in the long
run for a national book industry, or as much of it as possi¬
ble, to be indigenous from the start.
A book-publishing industry can contribute to long-term
economic and social development and to industrial expan¬
sion and it is also a source of satisfaction to national
pride. There are also sound educational and psychological
reasons for developing national book publishing. Local
writers, artists and, above all, editors are more likely
-than those from another country to be responsive to the
ideas, feelings and general outlook in their own com¬
munities.
Should publishing in a developing country be state-
controlled or run by private entreprise? In some African
countries there is now a tendency for school books and
books for the general public to be state-controlled. One
example is Guinea where the national presses at Conakry
print political books under government auspices. Centra¬
lized state publishing has certain advantages, notably lower
production costs. The best solution for Africa appears to
be a combination of national centralized publishing and
private publishing.
Commercial publishing has established itself in Africa on
over the years, although mainly through foreign publishing ¿3
houses. Some countries have now set up companies to
which foreign publishers contribute capital and experience
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

IN QUEST OF A PUBLISHING INDUSTRY (Cont'd)
Opening 'book roads' to the village
30
and Africans provide the rest of the capital and the men
who will be trained to run the firms.
In countries with populations of three million or less
neither local nor foreign commercial publishers can produce
primers and readers for mass literacy at prices within
the reach of the average reader. The need to produce
books in several languages, perhaps with different scripts,
creates serious problems for the commercial publisher.
Today most primary school books are produced for a
wide area. It is true that publishers try to meet the needs
of smaller countries by publishing special editions, but
for financial reasons they can only make minor alterations
where, in fact, the books should be completely rewritten
to suit local conditions and school systems.
For small countries the best solution seems to be cen¬
tralized local publishing firms,- financed wholly or partly by
the government, but retaining freedom of action to plan
and handle operations to meet local needs.
The publication of books for mass literacy campaigns
is handicapped by the multiplicity of local languages in
African countries. Nigeria is said to have over 200 local
languages and dialects. Countries facing this problem sim¬
ply publish books in those of their languages which have
the widest currency. Sierra Leone, with a population of
only two million, has eighteen languages. It publishes
primers, readers and other literature in five languages and
primers in two others.
In most countries governments and educationists have
taken a firm line and have adopted the one or two languages
of widest circulation for teaching. This linguistic problem
may eventually be solved by adoption of a single national
language. Ghana, which has 56 languages and dialects,
is now working towards the use of Akan as its national
language.
I N some countries it might be better to combine
mass literacy publishing units and the school
publication centres into a single operation. A distinction
has to be made between the publishing and the printing of
books; to publish the books it needs for school and literacy
teaching a country does not need full book-printing facilities.
American publishers sometimes have their printing done
in Japan and British publishers have been known to print
as far away as Hong Kong.
There is, however, an obvious need for greater printing
facilities in Africa. While there are probably enough
presses to satisfy demands on a regional basis, a country-
by-country study reveals some critical situations. Cer¬
tain countries, Egypt, Nigeria, Kenya, Southern Rhodesia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example,
have a comparatively large concentration of presses. But
many African countries have only a few each (often a
single government-owned plant) and at least five have no
presses at all.
Neither large nor small countries appear to favour region¬
al co-operation as a solution to the problem of providing
printing facilities. The Unesco Textbook Production Centre
at Yaounde in the Cameroon is a type of organization that
it may be difficult to duplicate elsewhere in Africa. This
centre provides textbook printing facilities for the five
adjacent countries of Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Congo (Brazzaville) and Gabon.
The centre is already doing extremely useful work yet
in the near future it may become even more important
as a training ground for African printers than as a printing
centre for textbooks and manuals.
All over the African continent plans to install or expand
printing facilities are dependent on the availability of skilled
printers, proper machinery, paper and printing materials and
electric power.
Broadly speaking, once publishing houses begin to
function in African countries, the development of local
printers, proper machinery, paper and printing materials and
of a regular volume of books to be printed. An example
of how this process functions is offered by Jamaica in the
West Indies. There the creation of a schools publication
branch by the Ministry of Education has greatly stimulated
V / V / V J V 4
©mSOtaOSOSQfâSsteiaï
L-^
m^s^msmz
fl [^ fl t>fl ï^ fl P-fl *
]@[]@[i@[]@[]@d
\*WW J PwrV I JWAWJ [ ViV*V | j^V^ J [Wrtr^yj jW-Vw| |WVVV| [v*\rw| [v»W j
Í1S1ÍWWV VSrVWl^H *rVfc**V K-MhUW
HACHE
] IwwV^l |wsw|
"TTE=il
LTWWWWW
Many African countries still depend to a large
extent on imported school books. These de¬
signs are part of the cover of a French language
reader for African schools published in France.
the local printing industry. Jamaica, which previously had
no modern printing facilities, now has two large plants
capable of producing most kinds of primers and readers
for primary schools and adult literacy campaigns.
But in developing countries book publishing comes up
against a serious obstacle: printing costs. Many publishers
complain that prices in local African plants are much higher
than in countries on other continents.
In the new African plants printing costs are inevitably
high at the start. But publishers have to keep their prices
low to stay in business. Some compromise solution must
therefore be found.
The developing countries are not only short of printing
facilities but also of paper for printing books. African and
Asian needs in paper are steadily increasing. In 1960
countries on these continents (exclusive of Japan and
mainland China) required one and one eighth million tons
of newsprint and printing and writing paper. By 1975
these needs may well have increased five-fold to nearly
five million tons.
Even though these five million tons only represent
about one-tenth of the expected total world consumption
in 1975, it is doubtful whether' Africa and Asia will be
able to satisfy this demand from their own production
resources or even to purchase the paper they need.
Expensive freight charges, poorly developed distribution

systems and high tariffs, which vary from country to
country and which average between 20 % and 30 %, all
raise the cost of paper in Africa, sometimes to double
the international price level. Here, foreign aid would be
an invaluable asset. To supply Africa and Asia with paper
would be a sure way of helping their countries along the
road of educational and cultural progress.
Governments should be urged to reduce or abolish tariffs
and taxes on newsprint and paper for educational books.
They should also be encouraged to provide foreign currency
for the import of paper and printing supplies.
African countries wish to be free from their present
dependency on foreign supplies of paper and printing
materials. Many are now studying how to set up paper
mills and one in particular is watching with special interest
experiments in the production of paper from the eucalyptus
tree which grows plentifully within its borders.
Yet it is unlikely that on the basis of present plans
Africa will be able to produce more than a small proportion
of the paper it needs for some time to come. The pro¬
duction of newsprint and other printing paper depends not
only on availability of raw materials, but also on the
development of supporting structures: electric power, chem¬
icals, transport and so on.
In Africa, as in other developing areas, books must be
sold as cheaply as possible. This means that import
and export taxes, sales taxes and similar restrictions on
books must be reduced to a minimum or abolished. The
special claim of books for preferential treatment in compe¬
tition with other products is justified by the primary role
they play in national development, in the preservation of
culture and knowledge and in the free flow of ideas.
Although less than one quarter of the African countries
have so far signed the Unesco Agreement on the Impor¬
tation of Educational, Scientific and Cultural Materials, most
adhere to the spirit of this agreement by allowing books
to be imported free from customs duties and charges.
In Africa, bookshops are concentrated in large cities, and
attempts to establish them in rural areas have often been
difficult. Hence less conventional methods are used: retail
traders carry books as a line of stock, pavement hawkers
offer them to the passer-by and vans, mobile bookshops
and small bookshops attached to schools are all mobilized
as distribution points.
V"ÏT hVÜ^C
A geography text book
published in Addis Ababa
for Ethiopian schools.
DE TANAXAMYt
A work published by the
Institute of Higher Stu¬
dies at Tananarive, the
capital of Madagascar.
HE Unesco inquiry shows that in city areas the
most effective means of book distribution is the
bookshop, followed by the newsagent and the bookstall.
In rural areas the bookshop, even a small one attached to a
school, is found to be the most effective method of distri¬
bution; next come mobile bookshops and last of all the
book pedlars.
What measures will help to promote bookselling in Africa?
1) Prices of books must be kept low by both local and
foreign publishers; 2) controls on the importation of books
should be removed by governments; 3) shipping charges
should be cut, by international agreement if necessary since
shipping companies are seldom African-owned; 4) road and
rail charges should be reduced for book transport.
Every large town should have its bookshop and every
country its chain of bookshops. For this, government help
is needed. Such financial support is an investment in
education and therefore in the development of a nation's
potentialities.
In rural areas valuable work is being done by bookshops
attached to local schools and run by teachers and also
by small book vans and mobile bookshops. Furthermore,
in country districts the bookshop is not there merely to
stimulate the reading habit. If many bookshops in Africa's
rural centres have so far done only poor business, it is
because the booksellers are not properly trained. African
governments would be well advised to co-operate with
local booksellers in drawing up a comprehensive long term
plan for developing book distribution in their countries.
No matter how much is done to promote book sales,
some titles will always be beyond the reach of the average
pocket. This is especially true of the developing countries.
It is up to libraries to provide such books.
A good library service does more; it is itself an incen¬
tive to reading, and by stimulating people to buy their
own books and to gradually assemble home libraries it
helps to create a flourishing book trade. This, of course,
raises the problem of training competent librarians.
The same problem exists in book publishing. Africa
urgently needs properly trained personnel in this field, and
in setting up a training programme, the co-operation of
foreign publishing houses would be a major asset.
CLIFFORD. M. FYLE is a member of the Ministry of Education,
Freetown, Sierra Leone. He is the author of "The Flow and Pro¬
duction of Books in Africa" , published in "Books for the Developing
Countries" (No 47 in Unesco's Reports and Papers on Mass Com¬
munication) which is the result of a special inquiry carried out
under Unesco's auspices into the development of book production
and distribution in Africa and Asia.
31
