Elliott Erwit-Magnum
Below, the great day : examination time for students
of Columbia University, U.S.A. Right, a less solemn
occasion: U.S. high school students en route to
classes hold a student organization meeting in the
school bus. Students in most U.S. high schools
and colleges have some form of self-government.
This serves as a liaison with the school authorities
and gives students a chance to experience at first¬
hand some of the responsibilities of self-government.

IN THE
GROWN-UP
WORLD OF
TEEN-AGERS
Holmes-Lebel, Paris
I
26
T is an American tradition
I for students to work with
their hands and to earn money to help
pay for their college expenses or for
clothing or entertainment. They have
no qualms about taking jobs as
waitresses and waiters, clerking in
clothing stores, baby sitting or carry¬
ing bricks for construction work. What¬
ever jobs they find are welcome.
Nobody knows exactly how many
CONT'D ON PAGE 29
I

Left, rehearsal time for members
of a U.S. student theatre group.
The United States has over
25,000 amateur dramatic groups
and 5,000 of them are run by stu¬
dents. Many teen-agers working
voluntarily in youth centres help
to give local children a chance
to experiment in drama and art.
© Bruce Davidson-Magnum
Right, a useful vacation. A junior
student of geology at Pennsylvania
University spends his summer vaca¬
tion in the Rocky Mountain region
of the U.S., working forthe Geolog¬
ical Survey of the U.S. Department
of the Interior. He helped to map
plant species and to test them for
metallic elements that would reveal
the presence of ores in the soil.
USIS
27

THE DAY THEY DON THE MORTAR BOARD. Wearing academic caps and gowns, U.S.
students gather to receive their diplomas at a graduation day ceremony. In 1 900 only 1 3% of U.S.
children between the ages of 14 and 17 were students. Today close to 95% of the high-school-
age population is enrolled, and more than half the graduates will enter universities and colleges.
DISCOVERING NATURE'S HIDDEN SECRETS. More than 15,000 young people have
attended the Audubon Camps in the U.S. since these were set up under the National Audubon
Society's conservation education programme. (The Society is named after the famous American
ornithologist.) Some are students who seek leadership training for later work as camp counsellors.
f.. Others look for guidance in selecting future courses for specialization. In four camps, spanning
¿Q the U.S: from an island off the Atlantic coast to Wyoming in the Far West, Audubon students
add to their knowledge and understanding of nature and, helped by staff naturalists, experience
the thrill of exploration and the excitement of discovering nature's hidden secrets. Above, the
history of an area is revealed in its rocks;' right, collecting specimens for study ashore.

IN THE GROWN-UP WORLD OF TEEN-AGERS (Cont'd)
H. Cartier-Bresson-Magnum
Photos © National Audubon Society
An almost unlimited need
for junior volunteers
young people are employed during the
summer or hold down part-time jobs
while at school, but it is estimated that
well over 50 per cent of American's
college and university students have
some kind of job either on or off the
campus.
NLY recently the U.S.
Government announced a
nationwide work-study programme
which will provide summer jobs for
nearly 40,000 American college stu¬
dents from low-income families. The
U.S. Secretary of Health, Education
and Welfare described the programme
as a significant contribution to the
youth opportunity campaign launched
in May 1965 to aid 500,000 teen-agers
to obtain summer employment.
Summer occupations for young peo¬
ple may include working as gardeners,
playground supervisors, lifeguards at
swimming pools and so on. Other,
more enterprising projects are set up
by groups who make . and sell small
items of practical use such as memo¬
randum pads, costume jewellery and
stationery.
Today some 94,000 U.S. teen-agers
are learning by actual experience the
techniques of manufacturing and sell¬
ing products. Helped by local busi¬
nessmen, who explain basic principles
of production and salesmanship, secon¬
dary school students organize, finance
and run small businesses of their own.
Their activities are guided by a nation¬
wide non-profit organization which
encourages after-school projects to
teach youngsters how business sys¬
tems work.
I ARALLELING the desire to
earn money is the urge to
contribute to the welfare of the com¬
munity around them. Encouraged by
fathers who act as Boy Scout troop
leaders and mothers who work in
Parent-Teacher organizations, young
people take on chores which have as
a reward a feeling of personal satis¬
faction in addition to giving practical
experience and developing self-confi¬
dence.
All over the United States teen-agers
are working as junior volunteers to
help others. The opportunities and
the need for junior volunteers are
practically unlimited. Each summer
thousands of Junior Red Cross volun¬
teers work for several days a week
in hundreds of hospitals, recreation
centres and other agencies. Many
teen-age Red Cross volunteers proudly
wear the badge they have earned by
contributing 500 hours' service.
Other ways in which young Ameri¬
cans serve in the Red Cross are as
first aid instructors, and in small craft
and water safety and emergency dis¬
aster training. Within one twelve¬
month period, American Red Cross
training courses were completed by
927,000 school children and college
students.
Along with the Red Cross, Boy
Scouts, Girl Scouts, Campfire Girls and
organizations connected with the
Young Men's and Young Women's
Christian Associations are especially
active in serving the underprivileged,
the sick and the aged.
I N many cities young
people work in after-school
centres run by youth councils which
offer local children a chance to expe¬
riment in art, drama and music. Other
volunteers serve as club leaders and
librarians, coach in athletics and tutor
youngsters who need help with their
school work.
These young volunteers may be just
as poor and face just as many prob¬
lems as do the children they are
trying to help, but they have decided
that this is the way to make things
different and better.
Other groups sponsor summer
camps for underprivileged children,
staffed in part by young volunteer
counselors. Many high school civics
classes have as part of the course a
community service project.
In 1831 a brilliant young French
writer, Alexis de Tocqueville, crossed
the Atlantic to take a look at demo¬
cracy in the New World. One pene¬
trating observation he made in his
famous work, "Democracy in America,"
aptly explains what so many young
Americans are doing today.
De Tocqueville wrote that amongst
democratic nations no citizen could
oblige his fellow-men to lend him their
assistance and that if they did not
learn voluntarily to help each other
civilization itself would be endangered.
29
