J THE ANCIENT WORLD (Cont'd)
The birth
of functional
architecture
Town planning
and housing
in ancient Rome
by M. W. Frederiksen
Skilful architects and indefatigable buil¬
ders, the Romans raised cities in every
corner of their vast empire. Right, the
noble ruins of Timgad, in Algeria. It was
named Thamugadi when the legionaries
of the emperor Trajan founded it in the
Aures mountains in 1 00 A.D. Timgad con¬
forms to the typical Roman town plan
in which the forum or central square was
placed at the intersection of two main
streets (clearly visible in airphoto below).
As in Rome itself the cities of the outlying
provinces had their public baths, theatres,
arches of triumph and long arcades run¬
ning alongside the streets. At Timgad
many of the columns supporting these
arcades still stand, as this photo shows.
Compagnie aérienne de photographie
vO. w
HE skill and understanding of the Romans, both
in selecting sites and planning the towns, are
shown most 3trikingly by their survival into modern times:
in Italy, and the western provinces, where such policies
were especially applied, many towns were created whose
street-plans even today indicate their Roman origins. Like
Juilius Caesar before them, the emperors accepted that
municipalities were the basis of social life and administra¬
tion, and so wherever conditions permitted they founded
new colonies and towns.
The typical Roman town-plan was derived partly from
earlier Greek traditions and partly from their own ex¬
perience in laying out large military encampments. In Its
purest form, it was a strictly geometrical design, in which
«J¿ *4*t¿t \

two main streets intersected at right angles, and around
these was laid out a network of lesser .streets dividing
the city Into a series of uniform rectangular areas and build¬
ing-blocks. It Is seen most clearly where the builders were
able to create a completely new city.
The town of Aosta (in northwest Italy) founded in 24 B.C.
as the colony of Augusta Praetoria, was divided mathema¬
tically into sixteen rectangles, each of which was further
divided Into four; the surrounding town-walls took the form
of a larger but similarly-proportioned rectangle.
In the Trajanic colony of Timgad in North Africa, one of
-the best preserved Roman towns, the same precision can
be observed. But such perfection could not "always be
achieved; the plans are sometimes changed to meet the
© Ray-Delvert
difficulties of a site or to include an earlier settlement.
Roman architects sought to avoid any appearance of mo¬
notony by adding secondary features; colonnaded streets,
arches and gateways, or ornamental sculpture and fountains
could help to soften the sense of geometrical rigour. But
by such systematic planning they were able to provide the
building and amenities that were, for the Romans, of the
very essence of city life: the solemn central forum with its
temples and public buildings for local magistrates and
senate; an adequate drainage system and plentiful water-
supply; public baths and theatres; and shops and open mar¬
kets under official control.
Within a Roman town, private houses followed a variety
of patterns. In Italy, where our Information is fullest, the
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
31

Wf*3¿:
German Museum. Munich OLD ROMAN AQUEDUCTS. A painting by Zeno Diemer showing the last
remains of a huge network of water supply channels which ran for several hundred
kilometres around Rome. The greatest of these aqueducts, which brought water from
the hills around the city, was the Acqua Marcia, 55miles (90kms) long. At the fall of
the Empire, Rome had nearly 1,000 public baths and 1,350 fountains, used one
million cubic metres of water daily and, in the words of the poet Properce, "every¬
where was heard the soft murmur of running water." Lead pipes and terracotta
tubes were used to bring water supplies right into the houses of Roman citizens.
THE ANCIENT WORLD (Cont'd)
Five-storey housing development schemes
32
earliest houses are of a low-built, spreading form of one
or two storeys, which were centred on an open hall
(atrium) and a colonnaded garden (peristylium). These
houses are best known from Pompeii, but they were
fashionable also in Rome, and were of a style well suited
to the aristocracy and municipal classes of the early
empire. In the provinces, housing seems to have kept to
local traditions, improved and embellished to suit the
prosperity of the times.
It was not long before the increasing wealth and social
changes in the empire were reflected in architecture. The
richest classes began to build luxurious villas with sur¬
rounding gardens, often in the countryside or by the
sea. But in the largest towns, where space was expen¬
sive and a large population of labourers and small craftsmen
needed housing, there begins to appear the new style of
building known as insulae, which were large apartment
houses divided into many shops and small flats. Some
areas of poor-class tenement housing in this style had
existed in Rome from early times; but the new technique
of brick-and-concrete architecture had made a revolution
ary change, and after the great fire in 64 A.D. Nero took
the opportunity to rebuild Rome systematically in the new
style.
Of the many cities where these insulae were built, our
best knowledge comes from the harbour town of Ostia.
It is vividly clear how with new building methods spacious
apartment houses of five storeys or more could be designed;
the insula, which had previously been a ramshackle tene¬
ment in a slum, was now converted into a safe, pleasant,
and almost fire-proof structure.
The historian Tacitus refers to the opponents of Nero's
scheme, who defended the unsafe and often insanitary city
quarters as they had been before and his comments
have a certain ironical flavour to modern readers. This
new utilitarian architecture reflected the changed social
conditions ; it supplied economical housing for a new
population who found that only the cities supplied them
with their employment and their amusements (Vol. II Pt. 3).
M.W. FREDERIKSEN, of Worcester College, Oxford, is one of
a number of scholars who contributed papers on specialized
subjects to Volume II of the "History of' Mankind."
