THE DILEMMAS
A Hindi manual on anatomy,
published in New Delhi.

OF PUBLISHING IN
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
by Om Prakash
¿>*.Ji>LS-
"The Peaceful Uses of Atomic
Energy", Urdu booklet pre¬
pared with Unesco assistance
and published in Pakistan.
^úiJIrfláasr
"Africa" by Vidwan N. Subrah-
manian, an Indian author. This
book in Tamil was published
in India with Unesco's aid.
Jmtoli i Ch rpcn Jcpu i
,jL
I t
f1 1
*1 1
1
L^^^^H .^M
SHOJI
A collection of Japanese short
stories translated into the
Malay language and published
at Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia).
"Our Occupations", a collec¬
tion of articles on Thai careers
published in Bangkok (Thai¬
land) with Unesco's aid.
O VER 800 million people, or one quarter of the
world's inhabitants, live in South-East Asia (1).
Yet of 400,000 titles of books produced throughout the world in
1962, only 20,000 or one twentieth of the total were published in
this region.
It is evident that book publishing in South-East Asia
as a whole ¡s in an undeveloped stage. While twelve
countries together publish two-thirds of the world's books,
only one of them India is in South-East Asia. Book
production in other countries of the region is extremely
limited.
The production of translations is similarly limited. Of
a world total of 32,787 translations produced in 1962,
only 1,455, or 4.4 % of the total, were published in South-
East Asia.
South-East Asia's role in the international book trade
further illustrates the embryonic state of its publishing
industry. Although there is a substantial volume of exports
of books from Indonesia, India and the Philippines to the
Netherlands, the United Kingdom and the United States,
(1) Afghanistan, Burma, Cambodia, Ceylon, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Laos, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand, Viet-Nam.
respectively, book exports from the greater part of the
region are negligible. In contrast, imports of books, peri¬
odicals and other printed matter may represent almost
one per cent of a country's total imports.
Underdevelopment of book publishing in South-East Asia
results from a host of restrictive elements, ranging from
factors which directly limit the book market, such as
shortages of paper and equipment, to handicaps of a more
general nature, such as low purchasing power and poor
transport facilities.
The biggest single obstacle to a wider circulation of
reading materials is doubtless the high average level of
illiteracy in the region. However, illiteracy rates vary
widely betwen individual countries as the following figures
show:
Afghanistan and Nepal (95 to 99 %); Iran (85 to 89 %); ««
Indonesia, Laos, Pakistan and Rep. of Viet-Nam (80 to ¿u
84 %); India (70 to 74 %); Cambodia (65 to 69 %); Malaysia
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SOUTH-EAST ASIA (Cont'd)
Dearth of scientific books for children
24
(50 to 54 %); Burma (40 to 44 %) ; Ceylon and Thailand
(30 to 34 %); Philippines (25 to 29 %).
Low income constitutes another major barrier to increas¬
ed reading. While low-cost paperbacks may offer a
means of extending book sales, per capita income is in
fact so limited as to affect the purchase of even the cheap¬
est books. Only Ceylon, Iran, Malaysia and the Philip¬
pines can claim an income of $101-300 per capita. All
the other countries In the area fall within the less than
$100 range.
A third major obstacle to increased production of reading
materials arises from the region's deteriorating terms of
trade. Suffering from a deficit in export over import earn¬
ings, nearly all South-East Asian countries are finding
it increasingly difficult to import the materials and equipment
they need for their national development efforts.
Printing paper looms large in these requirements.
Of the three newsprint producers in the region India,
Pakistan and Cambodia India's production covers only
20 per cent of its own demand, and only Pakistan has an
export surplus (some 15,000 tons in 1963). India is the
only substantial South-East Asian producer of printing
paper other than newsprint and writing paper but, here
again, consumption (234,400 tons in 1962) leaves no sur¬
plus for export. Nor does any other country in the region
export these grades of paper.
In contrast with the discouraging outlook for the develop¬
ment of paper-making in South-East Asia, a huge increase
in demand is foreseen. On the basis solely of population
growth and per capita income in the Far East, the demand
for newsprint in that region, excluding mainland China,
is expected to rise from 672,000 tons in 1955 to 2,920,000
tons in 1975.
The reduction of illiteracy acts as a powerful Incentive
to the demand for printed matter. In countries where
illiteracy is very prevalent, its reduction by one per cent is
estimated to have the same impact on the demand for
printing paper as a five per cent increase in purchasing
power.
However, it must be noted that the demand for books
at prices which the Asian peoples can afford has not
yet been adequately met. Low levels of literacy and of
purchasing power, coupled with the absence of wide read¬
ing habits, continue to limit the production and distribution
of reading materials. Publishers of general books and
books specially suited for children and new literates are
far fewer than those engaged in the publication of educa¬
tional or textbooks.
In the educational field, too, many countries continue
to rely on imports or on local branches of foreign publish¬
ing houses. In several Asian countries, European lan¬
guages introduced by the former European powers are
still used as media for advanced instruction.
There are general publishers of more than 50 years'
standing in Ceylon, Burma, Pakistan and India. In their
early years, they were almost exclusively engaged in
publishing religious books; some used to publish works
on mythology and astrology as well.
The number of regular book publishers in the region is
not available and would be difficult to estimate. Many
countries have no means of counting the publishers or
booksellers.
UBLISHING is a relatively small and unprofit¬
able business in most countries of South-East
Asia, and it has failed to attract capital. Scope for general
publishing is extremely limited. Recently, with progressively
wider use of national languages in instruction, there have
been increased activities and investments in educational
publishing. There are few large, well-organised publishing
firms in the region which can match their counterparts in
the West. The paucity of capital for publishing will persist
as long as the demand for general books continues to be
meagre.
Meanwhile, publishers need to depend upon their own
limited resources. In no South-East Asian country will

Palm leaf books & 'tamarind seed' script
In past centuries many of the
books produced in South-East Asia
were devoted to religion. Tens
of thousands of religious works are
now preserved in the extensive
library of Adyar, near Madras
(India). Left, sixteenth-century
Buddhist texts written on palm
leaves. Linked by cords, these
manuscripts include 47 volumes of
the Pali Tipitaka (canonical works)
from Ceylon. Right, another manu¬
script from the Adyar library: a
17th-century Buddhist manuscript
from Burma embellished with red
lacquer and gold. The text, written
in "tamarind seed" script, sets
down rules for Buddhist monks.
Photos © Francis Brunei, Paris
Ft>
^""Stf
banks lend funds with printed material as collateral secu¬
rity. Loans from various other sources are not as easily
available to publishers as to other trades, with the result
that their activities remain cramped. In many countries
of the region, government loans are available to small
industries, including the printing industry. Such facilities
are, however, denied to publishers.
Publishing is generally conducted by small units which
are either owned individually or In partnership. The number
of nationally based joint-stock companies, with larger
capital resources, is very limited.
Only a small percentage of books have a chance of
being reprinted; most publications go through only the
first edition. There are few books, except religious and
traditional ones, which could be called "best-sellers" in the
modern sense.
The average first printing order for a general book in
Singapore is 5,000 copies; in Ceylon, 2,000; in Burma, 3,000;
In Indonesia, 5,000 to 10,000; in Iran, 1,000 to 10,000; in
Pakistan, 5,000; and in India, 1,000 to 3,000.
For books for children and new literates, the first printing
orders are for 5,000 copies in Singapore; 5,000 in Ceylon
and Burma; 5,000 to 20,000 in Indonesia; 2,000 in Iran;
2,500 in Pakistan; and 2,000 to 10,000 in India.
The largest first printing orders are given to educational
books. They amount to 20,000 in Singapore; 7,500 to
50,000 in Ceylon; 20,000 to 30.000 in Iran; and 5,000 to
100,000 and more in India.
University textbooks are printed in editions of 2,000 in
Burma, 3,000 to 5,000 in Indonesia and 2,500 to 5,000
in Pakistan.
The average price of books for children and new literates
varies, but considering the average capacity and inclination
to buy books in these countries, the prices must be
considered high. Until books are priced more cheaply
and printed in much larger numbers they will fail to be
widely used in South-East Asia.
Subjects for books for children and new literates are
folk tales, stories, religious and moral instruction and
biography and travel. The publication of books on develop¬
ments in science has been started recently.
There is a dearth In all the South-East Asian countries
of scientific books for children and new literates, parti
cularly in national languages. Owing to the lack of printing
facilities, few translations of such books are published
and attempts made in this field have not been very success¬
ful.
The production of reading materials for mass consump¬
tion suffers many handicaps in South-East Asia. Some
help, by way of subsidies or assured purchases, would
be required to effect a break-through. Unesco, through
its programme to stimulate the publication of reading
materials in the region, has subsidized the production in
certain Asian countries of selected titles in order to
promote international understanding (1).
Franklin Publications (U.S.A.) have also subsidized certain
publishers in Pakistan and several other countries to this
end, by meeting translation expenses and part of the
promotional costs. Franklin Publications charge a small
percentage of royalties on books thus assisted.
HERE has been little agreement among countries
of the region as to what constitutes a "book", a
"newspaper" or a "magazine". Ceylon defines a book as
"any number of pages permanently bound between two co¬
vers"; this includes pamphlets, booklets, magazines and
periodicals. A book is "a work of eight pages or more" in
Indonesia. Iran defines a book as "any printed material,
being bound or to be bound within the importing country."
The Philippine definition is "a volume, with or without covers
consisting of more than 100 pages." This ambiguity creates
continual complications, particularly for book importing and
exporting countries, but should now be resolved by the
latest Unesco definition of a book (see page 15).
The distribution of books in South-East Asia does not pre¬
sent a very happy picture either. Apart from bookshops,
other outlets are small bookstalls, pavement bookhawkers
and the newsagents. The latter are poorly organized and
are not dependable outlets financially. Few of them have
(1) A Unesco Regional Centre for Reading Materials was set up
in 1958 at Karachi, in collaboration with the Government of Pakistan,
to promote the publication and distribution to an increasingly wide
public of appropriate reading materials in their national languages.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
25

SOUTH-EAST ASIA (Cont'd)
26
Red-tape and
unfair competition
bank accounts, or the will or capacity to cater to intelligent
demands. Newsagents are little interested in books unless
they are low-priced, fast-selling items such as paperbacks.
Regular investment in stocks of books is practised by the
better type of bookshops and in most South-East Asia coun¬
tries these deal in imported books rather than in books
published locally in the national language. Booksellers who
stock books in national languages prefer to deal in fast-
selling educational books. The distribution of general books
faces great handicaps.
One factor hindering the growth of the booktrade in all
countries of South-East Asia is widespread price-cutting
and cutthroat competition. The published price of a book
does not mean much, since a buyer can haggle to obtain
a rebate on its face value. In the absence of a strong
demand for books, a publisher or bookseller has little
inclination to hold on to a book rather than sell it at the
cut price offered. The bookseller continually presses the
publisher to grant a higher discount so that after he has
allowed a discount to his retail buyer, he will still have
some margin left for himself. The result is that, even
though the bookseller may be getting a fairly high discount
on the published price of a book, he does not have enough
margin to meet the expenses or make a profit. Bookselling
remains a very unlucrative business which fails to give
the support expected of it by the publishing industry.
S earnings from the publication of translated
books in most South-East Asian countries are
meagre, many western authors and publishers are reluctant
to assign translation rights to publishers of this region.
Prices of translated books are much lower than the original
publications, though editions are small and must carry
the additional burden of translation. In addition, a foreign
publisher has no recourse when an Asian publisher defaults
in the payment of royalties. Western publishers conse-
quent'y tend to demand heavy advances on royalties
which South-East Asian publishers find it difficult to pay.
In most South-East Asian countries licences must be
obtained for the import of books. Iran and Singapore
are exceptions. In Pakistan books priced at Rs. 150.00
($30.00) can be imported for personal use without a licence.
In India even non-commercial institutions such as univer¬
sities and established libraries must apply to obtain a
licence for books which they may decide to import them¬
selves. In Burma, restriction on the import of books
from hard currency countries is comparatively stringent,
and in Indonesia an importer must obtain government
approval for each title if foreign exchange is to be officially
provided. In almost all parts of the region, systems for
obtaining import licences are cumbersome and complicated
by excessive red tape.
The developing countries of South-East Asia could benefit
greatly from the "paperback revolution". Prospects for
the publication of paperbacks in the region are not yet
encouraging, however. The number of publishers engaged
in publishing paperbacks is small, as are the number
of copies and titles they issue.
In Singapore, six publishers at present produce paper¬
backs, the initial printing order being 5,000 copies per
title. Ceylon has yet to begin publishing these books.
In Burma a number of publishers are now producing paper¬
backs, with the first printing order limited to 5,000 copies.
Two publishers in Indonesia and four in Iran are engaged
in this type of production with their first editions averaging
10,000 copies each. In Pakistan, publishers have not
yet taken to paperbacks seriously. One or two publishers
J. P. Charbonnier-Réalités
have tried to establish themselves in this field but their
first printing orders do not exceed 4,000 copies. In India
a number of publishers have successfully undertaken
paperback publishing in Hindi and various other languages,
though business now seems to be slowing down because
of a heavy percentage of unsold returns from newstands.
Publishers in Hindi, the official language, have had good
sales results, with first printing orders varying between
5,000 and 25,000 copies.
Most of the successful paperback publishers in the
West use newsprint. Because of the shortage of domestic
newsprint in South-East Asia, the authorities severely
restrict its use for paperbacks. Good quality newsprint
which could be used for books is mostly imported and
can be obtained only in limited quantities by special permit
and import licence. Import and excise duties on newsprint
increase the cost of paperbacks. Small printing orders
are another major cause of high prices. In comparison
to average purchasing power in the United States, for
example, which produces 25 and 35 cent "pocket books,"
the price of paperbacks in India, Pakistan and Indonesia
should be no more than a quarter of a rupee ($0.05),
whereas the actual cost is one rupee. Paperbacks in

is president of the All-India Hindi Publishers' Association, in Delhi. ¿ /
For a fuller account of this subject by Mr. Prakash, see the Unesco
booklet, just published, "Books for the Developing Countries:
Asia-Africa" (price 3/- stg; $0.50).
