A biologist's view
THE FUTURE
OF HOMO
SAPIENS'
by Jean Hiernaux
I
12
T takes considerable presumption to foretell
the future, yet it is a task that the research
worker cannot evade, although he may admit that his fore¬
casts are based on incomplete knowledge and on hypo¬
theses which are coloured by his own personality.
Man is the product of the evolution of animate matter;
and his future can be foretold only by projecting into the
future evolutionary trends which are perceptible today.
Throughout the natural history of life on our planet, we
may trace a series of forms, rising from the simplest to the
most complex from giant molecules, not yet completely
differentiated from inert matter, to mammals.
The main stages in this evolution reveal an increasing
degree of freedom from close dependence on the environ¬
ment. For example, by acquiring the ability to maintain the
body temperature irrespective of the temperature of the
external environment, which scientists call "horiothermy,"
the higher forms of animate matter have entered regions
in which previously they could not live.
As life became increasingly complex, the structure and
role of the brain grew larger. The maximum development
of the brain and the maximum freedom from the power
of the external environment were to be achieved by man;
and, having acquired that freedom, he gained increasing
control over the forces of nature, which he harnessed
to suit his needs.
Man is unquestionably the spearhead of evolution, but
he does not follow it's course in the same way as did those
forms which lived before him; at least, it may be said that
an evolutionary mechanism not previously in operation came
into being with man. Before his coming, evolution
was genetic in character; it consisted in changing the
qualities inherited by the various species in other words,
changing the stock of genes borne by them. It had nothing
to do with the will or with consciousness.
With the coming of man and, no doubt, as a necessary
condition for his emergence, an entirely different evolu¬
tionary mechanism came into being and developed the
transmission from one individual to another and from one
generation to the next of knowledge, inventions, and ways
H
|
of life which are not inherited, and which can be perpetuated
only through constant effort.
This is a less stable form of evolution, but it enables
man to advance along the path of freedom and to gain
control over his environment much more rapidly than he
can through genetic evolution. This is probably the reason
why, after a period of interaction between the two evolution¬
ary mechanisms (lasting from the emergence of man,
some two million years ago, until his appearance in his pre¬
sent form as "Homo sapiens" about 50,000 years ago),
evolution towards a higher state now takes place essentially
in the sphere of acquired ability, which we may call the
cultural sphere.
There is no perceptible difference between the anato¬
mical development of the skull of fossilized Homo sapiens
and our skull, but man's control over the forces of nature
has grown tremendously, and knowledge and techniques
are progressing with ever-increasing speed; cultural evolu¬
tion has taken the place of genetic evolution.

>?^^,
V
If this explanation of the lack of change in the brain
over tens of thousands of years is correct, we must not
expect man in the future to have an enormous head; the
brain he has now is large enough for him, and in any case
he is already extending its range by means of electronic
computers.
It is true that, judging by the bone-structure, "Homo
sapiens" usually had coarser features in the stone age than
today (as have the modern representatives of that cultural
stage, the Australian aborigines). A certain refining of the
bony projections has accompanied cultural evolution. Yet
it is not to be expected that this trend will continue until
the head is markedly different; the ridges of the brow may
vanish, but the frontal bone cannot. There is also a ten¬
dency for the teeth to become smaller, and even for the
third molar to be missing. Here again, there Is no reason
to think that this situation will ultimately produce a toothless
human being. In any case, these processes are extremely
slow compared with cultural evolution.
Unesco - Kitrosser
A process still in operation today in the genetic sphere,
and there is no sign that it is nearing its end, is the modi¬
fication of the inherited traits of populations so as to secure,
from the genetic point of view, the best possible adaptation
to a changing environment. Our adaptation to our environ¬
ment, too, is increasingly cultural in character (take, for
instance, our clothing, heating and air-conditioning), and
advances in medicine are helping to lessen the importance
of natural selection; but we are constantly creating new
environments (such as that of the great metropolises) which
give rise to fresh biological problems. It will be a long time,
no doubt, before cultural measures make genetic adaptation
to local conditions unnecessary, and so put an end to it.
All that has been said so far concerns the spontaneous
biological evolution of man. Now, man has acquired
knowledge and technical ability which enable him to._
influence his inherited traits. The branch of science which 10
deals with this process is eugenics. It is based on the
theory that, for each inherited characteristic in which men
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

© Ilse Steinhoff IBM
FUTURE OF 'HOMO SAPIENS' (Cont'd)
Not superman, perhaps a supermankind
14
differ from each other (such as the A, B and O blood
groups, in which individuals are divided into four groups),
there is a determining factor (a gene) which is the best of
its kind, and which is found in all parts of the world.
Natural selection will tend to eliminate all alternatives
except the best. If a new gene appears, as a result of
mutations, either it will be better than the existing genes,
and will supersede them, or else it will be weaker, and will
be eliminated.
The aim of eugenics is to assist what is good in nature,
by discouraging deleterious genes (through preventing indi¬
viduals possessing them from reproducing) and by
encouraging the best gene (for instance by advocating arti¬
ficial insemination by semen which bears that gene). The
tendency is, therefore, for eugenics to produce a human race
composed of genetically identical individuals.
In many cases (when it is recessive), the elimination of
a deleterious gene, even by total eugenics (the complete
prevention of reproduction by those who bear it), requires
many generations. Apart from this practical aspect there
is a serious argument against the general application of
eugenics: recent research has revealed that in very many
cases natural selection does not move towards a state of
uniformity through the elimination of all genes except one,
but rather towards a state of balance between the fre¬
quencies of different genes.
Mankind has always exhibited considerable diversity In
respect of many hereditary traits, which is a good thing. This
is not only because the vitality of each population depends
upon such diversity (or polymorphism), but because a gene
may be beneficial in certain environmental conditions and
harmful in others. We know of genes, for instance, a certain
frequency of which is beneficial in malarial regions, but
which are by no means desirable in other regions.
Men have settled in all parts of the globe; they live in
widely differing natural environments which they are con¬
stantly modifying in ways that are not always predictable.
This being so, the genetic ideal is to maintain diversity
the opposite of the aim of eugenics. Eugenics is un¬
justifiable except in so far as it can eradicate very serious
hereditary diseases, of which there are few; if an appa¬
rently unfavourable trait occurs frequently in a population,
it is very likely to be desirable in some respect at present
unknown to us. If a gene is really undesirable in all re¬
spects, natural selection will keep its frequency very low.
HIS criticism applies to positive eugenics, the
object of which is to increase the number of
"good" genes, as well as to negative eugenics, which aims
to eradicate the "bad" ones; underlying both is the same
ideal uniformity. We have no reason to hope that a
Superman will be produced in the eugenists' test-tubes;
any highly gifted beings they might produce would not
constitute a biologically viable human race.
We should do better to devote, our energies to providing
populations and individuals with living conditions in which
their inherited potentialities can best be realized, rather
than manipulating genes; and that is not eugenics, but
what has been called euthenics.
There are hundreds of millions of human beings who,
through hunger or disease, are prevented- from realizing
their physical potentialities as they would have done under
better conditions. Differences between the intellectual
achievements of the various human populations appear to
be due entirely to the fact that their food, health and
educational conditions are different. Euthenics opens up
much broader and safer avenues for the betterment of
mankind than does eugenics.
The processes in operation today especially selection,
which has the effect of differentiating populations by genetic
adaptation to their living conditions, and cross-breeding,
which produces greater homogeneity, while at the same

FROM STONE TOOLTO COMPUTER. Ittook man hundreds of thou¬
sands of years to evolve his stone-cutting techniques (left), yet only
a few thousand years to advance from the stone age to the atomic age.
Between the anatomical development of the skull of "Homo sapiens"
of 50,000 years ago and our skulls today there is no perceptible difference.
Cultural evolution has taken the place of genetic evolution. Man is
now extending the range of his brain by means of electronic
computers. Above, perforated computer programming cards.
time putting a premium on polymorphism can, of them¬
selves, produce the state which appears to meet the bio¬
logical needs of our race, that is, unity in diversity. Indivi¬
dual adaptations are never very marked, and they are much
less characteristic of man than his genetic capacity for
general adaptation to varied conditions.
It would seem, therefore, that man is not destined to
undergo any striking biological transformation through
either spontaneous or induced evolution. He is, however,
undergoing an ever more rapid cultural evolution; it took
him hundreds of thousands of years the palaeolithic era
to bring his stone-cutting technique to a moderately high
standard, but only a few thousand years to advance from
the stone age to the atomic age. It is in the sphere of
cultural achievements that man can undergo a profound
evolution which, though different in kind from genetic evo¬
lution, as we have seen, is moving in the same direction,
and is the specifically human form of evolution.
This kind of evolution has become self-conscious; it is
dependent upon man's desire to advance and on the effec¬
tiveness of the measures he adopts to do so. It requires
of men a sustained effort to improve, both as individuals
and as a society. It does not appear to be necessarily
inevitable; our present state of knowledge, indeed, provides
mankind with the means of total self-destruction.
Are we then justified in predicting that the cultural
evolution will continue to progress? We may be somewhat
prejudiced on the side of optimism, but not without reason.
Under pressure of the forces of selection, the genetic
evolution has gone on, passing through numerous phases,
for over a thousand million years; and in every case the
more complex, more highly developed form has supplanted
the lower form when they have been present together and
in a competitive situation.
True mammals, for example, have supplanted marsupials
in all parts of the world except Australia, where they have
been but recently introduced. We may reasonably expect
that by a similar mechanism a more highly-developed
cultural form, when brought into contact with a less highly-
developed one, will supersede it. Examples of this may be
found in our past. One case is the extremely rapid expan¬
sion of the neolithic revolution, i.e. the invention of agri¬
culture and cattle-breeding.
Biological evolutionary forces (using the word "bio¬
logical" in the narrow sense) altered inherited traits; but
cultural evolutionary forces preserve whatever is felt to be
an incentive towards mankind's advancement. These inclu¬
de the desire for knowledge, which leads to scientific pro¬
gress, and the desire of individuals and human societies to
draw closer together, which impels us to love our neighbour,
to feel ourselves involved in whatever affects mankind as
a whole, and to strive for greater social justice.
It is true that, as in the case of genetic evolution,
these forces produce nothing more than trends, and do
not exclude the possibility of periods of retrogression and
partial failure; but, if we look at history from a sufficiently
high vantage-point, it seems reasonable to think that they
will succeed.
Where can this sort of evolution take mankind?
In some fields, it is moving very quickly; know¬
ledge is advancing with great rapidity; and, amidst storm and
stress, men are seeking for new forms of ¡social morality
consonant with their increasing awareness ¿f their unity and
of the interdependence of the elements of which the race
is composed.
When we observe the rate of our progress we may
wonder whether animate matter inhabiting the earth is not
about to undergo, in man, one of those changes of state
which dialectical thinking entitles us to visualize. It would
seem that, in' biology as in physics, slight but accumulated
quantitative changes may somewhat suddenly lead to qua¬
litatively new states (consider, for example, the changes
undergone by a block of ice which is heated gradually).
Thus, the increasing complexity of inert matter gave rise
to life, which had new properties, but within which chemical
particles retain their ordinary characteristics; it is the inter¬
action and organization of these particles which is char¬
acteristic of life. The increasing' complexity of animate
matter led to the emergence of man, a qualitatively new
creature in certain ways, as in his capacity for abstract
thinking, but whose cells possess the same general bio¬
logical properties as the amoeba.
If we try to apply this principle still further, we shall see
that the next critical threshold will bring us to a state in
which men differing but little from present-day men will, by
virtue of their desire to draw closer together and the inten¬
sity and nature of their interaction, constitute a qualitatively
new stage of animate matter.
So, if we see the matter aright, we are advancing towards
a Supermankind, and not towards Supermen. We may be
unable at our stage in evolution to gain a complete picture
of this future state, but already we know the paths that lead
to it. It may sometimes be difficult to abandon an untrou¬
bled immobility but if we are to accept our responsibilities
as human beings and respond to the forces of progress, we
must move forward along these paths the ways that lead to
knowledge and amity.
PROF. JEAN HIERNAUX was scientific director of the meeting of
biologists organized by Unesco in Moscow in August 1965 (see
page 8). An anthropologist, he is a director of research at the National
Centre of Scientific Research in Pans and also collaborates with
the Institute of Sociology at the Free University of Brussels, Bel¬
gium. Professor Hiernaux has written a number of popular science
works, including "Origine de l'Homme" (The Origin of Man]; "Nature
et Origine des Races Humaines" (The Nature and Origin of the
Human Races) and "L'Avenir Biologique de l'Homme" (The Biological
Future of Man). These have been published by the Cercle d'Education
Populaire, 20 rue de Verviers, Brussels.
15
