NEW STRATEGY
FOR DEVELOPMENT
IT is no longer necessary to prove that education is one
of the basic factors, if not the basic factor in develop¬
ment. Man is both the instrument and the end product of development,
and his education is now a subject that has assumed increasing weight
even in economic studies. If we compare 1965 with 1960 we find that
this is perhaps the major innovation in thinking on development and in
the strategy for development adopted by international organizations.
I am convinced that this fact, now that it is universally acknowledged
and affirmed, should be the major factor in shaping the future policy of
these international organizations in the second half of the U.N. Develop¬
ment Decade.
WITHOUT scientists, engineers and technicians at all
levels no country can call itself free. This raises the
whole problem of scientific and technical education, from secondary
school study to basic research carried out at the higher institute level,
taking in every type of technical training whether in or outside univer¬
sities and schools or within the framework of industry and agriculture.
"HE idea of education no longer has to be promoted.
The motivation for it exists already and springs from
deep within the hearts of the great masses of humanity. This demand
for education has not been created by international organizations or by
governments. On the contrary, to many it must seem like some surging
wave that threatens to sweep everything before it unless it is channelled
in time into new paths where its vast potentialities can be rationally
exploited. The need, the passion, for education is such that it is turning
into an irresistible clamour of world-wide dimensions sparked by the
triple cry for national development, national freedom and respect
for the dignity of man. So strong and far-reaching is this demand that
many nations be they highly developed or not, newly independent or
established for centuries now find themselves face to face with a host
of formidable problems which are no longer just technical or even eco¬
nomic and financial in nature but also political.
René Maheu
Director-General of Unesco
(Passages from an address to the U.N. Eco¬
nomic and Social Council on July 9, 1965)
