This is a "portrait" of
the mathematical con¬
cept of geometric pro¬
gression. In the series
of reflections each boy
is half as high as the
next larger boy. The
sequence of heights
forms a geometric pro¬
gression. There are infi¬
nitely many boys in the
picture but if they stood
on each others heads,
the resulting tower
would not be infinitely
high. It would only be
twice as high as the boy
seen in the first mirror.

SCIENCE AND THE
COMMON MAN
by Ritchie Calder (Part two)
WmSSM,
*j»uiii'i iaw
-"«í> Ü- váí-SÍ -.- t£ A
mifeifaU*<til
B*&t<
.-.-R. n »*:
1
fp
1
Br $\ ~tXm l
1 II ^m
m r B
mjwf rT 1 1 1 * * ml^^^^MWi'' H^HI
&Û Cnkw
ÎAL/i ' H1MBHH BiAfll
3ÇG&Z&PZ5&??*?
¡y/*vs RT?W
¿-o^;í->í
»*.. r *7 oäv^****<
/n past times a "man of science" could
converse and communicate with any other
educated man. Today the cryptic language
and private jargons of the scientist have
built barriers between the ordinary man
and a proper understanding of science
the social dynamic of our times. In our
February issue, Ritchie Calder reviewed
these obstacles and stressed the dangers
for our civilization and for science itself
of the gulf separating the scientist in his
specialty from the wider community. Here
we present the second part of his article.
:w
.<>
rfriz
i, r
AN'S anxiety about his own search for know-
hedge and. for power is reflected almost uni¬
versally in myth and legend and still lurks in our own nature
today. Prometheus, in stealing fire, the prerogative of the
gods and appropriating it for the use of man, was terribly
punished for his presumptuous act. Pandora wantonly
unleashed forces which she could not control because,
again, she trespassed on the jurisdiction of the gods, but
since her action was accidental and innocent, mankind was
at least left with hope.
But when Faust invoked the Devil in order to usurp the
powers of the gods, there was nothing accidental about his
actions and he was consequently doomed to everlasting
punishment. The association of acquisitive knowledge with
evil and punishment is to be found in the story of the
Garden of Eden, and also In the ancient Egyptian saying:
"When man learns what it is that moves the stars, the
CONT'D ON PAGE 20
17

Models of Leonardo da Vinci's automobile, helicopter, aeroplane
Photo © Three Lions, New York
Four centuries before their invention, the automobile,
the helicopter, the aeroplane, the parachute and
many other modern machines had already been
foreseen by one of the keenest minds of the Italian
Renaissance. Giant among painters, musician and
poet, Leonardo da Vinci in fact considered himself
first and foremost a man of science and an engineer.
Here we present some examples of his inventions
in the form of present-day models built to Leonardo's
drawings and notes. Below, a model of the earliest-
known design for a self-propelled vehicle. Based on
Leonardo's drawing (left), it is spring driven.
'
=«<KV
v. r **
u-i ^tsf? aiv
o I
Photos Michel Péron, Paris
» H*
\^-
V
*_±
j
© Three Lions,
New York
HELICOPTER. This drawing by Leonardo da Vinci, illustrat¬
ing the principle of the "airscrew", is a preview of the heli¬
copter. But the only motive power Leonardo could give it
was the strength of the human arm (model right). The inven¬
tor took the precaution to write his scientific notes so that
they could only be deciphered when reflected in a mirror.
AEROPLANE. Leonardo studied the flight of birds
and also experimented to discover how much lift
could be obtained from wings. This model of an aero¬
plane embodies the ideas in his drawings and notes.
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE


/
û X
DA VINCI (Cont'd) Photos Michel Péron
FROM PARACHUTE TO FIREMAN'S LADDER. The
versatile genius of Leonardo da Vinci found expres¬
sion in the most diverse fields of art. science and
technology. Documents bequeathed to us by Leonardo
abound in creative ideas for Inventions such as hy¬
draulic machines, excavators, piledrivers, cranes,
swinging bridges, spinning and weaving machines,
diving equipment and many others. Above, da Vinci's
own drawing and a model of the parachute he desi¬
gned. Below, this mechanical model of a scaling
ladder built to Leonardo's blueprint has a similarity in
some respects to ladders used on fire engines today.
£ Three Lions. New York
SCIENCE AND THE COMMON MAN (Cont'd)
The fear of being afraid
Sphinx will laugh and all life upon earth will be destroyed."
There is a built-in fear in most people that trespassing in
the Unknown will invite a kind of cosmic revenge on
mankind or, as the psychologists put it, "the tendency to
relapse into more primitive forms of thought and feeling
which is characteristic of much of the psychological
reactions of the public to nuclear energy can be ascribed
to a psychological mechanism known as 'regression' ".
There is no safety in ignorance. In October 1957, the
World Health Organization called together a group, of
which I was a member, to study the mental health aspects
of the peaceful uses of energy. One of the questions
studied by this group was apathy. One would have assum¬
ed that this was a sort of emotional carapace, but it was
not: it was the "fear of being afraid". People knew enough,
censed enough, or guessed enough to have their unspoken
fears, and they shrank from facts which might confirm or
exaggerate those fears. Their attitude was not "don't care"
but "don't want to know". And the psychologists recogniz¬
ed of course that this abdication does not produce reassur¬
ance but a neurosis which in the mass can give rise to
social malaise. It is better to have rational fears than
irrational ones.
ND so nuclear superstition grew up. The only
way to combat superstition is to confront it
with reason. But what happens if the custodians of reason
are not believed? The study group found that scientists
themselves were mistrusted. In part this was due to the
primitive sense that they were interfering with things which
they should not touch, but also in part to the manifest
evidence of their achievements people remember the bomb
but they forget penicillin. But the most serious part was
the distrust of the motivations of the scientists' evidence.
If the release of atomic energy had not happened behind
the silent walls of secrecy, if there had been free discussion
among scientists everywhere, the processes of the discovery
and the release would have "got through to the public" and
would have prepared people for the greatest achievement
of man since he mastered fire. Instead, without any pre¬
paration of the public, it exploded with the violence of a
bomb. The conditions of military secrecy continued and,
also, the fears engendered by the original bombs persisted
because of the testing of bigger and bigger weapons.
Scientists became the spokesmen of government policies.
They were called upon not only to give the facts, within the
limitation of their specialized knowledge but to extrapolate
those facts beyond that knowledge and to pass judgements
and to express opinions.
The fact that scientists, and the authority of science, have
been invoked in recent years to promote policies, or to
win appropriations or contracts, or to defend government
agencies and industrial concerns, or to "reassure the public"
on subjects such as fall-out or thalidomide, has tended to
make people suspicious of their motives and question the
integrity of their facts.
Even more difficult to analyse than the relationship of the
scientist to the general public is the relationship of the
politician to the scientist; it is a love-hate relationship. As
the published report of the WHO Study Group on the Men¬
tal Aspects of Atomic Energy (1) stated: "With regard to
science and the scientists, the position of political leaders
is often fraught with additional difficulties. Few, if any, have
the background which includes a thorough scientific train¬
ing, yet they are called upon to face situations which have
been built up, little by little, through the work of scientists
and which require for solution some conception of the
ultimate implications of the scientific world...
"Lack of adequate conceptual background may lead to

.and the philosophy of risk
a tendency to make a programme without real plans, and
this can lead to tremendous insecurity."
"Another aspect which generates anxiety is the un¬
certainty about who actually wields the power," said the
WHO report. "In one sense, the politician has power
over the scientist, but in another, he is dependent on
the scientist and hence is in his power. In this respect
an entirely new situation has arisen in many countries
of the modern world."
This danger of "the tyranny of the expert" is, and should
be, a matter of real public concern. The faceless men at
the elbows of the scientifically uneducated are becoming
decision-makers without being answerable to the commu¬
nity.
Scientists do not make the task of common understanding
any easier when they vacillate between statements which
are limited to their scientific competence and statements
which wear a meretricious mantle of science but which
are actually expressions of value and even of policy
decision.
One of the value judgements passing as scientific truths
is the concept of "maximum permissible dosage" of radia¬
tion. This belongs not to science but to the "philosophy
of risk." It has no more scientific authority than the forty-
mile-an-hour speed-limit sign on a highway, yet scientists,
including many eminent ones, have got into the habit of
quoting "m.p.d.s" as though they were scientific units.
The bandying of "m.p.d.s" by spokesmen-scientists in dis¬
cussing such things as fall-out, either to minimize or
exaggerate the risks, has bamboozled the public and in¬
creased its distrust of the scientist.
In November 1963, the World Health Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, brought together world experts at
Geneva to consider the radiation hazards from peacetime
accidents. This meeting followed the suspension of tests,
so that the official scientists were no longer looking over
their shoulders, speaking with their tongues in their cheeks,
nor waiting for government reprimands if they said any¬
thing which, even if true, would be officially indiscreet.
The consensus of that meeting was that in terms of the
population at large no dosage was permissible, neither
maximal nor minimal. All radiation beyond the natural was
to be assumed to be bad. If an accident to a nuclear
installation was to occur and there was to be an escape
of radiation of any kind, no one was to say: "Until the
dosage is so-and-so, there is nothing to worry about."
Everyone's job, urgently, must be to restore the environment
to normal. A pseudo-scientific unit which had bewildered
the public for eighteen years was thus discarded, as far as
public health was concerned, although its usefulness as
a guide to risk still applied to the radiological protection
of individuals.
VER a century ago, the famous French physio¬
logist, Claude Bernard, made a pronouncement
which his modern successors would do well to heed: "True
science teaches us to doubt and, in ignorance, to refrain."
When the entire living environment has become a labora¬
tory, scientists ought to be restrained within the limits of
their knowledge; they ought to admit to themselves what
they do not know. Fall-out is a case in point (although we
can think also of pesticides and new drugs like thalidomide)
because it should remind them to compare notes with their
colleagues in other disciplines.
Another saying of Claude Bernard applies to the respon¬
sibilities of the modern scientists: "When you enter your
laboratory, put off your imagination as you take off your
(1) No. 151 of the Technical Reports series, Geneva. WHO, 1958.
coat; but put it on again, with your overcoat, when you
leave. Before an experiment and between whiles let your
imagination wrap you round; put it right away from you
during the experiment itself lest it hamper you and your
power of observation."
Outside his laboratory, the scientist is entitled to use
his imagination in politics, in religion, or in any other
social concern. Indeed, it is his duty to do so. He ought
to have some regard for the use, misuse, abuse, or non-
use of his discoveries. He is a functional citizen and
should be expected, as the repository of information, to
make that information intelligibly available, and, also, with
a sense of responsibility, to put forward arguments on
which social judgements can be sensibly made and with¬
out which social judgements cannot be made.
Today, many scientists, including the most eminent, earn¬
estly accept this responsibility. They take the initiative
on great issues issues which science itself dictates with¬
out arrogating to themselves the powers of the invisible
experts, the faceless men,' and bring their knowledge to
the bar of public opinion. The Pugwash Movement is the
conspicuous and impressive example of this. Scientists, in
this way, can form a very powerful benevolent "lobby" in
the interest of the lives and livelihoods of their fellow
humans.
OMMON understanding of science does not
mean just what is conveyed through the popular
press or radio or television or films, much of which is now
being done very ably and is introducing the ordinary person
not only to the exciting developments of science but to
the ways in which the scientist goes to work. Science
has to be understood at all levels. If we are to have science
effectively administered by governments and public bodies
or by the boards of industries, we have to educate those
who are to form the judgements about sciences and to de¬
cide priorities. Men of affairs have to be sufficiently well in¬
formed to know what it is that the scientistis talking about,
otherwise they may find themselves carried away by
the enthusiasm of the scientist, caught by the glamour of
the latest "scientific cult" or just bemused by the jargon
of science. Conversely, much that is worthwhile goes
a-begging because those who have to take the decisions
cannot properly understand.
This problem is one of education, at all ages. When
people ask "At what age do you teach a child science?"
the answer is simple: from the moment a child lisps "Why?"
Innate curiosity has to be encouraged instead of the child
being told: "Wait until you know all about kinetics and dyna¬
mics and you will understand." To discourage curiosity is to
discourage scientific inquiry in later years.
Recently, at an educational conference, I was asked to
speak on "Teaching science in general education in the
year A.D. 2000". I said I hoped that we would not be
teaching "science" as a subject in general education forty
years from now, but that science would pervade be as
natural as the blood corpuscles and that specialization
would be reserved for much later in the student's life.
Moreover, every university student should be introduced to
scientific method and given the background which will make
him, even when he is not going to be a career scientist,
capable of evaluating science.
An essential attribute of the rounded man in this day and
age is that he should know about the forces which are
changing and dominating his life and affecting culture in all
its aspects. This is a challenge to educators in every
country those which we call "developing" as well as those
which are highly developed scientifically and technologically.
In all this, the present-day science writers have a peculiar 21
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

SCIENCE AND THE COMMON MAN (Cont'd)
The inalienable right of curiosity
22
responsibility. There are not enough of them and not all of
them understand, nor do all of whose who do understand
accept the function of social interpretation which has been
elaborated here. Many regard their "popularization" merely
as the explanation of the latest gadget or of the latest cure
or of some exciting new theory. This is the easiest of all
science writing.
If the scientist, who has the facts, is patient, and the
journalist, who has to simplify these facts, is patient, there
is practically no scientific advance however abstruse it may
seem at first sight which cannot be made intelligible to the
general reader. The expositor may be a science graduate
trained as a journalist or a journalist who has acquired the
necessary background of science. In either case, he (or
she) must have the craft of presenting difficult concepts in
ways which will arrest and hold the interest of readers (or
listeners or viewers) who are not predisposed to science.
There are many layers of explanation. The scientist writ¬
ing in his own scientific journal, for his own immediate
colleagues, can use all the jargon he likes. If he Is writing
for a wider scientific group, he has to be less cryptic and
more descriptive but he can still assume (a) that they know
the basic concepts and (b) that they will concentrate on
what he is trying to explain.
Then there are journals about science (as distinct from
scientific journals) purveying a great variety of scientific
subjects for earnest people who may not be scientists but
who want to keep themselves informed. Such journals per¬
form a very important function because they "brief" well-
meaning politicians, civil servants, company directors,
teachers of the humanities, etc.; they are for an educated
élite who will grapple with a subject provided that the
language does not defeat them.
Then there are the "serious" newspapers which will give
space for explanations and whose readers will give atten¬
tion, again provided that they are not expected to under¬
stand the terminology until they have been introduced to
it. Then there are the large-circulation newspapers the
function of which is to inform (or entertain) rather than to
educate. This means "sneaking up on the reader" and
surprising him into being interested in a subject which he
would otherwise avoid.
ND there is the level of the "comic strip"
which is not to be altogether despised. In
Britain a whole generation was prepared for space travel,
years before the first space capsule was launched into
orbit, by the "Adventures of Dan Dare". Children knew
far more than the grown-ups about Mach numbers,
weightlessness, orbits and stagings. This was impressed
upon me by a fourteen-year-old who, on the morning
Sputnik I went up, asked how it was done. I told him all
about propellants, boosters, etc. He listened to me politely
and then said: "I know all that. But how did they get it
into that particular orbit?" He was more interested in the
science than in the technology. His instructor had been
Dan Dare, a comic strip with a great amount of substantial
information built-in. For "journals" and "newspapers"
read films, television and radio. The same considerations
apply.
The mere explanation of science, however, is not enough;
it has to be translated into the lives and experience of
ordinary people. There have to be, in this day and age,
interpreters.
The crisis of our times is the breakdown of communica¬
tions, not only in the semantics of politics and Ideologies,
but in this all-important area of science. Our lives, our
hopes, our survival as a species depend upon the uses
which are made of science. To progress, we have to use
scientific discoveries and knowledge to the utmost. Science
in the advanced countries is moving so fast that it is almost
impossible to keep up with the knowledge and the gadgets.
Science feeds fundamental truths to technology; techno¬
logy feeds back more and more elaborate instruments to
science; they speed each other up. Over three and a half
million original scientific papers are published every year
and the increase is exponential. Wisdom is being drowned
in a Niagara of information. The various branches of
science are out of step, encouraged or discouraged by
"cults" which impress the money-givers into providing dis¬
proportionate budgets.
Large areas of science are still enclosed within the
barbed wire of military security. Much is circumscribed
by industrial secrecy. Much more is fenced off by the
jargon of over-specialization. One set of scientists does
not know what another set is doing, even when their
areas of work impinge and may have a critical relevance
to each other.
I N the aggregation of experimental knowledge
we have lost the sense of natural philosophy.
With a singlemindedness that would have astounded the
eighteenth century, schools of research pursue their objec¬
tives. We are ¿now in th& cult of DNA and the study of
deoxyribonucleic acid and molecular biology probing the
secret of life before we know what we are going to do with
it when we have got it. Over $6,000 million a year is spent
on space research only a small fraction of the $43,000 mil¬
lion which the nations spend on armaments, but twice as
much as is invested in the developing countries.
There are too few communicators within science and
between the humanities and science. How are we to teach
people about science to enable them to make judgements
and to see that, with the inalienable rights of curiosity and
the quest for knowledge unimpaired, science, with all its
potential for good or evil, shall be directed to the benefit
of all mankind?
While we should certainly be encouraging the aspirations
of Man in breaking the gravitational boundary walls of his
planet, are we really maintaining at the same time a proper
sense of priorities? How much more resources and atten¬
tion should we be giving to the problems of this planet on
which 3,000 million people today and 4,000 millions by
1980 will have to contrive to live in conditions more consis¬
tent with human dignity than most of them now enjoy?
Is space adventure more important than food and popu¬
lation problems for instance? And how, with all the spec¬
tacular advances of today, can we close the widening gap
between the prosperity, scientifically and technologically
produced, in the advanced countries and the poverty of
two-thirds of the world?
The United Nations Conference on the Application of
Science and Technology for the Benefit of Less Developed
Areas, at Geneva, in February 1963, spelled out what we
know and what is needed. While we would be grateful for
some new breakthrough giving to food problems, for
example, the kind of answers which sulpha drugs, anti¬
biotics and DDT gave to medical services it was evident
from that conference that there are answers already wait¬
ing to be applied, and that it is not a question of know¬
ledge but of intention. It is a question of sharing know¬
ledge and skills and resources that we already have at
our disposal.
These are social judgements, fraught with stupendous
meaning, and they must be based on a proper understanding
of science and what it can make available. Th¡s transfer of
knowledge and skills has to be done rapidly if the Scientific
and Technological Revolution is to give substance to the
Revolution 'of Rising Expectations, which, as more and more
countries become independent, becomes more and more
insistent.
