Young people have a vast potential of hidden
creative talents which with a little encouragement
quickly develop and produce striking results.
One example is seen in the remarkable modern
tapestries woven by teen-age artists from Egypt
reproduced in full colour and black and white on
the following pages. The "Pygmalion" in this case
was an Egyptian architect, Mr. Rameses Wissa
Wassef, who set up a weaving workshop in a
village near Oairo. Below he describes the
artistic development of the young villagers over
the years. An exhibition of their tapestries was
held this year at the Louvre's Musée des Arts
Décoratifs in Paris. Many other exhibitions of
these works have been held: Paris (1956), Swit¬
zerland (1958), Sweden and Denmark (I960),
Netherlands (1960 and 1963) and the Federal
Republic of Germany (1962).
by
Rameses Wissa Wassef
Birds? Flowers? Everyday scenes or
imaginary themes? Which subject will
this young Egyptian weaver choose as
he passes strands of coloured wool
across his loom? (left) Spontaneously
and without the help of any sketch,
he will fill his tapestry with images
drawn from his experiences and his ima¬
gination. Above, tapestry depicting a
traditional ceremony (70 * 125 cm)
woven by a girl artist, Rawhia AM, aged 20.
© J. P. Bonnin

w v* " v¡M *
vv
A POETIC WORLD FASHIONED
ON THE WEAVER'S LOOM
BOUT twenty years ago I decided to teach the
young people of a small community school in
the suburbs of Cairo how to weave tapestries. What I had
in mind was much more a human experiment than a pedago¬
gical project. All these youngsters came from very
poor families and had never had any kind of education in
art. By teaching them to weave, I was sure that 1 would
encourage them to use the creative talents that are latent
in all young people, simply waiting to find an outlet. The
results were so remarkable that 1 decided to continue the
experiment at Harrania, a little village just outside Cairo.
At Harrania I assembled a group of youngsters hap¬
hazardly. They had no special aptitudes, apart from their
youth and their desire to work. They were free to come to
the workshop whenever they wished, outside school hours,
of course.
Today all these young people without exception are capa¬
ble of creating directly on the loom, without the help of
any sketch, tapestries of a beauty that has impressed
visitors to a great many European galleries of modem art.
including recently the Musée des Arts Décoratifs in Paris.
I am convinced that this experiment, if it is properly
appreciated and the right conclusions are drawn from it,
deserves to be repeated on a far wider scale. It offers
simple, natural and effective solutions for a great many
problems, social and individual alike. Its innovation con¬
sisted in combining art, education, social life, craftsmanship
and wage-earning in a single activity that allowed complete
freedom of expression.
People who see these tapestries always ask two ques¬
tions: "How do these young people succeed in weaving,
without preliminary sketches, scenes which are often com¬
plex but always well balanced?" and "What induced you to
try out this experiment?"
I can answer the second question immediately by saying
that I always had the feeling that I could have done the same
as these youngsters if the opportunity had been offered me
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
33

A POETIC WORLD (Cont'd)
Above, young girl at a loom. When weaving
the artist sees only a small part of his operation
and often works in a lateral direction. At first
weaving is a slow and difficult process, but
young people find it passionately interesting
and in time become gifted artists. Below, dyeing
skeins of wool for the weaving workshop.
Photos © J.P. Bonnin
Colour and harmony
in time and, furthermore, that in my view the reproduction
of a drawing on a loom is not really a work of tapestry
creation; it is a fruitless activity and wrong approach.
To reply to the first question is more difficult. Just watch
a youngster who has been given drawing materials. He
doesn't ask you what he must do. Without hesitation, he
begins to depict people, animals, plants, etc. It is his own
intimate language, full of warmth and expression, and he
gives himself up entirely to it. This language is universal.
To criticize such drawings because of their lack of
perspective or their inaccuracy or even merely to say "be
more observant" would destroy the youngster's wish to
express himself by drawing. What interests me is to try
to perpetuate the act of expression and to lead the young
person to go on drawing as an unself-conscious habit.
Everything that is expressed afterwards starts from here.
Instead of giving the boys and girls pencil and paper,
I introduced them immediately to weaving. For some time,
I let them struggle with the network of threads on the loom.
They began by trying, thread by thread, to depict the ¡mage
in which they were interested, and once it had assumed a
shape, however embryonic, the battle was won. Very soon
their fingers were weaving a steady flow of pictures.
Years of work and experience did the rest. The complicated
scenes which they have depicted day after day since then
represent everything they have experienced; it is just as if
they were writing the story of their own lives.
All young people have an innate sense of colour, har¬
mony, balance, rhythm and movement, and the pictures
they make are based on geometrical and architectural
figures of great clarity and strength. Nature has given them
a creative power which, once set free, never ceases to
amaze us. Unfortunately, all these gifts, latent and hesitant
when adults are present, are neglected by most teachers.
Even those who sense this fact are apt to complain regret¬
fully that after the age of twelve nothing spontaneous can
be expected from a child. Whose fault is this?
I have often been asked why I chose weaving for my
Harrania experiment. Before explaining my reasons I should
like to mention that we intend to enrol new groups of young
people to work with other materials. We have already
begun with pottery and the construction of vaulted roofs
with dried mud bricks, for which we have no need to buy
materials. We shall also add woodwork, glass, enamels,
printing on cloth, and speech training. We hope that all
these activities will complement each other and generate
sufficient energy to transform the entire life and culture of
the village.
Tapestry seemed to me to be admirably suited for my
first experiment since it combines two extremely well-
balanced forces, namely ¡mage and technique.
The image is the mirror of the intellect. Consequently,
the whole inner life of the young person ¡s freely
expressed and controls the form the work will take.
Technique is the effort made by the body itself, domi¬
nated and disciplined by the mind. It develops parallel
with the progress of the work.
CONT'D ON PAGE 39
Colour page, opposite:
"Sunlight on Aboukir Bay" (260 x 120 cm.) a work
by a woman artist, Saadia Ibrahim, aged 20.
Centre colour pages:
Right: "The Plum Harvest" (240 x 100 cm.) by a
19-year old girl, Leila Achri.
Left: "The Bird Cage" by Karima Ali, a young woman
of 22.
Photos © J.P. Bonnin

Z¿':Ä

m
mm !í¡ '; pu
' ! I


t»*J.	,
«SB»
J^¡pg
flrr
^
A
«ilîiflliïiMIlllf

A POETIC WORLD (Cont'd)
's young artist-craftsmen
Therefore, tapestry contains everything necessary to
enable a youngster to use simultaneously his skill and his
imagination to the full.
At the beginning weaving is a difficult and slow process,
and that is why young people become passionately inte¬
rested by it. Many months go by before it can be perform¬
ed satisfactorily, but every tiny achievement is a triumph.
By comparison it is easy to understand that drawing on
paper fails to absorb a youngster who composes a picture in
a few minutes and then loses interest immediately.
Studying the development of tapestry work over many
years, I was able to distinguish a number of important
stages. In the first few months, the subjects are rudimen¬
tary. Animals' paws or tree trunks are like pillars supporting
a mass in which one can just distinguish a few signs
revealing an intention to differentiate between them. Later,
these distinctive signs become more pronounced and varied
every day. Then for a fairly long period, the existence of
unconscious forms and movements can be detected; these
are the precursors of conscious design and are just as
important for the final whole as for the structure of every
detail. In other words, birds, plants, men and trees have
very similar and almost interchangeable shapes. Often
these shapes appear in a pure form free of any embellish¬
ment and reminiscent of abstract art. I should point out
that, when weaving, the artist sees only a small part of his
work and often works in a lateral direction.
Later, these forms become more flexible and lead to a
more vivid picture based on actual impressions. Some¬
times, the artist tends to exaggerate the characteristics of
the object or scene he wishes to depict. This might
be called an expressionist trend and the scenes depicted
are narrative or descriptive. Sometimes, he puts together
a few motifs inspired by poetic feeling or pure fancy.
In some cases, maturity leads to realism and observation,
while in others the scenes depicted are mere reconstruc¬
tions. However, in every case, the picture is embellished
as experience grows. The works are constantly renewed,
without repetition and without fatigue.
The many similarities with past and present works of art
are never due to direct influence; these young artists have
never seen any work of art outside their own workshop.
No difference of aptitude has been observed between boys
and girls, and their work is indistinguishable.
FROM the day we began work in Harrania, girls
immediately realized the advantages that this
work might represent for them and enrolled in large num¬
bers. Boys, however, showed less patience with the loom
and did not take it seriously át first. This attitude changed
on the day that Ali, a little boy aged eight, the brother of one
of our girls, found an irresistible way of gaining admission
to the workshop, which made me change my decision to
limit the number of children to those I had already enrolled.
Ali used to wander around the workshop watching what
was going on. One day, he came to show me a tiny
tapestry woven with discarded pieces of thread on a loom
he had made himself out of old planks and rusty nails.
What is the significance and value of craftsmanship for
our era? Recently, I received two letters on the subject,
one from the U.S.A. and the other from the U.S.S.R. The
publishers of a Soviet art magazine asked me for my
opinion on three questions: "Will craftsmanship and folk art
disappear in highly industrialized countries? What must be
done to protect craftsmanship traditions? Can home crafts
be described as a relic of the past, and have they a place
in modern society?"
The American letter was a report of the first International
Crafts Conference, held at New York in June 1964.
It is curious to see that the two powers in which an
industrial revolution has progressed most, although the
methods used are different, are taking an interest in crafts
in the second half of the twentieth centuryl
In a country such as Egypt, where most of the population
work in agriculture, it is clear that the practice of a craft
can offer great opportunities and lead to considerable
expansion, both cultural and material.
However, the question is obviously different in other
countries, and we should review the problem of handicrafts
as an activity and ask whether it is really a useless relic of
the past fated to disappear in an industrialized world.
I
Colour page, opposite:
Top: "In the Woods" (260^170 cm.) by Nicolas
Fayek, aged 17.
Bottom: " The Donkey Market" (125 x 80 cm.) by
AM Selim, aged 17.
Photos © J.P. Bonnin
N analysing this problem, let us look at the
definitions adopted by the International Crafts
Conference in New York. According to these definitions
there are three types of craftsmen: the creator, the
executor, and the person who combines both activities.
I cannot agree with this concept, which is based on an
unfortunate practice that developed in the Western world
after the Middle Ages and to which there is now a gradual
return. It recognizes two stages in a creative activity and
claims that in art conception is nobler than execution.
The artist, whether sculptor, painter or poet, is also a crafts¬
man at the moment he puts his intention into practice.
Nowadays, it is impossible for us to distinguish between
major and minor arts, pure and applied art, or figurative and
decorative art. The potter, jeweller, builder or cabinet¬
maker, who provides his work with a valid shape and a
new expression, is also an artist.
True craftsmanship can be described as the ancestor of
industry, its field of activity being that of useful and per¬
manent forms. The task of the potter, the shoemaker or
the weaver was to satisfy the need of society for useful
objects. These craftsmen interpret the tradition sensitively
and know how to adjust their work to the tastes of their
social environment. Their activities can be related to the
folk art which is integrated in social structures, sometimes
dating back thousands of years. This form of craftsmanship
will inevitably disappear both in the industrialized and non-
industrialized countries and no one can hope to save it.
There are two reasons for this disappearance. In the
first place, the modern world has broken with traditional
social structures now regarded as outmoded and, rightly
or wrongly, condemned as illogical. Secondly, it is obvious
that industrial production is depriving the craftsman of his
economic reason for existence and of his means of earning
a livelihood. Industry uses models drawn up by designers,
which give a semblance of beauty to mass production, and
the customer is satisfied!
However, even if craftsmanship is dying, art cannot die.
Consequently, we must always seek the help of art to pro¬
vide vitality to forms of craftsmanship that are still regarded
as valid, and it is therefore important to appreciate the
conditions that would promote the restoration of such
craftsmanship if we are to achieve anything. In my experi¬
ment, 1 decided to study and to carry out this task because
I regretted the disappearance, not so much of the work
produced by the craftsman, but of his living conditions, his
creative power and the methods required for his training.
If these can be restored, civilization will be the beneficiary.
The chief merit of my experiment at Harrania has been aa
to prove that it is always possible to recruit wonderful 00
craftsmen and excellent artists among the youth of even
the humblest village.
