ENGINEERS IN THE
14
The Bombay
Institute
of
Technology
HE Republic of India needs thousands of
technicians for the many industries now deve¬
loping all over this huge sub-continent. To try to
meet part of these enormous needs the Indian Govern¬
ment has set up five regional technological institutes. One
of these top-level engineering schools is the Indian Institute
of Technology, Bombay (1).
As part of its technical assistance programme, Unesco
has given India large-scale aid in setting up the Bombay
institute. In 1955, an agreement was signed to enable
Unesco to use a contribution in roubles by the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations Technical
Assistance Fund to aid the institute. It was foreseen that
(1) Editor's note: India's other technological Institutes have been
set up at Kharagpur (with aid from U.S.A. and U.K. and U.N.
technical assistance through Unesco); at Delhi (with aid from
U.K.); at Kanpur (with aid from a consortium of U.S. univer¬
sities) and at Madras (with aid from the Federal Republic of
Germany).

í
>
/
The administration building of the Bombay Institute of Technology (above) dominating
the campus of this engineering school was designed by the Indian architect, G.M. Bhuta.
The severe lines of reinforced concrete construction are softened by elements of traditio¬
nal Indian style. Only seven years ago the site was covered by jungle vegetation. Left,
one of the two vast reading rooms of the central library, which has over 60,000 books.
Photos Unesco - Boucas
NEW INDIA
by Vadim A. Javoronkov
aid amounting to $3.5 million would be provided over
five years, but assistance has actually amounted to over
$4.5 million. In addition, the Soviet Union has donated
equipment worth three million old roubles. On its side,
India has spent an estimated $10 million on the institute,
more than doubling the international aid received.
Soviet specialists have helped the Indian Ministry of
Education in working out a project for the institute, includ¬
ing workshops and laboratories. The Indian Government
undertook the full task of building the institute and Unesco
provided equipment for the main laboratories and workshops
and helped to organize academic and scientific activities.
From these combined efforts a university city has sprung
up on the shores of Lake Powai, in an area where signs
still warn swimmers of the danger of crocodiles. The
institute is located 18 miles from the heart of Bombay
on a site that only seven years ago was a jungle wil¬
derness.
Building operations were already in progress when India's
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

BOMBAY INSTITUTE (Cont'd)
Eight faculties, 2,000 students
Prime Minister, Jawharlal Nehru, laid the foundation stone
of the main administration building on March 10, 1959.
But as the need for engineers was so great the institute
had not waited for buildings to be completed. The first
students were enrolled in 1958 and in July of that year
the first classes were started in temporary premises in
Bombay.
The installations at Powai are now an impressive sight.
The dominating feature of the new campus is the admin¬
istration building which combines the clearcut lines of
modern architecture with elements of the traditional Indian
style. Reinforced concrete slabs jut out to give protection
from the sun and án efficient ventilating system keeps
the interior cool and fresh.
Behind the administrative centre, covered passages giv¬
ing protection against blazing sun and tropical monsoon
rains link a series of buildings with striking sawtoothed
roofs: mechanical workshops and the laboratories of the
mechanical and metallurgical departments.
The institute has other impressive-looking installations.
A water tower, rising like a lighthouse above the campus,
stands alongside the hydraulic laboratory. In the heavy
machinery shop is a giant travelling crane. There is
also a thermal station which services the turbine laboratory.
Few other technical institutes, even the most modern, can
boast such a harmonious blending of light and space
and the latest technological equipment.
EQUALLY striking are the architectural forms of
a conference hall, seating 2,000 people, which
faces the main entrance of the institute. Through the palm
and mango groves between the foothills and the shores of
the lake gleam the dazzlingly white walls of the student
hostels. These provide separate rooms for all undergra¬
duate and postgraduate students, and each building has its
own dining hall, games room and reading room. The
hostels are set around a great sports field with a gymna¬
sium and stands for spectators. Track and field athletic
events, volley ball and hockey are among the most popular
of the student's sporting activities.
The central library is housed in a three-storey building.
It has two large reading rooms, each seating 250 persons,
and over 60,000 volumes, including India's largest collection
Unesco - G. Mull
«WBWNM
IMS
If VJSVft
it,
(Wj
tMSfci
mf
»j». a"
^K<* *w, <*.amm¥,s i
a^llllftlk
? rmamnmcumz
&aaaaaaa«
»SI
"'
9 Hid L-2ftU¿I « £
-
*
LB**
¿«if
Waif II
îarjaa
'I
Bit* s
mmmwxt
".- 9 Utu.
««
n rupinev. 'u%«I:
"aftaMi-*'
*i«fc'£i
MISM*
«in
taai
«ai
W
É
Mht
Left, post-graduate students operating an electron-microscope in
the metallurgical department of the Bombay institute. Supplied by the
U.S.S.R., under the U.N. - Unesco technical assistance programme, it
magnifies specimens 100,000 times. Above, Professor Y.N. Loladze,
a Soviet specialist in machine-building technology, head of the
Unesco mission in Bombay in 1962 and 1963. "The purpose of
the expert here," he once said, "is to work himself out of a job."

of Russian technical literature (5,000 works) from which
books are loaned out to other Indian institutions.
Members of the faculty and technical staffs will live
in small houses and in buildings comprising two and
four-room flats now under construction.
The university city has now a population of 6,000 and
as its numbers increase more and more buildings rise on
the campus. The speed of this development owes much
to the organizational skill and energy of the director
of the institute, Brigadier S.K. Bose, ably supported by his
second in command, Professor Kamooth, and the institute's
registrar, Mr. Nera. Brigadier Bose pays special attention
to the living conditions of teachers and students, and the-
results of his efforts can be seen in the increasingly fine
academic record of the institute.
The project for technical assistance to the Bombay
Institute was financed by Unesco from the Soviet contri¬
bution to the U.N. Expanded Programme of Technical Assis¬
tance. Deliveries of Soviet equipment paid for by these
funds include an electron microscope with a magnifying
power of 100,000, highly sensitive instruments for use
in electricity and physics, precision metal-cutting tools and
100 and 200-ton hydraulic presses. The long list of
equipment includes such diverse items as an automated
rolling mill, an oxygen station and refrigeration units, and
Photos Unesco - Boucas
a continuous metal teeming machine, closed circuit tele¬
vision and high frequency heating apparatus.
These modern devices and machines are used to train
junior students in the fundamentals of the technology
of metals (cutting, welding, casting, forging, etc.) and
to help senior students familiarize themselves with the
basic processes and operations in their chosen specialities.
This specialized equipment is provided on a lavish scale
and enables the institute to cover a broad spectrum
of research.
HE institute has reached a planned enrolment of
2,000: 1,600 undergraduate and 400 post¬
graduate students. It has eight departments: chemical
engineering, civil engineering, electrical engineering, mech¬
anical engineering, metallurgical engineering, physics,
mathematics and humanities.
Students complete a five-year course to gain a bachelor
of technology degree, and then go on to take a two-year
course for their master of science degree.
The institute now trains students in twenty-six major
specialities some of which are quite new to India. Their
training is in the hands of 170 Indian teachers and eight
CONT'D ON PAGE 33
The Bombay Institute of Technology is well
equipped with heavy machinery to give
practical training to the future engineers of '
India's rapidly developing industries. Right,
Unesco specialists. A.A. Cosmin (far right)
and V.A. Javoronkov (author of our article)
discuss training with staff members.

(Cont'd from page 17) BOMBAY INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
Unesco experts. Some of the Indian teachers were given
Unesco fellowships to complete a three-year course in
Soviet institutes and present their theses. They have
now returned to India and are working as departmental
and section chiefs at the institute. Other teachers have
received study fellowships in Australia, the U.K. and U.S.A.
Today the students they have trained are going out to
posts in India's developing industries. Many have already
joined the staffs of steel-making plants like those at Bhilai,
Durgapur and Rurkela, the machinery plant at Ranchi
and the heavy electrical installation at Bopal, to name
but a few.
There is also an urgent need to retrain men already
working in industry. The institute has therefore been
offering refresher courses to engineers and other techni¬
cians. In 1962-64 these courses included welding, metal
cutting, machine tools, rolling, electronics and automation.
new form of participation for the Unesco spe¬
cialists are the annual diploma courses attended
by engineers from different industries. These engineers
spend a year studying their speciality, design projects for
their diplomas and take examinations for a bachelor of
technology degree.
Unesco specialists also travel to other scientific and
research institutes to lecture and deliver reports which
all leads to shared experience between India's technical
institutes. The Bombay Institute also co-operates closely
with such major scientific centres as the Indian Institute
of Science at Bangalore and the National Physics and
Metallurgical laboratories at Delhi and Jamshedpur.
The Unesco and Indian specialists at the Bombay Techno¬
logical Institute are working in a spirit of true co-operation.
The daily discussions of curricula, lectures, teaching aids
and curricular guides have convinced every Unesco expert
completing his two or three-year stay at the Institute that
his work will be ably carried on by other members of
the faculty.
Now that the main laboratory equipment has been
thoroughly tried and tested, the Institute has begun to
concentrate on research facilities for its teachers. Young
staff members are working on their theses for master
of technology degree and many senior teachers are pre¬
paring their doctorates. Thanks to the Bombay institute
they can now do so without having to go abroad. In
1964 over thirty members of the faculty were doing research
and working for their doctor's theses. They received
valuable assistance from Unesco specialists who consider
this as one of their most rewarding duties. The series
of textbooks and manuals written by members of the
faculty and Unesco specialists now being published by
the institute is in great demand in other technical colleges
both in India and abroad.
The Bombay Technological Institute is becoming one of
the great technological research centres of India and,
in fact, of Asia as a whole. It plays host to All-India
conferences, seminars and symposiums concerned with
different branches of technology. The XVIIth Metallurgical
Congress, held there in 1964, heard reports from fifteen
teachers at the institute and from three Unesco specialists.
Recently an All-India seminar aimed at improving co¬
operation between technical education institutes and indus¬
try was held. The institute receives many visitors dele¬
gations and individual technicians from countries in Asia,
Africa and Europe.
VADIM A. JAVORONKOV is a Soviet specialist in metallurgical
technology. He was a member of Unesco's mission to the Bombay
Technological Institute and taught there from 1961 to 1964.
He is now a member of the staff of the Bauman Higher Technical
Institute, Moscow.
Specialized equipment is
available on a large scale
at the Bombay institute.
Using these modern ma¬
chines junior students learn
the basics of metal techno¬
logy and senior students
become familiar with their
chosen specialities. Right,
milling machine fitted with
a special device for studying
the stress at the toolpoint.
Unesco - Boucas
