THE WORLD IS
HEADING FOR
A COLLISION
by Gunnar Myrdal
WE must have the candour to face the fact that,
as a prominent American agricultural econo¬
mist, Professor Earl L. Butz, has expressed it: "The world is
on a collision course. When the massive force of an
exploding world population meets the much more stable
trend line of world food production, something must give.
Unless we give increased attention now to the softening of
the impending collision, many parts of the world within
a decade will be skirting a disaster of such a proportion
as to threaten the peace and stability of the Western
world."
In contemplating the threatening world food crisis we
have to recall that in several very big countries like India
and Pakistan and many smaller ones, it would have
already broken out, had it not been for the availability of
large-scale food imports granted without foreign exchange
compensation, mainly from the surpluses in the United
States.
An intensification of the food crisis would create an
internationally intolerable situation. In spite of all tension
and clashes, we are now much more one world than
we were a generation ago. Communications have revolu¬
tionized our relations. I have no doubt that when the
crisis comes, people in the rich countries will suddenly
respond.
If the lid of production restriction is lifted in the United
States, food production could rise very much; Canada,
Australia and a few other countries are in a similar
situation. But we should not expect these countries to
send this food and carry the financial burden alone.
Other rich countries will have to share the financial
burden, but they will do it only if this food aid is inter¬
nationalized. Under these conditions it is well that we have
an international agency, working under the auspices of the
U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization, The World Food
Programme, already in operation on an experimental scale,
and that according to unanimous opinion it has been run
economically and effectively.
Internationally organized food aid, however, can under no
circumstances, be a permanent solution of the problem: it
GUNNAR MYRDAL is one of the world's best-known figures in
sociology and economics. A member of the Royal Academy of
Sciences in Sweden and former executive secretary of the United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe, he is now a professor
of international economy at Stockholm University. This article is
the conclusion of a lecture he delivered in November 1965 at
Rome under the auspices of FAO.
can merely bridge over an emergency. As a staff econo¬
mist in the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Lester R. Brown,
has recently pointed out the increase in grain consumption
by 1980, necessary in order to meet the expected population
increase and a modest rise of 10 percent in per capita con¬
sumption, would boost grain production requirements by
almost as much as the current output of North America
and Western Europe combined.
A similarly forbidding calculation could be made of the
shipping facilities necessary for an extensive food aid
program. The sharp impact of that type of flight into
fantasy is that, even if for a short time the first shocks
of the food crisis can be absorbed by aid from the rich
countries, the very great increase in agricultural produc¬
tion that is urgently needed if disaster is to be averted
must begin to take place in the vast underdeveloped regions.
How this is going to be accomplished is the main busi¬
ness of the agricultural ministries in underdeveloped coun¬
tries, of this organization, and of the present conference.
Even if reforms can have their full effects only in the
somewhat longer run, it is urgent that they are under¬
taken without delay and that they are planned in such
a way that they will have as much result as possible, as
quickly as possible. As a matter of fact, I feel much less
concerned about how things will look at the turn of the
next century. In the long run much will happen; we will
perhaps have entirely new techniques to produce the
food; the entire world situation will be different in all sorts
of ways; forecasts are bound to be proven wrong; perhaps
we may feel optimistic that things will in some way take
a radically new turn as we have often seen happening
before. It is the years to come in this decade and the
next about which I am worried. In the short run, our
forecasts are more reliable and they point to danger of
world calamity.
BOUT the policy measures to be undertaken I
will restrict myself to a few brief observations.
I want first to emphasize that, contrary to the experience
in the developed countries, what increase of food production
there has been in -the underdeveloped countries not enough
to match the population increase, but there has been an
increase has mainly been due to an extension of the
cultivated area, while the yields per acre have hardly
risen at all; this is true even in a country like India with
a very high man/land ratio and very low yields. New
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
21

HEADING FOR A COLLISION (Cont'd)
Have we passed the point of no return?
22
cultivable land is becoming scarce or else the costs of
cultivating it are forbiddingly high. Yields are generally
very low, which by itself should be reason for hope, if
there could be such a change in agricultural technology
that the yields would rise.
While, of course, there is much technology available,
the application of which is continuously proving itself to
be of importance, nevertheless there is to a large extent
need for a entirely new technology that has to be invented
and applied. This is due to two circumstances. For one
thing, most of the underdeveloped countries are in the
tropical and sub-tropical zones and there has been very
little of that specialized and localized practical research
which in the developed countries has made possible the
rapid rise in yields.
We are all aware of the disappointments that are often
experienced when applying fertilizers, for instance, or trying
to use seeds which should give bigger crops. Very much
more programmed, practically directed, specialized and loca¬
lized research into food production in these areas with
their particular climates and soil conditions, would be
warranted.
Moreover and this is too often overlooked even by
agricultural experts while from the beginning agricultural
technology in the now developed countries could reckon
with a decrease of labour in agriculture, most under¬
developed countries will have to adjust their technology to
an agricultural labour force that is now under-utilized and
for a generation will rise in numbers about as fast as the
present very rapid population increase.
FORTUNATELY, the road seems now to be open¬
ing for a much more determined policy of
spreading birth control among the masses. But we would
deceive ourselves if we counted on a rapid decline in fer¬
tility. Also, the relatively greater number of children, which
is a reflection of the higher fertility up till now, implies that
the population increase has a tremendous momentum. The
braking distance is so long.
This does not mean that a decrease in fertility would
not always and immediately improve income per head and
living levels, by lessening the dependency burden in the
families, but it does imply that the birth curve in a nation
will not be lowered as fast as if the age distribution were
a more normal one, adjusted to a more stable population.
Finally, the effects on the labour force are delayed for
fifteen years and will be very inconsequential for a whole
generation. The future workers are already born or will
soon be born.
To this comes the fact that industrialization in most of
the underdeveloped countries, even if it proceeded much
faster than it does, will not for decades absorb much addi¬
tional labour. I would like too to spell this out in a little
more detail but just cannot do it. You will have to take
it from me that the increase in labour demand is a function
not only of the speed of industrialization but of the level
from which it starts. Under certain circumstances indus¬
trialization will even throw out more labour in traditional
industry and craft than it gives new employment. This is
no reason for not trying to industrialize as fast as possible:
when once a higher level of industrialization is reached,
industry will increasingly employ more labour on a large
scale. Meanwhile, however, a swelling flow of refugees
from the countryside to the cities is not productive.
All this amounts to saying that agricultural technology
must try to increase yields per acre by putting to more
effective work a labour force which is now already under¬
utilized to a vast extent and which will be rapidly increas¬
ing for decades. This new, extremely intensive labour
technology is in part yet to be developed by fresh research.
A substantial and rapid increase in agriculture yields
has rarely, if ever, occurred in traditional self-sufficiency
farming, where illiteracy is prevalent and the relation
between the farmer and his land is such that he has little
possibility and little incentive to exert himself.
Among the several institutional problems raised by this
observation I would give high priority to the need for
land reform in the broadest sense of the word. It would
have a different direction in countries with different
systems of ownership and tenancy and it has to be accom¬
panied by other induced changes in regard to education,
marketing, availability of credits, etc. It must often be
costly in order to be effective in raising yields, and I think
we should begin to consider whether international credits
could not be given to make it more possible for under¬
developed countries to speed up land reforms and under¬
take all the other measures necessary to render these
reforms really productive.
But that assumes that these underdeveloped countries,
or rather those in these countries who have the political
power, begin to take seriously the urgent need for
reorganizing the relations between the toiler and the land
he tills. I think it is tragic and a contributory cause of
no small importance to the grave situation we face today
that local vested interests have made a sham of land
reform in so many countries.
FAO has for many years courageously and competently
laboured with land reform, and I have a feeling that in
recent years it has been reaping results in a greater
interest in many countries to do something effectively to
solve the problem, even if in other countries I sense a
tendency to try to forget about it and focus public atten¬
tion only on the more technical problems.
I fear that we are becoming accustomed to living
on happily and attending to the business of the
day while not giving much thought to the possibility or proba¬
bility of the unthinkable ahead of us. To this category I
reckon the outcome of the atomic armament race and the
less publicized preparation for biological and chemical war¬
fare; as time goes on without effective intergovernmental
agreement to stop this development, improvements in tech¬
nology must make it easier and cheaper for all sorts of
countries to equip themselves for genocide.
To this category of unthinkably menacing calamities
belongs also the gathering food crisis. We seem to be
taking the pattern from the entirely rational way in which
we as individuals live on happily from day to day and work
and enjoy ourselves, though we know we are soon
approaching the personal catastrophe of death. Otherwise
life would be unbearable; nothing can be done about it
anyhow; and our nations and mankind do not perish with
us but will survive.
But this attitude rational for an individual is danger¬
ously irrational for society, when we take it as members
of a nation and of mankind. Social catastrophes are differ¬
ent from the certainty of death for the individual, as they
can and should be averted. And if we do not use foresight
and take measures against them, we all perish and there
will be no posterity.

*?
