Mainstay of life
for 1,100 million
human beings
by Stanley Baron
Most of the world's
rice Is produced In Asia
where the average
person eats about
220 pounds a year.
The greater part goes no
further than the farm
where it is grown;
less than one-twentieth
moves across frontiers as
imports or exports. Right,
harvest time for Indian rice
farmers in Terai, at
the foot of the Himalayas.
O
16
|N any given morning this month 1,100 million
human beings will rise to face a future in which
the whole of their lives will be dominated by a single
word: rice. They are the rice-eating peoples of the world,
spread through the monsoon areas of Asia and elsewhere,
for whom rice means practically the whole of their diet,
nearly all their agriculture and much of their hopes.
Once again, like their ancestors throughout history, they
will sow the seed when the monsoon rains arrive and
before the river floods have come. As the waters rise,
the plants will grow. Later the water will drop back grad¬
ually until the paddy field is dry and the harvest can be
gathered. This is the moment of truth for which every
family has waited. Some will know a reasonable plenty
enough for modest rations lasting the year round. Many,
probably the majority, will have barely enough for an ade¬
quate standard of life. Others, having sold off their sur¬
pluses in attempts to make ends meet, will again end the
year in debt to the itinerant rice trader.
For more than a third of the population of the world
this is the round of life. Most will live it at the lowest
level of efficiency, health and comfort. It is to them that
the Food and Agriculture Organization has dedicated the
twelve months of 1966 as International Rice Year.
Supported by nearly every rice-producing country in the
world, the message of Rice Year is that the old ways
will no longer avail; men must use every device of science
to extract the maximum from the rice fields.
In 23 countries, special efforts will be made for the mul¬
tiplication and distribution of improved seeds, the expand¬
ed use of fertilizer, better water management, mechaniza¬
tion programmes, and pest and disease control. Besides
direct aid to farmers, it is hoped that rice experimental
stations will be increased and at least one apprentice
training centre established. There will be field demonstra¬
tions of machinery, equipment and cultural techniques.
An educational drive will include films and the distribu¬
tion, through extension services, of booklets, pamphlets
and monographs on improved methods of cultivation,
marketing and storage. Television and radio will be asked
to broadcast special programmes, and schools, universities
and rural centres will provide exhibitions and lectures. At
least 16 countries will hold National Rice Weeks. Four
of them, Dahomey, Japan, the United Arab Republic and
the United States, will print special postage stamps.
On the scientific side, fellowships for training and
research are being offered by India, Japan, the Nether¬
lands and the United Kingdom while, as a spur to the men
already in the fields and laboratories, there will be an inter¬
national competition for the best research papers. These

moves are especially important, for the application of
science and modern technology, rather than a mere exten¬
sion of the paddy fields, offers the best hope of a break¬
through.
Up to now, except in a very few countries, neither
science nor technology has kept pace with the plough.
In bold attempts to feed their bursting populations, Asia
has in a decade added more than 25 million acres to
her paddy, Latin America more than 4 million acres and
Africa about 750,000 acres.
It is harder to know the facts about Mainland China,
the world's biggest producer and consumer. The govern¬
ment has issued no official figures since reporting a big
increase in production in 1958, and unkind weather in
succeeding years seems to have held the country back
somewhat. But last year's harvests probably added about
90 million tons of paddy (rice still in husk) to the rest of
the world's total, making some 260 million tons in all.
Leaving Mainland China aside, world production has
gone up In less than a decade by an average of 25 per¬
cent. All of which sounds and is indeed heartening.
But one must also ask: how much more was produced
per acre? This is the acid test, for gains in yields are
fundamental to lasting progress. At present the gain is
minimal: 1.4 percent per year in the world as a whole.
The developed countries, none of them big producers
by Asian standards, have made the greatest advances in
rice production. Even allowing for the fact that their crops
are grown on prime acreage whereas Asia must use big
areas of marginal land, the following figures, showing
average yields per acre in 1961-64, tell their own story:
Europe: 800,000 acres - 4,527 lb per acre
United States: 1,792,500 acres - 3,996 lb
Latin America: 10,700,000 acres - 1,665 lb
Asia: 208,625,000 acres - 1,602 lb
Africa: 8,175,000 acres - 1,539 lb
Australia, with only 57,500 acres, has achieved a world
record of 5,958 lbs per acre.
The general gain of 1.4 percent undoubtedly covers some
big individual advances, where scientists, economists and
farmers have been able to work effectively together. The
fact remains that primitive cultural practices, poor seeds,
shortage and cost of fertilizer, and inadequate irrigation
and drainage too often rob fields of their full potential.
The reason is partly economic. The greater part of the
world's rice goes no farther than the farm where it is
grown. Less than one twentieth moves across national
frontiers in the form of exports or imports. Much will
be stored under primitive conditions, subject to damage
CONT'D ON PAGE 21
17

FAO
THE CYCLE OE RICE
A collection of 18th century engravings reproduced
through the courtesy of the Victoria and Albert
Museum, London, portrays the seasons of rice
cultivation and the labours that lead to the harvest
of the oldest of man's cultivated grains. Many of
the methods they depict are still used in Asia today
(left). The complete collection of 24 prints was
executed about 1760 by a London engraver, John
June, and was printed by three publishers. A now
unknown artist, who signed himself "A.H.", redrew
the original Chinese works, which are believed to
have been brought back from Canton by an East
India trading vessel. At that time Chinese objects
of all kinds were greatly prized as curios. The
collection was purchased by the Victoria and Albert
Museum in 1887 and is now combined in a single
volume with a similar collection illustrating the manu¬
facture Of Silk. Photos & Victoria and Albert Museum, London

^^¿ste/hct tiny /o (tanáfi cKnf
&¿ c/ii
<?
y c/i& -ycuiny lic&
jSSSSRrlflfeffK
¿A& cieccJ r/iina,
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE CYCLE OF BICE (Cont'd)
J^£iz--yiny is/t Críe ¿¡ftea-t¿e¿> in ticfu)
*-^sstea-fcinu, irte rtuö-fui
2> ftte¿)ftcn*?
Críe t^'ce
/innotcj-iniz>
Photos © Victoria and Albert Museum, London

BICE (Cont'd)
Spectacular results and astronomic losses
by rats, mice, insects and rot, awaiting primitive and waste¬
ful milling, before being eaten by the farm family or sent
to the town or village market.
Here again, however, it is necessary to make a quali¬
fication: what looks like waste in western eyes may not
seem so in the East, where the cost of a new technique
is usually measured first against a tried tradition and only
finally against necessity i.e., the amount of rice needed
to sustain life. Nor are all traditional practices wrong.
They have enabled the average Asian to eat about 220
pounds of rice a year.
Still, this production level does not meet the require¬
ments of a good and expanding life. To the farmer tied
to archaic ways, International Rice Year intends to convey
the point that the paddy can mean more than bare
subsistence it can mean a bicycle, a better house, better
clothes for the family and education for the children, all
the things that make life more than an endless battle
with poverty.
VEN the most sophisticated consumer usually
i knows little of rice beyond the fact that it comes
in two main sorts the indica, or long-grained, and the
japónica, short-grained. The former commonly grown in
the tropics is the kind the housewife thinks of when she
asks for Patna rice for curries.
Long, medium and short, about 7,000 varieties of rice
grow over a wider range of latitudes, climates and altitudes,
and soils than any other cereal crop. Thriving round the
equator, rice has also been cultivated profitably as far north
as Czechoslovakia and Hungary. It has been successfully
established at 10,000 feet in the Himalayas and in the
tropical swamps of Liberia. The only limiting factor, in fact,
seems to be water; for although there are drought-resistant
varieties, and research is going on in the hope of finding
more and better ones, none at present matches the yield
or reliability of rice grown in water.
The very adaptability of rice has to some extent held
back research until comparatively modern times; for when
a crop is so readily grown, there is, as has been said,
a strong temptation to cope with increased demands sim¬
ply by increasing the growing areas rather than by con¬
centrating on improvement of the yields. But, if mankind
is to be adequately fed, both must be multiplied.
The scientist's attack on the problem is four-pronged. It
includes cultivation, whether by irrigation or otherwise;
improved varieties and better seeds; efficient fertilizing;
and effective pest, disease and weed control.
The economist must find ways of making it profitable
for the farmer to use these scientific improvements.
Finally, linking farmer, scientist, government official and
economist, it is the extension worker's job to give demons¬
trations and instruction in the approved new methods.
Through a number of projects, carried out with the aid
of the United Nations Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance or the Special Fund, FAO experts have en¬
abled some countries to produce spectacular results.
Á striking example is the United Arab Republic, where
the problem was how to increase the crop without increas¬
ing the area. With 23 million inhabitants, the country has
less than 7 million cultivable acres. Every available square
foot has to 6e used. Called on for advice, FAO sent in
Dr. C.L. Pan, a Chinese expert. Studying the varieties
of rice grown, he decided, after many tests involving crop¬
ping, controlled irrigation, response to fertilizers and
resistance to disease, that one stood head and shoulders,
or perhaps one should say awns and stalks, above all
others. It was a variety labeled Y.M.47 in the U.A.R.
Ministry of Agriculture's seed stores. At Dr. Pan's suggest¬
ion, this was singled out for cultivation. The result has
been so successful that, since 1954, rice production has
doubled.
In Sudan, three FAO experts in succession have helped
to double rice yields through the use of improved varieties.
Now, after eight years of endeavour and assistance, Sudan
is able to grow enough, if necessary, for self-sufficiency
and could even produce a surplus for export.
Other projects are going ahead in Somalia, the Liberian
swamplands and Guinea. All have an importance beyond
the countries immediately concerned, for Africa needs
rice as the next step forward to a better diet than maize,
millet, yams or cassava flour, the present staples. There
is good reason to believe her present sporadic production
can be greatly increased once some of the difficulties,
including lack of irrigation, can be overcome.
Suitable rice varieties, however, vary from latitude to
latitude, as well as by country, and breeding has there¬
fore to take account of many conditions. Rice that does
well under irrigation, for example, would be useless on
African savannas or the South American prairies, where
it must be able to resist drought.
I NTERNATIONAL Rice Year will focus attention
also on the astronomic losses caused by
inefficient storage and processing. In countries where
storage amounts to little more than piling the paddy on the
ground, it is common for up to half of the crop to be spoiled,
or eaten by insects and rodents. In humid areas with a hot
climate, up to 30 percent loss is quite normal, and when
the paddy is dried and milled by the prevailing crude
methods another 8 to 12 per cent may be lost.
In Burma, one of the world's great rice-producing and
rice-exporting countries, the storage picture has been
changed by FAO experts who came at the government's
invitation in 1955. Improved storage units there now have
a capacity of 3 million tons. Besides reducing losses, they
enable the crop to await optimum market prices. At the
same time, low milling yields were found to be due in great
part to inefficient drying techniques. A Dutch expert, Gus
Huysmans, helped to install two artificial driers and has
since gone on to set up 12 state-owned rice mills that
demonstrate the value of modern machinery and methods.
In every country aiming at self-sufficiency a ton saved is ¿\
a ton gained, with an immediate benefit to the economy.
Processing and storing are indeed so vital in the lives
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

BICE (Cont'd)
Protected from pests
and market fluctuations
of the rice-growing countries of the tropics that FAO hopes
to include model projects for each as part of the Interna¬
tional Rice Year, bringing specialized knowledge and facil¬
ities down to farm and village level, where they are most
needed.
Technical knowledge and application of research on rice
in the Far East are co-ordinated by the International Rice
Commission, originally set up by FAO and now with its
own secretariat at Bangkok. Through its working parties,
dealing with rice production and protection, agricultural
engineering (including irrigation), and fertilizers, it covers
every aspect of the agronomy of rice from plant breeding
and seed production to storage.
But of course rice also means trade and must mean so
increasingly, so that developing countries can gain foreign
exchange and thus build up their economies. For several
countries, among which Burma, Cambodia, Thailand and
Viet-Nam are outstanding, rice is by far the greatest export
earner. Unlike wheat, coffee and some other key commo¬
dities, however, it is not the subject of any formal trade
agreement. Instead, FAO member countries most concerned
have preferred to approach the problems of the world
market through the FAO's Consultative Subcommittee on
the Economic Aspects of Rice. Set up in 1955, it Is
counterpart of the International Rice Commission, doing
in the world of economics what the commission does in the
field of research and practice.
Its task, among others, is to keep international trade
under constant review and to aid the rice-producing coun¬
tries, whether exporters or importers, to develop their na¬
tional production plans, for their common good as a com¬
munity of trading nations and their individual good as
producers. The Consultative Subcommittee does this
through regular meetings of national rice experts who survey
the current market situation, as well as the long range
outlook, and exchange ideas on current problems and
plans.
A Cambodian teacher
gives his class an
on-the-spot lesson on
the cycle of rice
cultivation the hard
round of ploughing,
harrowing, planting and
reaping that brings
the harvest.
As the schoolboys squat
amid the rice stalks,
buffaloes on their
way to pasture and geese
gleaning for fallen grains
cross the landscape like
figures In an ancient frieze.
© Pierre-André Pittet. Geneva
O
22
I NE of the peculiarities of the world rice trade
as compared with other commodités is that
three quarters of it is carried on among developing
countries. In the richer, industrialized countries, rice,
though enjoyed "as a change," plays very little real part In
the national diets. Japan is practically alone among the
developed countries in eating it in such plenty that she
imports large quantities. Moreover, exporting to developed
countries faces fierce competition from United States and
Italian rice.
But improvements in quality and grading, closer attention
to market requirements, publicity compaigns and market
research all these, together with the abolition of Europe's
preferential tariffs, have been suggested as means of
aiding the exporting countries' sales.
Still, the largest market opportunities lie among the
developing countries themselves. Here there is the knotty
problem that, while some are trying to push their rice ex¬
ports, others, for currency reasons, have to restrict their
imports. A possible solution to this dilemma, being studied
by economic experts at FAO, is some form of infraregional
trade arrangement within groups of countries that are pre¬
pared to pursue their production and marketing policies
on a regional rather than on a national basis.
Meantime, the very precariousness of the rice trade
contains its own lesson. It Is that, if man is to survive, he
must co-operate. In the world of the paddy field, of back-
breaking labour under a hot sun on too often unresponsive
soil, this is especially so, because it Is by rice that a third of
the world lives. That third, by the end of the century, will,
at the present rate of population growth, have become more
than a half. Within the working lifetimes of children now
being born, the numbers of the rice-eating Asians may
vastly exceed the population of the whole of the rest of the
world put together.
It is to take up the monumental challenge of feeding
these people that International Rice Year has been laun¬
ched.
