TO BE
OR NOT TO BE
that will be the question
by Binay Ran]an Sen
Director-General, FAO
N
10
ATIONS are increasingly aware of the implica¬
tions of an unprecedented rate of population
growth for the future well-being of mankind.
The first World Population Conference which was held
in Rome over ten years ago concerned itself mainly with
the promotion of genetic research and the collection and
co-ordination of demographic statistics, and made a valu¬
able contribution to the international understanding of
population problems.
During the decade that has elapsed since then, the study
of population growth has assumed critical importance as
a major factor in determining the pace of economic and
social progress in the developing countries. Nevertheless,
it has to be admitted that while the consequences of the
continuation of the current situation have not escaped the
attention of individual scientists, historians and sociologists,
international organizations, including the United Nations,
had to observe great caution in discussing matters of popu¬
lation policy, especially those relating to population stabi¬
lization, in order to avoid hurting the susceptibilities of
member nations. The 1965 Conference therefore initiates
a welcome departure from the approach that has so far
marked the consideration of population problems under the
auspices of the United Nations.
It would, I believe, be correct to say that among the
international intergovernmental organizations which have
consciously and progressively approached the subject with
an open mind and have tried to set the problem of popula¬
tion growth in a proper and realistic perspective in terms
of their goals is FAO, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations.
FAO's primary tasks, as laid down in its Constitution, are
to assist member nations to raise the nutritional levels of
their peoples through improved production and distribution
of food, to raise the living standards of rural populations
and to contribute to an expanding world trade in agricultural
products. In carrying out all these tasks the question of
population growth comes inescapably into play as a basic
factor.
The first opportunity we had to have the problem pre¬
sented authoritatively to our member governments was in
1959 when Professor Arnold Toynbee, the eminent historian,
delivered the first McDougall Memorial Lecture at the 10th
Session of the FAO Conference (see page 12). Professor
Toynbee's address made an immediate impact, but it was
clear from the reactions of the delegates present that world
public opinion was not yet ready to face the issue and
discuss the implications.
Two years later, at the next FAO biennial conference
in 1961, we invited Mr. John D. Rockefeller III who devoted
most of his McDougall Memorial Lecture to the theme of
population and food supplies. He said: "The grim fact of
population growth cuts across all the basic needs of
mankind and, more than any other single factor, frustrates
man's achievement of his higher needs." From the reac¬
tions to Mr. Rockefeller's address it appeared that the
subject was no longer anathema and that there was a
possibility for this problem to be discussed more freely
than before.
At the Economic and Social Council in 1957, and again
in 1958, I had raised the problem of hunger and want as a
reflection of underproductivity and pleaded for concerted
action by the United Nations family. In November 1959, the
FAO conference approved my proposal to launch the Free¬
dom from Hunger Campaign in order to create a world-wide
awareness of the perilous dimensions of hunger and malnu¬
trition and of the urgency of taking timely action tô avert a
deepening crisis. The wide support that the Campaign
received from its very inception was a proof of the growing
anxiety concerning the problem and the impetus it gave
has been growing ever since.
The year 1962 was marked by the historic pronounce¬
ments of Pope John XXIII. In his Encyclical "Pacem In
Terris" Pope John dwelt at some length on man's rights
and duties in a changing world. The great good man did
not live to see how profoundly he had stirred the cons¬
cience and thinking of mankind, nor to follow up the implica¬
tions of the great Encyclical.

The general world
outlook is
indeed alarming.
In some of
the most heavily
populated areas
the outbreak
of serious famines
within the next
five to ten
years cannot
be excluded.
And it is a simple
arithmetical
calculation that
if food output
everywhere just
kept pace
with population
growth, by the end
of this century
the number of people
who would
be subject to hunger
and malnutrition
would be
double what
it is today.'
The Encyclical states that any human society, if it is to be
well-ordered and productive, must lay down as a foundation
the principle that every human being is a person; meaning
that his nature is endowed with intelligence and free will,
and that, by virtue of this, he has "rights and duties of his
own, flowing direct and simultaneously from his very nature,
which are therefore universal, inviolable, and inalienable."
The first of these "universal, inviolable, and inalienable
rights" is defined as "the right to life and a worthy standard
of living", comprising "the right to the means which are
necessary and suitable for the proper development of life",
including primarily food and other necessary goods and
services.
The first of the "universal, inviolable, and inalienable
rights" is a dual right, not merely the right to life but also
the right to a worthy standard of living. The text of the
Encyclical does not itself comment on the implications of
the stipulation of this dual right, affecting, as it does, the
issue of the rapid rate of world population growth.
The problem before mankind is that whatever practical
new measures, may be taken nationally and internationally,
now or in the near future, aiming at the accelerating expan¬
sion of productive capacity for the provision of food and
other means of livelihood, a continuation of the present
trends of population growth may well lead to a situation
when "the right to life" of those not yet living, that is of
larger and larger numbers of future generations, will no
longer be a right parallel to, but will be in conflict with,
"the right to a worthy standard of living."
In 1962 FAO launched a number of basic studies relating
to its major fields of work in preparation for the World
Food Congress which was held in 1963. One of these
studies, "The Third World Food Survey," clearly showed
that 10 to 15 per cent of the world population are under¬
nourished, and up to half suffer from hunger or malnutrition
or both. This survey also furnished food supply targets,
both short-term and long-term, taking into consideration
population projections and the need to eliminate under-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

THE QUESTION (Cont'd)
nutrition and provide a modest improvement in the nutri¬
tional quality of the diet.
To reach the short-term target by 1975 it would be
necessary, according to this survey, to obtain an annual
growth rate of 4 per cent in food supplies in the developing
countries. This increased rate of food supplies has not
been reached so far in the developing regions; in fact, the
average annual rate of increase in food supplies during the
last five years has not exceeded 2.5 per cent.
It is against these developments that at the 38th Inter¬
national Eucharistie Congress held in Bombay in 1964, as
head of one of the members of the United Nations family,
for the first time I spoke candidly on the urgent need to
face the question of population stabilization. I said:
"The important factor to watch is that the development
of available resources and the production of goods and
services keep pace with population growth. Where there
is maladjustment between the two, famine, pestilence, wars
have in the past intervened to restore the balance. Can
mankind reconcile itself to this kind of remedy in this age
of science which has opened up almost unlimited possibili¬
ties for satisfying basic human needs? Can we any more
turn our faces away from the concept of family planning
when the alternative is starvation and death?"
In May 1965, a resolution of the World Health Organiza¬
tion authorized WHO "to provide, on request, technical
advice on birth control methods to its member govern¬
ments"; this is another important step forward.
Early in 1965 in New York I addressed the United Nations
Population Commission, and said that the prospect seemed
dark indeed unless there was a combined world-wide effort
to raise agricultural productivity in the developing countries
along with determined measures to control population
growth.
The majority of the Commission felt that the social and
economic development of the developing countries would
be considerably accelerated by population stabilization
measures and were definitely in favour of public action.
Some members, however, expressed the opinion that the
difficulties inherent in the rapid population growth could
be overcome by vigorous and well-planned measures to
promote economic development and not by attempting the
promotion of family planning. They would rely heavily on
the social and cultural checks resulting from industrialization
and urban development.
But what is the real issue? Is it what might be the ideal
solution in the long run, or is it whether in the cir¬
cumstances of the developing countries today, the growth
rate in agricultural productivity can be increased fast
enough to meet the essential food needs of the immediate
future?
It is now less than seven years since there was any
appreciable increase in food production per head of the
world's population, seven very lean years for the developing
countries. In two regions in particular, the Far East and
Latin America, per capita production is still less than it was
before the last war, more than a quarter of a century ago.
Many countries in these regions have been able to main¬
tain their wholly inadequate dietary levels only by reducing
exports, or by increasing imports of food, including in some
cases a very heavy dependence on food aid.
Where this increased demand is not matched by a
corresponding increase in supplies, food prices increase
rapidly. This has a particularly serious inflationary effect,
for in developing countries food represents much the lar¬
gest part of total consumer expenditures. Such has been
the case in India, where rising food prices are causing
great hardship to consumers.
The general world outlook is indeed, if I may say so,
alarming. In some of the most heavily populated areas the
CONT'D ON PAGE 14


THIRTY-FIVE YEARS
FROM NOW (2000 A.D.)
THE WORLD'S POPULATION
WILL REACH 7,000 MILUON
AND WILL NEED
60 million teachers
for 2,000 million children aged 5 to
14 (35 per class). Today there are 10
million teachers.
7 million doctors
to provide one doctor per thousand
population-the proposed WHO mini¬
mum. The world now has 1,500,000
doctors.
3 times more milk, meat, eggs and fish
than are produced today, if the people
of every country are to be adequately
fed.

^3
THE QUESTION (Cont'd)
A simple arithmetical calculation
P. Almasy, Paris
14
outbreak of serious famines within the next five to ten
years cannot be excluded. And it is a simple arithmetical
calculation that if food output everywhere just kept pace
with population growth at the present level of consumption,
by the end of this century the number of people who would
be subject to hunger and malnutrition would be double what
it is today.
The situation clearly requires specific production targets
on the basis of realistic figures of population growth; and
this again means working for a much higher rate of agri¬
cultural productivity in the developing countries rather than
attempting, at least in the foreseeable future, any significant
extension of cultivable land.
We have calculated that a sustained increase of 4 per
cent per annum in food production, as against the present
average of 2 1/2 per cent in population increase, over the
next 15 years, would be necessary to avoid any serious
breakdown of the current precarious balance between
population and food supplies. The question is, can this
rate be achieved by the developing countries?
There can be no doubt that in most of the developing
countries it should be possible to increase crop yields
per acre significantly by judicious investment of resources
in land improvement, application of fertilizers, use of more
efficient tools and machinery, improved crop varieties and
seeds, and in plant disease control. To start with, they
will have the advantage of underdevelopment itself as a
factor favouring a rapid rate of growth.
It is true that our knowledge of the basic factors for
improving tropical agriculture is still very inadequate.
But we know that there is enough scientific and technical
knowledge available from temperate zone research for
revolutionizing backward agricultural practices in most
parts of the world; in the initial stages all that is necessary
is to adapt this knowledge to local conditions.
The greatest impediments to progress however, lie in
social and institutional factors. The farmer, who for the
past centuries has remained static, largely due to lack of
incentives and to general neglect, must now be assisted
to step into the market economy with the hope of a better
return for his labour. He must be given price and other
incentives and also, what is equally important, adequate
marketing facilities for his produce.
Special attention will have to be given to provide basic
education to the farmer to make him more receptive to
new ideas. He must be given proprietary rights in his land
so that he feels that he can improve his conditions by the
fruits of his own labour.
All this will also need massive investment for which the
domestic savings of these countries will be inadequate.
We calculate that to enable the developing countries to
achieve a rate of growth of 5 per cent per annum in
national income, the amount of foreign capital inflow by
1975 should reach about 50 billion dollars a year (at
1960 prices), as against the current, almost stagnant, rate
of about 7.5 billion dollars. Much will also depend on the
expansion of export markets for the products of developing
countries, since the bulk of foreign exchange receipts of
these countries at present about 75 per cent are provided
by commodity exports.
Having in view the urgency of stepping up agricultural
production and productivity, FAO is now working on an
"Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development". The
Plan is designed to provide an international frame of ref¬
erence for our member nations in their national planning and
one within which donors and recipients can see more

ft V
t
A*
>-
O Holmès-Lebel - Ray Pinney Smiles and expert care for newly-born children in a European maternity hospital.
Progress in medicine and hygiene
has reduced infant mortality in more than 60 per cent
of the countries of the world since 1960.
clearly the priorities in respect of agricultural development
in developing countries.
As we know development policies are determined and
implemented by national governments, acting either unila¬
terally or in concert with other governments in regional or
other groupings, or as members of world bodies which
influence international policies.
The Indicative World Plan will not imply any departure
from this fundamental principle of national and international
action for development. It will exert an influence to the
extent that its analyses and recommendations enjoy the
confidence of governments and of the bilateral and multi¬
lateral agencies dispensing aid. The success of the plan
will of course depend on the co-operation and participation
of all concerned in its formulation and application.
What then is the answer to the question I have posed?
Taking all relevant factors into account, can we expect the
growth rate in agricultural productivity in developing
countries to keep pace with the population growing at the
present rate?
If we go by the experience of some countries who have
gone through this process of development, the prospect is
by no means reassuring. It took Japan more than 40 years,
beginning from the third quarter of the last century, to
double her agricultural production the average annual rate
of increase did not exceed 2 per cent. The population
growth in Japan during this period was below one per cent
per annum. There was also a parallel growth of industriali¬
zation which relieved land of the population pressure.
The experience of the Soviet Union, which started with the
advantage of vast unused and under-used physical resour¬
ces, has not been any better.
I can therefore only repeat what 1 said to the U.N. Popu¬
lation Commission: "One is left wondering whether the
large increases can in fact be achieved over a decade
or so. Doubts arise because the necessary effort to reach
the targets may not be made. The financial resources
required may not be forthcoming. A sustained effort to
expand production may be lost in a feeling of despair."
The question of population stabilization must therefore
be viewed against this background. The demographers will
tell us that for the next 20 or 25 years the current pattern
of short-run growth in population is likely to continue more
or less unchanged. Despite all these so-called food
"surpluses" that we can possibly muster, the hard possibi¬
lities are that we may not be able to forestall and avoid
some large-scale breakdowns in the next few decades, at
least in some parts of the world. The greatest danger in
that respect lies in the Far East.
Yet if such large-scale breakdowns are to be brought
within a measure of control, then, side by side with a
concerted effort to increase productivity of agriculture in
the developing countries, population stabilization must be
undertaken simultaneously as a social policy of urgent
priority without further delay. It should be undertaken
nationally under the moral leadership of national leaders
on as wide a scale as possible, supported internationally,
not only through provision of scientific information but
also with the necessary equipment and trained staff as well
as finance.
The next two or three decades will be a critical period
in man's history, and will either see the beginning of
mankind as a whole taking responsibility for its destiny
or the drift towards disaster. But inaction will be a counsel
of despair. Man with his inexhaustible resources of intelli¬
gence and inventiveness is capable of meeting the challenge.
What is necessary is to put moral ardour and unbending
will into the heart of this intelligence. Only thus will human
fellowship and human rights acquire their true meaning.
15
