'ONE DAY'S
EXPENDITUDE ON ARMS'
A gift of $700,000 to be used in the
fight against illiteracy has been made
to Unesco by Iran. The gift was
announced to the Unesco Executive
Board, meeting in Paris on May 2, by
Mr. René Máheu, Director-General of
Unesco. Mr. Maheu read a letter he
had received from the Shah, who
explained that the contribution was
"the equivalent of one day's expendi¬
ture under our military budget." The
Shah's action follows the proposal he
made to the Unesco-sponsored World
Congress of Ministers of Education on
the Eradication of illiteracy, held in
Teheran last September, that all
nations should help to finance literacy
by making small deductions from their
military budgets. At a press confer¬
ence in Unesco House on May 2,
Mr. Fereydoun Hoveyda, Iranian Vice-
Minister of Foreign Affairs, announced
that the Shah had addressed a solemn
appeal to all governments to make a
special contribution to assist the
struggle against illiteracy throughout
the world. Mr. Hoveyda added that
his country would be ready to repeat
its donation if there were a favourable
response to the Shah's appeal. Below
we publish the text of the Shah's letter
to Unesco :
You will remember that at the opening of the World Congress of
Ministers of Education on the Eradication of Illiteracy, 1 said that, as
many of the countries afflicted by this scourge have insufficient financial
resources, international solidarity can and must come into play. Speaking
of the possible sources of finance, I added that it would perhaps not
be so very fanciful to ask the governments of the world to devote a
negligible proportion of their military budgets to this great work. I also
said that so far as we were concerned, we had made a national effort
of this sort by setting up the Education Corps, and that we were ready
to extend our efforts internationally for the good of all peoples.
I am now happy to tell you that as the Iranian year begins, with the
budget just voted by Parliament, I have decided, in pursuance of the
statement I made last September and of the recommendations of the
Teheran Congress, to make available to Unesco the equivalent of one
day's expenditure under our military budget, in order to assist in the
struggle against illiteracy throughout the world. This represents a sum
of about $700,000 drawn from thé Iranian military budget for the year 1345
(1966-1967).
The eradication at the international level of the social evil of illiteracy
naturally demands time and money on a far larger scale than that of
my government's modest contribution. But it is to be hoped that this
decision which, for a developing country like mine represents a real
sacrifice, will be followed by many others and will perhaps enable Unesco
to institute a special fund for carrying out an historic undertaking which
is among those of greatest urgency for the economic, social and cultural
development of mankind.
I am glad that the implementation of the recommendations of the Teheran
Congress coincides, in 1966, with Unesco's twentieth anniversary that
you will be celebrating in a few months' time. I take this opportunity
of saying how heartily I desire that your Organization's efforts in the
struggle against illiteracy, as in other important spheres of education,
science and culture, may be crowned with success.
