TO ALL YOUNG PEOPLE
TWENTY YEARS OLD
A message
from
René Maheu
Director-General
of Unesco
for the
New Year
1966
AS the New Year begins, my thoughts and my good wishes go out especially
to you, young people all over the world, who will be twenty this year
First of all because good wishes are the natural companions of hope,
and you who stand on the threshold of the springtime of life are indeed
our hope. And also because Unesco is your age; like yourselves it will be celebrat¬
ing its twentieth birthday in 1966.
There is no doubt that between you and Unesco there are those affinities, that
spontaneous fellow-feeling which historians find in a given generation like the very
air it breathes. May there be between you and the Organization an understanding
no less great than this resemblance which will gradually be revealed in the mirror
of history! , ...
Meanwhile, you are a mirror for those who set up the Organization or who, like
myself, have served it from the beginning. In your eyes, which turn towards the
future, we see our past, and the way it will probably look to coming generations.
In your hearts, your souls, we see the value of our work.
For it was indeed for you, first and foremost, that the founders and original ser¬
vants of Unesco worked, and the true measure of our success is the contribution
we have been able to make to the conditions that ensure your dignity and your
happiness.
We are of course fully aware that our endeavours are not free of imperfections
and mistakes, and these we deeply regret.
I know that we have not wholly succeeded in persuading you that justice and
reason, tolerance and goodwill, must inspire your thoughts and govern your actions,
when, in the world which we are handing on to you, injustice and hatred, misunder¬
standing and violence, are still rife. We have not succeeded in making you bend
your energies exclusively to the work of securing the unity of mankind, which is
peacewe who still inflict on you the spectacle of our discords and rivalries. And
I know all too well that we have not given you equality and that in spite of truly
substantial advances we have not yet managed to provide for each of you sufficient
education, science and culture to ensure that you all have equal opportunities of
self-fulfilment.
-All this I know. But I also know, and can assure you with equal certainty and
conviction, that never, especially for the young, have there been so many opportunities,
so many means, so many reasons to give expression and reality to that humanity
which is in each and every one of us. Never has it been so possible, and so
necessary, to be a man, and nothingno lack, no flaw in today's worldmust turn
you aside from this inspiring and sacred task.
We live in an age when nature has been mastered, an age of which a great
scientist has said: "For the first time in the course of history, man on earth faces
only himself; he finds no longer any other partner or foe."
We live in an age when men are being brought together into a single brother¬
hood by the instantaneous nature of communication media.
We live in an age of tremendous perils which threaten the very survival of our
race, but, for that very reason, compel us to carry out a radical reform, political and
moral, towards a better and safer destiny.
And we live in an age when the reign of Man in his full universality is being
organized. States have set up institutions designed to establish it step by step.
The peoples of the world must support those institutions and help them forward.
Unesco is one such agency. Born at the same time as yourselves, it was created
for you. It has grown up with you, it is through you that it will come to be what
it must be to fulfil the great hope it carries of achieving peace through the conversion
of men's minds.
On behalf of Unesco I wish you, my friends, most heartily, a happy New Year
and a happy start in life.
As for Unesco, its future is in your hands.
