SOSEKI the most popular
writer in Japan
N
Soseki Natsume (1867-1916). His immense
scholarship gave him a balanced view of
Western literature and the Oriental classics.
ATSUME KINNOSUKE,
who Is generally known by
his pen-name, "Soseki," is the most
widely read and popular writer in
Japan. Soseki was born in 1867, a
year before the Meiji restoration, and
died in 1916 at the age of 49.
A Soseki exhibition was held last
January at a major Tokyo department
store on the occasion of the 100th an¬
niversary of Soseki's birth (Japanese
custom counts the year of birth twice).
More than 40,000 persons attended,
establishing a new record for exhibi¬
tions for the department store.
The popularity of Soseki's novels
today is considered quite phenomenal
even for Japan. One leading Japanese
publisher, Iwanami Shoten, began pub¬
lishing a complete collection of So¬
seki's works in December 1965, and
over 100,000 persons subscribed for
the series of 16 volumes, each priced
at 1,200 yen (over $3.00) and contain¬
ing 700 pages.
This year, with the publication of the
seventh complete set of Soseki's
works, the total number of his volumes
has reached the impressive figure of
6,450,000, an unprecedented event in
r .
Japanese publishing for a writer dead
50 years.
Soseki's books appeal to a broad
cross-section of Japan's population
housewives, factory employees, white-
collar workers, college students and
even secondary and primary school
children. A survey conducted in 1964
in five leading Tokyo secondary
schools revealed that Soseki was the
most popular author read by young
people today. Paperback editions of
his books now sell as fast as those
of the biggest Japanese best-sellers.
Soseki started out as a secondary
school teacher of English, and then
went on to teach at college. He
studied in England for several years,
and on his return to Japan he was
appointed lecturer in English literature
at the Tokyo Imperial University.
In 1906, at the age of 39, Soseki
wrote his first novel, "I Am a Cat",
a humorous, satirical commentary on
modern society. The novel was an
immediate success and it enabled
Soseki to resign his university post
and to devote himself to a literary
career. In the eleven brief years
before his death, Soseki wrote
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
25

THE THREE-CORNERED WORLD
by Natsume Soseki
Text © Reproduction prohibited
OING up a mountain track, I fell to thinking.
	._ Approach everything rationally, and you become harsh.
Pole along in the stream of emotions, and you will be swept away by the
current. Give free to your desires, and you become uncomfortably
confined. It is not a very agreeable place to live, this world of ours.
When the unpleasantness increases, you want to draw yourself up to
some place where life is easier. It is just at the point when you first
realize that life will be no more agreeable no matter what heights you
may attain, that a poem may be given birth, or a picture created...
There is no escape from this world. If, therefore, you find life hard,
there is nothing to be done but settle yourself as comfortably as you can
during the unpleasant times, although you may only succeed in this for
short periods, and thus make life's brief span bearable. It is here that
the vocation of the artist comes into being, and here that the painter
receives his divine commission. Thank heaven for all those who in
devious ways by their art, bring tranquillity to the world, and enrich men's
hearts.
Strip off from the world all those cares and worries which make it an
unpleasant place in which to live, and picture before you instead a world
of graciousness. You now have music, a painting, or poetry, or sculpture.
I would go farther, and say that it is not even necessary to make this
vision a reality. Merely conjure up the image before your eyes, and
poetry will burst into life and songs pour forth. Before even committing
your thoughts to paper, you will feel the crystal tinkling, as of a tiny
bell well up within you; and the whole range of colours will of their own
accord, and in all their brilliance, imprint themselves on your mind's
eye, though your canvas stands on its easel, as yet untouched by the
brush. It is enough that you are able to take this view of life, and see
this decadent, sullied and vulgar world purified and beautiful in the camera
of your innermost soul.
Even the poet whose thoughts have never found expression in a single
verse, or the painter who possesses no colours, and has never painted
so much as a single square foot of canvas, can obtain salvation, and
be delivered from earthly desires and passions. They can enter at will
a world of undefiled purity, and throwing off the yoke of avarice and
self interest, are able to build up a peerless and unequalled universe.
Thus in all this, they are happier than the rich and famous ; than any
lord or prince that ever lived ; happier indeed than all those on whom
this vulgar world lavishes her affections.
After twenty years of life I realized that this is a world worth living
in. At twenty five I saw that, just as light and darkness are but opposite
sides of the same thing, so wherever the sunlight falls it must of necessity
cast a shadow. Today, at thirty my thoughts are these : In the depths
of joy dwells sorrow, and the greater the happiness the greater the
pain. Try to tear joy and sorrow apart, and you lose your hold on life.
Try to cast them to one side, and the world crumbles...
...It was just as my meandering thoughts reached this point, that my
right foot came down suddenly on the edge of a loose angular rock,
and I slipped. To compensate for my left foot, which I had hastily shot
out in an effort to keep my balance, the rest of me droppedl Fortunately
I came down on to a boulder about three feet across, and all that
happened was that my colour-box, which I had been carrying slung
from my shoulder, jerked forward from under my arm. Luckily no damage
was done.
As I rose and looked around me, I noticed away off to the left of the
track a towering peak shaped like an inverted bucket. It was completely
covered from base to summit with dark-green foliage, but whether
cryptomeria or cypress I was unable to tell.
26
This text, which is copyright ©, is taken from The Three Cor¬
nered World, published in the Unesco Collection of Represen¬
tative Works (Japanese Series) by Peter Owen Ltd., London.
The book is a translation by Alan Turney of Soseki's novel
Kusa Makura (literally, Pillow of Grass).
t
I
í
THE MOST POPULAR
WRITER IN JAPAN
(Continued)
numerous books, since acknowledged
as literary masterpieces.
As a writer, Soseki sought to har¬
monize the ideas of the Occident
and the traditions of Japanese litera¬
ture, and to express simply and clearly,
the innermost human hopes and de¬
sires. His work was also influenced
by the spirit of social responsibility
that characterized his contemporaries
of the Meiji era.
One reason why the works of
Soseki are so popular is that the maj¬
ority of his novels are woven around
an ordinary family and household, with
which readers can readily identify
themselves.
Soseki's most popular novel Is
probably Botchan, his second book,
which describes the life of teachers
in a provincial secondary school. This
novel, based on Soseki's own
experiences as a secondary school
teacher, has sold more than 2,140,000
copies since 1945 in paperbound
pocket editions alone.
Soseki's extensive study of English
literature added to his knowledge of
Oriental classics gave him a breadth

Photo © Smithsonian Institution, Freer Gallery of Art. Washington D.C.
"Figures and wind in willows", by the Japanese painter and poet, Yosa Buson (1716-1783),
whose works were greatly admired by Soseki. This landscape is
painted on one of a pair of silk six-fold screens in ink and colours.
of background unique among his
contemporaries, and in his last years
this enabled him to write outstanding
works such as Sorekara, Kokoro,
Mon, Michikusa and Meian. These
novels the fruit of an intensive
pursuit of the writer's "self are very
different from Soseki's earlier works,
which were masterpieces of wit and
humour.
In his later years, Soseki frequently
wrote on the theme of conflict in
family life, though each time he
analyzed the theme from a different
standpoint. Moreover, since these
later novels are more powerful and
probe more deeply into the psychology
of the characters, they have a greater
subtlety and refinement than the
author's earlier writing. Soseki delves
within the minds of his characters and
through them strives to reveal the
nature of man's inner life.
The chief characters in the majority
of Soseki's novels are men, and
neither they nor even his women
characters are depicted with the
wealth of detail found in works by
authors of the school of naturalism.
On the contrary, many of the women
are portrayed as intensely self-
centered beings, a further affirmation
of the taste for introspection displayed
by Soseki an antinaturalistic writer
par excellence.
Soseki's last work, Meian appeared
as a newspaper serial, 188 instalments
of which were published before the
author's death. In Meian, Soseki
pursued to the end his efforts to
elucidate the mysteries of "self.
Soseki was a man of many talents,
well versed in Japanese, Chinese and
Western literature, and before be¬
coming an author he had already
established his reputation as a poet.
Under the pen name of "Gudabutsu",
he wrote a great many Japanese Haiku
poems in which he gives profound
expression to such great concepts of
Zen philosophy as "selflessness" and
"quietude".
Soseki also excelled at calligraphy
and painting and composed poems in
Chinese. When he first took up calli¬
graphy, he was greatly influenced by
the work of the Zen priest, Ryokan
(1757-1831), but later changed his
style completely, and created his own
highly original calligraphic forms.
In art, Soseki apparently preferred
Japanese painting to Western-style
oils. He started painting in water-
colour around 1904, but it was only
after 1913 that he concentrated his
efforts in this field, after he became
acquainted with the painter Seifu
Tsuda.
Few writers today in Japan possess
talent comparable with that of Soseki.
Still fewer writers have left as many
excellent paintings as those from
Soseki's brush.
Following is a list of works by Soseki
translated Into English: Kokoro, translated
by lneko Kondo (Kenkyusha, 1941), also
published In French in the Unesco Collection
of Representative Works (Gallimard, 1957);
Botchan, translated by Yasotaro Mohri
(Kinseido, 1947); Ten Nights' Dreams and
Our Cat's Grave, translated by Sankichi
Hata and Dofu Shirai (Tokyo News Service,
1949); I Am a Cat, translated by Katsue
Shibata and Motonari Kai (Kenkyusha, 1961);
The Three Cornered World, translated by
Alan Turney (Peter Owen Ltd., London 1965).
A translation of Michitfusa, by E. McClellan,
is in preparation for the Unesco Collection
of Representative Works.
27
