THE NEW
ARCHITECTURE
OF UNESCO
On its 19th anniversary, November 4, 1965,
Unesco inaugurated a fourth building on its
Paris headquarters site. When the first
three headquarters buildings were inaugu-
rated in November 1958, Unesco had 87
member states. Today it has 120 and its
activities have grown in proportion.
A project to build a 10-storey structure was
abandoned because of city planning re-
strictions. So instead of buitding up,
Unesco built down, following a plan de-
signed by the French architect, Bernard
Zehrfuss. The existing piazza area in front
of the existing buildings was excavated to
a depth of 33 feet and from this 2-1/2 acre
site, 156, 000 cubic yards of earth were
removed. In this huge excavation 350 of-
fices and two conference rooms were built
around six patios (above right), each mea-
suring 82 by 49 feet. Below these, a
garage for 350 cars was built. The two
floors of office buildings look out on the
patios (photo right) and thus have natural
light and ventilation and are insulated from
noise. Each patio has pools and fountains,
pebbles and marble flags, and beds of
plants, shrubs and grasses following a
layout designed by the Brazilian landscape
architect, Bur) e Marx.
Photo Unesco-R. Lesage

Photo Unesco-R. Lesage
Ha a million
visitors
Unesco's strikingly modern headquarters,
now a familiar Paris landmark, has also
become one of the city's most visited sites
since it was inaugurated in November
1958. In eight years, half a million people
have looked over its Secretariat building
(left), the Conference building and the De-
legations building. The headquarters was
designed by an international panel of
architects : Marcel Breuer (U. S. A.), Pier
Luigi Nervi (Italy) and Bernard Zehrfuss
(France). The whole is embellished with
paintings, sculpture and mosaics by
internationally-known artists : Jean Arp,
Jean Bazaine (France), Karel Appel
(Netherlands), Afro (Italy), Alexander
Calder (U. S. A.), Roberto Matta (Chile),
Pablo Picasso, Joan Miro, Jose Llorens-
Artigas (Spain), Henry Moore (U. K.) and
Rufino Tamayo (Mexico). In addition, a
number of Unesco's member states con-
tributed to the decoration and furnishing
of the headquarters. Below, a corner of
the Japanese garden, designed and laid
out by Isamu Noguchi (Japan).
Building
for the future
Uneseo plans to ex-
pand its headquarters
in Paris to keep pace"
with its growing activ-
ities and responsibil-
ities. Work on this
fifth building, sited a
few hundred yards
from the existing head-
quarters, will begin this
year and should be
complete by the end
of 1968. Right, model
of the new building.
It will have 600 offices,
and was designed by
the French architect,
Bernard Zehrfuss.

The facade of Unesco's Secretariat building towers
over one of the six patios inaugurated on November 4, 1965.
Two floors of office buildings look out on the patios.
Photos 0 Pau ! Aimasy, Paris
Two new conference rooms have been built
around the patios. Above, the star-shaped ceiling
of the Unesco Executive Board hall.
Photo Unesco-Domin ! que Roger
61
