UNESCO'S
20
YEARS
1fH ! S year, as Unesco prepares tomark its twentieth annive sary next
November fourth, plans are already under way
for a frank and uninhibited reappraisal of the
work that has been accomplished in the short
span of this Organization's existence.
Let me indicate first in what light Unesco
appears to me as an instrument of international
co-operation. While for many years Unesco's
concept of co-operation was that of intellectual
co-operation, today it is both operational as
well as intellectual.
By intellectual co-operation I mean the encour-
agement and organization on a world scale of
4 the pursuit, examination and interpretation of
knowledge as well as the exchange of ideas
and mutual experiences. This is being done
diligently and without fanfare by the specialist,
unnoticed usually by the public at large, and
aims principally at promoting the advance of all
branches of intellectual endeavour.
To the scientists, artists and scholars of this
world, then, must go our thanks for the changes
man has brought about through his creative
spirit and his reasoning, and Unesco is proud
of the efforts it has been able to make to help
these scientists and scholars and to bring
them closer together. Thanks to them the story
of our species is slowly ceasing to be that of
man submitting passively to his fate and is
becoming one of a rapid march of triumph
toward freedom and liberation and responsi-
bility. The practice of intellectual co-operation
is becoming more widespread every day as its
import and scope are being nurtured and enrich-
ed, and this is fashioning the understructure
of what we may well call the first true world
civilization.
Quite another matter are Unesco's opera-
tional activities in aid of development. This is
a dual type-action-on the one hand it is inter-
national in purpose, and the means and methods
used ; on the other it is national as regards
execution and at least in the immediate objec-
tives pursued. In this sense it is a unique
formula, and the most typical, and I daresay,
the most effective contribution that the special-
ized, technical agencies of the U. N. such as
Unesco are now making to development.
It must be admitted that the founders of
Unesco could not then foresee an undertaking
of such scope, and that when Unesco did ulti-
mately adopt operational assistance as a
normal and indeed main method of work this
was due much more to the fact that it was a
member of the United Nations family than to its
own exclusive initiative.
If since 1950 operational assistance has
become a systematic part of the Unesco pro-
gramme, the credit belong's to the U. N. Expan-
ded Programme of Technical Assistance as
well as to the U. N. Special Fund which since
1960 has placed at Unesco's disposal vast addi-
tional funds, so that the total of these resources
now accounts for a predominant part of Unes-
co's overall budget. I should like to pay my
tribute to those responsible for conceiving and
directing these two great inter-organizationa)
enterprises which this year have been com-
bined into one body, called the United Nations
Development Programme. To them Unesco
owes a new dimension in its work.
The expansion of Unesco's operational activ-
ities, occurring as it did simultaneously with
the entry into Unesco of many newly indepen-
dent states, mainly from Africa, has resulted in
such a profound change in the programme and
structure of Unesco since 1960 that the term
"mutation"has been used to describe it.

Perhaps the expression"conversion to devel-
opment"would be more descriptive.
At present operational assistance for devel-
opment represents about two-thirds of Unesco's
total resources, which shows the high priority
that Unesco accords to aid for the developing
nations and the degree of its concrete action in
this respect.
I have no doubt that the day will come when
in speaking of economic development we will
think of it more in terms of its cultural aspects.
It has been said time and again that the instru-
ment and final purport of development was
man, but perhaps the deep implications of this
statement have not always been fully recog-
nized. It signifies that the cultural values a
people or a nation hold most dear and consider
their raison d'etre ultimately will determine
what they consider possible to achieve and
what they consider they ought to achieve for
their own development.
The technocrats-it makes no difference
whether they are local technocrats or foreign
technocrats-who are often the masters in
these matters, and who delight in the cold
technology and the impersonal machines they
import from abroad, have learned this to their
great chagrin-and of course to the chagrin of
those they believed they were hel, ping without
knowing or understanding them. Here the
social sciences have a paramount role to play
particularly in the earlier planning stages of
development, the importance of which we are
often inclined to underestimate.
W HAT precisely do we mean when weWW sa  that a community is u derdevel-
oped ? I would not hesitate to say that it was
one which had not acceded in its thinking and
habits to the civilization of science and techno-
logy which is the pattern and driving force of
human progress today. In other words, that a
country is developed to the degree that its
science and technology have ceased to be a
magic potion imported from abroad and have
become a living, integrated part of its culture.
Unesco considers the establishment of
science within the nation itself of the utmost
importance because it is convinced that this,
more than the mere transfer of knowledge, is
the only real way to create the basic prerequi-
sites for a nation's development. But it should
be clear that what we are actually dealing with
here is not just a question of proper organiza-
tion but of social change, or what the social
scientist calls"acculturation". Development
is science become part of the cultural fibre.
These are the chief characteristics, in my
view, of the technical action Unesco is carrying
out in the two closely integrated fields of
intellectual co-operation and operational co-
operation or assistance.
And yet they are not the main features of
Unesco's work. Unesco's ultimate objective is
not simply technical ; it is essentially and funda-
mentally ethical or moral in nature. Unesco is
not interested merely in the advancement of
education, science and culture per se, no matter
how great their intrinsic worth may be, for in the
light of Unesco's Constitution they are no more
than a means and a way. The aim of Unesco is
the aim of the whole family of the United
Nations, namely, peace. But a peace construed
and pursued in a unique fashion, which govern-
ments had never before had the courage-one
is tempted to say the candour-to proclaim
openly as the rule for their concerted action.
j t NESCO was founded on the beliefthat it is man in his own freedom
who ultimately decides the course of history
and chooses between peace and war ("wars
begin in the minds of men"says the Preamble
to the Unesco Constitution) and consequently
there can be no true peace unless there is a
consensus of the mind for an order which the
mind esteems.
What is that order ? It is human dignity, which
is expressed and particularized in the various
human rights and whose reign is called social
justice and love, or at the very least tolerance
in the hearts of men. That is why the founders
of Unesco proclaimed that"it is in the minds
of men that the defences of peace must be
constructed."
Education, science and culture are the do-
mains that form and inspire the mind. Unesco's
mission, and the ultimate reason for its
existence, lies in using these domains-I
employ the word"use"advisedly-to establish
in the very depths of the consciousness of indiv-
iduals and peoples those conditions of justice
and tolerance which in the fina ! analysis govern
freedom or slavery, life or death...
For Unesco, therefore, both the technical
and the ethical aspects of its work are inescap-
ably bound together, and Unesco's existence
is predicated on the continuance of this bond.
That is why all those who have had the honour
to serve Unesco are p, y aware, since they
have experienced it in their own lives, that
Unesco is not only an institution at the service
of its member states but an attitude of mind
and a voice directed at the conscience of every
mar. 5
Rene Maheu,
Director-General of Unesco
Prom an address to the e N. Economic and Social Council, delivered
in Geneva on July 7, 1966.
