'since wars begin in the minds of men,
it is in the minds of men
that the defences of peace must be constructed'
- Constitution of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization
The Governments of the States Par-That a peace based exclusively upon the
ties to this Constitution on behalf political and economic arrangements
of their peoples declare : of governments would not be a peace
which could secure the unanimous,
lasting and sincere support of the
people. : of the world, and that thethat since wars begin in the minds of peace must ther fore be founded, if
men, it is m the minds of men that it is not to fail, upon the intelkctual
the defences of peace must be cons-and mora. l solidarity of mankind.
tructed ;
., For these reasons, the StatesPartie$ toThat ignorance of each other's ways and thins C.. b I'., fì II
I. h b t IS onstItUtIon, e IevIng In uIres as even a common clause,,.,
h h t thh't f k'd and equal opportunItIes for educationt rug you e.. ITS Orgy 0 mao Ion.'......,,
,..'four wall, In the unrestncted pursUIt ofof that suspicion and mistrust between b't't th d'th f
o ec Live r ain In e reethe peoples of the world trough,'
which their d'f have II exchange of ideas and knowledge, arew TIC tell I.. erences r a tor.
ft b k't agreed and determined to developo yen rio y n In 0 wan..and to increase the m ans of commu-
nication between their peoples and to
That the great and terrible war which employ these means for the purposes
has now ended was a war made of mutual understanding and a truer
possible by the denial ofthedemocra-and more perfect knowledge of each
tic principles of the dignity, equality other's lives ;
and mutual respect of men, and by
the propagation, in their place, In consequence whereof they do here-
through ignorance and prejudice, of'by create the United Nations Educa-
the doctnne of the inequality of men tonal. Scientific and Cultural Organi-
and races ; zation for the purpose of advancing,
through the educational and scientific
That the wide diffusion of culture, and and cultural relations of the peoples
the education of humanity for justice of the world, the objectives of inter-
and liberty and peace are indispens-national peace and of the common
able to the dignity of man and consti-welfare of mankind for which the
tute a sacred duty which all the United Nations Organization was
nations must fulfil in a spirit of established and which its Charter
mutual assistance and concern ; proclaims.

While London was still being battered by the
air raids of World War II (right), ministers of
education of the Allied Governments met there
in 1942, to study common problems of educa-
tion. In November 1945, shortly after the war
ended, a meeting in London attended by rep-
resentatives of 44 countries drew up the C. ons-
titution of Unesco. On November 4, 1946, fol-
lowing its acceptance by 20 states, this docu-
ment became the official birth certificate of
Unesco. Below we reproduce the Preamble and
Article I of the Constitution. Lower right,
today, in Unesco's 20th anniversary year,
young people visit its headquarters in Paris.
Photo &commat; Keystone
Photo Unesco-Holmquist
PARTICLE I.
the purpose of the Organization is to contribute to peace
and security by promoting collaboration among the nations
thorough education, science and culture in order to further
universal respect for justice, for the rule of law and for the
human rights and fundamental freedoms which are affirmed
for the peoples of the world, without distinction of race,
sex, language. Qr religiofl by the Charter of the Ut3ited Nations.
2 To realize this purpose the Organization will :
a. Collaborate in the work of advancing the mutual know-
ledge and nderstanding of peoples, through all means
of mass communication and to that end recommend such
international agreements as may be necessary to promote
the free flow of ideas by word and image ;
b. Give fresh impuise to popular education and to the spread
of culture :
by collaborating with Members, at their request, in the
development of educational activities ;
by instituting collaboration among the nations to advance
the ideal of equality of educational opportunity without
regard to race, sex or any distinctions, economic or social ;
by suggesting educational methods best suited to prepare
the children of the world for the responsibilities of free-
dom ;
c. Maintain, increase and diffuse knowledge :
by assuring the conservation and protection of the world's
inheritance of books, works of art and monuments of
history and science, and recommending to the nations
concerned the necessary international conventions ;
by encouraging co-operation among the nations in all
branches of intellectual activity, including the international
exchange of persons active in the fields of education,
science and culture and the exchange of publications, objects
of artistic and scientific interest and other materials of
information ; by initiating methods of international co-
operation calculate to give the people of a ! !' countries
access to the printed and published materials produced by
any of them.
with a view to preserving the independence, integrity and
fruitful diversity of the cultures and educational systems of
she States members of this Organization, the Organization is
prohibited from intervening in matters which are essentially
within their domestic jurisdiction.
