MURASAKI SHIKIBU
The world's oldest novel, The Tale of
Genji, a Japanese work of the tenth century
was written by a woman, Murasaki Shiklbu.
Her exact date of birth is unknown, but she
is thought to have died about 1016. Lady
Murasaki, as she is sometimes called, was
the widow of a dignitary at the Imperial
Court of Japan. She was a woman of great
culture, like so many nobly-born women of
the Heian Period, which was marked by an
unprecedented flowering of art and litera¬
ture in Japan. In the tenth century a new
and simplified form of writing called Kana was
invented in Japan. Women in particular
adopted it in preference to the old-style Chi¬
nese characters. Kana made a vigorous Im¬
pact on Japanese literature; stories, narratives,
diaries and novels began to appear. Women
were revealed as outstanding novelists and
poets. The Tale of Genji was to make Lady
Murasaki the most famous of them all. Her
work is a long, 1,000-page novel which, while
recounting the amorous adventures of Prince
Genji, describes the exquisite refinement and
psychological complexity of Japanese court
life at that time. Murasaki Shikibu was a
perceptive and sensitive observer of life who
might well be said to have "invented" the
psychological novel six centuries before it
made its appearance In the West. Its In¬
fluence on Japanese literature was consider¬
able not only on the novel, but equally so
on Noh drama and the Kabukl theatre. This
classic of Japanese literature Is now part
of the universal cultural heritage. The most
famous translation into English is that by
Arthur Whaley, first published In the 1930s,
and ¡t is this version that has been accepted
in the Unesco Collection of Representative
Works, for which it has now been reprinted
by George Allen and Unwln, London.
FRANZ HALS
The name Frans Hals is one of the most
renowned in Dutch painting. Hals (someti¬
mes called "Hals the Elder"five of his
sons became reputed artists) was born In
1580. The dating of his first authentic work,
a portrait, as 1613 shows that he made a
late start on his career, and it is often said
that he had hitherto led a dissolute and
Improvident life. Nevertheless he quickly
made up for. lost time and established his
reputation with the now famous "Banquet
of the Archers of Saint George", painted
in 1616. This splendid group, In which the
influence of Rubens is clearly apparent, reveal¬
ed Hals as master of portraiture and of
colour harmonies. Hals continued to paint
the large portrait groups that were now in
fashion and replacing allegorical and religious
paintings in homes and public buildings. Most
of his later works were individual portraits
painted in sombre tones dominated by black,
grey and silvery shadows. Hals was gifted
with deep psychological insight. His por¬
traits reveal a searching analysis of character
whether the model Is a great man such as
Descartes or a simple gypsy girl, whether
a fisherman or a carefree youth. Hals died
In 1660 three years before Rembrandt.
Throughout his long career he continued to
develop his painting techniques, using ever
larger, bolder and more rapid brush strokes,
and overriding the confines of the sketches
on his canvas. Not without justification Is
he now called a precursor of Impressionism.

GREAT
GREAT
MIGUEL DE CERVANTES
The name of Miguel de Cervantes In¬
separable from that of his hero Don
Quixote is one that dominates world
literature. The life of Cervantes resembles
a picaresque novel. The son of a poor
surgeon, he was born in Alcalá de Henares
in 1547. From his earliest years he
displayed a passion for books. At 17 he
enlisted as a mercenary in the service
of the Colonna (an important Roman
family), a life which took him across all
of Italy. He lost the use of his left hand
at the battle of Lepanto in 1571. The
galley bearing him back to Spain was
seized by the Turks. He was sent to
Algiers as a prisoner where he suffered
hard privations and was finally ransomed.
Cervantes was in Madrid in 1580 trying
to live by his pen. He wrote plays, led
a poverty-stricken existence in Seville and
then in Grenada. On two occasions he
so badly managed his affairs that he was
put in prison. In 1604 he published the first
part of Don Quixote which was an instant
success. However, it was ten years before
Cervantes decided to finish his Quixote,
by now being read in all parts of the world.
The first part was translated into English
by 1612 and into French two years later.
Today translations of Don Quixote have
been made in almost every written
language including Chinese, Korean,
Tibetan, Japanese, Sanskrit, Arabic,
Hebrew, and all the languages of Europe.
In 1959, no fewer than 2,047 editions of
the work existed all over the world
in 53 languages (including Dog Latin).
A source of inspiration for other literatures,
Cervantes's masterpiece has been studied
for its bearing on politics, religion, science,
criminology, botany, medicine, in short,
in every one of its thousand aspects, both
comic and tragic. Sancho Panza in no
less celebrated than his master. The
donkey and the mare have entered the
world's lore of famous animals. Ever since
30
Romain Rolland's life (1866-1944) spanned
a period of social and political unrest, and
his works reflect the clashing forces of a
changing world: the nineteenth century
demands for justice and liberty, the twen¬
tieth century's search for communication
and human understanding. Rolland's path
led him from Tolstoy (with whom he kept
up a regular correspondence) to Gandhi,
to whom he dedicated a major work in
1923. For twenty years between 1920
and 1940 he strove to conciliate Occi¬
dental and Oriental thought, to reconcile
the rejection of tyranny and the doctrine
of non-violence. The theme of all his
writing is faith in man and in what he
ROMAIN ROLLAND
called the "grandeur of the world", and
nowhere does this resound more clearly
than In his vast correspondence. His out¬
put of works plays, essays, novels, pol¬
emical writings was one of the most
prolific of his day; all reflect an unswerving
belief in the unity of mankind. When he
was awarded the Novel Prize for Literature
just fifty years ago, Romain Rolland was
certainly the best known French writer in
Europe. His romantic cycle, Jean Christo¬
phe (the story of a German musician), was
immediately translated Into several lan
guages, and earned for him an International
reputation. His Au-dessus de la mêlée
(Above the Battle), written In the midst
of World War I, reflected his militant paci¬
fism and added to his prestige as an
idealist. Rolland, who was later to write
the lives of Ramakrishna
« and Vivenkananda, had
I already become a "guru",
I as a spiritual teacher is
called in India, in the eyes
I of the Western world. A
ttri| great lover of music and
_ art, Rolland wrote with
k N^ I intense feeling on Beetho-
Ä ven and Michelangelo.

its appearance, Don Quixote has inspired
great writers. Samuel Butler's Hudibras,
Marivaux's Pharsamond, Wieland's Don
Silvio de Rosalia all are manifestations
of "Quixotism". Much of the philosophical
and spiritual writings of Miguel de Una-
muno are directly influenced by Cervantes
and Quixotism. The Melancholy Knight
also left a strong mark on music and the
other arts, from the seventeenth to the
twentieth centuries. Don Qu/xoie has
unspired a host of operatic composers,
from Purcell (1694) to Massenet (1910);
Richard Strauss used it as the theme for
one of his most beautiful symphonic
poems, as did Manuel de Falla in his
"Master Peter's Puppet Show". Painters,
sculptures and illustrators throughout the
world have added their interpretations
William Hogarth, Gustave Doré, Salvador
Dali to name only three. Don Quixote
has appeared as an American fiilm (1916)
and a Soviet film (1957). In 1935, the
celebrated Russian base, Chaliapin, sang
the role of Don Quixote in a film made
by the German producer, G.W. Pabst a
cinema opera with music by the French
composer, Jacques Ibert. Miguel de Cer¬
vantes died 300 years ago on April 23,
1616 on the same day as William
Shakespeare.
ISAAC NEWTON
Just three centuries ago, Isaac Newton,
a young scholar of Trinity College, Cambridge,
pondered a question that was to lead him
to one of the most important discoveries in
the history of natural science. Was the force
which caused objects to fall merely a ter-
restial phenomenon or was it one manifesta¬
tion of a great Universal Law ruling all motion
throughout space? It took Newton a number
of years to prove that there was indeed a
universal force, and to work out his full
statements on the laws of gravitation, which
he eventually published ¡n 1687. Newton first
tested his theory by calculating the orbit of
the moon, but when his results failed to
agree precisely with the moon's observed
course he laid aside his research until more
accurate figures were obtained for the dis¬
tance between the moon and the earth. With
these figures his calculation of the action of
gravitation on the moon corresponded exactly
with the moon's course; similar calculations
applied to other heavenly bodies completed
the chain of evidence.
Newton's discovery of the law of gravi¬
tation has tended to overshadow his many
other achievements. His contributions to the
theory of light were of almost equal import¬
ance. Through his experiments he was able
to break up white light into the colours of
the spectrum and to recomblne colours Into
white light. His studies on light also led
him to invent the reflecting telescope. His
discoveries in mathematics Included a new
method of calculus (or, as he called It,
"fluxions"). His contributions to science
include many of the fundamental laws of the
physical world upon which modern physics
and mechanics have been developed. Yet
this outstanding physicist and philosopher had
the modesty of true genius. "If I have
seen farther", he once wrote, "it is by stand¬
ing on the shoulders of giants." And on an¬
other occasion he declared: "I seem to have
been only a boy playing on the seashore
and diverting myself in now and then finding
a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than
ordinary, whilst the great Ocean of Truth
lay undiscovered before me."
GOTTFRIED LEIBNITZ
Mathematician, theologian, historian, dip¬
lomat the German philosopher, Gottfried
Wilhelm Leibnitz (1646-1716) was a man
of almost universal interests and attain¬
ments. At fifteen, already a practised scho¬
lar in Greek and Latin, he turned eagerly to
the works of modern thinkers Bacon,
Kepler, Galileo and Descartes. At twenty-
Five his theses on philosophy and law had
been accepted, he had studied chemistry,
higher mathematics and mechanics and
had written several works on theology and
politics two of his lifelong interests.
Leibnitz the mathematician invented diffe¬
rential calculus in 1676. As a theologian
he sought ways to bridge the schisms of
the Christian churches, and on this problem
he corresponded for many years with the
French prelate, Bossuet. As a diplomat
he sent to Louis XIV a memorandum on
French relations with Turkey, and drew
up for Peter the Great a plan for the
Westernization of Russia. As a historian
he founded the scientific method of histo¬
rical criticism. However, it was as a philo¬
sopher that he achieved his greatest fame.
In 1684 he rejected Cartesianism and ela¬
borated a new theory of knowledge in his
New Essays Concerning Human Under¬
standing. His Monadology (1714) was a
complete exposition of his philosophy the
doctrine of the supremacy of intelligence in
man and good in the world. Voltaire was
later to satirize this doctrine in Candide and
to ridicule its optimism with the famous
phrase, "everything is for the best in the
best of all possible worlds".
But optimism has always been a basis
of scientific thought and makes Leibnitz
more up to date than ever.
RUBEN DARIO
The works of Ruben Dario occupy as
honoured a place in modern poetry as they
do in the history of Spanish-language lite¬
rature. Yet despite their wealth of vigour
and elegance, they remain too little known
outside Spanish-speaking countries. Such
is their reputation within those countries
that it is often said there are two periods
in Spanish-American poetry "before Da¬
rio" and "after Dario."
Ruben Dario was born in Nicaragua in
1867. He lived in Chile, in Argentina and
In Paris, and travelled widely In Europe
as a diplomat and journalist. With his
knowledge of languages and his profound
culture, he recognized the importance of
the new literary movements in the Europe
of the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. Among French poets like Bau¬
delaire, Mallarmé and Verlaine he redis¬
covered an economy of expression (of
which he was already a past master), and
their experiments inspired him to breathe
new life into Spanish-American poetry,
which had still not freed itself from a
rather grandiloquent romanticism. He be¬
came the leader of a movement, quickly
labied modernísimo, which gave new
accents to the great Spanish classic tra¬
dition represented by Cervantes, Lope de
Vega and Quevedo. The appearance of
each of his works Prosas profanas (Pro¬
fane prose) in 1896; Cantos de Vida y Espe¬
ranza (Songs of Life and Hope) in 1905;
El Canto Errante (The Wandering Song)
in 1907 and Poema de Otoño (Autumnal
Poem) in. 1910 was hailed as a major
event in Spanish-speaking countries. To¬
day, fifty years after his death, the repu¬
tation of the great Nicaraguan poet
continues to grow.
31
