Diving saucers and sea-going laboratories
a.
SCIENTIFIC tangles plaguing the
world's oceanographers may finally
be unravelled by new tools now being put at the
disposal of researchers (see photo story on follow¬
ing pages). Previews of many of these devices
were offered recently at the Second Inter¬
national Océanographie Congress in Moscow.
Despite the arrival of many novel instruments
of oceanic exploration including floating islands,
undersea laboratories, buoys and diving saucers,
the research ship has not yet had its day. Two
Diving saucer, a French underwater research
vessel, skims the sea bed after being
launched from its mother ship. Light and
highly manceuverable, it can carry out exploration
missions down to depths of 300 metres (1,000 ft.).
The 6,800-ton "Akademik Kurchatov", recently
acquired by the expedition service of the U.S.S.R.
Academy of Sciences, is the largest ship
ever built specifically for océanographie research. It
carries 84 scientists and houses 22 laboratories
and is almost as manceuverable as a rowboat.
It has a separate electric motor and propeller on its
rudder for working at slow speeds
and can turn a full circle while
advancing only 14 metres (45 feet).
of the newest afloat were described at the Mos¬
cow congress.
One, the Akademik Kurchatov, was built for
the expedition service of the U.S.S.R. Academy
of Sciences, and has been outfitted in Leningrad
prior to her maiden cruise in the Atlantic Ocean
from North Africa to Iceland.
With a displacement of 6,800 tons and an over¬
all length of 124 metres (406 feet) she is the
biggest ship ever constructed specifically for
océanographie resarch. She carries eighty-four
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Photo O APN

DIVING SAUCERS (Continued)
scientists, twenty-two laboratories, a helicopter
and a meteorological rocket launcher.
The other is the Silas Bent, a 2,364-ton ship
operated by the United States Naval Océano¬
graphie Office, and probably the most automated
océanographie vessel now in operation. While
under way, she can simultaneously measure depth,
magnetic intensity, gravity, sea surface tempera¬
ture and the structure of the bottom. On station,
she uses a "sensor package", continuously mea¬
suring depth, temperature, salinity, sound velocity
and light as far down as 6.100 metres (20,000 feet).
To handle this Gulf Stream of data, she is
equipped with a "central data recording sub¬
system" where information is immediately pro¬
cessed by an all-purpose digital computer.
Computers like the ones aboard the Silas Bent
and the Akademik Kurchatov can mean the
difference between survey and research at sea.
Immediate processing of data enables a ship's
chief scientist to change his research programme
so as to explore an interesting phenomenon
instead of waiting months to learn of its existence.
And computers not only record more information
but make it more accessible in international banks
of océanographie data.
The congress was given a review of the recent
past which has seen such developments as FLIP,
an American vessel 108 metres (355 feet) "long"
that flips 90 degrees to become the most stable
platform ever used at sea (see page 18) and a
floating tower used by Soviet oceanographers
in the Caspian Sea to make wave measurements.
Some of the least spectacular instruments have
proved the most valuable. One is the "Swallow
Float", named after the British oceanographer who
designed it. This is simply a neutrally-buoyant
float which can be set to drift at a given depth
and follow a current, and which reveals its posi¬
tion by "pings". Another huge advance is repre¬
sented by instruments measuring the conductivity
and. therefore, the salinity of the sea, thus elimin¬
ating much tedious chemical analysis of water
samples.
Photo-Bureau of Commercial Fisheries
Biological Laboratory, Honolulu.
U.S. Fisheries and Wildlife Service
DRIFTING LABORATORY. Scientists at the Honolulu Biological Laboratory use this incongruous-
looking seaborne house to study the behaviour of fishes, many species of which tend to gather
under floating objects at sea. Named "Nenue" (after one of the so-called "rudderfish" that
are reputed to follow ships) it has a metal caisson with viewing ports suspended beneath it.
From this vantage point, biologists have counted as many as 60 species of fish gathered
around the craft. Some of their observations will be of great value to fishermen

Submersibles have also appeared. Several
of them were described, including the Aluminaut
designed to work nearly 5,000 metres down with
six people aboard, the smaller Alvin which has
already gone down to 2,000 metres (6,500 feet)
and the Deep Star designed in France. Telenaut,
a French unmanned submersible equipped with a
grappling arm and a television camera, was also
presented in Moscow. Intended for oil prospec¬
tion work, it is linked to a surface ship by a
two-way cable transmitting power and commands
from above and data from below.
These new undersea vehicles have already
made their contribution to research. Geologists
find them invaluable in studying the walls of sub¬
marine canyons and deep channels.
Another device for work in the very deep ocean
is the tide-recording "capsule". It can mea¬
sure temperature to 1/1 00.000th of a degree and
pressure to a flut tuatio i of 1 millimetre (1/25 inch)
in a "water column" 5 kilometres (3 miles) deep.
It can record 6 m Ilion items of data on magnetic
'ape and can then be recalled bv acoustic siqnai
EXPLORING A NEW FRONTIER. For 45 days last year, a group
of 28 U.S. volunteer "aquanauts" lived on the ocean floor,
half a mile off the California coast, inside a 17 metres (57 ft.) steel
cylinder, called "Sealab II". anchored 62 metres (200 ft.) deep.
At times the "aquanauts" left the cylinder to engage in
océanographie and marine biology research and
to undergo physiological and endurance tests designed to
determine man's ability to live and work under the sea.
Here, an "aquanaut" repairs transmission apparatus
watched by curious spectators at the porthole.
Photo © Pierre de Latil, Pans
MIDGET SUBMARINE. This remarkable underwater
research craft, the U.S. midget submarine "Alvin", can
carry a crew of two and a wide assortment of scientific
instruments to an ocean depth greater than 1,800 metres
(6,000 ft.). "Alvin" is 6.6 metres (21 ft.) long and the
fibreglass portholes in its pressure sphere are 17 cms.
(6 ins.) thick. Equipped with 3 propellers for speed
and manoeuverability. "Alvin" can cruise at 4.6 kms.
(3 miles) per hour for 30-40 kms. (20-25 miles).
TELENAUT. This French unmanned submersible, is
controlled from a surface ship by a two-way cable
transmitting power and orders from above and information
from below. Carrying a combined television-cinematograph
camera, it can operate at a depth of 1,000 metres (3,300 ft.).
When something of interest is picked up on the
television screen, it is immediately recorded by the film
camera. "Telenaut" is also equipped with a grappling arm
capable of lifting objects weighing 50 kilogrammes (100 lbs.).

mm . . . . i
a*»**»
A SHIP
NAMED FLIP
A stable platform from which to perform exper¬
iments at sea has been a long-sought goal of
sea-going scientists. They now have one in
FLIP (for Floating Instrument Platform), a
108 metres (355 ft.)-long, 600-ton craft d<jè
signed and built in the United States. Here i- 1
how FLIP flips. (1) Having no motive power o
her own, she is towed in the horizontal position
to her research station. (2, 3, 4) As the crew
floods the ballast tanks with some 1,500 tonr
of salt water, the prow gradually rises; the stern
slowly sinks. (5) Suddenly, the whole 15 metres
(50 ft.) of the prow abruptly lifts in a matter
of seconds. The whole operation has taken
only 15 minutes. Ninety metres (300 ft.) of the
vessel now extend into the ocean, exerting a
strong stabilizing influence. In the working
portion of FLIP are four stories for use of
crew and scientists (photo right). FLIP has
already made 34 expeditions, and once remain¬
ed vertical for 27 days. In 10 metre (35 ft.) waves
its vertical oscillation was less than 7 cm. (3 In.).
© Honolulu Advertiser
B
.v
Wñ

