Vast chains of submarine mountains shown in this detail of a physiographic diagram
of the Indian Ocean belong to globe-girdling mid-ocean ranges, estimated to be
40,000 miles long. Part of this system runs through the Indian Ocean into the Arabian
Sea and then, via the Gulf of Aden, enters Africa along the Great Rift Valley.
Shown in grey are Mozambique and part of the East African coastline, Madagascar
and the Islands of Reunion and Mauritius. Published by the Geological Society
of America, the diagram is based on soundings made by vessels of the 25-nation
Indian Ocean Expedition (1959-1965), co-sponsored by Unesco and the Scientific
Committee on Oceanic Research of the International Council of Scientific Unions. © 1964 Bruce Heezen and Marie Tharp
Reproduced by permission

THE CONTROVERSY
ON CONTINENTAL DRIFT
by Daniel Behrman
"... '.,"] N OT so long ago, it was fashionable to remark that we knew less about
the ocean floor than the face of the moon. Despite progress in
space exploration, this is no longer true. The Second International Océanographie
Congress, held in Moscow last June, heard reports of what can only be
described as a breakthrough no matter how much scientists hate the word in
man's knowledge of the ocean floor and, consequently, of the processes that
shape the earth (1).
Papers read at the congress by
marine geologists from a number of
nations and notably Britain, the United
States and the U.S.S.R. showed huge
progress not only in charting the ocean
floor but in our understanding of how
it works.
For it does "work." Our planet's
youngest rocks are on the bottom of
the sea and intense "manufacturing"
activity takes place along the mid-
ocean ridges that have now been found
in every ocean.
One of the most startling interpreta¬
tions of marine geophysical findings
heard at the congress was presented
by Dr. Bruce Heezen, Dr. Dragoslav
Ninkovich and Dr. Neil Opdyke of
Lamoñt Geological Observatory at Pali¬
sades, New York. They correlated
reversals in the earth's magnetic field
during the past three million years with
major evolutionary mutations in marine
life.
A sampling of 5,000 cores drilled out
of the sea bottom in all oceans to a
depth of ten metres of sediment sugg¬
ests, they stated, that the earth's mag¬
netic field has first disappeared and
then reversed at intervals between half
a million and a million years.
No magnetic field means no mag¬
netic shield. And this means intense
bombardment of the earth by cosmic
rays producing a disastrous effect on
life. "Some species are completely
killed off, other species are created,"
Dr. Heezen noted. "Of current interest
is the fact that the magnetic field is
now decreasing and if this drop con¬
tinues for 2,000 years, it will be zero.
I don't want to sound like an alarmist
but we may be next."
In the background of this research
can be found the impressive advances
recorded by marine geophysics in the
last seven years.
One such advance has been the
magnetic surveying of the deep ocean.
Off the coasts of California and Can¬
ada, a strange pattern of zebra
stripes running north and south was
recorded by magnetometers. A similar
pattern was found by Soviet re¬
searchers in the Arctic.
One theory of their' origin is that
new rock is polarized magnetically as
it spews out of the median crack in
mid-ocean ridges and is laid down on
the sea floor. When it cools, this
magnetism is frozen and remains con¬
stant as "paleomagnetism" despite
later reversals in the magnetic field.
The stripe is formed when new rock
appears after a reversal.
In the research described by
Dr. Heezen, pencil-sized samples of
deep-sea sediment cores were placed
in magnetometers. The results imply
that our magnetic north has been
north only for the past 700,000 years;
before that it was reversed for a time,
so that a compass would have pointed
south. These reversals, he explained,
could be caused by disturbances with¬
in the earth's core which acts as a
dynamo.
Nine hundred thousand years ago
there was another brief reversal; others
occurred 1,900,000 years and 2,400,000
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
(1) The Congress, organized by the
U.S.S.R. government and the Soviet Aca¬
demy of Sciences, under the auspices of
Unesco, enabled over 1,700 oceanographers
from 57 countries to take stock of progress
in the study of the sea since the First
International Océanographie Congress was
held seven years ago in New York. Under
the general theme of "Ocean Research for
the Benefit of Mankind," the Moscow
congress covered four major fields of
study: ocean and atmosphere, ocean and
life, marine geology and oceanography of
the Antarctic and the Indian Ocean (special
studies of the findings of the 25-nation
Indian Ocean Expedition1959-1965).
13

CONTINENTAL DRIFT (Continued)
When the North was at the South Pole
Photo © Les Requins Associés, Paris
14
years ago. Study of the cores shows,
Dr. Heezen stated, that the earth's
magnetic field did not simply change
direction but disappeared for a period
as long as 10,000 years.
During this period of full exposure
to cosmic rays, drastic changes occur¬
red. Examination of fossil organisms
in cores showed, for example, that
one microscopic species of radiolaria
had no spines before magnetic reversal
but sprouted them afterwards.
The magnetic zebra-striping, already
detected on two per cent of the earth's
surface, is not all that marine geolo¬
gists have found on the ocean floor.
Their main achievements were reported
to the congress in a masterly review
by Sir Edward Bullard, head of the
department of geodesy and geophysics
at Cambridge University.
Next in importance, he ranked the
discovery of continental blocks in the
middle of the ocean that is, islands
formed of old granite rather than the
young basalts of the ocean floor. The
Seychelles group, for example, is "a
continent in everything but size" geo¬
logically speaking, and he suspected
other oceanic areas as being of conti¬
nental origin as well. Continental
rocks are much less magnetic than
oceanic rocks, thereby giving away
their origin.
Work has also been done on the
structural transition of the earth from
the continent to the ocean. Magnetic
surveys show that the old pre-Tertiary
folding of Western Europe's mountains
can be traced out across the continen¬
tal shelf. . . where it suddenly ends.
The folding of younger ranges like the
western Andes, however, has been fol¬
lowed magnetically all the way into the
ocean basin.
Sir Edward then touched on the
theory of continental drift seen in
certain quarters as confirmed by the
intense activity of the mid-ocean
ridges. The theory was discussed in
much greater detail by Dr. Robert S.
Dietz, of the Environmental Science
Service Administration in Washington,
who regaled congress participants with
slides showing how continents might
once have fitted.
The most classic example of such
a fit is what Dr. Dietz called "the knee
of South America into the groin of
Africa." Working with computers, he
has been able to fit India against
Australia, Magadascar against India
and Australia against Antarctica. A
few missing pieces each the size of
Texas are needed to complete this
picture, and Dr. Dietz thinks they are
lying on the floor of the Indian Ocean.
His studies have led him to discard
the idea of a single, primordial world
continent, known as Pangaea, in favour
of two super-continents each measur¬
ing 32 million squares miles Laurasia
in the Northen Hemisphere and Gond-
wana in the Southern.
Dr. Dietz and other proponents of
the drift theory believe that the pro¬
cess began 150 million years ago, went
on energetically for 50 million years
and has reappeared less markedly
in the past 20 million years. On the
basis of movement observed along the
San Andreas Fault in California, he
estimates the present rate of drift at
from 1 to 5 cm (è to 2 in.) a year.
However, the big question among
geophysicists at the congress was not
whither but whether we are drifting.
Prof. V. V. Beloussov, of the Institute
of Geophysics of the U.S.S.R. Aca¬
demy of Sciences, is still far from
convinced (see the Unesco Courier,
Oct. 1963).
At the congress, he marshalled a
number of impressive arguments. In
particular, he maintained that processes
affecting the earth's crust are rooted
deep in its mantle, as much as 700
to 1,000 kms (430 to 620 miles) down.
This leads him to believe that the crust
cannot move over the mantle and also
that movement of a layer of several
hundred kilometres of crust and mantle
is impossible for mechanical and other
reasons.
Continental drift is one of those geo-

logical theories, that have, as Sir
Edward Bullard remarked in his lecture,
"the great merit of suggesting nu¬
merous experiments and observations
to verify or refute them."
One way to verify or refute conti¬
nental drift is to drill a hole in the
earth's mantle under the ocean floor
to see if it consists only of new rocks
which would indicate that the conti¬
nents have moved apart in the past
100 million years.
This is the purpose of the Mohole
project designed by the United States
to probe through the Mohorovicic dis¬
continuity layer between the crust and
the mantle. At the congress, Dr. Henry
Menard, of the Scripps Institution of
Oceanography in the United States
described the phases of the project.
Its floating platform is expected to be
ready in two years when it will be
taken to a point 1,000 kms (620 miles)
west of Southern California to drill
about 350 metres (1,200 ft.) into the
sea bottom at a depth of four kms
(2è miles).
If this experiment succeeds, the next
point of research will be 500 kms (310
miles) northeast of Oahu in the Ha¬
waiian Islands where an attempt will
be made to drill at a depth of 4.5 kms
(about 3 miles) through another
4.5 kilometres of the sea floor down to
the mantle. It is planned to drill ten
holes in the next twenty years.
Prof. Beloussov also reported on a
Soviet project now under considera¬
tion to drill down seven kms (about
four miles) this time on land in the
Kola Peninsula of northern Russia
where there is a possibility of reaching
the basaltic layer of the earth's crust.
"These two projects form an en¬
semble," Prof. Beloussov commented.
Drilling holes, therefore, is the next
step in geophysical exploration of the
ocean bottom but it will have to await
the proper tools. Once they are ready,
they will spur marine geology in the
future as much as the development of
"sparkers" and "air guns" as sound
sources replacing explosives in seismic
refraction work has done in the recent
past.
Few sciences are evolving as fast as
oceanography, and océanographie re¬
search, while supplying answers to
many vital problems, is also opening
up new fields of Investigation. Com¬
menting on the results of the Moscow
congress, a Canadian scientist, Dr.
Robert W. Stewart, of the University
of British Columbia, observed: "The
area of our known ignorance has been
greatly extended."
Dr. Stewart is wrestling with one
of the trickiest problems facing ocean
ographers the interaction between
the ocean and the atmosphere, and
the consequent effects of the sea on
the weather.
Recent research has brought out
that half a day of 60-knot winds affects
the ocean more than a month of
15-knot winds, setting up momentum
that remains in the sea as much as
a year. Dr. Stewart felt that further
investigations should concentrate on
the effects of very local storms.
An example of such air-sea inter¬
action on a global scale was report¬
ed to the congress by Prof. Jakob
Bjerknes, of the University of Cali¬
fornia, who presented an apparent
paradox: when surface waters are
warm in the equatorial Pacific, Europe
has a cold winter.
Prof. Bjerknes turned to the period
from 1955 to 1958 when this phenom¬
enon appeared. It began when the
prevailing easterlies along the equator
weakened to the point where they
no longer drove currents hard enough
to produce normal upwelllng of cold
water from the depths. The Pacific's
"equatorial heat source" of warm
water became much greater.
This was a case not of winds driv¬
ing the ocean but of the ocean driving 1 K
the winds. "When heat is high in **
the equatorial zone from South Ame¬
rica to the mid-Pacific, the Northern
CONTINUED ON PAGE 31

The controversy
on continental drift
(Continued from page 15)
Hemisphere receives more energy
to maintain wind," Prof. Bjerknes
declared. "Winds increase in the
North Pacific", he said, "and, at the
same time, winds in the North Atlantic
decrease. Europe then receives less
heat from the Atlantic and experiences
a colder winter."
When Prof. Bjerknes summarized
his work at a press conference, a
correspondent at once queried: "But
why do the easterlies grow weaker?"
This is the kind of chicken-and-the-
egg question that oceanographers will
be able to answer fully only when they
have understood the movement of
great water masses transporting tem¬
perature changes over thousands of
miles of ocean.
Investigations along this line in the
Gulf Stream were described by
Dr. John Knauss of the University of
Rhode Island in the United States.
Working with newly-developed current
meters that remain three days on the
sea floor recording on magnetic tape,
Dr. Knauss concluded that the Gulf
Stream extends to the bottom even
in deep water. The old concept of
the deep sea as a "zone of no
motion" Is long dead.
Dr. Knauss reasoned that if the
Gulf Stream extends all the way down,
then its meander pattern should be
influenced by bottom topography. In
other words, when the bottom rises,
the Gulf Stream is more affected by
the earth's rotation and wanders off
its previous path.
Dr. Knauss also investigated the
amount of water transported by the
Gulf Stream. Measurements in the
Florida Strait relatively easy to make
because the Gulf Stream is flowing
between fixed banks and not through
the middle of the Ocean indicate
that here it moves 35 million cubic
metres of water a second. In other
words, in the Florida Strait this
immense "ocean river" is moving
350 times as much water as the
world's greatest land river, the Ama¬
zon, whose average flow is only
100,000 cubic metres of water a
second. This particular piece of re¬
search points to the need for still
broader studies an investigation of
the Gulf Stream's flow in deep water
for example.
Seven years from now, the Third
International Océanographie Congress
will probably see many of the ques¬
tions raised in Moscow answered
and many new ones posed.
31
