Undersea aquarium. Members of a French océanographie expedition
in the Red Sea return to their sea-bed base with collections
of fish held captive in plastic bags.

A new Mediterranean fishing problem
© Les Requins Associés, Paris
THE
TRANSMIGRATION
OF SHOALS
by Daniel Behrman
WO gigantic and involun¬
tary human experiments
are affecting the biological environ¬
ment of the eastern Mediterranean
Sea.
The first in point of time, for it is
nearly one hundred years old, was
the digging of the Suez Canal which
opened an artificial waterway for ma¬
rine life as well as shipping between
the Red Sea and the Mediterranean.
The second, much newer, is the sud¬
den cut-off of a flow of silt loaded
with nutritive substances into the east¬
ern Mediterranean following the con¬
struction of the new Aswan High Dam
which has already reduced and will
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
23

MEDITERRANEAN SHOALS (Cont'd)
Goat-fish losing ground to lizard fish
shortly arrest the seasonal floods of
the Nile.
Océanographie research into the
effects of these man-made changes in
the sea may become a subsidiary as¬
pect of a co-operative study of the
South Mediterranean and the Levant.
The study, to be focussed on the
Atlantic Current entering the Mediter¬
ranean at the Straits of Gibraltar, was
recommended by a recent Unesco-
sponsored inter-regional meeting of
scientific experts from thirteen coun¬
tries at Split, Yugoslavia.
The problem' of the Nile flood direct¬
ly involves sardine fisheries in the
Levant. Traditionally, fishermen all
along the eastern coast of the Mediter¬
ranean enjoy a bonanza every year as
sardines teem in the muddy waters
of the flood, first off the Nile delta in
September, and then as late as the
following spring off Lebanon.
These waters form a grey surface
layer which can be seen from the air
as far north as the coast of Lebanon.
Plant life flourishes on this sudden
dose of fertilizing nitrates and phos¬
phates which produce green blooms of
phytoplankton. Quickly, the next link
in the food chain of the sea, Zooplank¬
ton, appears to provide the minute ani¬
mal life upon which the sardines feed.
I
24
T is not only through this
massive transport of mine¬
rals that the Nile flood creates more
favourable conditions for marine life.
The eastern Mediterranean is highly
saline 39 parts per thousand, compar¬
ed to an average of 35 through the
oceans but this solution is consid¬
erably diluted by the autumn onrush
of the waters of the Nile. A drop in
salinity can favour certain groups of
marine organisms.
Now, the Nile flood will vanish. Al¬
though insignificant economically com¬
pared to the benefits of the Aswan
High Dam, the consequent loss to fish¬
eries will have to be studied in all its
side effects.
Research on this and other effects
of the damming of the Nile, the experts
felt, should start at once when the
process is only beginning. This will
provide a base point against which
future findings can be compared.
Dr. El Sayed Mohamed Hassan, di¬
rector of the Suez Branch of the In¬
stitute of Oceanography and Fisheries
of the United Arab Republic, said that
the UAR is already making surveys
to determine these effects and will
continue them until the dam is com¬
pleted.
Unfortunately, such surveys do not
exist in the case of the other man-made
change in the ecology of the Mediter¬
ranean, the opening of the Suez Canal.
Most of the year about eight
months the current in the Suez Canal
flows from the Red Sea to the Medi¬
terranean. With it come both fish and
forms af plankton, anything from one-
celled plant life to larvae of fish and
invertebrates, that must depend upon
currents for transport
Once they have passed through the
canal, a process of colonization begins.
Not all forms of marine life survive the
change by any means, but some appear
to thrive on it.
This has been the case of the goat-
fish, an Indo-Pacific species from the
Red Sea. Up until the late 1940s,
red mullet was the main catch of fisher¬
men along the Levant coast. Then,
in the 1950s, the goat-fish appeared
in commercial quantities and, accord¬
ing to Dr. Heinz Steinitz of the zoology
department of the Hebrew University
of Jerusalem, it has replaced the red
mullet as a major catch as far north
as the Turkish coast off Iskanderun.
But the goatfish is now losing ground
in turn to the lizard fish, another new¬
comer from the Red Sea. This is a
voracious animal that appears to eat
anything, even its own young, and it
is a fearsome competitor. While
fishermen's hauls do not diminish in
weight as a result, the lizard fish
fetches a lower market price than its
victims did in the past.
Dr. Steinitz did not foresee any eco¬
logical changes in the Mediterranean
as drastic, for example, as the result
of the introduction of the rabbit into
Australia, but he commented, "as soon
as you transplant an animal or a plant
into new surroundings, you can expect
anything."
\ T the Split meeting, Prof.
Jean-Marie Pérès, who
heads the Endoume Océanographie
Centre in Marseilles, remarked that the
first large-scale appearance of Red
Sea species occured in the Mediter¬
ranean between 1940 and 1945.
"But certain countries had other
things to do at the time", he said
wryly, "and this phenomenon could not
be properly observed. At present,
nothing enables us to say whether
the change will be good or bad."
One question immediately comes to
mind: why did the change occur so
long after the opening of the Suez
Canal?
It does seem certain that marine life
was moving across the isthmus of Suez
long before the 1940s. The first Red
Sea fish was found about eighty years
ago in the Mediterranean by a zoolo¬
gist on the Suez Canal staff.
But there were no reports of Red
Sea fish in the commercial quantities
now being found. The explanation
seems to lie in the Bitter Lakes through
which the canal runs. When the sea
receded in past geological times from
the isthmus of Suez, it left behind great
beds of salt and the Bitter Lakes.
These salt beds raised the salinity of
the Bitter Lakes to a point so high that
it prevented the passage of marine life
in any significant amounts when the
canal was opened. But then a gradual
process of flushing began and the
salinity of the Bitter Lakes dwindled
until it reached a level where it no
longer constituted an almost impene¬
trable barrier against the migration of
Red Sea organisms.
WHEN these Red Sea fish,
invertebrates and plants
compete with indigenous species for
survival ¡n the eastern Mediterranean,
they have several factors on their side.
The salt content at the northern end
of the Red Sea is 41 parts per thou¬
sand, while that of the southeastern
Mediterranean is only 39. Ability to
adapt to high salinity may help explain
why Red Sea life has been able to
pass more easily through the Bitter
Lakes than Mediterranean species.
But once these animals are in the less
salty Mediterranean, they find more
favourable conditions under which they
flourish.
At the same time, the Levant ¡s an
outer fringe for West Mediterranean
and Atlantic species penetrating the
Straits of Gibraltar. They are dwarf¬
ed here in comparison to their size
further westward and less fitted to
wage a struggle for survival.
At present, thirty species of Red Sea
fish are believed to have migrated into
the eastern Mediterranean. Scien¬
tists at the Split meeting did not view
this as any sudden increase or cause
for alarm.
But, they agreed, research must be
carried out now if the process is to
be followed closely from its inception,
with the movement of individual spe¬
cimens or larvae, to its culmination with
the appearance of an unfamiliar haul
in the nets of commercial fishermen.
