THE RAINS
THAT
DID NOT COME
4
ILLIONS of people in India are faced with a
grave shortage of food, and even starvation,
because of the rains that did not come last year.
The Indian farmer is utterly dependent on the monsoon
rains that normally fall from July to September. The baked
earth containing the newly-sown seed hungrily absorbs the
downpour to a great depth. Then, sated, it can imbibe
no more and the farmlands take on the appearance of an
area stricken by floods. But without this annual flooding
the crops wither and die in the blazing summer sun.
Last year the monsoon rains started at the usual time,
but they soon tapered off and then stopped. The failure
of the rains was of such proportions that the India govern¬
ment described it in an official white paper as "a natural
calamity of a magnitude unknown In recent times".
Some 10 million tons of rice, corn, millet and pulses
perished in the parched earth around Rajasthan, Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Madhya, Pradesh, Mysore and parts of
Andhra and Orissa. In September and October the rains
which should have given life to the crops for harvest this
spring also failed. This has meant a probable loss of a
further two to three million tons of food.
In 1964/65 India produced 88 million tons of food grains
and imported a further 6.5 million tons, bringing food
available for the year to 94 million tons. This year the
country has been able to grow only 76 million tons and,
with population increasing by 12 million a year, she would
need more than 96 million tons to maintain last year's
level of subsistence which could by no means be described
as lavish.
Even taking into account government stocks of a little
over two million tons and about the same quantity of
private stocks, the government of India soon realized that
the country's needs would be between 11 and 14 million
tons short. In any country such a proportionate shortfall
would have been critical. In India, vast both in area and
population, it could be disastrous.
The precariousness of this situation has long been
obvious to many people, not least to the Indian government.
In 1963 the late Jawaharlal Nehru, then Indian Prime
Minister, told a meeting of the Indian National Development
Council: "Agriculture is more Important than anything
else including the big plants you may have, because that
sets the tone to Indian progress. That gives you the
wherewithal of progress. If we fail in agriculture then you
fail inevitably and consequently in industry also."
FOR a time during the 1950s agricultural produc¬
tion in India was increasing by about three per
cent per year, but recently the increase has slowed down.
If agricultural production has stagnated, the growth of
population has not. India's population is today increasing
by 2.4 per cent per year more than 12 million people
every year bringing into the world with them a need
for two million more tons of food grains. This year India's
population will reach 500 million.
The net result has been that for several years, small
improvements which have been made in India's diet have
been owed to heavy food Imports. The Indian farmer has
merely kept step with the rising population until this
season.
The government took immediate practical steps to meet
the deteriorating situation. Rationing has been introduced
CONT'D ON PAGE 6

m
M.
P.A. Pittet. Geneva

THE RAINS THAT DID NOT COME (Cont'd)
}y
* "**Av ' »
1 * " i
J!f\
> I
M II
ir
¿V
&
tüi
- 1
*^fSä
»
S
?-" --T
Unicef - Jack Ling
Vulnerability of 15 to 20 million children
6
and á formula prepared for ensuring not only the equitable
distribution but equality of sacrifice, so that rice rations will
be the same throughout the country.
Port and railway facilities have been geared to offload
and distribute 1.2 million tons of imported supplies monthly,
while administrative arrangements to handle such
enormous supplies have been continuously improved. The
government is equally concerned about the coming crop
for which large quantities of nitrogenous fertilizers are
needed. It requires at least an additional 150,000 tons of
nitrogen from abroad to supplement local production and
what has already been arranged for purchase. Availability
of shipping has become a key factor.
International response to India's plight has been prompt.
In a joint appeal to other countries to aid India, Dr. B.R.
Sen, Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Orga
nization, estimated that 15 million to 20 million children
aged between one and 14 years were in a particularly
vulnerable position. The situation was already assuming
famine proportions and could be expected to worsen
progressively during the next few months. U Thant, United
Nations Secretary-General, and Dr. Sen reported that
130,000 tons of powdered milk were needed, besides up
to 14 million tons of food grains. His Holiness the Pope
also issued a stirring statement on India's plight,
beseeching people of all faiths everywhere to help.
The United States promised speeded-up delivery of three
million tons of grain out of its food exports to India for
the year, and Canada promised 15 million dollars worth
of wheat. Australia announced that it would give India
about nine million dollars worth of wheat and milk powder,
and Sweden offered 3.5 million dollars worth of dried

TREE OF LIFE
In India's hot weather season,
people count the sweltering
days and eagerly watch
for the first
sign of leaves on
the tree they call
"the rain tree" (>ight).
Conjured forth by the first traces
of moisture carried
in over the sea,
its leaves are the harbingers
of the approaching monsoon.
The winds which then begin
to blow from the Indian Ocean
usher in the period
from June to October
when life-giving rain drenches
the parched earth.
But there are good
and bad monsoon years.
If rainfall is uneven
or fails completely,
as it did last
September and October.
harvests are imperilled.
Indian agriculture
has rightly been called
"a gamble in rain."
Left, an Indian farmer
in the state of Orissa
shoulders his traditional
wooden plough,
and driving his oxen before him,
sets off for the fields.
V
,-.,t
m
m
flyytfLWi&¿,£áfcá . 0* *-*f/f|»M
*f\P* 'î11/ ;*
»Ä
, 4\
JN
© Brian Brake . Magnum
skimmed milk. Britain had already made an interest-free
loan of 7.5 million pounds.
The score of countries promising aid were joined by
private donations, both organized and individual. Within
less than three weeks, for example, RAI, the Italian State
Radio and TV network, collected more than 11 million
dollars from its listeners, while in the Netherlands five
million dollars were collected from listeners and viewers
In 10 days.
Within the limits of its resources the United Nations
family was also rendering aid. At the direction of FAO's
Director-General, the UN/FAO World Food Programme
has committed 7,000 tons of dried skimmed milk for
children and nursing or expectant mothers, besides 54,000
tons of wheat. These supplies were timed to arrive in
India before the monsoon rains come and
distribution.
slow down
On his return to Rome after a month's tour of India,
Dr. Sen spoke of the Indian government's gratitude for
the spontaneous manifestation of goodwill towards her
throughout the world. He said: "The fact that actual
famine has not occurred and starvation deaths are so far
not evident should not be construed as the government
having raised a false alarm. On the contrary there is real
shortage of food over a widely dispersed area and the
government have acted with commendable foresight in
taking preventive measures at an early stage. Even now,
difficult months lie ahead, and much will depend on the
speed with which foreign supplies will reach India before
the monsoons break in July."
Some high-value foods may be airlifted into the country
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
7

THE RAINS THAT DID NOT COME (Cont'd)
and air transport may also be used for meeting sudden
local crises but, in general, the great quantities of food
needed, and the distances it must be carried will prevent
India from being fed by air. In short, even if India can
find an extra 10 to 12 million tons of food overseas there
will be great difficulties in the way of carrying it to the
people who need it. Even with severe rationing and every
measure conceivable to conserve the food available and
make it go the longest distance, the food situation will
deteriorate until September. Then, if the rains come this
year, there will be a new crop and new hope in India.
The present food crisis has shown how precarious is
the balance between subsistence and starvation. One bad
harvest can upset this balance and bring a severe crisis.
The government of India is fully conscious of this and
has decided to accord the highest priority to agriculture
in its fourth five-year plan.
8
AN ANSWER
THE VAGERIES
THE MONSOON
The possibilities that could be opened up in monsoon
Asia by properly conceived control and use of water are
well illustrated by a case study carried out by FAO of
the Lower Ganges-Brahmaputra basin (1).
Although it is a region with an old civilization, densely
settled, and with heavy pressure of population on land
combined with extreme poverty, the basic resources of
land and water are grossly under-utilized. For the most
part, agricultural operations are confined to the few months
of the year when the monsoon rains provide adequate
moisture, and there is a general lack of useful occupation
for up to eight months of the year, while the vast bodies
of water carried by the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the
Megna (about 1,000 million acre feet a year) roll almost
unhindered into the Bay of Bengal.
Adequate explanation of this situation can be found in
terms of historical development but adequate justification
does not exist in terms of present-day techniques. Over
the centuries, agricultural practices have adjusted
themselves to the rhythm of the monsoon, which with 1,000
to 2,000 millimeters has made it possible to do without
irrigation, even though a late start or failure during the
critical flowering period can cause a partial crop failure.
Thus both farmers and the government agricultural
services have accustomed themselves to a system of
predominantly monocultural cropping. Such irrigation
schemes as have been developed in the postwar years
have been directed mainly at ensuring against failure of
the monsoon rather than for irrigation during the dry season.
Starting from the proposition that with cultivable land
scarce and water abundant, resources should be developed
toward a pattern which would make maximum use of the
land, the study of the Lower Ganges-Brahmaputra basin
examined the extent of the possibilities for a system of
perennial irrigation.
On the basis of a tentative assessment of water resources
in relation to irrigable land, the conclusion was reached
that it may be possible to provide an adequate water supply
throughout the year to more than half of the cultivable
area in the alluvial plain; while irrigation could be furnished
to a further area for two of the three seasons during which
crops could be grown, given favourable temperatures.
(1) "Possibilities of Increasing World Food Production" ,
N" 10 in the Basic Studies series supporting the Freedom
from Hunger Campaign. FAO, Rome, 1963. Price $2.50.
A
* i
¿¡t*-'

4
,*
'*¡
ï
*T»
r:
*>>
**A-
M
N*-
A peasant farmer
from the sertao
anxiously scans
the sky.
Driven from
his farm by drought,
he has planted
his cassave crop
on new land.
But if rainsfail again
he will have little
or nothing
to harvest.
ii
Y *
Ä<rf
The xique-xique cactus
is the last resource of sertao dwellers
who have watched their crops fail
and their food stocks disappear.
When peeled and fried or roasted
it is edible by man and cattle.
Left, repairing a windmill
which pumps water for an irrigation
network in the state of Pernambuco.
The Brazilian Government
in co-operation with FAO
is building irrigation systems
to make regular crop raising
possible on 300,000 hectares
(740,000 acres) of good land.
Photos FAO V. Bianchi
n northeastern Brazil, the sertao
or backlands are periodically visited
by disastrous droughts and resulting
famine. When this happens, herds are
wiped out, entire to wns go hungry and,
in a mass exodus, thousands abandon
their homes and set off for more
fortunate regions (see the " Unesco
Courier ", May 1963).
