Unesco - J. Bhownagary

CALLING ALL VILLAGERS
Where illiteracy may cover up to 90 per cent of the population,
radio is an all-important medium for reaching the rural community.
NE African farmer out of three works for the
birds, rodents, insects and fungi, declared
Ghana's Minister of Food and Nutrition, last year. Accord¬
ing to some estimates, nearly one-third of India's crops
are lost to rats, birds and other pests.
Thus drought is not the only cause of hunger. To
attack this problem in its ensemble, farmers must be made
aware of all the facts, and they must be encouraged to
adopt new attitudes, methods and techniques. To convince
them is often a matter of reaching the entire community
rather than addressing the individual; it is here that radio
comes into its own (1).
The use of radio for adult education in rural areas has
contributed, for some years past, to improvements in living
standards and an increase in farm output.
The organization of Radio Rural Forums which began in
Canada in 1940 under the title of Farm Radio Forums has
since spread to many other countries. In India, for instance,
the first Radio Rural Forum began in 1956 as a Unesco
pilot-project run with government collaboration. The
experiment, originally carried out in 150 villages in the
Poona region, proved to be a success from every point
of view. Its growth has been phenomenal. This year the
Radio Rural Forums cover some 10,000 Indian villages, and
each year thousands of other villages are adopting this
adult education technique.
The Government of India through All India Radio
broadcasts rural programmes from 30 stations in all the
major languages and about 50 dialects. This represents
some 30 hours of broadcasting a day. More than 145,000
receiving sets have been supplied to rural communities for
collective listening, and steps have recently been taken
to supply another 46,000 sets.
Today Radio Rural Forums are spreading through¬
out India. They are stimulating thousands of villagers
by giving them an opportunity to take part in discussions
and air their views. The success of the broadcasts over
the past few years is such that the Indian Government has
decided to make still greater use of them in order to help
the rural population meet the food crisis which now
threatens the country.
(1) See "Radio Broadcasting Serves Rural Communities" , N° 48 of
Unesco's Reports and Papers on Mass Communication; 4¡-; $0.75; 3 F.
In Africa, Togo was the first country to adapt the forum
technique to the needs of its people. By August 1965,
with the aid of a Unesco expert, some 152 villages were
equipped with collective listening centres. These centres
work on the same lines as those in India, each broadcast
being followed by a general discussion among listeners,
after which questions, comments and suggestions for future
programmes are sent to the radio station.
These questions and suggestions show how actively
the audience participates: someone will want to know how
to increase output of a particular crop; a village asks for
a visit from an agricultural team because it needs advice
before sowing time; a husband wonders if it is all right for
his wife, who is pregnant, to carry bundles weighing as much
as 100 lbs. on her head; some listeners want to know about
radio itself: how can it transmit in one place and be heard
in another?; others write in to say they have decided to
help the government by opening a village dispensary.
This sort of questioning indicates to what extent the
radio forums have entered the lives of the Togolese
villagers, and how far the forums may go toward trans¬
forming their way of living. It also explains the rapid
progress of the forum technique in this young nation: by
the end of 1965, some 800 villages were equipped with a
receiver for collective listening and this figure is expected
to exceed 1,000 this year.
Ghana also tried its first project in the technique in
1964-65 with the aid of Unesco and with the collaboration
of the Canadian External Aid Office. The results of this
project have further proved that radio forums have long
since passed the experimental stage.
The success of the forums in such widely different
countries as Canada, India, Togo and Ghana is due to the
fact that those in charge of the broadcasts have applied
education methods which correspond to basic realities.
They are addressed not to the farmer as such, nor do
they deal exclusively with farming problems; rather they
are directed to people at large and concern the thousand
and one problems of everyday life.
The use of new methods of cultivation, new tools and
new machines wiiï be possible only in so far as the oc
villager can be induced to give up some of his traditional ^"
habits and routine practices. It is towards these indis¬
pensable changes that the Radio Rural Forums are working.
