Sparking tomorrow's
tourist explosion
e
PERU
P eru is giving high priority
to tourism in its national economic and
social development plan for 1967-70.
The Peruvian Government has
announced that action to promote tour¬
ism will include:
improvement of roads, health ser¬
vices, sanitation and telecommunica¬
tions in touristic regions, and develop¬
ment of local crafts;
protection and preservation of
Peru's cultural and touristic heritage;
construction, expansion and opera¬
tion of hotels, restaurants and lodging
houses and training for hotel staff,
guides and other personnel. These
measures aim at the development of
three regional touristic areas compris¬
ing: Puno, Cuzco, Machu Picchu and
Quillabamba; Trujillo and Chan Chan;
Callejón de Huaylas .and Chavin.
Most people think of Peru primarily
as a land where Renaissance Spain
imposed its domination on a people
called the Incas. They often consider
the whole of Peru as Inca, as having
had an Inca population, Inca princes
and Inca rule. It is true that the Incas
produced a princely dynasty in the last
two centuries of pre-Colombian times,
and have left a profound mark on
popular imagination because of their
contacts with the Spaniards.
The true history of Peru, however,
began ten thousand years ago. Few
are familiar with this history and it is
not easy to retrace since no written
documents exist on which to recon
struct it. Ruins and the remains of
monuments and works of art are the
only evidence to indicate the movement
of populations and the space and time
in which they evolved.
Few people are aware that Peru is
one of the handful of places in which
the very ancient cultures of the world
originated. In this sense, the history
of pre-Columbian Peru, like that of
Mexico, is quite unlike the history of
other American regions whose cultural
contribution was insignificant in pre-
Columbian times. For thousands of
years, Peru has been a cultural centre
where agriculture and a settled existen¬
ce developed almost at the same time
as they did in the Near East, some
eight thousand years ago.
Eight thousand years ago, the Peru¬
vians were already living in villages,
fishing and raising manioc. Six thou¬
sand years ago, they were growing
beans, and five thousand years ago
were using cotton for their clothes,
and creating their remarkable art of
weaving which reached its height some
two thousand years ago and was to
gain the admiration of the world.
Four thousand years ago, the Peru¬
vians began to build complex stone
structures faced with clay, which in¬
cluded most of the architectural fea¬
tures subsequently embodied in the
great buildings of classical Peru.
Some three thousand five hundred
years ago, the inhabitants of the Peru¬
vian coastal strip began to grow maize
and to produce pottery. The art of
weaving developed and, about two
thousand five hundred years ago, the
great structures of the Chavin culture
adorned with carved stones and floor
tiles were built. The Chavin culture
left at least a hundred buildings of
importance along the coast and in the
Andes valleys. These are mostly
hidden under mounds of rubbish and
are often overlooked even by the
specialist. Like the structures of still
earlier cultures, they are . of great
value for an understanding of the
history of mankind just as are the
Mexican buildings of the Olmec, Ven¬
ta, Monte Alban and other cultures.
The fact that an American monument
was built 3,500 years ago whereas
comparable monuments were erected
5,500 years ago in the Near East in no
way diminishes the significance of the
New World structures. Comparisons
have to be made within the context of
the relative chronology and not the
absolute chronology of dates, i. e. the
comparison should be between the
achievements of peoples living on the
same cultural and technological level,
such as the early stages' of agriculture
and the Bronze Age.
The end of the Chavin culture in
Peru coincided with the development
of the first major regional cultures,
Mochica in the North, Lima in the cen¬
tre and Paracas-Nazca in the South.
It was at this stage that metallurgy __
developed, that agriculture changed )j
its form and that larger urban centres ^ '
emerged. Peru must have already
been relatively populous between
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

PERU (Continued)
A land of 50,000 archaeological sites
28
about 500 and 800 A.D. when a phen¬
omenon occurred, the origins of
which are obscure and which pre-
historians describe as "the impact of
the Tiahuanaco culture". Following
what may have been a climatic and
hydrological crisis the regional coastal
cultures appear to have declined and
this seems to have been followed by
an invasion of tribes from the Andes.
As early as the twelfth century,
however, the regional cultures took
shape again and the last three pre-
Columbian centuries seem to have
been Peru's Golden Age. The Chimu
princes dominated in the North, with
Chan Chan as their capital. Lima and
the central coastal region were domi¬
nated by the Chancay culture, while
the South East was held by the Chin¬
cha, lea and Nazca princes. Peru
entered on a period of urban life and
intensive agriculture based' on major
irrigation systems. The population
increased greatly and may have reach
ed 10 millions which is almost that of
present-day Peru.
It is possible that a new crisis was
at the root of the Inca conquests.
The history of the conquests achieved
by the dynasty of the Cuzco princes
(a dynasty which was short-lived in
comparison with the long history of
pre-Hispanic Peru) is not readily
understandable except on the assump¬
tion that the power of the coastal
principalities had again declined.
The gigantic effort made by the
Inca princes to create and organize
an empire covering some two million
square kilometres (nearly 800,000
square miles) is a prodigious exploit
if we consider that its authors had no
knowledge of writing, that they had
neither chariots nor draught animals,
and that their metal industry was only
in its earliest stages. The achieve¬
ment of the Incas in creating on the
basis of Cuzco the only American
empire deserving of the name is an
astonishing feat and one worthy of
admiration. (The Inca empire is often
compared with the Aztec empire, but
the administrative and military organiz¬
ation which the Incas imposed upon
their conquests have few points in
common with the Aztec wars.)
The assimilation of the Incas by the
Spanish conquerors was slow and
difficult. This process has been sev¬
erely criticized by many historians and
sociologists but, in order to be
correctly understood and appraised, it
should be set in the anthropological
and cultural context in which it took
place. In the sixteenth century, two
worlds came into violent contact, one
living as in the Egypt or Mesopotam¬
ia of six thousand years ago, the
other inspired by the profound Chris¬
tian faith of the Spaniards mixed with
new ideas imported from the Near
East as a result of Arab invasions
and of the Renaissance. Clearly, a
new evolution resulting from this tragic

w*v.
Photo Unesco - Cart
Peru's share of world receipts from international tourism in 1965 was a mere 1 /730th.
In Peru's national plan for economic development for 1967-1970 a high priority is given to tourism.
Measures to promote tourism will include road improvement and an expansion of the hotel network.
Priority is given to the region of Cuzco, the former seat of the Inca Empire and one of
Peru's most remarkable cities. Built at a height of nearly 3,500 metres (11,500 feet)
at the head of an Andean valley, Cuzco is now linked with Lima, the capital, by air.
Left, young Indian from Cuzco. Above, detail of an 18th-century Spanish-Indian church.
meeting could only emerge with diffi¬
culty. The cultural gulf that existed
between the two peoples explains the
reluctance of the indigenous popula¬
tion to change its ways of life and
thought, and this gave rise to repres¬
sion and excesses.
During some eight to nine thousand
years of pre-Columbian history and
four centuries of Spanish domination,
Peru has acquired an architectural and
monumental heritage of an importance
which has scarcely been realized by
most people. This heritage, which has
been neither studied nor made known
systematically and scientifically, is
therefore more familiar to plunderers
of tombs and treasure hunters than to
even the cultured reader.
Some 50,000 or so pre-Columbian
and Hispanic archaeological sites exist
in Peru. This architectural heritage
ranges from very small sites which,
nevertheless, are of value for studying
the history of mankind, to large-sized
towns. The world has few antique
cities which are almost intact and
cover an area of over five square kilo¬
metres, like Paestum in Italy, for
example. Yet Peru has several that
cover even larger areas.
Stone monuments are to be found
side by side with vast complexes of
unbaked adobe, one of which the
Temple of the Moon at Moche com¬
prises more than twenty million bricks.
The Andes conceal innumerable stone
cities with buildings ranging from the
monolithic structures of the Incas to
the two or three-storey buildings set
up by other civilizations. Even in the
Amazonian fringe of the Andes, vast
cities lie hidden under the tropical
vegetation.
The passion for building continued
during the Hispanic period, though
monasteries and churches then replac¬
ed the polytheistic temples. The Cuzco
school of painting and wood-carving,
for example, may be compared to that
of Quito, and the tapestries of Caja-
marca introduce an original note which
combines Indian craftsmanship with
the inspiration of Rubens and Euro¬
pean motifs.
The monumental heritage of Peru is
obviously of considerable scientific,
cultural and aesthetic interest. It is
a possession which, through touristic
development, could be made to contri¬
bute appreciably to the country's
economy. The study and protection
of this heritage which is essential for
its fuller development, will be warmly
welcomed by scientific circles through¬
out the world.
Peru, with 3,000 kilometres (nearly
2,000 miles) of Pacific coast, the
Andean mountain chain including peaks
over 6,000 metres (20,000 feet) high
and the Amazonian jungle, is one of
the most varied and fascinating parts
of the South American continent.
The Amazon region of Peru offers the
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
29

Peru has not only its wealth of artistic
and cultural treasures, including
innumerable Indian and Spanish-Indian
monuments to offer the tourist, but
also the grandiose scenic beauty
of the Andes. The people who live
'm the valleys and high plateaux
of the Andes maintain their
ancient traditions and folklore. Right,
youthful piper on a mountain road. Far
right, herd of llamas in the High Sierra.
6
PERU (Continued)
At journeys end the smiling valley
30
spectacle of the vast tropical forests
which cover a large part of the country,
and which are still not completely
explored. Its flora and fauna are
among the richest and most unusual in
the world.
Travel in the interior is only possible
by air or along the giant rivers that
cross this region. Iquitos, the largest
town in Peruvian Amazonia, is linked
with Lima by a daily airline flight, and
to the Atlantic by regular boats sail¬
ing up the Amazon river.
Trujillo, on the Pacific coast, is a
pleasant town with fine churches,
attractive houses with elegant balcon¬
ies and windows, and handsome
parks and squares. Huanchaco, where
the fishermen to this day use curious
boats made of reeds, is a picturesque
little port. But the main tourist
attraction of Trujillo is its proximity to
Chan Chan, the ruins of the fabulous
capital of the Chimu empire; and to
Moche, with its two enormous adobe
pyramids.
Not only the Trujillo region but the
whole of the Peruvian coast has much
to offer the tourist, and is reasonably
well equipped to receive visitors. It
is crossed by the Pan American High¬
way, and has an adequate network of
hotels. In its valleys still stand many
pre-Columbian monuments: at Sechin,
Panamarquilla, Cerro Blanco, Carbo¬
nera, Huancarpon, El Paraíso, Cajamar-
quilla, Tambo de Mora, Tambo Colo¬
rado, Haytara among other places;
those at Pachacamac, near Lima, have
been partially restored.
Seventeen international airlines link
Lima, the capital with other South
American capitals and with North
America, Europe and Asia, via Japan.
From Callao, the port of Lima, ships
sail to all parts of the world. Three
airlines provide services on internal
routes, and a road and a railway line
connect Lima overland with the Sierra.
The jagged peaks of the Andes give
the Sierra a grandiose scenic beauty.
The climate of this region with its
valleys and plateaux inhabited at alti¬
tudes of up to 4,500 metres (14,500
feet), is dry and healthy, hot in the
daytime and cold at night. The
western slopes have constant sun¬
shine; the eastern slopes, exposed to
tropical rainfall, are covered with jungle
up to an altitude of almost 3,000 metres
(10,000 feet).
The people have preserved their
language and customs, their tradi¬
tional dress and their crafts; and the
folklore, both Indian and Spanish, is
remarkably rich and varied. The region
also has thermal springs, numerous
waterfalls and lakes (including Lake
Titicaca, the world's highest navigable
lake) and excellent facilities for sports
(fishing, hunting, climbing).
Lastly and most important, It Is in
the Sierra that the largest number of

i
..xa«
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
monuments and architectural remains
have survived. In addition to the Inca
and pre-lnca remains, art treasures of
the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries are
numbered in hundreds.
The Puno-Cuzco-Machu Picchu-Quil-
labamba region, the heart of the Inca
empire, also possesses monuments of
exceptional interest. The world famous
Inca citadel of Machu Picchu not only
merits the conservation work at pre¬
sent being done by the Peruvian
authorities, but would justify the spend¬
ing of far larger sums. Other archaeo¬
logical monuments of outstanding
interest in this region include those
at Ollantaytambo, Sacsahuaman, Ken-
ko, Pisac, Sicuani, Sillustani and Chin¬
cheros.
Cuzco, a veritable museum city,
was both the capital of the Inca
empire and the first centre from which
Spanish culture spread through Peru.
Here the elegant refinement of 18th
century Spanish architecture and art
blends to remarkable effect with the
dignified severity of Inca building, and
this has made Cuzco one of the most
frequented tourist centres of Peru. By
following the examples of Toledo in
Spain and Siena, in Italy, it would be
possible, at relatively little cost, to
reorganize Cuzco touristically and to
give new life to the city.
Several planes a day fly from Lima
to Cuzco, where a new airport is now
being built. There are also roads and
a railway line which pass through
magnificent mountain scenery and
cross the Cordillera at very high alti¬
tudes. The Anticona road pass, for
example, is nearly 5,000 metres (16,000
feet) high. A network of hotels spans
the region; new ones are being built
and more are planned. Yet this area
is still one of the poorest and least
developed in Peru.
The second locality of the Sierra
earmarked for tourist development,
the Callejón de Huaylas, is a long,
broad green valley with an excellent
climate, bounded by two imposing
mountain chains, the Cordillera Blanca,
and the Cordillera Negra. The road
from the coast is hard going, and the
scenery, though grandiose, is bleak
and bare until it dips down into the
Callejón, where the traveller suddenly
comes upon a spectacle calling to
mind the smiling valley of James Hil¬
ton's "Lost Horizon" a gay welcom¬
ing scene, fertile and well-watered
country and a prosperous people.
However, the most remarkable pre-
Columbian monuments of the region,
those of Chavin, lie some distance
away from this fertile valley. There
. are no prospects of development, so
that the sole means of rescuing the
people from their present destitution
would be to develop this historical
site as a tourist centre. The archaeo¬
logical and architectural value of
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
31

Photo © Lee Boltin, New York. From
"Treasures of Ancient America" by
Samuel Kirkland Lothrop, published
by Editions d'Art Albert Skira, Gen¬
eva. Rafael Larco Hoyle Collection,
Lima.
This vessel in the shape of an old woman's head is one of the remarkable
pieces of pottery produced by ceramic artists of the Chavin culture which
flourished in central Peru nearly 3,000 years ago. It was found in a grave
near the Cupinisque Valley to the north of Trujillo, on the Pacific coast.
Peru's rich museum collections and particularly that of the Anthropological
Museum in Lima, afford the tourist an opportunity to admire the astonishing
originality and diversity of art created by the ancient Peruvian civilizations.
PERU (Continued)
32
Chavin warrants restoration work on
a larger scale than that now being
carried out.
The climate, the scenery and the
folklore of the Sierra are first-class
tourist assets, but it is none the less
the stupendous monuments of Peru¬
vian history that are the country's
most precious resources. The funds
needed for the restoration, protection
and display of these monuments repre¬
sent only a fraction of the cost of
implementing the tourist development
plan as a whole. Since most of the
monuments are still completely un-
cared for, a prey to wind and weather
and to the depredations of art plun¬
derers, prompt action is called for.
The Peruvian authorities are aware
of the danger and commendable efforts
are being made to cope with the
situation; but they do not go far
enough. The tourist development plan
provides an opportunity for action on
a large scale.
One of the measures proposed is
to establish a technical school for
research and for training personnel in
the study, conservation and restoration
of monuments. The Peruvian authori¬
ties also intend to draw up an inventory
of historical monuments and sites,
showing an order of priority. Unesco
has been asked to assist in carrying
out these projects.
A Unesco survey made at the
request of the Peruvian government
indicated that it would be well worth
while investing $38 million for the
development of Peru's tourist facilities
(communications, hotels, restoration
and display of monuments). This sum,
plus bank interest estimated at $7.7
million would increase the country's
revenue by $385 million within ten
years. Indirectly, this would benefit a
large part of Peru's economy, not
counting the airlines, which might earn
as much as $10 million a year.
In certain regions of Peru where
geographical factors, over-population
and the lack of exploitable resources
combine to make development acutely
difficult, building up a tourist industry
appears to be the best means of
establishing a "development nucleus".
Peru's share of more than $11,000
million spent on international tourism
in 1965 by over 115 million people was
about $15 million, or 1/730th of the
total an insignificant proportion in
view of Peru's immense potential tour¬
istic assets.

A CITY
WRESTED
FROM
THE JUNGLE
Hardly a year goes by in Peru without some
new discovery being made of relics from
pre-Columbian civilizations. In 1965, an im¬
mense city of pre-lnca times was found in the
region of Pajaten, where the eastern slopes of
the Andes sweep down towards Amazonia.
The city covers some 34 square kms. (12
square miles). Hacking away the jungle
vegetation, an expedition uncovered massive
stone structures built on circular terraces,
temples adorned with winged human figures
and condors, and traces of a vast network of
roads. It is believed that the city was built
by the Chachapoyas, a people conquered by
the Incas in the mid-fifteenth century. Right,
ruins of a temple decorated with carved stone
heads and geometric designs. Below left, a
stone condor. Many stylized figures of this
bird, which was worshipped by the Chacha¬
poyas, were found. Below right, freeing a build¬
ing from its tangled covering of jungle growth.
Photos 0 Vautier
Y-\ it
?f£%&^
m
/ R
ÉÉ>T,£,£r>
mJr** \+ -v^.TliJi.pi j-*T »f «jri , , ^*L TV- «v "* u J"
