THE ROOTS
OF PEACE
by Bert V. A. Roling
A new expression has entered the language ¡n recent years: "peace research".
Peace research deals not only with intentional war, but also with unintentional war
(war as a traffic accident) and civil war. The growing interest in this new activity
is conditioned by the nuclear arms situation which calls for a fundamental change
in the traditional organization of international relations Unesco is helping to pro¬
mote the peace research movement, and gave its support to the first international
conference of the International Peace Research Association, which took place in
Groningen (Netherlands) in July 1965. This year, Unesco is sponsoring a series
of studies on the economic and legal aspects of disarmament. Three inquiries
into the social and economic consequences of disarmament will later be carried
out under Unesco auspices in the Federal Republic of Germany, U.S.A. and U.S.S.R.
Readers' attention is drawn to a recent issue of Unesco's quarterly, International
Social Science Journal, devoted to Peace Research (Vol. XVII, No. 3, 1965)* The
complete text of the article below can be found in that issue.
(*) Single issue : 10/-(stg.), $2.00. Yearly subscription : 35/-(stg.), $7.00.
HE term "peace research" is comparatively
recent, as is the scientific interest in questions
of war and peace which is emerging all over the world.
This new interest is not surprising. It is linked up with
the changes in the nature and dangerousness of war.
Through these changes it has become possible, as is now
realized, for our technically highly developed culture to be
brought to ruin by its technology, through war.
There has always been war. An historian has calculated
that in 3,400 years of known history there have been 234
years without a known war. A French sociologist, Gaston
Bouthoul, has written a book entitled "8,000 Peace Treaties."
It is understandable enough that people should think that
war is unavoidable in view of what human nature is.
This idea of the inevitability of war has been expressed
through the ages in the "cycle of war," and is still alive
in wide circles of the population. In 1696 "The Beehive,"
by Francis Daniel Pastorious, described the cycle of war
in rhyme: "War begets Poverty, Poverty Peace, then
people will traffic and Riches increase. Riches produceth
Pride, Pride is War's ground. War begets Poverty, So we
go round." It is also understandable that people should have
made a virtue of necessity and have come to regard war
as a good thing, as the supreme manifestation of humanity,
as a cause of progress.
BERT V. A. ROLING Is secretary general of the International
f.,. Peace Research Association. From 1950 to 1957 he was a mem-
¿¿ ber of the Netherlands Delegation to the United Nations General
Assembly; he is now professor of international law and director
of the Polemological Institute at the University of Groningen
(Netherlands).
This may be surprising, in view of the misery caused
by war. But the dead are in their graves, and the cripples
are kept more or less in the background when the war is
over. The survivors usually regain their prosperity before
long. That mankind has been able to thrive and prosper,
despite our continual attempts on one another's lives, is
not due to the wisdom of our ancestors, but to their ignor¬
ance of the possibilities of destruction. We no longer live
in such ignorance. Technological evolution has now made
total destruction of the adversary possible.
War has changed its character primarily as a result
of social changes in the last few centuries. There were
times when it was waged with mercenary armies, later with
national professional armies. The Napoleonic period saw
the development of popular armies: the democratization of
war. This also had its effect upon the nature of war;
the limited war as waged by professionals had left open
the possibility of a certain chivalrousness and a military
code of honour. With the advent of the popular armies
all this was changed. Churchill rightly asserted: "From
the moment Democracy was admitted to, or rather forced
itself upon the battlefield, War ceased to be a gentleman's
game." It came to be the total war, in which people
stood facing each other.
The technical evolution in armaments made this total war
totally intolerable. There were revolutionary developments
in explosive power, in range and in speed. The destructive
power of weapons has become a million times intensified,
their range spans the earth, their speed makes defence,
effective protection against them, impossible.
From a means of pitting one's strength against another,
armaments have become a means of unrestricted mutual
CONT'D ON PAGE 24

Mother and Child.
A sculpture
by Henry Moore.
© From "Mutter und Kind,"
Migros-Genossenschafts-
Bund, Zurich
23

THE ROOTS OF PEACE (Cont'd)
Military strength and foreign policy
destruction. This makes the total nuclear war an intolerable
catastrophe.
But will not this consequence tend to prevent war?
The power of the state is political power, and "political
power is not a power over nature, or material, or oneself,
but over the minds and actions of other men." Will not
the result of this enormous military strength be that the
adversary will no longer risk war? That is the doctrine of
the "deterrent," in which peace is sought through the threat
of intolerable destruction. Through the "balance of terror"
the intentional thermo-nuclear war certainly is excluded.
Von Clausewitz described war as the continuation of
foreign policy by other means: an attempt to achieve through
military power what had proved impossible without use of
force. Such views are no longer reasonably possible. The
thermo-nuclear war is no longer a reasonable means of
national policy. Possibly a smaller-scale war could still be
considered as such; the "limited war" of nuclear powers
or a war waged by ill-armed non-nuclear States. But in
both cases there is the danger of "escalation," of intensi¬
fication because the losing side resorts to ever bigger
weapons (military escalation), or because nuclear powers
become involved in the struggle for power between smaller
states (political escalation).
The thermo-nuclear war, in which the existence of peoples
and their cultures is at stake, is only conceivable as a
result of accident, miscalculation or escalation, as an unin¬
tentional war, as an accident in the hazards of interna¬
tional traffic.
Military strength by its very nature has a great in¬
fluence on a country's foreign policy. Military strength
opens up the possibility of a provocative, reckless foreign
policy, of brinkmanship, in the confidence that the opposing
side will not respond to the provocative policy with violence.
Only if interests that are considered really vital are affect¬
ed can the inflexibility be expected which makes a country
prepared to protect these interests by all means. But when
is inflexibility certain? On this point there is uncertainty.
N
24
ATIONAL nuclear armament is already a risky
foreign policy. Nuclear armament does prevent
an intentional nuclear war, and is as such a factor of peace.
But it also leads to reckless international policy, and in the
case of reliable "arms control" enables a country to
engage in "limited war." Because of this it increases the
risk of unintentional thermo-nuclear war, and does not
ensure the lasting peace which is the vital interest of
technically highly developed countries. National armaments
do not provide the required national security, since they
cannot prevent unintentional war, and cannot protect the
civilian population in case of war.
The increasing realization of the danger into which tech¬
nically highly developed cultures and possibly all mankind
are being led by their technology is the chief motive for
the present interest in peace research.
There is yet another motive. That is the moral aspect
of the present military situation. We have to do with
weapons of wholesale destruction, and today some -of
these weapons are aimed at the civilian population, at the
great cities. "Counter-city strategy" is an official compo¬
nent of this strategy.
The civilian population as a military target is a compa¬
ratively recent phenomenon. It seems that the practices
of actual warfare have changed the traditional law of
nations, and modern laws of war apparently sanction the
destruction of open cities. But such methods of warfare
are incompatible with what used to be regarded as the
military code of honour: war was fought against soldiers,
not against civilians.
HE "counter-city strategy" marks a lowering of
this level of warfare. It is clear proof that the
world wars did not only destroy material goods, but also
spiritual values. But this lowering of moral standards hardly
fits in with the great emphasis on human dignity in our
culture. This recognition of human dignity is the most
characteristic trait of our times, a recognition of dignity
"without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion"
(Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations). Weapons
of wholesale destruction can hardly be reconciled with such
recognition. One may readily concede that they work
"without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion."
But they are hardly compatible with respect for man and
for human life.
In other respects, too, the "counter-city strategy" runs
counter to prevalent views and positive international law.
In 1949, the Red Cross conventions, which re-formulated
the laws of warfare, were concluded; under these conven¬
tions the taking of hostages was expressly forbidden
(Article 34, Geneva conventions relative to the protection
of civilian persons in time of war). But in the "counter-city
strategy" the civilian population as a whole is a hostage
for the good conduct of its government. "Hostageship"
has not disappeared: indeed it has been extended and
democratized!
This paradoxical situation is cited to demonstrate that
the arms situation has become morally intolerable, and
degrading for the culture in wHlch it appears. The "coun¬
ter-city strategy" undermines the cultural values which
it is supposed to defend.
Many writers have been most outspoken in their condemn¬
ation of the weapons of wholesale destruction. The ques¬
tion is, what consequences follow from this condemnation?
Unilateral disarmament? Some draw this conclusion. It
is the emotionally understandable answer to a situation
which is felt to be morally unjustifiable. But it is an
extremely unwise answer. It should be realized that the
arms situation has grown to what it is now through a
process lasting over many centuries.
We must take as our starting-point the situation in which
history has placed us: a world grown accustomed to think¬
ing in terms of the balance of power. A sudden disturb¬
ance of this pattern might have disastrous effects. The
non-disarmed adversary now unassailable in his power
would no longer be held in check in his foreign policy by
the power of his opponent, and would resort to a reckless
foreign policy which would be felt as intolerable by the
other side. This would very soon result in a tendency
towards rearmament. But this again might lead to pre¬
ventive action. Thus unilateral disarmament might pro¬
mote war, and encourage the use of nuclear weapons.
The realization that our armaments provide no security,
and that they morally undermine our culture, can only lead
us to strive for collective disarmament.

Unesco-Dominique Roger
PEACE IN JAPANESE
This Japanese character engraved
on the huge fountain-rock
in the garden at Unesco's H.Q.
signifies "peace".
It Is derived from an ancient
Chinese character depicting
a grain stalk (on right)
and a mouth (lower left).
General disarmament is no small problem. It can only
be achieved very gradually and with great caution. But
it is only through this approach that it will be possible to
attain lasting peace; and this will involve great changes
in the position of the national state and a great strength¬
ening of the world organization which must largely take
over its security function.
Complete disarmament under international control, with
appropriate provisions to take over the earlier function of
threat and violence, confronts the world with unprece¬
dented problems. It will strike at the root of a pattern of
life as old as humanity itself. This change cannot be
achieved by activity based on intuition. Up to the present
day existing peace movements and how popular they
were, especially between the two world warsl have
shown no practical results whatever.
Good intentions are not enough. The catch-phrases
of 19th-century peace movements disarmament and de¬
colonization as they were given expression in the resolu¬
tions of the conferences organized by the Bureau de la
Paix were correct. But the question of how such a result
could be attained was scarcely put. It would probably have
been unattainable then, too.
The Covenant of the League of Nations (Article 8) stated
that "the maintenance of peace required disarmament",
but this only implied a "reduction of national armaments
to the lowest point consistent with national safety". Consid¬
ering that the preservation of the colonial system was
impossible without arms this was an empty phrase, an
official truth which came distressingly near common
deception.
The nuclear weapons have opened our eyes to the neces¬
sity of disarmament. The Charter of the United Nations
hardly concerned itself with disarmament. It refers primar¬
ily to collective security. But then the Charter dates from
the pre-atomic age. Nuclear technology necessitates nation¬
al disarmament, makes it imperative to change the present
system, under which military power is the hard core of
relations between States.
This may be required by the actual situation, but how
can it be realized? The more one occupies oneself with
the problem of disarmament, the more strongly one is
impressed by its unprecedented complexity. One is driven
to the conclusion that today a good deal of "official
truth" is expressed in statements about general complete
disarmament, which is not always sincerely meant, and
which sometimes serves to mislead the masses.
HE effects of disarmament will be extremely far-
reaching. It follows that disarmament can only
be achieved very gradually. What are the appropriate first
steps? How is the process to proceed? What constructive
measures will have to accompany each stage of the
breaking-up of the national military machinery?
These are technical, military questions, economic and
social problems. But the greatest problems at this point
are political ones. They concern the attitudes of govern¬
ments and of the masses. For the solution of these
problems scientific research is indispensable.
The moral rejection of the arms situation, which is prima¬
rily based on the existing weapons of mass destruction
but which strikes at the root of the whole traditional military
organization is another motive for the present interest in
peace research.
A third motive may be mentioned. History shows us
that the size of the political unit in which man seeks pro¬
tection against enemies from outside has been more or
less dependent upon the range and penetration of the
existing weapons. The fortress, the town, the county, had
to disappear as distinct political units because they could
no longer be defended. The range and penetration of
modern rockets make the state a unit which can no
longer be defended. Even regional groups are no longer
capable of such defence. Modern weapons with their
world-wide capacity necessitate some form of world-wide
organization, which takes over the security function of
the states.
The age of nuclear weapons and rockets an age in
which the national state has a greater military potential
at its disposal than ever before, but can no longer guar-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
25

THE ROOTS OF PEACE (Cont'd)
The science of waging peace
26
antee security is also an age in which far-reaching
changes must be effected in the current international organ¬
ization. This is a task which cannot possibly be achieved
by statesmen with a short-term policy based on conven¬
tional wisdom. The task requires extensive scientific
preparation, not only with regard to the system that would
eventually have to be established, but also with regard
to everything that would be needed to make populations
prepared to accept the ultimate goal.
In earlier times, many studies on war were published.
Indeed there exist a great many books about the causes
of war. They are worth while. But it should be borne in
mind that most of these earlier works deal with war as it
was understood by Von Clausewitz, that is to say inten¬
tional war, and pay little attention to unintentional war,
war as a traffic accident.
The old theories often lay the responsibility for war at
the door of small groups, such as ambitious kings, war¬
like generals or profit-seeking arms manufacturers. If
one asks after the cause of the unintentional war and
this implies asking after the cause of risky foreign policy
one is more likely to find it in very general factors,
current habits of thought and action. It then becomes
clear how fatal traditional habits and attitudes can be.
The cause of war is closely linked with the existing general
situation. All this indicates the democratization of the
cause of war.
If this is so, it makes the problem even more difficult.
So long as the fault lies with small élite groups, it is pos¬
sible to attempt to counteract their influence. But if we
have to do with attitudes and views which are deeply
embedded in the people as a whole, it is so much more
difficult to find ways of bringing about conditions for a
lasting peace.
It should also be recognized that as yet we know only
very little about the factors which lead to risky foreign
policies. Here too as in the problem of the cause of
the intentional war we have to do with a combination
of factors originating with the individual, with the state
and with the world. Is war unavoidable because man is
by nature aggressive? What gives rise to this aggressive¬
ness? Is it an essential component of human life, or a
reaction against frustration, or a cultural phenomenon,
acquired by imitation and adaptation to an existing pattern?
What is the effect of pornography intermingled with
violence, of films featuring violence?
And what about the factors in the state? What part is
played by public opinion here? How is public opinion
formed?
ND what factors govern the relations between
states? Are these primarily determined geo-
politically? Is overpopulation the all-important factor, as
Bouthoul thinks? What part is played by history here? What
are the origins of the stereotyped notions that peoples have
about one another? Is a disappearance of the general
distrust of foreign states possible? Is competition still more
profitable than co-operation? And if not, how can the
current pattern of competition be modified?
I mention only a few questions. They could be supple¬
mented with hundreds of others. They are mentioned
simply to show that many disciplines will have to co¬
operate to yield some insight: psychology, history, econo¬
mics, sociology, legal science, and even theology and art
history, for the Church and the arts play an important
part in attitudes and views held by individuals and groups.
These attitudes and views are of the greatest importance
with respect to war and peace. Here, too, it is essential
to emphasize, besides the concept of "intentional war",
the importance of the "unintentional war." Gradually,
there is developing a general feeling against war; there is
a growing aversion to war. But this is not yet the case
with "risky foreign policies." In the matter of foreign policy,
many things are still as they always were: security through
national or regional power, and occasional provocation if
the other party can be expected to give in out of fear.
It is an attitude which gives insufficient attention to the
concept of "unintentional war."
I N this context I would briefly note that as war
recedes into the background as a result of the
arms situation, world organization and war prohibition, civil
war acquires greater importance. A civil war is often a
limited "war by proxy," in which it is the outsiders who give
an originally purely domestic conflict its international
aspect, and contribute to its prolongation and intensification.
Civil war, too, falls within the scope of the science of war
and peace.
What system of world order would have to be set up
to prevent (total) war?
What are the requirements that would have to be met by
an effective peace policy? What is needed to ensure the
safety of international traffic? It stands to reason that
sacrifices will have to be made for peace, both in the
material and in the spiritual sphere. In the long run
war is inevitable if the gap between rich and poor countries
continues to widen, as it is now doing. Hence the need
for intensive activity to raise the standard of living in
the developing countries. It cannot be denied, however,
that economic changes in these countries will also entail
great social changes, with all the unrest and aggressiveness
that go with them.
It is important to arrive gradually at a clear idea of
the nature of a disarmed world. It goes without saying
that material sacrifices will be necessary. It is easily said
that of course peace has its price. But it is not only a
matter of material "sacrifices." Concessions will also have
to be made in spiritual matters. There will be opposition
to overcome for the very reason that the spiritual climate
in a disarmed world will necessarily differ from the present
climate. This will not tend to make things easier.
The traditional attitude is a facile one which is deter¬
mined only by the views current in one's own circle, which
takes a black-and-white view of' right and wrong accord¬
ing to the views prevalent there, and is prepared to
risk war for what is- felt to be right. A world-wide security
system involves entering into a larger whole, a recog¬
nition of the right of "foreign" views to exist, an atti¬
tude of tolerance towards others, of give-and-take, a willing¬
ness to act reasonably an'd to compromise.
To form an idea of what is needed for maintaining peace
is important also because by so doing we make it clear to
CONT'D ON PAGE 31

THE ROOTS OF PEACE (Continued from page 26)
ourselves how far we are still removed from what is
vitally necessary.
Yet even when we have ascertained what is necessary,
"necessary for survival," we have still not touched the
question whether the necessary will also be attainable.
Every community and every generation has only a narrow
range of action. Only gradual, small steps can be taken.
This leads to a fourth complex of questions: can the
necessary be made possible? The time available is not
unlimited. There is a certain urgency. The problem is
whether individuals and peoples can be induced by edu¬
cation and other means to make "the necessary" possible.
Is the "human way" of change through reason and common
sense possible? Man is also "irrational man," who in his
opinions and actions is primarily swayed by instinct,
emotion and tradition. Reason, especially in the human
group, has but little influence, and the influence of what
is emotionally felt, direct, and immediate, dominates. It
has been said that if one wishes to influence the masses,
one cannot afford to fly in the face of the "basic attitudes"
of nationalism, or freedom, or of security sought through
power.
The prevalent pattern of international relations is a
pattern of distrust and fear. Can this possibly be changed?
Certain fundamental human attitudes "have become so
much a part of the mind, and lie so far back, that (men)
are never really conscious of them at all. They do not see
them, but other things through them." The important ques¬
tion is how far ways can be found to make individuals and
peoples prepared to accept what the "long-term interest"
of ensuring peace demands.
This ends our brief survey of some questions which
determine peace research. To answer them thorough
scientific investigation is required in which almost all
scientific disciplines must be involved. Close co-operation
between these various disciplines will be indispensable.
The problem is a social one, one of individuals and
groups, and of contacts between individuals and groups.
In such an investigation the starting-point will have to be
the present situation, as a product of historical evolution,
hardened and intensified by the ideas and interests rooted
in it. The historical evolution of each group, which distin¬
guishes it from other groups through the deep-seated
memory of shared joys and sufferings, makes it desirable
that peace research should primarily be cultivated in each
individual political collectivity. Each collectivity has its
characteristic peculiarities and idiosyncrasies, each collec¬
tivity may have its own ways and possibilities of change.
EACE research in each state is important also
because there is a tendency towards spiritual
insulation on certain points, to protect the national pattern
of thought.
Peace research in each country will be able to help
counteract this nationalization of truth. Research in the
social sciences will recognize such nationalization as a
fact, but may through this very recognition be able to
prevent its worst excesses.
There is another important aspect. If it is true that our
world is not organized in such a way as to be equal to
the dangers that technological evolution has brought about,
then it is imperative that changes should take place.
That this is so is beyond doubt, although for the moment
we can leave aside the question of what these changes
would have to encompass. There is a predominant school
of thought which maintains that these changes will have
to run on lines of general and complete disarmament, and
the ensuring of security through world organization.
This means that the changes will have to be realized
everywhere. Security cannot be achieved by unilateral
measures, of whatever kind, but only through combined
efforts and concerted action. Changes at home will only
be possible as adequate steps are taken elsewhere,
prompted by a recognition of common long-term interests.
Now if it is true that for the realization of the changes
required for lasting peace scientific research is indispen¬
sable, then it is essential that such research should be
carried out everywhere. If peace research is to be effec¬
tive, the understanding it provides will have to become
public property everywhere. This will be promoted by the
existence of peace research institutes in every country.
v^h E have here a consequence of interdependence,
which is even more evident than that which led
to the establishment of the International Labour Office.
Improvements in the social conditions of the labouring class
could not be effected nationally without simultaneous
implementation elsewhere. Hence the attempt at inter¬
nationalization of labour legislation in 1919. International
security through disarmament can naturally only be attained
if the pattern of security through national armament is
universally abandoned, and appropriate measures are
universally accepted.
The first requirement, therefore, is that peace research
should be cultivated in all countries and nations: peace
research which can then start from the pecularities of
each, historically conditioned, national situation; peace
research which can express itself in the specific national
pattern of thought, enjoy national confidence, and thus
influence national patterns of thought.
The possibility cannot be ruled out, however, that the
nationalization of truth will also set its mark on nationally-
conducted peace research. Here is a first special reason
for the desirability of international contact and co-operation
in the science of war and peace.
Another special reason is that peace research deals
with matters which affect the whole world, so that it is
important to be informed of "the situation" everywhere..
It is only through the co-operation of scholars that an
understanding may grow of what is thought and felt in
various parts of the world, and of what in a concerted
effort to effect changes represents action possibilities.
In addition to these special reasons for international
scientific co-operation there are the general reasons of
mutual stimulation and supplementation favourable results
of which in different fields we can daily see before us.
The need for international contact and co-operation has
led to the establishment of the International Peace Research
Association. The Association aims to make a substantial
contribution to world and international peace research in
order to promote world order, peace and security. This will
be possible if many are prepared to lend their active
support.
