FOR CHILDREN
ONLY
Children's libraries exist all over the world, but most of them are school librar¬
ies or simply sub-departments of public libraries designed to serve adults.
Libraries conceived and built to operate as independent units, catering exclu¬
sively for children are still rare exceptions. The latest of this kind and the
first in France opened recently among the red-brick apartment houses in the
Paris suburb of Clamart. Recent urban development in this, area had raised
its population of youngsters, aged four to fourteen, to over 6,000, but little
was being done to cater for their leisure time needs. So "La Joie par les
Livres," a nonprofit organization for promoting reading, decided to build a
comfortable and attractive cultural and recreational centre which would pro¬
vide books, illustrated lectures and classes in painting, pottery and clay mod¬
eling. The centre opened towards the end of last year and within two
months over 1,000 children were using it regularly. Our photo story shows
some features of the library, whose architecture, equipment and methods
combine to stimulate and satisfy the spontaneous interests of young people.
k
Children come down
the stairway from the reading
room to the lending section.
Youngsters really feel at home
in this library
with its attractive decor
of concrete and pinewood
lit by large lamps (left).
Below, young readers
take book choices
to the lending desk.
Library has space
for 10.000 books.

Bl BS
I JÍÍMÍi SfS h.
** «S S3 SB SB Ml SB «
- 's»» s--» ¡buk asa sc sai a«
-Jhivlt
The new children's library
at Clamart, near Paris,
mantled in snow.
Its design, based on a series
of intersecting curves,
makes maximum use of space.
Popular with the
youngest children is
the Story Room where
they listen to tales
and follow them with the aid
of picture books. Right
library viewed from garden.
Photos Unesco-Dominique Roger
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

$^;^m.>zx8®®m
Children find it great fun to walk
around the Clamart library
in their stockinged feet.
They were first asked to take off
their shoes because of the mud
they tracked in when the area
around was churned up
by building operations. The rule
has now been definitely adopted.
Shoes are stored in compartments
in the cloakroom (below).
Children run no risk of chills;
the heated floor warms their silent feet.
II 11!

m*
i*.
A PAINTING LENDING
LIBRARY FOR JUNIOR
How would that look in my room? A
young boy discovers some marvels of
world art (left), reproductions of which
are kept in a special collection at the
library. Children can take away these
framed pictures, just like library books,
and keep them for up to two weeks.
The collection is renewed regularly and
ranges from abstract art to Renais¬
sance paintings a youngster may
come across anything from a work by
Max Ernest to a drawing by Leonardo
da Vinci. Tasting art like this can
inspire children with a real taste for
art; aspiring artists can put their urges
to work in rooms set aside for paint¬
ing and modeling, and also get some
help from the art teacher if they wish.
The library has over 300 foreign language books English, Danish, Russian,
Italian, German, Japanese and so on which are equipped with tape-recorded
texts in French. Here a boy pores over some fascinating illustrations
in a Japanese book which he can also "read" on tape.
So far more boys than girls have been making use of the library.
Photos Unesco-Dominique Roger
