- 'V f i
i -: ^ '* ah ^
'fe; y n
^.m
' This tangled mass of wires I
problem for a telephone sw
reality it is part of a carefully-planned and complex
network of electronic equipment with which atomic
,., research teams monitor the results of experiments
at the European Organization for Nuclear Research.
Unesco-Paul Almasy, Paris
H

EUROPE'S
EXPANDING
NUCLEAR
RESEARCH
CENTRE
by M. S. Wilde
To probe deeper and deeper into the infin¬
itely tiny world of the atom, science has
paradoxically to design and build larger
and larger tools giant accelerators pro¬
ducing beams of high energy particles that
can "prise open" the close-knit structure
of atomic nuclei. CERN, the European
Organization for Nuclear Research, in
Geneva, which was created under the
auspices of Unesco in 1952, has decided
to build a new type of atom smashing
machine, 50 times more powerful than any
existing accelerator. What this will do
and why CERN foresees the need for a
still more colossal one within the next
decade are explained in this article.
peaceful penetration into France from Switzer¬
land has been made by CERN, the European
Organization for Nuclear Research, to find space to build
a new type of atom smashing machine which can reach
energies more than fifty times those produced by the
biggest conventional particle accelerator In the world today,
which is at Brookhaven, U.S.A.
On a 100-acre site In Switzerland, on the French border
just outside Geneva, CERN now has an accelerator called
a Proton Synchroton with an energy of 28 GeV (28,000
million electron Volts), the second most powerful in exis¬
tence.
This machine accelerates proton particles to speeds near¬
ly equivalent to that of light (186,000 miles per second),
which then smash against atomic nuclei in detectors.
However, these latter are stationary; and because of their
resistance or recoil, three-quarters of the original force is R
lost, so that the impact represents an energy of only 7 GeV.
The same, of course, holds true for all other accelerators
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE

CERN CERN is a European co-operative enterprise in which the skills and resources of 13 European countries
are being applied to experimental and theoretical nuclear research of a non-military nature. The results
of its work are made available to all countries throughout the world. Over 350 fellows and visiting scien¬
tists come to stay at CERN for anything from two months to two years, so that It also plays an important
role in the education of the new generation of scientists. Many other scientists visit CERN to discuss and
describe the most recent discoveries in nuclear research. Above, an international group of physicists
carries on a discussion and (facing page) a visiting scientist lectures on atomic structures at CERN.
EXPANDING NUCLEAR RESEARCH (Cont'd)
Peaceful collisions beneath the frontier
6
of the same type, such as the one of 33 GeV at Brook-
haven, and the one of 10 GeV at Dubna, near Moscow,
U.S.S.R. It is also one of the reasons why nuclear physi¬
cists call for the construction of ever larger and more
costly conventional accelerators; one of 70 GeV is now
under construction at Serpukhov In the U.S.S.R., while
one of 200 GeV Is under contemplation in the United
States, and another of 300 GeV by CERN somewhere in
Europe, but not at Geneva where there is no suitable site
for it.
But some years ago, and practically simultaneously, a
team of physicists from Stanford and Princeton Univer¬
sities in the U.S.A., a group of Soviet physicists at Novosi¬
birsk, and another group, a mixed Italian and French team,
hit upon the same brilliant idea. Why not have two beams
of particles accelerated to about the equivalent of the
speed of light collide with each other In an intersecting
storage ring? In this way, energies could be produced far
exceeding those of smashing Into any stationary target.
However, at Stanford University it took six years of trial
and error to put the Idea into practice. The French and
Italians, working at Frascati, Italy and Orsay, France have
been experimenting with a small storage ring called "Ada"
since 1962. In the Soviet Union, physicists have built and
operated intersecting storage rings for electrons and posi¬
trons.
Once assured of its probable success, CERN decided to
put the collision principle into practice on a large scale.
Its Council has approved the construction of such a ring
in an underground circular tunnel, using protons, the acce¬
leration of the particles being provided by the existing
Synchrotron, which will feed beams at about the speed of
light Into the ring at two different points and In opposite
directions. There will be eight points of Intersection at
which collisions can be made to occur, and their results
observed, at a force for which a conventional accelerator of
1,700 GeV would be needed at present a practical Impossi¬
bility.
The ring, which will have a diameter of about 330 yards
(302 metres) will be equipped with powerful concentric
magnets to guide the beams. Its estimated cost is 64 mil¬
lion dollars (£22,500,000), which will be spent over the next
six years. The money will be provided by the thirteen
member states of CERN: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France,
the Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Italy, the Nether-

gw«^
l^t**'
Ä^M
Paul Almasy, Paris
lands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United
Kingdom (1).
Since there was not enough adjacent room on the Swiss
side of the border to construct It, CERN has leased another
100 acres (40 hectares) of land, belonging to the French
State, across the border in the foothill country of the Jura
mountains. The lease covers a period of 99 years and is
renewable. It Is at a "peppercorn" rent of ten francs (not
quite a pound sterling) per annum. However, In order
not to interfere with the provisions of the 1953 Convention
which established the European Organization for Nuclear
Research In Switzerland, the new area across the French
frontier will be completely fenced off, so that all entrances
and exits will be on the Swiss side. The agreement hand¬
ing over the French territory to CERN was signed at a
ceremony on September 13, 1965.
With this new project now virtually under way, with the
main object of achieving high energy collisions between
(1) Three other countries, Poland, Turkey and Yugoslavia, have
observer status with CERN.
particles, the question naturally arises why It should be
necessary to build bigger and more powerful accelerators
of the conventional static target type as well. The main rea¬
son Is that only collisions between protons and protons
can be investigated in the new storage ring, which Is cer¬
tainly not enough to explore properly the new world of sub-
nuclear particles and forces now opening up. It does not
allow the use of "probes" of mesons and other particles
which make up the large majority of today's experiments.
"This is why", says a recent CERN report, "everyone Is
agreed that a 300 GeV Proton Synchroton is essential for
Europe within the next decade, since it will generate the
whole range of different "probes" the high-energy beams
of many kinds of particles which will be needed. Never¬
theless, just as the first look into this new world was made
through the window of cosmic rays, so the Intersecting
Storage Rings which provide collisions similar to those
of cosmic rays, but with very much larger Intensity and
much better defined and controlled are to be seen as a
window into the possible world which lies behind the com¬
plexity of today's high-energy physics.
"The proton-proton interaction has always been a res-
CONT'D ON NEXT PAGE
7

EXPANDING NUCLEAR RESEARCH (Cont'd)
Nine countries
offer 19 sites
for future accelerator
pectable part of nuclear research, and the Intersecting
Storage Ring can provide for this part of the physics of
1,500 GeV (or even bigger) accelerators at a comparatively
small costabout 5 per cent of that of the equivalent
Proton Synchrotron."
Nevertheless, there are risks. The CERN report adds:
"Firm guarantees cannot be expected: any important step
Into the unknownwhether it be the CERN Proton Synchro¬
tron ten years ago or the Intersecting Storage Ring now
must ultimately be a scientific act of faith, since experience
shows that the questions that seem important now are
often resolved in other ways before a new machine starts
operating, and that its most valuable contributions to
knowledge are never foreseen at the start.
"It Is reasonable that CERN should carry for the whole
of Europe risks of this kind, which would not be acceptable
to countries individually, provided that they do not endanger
the running of CERN itself. The amount at stake can per¬
haps be judged from the fraction of the CERN budget
about 20 per cent which the operation of the Intersecting
Storage Ring will represent after 1970. The fraction of
the total European expenditure (on nuclear physics) will,
of course, be smaller still."
There is also the time factor to consider. If all goes
well, the new Intersecting Storage Ring should be in ope¬
ration within five to six years. The construction of the
colossal 300 GeV conventional accelerator, in a circular
tunnel with a diameter of one and one-half miles (2.4 kms)
on the other hand, has not even reached the planning stage.
When finally completed it would, of course, be the largest
of its kind in the world for many years to come; even the
U.S. is only contemplating construction of a similar machine
of only two-thirds this size and energy.
-'.''..'Jr-. -*"
PUZZLE
PHOTOS
These are playthings of grown men. With
them they learn a great deal about the
structure of the universe. You probably
can't guess what each contraption is for
except for one. Answers on page 32.
Photos CERN
8
BOUT a year ago, CERN asked member states
to offer sites for the new giant accelerator and
the response was gratifying; nineteen possible sites were
put forward by nine member states out of thirteen. All of
these had to be Investigated for suitability and, by the end
of 1965, there remained for consideration the following:
Goepfritz in Austria, Focant in Belgium, Le Luc in France,
Kongsvinger in Norway, El Escorial in Spain, Uppsala in
Sweden and Mundford in the United Kingdom. In addition
there are two sites still under review in the Republic of
Germany: Drensteinfurt and Sarrelouis; and another two
in Italy: Nardo and Doberdo.
Geological, geotechnlcal and hydrogeological studies are
continuing at all these places, as well as investigations
into local industrial potential, the availability of manpower,
housing, schooling, etc. It is expected that complete
reports on ten sites will be placed before the CERN Coun¬
cil when it meets next June, the other nine by then having
been eliminated.
Not until then will it be possible to make a final selection.
Thereupon the money for construction, estimated at about
150 million pounds sterling ($420 million), will have to be
found. Thereafter it will take at least ten years to build,
so that in no circumstances could the 300 GeV accelerator
be completed before 1976-77.
