THE WORLD
OF THE COMMUNICATION
SATELLITE
by Arthur C. Clarke
Ceylon, only a few hundred miles from the equator. There are no
telephones, no electric light, no newspapers, no cinemas; there are a few
battery-powered radios, but reception is poor on the short waves and impos¬
sible on the broadcast band.
It is difficult for a visitor from one of the more developed countries to
Imagine the social isolation of such a community though this village is
positively suburban when compared with thousands in the more remote parts
of Asia and Africa. Most of the human race exists in a cultural vacuum; it is
still divided into myriads of insulated villages or tribes, as it has been since
the dawn of history. But now, in a brief moment of time, all this will end.
The coming of the communications satellite will make it impossible for any
human group indeed, any individual to be more than a few milliseconds
from any other. The social consequences of this, for good or evil, may be
as great as those brought about by the printing press or the internal combus¬
tion engine. And they will dome upon us much more swiftly.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 2«
ARTHUR C. CLARKE is a British science and science fiction writer. He is
president of the Ceylon Astronomical Association and was formerly chairman
of the British Interplanetary Society. In 1962, he was awarded the. international
Kalinga Prize for the Popularization of Science. Among the *--' ' «---
published are "Interplanetary Flight". "The Exploration of Sp
Across the Sea", "The Challenge of the Spaceship". "The Oti
Sky", "A Fall of Moondust " and " Voices from the Sky".
X ft
30V
î-iSAîv-iji
;>' ^

>
This sphere looming on .'the horizon like some approaching planet is the protective dome
of the giant antenna at Pleumeur Boudou, in Britanny (France). The antenna
and one at Goonhilly Downs (United Kingdom) picked up the first television programme
transmitted from the United States via the communications satellite Telstar, in 1962.
Photo © René Bouillot

26
The four space
fantasy drawings on
these pages are
by the U.S. artist
J. Huehnergarth.
© Vitro Electronics,
Silver Spring,
Maryland (U.S.A.).
COMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE (Continued)
Orbital post offices
telephones and newspapers
The progress of astronautics since
the opening of the space age in 1957
has been so phenomenal that all the
technical problems of the synchronous
satellite should be solved by the mid-
seventies. Millions need no longer be
spent, as they are at present, in the
vain quest for absolute component
reliability. The communications satel¬
lites may not be permanently inhabited,
but they will be regularly serviced by
low-thrust ferries which can bring
repair crews to deal with any emerg¬
ency within a couple of hours. For by
1975, of course, there will be numerous
manned space complexes in orbit, to
conduct scientific research and to
operate the presently unimaginable
zero-gravity, high-vacuum industries of
the next generation. The communi¬
cations satellites of the later part of
this century may be part of these sys¬
tems, and will share their servicing
facilities.
With the development of space tech¬
nology, therefore, all but one of the
synchronous satellite's present limita¬
tions will pass swiftly into history.
Rockets are already under develop¬
ment that can put many tons of pay-
load into the twenty-four hour orbit;
nuclear reactors such as Snap-8 could
provide enough power for direct TV
transmission to home receivers. Al¬
though those concerned with today's
satellites have to use the tools current¬
ly at hand, they should not let present
difficulties and failures condition their
thinking. But I certainly do not envy
them their problems, for every commu¬
nications satellite built during the next
ten years will be obsolete as soon as
it Is launched.
The only fundamental objection to
the synchronous satellite Is the pro¬
pagation time lag, which of course
does not affect radio or TV services,
but only telephony. I am convinced
that once the inevitability of this time
lag is understood and users are taught
the proper speaking procedure, they
will have no difficulty in handling it.
Every generation comes to grips with
new techniques; our fathers had to
learn to use the dial telephone, our
grandfathers, the telephone itself. We
are currently grappling with long-dis¬
tance dialling and ten-figure numbers;
our children may think nothing of end¬
ing each stretch of conversation with
"over" and it would probably improve
our own telephone procedure, and
shorten our talking time, if we did this
even now.
In any event, if the delay does prove
to be intolerable, then we can establish
low-altitude satellites (perhaps in
accurately sub-synchronous twelve,
eight, six or three-hour orbit6) purely
for telephony. These might provide a
first-class, premium rate service; the
cheap rate would be through the
twenty-four-hour satellites. (As a
much longer term possibility, It might
be mentioned that there are a number
of theoretical ways of achieving a
low-altitude, twenty-four-hour satellite;
but they depend upon technical devel¬
opments unlikely to occur in this cen¬
tury. I leave their contemplation as
"an exercise for the student".)
It seems clear, therefore, that the
next ten years will be an interim, tran¬
sitional period, characterized by small
low-powered satellites of the Telstar,
Relay and Syncom type. Transmis¬
sions from these will be received only
by very elaborate and expensive
ground tracking stations, which can
feed signals into national networks.
There will be no question of direct
broadcasting to the home viewer or
listener; he will still have to rely on
his existing local stations, if any, and
must accept what they choose to give
him.
Even so, the communications satel¬
lites of the next few years will have a
major Impact on world affairs, and part¬
icularly upon relations between the
United States and Europe. Telstar
proved this In the first few weeks of
operation, when it established the first
TV bridge across the Atlantic. As in
the case of the first Atlantic cable a
hundred years earlier, contact was
Intermittent; but again, as in that
case it will soon become permanent.
Because they share many common
interests (including language), already

possess extensive rebroadcasting facil¬
ities, and are separated by a relatively .
small time differential, the Americas
and Western Europe will obviously be
the first to benefit from communic¬
ations satellites. Some of the services
which may reasonably be expected,
either experimentally or on a full oper¬
ational basis, during the next decade
are:
The Orbital Post Office. It has been
pointed out by S. Metzger that a single
5 mc/s satellite has enough inform¬
ation-handling capacity to carry all
first-class and airmail correspondence
between the United States and Eu¬
rope. Delivery time would be reduced
to approximately half, the limit being
set by the physical collection and dis¬
tribution of the mail. One of the chief
problems involved in this system is
psychological; how would the public
react to a postal service in which its
letters could be read by unauthorized
persons at any point? However, it
accepted wartime V-mail; and for really
confidential correspondence, there
would be no difficulty in developing
private electronic coding systems, so
that only the right recipient could
receive readable copies.
As ground facilities improve, to keep
up with the possibilities offered by the
satellites, we may expect high-speed
facsimile systems to spread to at least
all important towns. For business (as
opposed to personal) needs, the dis¬
tinction between mail, telegram and
teletype will rapidly blur. In each case,
transmission time will approach zero,
with profound effects upon Industry
and public affairs, and a speeding up
of the tempo of life.
Orbital Newspapers. The simulta¬
neous setting of international editions
has already been demonstrated. In¬
fluential newspapers such as The Times
of London and the New York Times
will experience a great increase in
distribution and immediacy. One of
the first countries to benefit from this
will be, rather ironically, the United
States, which has never possessed a
really national newspaper. In the
longer run, however, the newspaper
as we have known it for the last three
hundred years cannot be expected to
survive the advent of communications
satellites; ultimately, the home presen¬
tation will become purely electronic.
Intercontinental Telephony. As more
and more band widths are made avail¬
able, there will be a tremendous in¬
crease in long-distance telephony. It
is impossible to set a limit to this; man
is a talkative animal, and all estimates
that have been made of his need for
communication have been swiftly sur¬
passed. Although transatlantic calls
may not be substantially cheaper
during the next decade, I suspect that
well before the end of this same cen¬
tury all telephone calls to anywhere
may be charged at the same flat rate.
(How much of the present cost of a
call goes to maintain the equipment
that merely calculates the bill?) Even¬
tually, the telephone may become a
free public service; It will have the
same status as the water supply, for
in the society of the future it will be
equally essential. Any tax on free
communication is detrimental to the
public interest.
The full consequences of swift,
cheap, and universal person-to-person
telephony (and later television) cannot
possibly be anticipated at this stage.
One can only hint at some trends
which may become apparent during the
next decade, and dominant during the
one that follows. They are:
A great decline in personal corres¬
pondence, continuing the trend already
started by the telephone and conse¬
quently reducing the need for the "Or¬
bital Post Office" just when it becomes
technically possible.
A correspondingly great increase in
long-distance personal contacts. The
situation will develop over the whole
world that now exists in great cities,
when intimate friends may talk to each
other every day but seldom meet. This
would have been totally inconceivable
only a hundred years ago.
A steep decline in transportation for
other than pleasure purposes. Effi-
27
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

COMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE (Continued)
Blackboard in the sky for multimillion classes
cient communications and efficient
transportation are, to some extent,
opposing influences. If either were
perfect (i.e. free and instantaneous)
there would be no need for the other.
Thus one can envisage the time, in
the not too distant future, when con¬
ferences could be conducted with
none of the participants leaving their
own countries or even their homes.
It may be objected that much of the
important work at such conferences
takes place in private and behind-the-
scenes negotiations between indi¬
viduals, not amenable to telecommuni¬
cations. But even this will cease to be
true as person-to-person services
multiply. A generation from now, a
delegate in Canberra may be able to
locate one in Washington much more
easily than either could do so today,
if they were both looking for each
other among the many committee
rooms, private suites, simultaneous
lecture sessions, dining rooms and
bars typical of a large International
conference circa 1960.
N
28
ow let us look a little
further ahead, to the se¬
cond phase in the development of
communications satellites particularly
the Impact of direct broadcasting on
the undeveloped countries. This,
coupled with the timely invention of
the transistor, may give a great stimu¬
lus to radio; though we usually asso¬
ciate satellites with television, it must
not be forgotten that most areas of
this planet cannot yet receive reliable,
good quality sound.
However, radio brings us immedi¬
ately to the question of language. A
single orbital transmitter can broadcast
high-fidelity sound to half the world
but can it provide programmes of
equal interest to the Congo Pygmy,
the Afghan tribesman, the Greenland
Eskimo, the man-about-Manhattan?
Obviously not, until they share a
common language and, at least to
some extent, a common culture.
Communications satellites will make
a basic world language mandatory.
Just as (in quite recent times) all men
had to learn to read so that they could
work and even survive in modern
society, so in the one world of the
very near future they will have to
possess a language in common.
The full potentiality of educational
programmes from satellites could not
be exploited, however, until the arrival
of vision; one could hardly teach the
written language without this aid
(though a great deal could be done
with the help of leaflets keyed to the
programme and distributed in advan¬
ce). And here I would like to make a
suggestion for an interesting compro¬
mise between radio and full-scale TV.
I t should be possible to
develop a cheap and sim¬
ple slow-scan facsimile-plus-sound
receiver which could operate on the
normal radio band width, without
requiring the approximately thousand¬
fold greater spectrum space needed by
TV. Such a device could reproduce
line drawings and cartoons (halftones
would be unnecessary) at a perfectly
adequate speed for educational purp¬
oses, where the same picture has to
stay in view for a minute or more. It
would be the remote equivalent of the
teacher's blackboard, and with its aid,
even language could be taught to peo¬
ples who did not share a single world
of their instructor's tongue. It would
thus be possible to tape programmes
suitable for multimillion classes.
The impact of such a device every
element of which lies completely within
existing technologies upon preliterate
societies can perhaps be judged by
the following example.
In 1948 Monseñor Jose J. Salcedo,
appalled by the poverty and illiteracy
in his parish, set up a small radio
transmitter in the mountain village of
Sutatenze (Colombia). His facilities
were quite limited but his objectives
were large; reduction of illiteracy and
provision of useful information. Start¬
ing with a few hours of broadcasting
on Saturday evenings to fifteen
receivers and an audience of some
5,000 listeners, Monseñor Salcedo's
programme had grown by 1954 to six
hours of daily broadcasting to 16,000
receivers and 200,000 listeners... By
1960 there were in excess of one
million student listeners... With a very
modest investment, Monseñor Salcedo
has radically transformed rural life
over a large part of Colombia.
Through communal reception, support¬
ed by first-level maintenance by parish
priests, he has provided a broadcasting
system suited to the meagre resources
of the people and responsive to their
needs.
This gives a foretaste of what may
be done by satellite communications
to reduce illiteracy and ignorance if
we decide to devote them to this ser
vice rather than to selling soap. (Not
that I am against soap, but I am
against pretending that one soap is
better than any other, and feel that it
is essentially degrading to the commu¬
nications industry to be dependent
upon such impostures.)
Because the slow-scan receiver
would require a bandwidth of less than
10 kc/s, it avoids the power and fre¬
quency allocation problems which blur
the global TV picture, and could start
functioning in the very near future.
There Is no question, however, that
global TV will arrive just as soon as
it is technically and economically pos¬
sible. So much has been written on
this subject that it is difficult to add
anything new to it, but the following
comments seem in order.
It is often said that the existence
of time zones will inhibit the develop¬
ment of instantaneous, planet-wide
communications. This precisely paral¬
lels the argument, heard at the begin¬
ning of this century, that motor cars
would only be of use inside the cities,
because, of course, there were no
roads elsewhere on which they could
operatel
When we have true global
communications, our way
of life will adapt to them not vice
versa. It would be frustrating to live
in a society where, at any given time,
between a third and a half of one's
acquaintances were asleep. This will
be the global situation, a quarter of a
century from now, and society will
have to make some Procrustean
adjustments. Current attacks on the
problem of sleep may give one answer;
perhapswe can condense our present
requirements, by electronic means, into
an hour or so a day. Or the long
range solution, unattractive though it
is, may lie in the wholly artifical world
where life goes on independently of
the sun, and all the clocks on the
planet keep the same time. As will
appear later, this solution would not
be only unpleasant, but unstable.
The existence of nationally operated,
direct-broadcasting TV satellites will
immediately focus attention upon two
problems which today are merely a
minor annoyance, but which tomorrow
will be intolerable. They are cen¬
sorship and jamming. For the advent
of communications satellites will mean
the end of the present barriers to the
free flow of information; no dicta-

WORLD
GIRDLING
TRIO
Drawing shows how three
synchronous satellites
placed In orbit around the
equator could provide
communications coverage
over most of the world.
Experiments have also
en made with other types
of communications
satellites such as those
placed on inclined
elliptical orbits
(see article next page).
Drawing - USIS
torship can build a wall high enough
to stop its citizens listening to the
voices from the stars. It would be
extremely difficult, if not impossible,
to jam satellite broadcasts; any at¬
tempt by one country to do so would
result in an act of space piracy, or a
global telecommunications nuisance
which the rest of the world could not
permit.
One of the immediate objectives of
the ITU, therefore, should be a total
ban on jamming, and a recognition by
all nations that such behaviour is as
uncultured as interrupting other peo¬
ple's conversation by making rude
noises. And very much more dang¬
erous, since so many vital lifesaving
and navigation facilities now depend
upon radio links.
It seems that we have, in the com¬
munications satellite, a technical device
that may help to enforce good be¬
haviour and co-operation even upon
reluctant parties. (The meteorological
satellite, with which it is closely linked,
will do the same). Its influence will
be like that of air transport, though
on a much larger scale and affecting
whole nations rather than a relatively
few favoured individuals. The inexor¬
able force of astronomical facts will
destroy the political fantasies which
have so long fragmented our planet.
For when all major artistic productions,
entertainments, political and news
events can be viewed simultaneously
by the whole world, the parochialism
and xenophobia of the past will be
unable to survive.
his will be one major in¬
fluence of communications
satellites; another, perhaps even more
fundamental, may be the reversal of a
historic trend which has proceeded
with scarcely a break for five thousand
years. The traditional rôle of the city
as a meeting place is coming to end;
Megapolis may soon go the way of the
dinosaurs it now resembles in so many
respects. This century may see the
beginnings of a slow but irresistible
dispersion and decentralization of
mankind a physical dispersion which
will take place, paradoxically enough,
at the same time as a cultural unif¬
ication.
It will be none too soon, for it has
been truly said that the measure of
man's unhappiness is his estrange¬
ment from nature. There is ample
proof of this in the fact that the most
vicious of all savages are now to be
found in the rotting stone jungles of
our great cities. Civilization, in historic
fact as well as in etymology, was the
child of the city; but now it has
outgrown its parent and must escape
from its suffocating embrace.
It will be able to do so when almost
all the sense impressions, skills and
facilities that we employ in everyday
life become amenable to telecom¬
munications as they will. For as I
concluded in my address to the Xllth
International Astronautical Congress in
Washington, 1961:
What we are building now is the
nervous system of mankind... The
communications network, of which the
satellites will be nodal points, will
enable the consciousness of our grand¬
children to flicker like lightning back
and forth across the face of this
planet. They will be able to go any¬
where and meet anyone, at any time,
without stirring from their homes... all
the museums and libraries of the world
will be extensions of their living
rooms...
And it will not matter where those
living rooms may be; for on this planet
at least, the conquest of space will
be complete.
This article was prepared at the request
of Unesco to serve as background for a
Unesco report on space communications.
It was later presented by Arthur C. Clarke
at the Unesco meeting of experts on the
use of space communication by the mass
media in December 7965.
29
