MESSAGES
TO THE STARS
by D. M. A. Mercer
FACE IN SPACE
A profile of the human face
seems to float among
the myriads of stars
in this enlarged photo
of the Milky Way.
The brightly luminous nebula
forming the outline is
visible in the constellation
of Cygnus (the Swan),
distant from the earth
by 1,000 light years.
© Observatoire de Paris
I F we woke up one morning to find, hovering
over our city, a space-ship from a distant galaxy,
we would no doubt view it with very mixed feelings. But
after the initial surprise had subsided, the very practical
question would arise how could we get in touch with its
crew? If we did not, at best the ship might simply consider
that there was nothing of interest in the vicinity and go
away and we would have lost an almost unique opportunity
of immense potentiality. But at worst, the ship might have
the means of destroying our whole planet. For a variety
of reasons, we would find it imperative to communicate
with the crew (or with the ship if, as may well be the case,
it is an unmanned robot).
But how should we start to communicate? Obviously there
is no point in flashing English messages in the Morse code.
What means should we use? Clearly this needs a good
deal of thinking through, and it is this subject which I want
to deal with the basis of communication with alien
intelligent beings (I use the word "alien" in the science-
fiction sense; the inhabitant of another part of the physical
universe who may have no necessary common physical
traits with us).
All we know about these people is that they are intelligent
they must be so, or they could never have built a space¬
ship. Any communication must be on the basis of our
. common intelligence. This puts the problem in the best
way what is the basis, the lowest common multiple, if
you like, of intelligence: something which is common no
matter how much its physical vehicle changes. If we can
understand this, we can understand how to communicate:
in fact the two problems are bound up with each other.
To start with our case of the space-ship which has
appeared in our vicinity, we assume that its builders are
(1) Intelligent; (2) At least as far advanced scientifically
as we are, and probably much more so; (3) Interested in
finding other intelligences. (This is probably a fair assump¬
tion, as they have apparently sent an exploring spaceship
although it is not impossible that races who are completely
withdrawn and introverted exist.) (4) Ready to communicate
4
D.M.A. MERCER, of the Physics Department of the University of
Southampton (United Kingdom) is a specialist in acoustics.
and to receive signals, and also to try to interpret them.
This last point is important, and it needs some discussing.
The probe will obviously not expect communication in
its own language. In fact, we must both seek a common
language. This is rather like the problem set up in certain
branches of game theory. You are to meet someone in
London on a particular day, but neither of you has any
knowledge of the time or place; you must choose not
what seems obvious to you, but what you think he thinks
you will choose in the situation in which you both are, etc.
(You might in this case choose Piccadilly Circus at 12 noon,
for instance.)
To follow this thought up, we should ask what signals
would show that we are intelligent, and would be so
understood by the probe. Any signals we send must look
artificial space is full of light and radio waves, and our
signals must clearly look as if they have not arisen from
a natural source.
I don't want to spend time discussing the mechanics of
signalling, except to say that we are limited, over long
distances, virtually to two means: short-wave radio, and
"laser" light beams. For most purposes it appears that
radio is preferable. I might also remind you that such waves
travel at the speed of light; so to communicate with a
planet 10 light-years away, the round-trip signal would
take 20 yearsl Clearly there is little scope for rapidly
changing one's mind while conversing.
In many cases, we are limited to sending a series of
identical signals in time i.e. a train of pulses of elec¬
tromagnetic energy, either radio beams or light beams.
One such series which has been suggested is a series
of prime numbers (numbers which have no factors, but
are divisible only by themselves and 1). If we send pulses
in groups of 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17... etc., they will
clearly come from intelligent beings. No radio storms
in the galaxy, or any other natural process, will produce
prime numbers.
o. .oo. .ooo. .ooooo. .ooooooo. . ooooooooooo. .ooooooooooooo. .
Fig. 1
They might be indicated as in Fig. 1, in which we choose
a fixed spacing in time for the pulses, indicated by the
space between symbols. A dot means the absence of a
pulse, and a circle means a pulse.
CONT'D ON PAGE 6

w
v
'
. *"
/V **
.
. -*
*. «i"H'

MESSAGES TO THE STARS (Cont'd)
How to devise an interplanetary signal
We might also try a series of squares, 1, 4, 9, 16..., or
the digits of jt, the ratio of the circumference of a circle
O..O00O..OOOOOOO0O..OOOOO0OOOOOO0OOO..OO0OOO00OO0OOO0OOO0OO00OO..
0OO..O..O0OO..O« .OOOOO..OOQOOOOOO. .OO..OOOOOO. .ooooo.ooo. .oooooo. .
.Fig. 2
to its diameter, 3.141.592... (Fig. 2). This, being a ratio,
is independent of the units of measurement. It does however
raise the sort of point which we will be considering again
can we assume that the circle is such a fundamental idea
that any intelligent being, however alien, will know it?
I think we can make this assumption; any being with any
knowledge of working materials, such as constructing
radio transmitters, must be familiar with the circle.
At this stage it might be pointed out that we could
make pictures. It has been suggested in the past that we
should build an enormous chain of beacons over a large
land-area, showing, for instance, Pythagoras' theorem
Fig. 3
(Fig. 3). If a space-ship were hovering overhead, this
would certainly be possible; although we might well want
to indicate that we had progressed further than the ancient
Greeks, and some more sophisticated diagram, of the sort
to be discussed later, might be more appropriate.
Such beacons however would be visible only to some¬
thing close at hand an alien space-ship orbiting the
earth, as I mentioned earlier. What if we tried to send
signals to a distant planet? Is there any way in which
we can send pictures to them?
»
Before discussing this, perhaps we should consider
two further fundamental points. One is that we assume
other alien races have eyes, or at any rate some corres¬
ponding sense organs. The other is that they can understand
pictures, which are two-dimensional representations of
three-dimensional objects.
Here again, we feel that a sense of vision must be
essential to anyone with an advanced technology. Secondly,
we feel that such an advanced technology must deal in
pictures and diagrams. We may be wrong over this; there
may be races dependent entirely on tactile senses dealing
directly with three-dimensional objects. All we can say
is that it seems unlikely: this is the sort of thinking we
must however attend to if we are to establish a basis for
a universal intelligence.
While on this point, we ought to consider a little further
the modes which intelligence can take. There may be
some intelligent races which are completely withdrawn
and introspective, wishing to have no contact with anyone
outside. There may be others who are uninterested: they
may have solved all their political and economic problems,
and spend their time watching television.
There are two other cases which may raise problems;
one is the case of beings whose processes are very slow
compared to ours. Although they may be intelligent, it
would be virtually impossible to communicate with them.
The other is the case of a civilization well versed in the
abstract virtues of goodness, truth and beauty, but without
any technology.
These would be difficult to communicate with as a
superior alien community would have found the classical
Greeks but I do not think there is an absolute bar.
I don't consider that any entirely abstract philosophy can
exist in isolation from the real world: even on this earth,
our most idealist philosophers slip in ideas of material
things counting, for example which they could not do
if in fact mind were the only thing which existed. (And
it is worth noting that the ancient civilizations have led,
in time, to our technological one.)
Returning to the problem of sending pictures, in fact it
is not too difficult to do so by a series of pulses. Suppose
we send a series as in Fig. 4. By itself it is not very
ooo	 .o.	boo. ....
	.o	...o....	ooo	.o
o	ooo o	
	o	ooo o	
	o	ooo o
..o	ooo o	W	o...
ooo .o. .o	ooo. .....
	o	o	ooo
o Fig. 4
meaningful. If however we cut off each series beginning
with three circles, and put them all one above the other,
we have a diagram of a circle, Fig. 5. This of course is
OOO o
OOO O o
OOO o o
ooo o o
ooo o o
ooo o o
ooo o o
ooo o o
ooo Fig. 5
a form of scanning in exactly the same way as that carried
out in a television receiver.
Alien races may not have the same sort of television
of course their sets may scan in a spiral but we would
think that they would be intelligent enough to try various
ways of superimposing traces until they hit on a "meaning¬
ful" one. (Here again I am assuming that "meaningful"
has the same connotation to any intelligent being i.e.
that the ideas of "random" and "ordered" are universal.)
o.o	oo	oooo . . . o . . . . o . . . o . . o	o ... o
....0......0.. .OOO. ..«.0....0. «OOOOO. .O. . .OOO. .00. »o. .
.o.... o	ooo.	o...o....o... o	...o-.,o... o	
..oooo	oo.o Fig. 6
There is in fact another way in which we can send
pictures in a rectangular array. Suppose we send a series
such as Fig. 6, starting and ending with one pulse, and

A.B.C.D.E.F.G.H.I.J.K.LM.IM.P.Q.R.S.T.U.V.W.Y.Z.
AA, B ; AAA, C ; AAAA, D ; AAAAA, E ; AAAAAA, F ; AAAAAAA, G ;
AAAAAAAA,H; AAAAAAAAA. I ; AAAAAAAAAA, J.
AKALB; AKAKALC; AKAKAKALD. AKALB; BKALC; CKALD;
DKALE. BKELG; GLEKB. FKDLJ ; JLFKD.
CMALB; DMALC; IMGLB.
CKNLC; HKNLH. DMDLN; EMELN.
JLAN; JKALAA; JKBLAB; AAKALAB. JKJLBN; JKJKJLCN.
FNKGLFG.
BPCLF; EPBLJ; FPJLFN.
FQBLC; JQBLE; FNQFLJ.
CRBLI; BRELCB.
JPJLJRBLSLANN; JPJPJLJRCLTLANNN. JPSLT; JPTLJRD.
AQJLU; UQJLAQSLV.
ULWA; UPBLWB; AWDMALWDLDPU. VLWNA; VPCLWNC.
VQJLWNNA; VQSLWNNNA. JPEWFGHLEFWGH ; SPEWFGHLEFGWH.
GIWIHYHN; TKCYT. ZYCWADAF.
14 DPZPWNNIBRCQC.
CAN YOU DECIPHER
THIS
INTERPLANETARY
MESSAGE ?
In 1960, Ivan Bell, an English language teacher
in Tokyo, heard about Project Ozma, a scien¬
tific plan for listening in for radio messages
from outer space. To amuse his friends he
devised a simple interplanetary message of
24 symbols. It was printed in The lapan
Times of January 22, 1960. and readers were
asked to decipher it. The newspaper received
four complete solutions, including one from
a U.S. reader who wrote her answer in the
same code, adding that she lived (by Jove !)
on Jupiter. Here we reproduce Ivan Bell's
lighthearted exercise in coding an interplane¬
tary message. The message is extremely
simple to decipher; far far simpler than it
looks. All readers are urged to try their hand
at it and if they fail, let them ask their
children to help. Three words of advice:
(1) Don't be afraid to use paper and pencil.
(2) When you've found the solution you won't
have to ask, "Is this it?" ; you'll know you have
the answer. (3) The key to the solution is to
be found in paragraphs 2 and 3. Paragraph 1
simply lists the alphabet (minus letters O and
X). Answers will be published next month.
Punctuation marks are not part of the
message but indicate time lapses.
repeating this series many times. If you count the total
number of symbols, (i.e. circles + dots) it comes to 203.
This is a number which can be decomposed in only one
way, 7 x 29. If we do split it up in this way, in a rectan¬
gular array 7 x 29 we arrive at Fig. 7.
oo oo oooo
oo o
° o oooo °
O OOOOO o oo
O O O ooo o
ooo o o
o oooo ooo
Fig. 7
Of course this expression 1+2 = 3 would mean
nothing as it stands, but I am simply indicating that it is
possible to send pictures using a train of pulses; and the
pictures could of course be much more complex than
this. What in fact should we send? I mentioned that we
wanted something more advanced than Pythagoras' theo¬
rem. One subject we do know about is the way in which
atomic nuclei can be split up in reactions taking place in
stars. One such reaction, believed to be correct, is when
lithium and hydrogen combine to form carbon and helium.
o o o
oo oo 00
o
o oo o ooo
o
oo oo oo
o o o
o 0
oo oo oo o
oooo o
o o 000 00
oooo o
oo oo 00 o
0 o
Fig. 8
If we indicate this as shown in Fig. 8, in which the
single and double circles represent two different types of
elementary particles in the nuclei, it is probable that it
will be recognised. (Of course we would use predeter
mined signs for the plus and equals.) The alien races
will then know that we understand stellar reactions. We
could send diagrams of the carbon cycle, indicating that
we live on the basis of carbohydrate chemistry. We
should perhaps send diagrams of our local constellation
and solar system.
Apart from all this, once one can send pictures the
problems become standard ones of education and logic.
It is however a fascinating idea to compile an educational
series on "All about us and our world for someone who
has never seen any of it." Think of putting together the
whole sum of human experience and existence in a series
of programmes. I would like to see some television series'
experts try it.
Quite apart from the problem of sending information,
however, there is the problem of listening. Suppose other
advanced galactic communities are trying to beam infor¬
mation at us? What should we be listening for?
Once again we are considering intelligent signals, differ¬
ing from the natural signals in the universe. There is one
way in which perhaps detection can be made easier,
Fig. 9
without examining every one in detail. Fig. 9 shows the
forms of two types of signal: (a) is noise, (b) is man-made.
The time spent by each near its zero line is quite different:
(a) spends a large proportion of its time near its zero-line,
the proportion becoming less the further away it gets;
(b) spends all of its time a fixed distance from its zero-
line. The test, in other words, to distinguish between
CONT'D ON PAGE 10

MESSAGES TO THE STARS (Continued from page 7)
40 years for an answer to come back
10
natural and artificial is a statistical one, and can readily
and quickly be applied, without studying each signal in
detail.
I might point out that we could learn a good deal about
the other planet just by the character of the radio signals,
quite apart from their information content. If the signals
appear at more or less fixed intervals, we might assume
that this represents the length of their day. The basic
frequency of their radio signal will slowly change, due to
the transmitter moving towards and away from us, due
to the rotations of the planet on its axis and about its star
(this is the well-known Doppler effect.) From a study of
this frequency, we could deduce these quantities, and
hence find something about their planet's behaviour. We
might even, from this, be able to identify their star.
It is necessary to digress to consider just how many
advanced communities there may be, as the type of signal
received (or the type we send) does depend on it.
S far as we know, a small fraction of stars have
^planets. For any planet to be able to support
life, it must be neither too hot nor too cold" because life
depends on chemical reactions, which will proceed too
slowly at low temperatures, and will not proceed at high
temperatures because substances decompose. (We know
that the whole universe is made of the same materials we
are familiar with, and the same general laws of chemistry
apply.)
Thus only a fraction of planets will be at the appropriate
distance from their stars. Further, only certain types of
star are suitable; they must give a constant energy output
over the biological time-scale.
When all this has been worked out, the next problem is
how long may technologically advanced communities exist,
compared with the whole time life has existed on their
planet? This is a matter for speculation: perhaps by
sociologists. In our own case, for instance, we have had
radio for only some 60 years, while life has existed over
the vastly longer biological life-time scale.
If we can imagine advanced communities existing for
much longer than our 60 years, we arrive at the quite
speculative figure that there may be some hundred million
advanced communities throughout our universe (taking the
number of stars in the universe to be denoted by a 1 fol¬
lowed by 21 zeros, i.e. one thousand million million million).
The general thinking in this section will be seen to stem
from one aspect of the "cosmological principle" namely,
that there is no reason to assume that we on this earth
are unique, or specially privileged in any way.
This is not a very useful figure, because many of those
communities will be immense distances away. But to come
nearer, within 15 light-years of us there are seven "suit¬
able" stars; within 50 light-years there are 100 "suitable"
stars. That is, there is a small probability that some
advanced communities are within hailing distance.
There is another conclusion to be drawn, however. The
lifetime of a technological community is probably so much
longer than the time we have had modern technology,
that nearly all the galactic communities are far more
advanced than we are. They may already be in a "galac¬
tic" club, busy communicating; and they may maintain a
small subdepartment who are beaming messages at other
likely stars in the hope that they may discover some novice
community, just on the threshold of interstellar communi¬
cation, to whom they can send .their kindergarten messages
and gradually educate to their standards. It is a humbling
thought.
What all this means in practice is that we might find
that any other community could pay very little attention
to us. They may have thousands of likely stars to send
signals to; as they would not have vast numbers of trans¬
mitters, we might receive signals only 1 day in 100 years
(and they might have been doing this for thousands of
years, of course without result).
This situation is perhaps rather pessimistic, because in
fact a much better way for any community to explore is
not to send signals, but to send unmanned space-ships,
or "probes". These would be loaded with computers and
recorded material, ready to give us information about them
and to record the information we send them. A superior
community might be able to spray thousands of such
probes into the galaxy with pre-programmed instructions
to listen for any radio waves, and "home" on any planet
sending them out.
What would such a probe do? It would circle a planet,
picking up radio waves. How would it make itself known?
This raises another basic problem; how you get people to
perceive the unexpected, and not to dismiss it just as
interference?
One suggestion which has been made is that the probe
would send back a replica of any message it received.
This is good technology, because the senders of the signal
would probably also be listening on this frequency. There
is in fact a case of some long-delayed echoes in a radio
transmission investigation about 30 years ago, which have
never been explained.
It is entertaining to speculate that they might have been
picked up by an exploring probe, which has relayed the
information back to its planet, many light-years distant;
a further message may be even now on its way to us.
(The delay is because, as pointed out earlier, no signal
can travel faster than light: so that if a planet is 20 light-
years away, it would be 40 years before a response to
the first signal was heard.)
I T is worth closing with the question, assuming
' that the sort of exploring probe I have discussed
may come to us one day, should we learn to listen or
learn to send? There is already a listening station in the
U.S.A. which has searched without result so far for
intelligible radio waves from some nearby stars.
Listening is exciting work: it has an appeal. Sending
information is not so appealing: you can do it for a long
time with nothing to show for it. But it seems to me that
it might be far more important. It is unlikely that a probe
will yield up its stored information unless we interrogate
it properly; and we should surely, besides giving informa¬
tion about ourselves, want to ask questions of the advanced
communities such as how to conquer cancer. (For it is
worth noting that the interchange of information in this
way is an entirely benign activity.)
I think we should spend time and energy on studying
how to send, and what to send to be ready for the
opportunity when it comes. For although the probability
of success in communicating with alien communities is
very small indeed, the probability of success if we do
nothing about it is precisely zero.
The above article Is the text of an address delivered by Dr. Mercer
at the meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of
Science, held in Southampton, England, last year.
