RONALD SEGAL, author and journalist, was
born in South Africa in 1932. After graduat¬
ing from the University of Cape Town, he
took a further degree at Cambridge, having
previously played a leading part in South
Arican student organizations. After a short
stay in the United States where he had a
fellowship at the University of Virgina, he
returned to South Africa and established the
quarterly "Africa South" which quickly became
an international front against racism. Nine
days after the Sharpeville shootings, Segal
fled South Africa to escape arrest. He
settled in England where he published "Africa
South in Exile" until 1961 when he became
editor of Penguin Books' African library. In
1963, he published his autobiography "Into
Exile". The following year he convened in
London the International Conference on
Economic Sanctions against South Africa.
His most recent book is "The Race War"
(Jonathan Cape, London, 45/-].

I T is piteous and appalling,
the ecstasy in which all but a very
few whites in South Africa pursue
their own degradation. There are
those among the victims of apartheid,
white and non-white, who consum¬
mate themselves in their refusal to
submit, discovering in resistance a
courage and a loyalty and a love that
seem1 the final meaning of humanity.
But inevitably apartheid degrades
many of its victims. There are those
who give way under torture by the
political police, betraying their collea¬
gues and so, desperately, themselves;
there are those who take service with
their own subjugation, as informers
and police, or like the docile chiefs
as administrative instruments, seeking
sanctuary in a little power and a pre¬
tended indifference to contempt; and
there are those, the still silent majority,
who do not resist, and whose degra¬
dation is their own shame, the vio¬
lence that they do, passively, to them¬
selves. Yet these, the acquiescent,
the betrayers, even the collaboration¬
ists, are the afflicted; and their
awareness of affliction secures them
from that other, deeper degradation,
the atrophy of the mind.
For there are those who afflict and
do not care, or deliberately cease to
know any longer enough to care. In
white South Africa the repugnant
quickly becomes the ordinary; and the
ordinary, the ignored. A new law yet
further savaging the lives of the non-
whites, in the cause of security or
separate racial development, stirs a
short rustle of consideration and then
settles into the unnoticed natural way
of life.
IHE emaciation of white
thought is everywhere evident. The
organs of fundamental opposition have
been suppressed or survive only under¬
ground. The English-language news¬
papers, once the source of a vociferous
if superficial questioning, are now
overwhelmingly subservient to the
demands of white supremacy.
Where the persecution of a few bold
journalists and the steady encroach¬
ments of censorship have not suc¬
ceeded, the prosperity of racial re¬
pression has promoted an eager sur¬
render. Indeed, like the official parlia¬
mentary opposition, the bulk of the
English-language press has taken to
attacking the government, when at all,
for being too liberal and endangering
white rule by bothering about separate
development for non-whites. Criticism
is safe only if it is directed at clearer,
closer, still more certain domination.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Photo © Ian Berry - Magnum
An old Afrikaner couple on May 31, 1961 when a republic was proclaimed and the
Union of South Africa, which had left the Commonwealth two months earlier, became
the Republic of South Africa. Such were the country's reactions to the many criticisms
levelled by other Commonwealth states at its apartheid policy.
25

THE DYING MINDS (Continued)
The South African Broadcasting
Corporation engages in ever more
extravagant propaganda, with pro¬
grammes on the Communist Menace
at home and 'abroad so contemptuous
of reality that only minds wasted over
the years can receive them without a
sense of outrage. There is no tele¬
vision. The government long ago
decided that television would require
too many imported programmes for
the security of white South African
assumptions, and white South Afri¬
cans have accepted, with a proper
sense of proportion, the sacrifice
required by the survival of their civi¬
lization.
The cinema is heavily censored, and
films which reflect a racial impartiality
are either banned altogether or so cut
as to become incoherent a drawback
of apparently small consequence, since
queues still form to see them.
T,
26
HE English-language univer¬
sities, especially the long unsegregated
ones at Johannesburg and Cape Town,
were once centres of intellectual rest¬
lessness and resistance. But the non-
whites are being removed from the
"open" universities to their own racial
and, for the Africans, separate tri¬
bal institutions; the staff has been
cowed by particular government inter¬
vention, like the expulsion of those
named as Communists from teaching,
and by the general intimidation of
dissent; and the diminishing numbers
of disquieted students, the more out¬
spoken of their leaders selected for
salutory persecution, satisfy themselves
with the formality of increasingly
meaningless protests or withdraw
completely from public communication
to find their way through underground
passages of rebellion.
From the bookshops and the libra¬
ries, private as well as public, dis¬
appears an ever lengthening list of
banned books, pamphlets and news¬
papers, published abroad or once upon
a time legally in South Africa itself.
Yet this is not sufficient to stop up the
leaks of intellectual enquiry.
The government bans the more
feared of its opponents not only from
all gatherings, but from the publication
of any statement anywhere in the
country. How much further can fear
of the single mind, of the individual
struggle against the atrophy of
thought, be taken?
The truth is that fear is far more
profound within the white community
than the non-white. The non-whites
fear the whites; the whites fear not
only the non-whites, but themselves.
The Immorality Act has made sexual
relations between white and non-white
punishable by long imprisonment and,
among whites, social horror. Yet the
number of contraventions steadily
mounts, with an embarrassing parade
of such responsible whites as Dutch
Reformed Church clergymen and
Photo © Emil Schuitess - Rapho
A permanent curfew prohibits Africans from entering "white" urban
districts between 1 1 p.m. and 5 a.m. unless they have the necessary
passes. Above, a Johannesburg street.
police brought before the courts.
There is fear at the consequences for
even the pretence of white race purity
in such flouting of the law, and deeper
fear still at the consequences which
might attend scrapping the law alto¬
gether.
And who is white? After more than
300 years of miscegenation, few fami¬
lies beyond first generation immigrants
can feel confident of a completely
colourless pedigree. The Population
Registration Act provides all South
Africans with compulsory racial classi¬
fication and suitable identity cards so
that, as the Minister of the Interior
declared in 1958, "To many a certainty
has been given that they never had
before."
But fear is not removed by such offi¬
cial adjudication; if anything it is for¬
tified. For now there are formal enqui¬
ries, with race tribunals, and whispers
or unco-operative genes can soon
enough cancel, beyond concealment,
one classification for another.
Fear breeds, indeed, around the very
source of protection against fear.
Whites who indulge only their imagin¬
ation by supposing themselves of
interest to the political police, whose
views are no less orthodox than the
conventions of parliamentary opposi¬
tion can comfortably contain, refuse to
discuss, politics on the telephone or
admit any criticism of the government
in private letters. The frenzy with
which many whites pursue luxury and
leisure their obsession with sport is
internationally remarked cries out
their fear of the risks in any interest
demanding more of the mind.
The refusal to think at all offers
itself as the one escape route from
fear. For, surely, to think is to reco¬
gnize the implications of racial repress¬
ion, and to reject its capacity to sur¬
vive in a sane world. And so white
South Africans perpetuate their privi¬
leges by surrendering their minds, and
in the name of civilization sacrifice
civilization's essence.
What is left is fear and the appetite
for domination, feeding insatiably upon
each other. If is the gangrene of huma¬
nity, and its amputation is imperative
if the sickness is not everywhere to
spread. History belongs to the victims,
for their human purpose is in their very
suffering sustained.
