Unesco's Director-General looks at
ethics in the mass media
THE INTRUDERS
by René Maheu
"La Civilisation de l'universel" The Civilization of the Universal is the title of a
volume by René Maheu, Director-General of Unesco, which has just been published
by Editions Laffont-Gonthier, Paris (1). An English edition is also scheduled to appear.
The volume forms part of the series "Inventaire de l'avenir" Inventory of the future
and consists of a selection of statements, speeches and papers written by Mr. Maheu
since he became Director-General of Unesco in 1962. Published with a foreword
by Julien Cain of the Institut de France, the book comprises three sections: A Uni¬
versal Ethical Code for Development; The Educational Mission; and the Universal Sign¬
ificance of Science and Culture. Mr. Maheu argues that, at this decisive moment
in history, it is not enough to proclaim men equal in dignity. A much more far-reach¬
ing task is involved, one which requires a methodical and unanimous effort for
which the international agencies and particularly Unescooffer a framework: the
patient creation of the material and moral conditions in which all men, wherever they
may be, can achieve their own fulfilment and contribute to the building of the world
of tomorrow.
The following text, drawn from this book, is the reply sent by Mr. Maheu on 10 May
1965 to the Editor of the French periodical "Plaisir de France" who had asked whe¬
ther it was incumbent on Unesco to combat abuses by the press and other inform¬
ation media, more especially in the form of sensationalism and scandalmongering.
(1) Price : 10,20 F.
T
HERE is no doubt that
scandal and sensationalism in the press
are growing evils which cannot leave
indifferent an organization like Unesco
which is dedicated to the advancement
of human dignity. Unesco's concern
is not only with the expansion of edu¬
cation, the dissemination of culture and
the development of the techniques of
mass communication, but also, and
perhaps even more, with improving the
content of education, preserving and
enriching the quality of culture, and
using the mass media for education,
science and culture.
Within the context of Unesco's over¬
all policies, therefore, I would be ready
to join all those be they public offi¬
cials, members of the profession or
civic leaders who are prepared to
take an active part in combatting these
evils.
But there must be a clear under¬
standing of what evils we are talking
about, for not only do they vary in
degree of seriousness but they stem
from different motives and hence call
for different remedies.
There is one category of offense
that I would put under the heading of
"vulgarity", as witness the hysterical
adulation of stars of the stage or
screen, or the" obsession with intimate
or trivial details of the lives of certain
celebrities.
Undeniably this is an offense against
good taste. It is a perversion of two
of the most natural instincts of man
curiosity and admiration. Moreover,
this is not done guilelessly but by the
deliberate use of purely commercial
means for strictly commercial ends.
There is a whole body of literature
which seeks to explain sociologically
or psycho-analytically the "star mania"
of today. But what might really clear
the air would be an exposé of the
business set-up and technique used to
"launch" that is to manufacture
such stars. Unfortunately, the facts
on this part of the story are much
harder to. come by.
True as all this is, we must admit
that no pressure on the individual is
involved (nothing forces me to buy
that silly paper or that childish maga¬
zine; nothing obliges me to listen to
that stupid radio programme or to
watch that vulgar or vapid show), and
the phenomenon is an integral part of
economic procedures otherwise looked
upon as quite legitimate (such as the
commercialism of the mass media and
especially entertainment), so that we
cannot justify resort to repressive or
preventive measures through legisla¬
tion or government action. This is the
domain of social custom, not of law
or authority. In other words only the
public and the profession can take
action here since they alone are impli¬
cated.
It is up to the public to choose bet¬
ween quality and trash, and in the final
analysis it is the consumer who has
the last word through his power either
to buy or reject a particular product.
I for one have no a priori lack of faith
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
23

THE INTRUDERS (Continued)
Shocking violations of human privacy
in public taste. First of all because I
do not believe that all mass-produced
goods are necessarily inferior in qua¬
lity the triumph of the paperback
book and the resurgence of what has
been termed the "people's theatre" are
two cases in point.
Then, too, experience has shown
that when the man-in-the-street is given
the possibility to choose for himself,
and the alternatives are duly explained
and made clear to him, more often than
not he will choose wisely.
The "conditioning" process utilized
by the entertainment industry excludes
by its very nature the possibility of
choice, let alone the exercise of judg¬
ment and discernment. The answer to
this should be the organization of what
I might describe as "campaigns of
critical appraisal".
As for the mass media they must
draw up their own code of ethics
without outside interference. And if I
may say so, I think that it is high time
this was done. Has the time not come
for those who control and work with
the information and entertainment
media reaching millions of people to
recognize that their responsibilities
are in direct relation to the fantastic
power they now have either to inform
or deform, to educate or stultify?
The determination of these respon¬
sibilities (apart from the ones laid down
by law which represent only a minute
fraction of the whole) should no longer
be left to the hazard of individual
viewpoints, or to arbitrary decisions
imposed from the outside by officials
unconnected with the profession. What
is needed today is a code of ethics
for the mass media as it affects society.
u
24
nesco recognized the im¬
portance of the mass media in society
even in the early years of its existence.
It has sought to throw light on this
problem by promoting research in the
field, and to raise the standards of
journalism through aid to schools of
journalism.
However useful or even necessary
this basic work may be, it is not
enough simply because it is purely
technical. Unesco has dealt with such
technical matters as the situation and
the mechanics of the mass media and
their modes of operation. A compara¬
ble effort is now needed on the ethical
plane to define more clearly basic aims
and objectives. To put it another way,
we must first have a clear idea of what
the mass media stand for in order to
establish the responsibilities of the
journalist, particularly in relation to the
rights of the public which receives the
information.
This task, I think, is essentially a
matter for the profession itself to work
out because (and I consider this to be
of utmost importance) since freedom
of the press is the corner stone. of all
the mass media it is the members of
the profession who should take the
initiative in formulating their own fair
code of ethics.
That at least is the principle which
Unesco has adhered to up to now and
which accounts for the discretion it has
observed in this matter. Nevertheless,
Unesco has followed with deep interest
the various attempts that have been
made in recent years at the national or
international level to induce the pro¬
fession to define and adopt a code or
codes of honour: though still somewhat
timid in my opinion, these attempts are
nonetheless most encouraging, and one
of the recurring preoccupations has
been to counteract "the exaltation of
sensationalism and scandalmongering".
I have no doubt that if it were asked
to do so by a consensus of the compe¬
tent international associations of news¬
paper owners and editors, as well as
the radio, film and press associations
of journalists and writers, Unesco
would unhesitatingly place its authority
and resources behind this movement to
give it the breadth and cohesion it still
lacks.
S
orne cases, however, call
for far more energetic measures. I am
thinking of the type of reporting which
respects neither the privacy of love
or prayer nor the seclusion of poverty,
neither the peace and quiet of a happy
home nor the grief and sorrow of
death. Here we are not merely
confronted with offences against good
taste or breaches of social decorum
but outrages against the human person.
These intrusions into the private life
of the individual have rightly been
called a "violation of the personality".
(I am not speaking, of course, of that
publicity game indulged in by those
men and women who make it their
business not to have a private life.)
In my opinion, the notion of the
"violation of the personality" should
be recognized in law, for in the mass
civilization to which we are more deep¬
ly committed every day, nothing is
more precious and more deserving of
protection by society than the dignity
of the individual. Rough outline or
masterpiece it does not matter which
each person is an irreplaceable sta¬
tue of Man; and as with the statues in
our museums and public parks, I
should like to see the crowd kept at a
respectful distance, leaving the statue
visible but inaccessible.
Against the real excesses the
shocking violations of human privacy
prompted by malice or greed, the
occasional outcry raised by the public
can hardly suffice. Here, clearly, we
must have resort with due precau¬
tions but nonetheless with firmness
to the preventive and restraining forces
of the law.
Who could honestly object? There
are those who perhaps will invoke the
"freedom of the press" or the necessi¬
ties of the "job", but it must be repeat¬
ed that the purveyor of information has
freedom only insofar as the public
which he serves has the right to be
informed; and the public has no right
to know other people's private lives.
These are theTwo types of offenses
and indignities most often committed
by a certain sector of the Press when
it is blinded by its own power and
resources and succumbs to the lure of
easy profit or the fury of commercial
competition. The first seems to me
to come under the head of professional
ethics and the second under that of
ordinary legislation; but quite clearly
neither ethical action nor legislation
will be effective, nor indeed can they
take form, except inasfar as they are
understood and actively pressed by
public opinion with a heart to support
and if need be impose them.
The welfare of the young would in
itself more than justify a mass move¬
ment of public opinion of this kind.
Admittedly the young are not the only
ones threatened by such malpractices.
Because of the resilience and funda¬
mental good nature which characterizes
youth, young people are often much
better equipped to withstand and ward
off the demoralizing influences we have
been talking about than many adults
whose defence mechanisms have not
infrequently been slowed down with
the passage of years.
N
othing could be further
from the truth, in my opinion, than to
believe that sensationalism and news-
mongering reflect the true taste of
young people. The youth of today seem
to me on the whole far healthier and
more balanced than previous gener¬
ations. And if they do give vent to
certain anti-social forms of rebellion it
is not so much for love of violence and
the absurd in themselves as a protest
against the fact that the world we pro¬
pose they live in appears to them
largely to have made violence and
absurdity accepted institutions under
the hypocritical cloak of convention.
Nevertheless the fact remains that
the young, who represent a quarter of
the world's population, have become
an important market and that a good
deal of money is to be made (the re¬
cord industry and all that goes with it
is one example) by exploiting their
eternal yearning for romance, their
insatiable appetite for wonder and
admiration, and their extraordinary
ability to satisfy both of these crav¬
ings by accepting symbols in their
stead.
We must protect this natural receptivity
of youth from the exploitation of com¬
mercialism, for it represents the fount-
ainhead of the simple decency, if not
always the innocence, of mankind.
