Earthquakes, hurricanes,
floods, tidal waves,
volcanoes, landslides...
One night in February 1943, a volcano suddenly sprouted
from the middle of a Mexican cornfield. Within six
months It had built up a huge cone and spewed forth a sea
of lava which engulfed the nearby village of San Juan
until only Its church tower emerged (shown in photo with
Parlcutin, as volcano was nam>ed, In background).
Eighteen months later, an eruption destroyed the nearby
town of Parangarlcutire. By March 1952, Parlcutin,
now 400 metres (1,300 feet) high was extinct, Its
eruptions ceasing as suddenly as they had begun.
Photo © Western Ways Features -Tad Nichols
I
P-^
WTft
1
I I
«il^^»»!^
tMk
YHfcs,

OPERATION ANTI-DISASTER
by Edward D. Mills
T
HROUGHOUT the ages
man has battled against the forces of
nature, and one of the battle fronts
has been the field of natural disasters:
earthquakes, volcanoes, floods and
storms.
History and legend record these
events, from the Flood described in the
Book of Genesis and the eruption of
Vesuvius which finally destroyed Pom¬
peii in the year A.D. 79 to the 1963
earthquake in Skopje and the report
from Pekin, on March 11, 1966, of a
severe earthquake in the Hopei pro¬
vince of Northern China.
Because of the unforeseen character
of natural disasters they have frequent¬
ly been classed as "acts of God," but
scientists are beginning to find ways of
at least forecasting certain natural
phenomena, even if as yet no means
are available for preventing them.
The urgent need is to mobilize our
scientific and technical skills on a
properly organized international basis,
so that the devastation that follows in
the wake of these catastrophes can be
minimized and the appalling loss of
human life and property prevented or,
at least, reduced.
For convenience, natural disasters
may be classed in three main cate¬
gories:
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions
and landslides;
hurricanes, cyclones and
typhoons;
floods resulting from storms, tidal
waves, etc.
But the natural forces present at
any given disaster area may well
EDWARD D. MILLS is a member of the
Council of the Royal Institute of British
Architects. He is responsible for the
design of a number of important buildings
in many parts of the world. He is the
author of several books on architecture
and is especially Interested in the problems
of school architecture. He has been
concerned with international relief work
for 30 years past.
include elements from all three.
Earthquakes may cause landslides and
tidal waves (tsunamis) and hurricanes
may spread damage not only by wind
but also by flooding due to torrential
rains.
One of the most extensive natural
disasters of modern times was the
earthquake in Japan which in five
minutes destroyed Tokyo and Yoko¬
hama in 1923; in this instance the
resultant fires were aggravated by a
typhoon. The total of persons killed
and injured was at least a quarter of
a million while the damage to property
was estimated at £900 million.
E ARTHQUAKE activity and
active volcanoes indicate that the
earth's crust is still unstable in certain
areas. Earthquakes are sudden adjust¬
ments of parts of the crust in response
to pressures generated during moun¬
tain-building and volcanic activity.. Pre-
sentday earthquake and volcanic belts
follow the more recent belts of
mountain-building, the Andes, Rockies,
Himalayas and Alps.
The most severe recent earthquakes
have been in Morocco and Chile (1960),
Iran (1962), Libya and Yugoslavia
(1963), Alaska and Japan (1964). The
total loss of life in these exceeded
25,000 and damage has been estimated
at over £500 million.
There appear to be two main
hurricane belts in the world. The first
is along the West Indies which lie near
the Tropic of Cancer in the Caribbean
Sea. The hurricane path usually
follows the curve of the islands and
runs from Trinidad and Tobago, past
the Lesser Antilles and then through to
Haiti and Cuba. An example of this
was the hurricane Flora in 1963 which
devastated nearly everything in its
path, killing thousands of people and
destroying the homes of tens of
thousands.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20
17

Landslides
in the Tavelas' of Rio
In. January and March 1966, torrential rain on Rio de Janeiro
(left) set off disastrous landslides, especially in the "favelas",
or shanty towns, which cling precariously to Rio's steep hillsides
(right and below, centre of photo). Over 250 people were killed
and 4,250 homes damaged or destroyed. A Unesco mission
has been in Rio studying the causes of the disaster. One of its
members, Mr F.A. Soeiro, a consultant engineer, reports that
the gravity of the destruction was due not only to rain and
the tropical climate, but also to several other factors: the topo¬
graphy and geology of the area, the local hydrographical system
and the rainwater drainage network, problems of accelerating
urban development, the destruction of protective vegetation. Rio's
town-planning problems are typical of many other tropical cities
in Latin America, Africa and Asia. The search for long term
solutions is thus of value to many countries and calls for
the mobilization of large-scale resources for International studies.
Photos © P. Almasy, Paris
18
fr
JÛfc*-i
i


OPERATION ANTI-DISASTER (Continued)
Emergency technical aid service
Jamaica and the Dominican Republic
were not in the path of the hurricane
itself, but suffered considerable loss of
life through heavy flooding. Many
villages remained isolated as a result
of the floods and the destruction of
roads and bridges. Hurricane Flora
lasted from September 30 to October 9,
1963 and finally blew itself out over the
North Atlantic.
Between 1959 and 1963 there were
three major hurricanes in this area: in
1960, from the Caribbean to New
England; in 1961, British Honduras
(which forms a semi-circle with the
Antilles); in 1963, Trinidad and Tobago,
Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica and
Cuba.
The second tropical storm belt
covers the Far East, both north and
south of the equator, along the shores
of the Pacific Ocean. Eight major
typhoons have been recorded in recent
years. Cyclone disasters also occured
in 1960 in East Pakistan, which was hit
twice in October 1961 by another, and
yet again in May 1963. Each time the
cyclone attacked the same area
Chittagong. Over 14,000 people were
killed and 85 per cent of all houses
were totally or partially demolished.
In September 1963 Hong Kong and
Formosa were both struck by typhoons
and thousands of houses were
destroyed.
V
20
OLCANIC eruptions occu¬
red in 1963 in Costa Rica and Indone¬
sia where 1,700 people were killed and
400,000 left destitute. Up to then the
most recent major volcanic eruption
was the one that shook Tristan da
Cunha in the South. Atlantic, in 1961,
when the islanders were all evacuated
and sent to the United Kingdom. Most
of them returned to the island later.
Major dam and flood disasters appear
to have occurred mainly in Europe, the
Middle East and South America in
recent years. There have been seven
major dam disasters, some due to land
subsidence, a few caused by faulty
construction.
The heavy toll of life and property
caused by natural disasters underlines
the need for co-ordinated international
emergency action, for it is unfortunate¬
ly a fact that these catastrophes often
overwhelm countries least able to cope
with them.
While the picture of world devas¬
tation is appalling, the remarkable work
of official and voluntary relief organi
zations at times of natural disaster is
something of which we may be justly
proud. United Nations agencies such as
Unesco, Unicef, FAO, WHO, together
with the International Red Cross and
many other bodies, have contributed
material and technical aid over recent
years to devastated areas with com¬
mendable promptness and unstinting
generosity. Food, medical supplies,
clothing, building materials and money
have all been provided in considerable
amounts. Governments from all parts
of the world have made emergency
supplies, equipment and manpower
readily available.
A T the time of the Skopje
earthquake disaster, for example, mas¬
sive aid for the stricken population was
forthcoming on an international scale.
Over forty Red Cross Societies sent
help in goods and money. The Govern¬
ments of Australia, India, Greece, the
U.S.S.R., the United Kingdom, the
United States of America, and many
others sent not only food, medical sup¬
plies and money (either as gifts or
long-term loans) but also provided
completely equipped mobile hospitals,
building materials and prefabricated
houses.
Soviet Army engineers and a de¬
tachment of the Royal Engineers from
Britain worked side by side clearing
debris and carrying out heavy rescue
and demolition work. Even compara¬
tively small charitable organizations
like the Round Table from Britain
bought and equipped fifty caravans to
serve as temporary homes and towed
them across Europe in convoys as their
practical gesture of goodwill and sym¬
pathy.
Similar examples can be given for
all the catastrophes which have over¬
whelmed countries unable to cope
with disaster situations from their own
resources. Yugoslavia, Iran, Chile,
Morocco, South Vietnam, Pakistan,
British Honduras, Mauritius, and many
other countries have all been greatly
assisted by the generosity of the
people of goodwill of all nations at the
time of their national need.
A recent report of the Skopje disas¬
ter by Adolf Ciborowski says: "The
international help given to Skopje
during the first stage of reconstruction
was very valuable, not only from the
material point of view, but especially
because of its social and morale-
boosting consequences."
Thus it can be seen that, at the time
of natural disaster, emergency assis¬
tance flows readily from national and
international philanthropic societies,
governments and United Nations
agencies.
It is, however, an unfortunate fact
that sometimes such well-intentioned
help is unco-ordinated and often given
without adequate knowledge of the
real needs and priorities. At the same
time, however valuable many of the
gifts and the offers of assistance may
be, it is often the case that they are
not backed up by expert co-ordinated
technical aid.
One of the major problems is the panic
and confusion that arise as a natural
consequence of any catastrophe. Rec¬
ords of disasters show that, if avail¬
able, a properly organized Emergency
Technical Aid Service could prevent
a great deal of this unnecessary con¬
fusion, the effects of which are not
only felt by the people immediately in¬
volved, but can inhibit plans for ulti¬
mate reconstruction and rehabilitation.
The 1961 hurricane which destroyed
Belize, the capital of British Honduras,
killed 400 people and rendered 65,000
people homeless. That the winds of
a speed of 200 miles per hour and
the giant tidal waves which destroyed
everything in their path caused panic
and confusion was understandable, but
the construction of temporary housing
where no water supply was available
and other examples of technical mud¬
dle were beyond understanding.
This is but a single example which
could be multiplied and confirmed by
many who have been engaged on
such relief work.
0 FTEN, in the days directly
following a natural disaster, temporary
housing is erected on unsuitable sites
where essential services are not avai¬
lable. Sometimes refugees are allowed
to return to partly demolished dwel¬
lings and temporarily repaired structu¬
res that should be scheduled for total
demolition. The resulting slums, often
heavily populated, are difficult to era¬
dicate at a later date.
In both cases lack of forward plan¬
ning imposes serious restrictions on
the town planners in preparing the
final reconstruction schemes. Similar¬
ly, rubble from badly damaged or de¬
molished buildings dumped indiscrimi¬
nately without thought for future re¬
construction becomes an immediate
hazard and an impediment to perma¬
nent replanning or improvement.

r -
~Ü.'.' .'-V-ä
Photo U.N. - Philip Boucas
M»edical aid, demolition squads and emergency supplies quickly flowed to Skopje, Yugoslavia, after a
major earthquake had devastated the city In 1963. But technical aid was lacking in the first
days, and months were needed to mobilize these skills. Today, Skopje is being rebuilt with
technical aid from many countries and organizations (including the U.N. and its agencies). Photo
shows bricklaying class in special training centre for construction workers at Skopje.
Earthquakes and hurricanes exercise
no discrimination in respect of the
buildings they destroy; the ancient
cathedral and the historic monument
are as vulnerable as the slum tene¬
ment or the shanty town. But historic
buildings are part of a nation's cultural
heritage and must be safeguarded to
give a town a sense of its continuity
and history. In the past, damaged
buildings of this kind have often been
totally destroyed or have suffered
further damage at the hands of well-
intentioned but inexpert and inexper¬
ienced demolition gangs.
The skill and care with which the
historic buildings of Warsaw were re¬
stored and reconstructed after the de¬
struction of that city during the Second
World War was an outstanding excep¬
tion. (See Unesco Courier, March
1961.) The same use of organized
technical skill and understanding could
well be applied in cases where historic
buildings have been destroyed or dam¬
aged by natural disaster.
At the time of a natural disaster
essential services and communications
are often temporarily or permanently
disrupted and this accentuates the
helplessness of the population. Tech¬
nical experts are needed to determine
the extent of damage to water sup¬
plies, drainage, electricity, roads,
bridges and many other essential ser¬
vices and to advise on temporary re¬
instatement. Confusion in this field can
not only lead to chaos but can be the
cause of epidemics and other health
hazards at a time when physical re¬
sistance to disease is at its lowest
level. These are but a few of the
immediate technical problems of nat¬
ural disasters that could be dealt with
by an internationally organized Emer¬
gency Technical Aid Service.
T HE 1963 Skopje earthquake
was well documented and received
more international attention that any
other natural disaster of this century.
Modern means of communication
meant that within a few hours details
of the catastrophe were relayed
throughout the world and a flood of
sympathy and practical help was made
available from many countries. Yet,
even here technical aid in the days
immediately after the shock was not
sufficiently well organized.
The following quotations are from
reports in The Times (London) of
October 7 and 28, 1963, three months
after the earthquake.
"Floods are causing the evacuation
of Skopje's largest camp settlement in
Central Park. Some 7,000 people have
lived in tents there ever since last
July's disastrous earthquake. This
area has now been flooded by heavy
rains. Tents and temporary buildings
collapsed. Rain-drenched tents are
being hurriedly dismantled and trans¬
ferred to safer sites where, it is
hoped, the population will remain until
houses are completed. . ."
"... Other complications, which
might have been avoided if the autho¬
rities had approached the problem with
a clear idea of what was needed at
this stage; have proved too numerous
to allow the emergency reconstruction
to proceed as fast as it was expect¬
ed. . . Skopje's problems are being
increased by bad organization."
This is not intended to be a criti¬
cism of the authorities of Skopje who
were faced with an overwhelming task
at a time when they were still feeling
the physical effects of the disaster
and unable to estimate the extent of
the calamity.
The fact is that while medical aid,
CONTINUED ON PAGE 22
21

OPERATION ANTI-DISASTER (Continued)
Three-phase timetable
demolition squads, and gifts of money
and kind flooded into the stricken area
immediately, the vital need was for
technical skills within twenty-four
hours (or less). Some months later
these skills were mobilized, and now
the permanent reconstruction plans for
Skopje are being developed and direct¬
ed by some of the world's most ex¬
perienced experts.
If UÑETAS (a United Nations Emer¬
gency Technical Aid Service) had been
available, modern jet air transport
could have ensured that a skilled tech¬
nical team was working side by side
with the Red Cross rescue and medical
teams in a matter of hours, helping to
create confidence and avoid the com¬
plications which must have made the
preparation of reconstruction plans
more difficult. Medical and rescue
work is accepted as having first pri¬
ority, but technical aid is of equal im¬
portance and urgency.
N
22
ATURAL disasters do not,
unfortunately, run to a readily discerni¬
ble pattern; they do not recognize na¬
tional boundaries or conform to a strict
timetable. By their very nature they
produce chaos and confusion, often
striking without warning and affecting
people who are least able to cope with
the situation in a logical and organized
way.
There are three phases in any disas¬
ter, although even these cannot neces¬
sarily be separated into distinct and
tidy compartments. If the occurrence
of the disaster is taken as zero, the
ZERO PLUS 1 is the period of rescue
of the injured, first-aid for those in
physical distress, the burial of the
dead, and attention to the immediate
needs of the population in respect of
their survival, safety, health and wel¬
fare.
ZERO PLUS 2 is the period for the
provision of temporary shelter, the
return of the community to an organiz¬
ed way of life, and the temporary
rehabilitation of homeless and often
emotionally distraught people. In this
period preliminary surveys and records
must be made and the broad outlines
laid down for the final period.
ZERO PLUS 3 is the period of long-
term reconstruction, and the perma¬
nent rebuilding of the shattered com¬
munity.
The experience of recent disasters
has definitely shown that the bounda
ries between periods 1 and 2 are not
always clearly defined and that if these
two stages in the ultimate return to
normality are too widely separated the
problems created by the disaster are
increased rather than diminished.
If an Emergency Technical Aid Ser¬
vice were available to work in parallel
with Red Cross and similar emergency
relief services these two apparently
separate phases could be usefully
combined.
HILE any natural disaster
brings confusion automatically in its
train, there is no reason why those who
bring physical relief should add to
this confusion by unco-ordinated oper¬
ations and overlapping activities.
Disaster "sight-seeing," which can
be an outward and visible sign of inter¬
national concern, can also cause
delay and muddle which is costly in
human life and suffering. It is regret¬
table that sometimes almost the first
arrivals on the scene are the "inter¬
national salesmen" of temporary hous¬
ing, building materials and equipment.
Phase 2 must, therefore, be tele¬
scoped to run concurrently with
phase 1, so that even while physical
rescue and first-aid work is proceed¬
ing, technical aid is available. This
must cope with longer-term relief in
terms of food, shelter, health, and wel¬
fare, and the detailed assessment of
the ultimate needs of the disaster area
against the background of local and
international resources.
While the temporary rehabilitation
of the community is vitally important,
the preparation of initial plans for
ultimate reconstruction is equally
urgent at this stage. An Emergency
Technical Aid Service must be avail¬
able to survey the situation, record
and analyse the findings, and plan and
prepare for the future reconstruction
in broad outline so that temporary
measures do not make permanent re¬
construction more difficult than is
necessary.
This initial emergency period of the
disaster time-table could be regarded
as a period of positive preparation for
the recreation of the damaged or de¬
stroyed community, just as important
as the actual detailed long-term plan¬
ning.
The third stage, the reconstruction
period, is a long-term one, and will of
necessity take years to reach com¬
plete fulfilment. Many agencies are
available to render this form of assis¬
tance to a stricken area. The United
Nations agencies referred to earlier,
central governments, the World Bank,
and the United Nations Development
Programme are able to make available
money, materials, equipment and teams
of technical experts (architects" plan¬
ners, economists,, etc.).
The work of these experts takes
time, and the execution of their plans
may spread over many years. The
summary of the report on the Master
Plan for Skopje, prepared by the In¬
stitute of Town Planning and Architec-
ure, Skopje, was published in October
1965, and represents an immense
amount of intensive work by experts
drawn together by the United Nations.
In spite of the realization of the
urgency of the task and the obvious,
harmonious co-operation of all con¬
cerned, two years passed from the
date of the earthquake to the publica¬
tion of the Master Plan. This is inevi¬
table, for few cities in the world's
disaster zones have ready-made de¬
velopment plans awaiting the fatal
moment, nor do they have the funda¬
mental data necessary for the prepara¬
tion of such plans.
I T is obvious that the orga¬
nization of adequate funds and long-
term technical assistance takes time,
and that comprehensive planning is a
time-consuming activity if it is to be
carried out properly and effectively.
Therefore, the emergency collection of
data and preparation of broad outline
plans by technical experts at a very
early stage after a disaster can be of
immeasurable assistance to the perma¬
nent reconstruction team and make
their task both shorter and easier.
Thus, a United Nations Emergency
Technical Aid Service could be the
strong thread that would link all the
various essential parts of the present
unco-ordinated but well-intentioned
relief and reconstruction agencies that
already exist to render help at the time
of a natural disaster.
For further information, readers may refer
to Unesco's quarterly. Impact of Science
on Society (Vol. XVI, 1966), No. 3. Annual
subscription: $2.50; 13/- stg.; per copy:
$0.75; 41- st.).
