Numerals open new mathematical horizons 
U.. the eleventh century, 
the only methods of calculation known 
in Europe had been the mechanical pro- 
cesses necessitated by the use of Ro- 
man numerals which were so awkward 
to manipulate. These processes in- 
cluded counting on the fingers, a pro- 
cess treated of in many manuals of 
computation; the abacus (a tablet with 
counters strung on or between hori- 
zontal bars), which the exchequer used 
for the financial reckonings of the 
English royal house, was a variant; and 
wooden tallies marked with notches 
of varying depth. 
It was Gerbert who introduced into 
western Christendom the “gubar” nu- 
merals, inscribing the symbols on 
counters, which he then placed on 
the abacus. It is uncertain whether 
he had fully grasped the idea of posi- 
tional value. 
Early in the twelfth century, Abelard 
of Bath translated Al Kharizmi's 
treatise explaining the mechanics of 
the Hindu numerical system. It was 
known thereafter as “algorism,” and 
was to be appreciated at its full value 
by Leonardo Fibonacci (¢. 1170-post 
1240), the son of a Pisan merchant, 
who had been educated by a Muslim 
teacher at Bougie, and had subse- 
quently travelled extensively in Egypt, 
Syria, and Greece. 
His efforts, however, were not suffi- 
cient to bring about a general adoption 
of the system. The abacus was held 
to meet current requirements, and the 
Hindu numerals to lend themselves 
more readily to falsification (hence the 
prohibition of their use in the keeping 
of accounts until the sixteenth cen- 
 
Photo University of Istanbul Library 
This 16th century Persian miniature 
shows Islamic mathematicians 
at work in an observatory. 
tury). Not until a much later date was 
there a general realization of the new 
mathematical horizons which were 
opened up by the use of these 
numerals. 
The techniques of calculation, then 
known as “logistics,” remained rudi- 
mentary. Fibonacci took over from the 
Arabs what still remains our current 
procedure for subtraction. Multipli- 
cation was treated as a series of addi- 
tion operations, with doubling as a 
further separate operation. Division 
procedures were a source of parti- 
cular perplexity: Gerbert sets out no 
fewer than ten of such procedures, 
and has recourse in the main to a 
series of subtractions. Fibonacci, 
however, was able to detail methods 
of extracting square and cube roots. 
Arithmetic consisted in the theory of 
numbers, which had been evolved by 
the Pythagoreans and expounded after 
them by Boéthius and Fibonacci. Fi- 
bonacci appears also in connexion with 
algebra, the name of which is derived 
from a treatise by Al Kharizmi, Al jabr 
w'al Muqébalah, translated by Robert 
of Chester. In his Flos (1225), Fibo- 
nacci generalized the substitution of 
letters for numbers in the solution of 
problems (as, at about the same time, 
did the German Dominican, Jordanus 
Nemorarius), and employed a negative 
quantity in solving financial problems. 
It was due to these same authors 
that some progress was also made in 
three-dimensional geometry. Certain 
rules make their first appearance in the 
work of Fibonacci (although it is not 
certain that he was the first discoverer 
of them), as, for instance, for ascer- 
taining the volume of the frustrum of 
a pyramid. Jordanus Nemorarius stud- 
ied plane projections, which were used 
in connexion with the astrolabe and in 
map-drawing. 
Trigonometry, despite a few trans- 
lations from the Arabic, was scarcely 
taken up. But the concept of infinite 
quantities, rejected by Aristotle but 
recognized by Christianity, set some 
minds on the road to the differential 
and integral calculus. Unfortunately, 
the work accomplished on mathemati- 
cal infinity around 1300 by scholars 
in Paris was to be lost sight of in the 
fifteenth century, until Fermat and 
Cavalieri worked it out afresh. 
— PHILIPPE WOLFF 
Vol. Ili, Pt. IV, Chap. 9 
(Scientific Thought) 
1
