DENNIS BRUTUS is a South African writer
banned from South Africa and now living in
England. An outstanding sportsman (cricket,
rugby, tennis, table tennis) he was founder
and secretary of the South African Sport
Association and President of the South
African Non Racial Olympic Committee
which, among other international demonstra¬
tions of opposition to apartheid, obtained the
exclusion of South Africa from the 1964
Tokyo Olympic Games. His struggle against
the apartheid policy led to his arrest on a
number of occasions. A secondary languages
teacher for 14 years, he was forbidden to
teach in 1961. In 1962, publication of his
literary work was prohibited. In 1964-65 he
did 28 months hard labour after having been
wounded by the police during his arrest. His
volume of poems, "Sirens, Knuckles and
Boots", won the Mbari prize for poetry in an
all-Africa competition in 1962. He is 43.

THE EFFECTS OF APARTHEID ON CULTURE
The seeds of wrath
by Dennis Brutus
I
e
TO
u
I
Sports stadiums in predominantly white
areas may in general be used by whites
only. Exceptionally, permission may be
granted to non-whites to attend major
events provided separate seating is made
available. As far as minor events are
concerned, coloureds and Asians may be
admitted to grounds so situated that white
residents are not disturbed. Above: an
enthusiastic supporter at a rugby match.
HE world knows a great
deal about apartheid. It knows it as a
repressive political system which
denies political representation to
14,000,000 South Africans because
they are not white; it knows it as a
divisive social system which keeps
people apart, dividing them ruthlessly
on rigid colour lines and punishing
those who try to cross these lines.
But the effects of apartheid in terms
of social behaviour and on cultural
development are less well known.
To understand the effects of apart¬
heid it is necessary to think of the
daily lives of the people and the ways
in which their lives are regulated by
apartheid both in law and in social
conventions.
It means standing for hours in a
bus-queue, because there are too few
buses specially set aside for black
people; it means having to pass thea¬
tres and swimming pools with no
thought of ever entering them, because
they are set aside for white people;
and because the restrictions extend to
the thoughts people think, and because
the laws apply to both black and
white, it means that all people in South
Africa are denied the right to read
certain books because the government
believes them to be subversive of its
apartheid society.
Apartheid means that outstanding
sportsmen like the cricketer Basil
D'OIiviera, the footballer Steve Ma-
kone, the weightlifter Precious Mac¬
kenzie could never represent their own
country because they were not white;
that singers and actors like Miriam
Makeba and Lionel Ngakane would be
restricted because of their colour to
appearing in certain places and before
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
23

24
THE SEEDS OF WRATH (Continued)
certain audiences a coloured cast
could perform Verdi's "La Traviata"
but no non-whites could attend a per¬
formance before the State President.
The list of restrictions is endless
these are only a few small examples.
But what they add up to is an isolation
of the people a division which breeds
bitterness and hostility. At sports
events, if white and black spectators
are present, they support opposing
sides and the result is friction so
much so that in many grounds only
white spectators are allowed.
Small things show the effects of
apartheid: When I tried to take my high
school pupils to the theatre because
"King Lear" which was their prescribed
work was playing, they were turned
back: when, as part of my studies, I
tried myself to see an Afrikaans play,
the ticket sold to me in error was taken
from me and I was refused entry: often
I have seen small children being
chased away from the swings in the
park playgrounds their only offence
was that they were black. And in the
few churches which white and black
can still attend together, the blacks
kneel at the back, go to Communion
after the whites.
It is illegal for white and black to
play chess together South Africa
continues to be a member of the World
Chess Federation in spite of this chess
apartheid. And whites who tried to
play football in a team with black
members were prosecuted in the
courts.
Of course white and black live in
different areas and it is not difficult
to pick out the houses for blacks
poor tin shacks, or at best, monoto¬
nous cubes of cement built by the
council housing schemes.
And in a society where these ugly
barriers exist, it is better to pretend
that they are not there. The result is
that the writers and poets of white
South Africa are incapable of pro¬
ducing any work which truthfully
reflects their society; and so deep has
this kind of blindness entered that no
work of any real worth has been pro¬
duced in South Africa for many years.
Perhaps one might expect the writers
among the blacks, in a situation full of
tension and bitterness and pain, to
produce works which live. But for
them apartheid presents another prob¬
lem; to be frank is to be banned.
And so talented writers like Alex la
Guma were silenced by banning or¬
ders, or others, like Alfred Hutchinson
and Bloke Modisane fled the country
to evade arrest. Some have faced
greater tragedy; for Nat Nakasa the
pledge he was required to sign to
leave his country and never return
proved too much; he committed suicide
in New York.
Even white writers André Brink, for
instance who have dared to criticise,
or appear to criticise, the apartheid
society have suffered. Their works
have been banned, or they have been
savagely attacked by the official
spokesmen of apartheid.
The failure of writers to write, or of
people to understand each other all
these are indications of the deeper
evil; the failure of communication. But
what is little understood by the outside
world is that this is a failure legislated
for. It is a failure which has been
deliberately designed.
It is the intention of those who have
constructed the apartheid society, and
who intend that it should endure indefi¬
nitely, that those who make up the
society should be prevented from com¬
municating with each other. Black and
white must be cut off from each other,
must be unable to communicate. It is
on this division that apartheid rests.
This is the true meaning of apartheid.
And it is this that inflicts the true terri¬
ble wound on South African society.
B,'UT the real damage is in
daily human relations. I have seen
white children standing in one of the
mixed buses rather than sit beside any¬
one who was not white and this seems
to me so complete a rejection of an¬
other human person that it goes much
further than the division and separation
enjoined by law. From this kind of
rejection comes a complete lack of any
feeling of common humanity; the suff¬
ering of a human being ceases to be
real because he has ceased to be a
real human being.
In an atmosphere like this, it is easy
for children at play to imagine them¬
selves shooting a few blacks. It is
equally easy for blacks to think of
massacring whites in revenge for the
many injustices they suffer.
This is the situation which has been
created in South Africa today. The
tensions are real, the threat of a vio¬
lent eruption constant. And this must
not be thought of simply as something
which the politicians say, or which is
the product of political factors or argu¬
ments. It is a simple truth that human
relations between people have deterio¬
rated so far, and have been so barri¬
caded against by apartheid laws, that
dialogue, understanding, friendship
all these are impossible.
This is the effect of apartheid in
terms of the society this is its all per¬
vasive extent: it breeds, if it breeds
anything, hostility: often the result is
simply the bitter sterility which will
engender violence.
