-" 0 ^ _^ûflBM
Facing the
of moder
by Mikhail Prokofiev
Ihe education of the rising
generation has long been a subject of
analysis and criticism in learned jour¬
nals and the popular press, at gather¬
ings and at conferences. It has been
examined from various angles and at
various depths, and we now see more
clearly our strong points and weak
points and the ways In which we can
Improve public education.
We are now convinced, for one thing,
that when the secondary schools In the
U.S.S.R. attempt to give vocational
training the result is a lowering of
scholastic standards, with less atten¬
tion paid to the main subjects.
It has also become obvious that the
MIKHAIL PROKOFIEV is Minister of
Education in the U.S.S.R. A Corresponding
Member of the U.S.S.R. Academy of
Sciences, Professor Prokofiev teaches at
the University of Moscow. He has written
extensively on problems of university
education, educational administration In the
U.S.S.R. and the admission of technicians
to higher studies.

complexities
education
Students in this class belong to a new
generation of scientists and mathematicians
being formed in the special science training
centres of the U.S.S.R. In Siberia, students
qualify for places in these specialized schools
by entering a Science Olympics competition
designed to select the most naturally gifted
young people throughout the region.
scope, methods and programmes of
instruction have to be re-examined.
In a period of rapid scientific and
technological progress, a period of
what is called the "information explo¬
sion," the teaching of many school
subjects has remained unchanged or,
even worse, the old subject-matter has
been patched up with new and fashion¬
able views that give a semblance of
bridging the gap between out-dated
material and contemporary knowledge.
Formal methods of instruction, with too
much stress on memorizing, have be¬
come widespread.
Fifty years ago the main job for our
country was to liquidate illiteracy.
When that was accomplished we intro¬
duced universal elementary schooling,
then a compulsory seven-year educa¬
tion for all children, and now universal
eight-year schooling.
We are now on the threshold of uni¬
versal secondary education for young
people.
Two or three years ago we were
telling teen-agers: you've finished eight
years of school; now get a job and
repay the nation for what it spent to
educate you. Now we tell them:
modern development requires that you
possess higher education or qualifi¬
cations. Greater knowledge will give
you more versatility and your life will
be more interesting. Society will
appreciate you more if you stay on in
school until you complete a general
secondary education or, if you prefer,
enter a specialized secondary school
or a vocational school where you can
learn a good trade and professional
skills.
This approach seems simple but it
is not so easy to put it into practice.
Nothing is ever accomplished mecha¬
nically in education. Planning and
facilities may be ideal, but education
will have an influence on society only
if we carry out painstaking, individual
work with the teachers, the pupils and
the parents.
It is becoming more and more imper¬
ative that each member of the rising
generation should be given a thorough
secondary education. We intend,
within the next few years, to draw all
boys and girls into secondary school
education in one form or another.
What are these forms? First, a ten-
year general secondary education
offering courses in all subjects but
providing a good knowledge of the
fundamentals of science sufficient for
admission to college or university. We
estimate that from 70 to 75 per cent of
the young people will choose this road.
Secondly, young people may choose,
after finishing eight years of school, to
enter a technical secondary school
where, in three or four years, they
receive a general education and learn
a trade or skill that will enable them
to get medium-level specialized jobs.
These two forms, we believe, plus
evening schools and study by corres¬
pondence, will enable us to give all
young people a secondary education.
There are many problems, including the
adolescent's possible lack of desire to
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20
15

MODERN EDUCATION (Continued from page 15)
Streamline teaching methods
and eliminate stereotypes
20
continue his studies. Only by working
in close contact with each family and
each teen-ager will we be able to attain
the truly unprecedented goal of a
secondary education for all.
To do this we shall have to open,
equip and staff 8,000 new secondary
schools this year and in 1968. The
main lines along which instruction is to
develop have been mapped out. We
realize that everything cannot be
changed all at once and intend to
improve the school curriculum grad¬
ually and persistently.
A new pattern of study hours is
being introduced to relieve the exces¬
sive load the pupils now carry; there
will be 24 hours of compulsory classes
a week in the junior grades and
30 hours in the senior grades. Doctors
and physiologists agree this is more or
less the optimal pattern.
To this we add a programme of
optional subjects to meet the interests
and inclinations of the individual pupil.
Elective courses must be particularly
well-thought-out. Experts will be invited
to conduct them. A mediocre teacher
will never be able to make an elective
course stimulating. It degenerates into
idle talk or a repetition of previous
lessons.
0
VER the past few years
a huge team of scholars, college edu¬
cators, methodologists and school¬
teachers has painstakingly analyzed,
re-examined and, in the main, approv¬
ed new syllabuses. The main idea has
been to avoid overloading the pupil's
memory with facts. Instead, the basic
laws governing the development of the
material world and social processes
will be studied from the standpoint of
our contemporary understanding of
them.
In the biological sciences the pupils
will, of course, gain a picture of the
great variety of forms of life, from the
virus to the human being. However,
the important thing is not to memorize
the names of the countless species,
families, etc., but to grasp the basic
laws governing the functions of the
living organism. This is what the
course in general biology now included
in the syllabus sets out to do, but so
far it is making slow headway in the
schools.
In chemistry the pupils will have to
learn about a great number of both
natural and synthesized substances.
Their efforts will be rewarded by an
understanding of the laws governing
the formation of chemical substances,
presented in up-to-date, comprehen¬
sible form in the courses provided
in organic and inorganic chemistry.
The course in the literature of the
peoples of the Soviet Union and other
nations naturally cannot encompass
everything. Not even specialized
college courses can. The secondary
school literature programme aims not
at "covering" a work of fiction but at
teaching the pupil to think about it, to
think about the social facts and con¬
ditions and moral principles it deals
with, discern the beauty of the imagery,
and develop a taste for reading.
Methods of instruction must be acti-
vized and individualized, stripped of the
stereotypes that sometimes result from
strictly following set teaching methods
supposedly suitable for all occasions.
We believe that the closer instruction
comes to the principle that "learning is
an act of discovery" the more success¬
ful it will be.
Laboratory experiments and demon¬
strations are not always meant merely
to confirm the generally accepted
laws recorded in the textbooks. More
often they are a study of laws and an
observation of facts that have to be
understood and explained a process
by which the experienced teacher leads
his pupils up to the discovery of a
law. In the final analysis, it is develop¬
ment of methods of instruction that
make the pupil realize science is not
something complete and unchanging
but is an ever deeper penetration into
the sphere of the unknown.
That, roughly, is the line reconstruc¬
tion of the curriculum and the sylla¬
buses is now taking. It presupposes,
naturally, the Installation and provision
of laboratories, study rooms, good text¬
books and manuals, teaching aids
which include technical equipment and
machines for programmed instruction,
and many other items.
T
ODAY'S younger genera¬
tion is living in a fortunate period.
Human genius has penetrated deeply
into the essence of social phenomena,
which man is using to remake the
world in the name of human happiness.
Human genius is delving deeply into
the secrets of the universe and the
essence of matter. Man has gone out
into space and is sending probes to
distant planets. He has discovered
a new form of energy, nuclear energy.
Ho is investigating living phenomena
and is, as yet timidly, changing their
lower forms. Progress is only a matter
of time.
A generation is growing up of inquir¬
ing, active young people inspired by
the great ideals of transforming the
world into a satisfying place for
everyone. And the schools are doing
their best to educate a new generation
of young people imbued with an
optimistic outlook.
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
The Soviet Union
has now more
than 760 universities
and institutes
of higher education
with over four
million students.
In science alone,
the U.S.S.R. has
more than 700,000
qualified men
and women.
Here, young scientists
at a Soviet
institute meet
colleagues from abroad.
