The sinews of industrial society
Photo @ Virna Haffer, Tacona, U.S.A.

by Caroline F. Ware, K.M. Panikkar and J.M. Romein

P.... lay at the heart of electrification of the whole country”,

industrial society, for it was the use
of energy to operate machines and
implements that increased produc-
tivity and altered the character of the
production process itself. The use of
energy was the chief measure of a
society's degree of industrialization
and mechanization.

Following the oft-quoted dictum of
Lenin, “Communism is Soviet rule plus

the U.S.S.R. expanded its production
of electricity more than a hundredfold
during its first forty years. It put into
operation in 1959 the largest hydro-
electric project in the world and it was
feeding its growing volume of power
into an immense grid designed to
extend from Leningrad to eastern
Siberia.

Japan's thorough electrification after

In Pre-Columbian Mexico, petroleum

in a viscous state was used as a paint
in pottery decoration. Left, terracotta
head painted with bitumen. The Aztecs
found a more surprising use for this
substance. They mixed it with flavoured
resins to make “tritcli"—an ancestor

of today's chewing gum.

Fifteenth century engraving (right)

shows a man filling a pitcher from

a spring of petroleum—or “rock

oil" as it was cnce called. In late

medieval Europe, petroleum was

already being sought after as a

Ie) wondertul natural substance. Springs
of petroleum were found in Italy,

Germany and France.

the first worid war sustained her
nation-wide industrial development. For
the people of central Africa the great
Kariba dam on the Zambesi was the
surest evidence of Africa's emer-
gence into the modern world. The
Chinese People's Republic, in its
determination to provide a base for
massive industrialization, projected a
dam for the Yangtze river designed

CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

26 
THE SINEWS OF INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY (Continued) 
to produce more than ten times the 
power generated by the Grand Coulee 
dam in the U.S.A. which had been 
the largest hydroelectric installation in 
the world in 1955. 
In the first half of the twentieth cen- 
tury the world's supply of energy 
from mineral fuel and water power 
increased threefold. The energy actu- 
ally put to work increased very much 
more because the efficiency with 
which supplies could be used doubled 
for the world during this period. 
Almost all of the increase however 
was in the highly industrialized coun- 
tries. On a per capita basis in 1950 
the only country outside North Amer- 
ica, Europe and Oceania that was 
using one-tenth as much energy as 
the highest energy-user, the United 
States, was Israel. 
With the exception of Japan no 
Asian country used as much as 5 per 
cent. India, the Asian country with 
the second largest industrial output, 
used less than 2 per cent as much 
energy per capita as did the United 
States, while Indonesia, Pakistan, 
Burma and Thailand used less than 
1 per cent. The Latin American and 
Caribbean countries ranged from 
Argentina with slightly less than 10 per 
cent the per capita energy consump- 
tion of the United States to Haiti with 
.003 per cent. 
The disparity between the energy 
consumption of the industrial and non- 
industrial areas had been growing as 
the consumption of the former increa- 
sed. It would clearly require heroic 
efforts by the industrializing countries 
to close the energy gap. 
The sources of power upon which 
industrial development depended chan- 
ged markedly during these years, and 
at mid-century further major changes 
appeared to be in sight. 
At the opening of the century the 
world was drawing about 40 per cent 
of its non-human energy from work 
animals, wood fuel and wind and 60 
per cent from mineral fuels, almost 
wholly coal. At mid-century more 
than 80 per cent came from mineral 
fuels and water power, and of this 
coal supplied only three-fifths while 
more than a quarter came from petro- 
leum and the rest from natural gas 
and hydroelectric power. . . 
The rapidly rising level of fuel con- 
sumption in the industrial countries, 
and the enormous prospective needs 
in the rest of the world, brought to 
the fore the problem of whether the 
world's energy resources were suffi- 
 
CAROLINE F. WARE, American historian and 
sociologist, was editor of “The Cultural 
Approach to History”, published in 1940. She 
is the author-editor of Volume VI (The 
Twentieth Century) of the History of Mankind. 
K.M. PANNIKAR, the distinguished Indian 
scholar, statesman and leader of educ- 
ation, co-edited Volume VI. Died 1963. 
JAN M. ROMEIN, professor of history, Uni- 
versity of Amsterdam, co-edited Volume VI. 
Died 1962. 
cient to continue to sustain industrial 
activity and growth. 
With the rate of petroleum con- 
sumption rising rapidly, fears were 
repeatedly expressed that petroleum 
might be in short supply by the end 
of the century. In 1942 the world 
consumption of petroleum products 
exceeded for the first time the new 
supplies discovered during the year. 
At the rate of increase in consumption 
at mid-century, the proved supplies 
would have lasted about fifty years. 
But unproved supplies in the Middle 
East were thought to be many times 
the proved amounts, great fields in 
the Sahara were being opened up, 
and exploration for new resources was 
being carried on in many parts of the 
world. Improved methods of extrac- 
tion increased the yield from known 
sources. . . 
Although only a small proportion of 
the energy consumed in the world at 
mid-century came from hydroelectric 
power, this source had gained in im- 
portance and immense resources re- 
mained untapped... It appeared that an 
amount equivalent to half the total 
energy which the world was consum- 
ing at mid-century might be deri- 
vable in the future from the great 
resources in the Himalayas, Africa, 
the Andes, the Amazon and the Ori- 
noco, the Columbia River basin of the 
United States and Canada, and the 
great rivers of Siberia and China. 
In addition the power potential in 
the ebb and flow of the tides had 
not been exploited to any substantial 
extent. Nearly half of the world's 
estimated untapped water power lay 
in Africa, approximately one-eighth 
each in Asia, South and Central Amer- 
ica and the U.S.S.R., and the remain- 
der in North America, Europe and 
Oceania. . . 
Great hydroelectric projects were 
at the heart of the U.S.S.R.'s indus- 
trial development programme. Dams 
and generating stations on the Volga 
and Dnieper rivers were included in 
the early five-year plans and these 
were promptly reconstructed after the 
destruction suffered during the second 
world war. In the period after the 
war the Soviet Union was doubling its 
hydroelectric capacity every five years, 
with gigantic projects on the Siberian 
rivers, at least one of which was des- 
igned to generate more than twice the 
volume of electricity put out by any 
existing plant elsewhere in the world. 
Other countries seeking industriali- 
zation gave hydroelectric projects a 
central place in their national plans. 
India looked to her great rivers as a 
major source of much-needed power; 
her Damodar Valley project was des- 
igned to form the basis of a great 
steel complex. The High Aswan Dam 
on the Nile, the Volta River project in 
© West Africa and the Kariba dam on the 
Zambesi in the Central African Fede- 
ration marked the beginnings of major 
developments on the African continent. 
— Vol. VI, Pt. I, Chapter 9 
(Industrial Production) 
 
LF) A wilbee TRL TE 'y 
Photo Avisun Corporation, Philadelphia 
PLASTIC 
SEAWEED
