Young women
students studying
the Periodic Chart
of the Atoms, in
a laboratory at
Queen's College,
Lagos (Nigeria). In
Africa's secondary
schools girls now
represent on the
average one pupil
in four, and the
proportion is rising
at a rate that would
hardly have seemed
possible even
a generation ago.
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris

Today's schools prepare
tomorrow's African scientists
by N. C. Otieno
A
NICHOLAS C. OTIENO of Kenya is
a senior lecturer at University College,
Nairobi, where he teaches mycology and
phytopathology. He is a member of the
College Academic Board and of the Senate
of the University of East Africa. Dr.
Otieno was first president of the East
African Academy and is vice-president of
the International Congress of Africanists.
He is the author of many scientific studies
on botanical questions.
central figure in the drama
of African development is the African
scientist and the type of education
he needs. It is not only the quality of
the scientist his ability to think critic¬
ally and constructively; his intellectual
qualities and trained capacities; his
ability to seek and discover the truth
that counts. Equally important are
the number of scientists that Africa
can produce within the shortest pos¬
sible time.
Until now, the number of scientists
(including doctors, agriculturalists,
engineers, science teachers and vete¬
rinarians) coming from African univer¬
sities has remained relatively low.
More students seem to prefer an
Arts degree, which can lead to a lucra
tive government job, to a degree in
the sciences; many eschew agricul¬
ture which requires working in areas
with fewer amenities than in the large
cities; others fail to receive adequate
scientific and mathematical training in
their secondary schools; many are not
attracted by secondary school science
teaching as a career, thus perpetuat¬
ing a vicious circle which results in
a shortage of good graduate science
teachers.
This appears to be an Africa-wide
problem. In both Ghana and Nigeria,
for example, education authorities are ««
disturbed by the fact that the number A A
of science students has lagged behind
the numbers admitted to non-science
courses. In East Africa the need for
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

IM
Air view of the impressive ensemble of buildings composing the new University College
of Tanzania, now nearing completion close to Dar es Salaam. Unesco and» the United
Nations Development Programme are contributing to its operation and expansion. The
College is part of the University of East Africa. Founded in 1963, this university is
unique in Africa, being composed of three university colleges sited in three countries:
at Makerere (Uganda), Nairobi (Kenya) and Dar es Salaam (Tanzania). All three colleges
have full faculties of arts, social sciences and general science. Academic standards and
examinations are unified and all degrees are awarded by the University of East Africa.
Photo Tanganyika Information Services
34
AFRICAN SCIENTISTS (Continued)
37 burgeoning universities
graduates in the sciences has been
estimated at just over 50 per cent of
all students graduating between 1967
and 1970. Yet for 1966-67, science
student enrolment in East Africa is
below 30 per cent of total university
enrolment.
In 1962, African states meeting at
the Unesco Conference on the Deve¬
lopment of Higher Education in Africa,
at Tananarive (Madagascar) proposed
that 60 per cent of the estimated stu¬
dent population of 274,000 in Africa's
universities by 1980 should be stu¬
dents of science and technology.
The 32 university institutions which
existed at the time of the Tananarive
Conference were considered ade
quate to supply Africa with the gra¬
duates it would need up to 1980.
Since 1962, however, five new
universities have been opened which,
if provided with sufficient funds, could
enrol more students and completely
alter the picture of total graduates
that would be provided by African
universities by 1980. .
The five are: University of Lesotho
and Botswana, University of Asmara
(Ethiopia), University of Zambia Lusaka
(Zambia), University "of Malawi (Ma¬
lawi), University of Njala (Sierra
Leone).
Another proposal which came from
Tananarive was that African universi¬
ties should co-operate in teaching at
expensive professional Faculties such
as Medicine which had already been
provided for in 11 universities by
1962.
To meet East Africa's urgent need
for more doctors than those which
Makerere College (Uganda) could pro¬
duce, the intake at Makerere was
increased from 60 to 90 students
annually from 1966, and it was also
decided to open a new medical school
in Nairobi (Kenya) in 1967 with an
annual intake of 30. Another medical
school has been started in Dar es
Salaam (Tanzania), which is affiliated
to the University College there, so
that students are awarded a medical
diploma of the University of East
Africa.

The Veterinary Faculty in Nairobi,
which also has students from Burundi
and Nigeria, has increased its annual
intake from 30 to 60. It is proposed
to open a school of forestry at Make¬
rere within three years, and a school
of agriculture in Nairobi. The Engi¬
neering Faculty in Nairobi has also
expanded from an intake of about
60 students per year to over 100. The
expansions are made not for the sake
of prestige, but because East African
countries desperately need high-level
manpower for their development.
The rapid educational expansion in
East Africa helps to illustrate what is
going on in other parts of the conti¬
nent. Ghana and Nigeria, certainly,
must be expanding at much faster
rates than those that apply to East
Africa.
The colonial legacy, whereby Afri¬
can universities had curricula adapted
to those of the universities of their
colonial masters, tended to produce
scientists who were alien to their own
backgrounds. With the coming of
independence, English-speaking West
African universities cut their ties with
the University of London, and intro¬
duced the West African School Exa¬
mination system which has been
working out syllabuses for secondary
schools as well as examinations suited
to their environment.
This has increased the number of
students going from schools to the
universities and created a flexibility
which enables university scientific
curricula to be devised that take cogni¬
sance of the local scene. A similar
situation has arisen in East Africa
since independence, following which
the University of East Africa severed
its relationship with the University of
London in 1963.
The University of East Africa is re¬
designing scientific courses and curri¬
cula to produce graduates with quali¬
fications relevant to East Africa's
requirements. Education options have
been introduced into the B.Sc. curri¬
culum so as to produce secondary
science teachers which countries so
desperately need. Ministries of Educ¬
ation are also giving more bursaries
for students following an Education
Course in the University. In Kenya,
60% of the bursaries go to students
taking teaching as a subject within
their B.Sc. course.
I T has been realized that
an Africanization of the curricula will
require research ariti the production of
local textbooks and teaching aids.
Moves are also being made to esta¬
blish the University of East Africa
Press to publish works produced by
this research.
Although it is accepted that basic
scientific methods are universal, their
application in the new publications
takes account of the resources and
needs of East Africa. The University
College, Nairobi is producing a "Flora
of Highland Kenya" and a "Textbook*
of Tropical Phytopathology" among
other books.
It is realized too that Africans alone
can effectively adapt the curriculum
to their own needs and aspirations;
and it is the policy of the University
and the governments to Africanize
academic staff as rapidly as possible.
The Special Lectureship scheme, finan¬
ced by the Rockefeller Foundation, is
one major move to make this a reality.
East African governments have fur¬
ther accepted the idea of providing
postgraduate fellowships to promising
students to enable them to carry out
research that would enable them to
join the teaching staff of the Univer¬
sity. In all these moves, great stress
is laid on science.
The training of laboratory techni¬
cians for laboratory departments of
the Colleges also was started in 1965
(financed by the Ford Foundation).
This is designed to put an end to the
serious shortage of auxiliary staff,
which places an extra load on the
university teacher of science and
tends to divert his energies from the
essential tasks of teaching and
research.
All these expansions have led to an
expenditure of vast sums for the
construction of laboratories and
accommodation for staff and students.
The University of East Africa, for ins¬
tance, spent nearly £3,500,000 for capi¬
tal construction between 1964 and
1967. This is expected to rise to
£6.8 million within three years. A
substantial proportion of this came
from external sources.
Large sums have also been spent
on laboratory equipment for teaching
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
MODERN HEALTH SERVICES FOR AFRICA
To reach the modest goal of one doctor
for every 10,000 people Africa will need
to train 13,000 doctors in the next ten
years. Nine countries (Congo-Kinshasa,
Ghana, Ivory Coast, Madagascar, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Tanzania and Uganda)
already possess a school of medicine.
Three other countries (Kenya, Zambia,
Cameroon) are setting up medical schools.
Left, Dr. Essomba, head surgeon at Yaounde
Hospital (Cameroon) performing an ope¬
ration and (above) studying an X-ray pho¬
tograph. Right, incubator room in the
maternity block, Dakar Hospital (Senegal).
Photo © Naud, Afrique Photo Photos masy, Paris

AFRICAN SCIENTISTS (Continued from page 35)
and research. All three Colleges,
however, are faced with the prospect
of overcrowded laboratories and stu¬
dent accommodation before 1970 if
more funds are not forthcoming.
It is evident that if current trends
in East Africa are symptomatic of what
is happening elsewhere in Africa, then
the future of science education and
the production of the scientists, on
which Africa so much depends for
economic development, is assured.
The new universities, Zambia, Malawi,
and Njala for example, which are
setting off on their own without affi¬
liation have a golden opportunity to
produce curricula uniquely suited to
their own environments. Universities
like Dakar which maintain close teach¬
ing links with French universities are
somewhat difficult to categorize with
respect to Africanization of staff and
curricula.
In addition to universities, there are
several research institutes which
employ large numbers of teachers
from overseas, but these institutes
look forward ultimately to filling their
faculties with African university gra¬
duates.
The East African Agriculture and
Forestry Research Organization is
engaged in studies on water control
and water use for crops, and its plant
breeding section is trying to increase
the resistance of crops to pests and
disease.
The East African Veterinary Re¬
search Organization does research on
major animal diseases such as rinder¬
pest for which it has developed effec¬
tive vaccines. It also works on bovine
pleuropneumonia, tickborne diseases,
animal physiology and genetics. The
Pesticides Research Unit concentrates
on eradication of the mosquito and the
tse-tse fly as well as control of agri¬
cultural pests and diseases.
The Trypanosomiasis Research Unit
is carrying out research to determine
how sleeping sickness is transmitted
from wild animals into man and domes¬
tic animals. There is also a Medical
Research Unit and an Industrial Re¬
search Unit, both of which are engag¬
ed on research of great importance
to East Africa. Many other kinds of
research await the scientists whom
we hope to produce from East African
universities.
The whole question of communica¬
tion needs engineers to conduct
research into highway construction
under tropical conditions. The Cape
to Cairo Road, which is being
constructed step by step, the road from
East Africa to the Congo, and several
intercontinental highways can be
constructed through areas either of
lateritic rock or the black cotton soil,
whose properties and behaviour need
to be thoroughly investigated by our
scientists if we are to construct major
roads to encourage trans-African
trade. Similarly, engineers are needed
for the construction of our rail system.
The great dam on the River Volta in
Ghana is destined to produce vast
amounts of electricity which in turn
will generate new industries for which
great numbers of scientists and tech¬
nologists will be needed in Ghana. At
present, there is a preponderance of
technicians from overseas who have
temporary posts. Ghana will have to
produce scientists quickly if this
remarkable construction, and the new
harbour at Tema, are to change the
lives of Ghanaians for the better.
At Kumasi University, the School of
Pharmacy has conducted outstanding
research on medicinal plants and has
produced some unique drugs.
Other research, through of a diffe¬
rent nature, has been carried out in the
Biology Department at Haile Selasie
University, Ethiopia, where scientists
have discovered natural herbs capable
of controlling water vectors of some of
the worst tropical diseases.
In Ibadan (Nigeria), the Institute of
African Studies collects information
appertaining to all branches of know¬
ledge in Africa including scientific
works.
Then there are the Academies of
Sciences in Ghana and East Africa
which hold symposia and encourage
members to conduct research on many
national problems. The East African
Academy might well become the Na¬
tional Research Council of East Africa,
advising governments and enabling
them to formulate co-ordinated re¬
search policies for the progress of
East Africa.
There is also the International
Congress of Africanists in which Afri¬
can scientists with their overseas
counterparts meet every four years
to read papers on research appertain¬
ing to Africa that has been conducted
in any other part of the world. The
last meeting in Accra was concerned
with the deficiencies of textbooks in
African schools and universities. It
also focussed on the problem of the
Sahara Desert moving southwards
towards the Equator.
All these and many more tasks the
African scientist must undertake if
he is to contribute to the eco¬
nomic and social development of his
continent. It may be hoped that the
educational programmes and curricula
in schools and colleges will produce
scientists equal to this challenge.

