  
The birth of wheat 
and maize farming 
by Jacquetta Hawkes 
VW... barley and millet 
in Asia, Africa and Europe, maize in 
the Americas, made the solid founda- 
tion for the agriculture of our Neolithic 
forebears. . . Precise facts about the 
first steps in the cultivation of the 
wild ancestors of the cereals are still 
very few, but their subsequent agricul- 
tural history is sufficiently well estab- 
lished. 
One very significant difference be- 
tween the ancestral wild grasses and 
the man-bred forms is that the former 
shed their seeds as soon as they 
are ripe. When, then, women were 
gathering wild seeds they had to beat 
them into skins or baskets and were 
liable to lose a large part of the yield. 
True reaping could only be invented 
after this natural method of propa- 
  
JACQUETTA HAWKES is the distinguished 
British archaeologist and writer. She is 
the author of Part | (Prehistory) of Volume | 
of the History of Mankind. 
Below, man bearing ears 
of wheat—a farming scene 
from 5,000 years ago recorded 
on a limestone seal 
from Mesopotamia. 

gation had been checked by selective 
sowing. . . 
It is likely that there were many 
centuries during which the food 
gatherers of Mesolithic tradition were 
trying out different species, before the 
crops on which so much of the future 
history of mankind were to depend 
became selected, improved and sta- 
bilized. Who at that time could say 
which was certain to be a domestic 
plant, which a “weed”? Even at a 
much later date, rye, which had been 
carried as a weed in soft wheat, mu- 
tated, was cultivated, and soon began 
to be extensively grown in the northern 
latitudes where wheat could not thrive. 
We have absolutely no tangible evi- 
dence for this period of tentative tran- 
sition. But ears of wheat found at 
Jarmo, Mesopotamia in the Old World 
and cobs of maize at Bat Cave, State 
of New Mexico, U.S.A., in the New 
were alike at a primitive and as yet 
unstabilized stage of development. 
It is a rather surprising fact that 
throughout the early centres of culti- 
vation in the Old World wheat and 
barley are almost invariably found to- 
gether ; no Neolithic culture is known 
to have been based on one alone. 
At that stage, however, wheat seems 
usually to have been the more impor- 
tant of the two. . . 
Emmer (Triticum diococcum) has 
been found more abundantly than any 
other wheat on all ancient sites (with 
the exception of some Danubian vil- 
lages) from Egypt to Britain and Scan- 
dinavia. All the great wheat deposits 
to have been preserved in Egypt from 
Neolithic to Roman times are of this 
species. Emmer is remarkably like 
its wild ancestor, now known to be 
Triticum diococcoides, which grows 
wild from Syria and Palestine to Iraq 
and Persia. The discovery that this 
was undoubtedly the ancestral form 
has finally disproved one theory that 
would make Abyssinia the home of 
emmer wheat. 
The wheat found at Jarmo and dating 
from about 5000 B.C. is of very irregular 
type, some ears being coarse and loose 
(closely comparable to Triticum dio- 
coccum) while others are compact and 
already close to the fully cultivated 
form of emmer. As the wild grass is 
at home in relatively high country, it 
is possible that bringing it to lower 
levels for field cultivation helped to 
cause rapid mutation. 
From its homelands in south-west 
Asia this wheat seems to have been 
diffused along two routes, dividing at 
the eastern end of the Mediterranean; 
one took it southward into Egypt, the 
other into Europe, where it was grown 
by the Danubians, the Swiss lake- 
dwellers, the Windmill Hill people of 
Britain and the first farmers of Scan- 
dinavia. Indeed, in the conditions 
offered by the sub-boreal climate it 
was able to do better in these northern 
lands than it would today. . . 
The origins and early history of 
maize have been studied so inten- 
sively of late that opinions have been 
rapidly changing. One basic convic- 
tion which has survived all attempts 
to challenge it is that this most pro- 
ductive cereal originated in the Amer- 
icas and was not known in the .Old 
World in pre-Columbian times. 
¥.. view which has been 
most clearly and consistently develop- 
ed, and which has gained most support 
from recent archaeological and palaeo- 
botanical discoveries is that maize de- 
veloped from a wild ancestor which 
was at once a popcorn (hard-seeded) 
and a pod-corn—in which each kernel 
is enclosed in its own glumes or chaff. 
In the fully evolved maize (Zea 
mays) there are no glumes, the ker- 
nels being attached to a rigid cob and 
enclosed in tight-fitting leaf-sheath or 
shucks. Such a form could never 
survive in nature as (a boon to the 
farmer) the seeds are non-dispersable 
and can only be sown artificially. In 
the primitive pod-corn the seed prob- 
ably grew on slender rachises (in 
place of cobs) which easily broke when 
shaken by wind or by birds, so scatter- 
ing the seed. 
Endorsement of the view that the 
wild ancestor was a maize and not, 
as others have argued, teosinte (Zea 
mexicana) or Tripsacum was provided 
by the discovery two hundred feet be- 
low Mexico City in a geological context 
dating it to at least sixty thousand 
years ago of unmistakable maize pol- 
len grains. That it was also of pod- 
corn type is supported archaeologic- 
ally—both by the finding of ancient 
and primitive cobs and by portrayal in 
prehistoric ceramics. The cobs found 
in the oldest level in Bat Cave, New 
Mexico, and a little uncertainly dated 
by Carbon 14 to about 3600 BC, cer-

tainly had the glumes and fragile rachis 
of the supposed primitive pod-corn. 
The same is true of the second most 
ancient specimens, the cobs from La 
Perra Cave, Tamaulipas, Mexico, which 
are some one thousand years more 
recent. As for ceramic evidence, vari- 
ous pots from central and South 
America, particularly a funerary urn 
with a maize god from the Mexican Za- 
potec culture, looks very much like a 
pod-corn, 
The Zapotec specimen also tends 
to confirm an interesting result 
obtained by a most ingenious method 
of regressive selective breeding. This 
breeding back towards the primitive 
suggested that in the early form the 
male flower, which in modern maize 
grows separately at the top of the 
stem, was immediately above the fe- 
male flower and therefore the ear. 
The ear held by the Zapotec god is 
crowned with plumes like a helmet. 
Almost certainly they represent the 
plumy male flower. This having been 
observed, re-examination of the Bat 
Cave cobs showed them to be topped 
by stumps which can only be the base 
of the male spike. 
The view that Zea mays is descend- 
ed from a wild maize of pod-corn type, 
is, then, seemingly confirmed from 
many directions. With it is associated 
the further belief that teosinte, so far 
from being the ancestor of maize, was 
in fact the result of a natural hybrid- 
ization between an already cultivated 
maize and Tripsacum. On the other 
hand after this hybridization maize 
seems often to have recrossed with its 
offspring, so that probably nearly all 
the modern variations of corn contain 
an element of teosinte . 
Where and when did the cultivation 
of maize begin? Until recently it was 
assumed that the wild ancestor was a 
native in the South American lowlands 
(where varieties of pod-corn still 
flourish) and that it was first fully cul- 
tivated in the Andes. Bat Cave, how- 
ever, has very much shaken this opi- 
nion: the oldest cobs there, about the 
size of a woman's finger-nail, are un- 
doubtedly very primitive and probably 
near the beginning stages of cultiva- 
tion. If the Carbon 14 date of 3600 BC 
is correct—and it is not unambiguous 
—this is the most ancient corn known. 
The Mexican La Perra cobs are also 
primitive but they differ from those of 
the North American site in several 
botanical features. Although no such 
early specimens have as yet been 
found in the Andean highlands their 
absence cannot be held to dismiss the 
earlier arguments in favour of a South 
American origin. 
— Vol. |, Pt. I, Chap. 10 (Farming) 

From long being dependent on hunting for food, 
the Neolithic peoples gradually began to domesticate animals 
and to raise herds. The wives of the hunters are believed 
to have been responsible for the beginnings of farming. 
Above, hunting scene, detail of an Egyptian relief (4000-3000 B.C.). 

