Mount Bezimlanyi "explodes". This
"extinct" volcano (its name signifies
"unnamed") on the Kamchatka
Peninsula, to the east of Siberia, was
considered unimportant by
volcanologists who focused their
attention on strongly active volcanoes
in the region. Suddenly, on March 30,
1956, a tremendous explosion blew
the top off Bezimianyi, hurtling debris
40 kilometres (25 miles) into the air
at a speed of over 1,000 km/h
(700 mph) and devastating 1,000 sq.km.
(400 sq. miles) of forest. This photo
was taken from 45 km. away.

THE MENACE
OF 'EXTINCT'
VOLCANOES
by Haroun Tazieff
In the almost twenty years I have been travelling
around the world trying to get to know something
about the most splendid and violent spectacle that
nature has to offer, I have gradually become
convinced of something that laymen and even
professional geologists and volcanologists usually
ignore, and it fills me with dreadthe prospect,
some day soon, of unheard-of volcanic catastrophes.
4
HAROUN TAZIEFF, Belgian geologist and
volcanologist, is well known to our readers
(see the "Unesco Courier", October 1963;
November 1965). He is the author of many
scientific publications and several popular
science books and has produced a number
of prize-winning scientific and documentary
films on volcanic eruptions. This text is
taken from a study published in Unesco's
quarterly, "Impact of Science on Society",
No 2, 1967 (annual subscription $2,50; 13/-).
You may perhaps imagine that only
the stupid outbreak of nuclear war
could cause the deaths of a hundred
thousand, five hundred thousand, or
a million people within a few minutes,
but you would be wrong; wrong, be¬
cause, ' as geological evidence has
finally convinced me, humanity has so
far been fantastically lucky and the
catastrophes of Pompeii and St. Pierre
de la Martinique are nothing to what
awaits it.
A loss of thirty thousand, forty
thousand people killed by the blast of
a volcano these were already bad
enough; but these were small towns
compared with the enormous modern
cities threatened at closer or longer
range by a volcanic outburst Naples
and Rome, Portland and Seattle, Mexi¬
co City, Bandung, Sapporo, Oakland,
Catania, Clermont-Ferrand. . .
Yes indeed! Rome, Portland, Cler¬
mont-Ferrand: volcanoes regarded as
well and truly extinct near these cities
are dead only to eyes that cannot or
will not see. Men, as we all know,
have short memories. Political or
natural, catastrophes cease to worry
them almost as soon as over, and
teach them little. A volcano may be
less than a century dormant and
people almost cease altogether to
think of it as such; all the more so
if a thousand years or more has pas¬
sed.
But volcanoes are geologically live:
time, for them, is counted not in years
or even in centuries, but in millenia and
tens of millenia. The thousand-year
sleep that is nothing to them is an
eternity to men living under their
shadow the volcanoes of the Massif

Central in France, those of Latium,
of the Cascade Range in Oregon, and
of California (although the latter had
numerous, if "not major,, eruptions
throughout the last century, and even
as recently as 1916 in the case of
Lassen Peak).
But Clermont-Ferrand, Rome?. Com¬
pletely forgotten by the inhabitants,
the fact remains that only a few mil¬
lenia separate us from the last erup¬
tions. In the course of their lifetimes,
millions of years long, there must have
been many lulls, for dozens or even
hundreds of centuries, and there are
really no grounds for supposing that
the present calm signifies the end of
the volcano's activity rather than a
period of repose. Obviously the very
length of these quiet periods is hope¬
ful; centuries, hundreds of centuries
might pass and Clermont-Ferrand,
Rome or Seattle not be wiped out.
But the interval might be much less.
The two most violent eruptions of
the twentieth century occurred at appa¬
rently extinct volcanoes; the first at
the Katmai volcano in Alaska from
June 6 to 8, 1912, the second at the
Bezimianyi Sopka in the Kam
chatka peninsula on March 30, 1956.
Relatively little was. known about Kat¬
mai and its neighbouring volcanoes,
but ten years ago it was thought that
there remained little to learn about
the volcanic chain around ' the Bezi¬
mianyi volcano indeed, Klyuchi, hard¬
ly- 50 kilometres away, is one of
the best-known volcanological obser¬
vatories. Nevertheless, and despite
intensive study of the strongly active
volcanoes in the area, no importance
was attached to this insignificant
"extinct" cone, its very name, "Unnam¬
ed" emphasizing its insignificance.
The explosion of March 30, 1956
blew the top off the mountain, hurtling
debris 40,000 metres into the air, blast¬
ing down the forests at its base, and
snapping tree trunks like matchwood
up to 20 kilometres away. As in
Alaska forty-four years earlier, no-one
was killed, but only because these
regions are practically uninhabited.
What would happen in six months, six
years or sixty times six years if a
cataclysm on this scale were to strike
Java or Japan?
In fact such a cataclysm did occur,
although fortunately on a smaller
scale, about fifteen years ago in New
Guinea. In this case it was not even
known. that the mountain was a volca¬
no; Mount Lamington, near the eastern
end of New Guinea, had been regarded
as just an ordinary mountain until the
day when, on January 16, 1951, a thin
column of vapour was seen rising from
its summit. The next day slight earth
tremors were noticed around the foot
of the mountain. The escapes of gas
and the tremors increased during the
next two days, and a small amount
of ash was ejected.
On January 20, the eruption had be¬
come spectacular; the wreath of ashes
reached up over 10,000 metres into the
sky and rumblings were heard, some¬
times dozens of kilometres away
On Sunday January 21, the volcano
was roaring continuously and at 10.40
a.m. it exploded: a fearsome wreath
of convoluting clouds of gas, spilling
ash, lapilli and blocks, shot up to a
height of 15,000 metres in a matter
of seconds and formed a huge mush¬
room cloud, while a glowing ava¬
lanche spread over the ground with
the same terrifying speed. Two hun¬
dred and fifty square kilometres of
5

MENACE OF 'EXTINCT' VOLCANOES (Continued)
Rome, Mexico City, Oakland, Seattle, Bandung, Catania,
Sapporo, Clermont-Ferrand... on the waiting list
countryside were laid waste, and 3,000
people killed.
I have tried to intimate to readers
my anxiety about supposedly extinct
volcanoes; but there is another, yet
more terrifying menace: the menace
of ignimbrite flows.
There has only been one ignimbrite
eruption in historic times. It was rela¬
tively moderate. I say relatively be¬
cause it nevertheless covered a sur¬
face some 30 kilometres long by 5 kilo¬
metres wide with a layer on average
100 metres deep, which, if spread over
the whole of Paris would bury it nearly
10 metres deep. This was the eruption
which created the Valley of Ten
Thousand Smokes in Alaska in 1912
to which I alluded earlier.
The geological history of the earth
is, however, full of really colossal
ignimbrite escapes in which thousands
and tens of thousands of square kilo¬
metres have been suddenly engulfed
beneath suffocating clouds of gas and
avalanches of incandescent sand.
T
6
HERE are ' a great many
sheets of ignimbrites in New Zealand,
where they were described for the first
time some thirty years ago, and there
are also many in the United States and
Italy, Japan and the Soviet Union,
Kenya, Chad, Sumatra and Central
America, Latin America, Iran and
Turkey.
All these were the result of sudden,
almost lightning-fast escapes of mag¬
ma, supersaturated with gas, which,
after forcing open a long fissure, spurt¬
ed up and spread out, allowing for
differences of scale, somewhat like
milk boiling over from a saucepan. It
is almost certain that speeds of over
100, perhaps even 300, kilometres an
hour were reached, and the very nature
of the material spewed out in this
way with droplets of lava, vitreous
fragments of exploded bubbles and
incandescent fragments of pumice
suspended in the released gas made
it so fluid that it was able to spread
over immense areas, immediately wip¬
ing out all life.
As already indicated, the only ignim¬
brite eruption known to have occurred
in the world in historic times is that
of the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes.
This name was given to the valley by
Robert Griggs when, after great effort,
he and his team arrived in 1917, five
years after the eruption, at the head
of the Katmai Pass and discovered the
extraordinary expanse of salmon-pink
and golden sand from which innu¬
merable jets of high-pressure steam
were rising, thousands of fumaroles
caused partly by the rivers and streams
trapped under the thick sheet of burn¬
ing ignimbrite sands, and partly by
the magma gases still imprisoned in
the sands.
Fifty years to the day after the erup¬
tion, on June 6, 1962, it was the turn
of my friends the geologists Marinelli,
Bordet and Mittempergher and myself
to arrive in this fabulous valley: only
three or four columns of steam still
rose lazily at the top end of the valley,
towards Novarupta, the small volcano
whose detonations marked the end
of the cataclysm.
We gazed for a long while at this
tawny wilderness, stretching away
astonishingly flat within its ring of
mountains. But behind the wonder
aroused by this austere beauty, behind
the geological interest, behind our
discussions of how the ignimbrites
came to be there, there lay the inesca¬
pable thought that an eruption of this
type might very well occur in the near
future, not this time in a desert as in
the Alaskan peninsula or the Tibesti
Massif of the Sahara, but in some
overpopulated part of the globe for
there are recent ignimbrites throughout
Latium and California, throughout Japan
and Indonesia.
This is what I have in mind when
I speak of the possibility, or rather
the probability, of volcanic catastro¬
phes involving a million or even
several million deaths. Like a giant
land-mine under our feet, this danger
threatens vast areas of the globe,
including a number of countries which
believe themselves safe from volcanic
perils.
Governments, whether "advanced"
or "developing", are obviously not
worried, primarily because of ignor¬
ance, but also through lack of fore¬
sight. Thus, as soon as we arrived
in a country on a volcanological inves¬
tigation mission, the local authorities
have sometimes submitted the most
preposterous projects to us, not merely
revealing a complete misunderstand¬
ing of what an eruption is but even
proposing methods for slowing or
stopping it or for harnessing its energy
for industrial use; we have really had
the greatest trouble in convincing
them that their beautiful plans were
scatter-brained.
During a recent mission to a country
where an eruption had gone on conti¬
nuously for a year, we could see as
soon as we visited the volcano an un¬
mistakable threat to the inhabited
areas around its base; as soon as the
rainy season started, the valleys would
be swept by torrents of volcanic mud,
the terrible lahars which year in and
year out claim thousands of victims
throughout the world.
Civil engineers should have set to
work months beforehand to protect the
population, building embankments to
divert the thrust of the liquid mud
pouring down at 50 or 60 kilometres
an hour.
As nothing of the sort had been
done, all that remained was to keep
a watch on the upper slopes of the
mountain where the lahars would start,
and get the people ready to evacuate
the threatened regions calmly and in
good order at any moment of the day
or night. I accordingly put a plan to
the authorities but could see straight
away that it evoked no enthusiasm
whatsoever.
After a fortnight, my friend Ivan
Elskens, the expedition's chemist, final¬
ly came up with a psychological expla¬
nation. Whatever a government may do
to avoid a . catastrophe, natural or
otherwise, it will still be criticized by
the opposition. Why lay oneself open
particularly since, whatever efforts
are made, it is almost certain that they
will not be totally successful, volca¬
nological forecasting being at present
no more foolproof than weather fore¬
casting (although it seems as absurd
not to attempt it as not to attempt to
forecast the weather)? Natural catas¬
trophes being, by the nature of
things, beyond the power of govern¬
ments, governments are unwilling to
chance their funds on undertakings
which simple prudence would dictate.
This is, I think, the reason why offi¬
cial contributions to volcanological
research have been, except in the case
of Japan, so insignificant. Earthquake
forecasting, which is much more diffi¬
cult' than the forecasting of eruptions,
receives equally little encouragement.
The authorities try to forget disasters
as quickly as possible: despite the
destruction of San Francisco in 1906,
the richest and most powerful country
in the world had to wait sixty years,
until the Anchorage disaster of 1964,
before it was decided to invest in the
necessary seismological equipment
and try to forecast future cataclysms.
A
FEW more examples like
Krakatoa, St. Pierre de la Martinique,
or Pompeii will probably be necessary
before the decision is made to set up
observatories which would make it
possible to forecast the awakening of
"extinct" volcanoes and the opening
of fissures from which ignimbrite flows
escape.
Providing the indispensable minimum
of funds are allocated, it should be
easier today to forecast the awakening
of a volcano than to forecast the wea¬
ther. This is, alas, still far from being
the case. Forecasting depends on de¬
tecting significant fluctuations in a
series of physical and chemical para¬
meters. The difficulty lies in interpret¬
ing the changes observed; some of
the parameters at times speak a rela-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 8

The 30,000 inhabitants of Pompeii
and the 6,000 of neighbouring
Herculanum were taken completely
unawares when Mount Vesuvius
began to erupt in earnest on an August
morning in the year 79 A.D. Pompeii
had just finished reconstructing
most of its buildings, devastated in
the earthquake which ravaged the
city 17 years earlier. When the hail
of volcanic ash and pumice descended
on the city, some people sought
refuge in their homes while most fled
across the countryside. Thousands
succumbed. The city remained buried
for 18 centuries until it was gradually
dug out. Today, Pompeii, like
Herculanum, presents the dramatic
spectacle of a powerful Roman
city in the grip of fear and death.
Plaster moulds of the cavities left in
the ashes after bodies had mouldered
into dust show the postures of people
at the moment they were killed by
fumes, ashes and debris. Below,
the outline of the body of a man who
died in the last moments of Pompeii.
Left, close to the Forum in Pompeii,
a statue of Apollo stands out today
against the backdrop of Vesuvius.
THE LAST MOMENTS OF POMPEII
Photo © Roger Vlollet
r? ä
m
fe
W.W.

MENACE OF 'EXTINCT' VOLCANOES (Continued)
Eruption forecasting could be easier
than predicting the weather
at the stage of
the causes and
mechanism of
tively comprehensible language while
others remain, for the present at least,
indecipherable.
Since we are still
conjecture regarding
consequently the
eruptions, these variation which mod;
em techniques make it possible to
measure cannot really be understood
nor, therefore, can their meaning be
interpreted with certainty.
But there is a gradual improvement,
and successful forecasts of impending
activity have several times been made,
the best example being the eruption of
Kilauea in December 1959-January
1960: seismographs had given notice
of the awakening of the volcano nearly
six months before it erupted.
Thanks to their excellent observa¬
tion network on Hawaii and on Kilauea
itself, scientists of the volcanological
observatory were able to determine
the focal depth of the tremors: about
50 kilometres, which is suprising
enough for volcanic seismic effects, the
hypocentre of which is usually localiz¬
ed less than 5 kilometres below the
surface, and still more surprising in
Hawaii where the lower limit of the
earth's crust itself is only 15 kilo¬
metres below sea level.
In the following weeks, the volcano¬
logists noted that the focal depth was
getting less and less and by measur¬
ing the speed of the rise they pro¬
duced an estimate of the time it would
take for this depth to be reduced to
zero, i.e., when the magma would erupt
at the surface.
As the measurements continued the
coefficient of error due to extrapolation
was reduced. A network of field seis¬
mographs was brought into service in
addition to the fixed network, allowing
high-precision determination of the
co
THE CIRCLE
OF FIRE
AROUND THE
NOT SO
PACIFIC
OCEAN
No less than 62 per
cent of the world's
active volcanoes are
located in what is often
called "the circle of
fire" in the Pacific.
Left, the majestic cone
of Mt. Shishaldin in
Alaska, one of the
79 volcanoes in a chain
running through the
Aleutian Islands into
the Alaskan peninsular.
Above, grandiose
firework displays from
active craters in the
Kamchatka chain
(28 volcanoes).

S1
»^
Photos © APN - Vadim Gnppenrelter
epicentres, i.e., the zones where the
eruption was likely to take place (with
this vast shield volcano, eruptions can
occur equally well in the area of the
central crater or up to 10 or 20 kilo¬
metres away on the slopes of the
mountain).
As the tremors increased in number
and intensity, the whole volcano
swelled, probably under the pressure
of the rising magma the angles and
directions of this tumescence, which
is otherwise quite imperceptible, can
be accurately measured with the aid of
instruments know as tiltmeters or clino¬
meters.
Thus, by carefully following the evo¬
lution of phenomena which had long
been known to be closely connected
with the rise of the magma, the scien¬
tists at Hawaii Observatory were able
to predict with unprecedented accu¬
racy the exact point the Kilauea Iki
crater and moment where the erup¬
tion would take place.
They went even better: when the
eruption stopped after three weeks of
violent and spectacular activity, not
only were they able to state that it
had not finished and would start again,
but were even able to say that this
would happen 15 kilometres away near
the small village of Kapoho. As a
result, it was possible to evacuate the
population and even' all their movable
belongings before the earth gaped
open to release the gas and incandes¬
cent lava which was to destroy the
houses and fields.
Unfortunately, it is not always so
easy to interpret seismograph and cli¬
nometer data. The behaviour of
volcanoes of the Hawaian type is rela¬
tively straightforward, but that of most
of the others is not particularly the
dangerously explosive stratified cones
which abound in the circum-Pacific
"ring of fire". These latter are, how¬
ever, up to now at least, the subject
of the most wary observation, since
more than half of the paltry dozen
volcanological observatories which
exist are concentrated here, most of
them in Japan, one in Kamchatka and
another in New Britain (lar9est island
of the Bismarck Archipelago to the
east of New Guinea).
There is as yet no means of knowing
exactly why eruptions of one type are
fairly predictable and why others defy
forecasting. The difference appears to
depend on the nature of the magma,
on its chemical composition, its visco¬
sity, its content in dissolved gases,
and perhaps even its origins.
Let us accept for the moment the
theory that the substance emitted by
basaltic volcanoes comes from a deep
magma, highly fluid and relatively poor
in gases and everywhere present be¬
neath the earth's crust, whilst the
circum-Pacific volcanoes are fed by
limited magma chambers, strung out
along narrow zones and consisting of
pockets, within the crust itself, of
molten rocks whose composition gives
the substance a high viscosity and a
high gas content. It is then easy to
see that the eruptive processes of
these different types of magma will
be different and so, therefore, will be
the premonitory signs which make it
possible to predict them.
To reach the surface and erupt, a
fluid magma coming up from the depths
of the earth has to force its way
through kilometres of rock, thus open¬
ing fissures first in the depths of the
earth and then higher and higher as it
rises, or widening existing conduits.
When it finally reaches the last few
kilometres, this new intruded material
produces a swelling in the configura¬
tion of the volcano itself and it ¡s
this which the seismographs and tilt-
meters register: the tremors accom¬
panying the opening of the fractures,
and the tumescence of the mountain
itself.
The magmas of the circum-Pacific
.chain are a different matter. Probably
starting life at lesser depths with the
melting of sediments within the earth's
crust itself, rich in silica and water,
they are both viscous and gas-super-
satured.
Before going any further, I would
like to point out that although these
ideas are based on geological evi¬
dence, they are nevertheless only a
hypothesis, and the evidence could be
interpreted in different ways. We know
a lot less about the inside of our own
planet than about outer space a para¬
dox that has various explanations; part¬
ly the nature of cosmic and terrestrial
matter, but also the incredible dis¬
proportion in the sums allocated for
these two different kinds of research.
The inadequacy of the funds allocat¬
ed for the study of the interior of
the earth shows once again how under¬
estimated is the importance of such
research.
Even from the utilitarian point of
view, the future of mankind lies here on
earth. Mankind will have to dig deeper
and deeper into the earth to find min¬
eral deposits when those at the sur¬
face have been exhausted, but the
old empirical methods of finding them
will no longer do, and they will have to
be located before drilling even starts;
for this we shall need more positive
theories concerning the origin of these
deposits than those we make do with
at present, and we shall find them
only if we go and look for fresh data
in the depths of the earth itself.
Accepting the hypothesis that the
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
9

MENACE OF 'EXTINCT'
VOLCANOES (Continued)
Rip-Van-Winkles
and legends of
Sleepy Hollows
10
circumLPacific magmas do not stretch
round the whole globe in a continuous
layer beneath the earth's crust but form
pockets within the crust, that because
of their viscosity, their mobility is
extremely low, and that they contain
a high quantity of dissolved gases, we
can understand why seismographs and
tiltmeters cannot, as in the case of
basaltic volcanoes, clearly warn of the
approach of an eruption.
If such be indeed the case, the
magma would normally be quite near
to the surface and the seismic effects
accompanying any possible rise of the
magma would not be distinguishable,
as in the case of Hawaii, by their focal
depth from the tremors due to various
causes which are constantly occurring
in the upper kilometres of any active
volcano.
Moreover, this magma is often so
viscous that the speed of its rise is
greatly reduced, if not nil. The seismic
effects connected with the rise of the
nragma may thus be lost among ordi¬
nary earth tremors, making it very dif¬
ficult if not impossible for the seismo¬
logist to distinguish genuine fore-
shocks. Tiltmeter readings would be
equally useless: the volcano will ob¬
viously not swell unless matter is rising
up inside, it.
How do these volcanoes erupt at
all if there is little or no rise of the
lava from the magma chamber towards
the surface? It may be that the action
of the gases alone is responsible.
Years or centuries may pass and
as yet we have no means of telling
from the surface of the earth that this
slow concentration of endogenic ener¬
gy is going on. As a result, such a
crater will soon come to be classified
as belonging to an extinct volcano
and we know the terrifying conse¬
quences which. this may have.
In these circumstances, how can
we forecast a renewal of activity? In
the first place, at the risk of repeat¬
ing myself, I would say that we must
get it into our heads that whatever the
type of volcano, magma or activity con¬
cerned, we shall never be able to pre¬
dict anything with any accuracy unless
a constant watch is kept by a specia¬
lized team.
Once this has been established, and
accepting the theory that the violent
explosions of volcanoes of the circum-
Pacific type are in fact the result of
the accumulation of gases under the
roof of the chamber, it would seem
logical to look for significant signs in
possible changes in the fumaroles
which the crater exhales to a grea'ter
or less extent and which have their
origins inside the pocket of incubating
lava. Changes discovered in this way
may not always be easy to interpret
in so far as they can be interpreted
at all but logically they must hold a
clue to what is going on down below.
T
HE temperature of some
fumaroles has been recorded for a long
time back, on the logical assumption
that the temperature will rise as an
eruption approaches. However, with
acid volcanoes at least, this method of
detecting an eruption has had practical¬
ly no success. This is not surprising if
we accept the theory that explosive
eruptions are the result of the building
up of gas pressure and not of the rise
of magma, since it is essentially the
latter which determines the rise in
temperature.
We are thus left with the chemical
composition of fumaroles, which ought
to depend on the deep-lying processes
mentioned above. The reflection of
these processes in the chemistry of
the fumarole gases should provide
valuable information.
Observation of a dormant volcano
may not require analyses at very close
intervals, but the development of the
chemical composition and pressure of
the fumaroles should at least be follow¬
ed step by step. Since only gases are
involved, this alone might yield warn¬
ing signs, however slight, by which to
detect renewed volcanic activity. But
the best hope for a better understand¬
ing of volcanic activity, and, hence, of
developing volcanological forecasting
is to make a close study of the varia¬
tions, both sudden and gradual, in
the gases given off from the mouth of
an active volcano sampled at a fixed
point.
This is the job with which we have
been particularly concerned; to try and
analyse the volcanic gases as nearly
continuously as possible, and to look
for warning signs in the variation in
their composition and in the compari¬
son between this variation and varia¬
tions detected by other means such
as the seismograph and the clinometer.
The first samples of gas taken by
our group were analysed in a labo¬
ratory by Dr. Marcel Chaigneau, direc¬
tor of the Gas Laboratory at the Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique
in Paris, using the Lebeau and Damiens
method over a mercury trough. The
results were extremely accurate but
the operations took so long that, with
the resources at our disposal (i.e.,
without special volcanological staff or

MOST
TERRIFYING
ERUPTION
OF ALL
The most formidable form
of volcanic activity is
an ignimbrite eruption. It
results from the sudden,
almost lightning-fast
escape of magma which,
after opening up a long
fissure in the ground,
bursts forth and spreads
out over a vast area, then
cools to form a solid
crust. Though such
incandescent "tidal waves"
were once common, only
one has occurred in
historic times. This
happened in Alaska
55 years ago, fortunately
in an uninhabited region,
and created what is now
called the Valley of Ten
Thousand Smokes. Left, at
the bottom of this valley,
glacier-like formations
mark the extremity of the
ignimbrite flow. Right, a
cliff of solidified magma
(averaging 100 metres;
330 feet in height).
*jjb x myjifa w 4:-"» £
, ^
n Tazieff
equipment) no more than two or three
series of analyses could have been
carried out in a year. The problems
to be solved in fact require the results
of hundreds of analyses for, primarily,
what we are trying to do is to detect
and follow up variations in composition
which we intuitively feel to be im¬
portant.
It was at this point that two chem¬
ists in our team1, Dr. I. Elskens of
the University of Brussels, and
Dr. F. Tonani, of the University of
Florence, rightly pointed out that the
high degree of accuracy obtained over
a mercury trough was not absolutely
necessary for our purposes, since it
was more important to detect varia¬
tions and establish relationships bet¬
ween the various constituents than to
know their exact composition.
By adopting a new industrial pro¬
cess used for quantitative analysis
of traces of gas in offices and facto¬
ries, we were able to do two analyses
a minute and on one occasion when
the explosive activity was favourable
(i.e., strong enough and at the same
time so directed that it was possibíe
to get near to the erupting mouth)
we were able to spend more than
two hours inside the crater of Strom-
boli itself and carry out a long series
of tests, mainly to determine the
amounts of water and carbon dioxide
present and with the subsidiary aim
of determining the hydrochloric acid
content. Although we expected to find
fluctuations, the range and rapidity
of those we did discover amazed us.
The carbon dioxide content went
from 0 to 25 per cent in less than
3 minutes and that of water vapour
from 0 to 45 per cent in a similar
time and even from 20 to 50 per cent
in a few seconds, that is it more than
doubled almost instantaneously.
With the hazardous and uncomfort¬
able conditions under which we were
working, it was difficult, in addition to
taking samples, to note with accuracy
the timing of eruptive effects and parti¬
cularly of explosions. It would seem
however, that there is a close con¬
nexion between variations in water and
carbon dioxide content and the explo¬
sive activity of the volcano, although
we still do not have sufficient data to
draw firm conclusions.
Continuous sampling at very fre¬
quent intervals is thus absolutely nec¬
essary for a proper study of the prob¬
lems of eruptive activity. On the other
hand, a watch can be kept quite satis¬
factorily on the fumaroles escaping
from a dormant crater, which are ob¬
viously subject to infinitely slower
varations, by less frequent analyses,
the development curve being deter¬
mined from points obtained at intervals
of only one a month or even less.
B UT to reach an understand¬
ing of the mechanism of eruptions
proper, even our new procedure is in¬
sufficient, particularly since it is un¬
usual to be able to stay more than a
few minutes or even seconds at a time
in a really active crater. In fact the
memorable "Operation Stromboli," dur¬
ing which we had several times been
peppered with incandescent projectiles
(from which our fibreglass helmets
gave us very good protection), ended
more or less in a scramble for safety
after three hours when, following an
explosion which had produced a parti¬
cularly large number of projectiles, the
rubber soles on the boots of the most
intrepid volcanologist that I know,
Franco Tonani, caught fire. We took
the hint and left.
Ivan Elskens, who quite properly be¬
lieves that the mouth of a volcano is no
place for any man in his right mind,
decided thereupon to apply himself
to the realization of our old dream
of an instrument capable of carrying
out continuous and automatic samp¬
ling and analysis of the volcanic gases
and transmitting the results to a
recording meter situated at a respect¬
ful distance from the crater. "Then you
can go and mess about near the
craters as much as you like," Elskens
told us, "and I will make myself com¬
fortable with a glaás of beer and a
book and just look up from time to
time to keep an eye on the meter."
In actual fact, in three years, with
the assistance of an electronics expert,
Mr. Bara, he succeeded in develop¬
ing this instrument. On August 29,
1966, on the slopes of the north-east
bocea of Etna, Elskens, albeit without
a glass of beer, used his field tele-
chromatograph for the first time,
measuring, to start with, a single cons¬
tituent of the volcanic gas and record¬
ing by remote control the variations
in the carbon dioxide content of gases
issuing at a temperature of 1,000°
from a vent which was belching out
molten lava.
It is too early yet to talk about the
results of this operation or predict the
potential of the new instrument, but
I am sure that a very important step
forward has been made and that the u *
simultaneous recording of two such I I
fundamental parameters as seismic
activity and the composition of the
gas given off by an erupting volcano
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

MENACE OF 'EXTINCT* VOLCANOES (Continued)
Research fundsthe weapon
most lacking to volcanologists
will enable us to understand this mys¬
terious phenomenon infinitely better
than hitherto.
I would like also to mention the
two other new aids to observation
and forecasting. One resembles the
tiltmeter but provides more easily
interpretable data than tilt variations
which, especially with volcanoes of
the circum-Pacific type, are often mis¬
leading.
The method consists of measuring
the diameter of a crater by means of
a tellurometer. Robert W. Decker,
whose idea it was, measured the dia¬
meter of Kilauea at fairly close inter¬
vals and discovered that it was increas¬
ing continuously and quite noticeably
right up to the time of eruption.
Before instruments were available
to measure distances of up to several
tens of kilometres very accurately and
very rapidly, such operations were
much too slow and expensive to be
of practical value in volcanology. It
is now quite possible that the Decker
method will produce results greatly
superior to those obtained by clino¬
meters.
The second method, used for long-
range forecasting (several months to,
perhaps, several years), is based on
a hypothesis deduced by Mr. C. Blot,
head of the geophysics section at the
ORSTOM Centre, Noumea (New Cal¬
edonia), from the relationship which
appears to exist between certain deep
(550 to 650 kilometres below the sur¬
face) and intermediary (150 to 250 kilo¬
metres) seismic effects, and certain
eruptions in the New Hebrides archi¬
pelago.
S
results
General
12
INCE submitting the first
of his observations at the
Assembly of the International
Union of Geodesy and Geophysics at
Berkeley in August 1963, Blot has been
applying the relationships which he has
discovered -to attempted forecasts of
the volcanic eruptions in the region of
the New Hebrides. In the last three
years, the volcanoes Gaua, Ambrym
and Lopévi all resumed strong activity
on dates forecast months in advance.
In collaboration with Mr. J. Grover,
chief of geological survey, Solomon
Islands, it has been possible to extend
these studies and forecasts to the vol¬
canoes of the Santa Cruz and Solo¬
mon Islands (Tinakula and various
underwater volcanoes).
At the last Pacific Scientific Con¬
gress in Tokyo, September 1966, Blot
and Grover presented a paper setting
out the results of these forecasts of
volcanic eruptions in the south-west
Pacific which ended a follows:
"It seems more and more likely that
a relationship exists between deep
seismic effects, intermediary effects
and volcanic eruptions. The relation¬
ship between deep effects and erup¬
tions cannot be a direct one, since
explosions and lava flows do not ori¬
ginate at depths of 400 to 700 kilo¬
metres.
"However, a certain alteration in
tensions or an abrupt change of phase
at these depths could set off a thermo-
energy phenomenon which in zones
where the critical physical conditions
obtain, particularly under the volcanic
arcs could cause other rapid changes
producing intermediary seismic effects
at depths between 250 and 60 kilo¬
metres, depending on the regional
tectonics. These would be the zones
in the upper mantle where the molten
pockets occur and where magma
forms and where, according to the
views of, for example, Dr. Shimozuru
and Dr. Gorshkov, volcanic eruptions
originate.
"By observing seismic activity in a
given area following the start of deep
seismic effects and by the detection
and localization of intermediary effects
beneath volcanic areas, it will be
possible to keep a closer watch on
one sector or one volcano several
months before a possible eruption."
The relationships discovered in the
New Hebrides and, with increasing
frequency, throughout the Pacific show
that there may be a constant interval
between the beginnings of phenomena
at different levels right up to the sur¬
face, if the depth, distances and inten¬
sities of these phenomena and other,
still somewhat indeterminate tectonic,
physical and chemical factors can be
taken into account.
These intervals appear to be, on
average, from 10 to 14 months between
the 650 and 200 kilometre levels (along
the line of the 60° inclination of the
deep structures of the Pacific arcs)
and from 4 to 8 months between the
intermediary seismic effects 200 kilo¬
metres beneath the volcanoes and the
actual eruptions.
If this theory proves true, it would
be of the utmost value for the fore¬
casting of possible cataclysms. So
far it has not been possible to verify
it thoroughly outside the New Hebri¬
des area and, even there, it is a little
early yet to draw any final conclusions
regarding the reality of these rela¬
tionships.
Though some questions remain to
be answered about the mechanical,
physical and chemical processes which
determine the upward propagation of
endogenic energy at a speed of some
hundreds of kilometres a year from
the depths up to the neck of a vol¬
cano, this link, if it really exists, will
certainly be one of the basic criteria
in volcanological forecasting in the
future.
Photo USIS
KILAUEA, THE HELPFUL

Kilauea, on the Pacific island of Hawaii, gives due warning of its eruptions. It is one of the few volcanoes whose
behaviour has so far facilitated early forecasts of impending activity. Its eruption in December 1959 was foreseen six
months earlier thanks to recorded data which volcanologists used to predict with unprecedented accuracy the place and
time of the eruption, thus enabling the local population to be evacuated in time. Photo shows lake of molten lava
that fills the Kilauea crater (10 sq. km.: 4 sq. miles in area).
