INDIA'S ANCIENT HEROES ON CELLULOID
N,lot long ago someone asked
the distinguished Indian film maker
Satyjit Ray, if it was true that he
wished to make a screen version of
the Mahabharata. "Yes, I do," he
replied. "I have given it a lot of
thought. It is a theme that endures,
a theme of war and peace, tyranny
and struggle. Also, ¡t is worthwhile
to- look at one's roots."
From the classic age of Sanskrit
drama some sixteen centuries ago to
the present times, poets, playwrights,
sculptors and film makers have looked
at these roots with growing fascination
and drawn sustenance from them.
It is small wonder then that the very
first Indian film, "Raja Harishchandra,"
produced in 1913 by Dhundiraj Gobind
Phalke, should have been a mytho¬
logical tale sung and celebrated
throughout the country.
The story concerns Harishchandra,
a king known for his piety and
truthfulness. One day Vlswamltra,
the wise Brahmin in the epic literature,
demands of him the sacrificial gift due
to a Brahmin and the king offers him
whatever he might choose to ask,
"gold, his own son, wife, body, life,
kingdom and good fortune". Vis-
wamitra strips the king of all his
worldly possessions leaving him but a
garment of bark and his wife and son.
The king suffers untold miseries and
hardships, sacrifices his son, and is
about to offer up his wife, when the
gods arrive and entreat him to accom¬
pany them to heaven.
The film was a tremendous success.
Exciting as films from other countries
had hitherto seemed, it was an even
greater thrill for the audience to see
a familiar, traditional story set in India
and performed by Indian actors. It
lifted the audience out of day-to-day
frustrations into the world of legendary
India whose glorious past, familiar in
song and story, yet even so, half for¬
gotten, had thus been given living, mov¬
ing reality.
The impact, in fact, was overwhelm¬
ing. In one of Phalke's subsequent
films, when Krishna appeared on the
screen men and women in the audience
prostrated themselves. This sponta¬
neous action was not the naive gesture
BHAGWAN GARGA is an Indian cinema
historian and film critic. He has written on
many aspects of the Indian cinema and has
produced a number of documentary films on
Indian film-making and Indian art. On an
international level, hé has helped to arrange
the exchange of films between India and
France and was a member of the Unesco
committee of experts on Anthologies of the
History of the Cinema which met in Paris in
April 1967. Bhagwan Garga is to prepare the
Indian anthology.
by Bhagwan D. Carga
of people mistaking the screen incar¬
nation for the real god; the reverence
shown was for the symbol not for the
man portraying it.
The first decade of the Indian cinema
was given over almost entirely to
mythological stories from the Mahab¬
harata and the Ramayana. The Indian
film maker was quick to discover not
only the perennial popularity of the
two great epics, but also that they
were an inexhaustible mine of dramatic
material that could be adapted to suit
any audience.
In the heyday of the serials, when
"The Perils of Pauline" helped Holly¬
wood to make Its millions, the Indian
film maker, like many others, followed
the trend but on his own terms. In the
epics, particularly the Ramayana, he
discovered a wealth of action the
basic Ingredient of the serial film.
One of the earliest serials produced
and shown in several instalments ¡n
India was "The Exile of Rama" (1918).
Thrilling as it may have been to watch.
Miss Pearl White dangling from an
aeroplane or leaping from a burning
building, this heroine was still no match
for the monkey-god Hanuman, who
could suspend himself in mid-air or lift
a mountain on his little finger. Danger
lurked behind every bush in the forests
where Rama and his beautiful wife,
Sita, were exiled.. And what greater
thrill than to witness the combat bet¬
ween Rama and Ravana, the demon-
king, in which Rama struck off Ravana's
ten heads one after the other, only to
find that as one fell another grew in
its place.
T
HE Mahabharata is not
only the more ancient and the longer of
the two epics, but has a larger fund of
stories those of Nala and Damayanti,
of Shakuntala (immortalized by Kali-
dasa in his play of the same name),
of Savltri and, of course, the moving
poetic colloquies between Arjuna and
Krishna which form a separate book,
the Bhagavad-Gita.
All these stories lend themselves
readily to screen adaptations. The
most popular of all is perhaps that of
Nala and Damayanti, the story of a
beautiful girl for whose hand the gods
compete with her lover (a mere mor¬
tal) and lose. This ancient story illus¬
trates the humanized concepts of the
traditional culture, gods with a touch
of human frailty, women celebrated for
beauty and wit, men capable of win¬
ning when pitted against gods.
The cinematic potentialities of the
story are obvious enough, and the first
version was made as early as 1919 by
Madan Theatres of Calcutta, with an
Italian, Eugenio De Llguoro, directing
the film. "Nala and Damayanti" has
since been filmed at least twenty times,
but has lost none of its popularity.
The advent of sound films served, if
anything, to increase the popularity of
scenarios based on the epics. It is
significant that among the first sound
films by far the best was "Ayodhya Ka
Raja" (The King of Ayodhya), a mytho¬
logical film. A little later, in 1934, came
"Sita," directed by Devaki Bose, which
is perhaps the finest screen rendering
of the Ramayana to date.
Devaki Bose used a characteristic¬
ally Indian device in unfolding his
story. The ancient Sanscrit dramas
traditionally opened with a prologue
in which the chief actor or narrator
(the sutradhar) outlined the story or
commented on one or another aspect
of the play. Bose opened his film
with a commentary of this kind illustrat¬
ed with murals depicting Incidents from
the lives of Rama and Sita.
During the Second World War when
the demand for entertainment increas¬
ed tremendously and commercial com¬
panies in consequence took the line
of least resistance, Indian films too
showed obvious signs of decline and
"fatigue". Significantly, the two out¬
standing films of the period were "Ram
Rajya" (The Reign of Rama) and
"Shakuntala", the first based on the
Ramayana and the second on the Ma¬
habharata.
In "Ram Rajya" the crucial moment
comes when Rama, though convinced
of the chastity of his wife, Sita, while
she was the captive of Ravana,
nevertheless sends her into exile after
hearing a callous remark casting doubt
on her innocence. Vijay Bhatt, director
of the film, has recalled public
reactions to this part of the story
when he showed his film in New York.
"Many people asked me why the
kindly Rama yielded to the wishes of
the people in spite of his conviction
that Sita was innocent. I replied that
this was the difference between the
democratic kings of the West and of
the East. Edward VIII left the people
for the sake of his wife; Rama left
his wife for the sake of the people."
Superficially, Vijay Bhatt's reply
might appear chauvinistic and vain; in
reality it is nothing of the sort. It
shows how the Indian ¡s always
comparing and judging his own
conduct (and sometimes that of others)
by the standards set in the epics.
These standards are by no means
unattainable. In fact the popularity of A^i
the epics is mainly due to their deep *V
humanity, wherein gods behave like
ordinary men and men like gods.
