EKPO EYO is director of the Fed¬
eral Service of Antiquities, Nigeria.
He was formerly director of the
Department of Archaeology, Jos
Museum, Nigeria. Dr. Eyo's text
was originally presented at the
Dakar Symposium organized under
Unesco auspices in connexion with
the first World Festival of Negro
Arts (April 1966). It is to be
published by "Présence Africaine",
Paris.
_JHY should we preserve
our African works of art and craft?
Why should we not spend whatever
money we have on improving our liv¬
ing standards rather than on the pres¬
ervation of works of art and craft
which after all do not bring us any
material benefit?
The answer is that the need for the
preservation and study of works of
art and craft cannot be over-empha¬
sized in countries where written hist¬
orical records are rare and recent. It
is precisely because these things had
not been done that the African has
often been regarded as a man without
a past, and as one still living in pri¬
mitive savagery.
In Western countries, protective
measures ' have long been taken for
the preservation of works of art. In
many countries national bodies have
been created for this purpose and
public museums opened whose func¬
tions include the collection and pres¬
ervation of the cultural heritage. The
British Museum, for instance, was
opened to the public as early as 1795.
In Africa certain unavoidable cir¬
cumstances militate against the natural
preservation of works of art and craft.
About 80 per cent of African works of
art and craft are wood which does
not survive thé ravages of fire, fungus,
termites, weather and worms. The
oldest wood carvings are probably the
ancestor (Ekpu) figures from Oron in
Eastern Nigeria and yet they are said
to be only 150 to 200 years old.
William Fagg, the British ethnologist,
attributes the continuity of African
art to the high rate at which termites
eat up carvings as soon as they are
made, so creating the need to pro¬
duce new ones. But perhaps that is
not the only reason, for continuity
originates in families of carvers who
train the younger generations as they
come along. Yet it is true that a
countless number of good works of
arts and crafts which we may never
know anything about have already
perished in this way.
The most ancient and best preserv¬
ed of African works of art are those
that were made in metal, but even here
cases are known where old brass

THE PROTECTION OF AFRICA'S
ARTISTIC HERITAGE
by Ekpo Eyo
works have been melted down and
recast.
In some cases where the owners
of these works have tried to take
care of them and save them from
destruction, they have been ignorant
of the scientific means of doing so.
The people of Tada for instance have
badly damaged their famous bronzes
by frequently scrubbing them with
sand.
But this is not the greatest danger
to the preservation of works of art and
craft. Such danger comes from the
disintegration of the old social struc¬
ture which was based on indigenous
religion and a subsistence economy.
Africans are extremely religious
people whose lives are marked ,at
every point with rituals and ceremo¬
nies. Whether they live in highly
organized kingdoms or in simple com¬
munities, individuals, families, lineages,
villages and kingdoms have their own
gods whom they consult in time of
crisis. These gods which are inter¬
mediaries between them and the High
God are usually sculptured in wood.
In this way, millions of pieces of
sculpture were produced..
But new converts often demonstrate
their faith in the new religions by
destroying those objects which were
associated with their old faith.
In 1951, in the Western Region of
Nigeria, a spiritualist movement known
as Atinga crossed over from Dahomey
and persuaded the chiefs and elders
of the neighbouring Yoruba villages in
the Egbado Division of Abeokuta Pro¬
vince to allow them to "clean up"
their villages.
The Atinga priests claimed that they
had the power to detect witchcraft
and those who practise bad medicine.
In this exercise, thousands of carvings,
calabashes, metal objects and carved
ivory, which were associated with
various indigenous Yoruba religions
were brought out and set on fire.
Only part of them was saved, thanks
to the British District Officer who
happened to be there and sent word
to the Department of Antiquities which
was able to rescue certain important
pieces. Today the Atinga collection
forms the largest single collection of
works of art in the Nigerian museums.
If Africans have done little to pre¬
serve their works of art and handicraft,
the awareness in Europe and America
of the beauty of African art has drain¬
ed the African Continent of most of
what is left over from the ravages of
white ants and other factors. From
the time of the Punitive Expedition
to Benin in 1897 and the visit of Leo
Frobenius, Europeans and Americans
have not ceased to collect any African
works of art that have come their way.
It is of course not desirable that
a nation should keep to herself all her
works of art. Some of them should
also be seen in other countries, not
only for the enjoyment of the people
in those countries but .'also to -make
possible- the ' understanding- of the cul¬
ture which inspired such works and'
to. confer prestige on their country
of origin. But such transfers ought
to be carried out legally, which is not
always the case.
TeHE first thing that we must
do, and some African states are already
doing it, is to collect and preserve in
museums, works of art and craft which
are exposed to the dangers 1 have
just outlined. And a museum is not
only a place in which these objects
will be safe, but also where they will
be studied.
The preservation of works of arts
and craft from countries undergoing
rapid development has been discussed
at three international conferences
during recent years. At Neuchâtel
in Switzerland in 1961, a meeting of
museum experts from many parts of
the world was held with Unesco's
assistance to discuss the problems
of museums and the conservation of
museum objects from these coun¬
tries.
The experts noted "the accession
to independence of many countries
has brought about increased aware¬
ness of the importance of the national
heritage and the need for preserving
it and turning it to account ... At the
same time the developing countries
have seen the rapid disappearance of
their cultural property to the benefit of
foreign museums and even more to
that of the antique market . . . More
often than not these countries do not
as yet possess legislation adapted to
the circumstances, or the scientific
personnel required for cataloguing,
collecting and preserving the cultural
property they want to prevent from
being exported."
The experts also noted that the
large scale construction works in the
developing countries resulting from
rapid economic and industrial expan¬
sion, entail the destruction of cultural
and particularly archaelogical sites of
national importance and the suppres¬
sion of traditional cultures over wide
areas, such as at. the Kariba, Volta
and Niger Dam. areas.
They therefore recommended -that
each country should establish a na--
tional service which should draw up
a list of objects of special value that
warranted preservation, and should try
to improve the legal standing of such
objects which would ensure their phy¬
sical conservation and prohibit their
export, although the prohibition of
export should not preclude the lawful
circulation of these objects.
In August, 1964, Nigeria played host
to a seminar on "The Role of Museums
in Contemporary Africa", which was
jointly sponsored by Unesco and
Nigeria. The late Dr. Paul Coremans,
the noted Belgian authority, in his
paper on the physical and chem¬
ical conservation of museum objects
in the tropics pointed out that various
types of climate in Africa have a rapid
and damaging effect, and that the
ancient objects kept in Africa, which
are mainly organic, are very sensitive
to climatic factors. He therefore sug¬
gested that each country should create
a national service for the preserva¬
tion of its cultural heritage, including
monuments, sites and museum
objects.
He also suggested that within this
national organization, a technical sec¬
tion should be set up, comprising 1 "7
primarily a "cultural laboratory" and I 1
one or more conservation workshops
attached to this laboratory.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

AFRICA'S ARTISTIC HERITAGE (Continued)
The emergence of new forms of art
18
Finally, the Unesco General Con¬
ference which met in Paris in 1964,
noting that "cultural property consti¬
tutes a basic element of civilization and
national culture", stressed the fact
that every state should protect cultural
property within its territory against
illicit export, import and transfer of
ownership.
It recommended the adoption of
appropriate measures to improve
international co-operation in tackling
this problem. Member states were
advised to take steps to see that
no import of cultural property is
authorized until such property has
been cleared from any restrictions in
the exporting state. Museums were
asked not to purchase works obtained
through illicit export or transfer of
ownership.
Among the measures recommended
by the Unesco Conference were:
That each state should set up a
national service for the protection of
cultural property.
That each state should set up a
fund or provide other means for the
repurchase of important works of art.
Member states were called on to
collaborate in facilitating the return of
cultural objects which had been
illicitly exported.
Here are some of the steps we in
Nigeria have taken in the preservation
of our works of arts and crafts.
In Nigeria, a law exists to check, and
if need be to prevent, thé export of
antiquities. One of the definitions of
an "antiquity" is "any work of art or
craftwork, including any statue, model¬
led clay figure, figure cast or wrought
in metal, carving, housepost, door,
ancestral figure, religious mask, staff,
drum, bowl, ornament, utensil, wea¬
pon, armour, regalia, manuscripts or
document, if such work of art craft-
work is of indigenous origin and:
was made or fashioned before
the year 1918; and
is of historical, artistic of scien¬
tific interest, and is or has been used
at any time in the performance and
for the purposes of any traditional
African ceremony."
This definition which may soon be
modified, is embodied in the Antiqui¬
ties Act of 1953.
Those who intend to export an anti¬
quity must apply in the first place to
the Director of Antiquities. If the object
is found to be an antiquity but not
very important, the Director of Anti¬
quities is authorized to issue a permit
for its export. All antiquities are
photographed and listed so as to
provide an accurate record of what
works have left the country.
For more important antiquities, the
Antiquities Commission or its sub¬
committee must see and determine by
agreement whether or not to allow
export. A would-be exporter is
required to submit his objects at least
three months before the date on which
the antiquities should leave the coun¬
try. In the case of an object for which
a permit is withheld, the Department
of Antiquities then offers to purchase
it at a reasonable valuation. If this
offer is refused the owner may be
asked to declare what his intentions
are concerning its subsequent custody.
The Department is also engaged in
a campaign of acquisition of antiquities
by purchases, loans and excavations.
In addition, an intelligence system has
been built up to deal with attempts
organised overseas to export antiqui¬
ties through local agents.
A,ILTHOUGH most African
sculptured objects are religious in
content, a good percentage of them
are household, farming and fishing
equipment based on a subsistence eco¬
nomy. With the introduction of West¬
ern science and technology, the
economy has become diversified and
Western products tiave become the
new status symbols.
So a new art has emerged; art which
is different from the old one both in
concept and quality. The constant
demand by the insatiable European
appetite for exotic art has not produc¬
ed more traditional artists; rather it has
produced a lot of plagiarists who are
cashing in on it by unauthorized
copying of the old forms. The result
is what Frank Me Ewen has christened
"airport art" and what Elsy Leuzinger
refers to as "works without cultural
roots or artistic content."
There are signs however that we
may yet rise to the occasion. At Jos
three years ago, a pilot project was
jointly established by Unesco and
Nigeria for the training of African
museum technicians. Students from
ten countries attend courses in English
and French, which include documen¬
tation, photography, chemical conser¬
vation and mechanical repairs of
museum objects.
Already three groups of technicians
have been trained. Technicians, on
returning to their respective countries,
not only carry out preservation of
works of art and crafts, but also sti
mulate the interest necessary for their
appreciation.
Equally as important as the preser¬
vation of old works of art is the fact
that African art can be preserved by
encouraging and patronising contem¬
porary artists. There is a tendency
among art connoisseurs to regard
earlier works of art as better than
contemporary ones, but the latter are
often equally good.
There are two categories of contem¬
porary artists in Africa today. First,
there are those who work in the tra¬
ditional style though not necessarily
from the same religious inspiration.
This category includes, among others,
the wood carvers of Nupeland and
Yorubaland, the cement sculptors of
the Yorubas and Ibibios and the Oyo
calabash carvers.
The second category comprises
those young artists who have had
training at schools and colleges of
fine art, therefore making use of
European techniques and tools but
deriving their inspiration from their
traditional surroundings. They pro¬
duce what might be called popular
art.
It is not therefore surprising nowa¬
days to find both the sophisticated and
the ordinary Africans decorating their
homes with works of art and crafts.
There is no doubt that with this kind
of appreciation and patronage the
future holds out some good promise
for African works of art and craft.
The future lies in the awareness
that our culture and tradition are as
rich as any other in the world. Since
the present generation of adult Afri¬
cans appear to have already grown
away from their tradition and culture
our only hope rests in the education of
our children in the African ways of life.
Ministries of Education should intro¬
duce African studies into the school
curricula and the universities should
intensify search for more knowledge
of the African past. More museums
should be established where only a
few or none now exist and craftsmen
still at work should be encouraged and
protected. This alone can save the
African past from obscurity and pre¬
serve our ancient works of arts and
handicrafts for posterity.
This strikingly modern African bronze figure,
a work by the Nigerian sculptor Ben
Enwonwu, adorns the façade of the
museum of Lagos, federal capital of
Nigeria.
Photo © Paul Almasy

