THE PAINTING HOSPITAL
IN THE LEMON GROVE
by Harold J. Plenderleith
0
24
n November 4, 1966, the
swollen Arno river burst its retaining
walls and flooded all the central sec¬
tion of Florence, the level of the waters
reaching heights between 1.50 and
6 metres (4 to 20 ft.) above street
level. In Venice the sea broke the
coastal dams at several points and the
water rose to about 1.50 metre above
street level.
Because these events took place at
an early hour (between 8 and 12 a. m.)
and due to the fact that the day was
a national holiday, the death toll was
less than might have been expected
from the magnitude of the catastrophe.
The damage to cultural property,
however, was immense; while initially,
at all events, the relatively slow rise
of the waters left time for people to
reach higher ground, not much could
be done for the immense wealth of
works of art, the libraries and the
archives that stood in the path of the
flood.
It must be recognized that the flood
level was far above anything that had
HAROLD J. PLENDERLEITH is director of
the International Centre for the Study of
the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural
Property in Rome. He was In Florence
on November 3, 7966, and thus wit¬
nessed the catastrophic floods. Before
becoming the first director of the Rome
Centre in 1959, Mr. Plenderleith was
professor of chemistry at the Royal Aca¬
demy of Arts, London, and Keeper of the
Research Laboratory at the British Museum.
His best known work is "The Conservation
of Antiquities and Works of Art" (Oxford
University Press, London, Toronto, New
York, 1957).
ever been recorded even though
records went back to the 11th century
in Florence. This explains why large
numbers of objects that were suscept¬
ible to damage even by short expo¬
sure to damp now found themselves
inundated completely immersed in
muddy water contaminated with black
oil from domestic central heating plants
and from submerged cars.
Dramatic rescue operations took
place in the Uffizi Gallery in Florence
where the waters progressively invad¬
ed the painting storerooms and the
restoration cabinet; in the latter, paint¬
ings by Giotto, Simone Martini and
other great masters were evacuated
just ahead of the rising water.
Part of the collection in the store¬
rooms could be lifted to upper levels
through a window which had to be
broken, as the door was already
obstructed by water, but many paint¬
ings had to be left behind. At the
very time that the salvage operations
were taking place, the Renaissance
stone building of the Uffizi, exposed
to the full blast of the raging torrent,
was felt to be shuddering violently
and many thought it would collapse as
a whole.
Not even a partial salvage was
possible in other parts of the city: the
museum of Santa Croce and the Cap¬
pella dei Pazzi were buried under 5-6
metres (16-20 ft.) of water. Paintings
on wood by Cimabue, Bronzino, Va-
sari, Salviati and detached murals by
Orcagna were completely submerged.
Other inundated areas were Casa
Buonarroti with a complete art gallery,
the church of SS. Apostoli with a
famous Vasari panel, S. Ambrogio,
S. Piero a Ponti and a number of
other churches, less known perhaps,
but each one a small precious museum
with altarpieces some of which had
been standing in their original positions
within their original frames ever since
the 15th centuryl
The bronze doors of the Baptistery
in Piazza del Duomo were forced open
by the great flood of water now hav¬
ing obtained a calculated speed of
40 mph; some of the precious reliefs
by Ghiberti and Andrea Pisano fell
down and a famous piece of sculpture
in wood by Donatello (the Maddalena)
was reached by the water, and
seriously damaged.
What happened to books and arch¬
ives was even worse: the National
Library (300,000 volumes) and the Uni¬
versity Libraries (100,000 volumes)
were completely inundated. So was
the State Archive of Florence with its
unique collection of codices and
manuscripts, an immense amount of
still unstudied and unrecorded material
essential for the study of Florentine
history and art, one of the reference
points of western civilization. Here
some 40,000 volumes were involved.
In the Archaeological Museum
where the Etruscan collection was at
least as important as Villa Giulia's in
Rome, the flood filled up the cellar,
then the vaults burst open under the
upward rush of ascending water: show¬
cases on the ground floor were shatter¬
ed and the objects dispersed.
In Venice the Marciana Library was
invaded by waters, but paintings and
other precious works of art could, for
the greater part at least, be transport¬
ed away from the menaced areas.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 26

Masked against the fumes of ether and benzol, a specialist sprays an oil-coated
marble figure of Mary Magdelene, a 17th century Florentine work. Solvents are the most
effective answer to oil stains, but they can only be used on stone sculptures.

,
PAINTING HOSPITAL (Continued)
Mobilizing
s: >**
**
>
H
I
\
»
On the evening of November 4 the
waters started to recede and by night
the river in Florence was back within
its original boundaries; more slowly
the sea retired in Venice. On ground
floors the submerged objects reappear¬
ed covered by a thin layer of fine drab
coloured mud; black residues of oil
marked the walls and statues, parallel
black lines indicating the levels of the
receding flood.
On superficial examination the
objects appeared dirty but unaltered,
but the processes of deterioration ini¬
tiated by the immersion in water were
under Way; a dramatic race against
decay had to be begun at once, if
ever the works of art were to be
saved.
Wood, even very old wood, absorbs
water readily: the process is accom¬
panied by expansion across the fibres.
On painted panels the gesso layer is
softened by the action of water on its
binding medium and loses much of its
consistence while both gesso and co¬
lour layers are distorted by the dimen¬
sional changes in the wooden support.
The big crucifix by Cimabue had
been submerged up to the top of the
head of the Christ; when the water
withdrew blisters appeared on the
surface due both to loss of strength
of the gesso layer and to the rather
speedy contraction of the wood to
which the colour layer could not so
quickly adjust itself. The enormous
weight of the crucifix and its deform¬
ation made it very hard to remove
from its vertical position.
The rescuers hindered by working
over a floor covered by a foot of mud,
were unable to save the situation
in time, and blisters opened and, to
the dismay of all, about 60% of the
painted surface flaked away to fall in
the mud. The friars of S. Croce care¬
fully sifted the mud for days after¬
wards; they retrieved a large number
of paint flakes, but it is doubtful whe-
/
^ ^
Ü
The state of this 13th century triptych
(left) dramatically shows the destructive
effects of water on painted wooden
panels. The painting has been taken
from the Santa Croce museum for
treatment in the picture hospital
at the Palazzo Pitti. The child in the
Virgin's arms disappeared as paintwork
fell away after the swelling of the
wooden support. Months may go by
before a painting regains its former
state; It is the time taken to "heal"
paintings that determines the length
of restoration programmes. Right,
delicate cleaning operation on a
self-portrait by Velasquez, the great
master of 17th century painting in
Spain. The work was damaged in
the flooding of the Uffizi Museum
restoration studios.

an army of art surgeons
ther it will be possible to use them to
reconstruct even part of the lost areas.
Other panels underwent the same
destructive process before the res¬
cuers could reach them, for some
churches remained flooded for days
and it was often quite an acrobatic
feat just to reach paintings located in
positions that were almost inaccessible
even in normal times.
With successive drying of the
wooden panels one could expect that
their condition would further deterior¬
ate because of the dramatic warping
of supports, splitting due to opposing
and contrasting forces in frames and
panels, extensive blistering and flak¬
ing of the colour layer; It was observ¬
ed that the paintings having thick
layers of transparent varnish exhibited
better resistance to water than the
thinly varnished ones.
Canvas paintings showed in general
good resistance, except when physi¬
cally damaged by objects transported
by the flood; however, the latter kind
of damage is less disfiguring by far
than would appear at first sight, a
simple relining operation being the
traditional and effective answer. The
excellent resistance to water of lin¬
seed oil based grounds was here the
deciding factor. Neither, in general,
did mural paintings suffer substantial
damage; the hardboard supports of
detached murals, however, easily be¬
came distorted by exposure to chang¬
ing humidity and careful control of
their stability will be necessary in the
future.
Two immediate dangers lie ahead
for submerged books and documents:
rotting and physical disintegration of
paper, and the cementing together of
contiguous sheets to form single blocks
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Photo © Epoca - Giorgio Lottl, Milan
27

PAINTING HOSPITAL (Continued)
Preventing the warping and blistering
of the art treasures
28
on drying. Farther on in time mould
growths are to be expected on par¬
tially dried paper and these produce
disfiguring marks. While such a
situation might be easily handled in
the case of a small number of books
and documents, the problem now was
to deal simultaneously with over
a million books and an archive which
had covered a surface of some thous¬
and square metres (over 10,000 sq.ft.).
More stable materials like bronzes
and porcelain were better able to
survive, always provided that they
were not damaged by mechanical
impact; some della Robbia polyptychs
were submerged but reappeared appa¬
rently in perfect condition.
The facilities available to the local
Soprintendenza were greatly exceeded
by the magnitude of the disaster, and
almost no emergency action was
possible with the means immediately
at hand. But even before an official
The International
Centre for studies
on restoration
The International Centre for the
Study of the Preservation and
Restoration of Cultural Property was
set up by Unesco in Rome, in
1958. It operates as an international
advisory centre for every kind of
technical and scientific problem
relating to the preservation and
restoration of cultural property.
It is an international laboratory
for the study of diseases of stone,
wood and other materials, and also
co-ordinates and stimulates research
into restoration techniques. It helps
to train researchers and technicians
and compiles and publishes special
reports and studies.
It works closely with Unesco, the
International Council of Museums
(ICOM), the International Institute
for the Conservation of Historic and
Artistic Works (ICC) and many
institutes and laboratories in Italy
and other countries.
Thirty-nine member countries sup¬
port and contribute financially to
its work.
Advice given by the centre is
usually based on the reports of
specialists which it sends to make
on-the-spot studies of monuments
and other cultural property in need
of conservation or restoration. Typ¬
ical examples Include the preserv¬
ation of monuments in Nubia, the
painted murals of Bonampak (Mexi¬
co) and Buddhist monuments in the
Republic of Korea, and also the
setting up of conservation services
in Tunisia and Morocco.
call for help was made volunteers
came quickly to the rescue.
Private experts and art students
from Florence and from elsewhere in
Italy rallied to help salvage the collec¬
tions and restorers arrived even from
abroad. They had received the news
of the water levels in the town and
they knew what it meant; a painting
restorer drove in from Lugano (Switzer¬
land) across the partially inundated
highway system, though not really
believing what he was being told ("it
must be one of those inflated news¬
paper stories"). Others came from
Bologna and Rome; the Rome Centre
made its own immediate contribution
in supporting an emergency expedi¬
tion of the neighbouring Istituto Cen¬
trale del Restauro.
Panel paintings were the first worry
of the painting experts; to avoid the
sad catastrophe of the Cimabue, panels
had to be laid down flat so that paint
would not fall from them even if blister¬
ing occurred. Then they had to be
faced with specially fine tissue to give
a strong support to the paint layer,
now held only weakly by the gesso,
and this in view of the foreseen shrink¬
ing and warping of the support.
Prior to facing, the paintings had
to be cleaned from mud, a very deli¬
cate operation as the mud overlay
softened and swollen surfaces; exper
ience taught that the best way was
to damp the mud again with water
using a soft brush, then to suck up
the muddy water with a very soft
sponge. While Japanese tissue was
generally used as a facing material, in
the rush of the moment almost any
kind of available material had to be
brought into service.
Reconsideration of the problem after
a few hours led to general agreement
that there should be a standard policy
using acrylic resins (Paraloid B72 or
Elvacite 2045) because they would be
easier to re-dissolve in the future and
were not subject to the danger of
being nutrients to mould growth. As
soon as the technique became uni¬
fied the emergency teams ran out of
materials, and a frantic search start¬
ed for Japanese paper and acrylic
resins and their solvents.
Here the Rome Centre had a key
function in assessing the needs and
transmitting the call to possible sup¬
pliers. Acrylic resins came from many
sources in Italy and abroad. A res¬
torer from Bologna had a stock at
home; his family went on for days
shaking the slowly dissolving polymer
with the solvent. One great Italian
firm which by chance did not manu¬
facture the precise material required
was kind enough to purchase a large
supply and ship it free to Florence.

The Laboratory of the National Gal¬
lery, London, gathered all that was
available and sent it at the earliest
moment: it arrived (via Rome) on the
table of a restorer in the Uffizi Gallery
within the day and just when he had
exhausted his own personal supply.
It was found that Kleenex tissue
could be used as a substitute for Japa¬
nese paper but it was not easy to find
usable tissue in downtown Florence
where all chemist shops and drug¬
stores had been flooded. The first
packs of Kleenex that the Rome Cen¬
tre secured were of a pale blue shade
and this accounts for the bluish tinge
of the faced Bronzino and Vasari
paintings in Santa Croce today!
Parallel with this work carried out
in feverish haste, plans were deve¬
loped for drying the wet panels slowly
under controlled conditions in order
to minimize shrinking and warping.
The Rome Centre took care of placing
hygrometers in the key points where
damaged panels were being collected
and when, seven days after the inun¬
dation the weather turned cold and
dry, the faced panels were lowered
closer to the wet muddy floor, and
wet sawdust was added to keep the
areas damp.
An immense storeroom was in the
meanwhile being prepared where the
400 panels and 1,000 canvases which
had been victims of the disaster could
be sheltered under controlled humidity
and temperature conditions. The so-
called Limonaia, a huge (120 m. long
and 10 m. high) masonry shelter for
the unique collection of lemon trees
of Palazzo Pitti, was requisitioned for
this purpose, and incidentally there
arose the problem of finding another
shelter for the lemon trees which were
threatened with destruction because of
the decreasing temperature.
In a little over one week the Limo¬
naia was converted to become a hospi¬
tal for paintings. It was equipped with
a stock-room for materials and wooden
stands for the pictures; thermal insu¬
lation of walls and windows was im¬
proved and finally a heating and
humidifying system was created. Two
weeks after the inundation the paint¬
ings started to come in; it appeared
that no further damage had taken place
in the panels after the first dramatic
hours.
For- books and documents the
emergency teams were composed of
students, Benedictine friars of abbeys
like the one of Grottaferrata (near
Rome) dedicated over the centuries to
the restoration of codices and manu¬
scripts and of experts from the Istituto
di Patología del Libro in Rome. The
emergency procedure consisted in
getting rid of the mud, interleaving
with a suitable kind of paper, then
drying as soon as possible.
Many hundreds of high school and
university students formed lines in the
mud passing books from hand to hand
to evacuate the flooded areas in the
libraries and in the archives. Part of
the books were sent away in blocks
of 10,000 to the Benedictine abbeys
of Praglia, Monte Oliveto, Grottafer
rata, Cesena, S. Maria Novella, or to
the Istituto di Patología in Rome, but
some of the most urgent treatment
was begun immediately in Florence.
Water could be squeezed out by
means of hand presses, drying could
be accomplished using industrial dry¬
ing equipment of large dimensions. It
was found for example that tobacco
and brick manufacturers had just the
kind of equipment that was needed.
This work is in progress now. On
the other side precious codices were
removed to the Vatican Library for
specialized treatment.
At the present time it is still impos¬
sible to assess the amount of losses
among the books and archival materials
damaged by the inundation.
At the Archaeological Museum no
emergency intervention has been
carried out so far; here are housed
ceramic and metallic objects from
excavations and these have already
been acclimatised to conditions in
damp soil. The danger here is thought
to be in the mechanical damage to
fragile objects or the possible loss of
loose parts in any hasty recovery
campaign.
Meantime the museum has been
secluded from the rest of the world;
nobody is allowed in the rooms. The
semi-dry mud will be excavated inch
by inch using the most refined archaeo¬
logical techniques. Repair of the dam¬
aged objects will come in due time,
using methods that are already well
established.
Temporary protection of panel palnt-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 34
Florence has been called
"The Athens of the
Modern World". The
Etruscan collections in
its archaeological museum,
along with those of
Rome, rank as the finest
in the world. Under
pressure from water in the
museum's cellars, floors
in groundfloor rooms
literally exploded (right)
and glass cases of exhibits
were demolished.
Thousands of exhibits,
including bronze and
Ivory objects, sculptures
and sarcophagi were
destroyed. Left, taped
like an ancient mummy,
a valuable Etruscan
terracotta work awaits
reconstruction.

The painting hospital in the lemon grove (Continued from page 29)
ings by facing and controlling their
environmental conditions obviously is
no final solution of the problem of
ensuring permanency and full visibility
of the paintings. Many roads, how¬
ever, are opened for possible treatment
and one can safely assume that the
treatment will be diversified and that
it will be adapted to the particular
conditions of each single panel.
Probably an effort will be made to
avoid transfer of panel paintings to a
new support, since this operation may
imply a substantial alteration of the
work of art. It may well be that the
damp wood could be treated with solu¬
tions of synthetic or natural resins in
order to displace the water from the
inner structure by substituting the
inert resin, thus avoiding collapse of
the cell walls on drying.
It must be remembered, however,
that the gesso ground might have lost
part of its cohesive strength, so impair¬
ing the adhesion of the colour layer
to the support. In such conditions the
painting would live in perpetual dan¬
ger of blistering and flaking of the
paint. When, as in such a case, the
strength of the ground cannot be res¬
tored by appropriate fixing operations,
transfer to a new support is likely to
be inevitable if the painting is to be
saved.
Problems lie ahead also for books,
archival documents and manuscripts,
for obviously industrial dessication
cannot be pushed too far or it would
damage the mechanical properties of
the sheets. If left too humid, on the
other hand, the paper would be subject
to mould infection. This underlines the
importance of adopting a disinfection
procedure. It appears that vacuum
fumigation with ethylene oxide will be
the preferred procedure, but there is
a serious problem of obtaining spec¬
ialized equipment and technical person¬
nel to handle it.
Since books and documents are
being distributed in different locations
for treatment, the Istituto di Patología
del Libro is planning to use movable
fumigation units which could be post¬
ed according to momentary require¬
ments and at the time of writing a
hue and cry is being issued in the
hope of locating such additional help.
Who will do the restoration of manu¬
scripts? We have seen that a solu¬
tion to this problem has already been
found for paper materials; it is fortun¬
ate that many religious institutions
in Italy are specialized in this kind
of work. Far more difficult is the
problem for paintings (for a total of
over a thousand paintings requires
restoration work by skilled personnel).
This exceeds the limits of possibi¬
lity for all the state institutions and
private restorers in Italy. However, it
must be remembered that offers of
help by specialized experts are com¬
ing in from all over the world: Britain,
U.S.S.R., U.S.A., Yugoslavia, the Fede¬
ral German Republic, Canada, Poland
among others.
The Florence disaster thus opens
the way for a major project in inter¬
national co-operation which, aside from
its spiritual value as a proof of good¬
will, has deep implications for techni¬
cal exchange and progress. If pro¬
gress results from disaster, as often
happens, it will not be for the first
time in Italian history that victory has
been thus achieved.
The superb frescoes in the Museum of Santa Croce one of the great legacies
of Renaissance painting were submerged under several feet of water. Below, deterioration
is clearly visible on Vasari's "Last Supper", painted in 1546 (left of photo) and on
"Descent from the Cross" by Alessandro Allori (1561). The water had hardly subsided
when rescuers began to apply first aid cleaning mud from paintings and covering
them with special paper to absorb moisture and consolidate the paint. Photo © Epoca Giorgio Lotti, Milan
