THE WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME
A new form of aid for development
by Colin Mackenzie
30
ODERN international aid,
in the years since the discovery that
wealth can be shared without too much
risk, with honour and indeed with pro¬
fit, has come to assume varied forms.
Cash of course predominates for, as
Schopenhauer once remarked, money
is the one thing which is not only a
concrete satisfaction of one need in
particular, but an abstract satisfaction
of all. In addition, however, there is
a wide variety of material and equip¬
ment. There is also technical advice
experts of one kind and another
spread around the developing coun¬
tries armed with anything from syringes
to theodolites. And now, as a rela¬
tively new form of aid, there is food.
Relatively new? After all, as long
ago as the third century B.C., Hleron II,
Tyrant of Syracuse, sent grain to Egypt
in time of famine. Yes, but food aid
today is something rather different. It
is not merely concerned with the feed¬
ing of hungry people, for, in the con¬
text of the looming world food crisis,
such a course would be not only
completely insignificant in relation to
the size of the problem but also totally
irrelevant to the need for curing the
basic economic malaise which has
caused it. Food aid, like other forms
of modern aid, is intended to produce
something more tangible and materially
lasting than the prospect of a descent
of blessings on the givers.
To get an idea of food in action as
a stimulus to a country's economic and
social development, one needs to look
at some of the projects that the World
Food Programme (W.FP) is aiding.
In the north of Morocco, some
30,000 children are being fed in pri¬
mary and secondary schools in seve¬
ral areas, with the result that enrol¬
ment is up by 15 to 20 per cent. This
means that one day there may be just
that many more doctors or administra
tors or engineers in Morocco than
there would otherwise have been.
In 1964, the Programme invested
some $300,000 to help in the
reclamation of land in the Republic of
China. The food was distributed for
two years to settlers while they went
about preparing the land and sowing
their crops. Now, 2,500 hectares
(6,200 acres) of wasteland have been
transformed into prosperous farms
whose annual production will be worth
five times the original investment of
food.
In Columbia, inhabitants of some of
the poorer city suburbs have worked
after hours paving their own streets.
Their incentive and to some extent
their compensation was the food sup¬
plied by the Programme.
In one village in Senegal, one ton
of couscous made from WFP sorghum
was used to mobilize enough people to
clear and plant enough land to pro¬
duce 45 tons of rice.
Ihese are a few small in¬
stances taken at random from the 230-
odd projects that have been approved
since the Programme started opera¬
tions at the beginning of 1963. The
range of development activities it has
aided is very wide.
There have been projects for feed¬
ing, not only school-children and stu¬
dents, but also expectant and nursing
mothers and children still too young
to go to school all this investment in
countries' future resources in human
skills.
The Programme has helped to
resettle Bedouins in the Middle East,
refugees in Africa and communities
threatened with inundation after the
building of the Aswan Dam. With the
food it has supplied, previously unem¬
ployed (or underemployed) rural wor¬
kers have set to work planting new or
more abundant forests, particularly in
sorely eroded areas around the Medi¬
terranean where there are the ravages
of 2,000 or 3,000 years to be repaired.
It provides animal feed to help fatten
and multiply a country's livestock.
There is a $10,000,000 project to im¬
prove milk supplies in India. Roads
have been built in one instance, in an
island off Korea, linking up 95 isolated
villages. There are projects in Tur¬
key to» help feed workers in some
industries and mines and thus boost
productivity. WFP food has been used
as part payment of the wages of wor¬
kers repairing the famous Hedjaz
Railway that runs from Damascus to
Medina and was originally built
largely to carry Moslem pilgrims.
A point to be remembered about the
Programme's assistance to countries
in their pursuit of economic and social
development is that it is only assis¬
tance. It has been found that, on aver¬
age, something like 80 per cent of
the costs of projects is borne by the
countries themselves. WFP aid is
often primarily a stimulus, the extra
incentive that makes the difference
between whether a project is started
or not.
It was said earlier that merely feed¬
ing the hungry is not enough. But
there are of course times of dire emer¬
gency when not feeding the hungry
would also be less than enough. That
is why the Programme, with the stocks
of food it has at its disposal, also
comes to the aid of victims of emer¬
gencies, whether these are sudden,
unforeseeable catastrophes like hurri¬
canes, typhoons, earthquakes and vol¬
canic eruptions or the slowly punishing
ravages of a long drought.
Emergency operations, however, are

'Ifv',. >. " -rfft
l«\*.¿
**H# .
Photo © H. W. Silvester
not the primary aim of the Programme,
and so far never more than about a
quarter of its resources have been
allocated to them in any one year. The
success of the operations has varied
inversely with the size of the emergency
and the number of victims. In Bots¬
wana, where there was a prolonged
drought, food supplies at a total cost
of less than $5.5 million helped to keep
the entire country going for several
months when things were at their
worst. On the other hand, more than
$13.5 million spent in the last year or
so on sending food to the drought-
stricken areas of India, including the
states of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, has
had little impact on so wide a sweep
of suffering.
The fact is that the resources
of the World Food Programme,
as yet, are totally inadequate for
meeting any kind of famine on the
scale that now seems to threaten.
What are these resources? And,
indeed, how did the World Food Pro¬
gramme come into being at all?
The story probably goes back to
the 1930s, when for the first time
people were struck by the disquieting
phenomenon of a glut of huge, waste
ful agricultural surpluses in some coun¬
tries (notably the United States,
although in Brazil too, for example,
75 million bags of coffee had to be
burned during the period) while masses
of people in other areas of the world
went hungry. It was the pressure to'
find an outlet for surpluses that origi¬
nally prompted the idea of food aid.
From the end of the Second World
War, the U.N. Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) worked hard on
the problem of surplus disposal, but
the most important large-scale initia¬
tive for putting food aid into practice
was taken by the United States in
1954 with the passage of an Act
usually known as Public Law 480 as
a result of which $13,000 million worth
of surplus agricultural commodities
were shipped to other countries in the
decade that followed.
By this time, however, the idea of
development aid on the multilateral
pattern was gaining ground, especially
following the heavy influx of newly-
independent nations into the councils
of the United Nations and its Specia¬
lized Agencies.
So the two trends a constructive
method of surplus disposal and the
new emphasis on multilateral aid
merged. At the end of 1961, follow¬
ing studies carried out by FAO at the
United Nations' request, parallel reso¬
lutions in the two organizations set up
the World Food Programme on an
experimental three-year basis with a
target of $100 million in commodities
and cash. Thus the Programme,
which formally started operations on
January 1, 1963, is the child of both
the United Nations, with its general
concern for economic and social dev¬
elopment, and FAO, with its special
competence in matters connected with
food.
By the end of 1965 when the ex¬
perimental period was drawing to a
close, the Programme had sufficiently
proved itself for the United Nations and
FAO to decide to continue it "for as
long as multilateral food aid is found
feasible and desirable." Despite the
fact that by its nature the Programme
is meant to be only a preliminary
to plenitude, this looks like being for
some while yet.
The Programme lives by pledges of
commodities and cash from its parti¬
cipating countries participation is
31

THE WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME (Continued)
32
open to all Members of the United
Nations or FAO. The proportion is
two-thirds in commodities food and
animal feed,, with cereals heavily pre¬
dominating and one-third in cash or
services such as shipping. During
the 1963-5 experimental period, the
target of $100 million was very nearly
fully subscribed. For the new three-
year pledging period 1966-8, a much
higher target was set $275 million.
This time the response in pledges has
been 'proportionately much lower the
resources at present available to the
Programme are worth less than
$60 million a year, a figure which
should be set against the annual
$1,500 million to $2,000 million which
represents the totality of food aid in
recent years.
In comparing these figures, it should
once again be remembered that there
is a growing preference for multila¬
teral aid not only among the dev¬
eloping countries which would thereby
have a greater say in events, but also,
in the case of food aid, among some
of the major donors which would like
to see the burden more evenly shared.
It may thus be that the Programme will
be allotted a really sizeable part of
the extra 4.5 million tons of food aid
that was agreed on in the closing days
or nights of the Kennedy Round
negotiations, and also that future
pledging targets and, even more per¬
tinently, the pledges themselves will
in the 1970s go sufficiently beyond the
$200 million now proposed for the two-
year period 1969-70 to enable the Pro¬
gramme to measure up more adequa¬
tely for its part to the trials awaiting
the international community.
The curious might, still inquire how
the Programme actually handles the
food it already has. The answer is
simple in general terms, but extremely
complicated in practice. Everything
must begin with a country's request for
aid which, in the case of development
projects, is submitted to a formidable
process of scrutiny by the Executive
Director and his staff in Rome and by
whichever of the co-operating inter¬
national organizations is concerned
Unesco in the case, for example, of
a school-feeding project. The preli¬
minaries for emergency operations
which have to be authorized by the
FAO Director-General are naturally
much more summary.
Among the most strenuous com¬
plications are those of earmarking
and allocating the variety of food-
U. N. Photo
Tuna fishermen off the coast of Ceylon.
stuffs from the large number ' of
countries which have pledged them to
the variety of projects or emergency
operations needing them and in the
quantities and units in which they are
needed. At the end of 1966, about
40 countries had pledged food and
WFP was operating in about 50. In
addition, unless a donor country pro¬
vides its own shipping, the Programme
has to organize transport of the goods,
including insurance, to the recipient
country. The World Food Programme
is very much a business operation.
So, from what was originally the
problem of how to make the best use
of unwanted agricultural surpluses has
grown a new form of aid for develop¬
ment in the long-term interests of all.
The need is great, but so are the po¬
tentialities. It is worth recalling what
John F. Kennedy once said, even before
he became U.S. President, addressing
a farm audience at Mitchell, South
Dakota, in the late fifties. "I don't
regard the . . . agricultural surplus as
a problem," he declared. "I regard it
as an opportunity." For, he affirmed,
"...food Is strength, and food is
peace, and food is freedom, and food
is a helping hand to people around
the world ..."
