THE EPICS IN THE
ART OF SOUTH ASIA
by B.N. Coswamy
0
18
n the walls of countless
Indian homes today hang inexpensive
prints with illustrations of Rama sub¬
duing the ocean, or Krishna deliver¬
ing his celebrated sermon to Arjuna
on the battlefield of Kurukshetra, and
before them the householders offer
dally worship, much as they repair
with devotion to the crowded open
air grounds where the traditional
festivals and the ritual dance, the
Ramalila, are annually performed.
In the Himalayan hill district of
Chamba, young girls patiently embroi¬
der scenes from the Mahabharata on
muslin pieces which they will take
with them as dowry at the time of
their wedding. The heroic figures of
Arjuna and Bhima and Kunti move
about, with the same agility with which
they did several hundred years ago,
in the Indonesian shadow theatre, the
Wayang-Purwa. In Thailand the ancient
masked play, the Khon, still relies
principally on themes from the story
of Rama.
All this adds up to the marvellous
phenomenon of not merely the survi¬
val of the two great Indian epics, the
Ramayana and the Mahabharata, as
vital elements in living cultures, but
also of the arts, at least those among
them which are folk-based, continuing
to find inspiration in themes that come
from across several centuries.
The epics run like a thread through
time and space. In our time and day
the emotion may be wearing a little
thin, but the social and moral values
enshrined in these stories still sustain
vast multitudes.
B. N. GOSWAMY is a world authority on
Indian and Asian art. Professor of Art
History, department of Fine Arts, Panjab
University, Chandigarh, India, he is the
author of many studies on Indian art, includ¬
ing "Glimpses of Mughal Architecture"
(Bengal Govt., Calcutta, 1953); "Designs of
Orissa Temples" (Thacker and Co., Cal¬
cutta, 1950) and "Indian Temple Sculpture"
(Lalit Kala Akademy, Delhi, 1956).
It was quite natural for the sculp¬
tors and painters of South Asia to
have turned to works which were so
interwoven with life and affected so
profoundly the minds and the spirit of
generations of men and women. But
they turned to them also because it
was meritorious, conducive to dhar-
ma (1) and emancipation, to treat of
Gods and their deeds; and again
because in them they found a treasure
of heroic tales that could be told with
love and care.
The Ramayana has a wonderfully
rich narrative in itself, while the Maha¬
bharata is a veritable encyclopaedia.
The epics are everywhere in the
art of India and South-East Asia. So
enormous, in fact, is the body of works
of art devoted to themes from the
Ramayana and the Mahabharata, that
one can hope only to treat briefly of
the most significant among them.
It is difficult to speak with certainty
of the exact period the earliest repre¬
sentations of the Ramayana or the
Mahabharata in the arts belong to,
for -much has been claimed by time.
But they appear to come from the very
beginning of the time when Hindu
themes started finding consistent
expression at the hands of the Indian
sculptor.
The artist of the Gupta age (320-
600 A.D.), the classical period of
Indian history, turned his attention
alike to Buddhist and Hindu themes,
and an early, fifth-century relief from
the Garhwal region, a beautifully realiz¬
ed treatment of the battle between
Bhima and Jarasandha, ushers us
into a period of great achievement.
It is to this period that that chaste
monument, the Gupta temple of Deo-
garh in Central India, belongs. Of this
gem of Hindu architecture, popularly
called the Dasavatara temple with
(1) A word used in all the Indian languages
with a rich connotation of duty, right conduct,
justice, order, natural, and essential quality.
reference to the ten incarnations of
Vishnu to whom the shrine is dedi¬
cated, the entire basement was once
decorated » with a continuous frieze
representing events from the Ra¬
mayana.
Only a small fragment of this
sculptured frieze has survived, but
what exists is deeply moving. In these
reliefs is mirrored the classical Gupta
ideal of balance and harmony. The
voluptuous grace of the figures, the
quality of movement in the composi¬
tions, do not interfere in the slightest
with the tone of noble restraint which
characterizes the art of this period.
The sculptor appears to be In com¬
plete command both of his material
and his emotion, and whether he is
showing the deliverance of Ahalya
(turned to stone by her husband for
being unfaithful) when Rama's feet
touched her, or Rama, Lakshmana and
Sita leading a life of contented aus¬
terity in the forest, there is a quality
of quiet sweetness In his art. There
is no effusion, no overstatement.
The same grace and refinement
belong to the work of the Pallava
sculptors of the South, but to these
are added a new quality of dynamism.
Thirty-five miles south of Madras, at
Mahabalipuram, stand the remarkable
seventh-century rock-cut temples nam¬
ed after the Pandava heroes of the
Mahabharata; but what towers above
everything else here is the massive
granite boulder on the sea-shore that
presents a marvellous aspect of ener¬
gy and Imagination.
The entire face of this enormous
piece of living rock has been carved
to represent a scene of epic grandeur.
The theme ¡s a matter of some con¬
troversy among scholars, but whether
it ¡s the Descent of the Ganges
from Heaven, or the story of Arjuna's
penance, the source of the episode is
the Mahabharata.
The familiar figures of the heroes

Carved into the stone of Angkor Wat,
this scene from the Mahabharata is
an outstanding example of the
monumental Khmer sculpture of
Cambodia which attained its apogee
in the first half of the 12th century. In
top centre of this carving lies Bhishma,
chief of the Kaurava clan, mortally
wounded by the arrows of Arjuna,
chief of the Pandavas.
do not appear here, for the story is
not an integral part of the narrative
of the epic, but a whole age is evok¬
ed while all the creatures of the world
range on either side of the Ganges
in gratitude for this miraculous gift to
the Indian world.
It is a little difficult to form an ade¬
quate Idea of the dimensions of this
great piece of sculpture and the
impression It makes, for no photograph
can easily convey this, but some idea
of the scale can be formed from the
fact that scores of figures of men
and animals, including a family of ele¬
phants, are represented here in life
size.
This vast, energetic composition,
suggestive of the magnificent quality
of the myth, is not confined by any
frame or line, but flows over the whole
surface of the boulder. Benjamin
Rawland has said: "Just as the space
of the relief Is untrammelled and,
indeed, seems to flow into the space
occupied by the spectator, so the
individual forms in ¡t are only partially
disengaged from the stone which
imprisons them. One has the
impression, indeed, that they are in
continual process of emergence from
the substance of the rock itself."
This seemingly is the age of great,
dynamic conceptions in the art of
India, one of the finest hours of crea¬
tive expression in human history. . And
the great rock-cut, eighth-century
Kailasanath temple at Ellora, near
Bombay, fits naturally into this age.
This enormous monolithic temple,
cut out of the rock, is dedicated to
Shiva after whose home, the sacred
mountain Kailasa, it Is named. But
this association with Shiva is no bar
in the mind of the Indian sculptor
against the representation of non-
Shivaite themes in the temple. There
are in fact numerous episodes from the
Ramayana that are carved in relief on
the walls of the temple and the smaller
sancturies that form a part of the
entire complex.
The mood here is dramatic and
scenes of remarkable liveliness unfold
themselves before the eye of the
spectator who becomes gradually a
Photo © Luc Ionesco, Paris
participant In the drama. Among the
most impressive scenes is one which
shows the abduction of Sita, the
heroine of the Ramayana, by the
demon-King, Ravana of Lanka. The
moment chosen by the sculptor is that
in which Ravana is fleeing with Sita
on a chariot towards his kingdom in
Lanka, and his way is barred by the
vulture-king, Jatayu.
The relief depicting this is an un¬
believably fine realization of dramatic
posture in sculpture. The figure of
Sita is mutilated, but the demon-king
powerfully breaks free from the simple
background of the composition, a
menacing figure, twisting around
angrily to deal with the bird that
vainly pecks at him.
The most dramatic and the most
monumental of reliefs at Ellora, how¬
ever, is Ravana shaking Mount Kailasa.
This is an illustration of the episode
in the Ramayana where Ravana
attempts to shake and uproot the
sacred mountain on which Shiva and
Parvati are seated, in order to use
it as a weapon in the great war
against Rama, and to destroy the
power of Shiva (see photo page 2).
The Ellora tableau it is difficult to
simply call ¡t a relief shows Ravana,
imprisoned in the foundations of the
19
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

20
ART OF SOUTH ASIA (Continued)
mountain, "in a cavern almost of Sty¬
gian gloom", straining his manifold
arms to shake the mountain with one
superhuman endeavour. The body of
the demon-king dissolves into the dark
recess, as his arms in the half light
seem actually to move and throb with
life.
In the upper part of the composi¬
tion, however, everything ¡s calm, for
Shiva with supreme effortlessness
simply stretches one of his toes to
press the mountain down with it. The
panic of the fleeing figures, the intui¬
tive fright of Parvati, as she leans to
seek support from her Lord as the
mountain trembles, are all ¡n mar¬
vellous contrast with the unruffled
serenity of the posture of Shiva.
The total effect ¡s indescribable for
this is one gigantic theatrical tableau
which sweeps the spectator off his
feet. Depth and darkness invest the
entire scene with a remarkable emo¬
tional and psychological suggestive-
ness. We here have one of the most
dramatic compositions in the entire
history of art.
With this monument, it is almost as
if the last great statement of an epic
theme, at least as far as sculpture in
India is concerned, has been made.
There is much that follows, but in
themes from the Ramayana and the
Mahabharata treated ¡n various periods
and schools of art, there is a certain
loss m intensity of feeling. The vision
falters a little. The interest in fact
shifts now to a distant region, the
lands of South-East Asia.
Indian settlements from a time going
back to the beginning of the Christian
era are known in these parts, but the
great periods of art date from the
seventh century onwards, when there
is evidence of Indian culture being
firmly rooted there. There is an enor¬
mous amount of artistic and construc¬
tion activity. The most impressive
monuments of Buddhism and Hinduism
alike are not in India, but in South-
East Asia.
With the institution of religious pil¬
grimages in the seventh and eighth
centuries, great complexes of temples
rose on the Dleng plateau in Middle
Java, the majority of them dedicated
to Vishnu. To this period also belongs
that supreme monument of mystic
Buddhism, the stupa of Borobudur,
rivalled by the great Hindu temple,
the ninth-century Chandi Loro Jong-
rang near Prambanam in Java.
This latter monument ¡s profusely
decorated with sculptures, the finest
of the carvings illustrating the earlier
part of the Ramayana. These run in
a continuous frieze on the exterior of
the balustrade of the upper terrace
of the temple of Shiva, and their
continuation was probably to be found
on the corresponding terrace of the
now ruined Brahma shrine on the right.
The style of these reliefs at Pram¬
banam, as indeed of the beautiful
reliefs of the great stupa at Boro¬
budur, which are perhaps even
CONTINUED ON PAGE 29

ART OF SOUTH ASIA (Continued from page 20)
One of the supreme arts of all time
superior, goes back clearly to the
Gupta reliefs at Deogarh. There is the
same quality of noble restraint in the
work. There is drama here, and much
movement.
Panel after panel Illustrates that
part of the Ramayana where Rama is
a witness to and a participant in the
fight between the monkey-kings, Su-
griva and Bali, and in these there is
an extraordinary animation, but the
emotion is again controlled. With
suavity and grace, the Javanese
sculptor makes his statements, always
employing economy but always suc¬
ceeding in evoking the feeling inherent
in the epic episodes.
We become witnesses to the divine
power of Rama as he bends his bow
with a movement of marvellous rhythm
to conquer the Ocean; we participate
in the struggle between good and
evil as the monkey-kings grapple in
their death struggle and Rama shoots
his arrow from behind seven trees.
Everything here is vitally alive.
The Indian models that so obviously
provided the inspiration for the work
in Java, lay also at the base of the
great periods of art from the first to
the seventh century in Cambodia. But
the styles change rapidly after the
upheaval of the eighth century and
the Khmer period of art In Cambodia
begins.
The relatively subordinate position
occupied by sculpture In the architec¬
tural monuments of the pre-Khmer
period also changes and we enter
upon a period of, increased sculptural
ornament that leads, step by step, to
the final explosive, Baroque style of
the last period.
The quiet note of early sculptures
like those at Sambor is left behind
INDONESIA'S WAYANG
SHADOW THEATRE
The name "shadow theatre" is inseparably
linked with Indonesia and its culture.
Here, the word "wayang" (literally,
"shadow"), identifies the flat, leather-carved
rod puppets whose shadows are projected
on to a screen. A form of entertainment
as popular as the cinema in Western
countries, the shadow theatre is a superb
medium for storytelling and has captivated
untold generations with its presentations
of ancient tales, bringing to life great
epics such as the Mahabharata and the
Ramayana. The Wayang theatre, which
is believed to have originated in India,
is also found in Malaysia, Thailand and
Cambodia (see page 34), and in parts of
southern India. The smallest of the
Indonesian puppets is about 9 inches high,
the tallest sometimes close to 40. A full
set of puppets may number 300 to 400
characters, each made according to strict
rules of iconography and all easily
recognizable. Left, episode from the
Mahabharata presented at Jogjakarta
(Indonesia).
Photo © Tony Saulnier, Paris
even by an early monument of the
First Style of Angkor, that jewel of
a shrine at Banteay Srei, -which an
inscription dates to the ninth century.
Several important lintels here illus¬
trate scenes from the Ramayana and
are set inside richly ornamented,
sinuously profiled arches. The scenes
are arranged in a formal manner, but
the symmetry does not jar. There is
an almost perfect balance in the
compositions, whether they be illus¬
trations of the battle between the
monkey-kings, or of Ravana shaking
Mount Kailasa again.
But in these there is an element
of ornamentation. The scenes lack
that dynamic character which belong¬
ed to the Indian reliefs of the eighth
century, and the representations are
suggestive of a playful air, "as though
the figures were moving to the mea¬
sures of an elaborate ballet."
The great Cambodian expressions
in sculpture came however from the
stupendous monument, the 12th-cen¬
tury temple complex of Angkor Wat.
It ¡s not only the architecture of this
monument of Khmer civilization at its
grandest that is difficult to describe,
but also the sculpture which covers
wall after massive wall.
Battle scenes are a favourite with
the Angkor Wat sculptors, and of these
the most Impressive and awe-inspir¬
ing are those that illustrate the Great
War from the Mahabharata. The
magnitude and the brilliance of the
epic scene are matched in this relief.
"The uproar and confusion, fierce
assault and valiant defence, of the
battlefield are rendered with Incredible
skill and inexhaustible Invention, the
whole surface of the wall being
decorated with forms in a brilliant
variety of dramatic postures," says the
great orientalist, Heinrich Zimmer, and
adds, "Once the eye has become
accustomed to this unemphatic style
there is an almost infinitely rich
variation to dwell upon and take in."
We have here one of the supreme
arts of all time at Its moment of
climax. The flatness of the surface of
these reliefs, a little disturbing to an
eye not used to it, is completely
intentional, for it is wholly appropriate
to the almost sunless galleries of the
temple.
The monotony of these anonymous
reliefs is only superficial, for in fact
there is in these scenes a dazzling
display of inventiveness, achieved
with an appearance of supreme ease.
Working on these scenes of a heroic
mould, the Khmer sculptors made
whole walls spring to life with the
great action which ¡s described with
such virtuosity and vividness in the
pages of the epic.
Only a century removed from Ang¬
kor Wat is the great mass of the
Bayon at the centre of Angkor Thorn.
Here again, there are whole friezes
representing scenes from the Ra¬
mayana and the Mahabharata, as at
Angkor Wat. This in spite of the fact
that the Bayon is a Buddhist monu¬
ment, but then it is only nominally so,
for ¡n fact ¡t reflects the true character
of the Cambodian ruler, Jayavarman,
who was neither a Buddhist nor a
Hindu but a Devaraja, or God-King.
Angkor Thorn once again displays the
Khmer virtuosity which is carried for¬
ward from the preceding century and
which ceases only with the disaster
that befell this civilization in the fif¬
teenth century.
What might be called the last of
the great periods of sculpture, at
least as far as the representation of
scenes from the Ramayana and the
Mahabharata in South-East Asia goes,
is to be seen at the fourteenth-
century shrine in Java, called the
Chandi Panataran. Here the epic is
the same, but the style has changed
appreciably. In a fantastic landscape
of forests and clouds that in itself is
reminiscent of an artificial stage-set,
characters from the epics take on the
aspect of puppets from the shadow
plays of subsequent centuries for
which they provided obvious inspira¬
tion. After this only stray voices are
to be heard.
In India at this time any sculptures
dealing with the themes from the epics
which we can call worthy of their
subject matter are now in bronze.
The growth of creativity from the
eleventh century onwards in southern
India is concentrated in the Chola
kingdom, and bronzes of breathtaking
beauty, including the famous Shiva
Nataraja, are produced.
Shaivism, however, does not claim
the entire attention of the Chola crafts¬
men; there is a great deal of sculp¬
ture of Rama and Krishna themes.
But the sculpture, in the nature of
things, is not monumental, nor is it
narrative in' any manner of speaking.
The concentration is on the produc¬
tion of icons which spring from the
needs of religion, not the narrative of
the epics. We do have deeply mov¬
ing sculptures like that of the great
monkey-God, Hanuman, who becomes
in the popular mind the archetypal
devotee of Rama, but the figures are
isolated. They do not become inte¬
grated with a narration in terms of
sculpture.
In stone, there are still numerous
representations of epic themes and
the Ramayana reliefs from Halebld in
the southern state of Mysore, or the
temple of the Thousand Ramas from
the Vijayanagar kingdom in South-
East India are cases in point, but
nothing as deeply moving as in the
earlier periods is seen. Great sculp¬
ture now treats of other themes, and
in the representation of epic themes yG
attention now positively shifts to ^**
painting.
From the great periods of early
CONTINUED ON PAGE 31

This Indian miniature by an artist of the Mughal school (late 16th century) depicts
the meeting between Rama and his brother Bharata in the forest. Bharata is outraged
by the intrigue that has deprived his beloved brother of the throne and telling
Rama, "I will not wear the crown that evil plotting has bestowed on me", implores
him to return as lawful ruler of Ayodhya. But Rama in obedience to his father's
command chooses to remain in exile. He gives his sandals to Bharata as a symbol
of authority and asks him to rule as regent in his place until his exile ends.
ART OF SOUTH ASIA
(Continued from page 29)
Indian painting from which we have
the frescoes of Ajanta, Bagh and
Badami, nothing has survived to indi¬
cate the existence of any great cycles
of paintings of Vaishnava themes
although literary references to Illus¬
trations of epic themes abound. But
soon after we move into the world
of miniature painting, we come upon
extensive sets devoted to illustrations
of the Ramayana and the Mahabha¬
rata, even if ¡n the style commonly
known as Western Indian, or Jaina,
not many representations of these
themes are found.
Among the first of the great sets
of miniature paintings dealing with the
theme of the epics ¡s an extensive and
brilliant series that was painted for
the Mughal Emperor, Akbar (1542-
1605). This is the famous illustrated
Razmnama a translation into Persian
of the Mahabharata, made under the
orders of the great Emperor himself,
and rendered in painting by the artists
of the Imperial atelier.
The set is believed to have been
completed by the year 1589, and an
estimated four' hundred thousand
rupees were paid to the artists who
drew and coloured the 169 full page
miniatures which are now in the col¬
lection of the Maharaja of Jaipur.
This is -one of the most sumptuous
of all Mughal manuscripts and we are
fortunate ¡n having the names of
several artists who collaborated to
produce this enormous work. This
is an exception to the great Indian
tradition of anonymity in the arts,
"one of the proudest distinctions of
Hindu culture."
We know little or nothing of the
nameless artists who created the
masterpieces of sculpture mentioned
above, but many of the Mughal paint¬
ings, in keeping with their own tradi¬
tion, are signed. Of the names of
several artists who are associated
with this great set, the most famous
are those of the gifted Daswanth and
his son, Basawan, two Hindu painters
working under the guidance and
supervision of Muslim master artists
of the Imperial atelier.
There is great richness and percep¬
tion in the work of these and other
artists. The colour and line are dazzl¬
ing. But there is something that seems
to be lacking in the series, perhaps
it is the feeling of devotion. One
senses that the epic has been reduc¬
ed in the transfer to the painted page.
The series tends to become the illus¬
tration of an engaging story, uninform¬
ed by the spiritual undercurrent which
runs through the epic as we know it.
Important series of Illustrations of
the Ramayana were also executed in
the Mughal period, and several sets,
some in the Imperial style others in
the provincial, have survived. There
is little doubt that the narrative of
the epics had conquered the imagina¬
tion of the Mughal artists of the
early period, and they illustrated it
with verve and imagination, but not
perhaps with the same intensity of
CONTINUED ON PAGE 44
31

In many temples on the
island of Java (Indonesia),
notably the famous temple
of Prambanan, stone reliefs
recount ancient stories
from the Mahabharata and
the Ramayana. Among
the finest are those
depicting the exploits and
adventures of Arjuna,
chief of the Pandava clan.
This masterly head of
Arjuna graces the ruins of
the 13th-century Djago
temple in eastern Java.
THE EPICS IIM THE ART OF SOUTH ASIA (Continued from page 31 )
44
feeling or psychological insight which
the Indian sculptor had brought to
his work.
In the seventeenth century, Mughal
painting takes a different turn, but
artists continue to paint the epics.
Now the scene shifts to Rajasthan
where several series of magnificent
paintings in long, extensive sets, are
produced. The favourite theme with
the Rajasthani painters is the Rama¬
yana and many sets now in impor¬
tant collections all over the world have
survived.
Although the technical level may not
be as high, the lines lacking the same
vibrancy, and the colour the same
sophistication or enamelled brilliance
of Mughal work, what has been gain
ed is an intensity of emotion. In
many of the Rajasthan paintings there
is a quality of naivete and wonder at
the beholding of divine form. These
are products of a wonderful spiritual
equilibrium. One feels that the artist
fully believed in what he was painting.
That other great centre of miniature
painting in India, the Punjab hills,
showed an equal interest in the epics.
One of the most famous sets of mini¬
atures of the Hill or Pahari schools
is the large Ramayana, many of whose
unusually large-sized leaves are now
in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston,
and the Cleveland Museum of Art.
The date of this set is a matter of
controversy among scholars, but there
can be little doubt about the quality
of these paintings. In a scene like
the siege of Lanka, the imaginative
inventiveness of the Pahari painter,
as he arranges whole armies of
monkeys and bears covering the hill¬
side outside the golden walls of the
fortress of the demon-king, combines .
with his rich sense of colouring and
design.
What is seen in these paintings
above all is the feeling of wonder
and humility with which the painter
approached the subject. Here we
have the mature flower of an ancient
tradition. An even earlier set of paint¬
ings treating of the Ramayana theme,
and dating possibly back to A.D. 1720,
comes from the tiny principality of
Guler in the Punjab Hills.

This is rendered in what is popu¬
larly referred to as the Basohli style,
and has all the vigour and intensity
associated with it. With the simplest
possible palette, consisting of hot
yellows and blues and reds, the artist
of the hills has created in these paint¬
ings a magnificent world of Gods and
heroes seen with eyes of devotion
(see colour plate, page 22-23).
There are still other sets of the Ra¬
mayana from the Hills, an important
and very extensive one coming from
the remote hill State of Kulu, and
popularly known among art historians
as the Shangri Ramayana.
But the set which has perhaps the
greatest amount of delicacy and
refinement of treatment illustrates the
moving episode of Nala and Da¬
mayanti from the Mahabharata. In
this series of exquisite drawings, some
partly coloured, the artist of the
eighteenth century has left behind a
masterpiece in terms of tenderness
of feeling. The number of paintings
in this set is not fully known although
it appears to have been very large,
but whatever has survived is of
magnificent quality.
The most extensive of the sets of
Pahari works is again a series of
drawings. This series illustrating the
entire story of the Ramayana has as
many as seven hundred leaves, these
being swiftly drawn In sanguine. upon
paper. The set is dated and signed:
it was executed in A.D. 1816 for Raja
Bhuplnder Pal of Basohli by the artist
Ranjha of the family of Pandit Seu.
The entire set is well preserved,
and is now in the collection of the
Bharat Kala Bhavan at Benares. This
makes it the most complete set of
paintings of any themes from the epics
anywhere in the world. And what is
amazing is that nowhere in these
hundreds of leaves is there any
weakening of intensity or emotion.
A significant passage from the Bal
Kanda of the Ramayana tells of the
legendary author of the epic, Valmiki,
realizing the story of Rama completely
in his mind before setting to work.
It was to gain this realization that
"seating himself with his face towards
the East and sipping water according
to rule, he applied himself to the yogic
contemplation of his theme.
"By virtue of his yoga power, he
then clearly saw before him Rama,
Lakshmana and Sita; as well as Da¬
saratha together with his wives, laugh¬
ing, talking, acting, and moving, in
his kingdom, as in real life. He be¬
held, by yoga power, all that had
come to pass and all that was to
come to pass In the future, like a
nelli fruit on the palm of his hand.
And having truly seen all by virtue
of his concentration, the generous
sage began the setting down of the
history of Rama."
The artist of the great works of art
of which we have spoken must also,
one feels, have proceeded in a some¬
what like manner.
