SCIENCE
AND DISARMAMENT
by Philip Noel-Baker
Nobel Peace Prize, 1959
10
PHILIP NOEL-BAKER, one of the world's
leading authorities on questions of disar¬
mament, was awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize in 1959. He has devoted many years
to research on problems of peace and
disarmament and has written numerous
works on these subjects, including "Disar¬
mament" (1926); "The Private Manufacture
of Armaments" (1936); "The Arms race:
A Programme for World Disarmament"
(1958) and many other studies. In 1932 he
attended the League of Nations Conference
in Geneva, the first of the major world
conferences on disarmament, in which 64
countries took part. Philip Noel-Baker has
been a member of two British Govern¬
ments (1942-1945 and 1945-1951) and is
a member of the present British Parlia¬
ment. In November 1966 on the occasion
of Unesco's 20th anniversary celebrations,
he took part in the round table meeting
which appraised Unesco's contribution to
peace (see page 64). Philip Noel-Baker
has always been closely associated with
sport. He was a member of the British
Olympic track team in 1912, 1920 and
1924 ; team captain in 1920 and 1924 and
silver medalist in 1920. He is now presi¬
dent of the International ^Council of Sport
and Physical Education.
"The time is not far distant when man will
get hold of Atomic Energy a source of
power which will enable him to build his
life as he likes . . . Will man be able to make
use of this power and direct It for good,
and not for self-destruction? Is he old
enough to know how to utilize the power
which Science must inevitably give him?"
Academician V. I. Vernadsky of the
U.S.S.R., February 1922
"Science has been glamorized for so long
that many people firmly believe it can do no
wrong."
Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, 1963
ITH the beginning of the
modern arms race about a hundred
years ago, science and engineering
became the major factors In prepara¬
tion for war. Until then, manpower
numbers, training and discipline had
been of decisive Importance in deter¬
mining a nation's military strength.
During and after the Franco-Prussian
war, the importance of armament
weapons, equipment, armour, trans¬
port, signals rapidly Increased.
Expenditure on ordnance and warships
grew greater every year.
Before the First World War began,
the General Staffs had grasped the
fact that superior armament might be
decisive. During the First World War,
new weapons were introduced, to the
production of which scientists had
made their contribution aircraft, poi¬
son gas, flame-throwers, tanks, and
many more. Before the Second World
War far-seeing members of the Brit¬
ish and German General Staffs had
Invited eminent scientists to join their
Defence Departments as permanent
advisers.
But It was only after the Second
World War had actually begun that the
military leaders of the belligerents
fully grasped the proposition which
Professor Isldor Rabi long afterwards
expressed as follows: "The combin¬
ing of military techniques and science
makes it easy to apply scientific prin¬
ciples to kill people who are not
strong structures." (1).
From 1939 onwards, scientists came
in mounting numbers into every war
department; military research was
rapidly expanded; scientific methods
were applied by leading scientists to
the actual conduct of operations by
land, sea and air. After the war was
over, this process did not stop. On
the contrary, It has continued with
accelerating momentum until today.
This has revolutionized the arma¬
ments that governments maintain, and
the training of their national forces. In
consequence, it has changed the prob¬
lems of disarmament and has made
it essential that the scientists should
play a leading part in disarmament
negotiations.
.In the League of Nations Conference
of 1932, the major problems to be
solved were the techniques by which
manpower could be equitably reduced
and limited; the abolition of military
aircraft; naval disarmament, by the
abolition of "capital" ships and sub-
and the limitation of other
budgetary reduction and
marines,
vessels;
control.
The negotiations in the League Pre-
(1) New York Times, January 1, 1958. Pro¬
fessor Rabi was chairman of President
Eisenhower's Scientific Advisory Committee
and has been consultant of the Military
Research and Development Board since 1946;
he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics
In 1944.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 12

Mutilated, deserted, its great cities In ruins will this be the face
of our planet after a Third World War? This bronze sculpture,
"Globe", is the work of the young Italian artist, Arnaldo Pomodoro.
In many of his sculptures the artist portrays the crucial problem
of man today: universal harmony or complete annihilation.
Photo © Paolo Monti
3SP^^P%*~ £V¡£í¿->B an ' Vi i« t- ' v.
A^mÊ^fi f 1 IS ¿ '
M M-
m
fl ^r^ L^^' ^^MB <j^^pbp^pS HÍ
fl ^r« * ^^V? K 1*P^F^ **^Ë ; A
V í Tti ,
ft iVnj*' d PP^ - P' ImP iHst.iRfll]
B ; y W^ ^-"¿ \ m 1 P1 40> ' ' SaC Hfl
f *?**1 l^ fe n*l Lrl MP lili
\ * PJ -_> «P'.P P^_ I mit Jll
1 ""
BFTF"^ "npt ú ¿- -ü * rfr
1.1 PI &MKI fS
1 .m -m m ¿l^fUíd Kfl
Br It' ii UM ~ \ le *T^C*T ^r-vb
/
K^^aEMkHH^^BB

SCIENCE AND DISARMAMENT (Continued)
12
paratory Commission and in the con¬
ference Itself were more thorough,
more serious, and technically much
more successful than any that have
taken place since 1945. They were
conducted by leading statesmen who
had military and civil service advisers
to help them. Every technical problem
of a general disarmament treaty was
satisfactorily solved; only the political,
decision to sign the treaty was requir¬
ed. Much of the work done . (for
example, on the four problems men¬
tioned above) still remains valid today.
Yet it Is doubtful if a single scientist
was present in the League commission
and conference from first to last.
Things are different now. Scien¬
tists have made the modern weapons;
they must play a major part in solving
the . new technical problems which
these weapons involve, and In draft¬
ing the detailed clauses of the disar- .
marnent treaty; they must helpto form
the public opinion by which a treaty
can be carried through.
The iollowlng table of expenditure
by two important countries shows how
"the combining of military techniques
and science" has expanded since
1939 (1).
Expenditure on military
research and development,
all defence departments
.... . United
Period JAL States
	K'n9dom of ^
(£ million) ($ million)
1938-1939 	 5.7 Nil
1939-1940 	 7.9 26.4
1947-1948 	 40.0 529.2
1951-1952 	 80.0 821.0
1953-1954 	 100.0 1569.2
1956-1957 	 204.0 1407.9
1960-1961 	 228.0 8 400.0
1964-1965 	 250.0 13 400.0
(1) In considering the meaning of these
figures, allowance must be made for the
factor of Inflation. At 1953 prices, the United
Kingdom figure would be £210 million, I.e.,
in real terms it had more than doubled in
ten years. (£ = 2.8 dollars at the current
exchange rate.)
There are no figures publicly avail¬
able which show United States and
United Kingdom expenditure during
the war years. But Dr. Vannevar
Bush has described the creation of
the Military Research Organisation of
which he was the head In the United
States; he had 35,000 scientists under
his direction. In addition there was
the very large international team, under
Dr. Robert Oppenhelmer, working on
the Manhattan District Project for the
production of the first atomic bomb.
These are large figures; but the num¬
bers, both in the United States and
the United Kingdom, have greatly
Increased since then. In his Econom¬
ic Message to Congress In January
1963, President Kennedy said: "The
defence, space and atomic energy
activities of the country absorb about
two-thirds of the trained people avail¬
able for exploring our scientific and
technical frontiers."
A small part of "atomic energy acti¬
vities of the country" is devoted to
civil ends; thus It is perhaps true to
say that 60 per cent of the United Sta¬
tes scientific and technical experts are
engaged in military work. The propor¬
tion in the United Kingdom is less;
20 per cent of the experts, and 40 per
cent of the national expenditure on
research. But President Kennedy's
words were true of £>oth countries
when he said: "We have paid a price
by sharply limiting the scarce scien¬
tific and engineering' resources avail¬
able to the civilian sectors of the eco¬
nomy."
The scale of the enterprises made
possible by a budget of $ 13,400 mil¬
lion is immense. In the platform
adopted by the Democratic Party for
the presidential election in August
1964, President -Johnson pledged him¬
self to "maintain the world's largest
military/ research and ; development
effort, which has initiated more thetn
200 new programmes since 1961, tb
ensure American leadership In wea¬
pons systems and equipment".
New weapons
developed
since 1945
There is no information about the
Soviet Government's expenditure on
military research: but its startling
achievements in multi-megaton nuclear
weapons, ICBMs (intercontinental bal¬
listic missiles), sputniks and space
flight show that It must be very high.
It is known that the Soviet General
Staff have devoted much attention to
tactical nuclear weapons and to other
types of new weapons.
There is no doubt that other govern¬
ments are doing the same. It was
recently revealed that French expendi¬
ture on military research had been
greatly Increased. It Is unlikely that
German and Italian expenditure is much
less. Mainland China, India, Israel,
Pakistan, the U.A.R. and many other
countries certainly have military re¬
search establishments, though prob¬
ably as yet on a much smaller scale.
If Increased power of offensive
attack Is the purpose of military
research, then the governments have
certainly got their money's worth. All
the weapons of offence used against
Hitler aircraft, tanks, artillery, sub¬
marines have been enormously "im¬
proved". New weapons of every des¬
cription have been added. Three cate¬
gories of weapons of mass destruction
nuclear, chemical and biological
have been developed.
Although it seemed In 1955 that the
"ultimate" weapons had been devised,
everything produced in that year is long
since out of date; there is now a total
revolution In military equipment every
five years. Professor Rabi has warn¬
ed us that the "progress" made in
the next twenty years will be no less
rapid or dramatic than that of the last
twenty.
Conventional weapons
It is already difficult to remember
that in May 1945, when Hitler's Ger¬
many surrendered, there were no nu¬
clear weapons; no ballistic missiles
except Hitler's rudimentary V2; no air¬
craft that could travel faster than
400 m.p.h.; no bomber with a range of
more than 1,000 miles. There were no
nuclear-powered submarines or sur¬
face vessels; the conventional torpedo
was still the deadliest naval weapon.
^Potent new poison gases had been
prepared by German chemists, ' but
Hitler's subordinates, already con¬
scious of defeat, had successfully pre¬
vented them from being used. Both
sides had arsenals of "biologicals",
but dared not risk the general oppro¬
brium and the strategic hazards which
their employment would have meant.
Broadly, up to the day when Hitler fell,
the war had been fought with improved
versions of the conventional weapons
produced by the First World War.
Twenty years later, those conven¬
tional weapons have been further and
enormously Improved.
Two of the latest types of United
States military aircraft are the B-58
and the B-70. The B-58 can carry a
50-megaton load of bombs, I.e., the
equivalent of 50 million tons of TNT.
It has travelled from New England to
Paris In just over three hours. The
B-70 is designed to travel at three
times the speed of sound; if it is cons¬
tructed in numbers for the United Sta¬
tes Air Force, It will cost $ 100 million
per aircraft. The British TSR-2, If it
were built, would "hedge-hop" at twice
the speed of sound; it could be guid¬
ed by instruments to its target and
back; the pilot, need only Interfere If
something went wrong. All these air¬
craft, refueled in the air, would have
a range of many thousands of miles.
The modern submarine is propelled
by nuclear power. It can cruise for
thousands of miles, and for periods
of weeks, without coming to the sur¬
face. It can navigate under the Arctic
ice-cap, and can break the ice and fire
its missiles. Or It can fire its missiles
from many feet below the surface of
the open sea.
The United States Government is
now installing what President Johnson
called "the new over-the-horlzon
radars giving us almost instantaneous
knowledge of ballistic missiles launch¬
ed for attack". Aerial reconnais¬
sance photography has been so much
improved that a handful of aircraft
could photograph the whole of Russia

in a few hours; from a height of
60,000 feet, they could reveal the smal¬
lest objects (a golf ball) on the ground.
Similar Improvements have been
made In tanks, artillery, naval surface
vessels, especially aircraft carriers and
amphibious landing vessels, and even
in rifles, machine guns, and all the
other conventional weapons of the
Second World War.
But most attention, and most expen¬
diture, has been concentrated on the
weapons of mass destruction.
Nuclear weapons
The basic facts about nuclear wea¬
pons are well known: the Hiroshima
bomb was more than 1,000 times as
powerful as the conventional "block¬
busters" used by the RAF against Ber¬
lin; the 20-megaton (1) weapons now
carried by United States bombers
and no doubt by Soviet bombers too
are more than one thousand times
as powerful as the Hiroshima bomb.
Thus the "yield" of the unit of air
attack deliverable by a single bomber
has been multiplied a million times.
One 20-megaton weapon Is equivalent
to nearly fourteen times the explosive
power of all the bombs dropped by
all the Allies on Germany in six years
of war. We forget that almost all the
cities of Germany lay in ruins in 1945.
One 20-megaton bomb
more devastating
than 1,000
Hiroshima bombs
The 20-megaton bombs exist in large
numbers. They can be delivered by
United States B-52 bombers, by the
obsolescent B-47, the B-58, by the
Soviet Bear and Bison, and the British
V bombers, and by some types of
Soviet intercontinental ballistic mis¬
siles.
But many authorities believe that a
20-megaton bomb Is larger than any
military or civilian target would require.
The British Home Office Manuals of
Civil Defence calculate the results of
a 10-megaton bomb on London; if it
were "dropped centrally", there would
be "irreparable damage over most of
the London County Council area" (i.e.
a. circle of total destruction roughly
eight miles across) "with minor
damage over the whole of the metro¬
politan area" (a circle perhaps
thirty-two miles across). In most
other British cities, however, a good
deal of potential damage would
consist of open country."
In other words, there is only one
target in the United Kingdom large
enough to need a 10-megaton bomb
for its total destruction. In fact a
1 -megaton bomb would probably
put all but the largest cities out of
action. The new United States
submarine missile, Poseidon, which
Is replacing the Polaris A3, has a
yield of 1.5 megatons (i.e. 75 times
Hiroshima.) Its greater yield is due
to the newly discovered, and more
potent, nuclear explosive, pluto-
nium-241. In 1961, the U.S.S.R.
exploded a 57-megaton bomb, and
boasted not without reason that It
could have been 100 megatons.
It has been calculated that the
United States has a stockpile of
nuclear weapons with a total yield
of 50,000 to 60,000 megatons; the
Soviet Union a stockpile of
20,000 megatons or more; the
British and French much less. The
United States stockpile includes "tens
of thousands of 'tactical' weapons".
The United States Secretary of State
for Defence, Mr. McNamara, has warn¬
ed us that new processes may soon
make the production of nuclear wea¬
pons cheaper and easier than it is
now. He has said that, in spite of
"fail safe" and the "permissive link"
(sometimes called the "electronic
key") and other devices to guard
against technical and human failure,
there remains a grave danger of "acci¬
dental" or "unintended" nuclear war.
Biological weapons
In the view of some qualified au¬
thorities, the menace of biological
weapons is now hardly less grave
than that of the nuclear stockpiles.
Brigadier-General J. H. Rothschild
was head of the United States Chem¬
ical Corps until 1957. (The Chem¬
ical Corps is in charge of both chem¬
ical and biological weapons.) In a
recent book, "Tomorrow's weapons",
Brigadier Rothschild says that the
small quantities required make "bio-
logicals" the Quartermaster's dream;
they can be used, says Rothschild, to
attack "hundreds of thousands of
square miles." A cloud of the chosen
agent can be released on to a favour¬
able wind; "a deep cloud several hun¬
dred miles across will be able to travel
long distances and still be effective".
All the diseases which attack man
are potential agents. The most suit¬
able are those with highest "infec-
tivity" and "virulence". Rothschild
adds: "The microbes can be made
more resistant to antibiotics, thereby
rendering treatment of the diseases
more difficult."
Another authority, Major-General
Brock Chisholm of Canada (2), com¬
mented In 1957 on this development of
biological weapons, which was then
beginning: "Research is at present
going forward with a view to making
the bacteria of more general diseases,
e.g., cholera, typhus, etc., much more
virulent, so that the vaccination, etc.,
now carried out might not serve as a
protection to anyone who was infect¬
ed. This line of Investigation is very
dangerous to the future of mankind."
Modern
microbe hunters
of death
(1) "Megaton" = 1 million tons of TNT.
(2) Major-General Chisholm, Commander
Canadian Royal Army Medical Corps, Second
World War, in personal charge of experiments
with biological weapons. After the war,
he was first Director-General of the World
Health Organization.
(3) WarjPeace Report. New York, July 1964.
There can no longer be any doubt
that blologicals are potential weapons
of mass destruction. The American
Chemical Society estimates that a
single large bomber, distributing only
450 pounds of the selected agent, could
spread~the disease over 34,000 square
miles; between 25 and 75 per cent of
the population would become casual¬
ties, although not all would die.
Expenditure on biological warfare
research has greatly increased in
recent years.
There is another serious objection
to the present rapid development of
biological weapons. Once research
has solved the technical problems of
producing and stocking these wea¬
pons, and of delivering them against
an enemy, their large-scale production
Is very cheap the amount of an agent
needed to attack a very large area is
very small. Thus an enormous power
of destruction might become available
to many nations at an almost negli¬
gible cost. This danger will certainly
confront the world within a measura¬
ble future, if the arms race goes on.
Chemical weapons
An American reporter, Mr. James
Polk, has vividly described a nerve gas
plant at Newport, Indiana.
"The killer chemical which emerges
from the plant's ovens and chilling
chamber is nerve gas. A stealthy
assassin. It Is odourless, tasteless and
virtually invisible. A drop, breathed
or soaked into the skin, can be fatal.
"At the end of this unique assembly
line, laced with 40 miles of pipes, the
nerve gas is poured into rockets, land
mines and artillery shells destination
secret . . . The plant has now been
in operation twenty-four hours a day
for three years" (3).
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
13

SCIENCE AND DISARMAMENT (Continued)
14
The nerve gas "paralyses and kills
by attacking the body's Cholinesterase,
a key substance In transmitting nerve
signals for muscles to expand. When
this fluid is crippled, muscles continue
to constrict, and the body strangles its
own vital organs".
A United States Army handbook says
that this gas can cause "death within
four minutes", and that it Is so potent
that, delivered only on a small scale,
Its effect can approach that of nuclear
weapons. "The gas Is very cheap;
the Newport plant costs only $3.5 mil¬
lion per year to run."
Brigadier Rothschild, in the book
referred to above, confirms all
Mr. Polk's assertions. The gases first
discovered by Hitler's chemists, which
they called Tabun and Sarin, Roths¬
child labels "GB". He says that GB
is thirty times as lethal as phosgene
the most deadly of all the gases of the
First World War. It can therefore be
used In expensive rockets. In high
concentrations, readily attainable in
the field, it cannot be detected until
the lethal dosage has been inhaled.
Brigadier Rothschild also describes
a class of less volatile anti-chol-
inesterase agents which he labels
"V-agents". He says: "These are very
effective through the skin, because
practically none evaporates. A tiny
droplet, if not removed immediately,
will be absorbed and cause death.
Such a droplet on the skin might well
go unnoticed, since the process of
absorption Is painless."
V-agents used in aerosols cause
long-term hazards drops which re¬
main on the ground, on trees, on build¬
ings, do not evaporate.
The American Chemical Society on
Civil Defence has calculated that one
big bomber carrying a load of nerve
gas could distribute the gas over "an
immediate effective area" of 100
square miles; the gas would cause
casualties to 30 per cent of the popu¬
lation in the area; not all the casualties
would necessarily be fatal. A group
of five bombers could cover a large
city. The United States, it says, has
no effective present defence 	
The brief assortment of facts recited
above may give a general impression
of what the scientists have achieved
In weapon development in the last
twenty years. It gives no idea of what
a war fought with these weapons would
be like.
No governments, and few scientists,
have even attempted this task. Yet
is it not essential that the peoples
should understand what would happen,
if the armaments for which they pay
were ever used? It is certainly essen¬
tial that the reader of this article should
have some picture in his mind, if he
Is to grasp Its point.
Two brief quotations may, therefore,
be reproduced quotations which des¬
cribe the probable effects of nuclear
bombs. The first ¡s a description,
based on material in the British Home
Office Manuals of Civil Defence, of
what would happen if a 10-megaton
bomb were burst over a central point
in London. It was given to a con¬
ference of the World Federation of
Mental Health in Paris in 1961:
"One 10-megaton bomb, burst
6,000 feet above Trafalgar Square,
would wipe out London: its centre
blasted to dust and rubble; a pillar of
flame a mile high, twenty miles across;
winds of hurricane force; gas mains,
tanks, petrol stations all exploding;
the air sucked from every shelter, re¬
placed by carbon monoxide; every
escape route blocked with crashed
vehicles and fallen buildings; every
person in the open within forty miles
blinded, their retinas burnt to nothing
by the thermo-nuclear flash, 1 ,000 times
brighter than the sun; the drivers of
trains and cars and lorries, the pilots
of aircraft, sightless, helpless, hurtling
to their doom."
The second is an account by two
eminent American scientists, Dr. Harri¬
son Brown and Dr. James Real, of
what a similar bomb would do, If it
were exploded above Los Angeles (in
Community of Fear, 1960). They asked
their compatriots to imagine that "the
bomb hits during the working hours of
a week-day".
"The blast effects would extermi¬
nate virtually all but the most deeply
sheltered living things within a radius
of five miles. Blast casualties would
be severe up to ten miles. But the
phenomenon that would complete the
devastation of life in the entire area
would be fire. The area would be one
great sea of fire which would burn
until there was nothing more to con¬
sume.
No survivors
in a 50-mile wide
sea of fire
"A good proportion of the metropoli¬
tan area's 3.5 million car and trucks
would be lifted and thrown like gro¬
tesque Molotov cocktails, to spew
flaming gasoline, oil, and automotive
shrapnel onto and Into everything in
their paths. In an instant most under¬
ground gasoline and oil tanks would
rupture and explode within the blast
area, and a large proportion of the
remainder within the firestorm radius
would follow, each In its own particu¬
lar manner pumps and pipes sheared,
and finally higher and higher ambient
temperatures, which would soon ex¬
pand, rupture and explode the remain¬
der."
The authors then describe how the
remaining area of Los Angeles, "row
upon row of cheap, flammable, com
mercial structures" would be burnt,
and what would happen to the "bush-
covered hills and scrub forest" on the
city's borders. They say that "anyone
unacquainted with the remarkable
explosive nature of the oil-carrying
grease-wood, sumac and scrub pine is
surprised and frightened by the vola¬
tility of the material, even when it is
wet. The novel aspect of a thermo¬
nuclear conflagration, however, is that
most of these highly flammable mate¬
rials would break into intense flame
simultaneously a phenomenon never
before achieved either by man or by
natural causes".
Dr. Harrison Brown and Dr. James
Real then say that, in their belief, in
Los Angeles "at least a twenty-five
mile radius (i.e., a circle fifty miles
across) . . . would be, within minutes,
engulfed in a suffocating firestorm that
would persist for a long time". No one,
they think, would survive unless Inside
very deep shelters, with built-in oxy¬
gen supply and cooling system. Even
so, the chance of reaching safety
would be "slim", after the firestorm.
"A major problem would be trying
to get through ankle-high to knee-
high ash containing numerous hidden
pitfalls; clambering for dozens of miles
over huge smoking piles of radioactive
rubble, burned out timber, wire and
steel. If the survivor made It to the
edge of the devastated area, he in all
probability would have accumulated by
that time a fatal dose of radiation which
would shortly claim what was left of
his life."
Radioactive fall-out
The two quotations above deal with
the effects of a single bomb delivered
on a single city. But in a general war,
in which the whole, or a large propor¬
tion of the nuclear stocks were used,
radioactive fall-out would be by far
the most potent cause of casualties.
Dr. Ralph E. Lapp, who has the unique
distinction of having been Nuclear
Research Adviser to all three of the
United States Defence Services, has
calculated that if a 20-megaton bomb
were burst in the air, so vast a quan¬
tity of radioactive bomb debris would
fall back to earth that it would give a
lethal dose of radiation to everyone In
the open over an area perhaps as
great as 5,000 square miles (1).
If the United States and Soviet Go¬
vernments decided "to destroy each
other's society" (this is the phrase in
current use to explain "deterrence")
each of them, as said above, could
launch an attack amounting to 20,000
megatons or even more. A lethal
mantle of fallout covering 5 million
square miles would be genocide on a
comprehensive scale; the wind would
take an ample part to other nations
perhaps neutral In the war.
This section on the achievements of
the scientists engaged in military res¬
earch may appropriately be ended by
(1) Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists,
April 1963.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 16

v^
This striking work by the famous sculptor Zadkine commemorates the
ordeal of Rotterdam, the big Netherlands' port which burned for
40 days and nights after a devastating bombardment in May 1940.
Many other striking works of art erected in the reborn city testify to
its afflictions during the war which caused the deaths of 20,000 persons.
Photo Unesco - Dominique Roger
15

SCIENCE AND DISARMAMENT (Continued)
16
a quotation from one of the most emi¬
nent of them. Writing in October
1964, Dr. Jerome Wiesner used the
following words : "Both sides of the
arms race are thus confronted by the
dilemma of steadily increasing military
power, and steadily decreasing mili¬
tary security . . . The clearly predict¬
able course of the arms race is a
steady open spiral downwards Into
oblivion." (1).
There are some scientists and
others who still believe that disarma¬
ment is a mirage. Dr. Edward Teller,
frankly leaving science for politics,
argued this at length in an article In
1957 (2). He foresaw the arms race
going on indefinitely for decades, with
Western experts saving freedom by
keeping ahead in armament technique.
This is a conception of international
relations which armament experts have
always held Dr. Teller was only giving
it a modern look.
To bolster up this view that national
security depends on constantly in¬
creasing armaments, attempts have
been made to show that the arms race
has brought indirect, but great, advan¬
tages in the promotion of scientific
knowledge, in the stimulation of indus¬
trial advance, and, In consequence, in
general social well-being. These
claims may be briefly reviewed, to
see whether, in fact they constitute a
valid off-set against the heavy cost
and the grave dangers which the arms
race involves.
Advancing scientific
knowledge ?
The discovery of atomic energy Is
usually quoted as, in itself, conclusive
proof that military research has paid
a handsome dividend in greater scien¬
tific knowledge.
No one would dispute that the re¬
lease of atomic energy "a source of
power which will enable man to build
his life as he likes" was accelerated,
perhaps by many years, because
Einstein and others perceived in 1939
that it might produce the decisive
weapon of the Second World War.
But it might be argued that It would
have been better for mankind if this
great discovery had been delayed until
the United Nations had built up a solid
system for settling international dis¬
putes and until the governments had
carried out a general agreement to
disarm. No doubt the making of the
first atomic bomb, with the vast resour¬
ces it involved, ushered in a cumulative
advance of modern physics; but it is
not yet certain that it has permanently
advanced the cause of human pro¬
gress; that depends on decisions still
to come.
In any case, It has been suggested
by Mr. Gerard Piel, an author who
commands respect, that, since military
research has now produced the "ulti¬
mate" weapons, its contribution to true
science is at an end.
Mr. Piel makes a distinction
between science and technology.
"Science", he says, is concerned with
the discovery of the unknown . . . The
work of Science is to increase our
understanding of the universe around
us, and of the world that Is within
each of us." Technology is "the
exploitation of the already known". It
must be clearly distinguished from
"the discovery of the unknown", which
is science.
Mr. Piel goes on: "Contemporary
weaponeering is essentially a process
of miniaturization, of packing more
devastation into a smaller and more
portable warhead . . . This is not
Science. It is Technology of a high
order, and it is exploiting whole reg¬
ions of knowledge only recently won
from the unknown . . . But the fact
remains that the immense research
and development activity sponsored
by the Pentagon will contribue nothing
to human understanding, and can yield
little else but an Increase in the
efficiency, flexibility and enormity of
our destructive power."
Military research
a spur to
industrial progress?
Mr. Piel concludes that a fully mili¬
tarized world, while constantly advan¬
cing in technology, would be "a world
without much science" (3).
Some experts would, perhaps, dis¬
pute this view. But few would deny
that, If the manpower and resources
given to military research had been
given to civil research Instead, the
resulting contribution to our "under¬
standing of the world around us and
of the world within us" would have
been much greater than it is (4).
It Is often said that military research
has been the dynamo of progress in
civil Industry, and has thus contributed
greatly to the material prosperity of
mankind. Indeed, this assertion has
been used as a major argument to
justify the vast expenditure on military
research.
Again, no one would dispute that
the sophisticated technological ad¬
vance of the armament Industry has
given results that are of benefit to
civil industry as well.
But the point is often over-stated.
It was claimed not long ago that among
the "better known" discoveries by
which military research has helped
civil industry were the following: "nu¬
clear power; the modern aircraft; high
temperature alloys; and the modern
automobile transmission". A subsi¬
diary list of "less known" contributions
included fire retardant paints, helicop¬
ters, anti-icing equipment, new plas¬
tics, and automatic electronic compu¬
ters.
It is ridiculous to assert that all
these inventions would not have been
made if there had been no military
research. The Wright brothers had
constructed an aeroplane, the first
heavier-than-air machine, Bleriot had
flown the Channel, there had been a
decade of important progress, before
any War Department showed the
slightest interest in aviation.
This progress would have unques¬
tionably gone on if there had been no
world wars and no military research.
Indeed, It can be reasonably argued
that, without war and preparation for
war, more and earlier attention might
have been given to the development
of civil aircraft, and to the creation of
a world system of passenger and
postal transport.
And If credit for progress In avia¬
tion is to be given to military research,
there is something to be set on the
other side of the balance sheet. Hun¬
dreds of thousands of airmen killed In
battle, millions of civilians blasted or
burnt to death by air bombardment,
the destruction of great cities and of
irreplaceable artistic and architectural
treasures these were the price paid
for the more rapid progress in aviation,
together with the vast economic cost
of maintaining the national air forces
In time of peace.
In any case, the benefits which in¬
dustry has derived from military re¬
search constitute only a tiny proportion
of the latter's output and they are an
accidental, not an intentional, result.
Its overwhelmingly preponderant effect
is to increase the complexity, the cost,
and the destructive power of arma¬
ments; to increase the capacity for
surprise attack; and thus to multiply
the dangers of the arms race and the
risk that unprovoked aggression might
succeed.
Indeed, to say that military research
is socially desirable because of the
benefits it brings to civil Industry is
not only an economic absurdity; it Is
the exact contrary of the truth. Pro¬
fessor Seymour Melman and his col¬
leagues have shown that the vast con¬
centration of eminent scientists and
technologists on armament work in the
United States has starved American
industry of the experts it needs, and
has caused it to fall behind the stan¬
dards of modern equipment and indus¬
try of other countries (5).
(1) The Scientific American, October 1964.
Dr. Wiesner was Chief Scientific Adviser to
President Kennedy.
(2) New York Times, 8 June 1957.
(3) Mr. Piel Is Publisher of the Scientific
American. He was awarded the Unesco
Kallnga Prize for the Popularization of Science
In 1963.
(4) Dr Peter Hodgson of Oxford University
writes: "I would guess that I per cent of the
resources spent on weapons research could
probably produce a far greater scientific
advance than the weapons programme Itself."
(5) A Strategy for American Defense,
Columbia University Press, 1963. See also
Professor Seymour Melman, Our Depleted
Society, Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1965.

The Prime Minister of Britain made
the same point in December 1964:
"Defence is taking too big a share of
our real resources in terms of foreign
exchange, scarce types of manpower
and load on the most advanced In¬
dustries . . . Defence uses one-fifth of
all qualified scientists and technolo¬
gists who are engaged on research
and development, and defence now
accounts for about 40 % of all re¬
search and development expenditure."
Social benefits ?
Other contributions to human advan¬
ce which have been attributed to mili¬
tary research include "the following:
yellow-fever eradication; chlorlnation
of water; blood-plasm substitutes;
advanced weather prediction tech¬
niques
It is enough to ask two questions.
If the resources in money and expert
knowledge devoted to biological wea¬
pons had been given instead to Inter¬
national research for the eradication
of disease, might not far greater medi¬
cal results have been obtained?
If the resources in money, equip¬
ment and scientific genius given to
nuclear weapons had been used ins¬
tead for research into what causes the
weather, and for computers to turn the
increased knowledge into reliable fore¬
casts, might not a much advanced
meteorology have made a large addi¬
tion to mankind's annual income of
food and other usable wealth?
The conclusion of this section of the
argument is plain. There are some
scientific, industrial, and social bene¬
fits from military research but they
constitute a minimal off-set against the
waste and dangers of the arms race.
If the scientists and technicians engag¬
ed on this work could be diverted from
"improving" armaments to peaceful
industrial, agricultural and medical re¬
search, and if they were given the
same equipment and resources that
they have today, their achievements
might quite quickly revolutionize man's
individual and social life.
Science
and
Conscience
The scientists have made the mod¬
ern weapons; for a hundred years,
scientists have contributed to every
development in armament technique.
With what motives have they done
so? Do they carry any special res¬
ponsibility not shared by their fellow
citizens?
Some of the men who have made
important new contributions to arma
ment technique did so, no doubt, in
the hope of making money. Some
who made money Alfred Nobel, for
example believed that their inventions
would help to abolish war. Nobel
wrote to his friend, the Baroness von
Suttner: "My factories may well put
an end to war sooner than your con¬
gresses. The day when two army
corps can annihilate one another In
one second, all civilized nations, it is
to be hoped, will recoil from war and
discharge their troops » (1).
Haber suggested the use of poison
gas to the German General Staff In
1915. He was the winner of a Nobel
Prize for Chemistry, he knew that poi¬
son gas would violate the accepted
law of war; but he had spent the win¬
ter of 1914-15 as a private in the
trenches and he foresaw the long
years of strategic stalemate and of
senseless slaughter which would
come, unless some new weapon could
break the stalemate and bring hos¬
tilities to an end.
Einstein, Szilard, Pelerls and Rotblat
all detested war; they knew the im¬
mense perils which nuclear weapons
would involve; but they thought the
greatest danger was that Hitler should
get nuclear weapons first. That was
what made them persuade President
Roosevelt to authorize the Manhattan
District Project; that was what inspired
their colleagues in the Project team to
the stupendous efforts which they
made. This could, no doubt, be
regarded as only a special case of the
general compulsion of the arms race;
but it was a case in which men pre¬
eminently endowed with social cons¬
cience acted from the highest motives,
In the interest of humanity as a whole.
The same could certainly be said of
Sir Robert Watson-Watt, who brought
the priceless gift of radar to the Royal
Air Force to help it meet the threat
of Goering's bombers. And it could
certainly also be said of many lesser
scientists, who have volunteered their
contribution to the military defence of
causes in which they ardently believed.
But, no doubt, for the great majority
of the men who have worked in mili¬
tary research in various countries, no
such special motive was required.
Their governments invited them to enter
this branch of Its service, precisely as
it invited (or compelled) other men to
join the fighting forces. They accept¬
ed the invitation, or obeyed the order,
with the same sense of patriotic duty
which all good citizens should feel.
Do the scientists engaged in
military research carry a special
responsibility for the present dan¬
gerous arms race a responsibility
which their fellow-citizens do not
share?
The following propositions will
probably command fairly general
assent:
1. No citizen of a democratic coun¬
try can escape a share of respon¬
sibility for what his government
does in matters of national defence.
If he pays his taxes, he is financing
the work on weapons which the
scientists complete.
2. It is open to a scientist to refuse
to work in military research one
example being that of Professor
Otto Hahn, who first split the uran¬
ium atom in 1939, when he led
eighteen foremost German physi¬
cists in 1957 in declaring that they
would "never take part in any way
in the production, testing, or use
of atomic weapons". This is equi¬
valent to the stand of the conscien¬
tious objector, who declares that
he will play no part in war. It is
worthy of all respect. But to most
scientists it will not seem an
acceptable way out of the dilemma
with which the arms race now
confronts them.
The responsibility
of the
scientists
(1) Quoted In August Schou, The Nobel
Peace Prize.
3. If a scientist accepts employment
in his government's military re¬
search, and if he feels, as he
normally will, that his nation's
security depends on his work in
keeping the national forces ade¬
quately equipped with modern
weapons, then it is his duty to
make the utmost efforts to improve
those weapons, and to keep his
national forces up to the highest
standards of fighting power achiev¬
ed by other nations.
4. In carrying out his share in mili¬
tary research, the scientist is nor¬
mally under orders from generals
and ministers. If there is guilt in
making the modern means of war,
it lies primarily on the shoulders of
the ministers who make the politi¬
cal decisions that these means of
war shall be produced, and on the
parliaments who pay. If the scien¬
tists were simply under orders, like
other civil servants, this would be
the main answer to the questions
now being discussed.
5. But in reality the scientists
engaged in military research are 1 "7
not simply under orders; they are ' '
not simply civil servants with no
direct responsibility for what is
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

SCIENCE AND DISARMAMENT (Continued)
18
done. On the contrary, they know
so much more about modern wea¬
pons, and about the possibility of
further "improving" them, than the
generals or the politicians can
possibly know, that they inevitably
play a large part in the process
of decision-making.
Of all the new departures in
United States nuclear weapons
policy since 1945, all but one were
initially conceived and put forward
by scientists: the Oppenheimer-
Baruch plan for nuclear disarma¬
ment; the "fusion" or hydrogen
bomb; the development of so-call¬
ed "tactical" or "battlefield" nuc¬
lear weapons; the ballistic missile
for the delivery of nuclear war¬
heads; and the ban on nuclear
tests. The only exception was the
doctrine of massive retaliation,
which was the brain-child of John
Foster Dulles.
In so far as scientists are effec¬
tive participants in decision-making
about weapons, they share the kind
of responsibility borne by generals
and ministers; and in view of their
greater knowledge, their true share
of responsibility for what is done
may be greater than the share of
their military or political chiefs.
6. This special knowledge and
Influence of the scientists lays on
them a special duty which they
cannot escape. This is the duty
to explain to their General Staffs,
to their ministers, and to all their
fellow citizens the real destructive
power of the new weapons which
they have devised, introduced and
perfected. This means, in plain
language, that they should do what¬
ever is needed to warn their own
nations and the world of the grave
dangers of the present arms race.
7. But this special duty does not
end with explaining the nature of
the modem armaments, and the
danger of their accidental or un¬
intended use. It must also include
an obligation to help devise the
technical clauses of a disarmament
treaty by which the arms race can
be ended and to join in the educa¬
tional effort needed to create the
public opinion by which the policy
of disarmament can be made to
triumph. This is a duty which lies
inescapably on those scientists
who are engaged, or who have
been engaged, in military research.
8. As pointed out in paragraph
4 above, the scientists share re¬
sponsibility for the making of the
modern weapons with the generals
and the ministers under whose
orders they serve. It follows that
the duty described in paragraphs
6 and 7 lies also on the generals
and ministers, and that the pro¬
gramme of action described in later
sections of this article should be
undertaken by them all.
In principle, it is impossible to
dispute this proposition. But today
it is necessary to recognize
the facts of international life.
Twenty years after the second
"war to end war", the generals as
a class have shown small belief
that war and armaments can be
abolished; they regard it, rather, as
their duty to explain the difficulties
and dangers of disarmament; so
far, very few of them have made
constructive proposals for ending
the arms race.
The ministers have been willing,
year after year, to accept resolu¬
tions in the General Assembly of
the United Nations declaring that
disarmament is the most important
objective of their foreign policy.
But they have failed to give their
delegates the instructions which
would enable them to negotiate a
disarmament treaty.
Against
the complicity
of silence
There is no point in arguing
which nations have been most to
blame. The fact is that the minis¬
ters will only feel able to take
grave decisions which disarmament
requires when there is an over¬
whelming body of public opinion
throughout the world on which
they can rely to give them support.
9. Only the scientists can create
this body of opinion. They can
speak with an authority which the
ordinary citizen, the non-scientist,
cannot challenge, and to which he
is compelled to listen. Since they
cannot hope for much help from
the generals or the ministers, they
must act by themselves, in a
supreme endeavour to avert the
mortal dangers which confront
mankind.
How far do the propositions set
forth in the previous section apply
to scientists who are not engaged, and
who have never been engaged, in
military research?
At first sight, it might seem that the
responsibility and duty of these
scientists is less than that of scientists
who are so engaged. Their respon¬
sibility for the arms race is less; their
knowledge of the weapons and their
influence on government decisions are
less.
But three further propositions will
not be disputed.
Many scientists outside govern¬
ment service have contributed to
the general body of knowledge on
which military research has drawn
in its work on weapons. A vast
army of physicists built up the
knowledge of nuclear energy from
which the making of fission and
fusion weapons resulted. Many of
them made contributions of new
knowledge without which the wea¬
pons could not have been made,
even when they had no idea that
they were helping to create a new
and more dangerous kind of arms
race.
In so far as they understand the
weapons, and the dangers to which
the weapons give rise, better than
non-scientists, they have a duty
to help in the task described above.
By reason of their greater
knowledge, they will have more
influence on public opinion than
non-scientists. For example, phy¬
sicists, whether engaged in military
research or not, can explain the
dangers of the nuclear arms race
better than non-scientists; and
they will carry greater weight with
the average citizen. The same is
true of medical practitioners and
biological weapons; and of chem¬
ists and poison gases and incen¬
diary weapons.
In short, no one with a specialized
scientific training can escape a moral
obligation to share in this essential
work of education. And those who are
not in government employ have full
freedom to speak their minds; govern¬
ment scientists may be bound to
silence by the terms on which they
are engaged.
The scientists have a large share of
responsibility for another development
of sinister significance: the use or
misuse of language to obscure the
realities of the present arms race and
of nuclear war.
Sir Solly Zuckerman, for long the
Chief Scientific Adviser to the British
Ministry of Defence, and, since 1966,
Chief Scientific Adviser to the British
Government, has given a strong warn¬
ing about the danger which this
involves. Writing in 1962 In the United
States journal Foreign Affairs, he
spoke of "the way the military have
altered the concrete nature of certain
military problems by turning them into
abstractions. One dangerous example
of this tendency is the term "in¬
terdiction targets". Another is the idea
that nuclear weapons are just a new
and more powerful form of artillery,
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20

A single 10-megaton bomb can wipe out a major city and cause
damage over a surrounding area of nearly 800 square miles.
Photo © Gene Smith - Magnum

SCIENCE AND DISARMAMENT (Continued)
20
and that one exchanges nuclear-fire
like counter-battery fire. A third is
that one is able "to restore a situa¬
tion" with nuclear fire".
Sir Solly went on to explain that the
destruction by nuclear weapons of
"interdiction targets" bridges rail¬
way Junctions, mobilization depots
and so on would Inevitably mean
the destruction of towns and a large-
scale attack on civilian targets ; that
the "exchange of nuclear-fire" would
not simply mean the obliteration of
the enemy's guns or launching sites,
but the devastation of a large area
of territory; that an adverse battlefield
situation could not be "restored" by
nuclear weapons as it might be by
artillery bombardment the nuclear
weapons would only add to the military
chaos, and would, by fall-out, be a
grave danger to troops using them (1).
Kilotons and Megatons
These were illustrations of the
general propositions which Sir Solly
stated thus : "We must avoid the
conceptual framework derived from the
military' terminology of pre-nuclear
warfare. One may fairly ask what
meaning there Is to the idea of using
nuclear weapons 'to defend our
territories and peoples'. One can
deter with nuclear weapons. Can one
defend?" (2).
Sir Solly was discussing the misuse
in the nuclear age of previously
accepted, and valid, strategic terms.
But there is also a large body of
newly-Invented jargon; a whole
vocabulary of phrases, unintelligible
to anyone but the expert, for describ¬
ing the nuclear weapons, the. various
kinds of attack for which they might
be used, and the "responses" (coun¬
ter-attacks) which might most advan¬
tageously be made.
One part of this jargon is mathe¬
matical and, no doubt, necessary, both
for the scientists and the General
Staffs. To express the explosive
power of a nuclear weapon, it is
described as either in the "kiloton"
or the "megaton" class.
A kiloton Is the equivalent of 1,000
tons of TNT; a megaton Is the equi¬
valent of 1 million tons of TNT. The
bomb that destroyed Hiroshima was
approximately 20 kilotons; the first H
bomb exploded at Bikini in March
1954 was 15 megatons; in September
1961, the U.S.S.R. exploded a bomb
of about 60 megatons. If this bomb
had had an outer sheath of uranium-
238 instead of lead Its power might
have exceeded 100 megatons.
These terms "kiloton" and "mega¬
ton" obscure from the ordinary citizen
the great destructive potential of the
weapons. A half-kiloton weapon
sounds like something very small; in
fact it has the explosive power of 600
to 700 twelve-Inch shells with a charge
of TNT. One twelve-Inch shell was
considered a very formidable weapon
in the First World War.
The effect of a megaton weapon can
best be understood by remembering
that all the Allies succeeded In drop¬
ping only 1.2 million tons of bombs
with chemical explosives on German
territory during six years of the Second
World War. In doing so, they ruined
most of the German cities, and they
destroyed a great part of German
industry, oil stocks and oil production,
and almost all the German railway
system. The smallest megaton weapon
has the same explosive power.
There is another insidious danger
in these mathematical terms, especially
when they are used in "the conceptual
framework derived from the military
terminology of pre-war nuclear war¬
fare". A United States scientist,
Dr. Donald Brennan, has expressed it
thus: "Even among professionals, I
have observed an occasional tendency
to think of kilotons as tons." (3)
The new military
jargon
a dangerous
word game
"Professionals" i.e., soldiers sail¬
ors and airmen trained with conven¬
tional weapons and experienced in
conventional military operations come
to think of the new weapons as similar
to those which they employed in the
two World Wars. This is a singularly
perilous aberration, which disguises
the real nature of operations from
those who plan them.
But, in spite of these dangers, the
use of these mathematical terms is
not only useful, but also necessary, as
noted above, both for scientists and
General Staffs. They cannot write out
"the equivalent of thousands (millions)
of tons of TNT" thousands of times,
to explain their meaning.
The problem is to ensure that all
who use the terms, including military
"professionals", journalists, commen¬
tators and the general public, really
grasp the significance of the terms;
that they really come to understand
that kiloton weapons are at least a
thousand times as powerful as the
shells and bombs used in the Second
World War, and may be up to 50,000
times as powerful; while even the
smallest of megaton weapons is at
least a million times as powerful as
(1) Foreign Affairs, January 1962.
(2) ibid.
(3) Arms Control and Disarmament.
the twelve-inch shell, and the largest
so far made, 60 million times.
There are other parts of this new
"strategic" jargon for which there Is
less intellectual excuse. The weapon
which destroyed Hiroshima was called
the "nominal" bomb. Perhaps the
word "nominal" was convenient. At
least it evoked no unpleasant
memories; perhaps this was not its
greatest merit to those who used it
first. For when "experts" and poli¬
ticians want to make the uninitiated
appreciate the power of a nuclear
device, they abandon the word "nomi¬
nal", and speak of "Hiroshima".
Seeking to persuade the House of
Commons of the great strength of the
proposed British "independent"
nuclear deterrent, Sir Alec Douglas-
Home said that the eighty Polaris
missiles in the five United Kingdom
nuclear-powered submarines "will
have a strikeload of 2,500 or 3,000
Hiroshima bombs".
"Hiroshima" evokes, "nominal"
disguises, the reality of what the
bombs would mean. The same is true
when a 2-megaton warhead, which, as
already mentioned, Is nearly double
the explosive power of all the bombs
dropped on Germany in six years of
war, is called a "low-yield thermo¬
nuclear device".
Some of the new jargon passed
into journalistic, and Indeed, into
general, use. The commonest and the
most misleading of the euphemistic
phrases which are employed is the
word "tactical" applied to the smaller
types of nuclear weapons.
Euphemistic phrases
No one thought that the Hiroshima
bomb was tactical in 1945. It had
caused casualties many times as great
as the total strength of the British
Army of the Rhine. It was a substitute
for, and had averted, an Allied cam¬
paign against Japan, to which several
million troops had been assigned,
and which was expected to last for
18 months. It caused the enemy's
immediate and unconditional surrender.
. The United States Lilienthal Com¬
mittee, which drew up the first draft
of the Baruch-Oppenheimer Plan,
writing in their report in March 1946
while the impact of the first bombs
was still quite fresh, spoke of: "The
really revolutionary character of these
(atomic) weapons, particularly as
weapons of strategic bombardment
aimed at the destruction of cities and
the eradication of their populations."
This view of A-bombs was univers¬
ally accepted until the first H-bomb
was exploded in 1954. Only then did
General Staffs begin to say that A-
bombs were "tactical". They called
them "tactical" because something
bigger and more devastating had been
devised. Having these bigger weapons,

the Staffs, by an almost subconscious
process of thought, began to make
plans for war in which A-bombs were
regarded as artillery. Marshal of the
Royal Air Force Sir John Slessor, in
Strategy for the West, spoke for many
of the experts when he said: "We may
use nuclear power in a bomb or shell
tactically for conventional purposes.
That is merely to employ one projectile
to do what we had to use thousands
to do in Korea".
This was written with the most
honest intent. But in fact, no nuclear
weapon, not even the half-kiloton
bazooka-launched infantry bomb, the
Davy Crockett, bears any relation to
what artillery used to do. It is entirely
different in kind. And, of course, only
a very small proportion of the so-called
"tactical" or "battlefield" weapons
have as low a yield of explosive power
as the Davy Crockett. The vast major¬
ity have a yield as large as the
Hiroshima bomb; and very many are
more powerful still.
In the summer of 1964, Mr. McNa-
mara, the United States Secretary of
Defence, said the average yield of the
different weapons classed as "tactical"
was 100 kilotons, I.e., five times as
powerful as the Hiroshima bomb. It
is evident that, by all hitherto accepted
canons of military literature, such
weapons are what the Lilienthal
Committee called them "weapons of
strategic bombardment", and that they
are capable of the "destruction of
enemy cities and the eradication of
their populations".
'Megadeath'
'megacorpse'
and other
abhorrent phrases
The use of the word "tactical" to
describe them has done more than all
the rest of the jargon put together to
distort the thinking of the "experts"
about the use of nuclear arms, and to
lead the general public to accept what
in 1945-46 almost everyone agreed
was utterly unacceptable.
But there are other dangerous
words. When missiles with hydrogen
warheads became operational, the
General Staffs based their plans on
the assumption that these more power¬
ful weapons would be used for the
"destruction of enemy cities and the
eradication of their populations".
But the eradication of civilian popul¬
ations was an unpleasant thought. It
was less distasteful to plan for the
elimination of "military" targets. The
phrase "counter-force strategy" was
invented to describe the policy of
making the first major, strategic
nuclear onslaught against these milit¬
ary targets Staff headquarters ;
manpower depots; airfields; missile
sites; naval, especially submarine,
bases and dockyards; munitions
factories; "interdiction targets", such
as major bridges, railway junctions
and marshalling yard, road transport
centres and the rest.
Of course, many of these military
targets are situated in, or near, towns
and cities; they could not be attacked
with megaton weapons (and a strate¬
gic onslaught would mean that) or
even with multikiloton weapons, with¬
out killing a great number of civilians
as well. But it sounds more civilized,
more in accordance with Grotian Inter¬
national Law, to speak of attacking
military targets first; "counter-force
strategy" has soothing overtones.
The alternative to "counter-force
strategy" is "counter-value strategy".
"Counter-value" means directing the
first strategic nuclear attack not on
the military targets but on centres of
population and industry. The delibe¬
rate purpose of this attack would be to
wipe out the enemy's towns and cities,
exterminate his civilian population, and
destroy his industrial production.
Blanketing the facts
There are human beings who advo¬
cate the adoption of a "counter-value
strategy"; they believe that to announ¬
ce the adoption of a "counter-force"
policy must weaken the strength of the
deterrent. Fortunately their numbers
are few; but the invention of the phrase
('counter-value') to describe the mur¬
der of a nation will rank with historians
of the future as a classic example
of the militarist thinking of 1965.
So will the parallel phrase, "bonus
kills". In strategic planning, it appe¬
ars, it is convenient to calculate only
the casualties that will be immediately
caused by the flash, blast and fire
effects of a given kilotonnage or meg-
atonnage of nuclear bombs. It is on
this basis that the plans for an ope¬
ration are drawn up, the weapons
allocated, and so on. If, In addition
to these primary casualties, other
people die as a result of fall-out, they
are referred to as "bonus kills" (1).
There are other jargon phrases, just
as abhorrent on moral and Intellectual
grounds: "megadeath", to mean the
death of a million people; "mega¬
corpse", to mean a million dead
bodies; "overkill", to express the
power to destroy the entire population
of an enemy country more than once.
Whatever its technical advantages,
there are dangers of various kinds
inherent in the use of this euphemistic
jargon. Others besides Dr. Brennan's
"professionals" think they are speak¬
ing of tons when they speak of kilo¬
tons; the error is common among
journalists, amateur strategists, and
the general public. In 1964, It led
a candidate in the United States pre¬
sidential election to speak of tactical
nuclear weapons as "the successors
of yesterday's conventional arms" (2);
he urged that officers in the field
be given authority to order their use.
Let no one think that this is a small
matter, or that the sinister importance
of euphemism has been over-stated.
The constant repetition of disingenu¬
ous phrases like those cited above
has led to a kind of self-induced
hypnosis among those who ought to
understand the dangers of the mod¬
ern arms race and particularly among
the politicians; while for the general
public it has simply blanketed the
facts. The scientists engaged in mili¬
tary research must carry their full share
of the blame for this result.
The first efforts
by scientists
to warn
the world
The scientists who asked President
Roosevelt to authorize the effort to
make a nuclear bomb did so with
heavy hearts. Those who served in
the international team of the Manhattan
District Project shared their doubts
and fears. Dr. Arthur Compton has
described how they "prayed that they
might not succeed".
When in 1944 it became evident that
their prayers would be In vain, and
that the age of nuclear fission was
dawning, the most eminent among
them, Niels Bohr of Denmark, wrote a
memorandum for President Roosevelt,
warning him of the Immense dangers
to mankind that nuclear weapons
would mean.
"Unless some agreement about the
control of the use of the new active
materials can be obtained in due time,
any temporary advantage, however
great, may be outweighed by a per¬
petual menace to human society... No
kind of customary measures will suf¬
fice for this purpose (the control of
atomic energy). The terrifying pros¬
pect of a future competition between
nations about a weapon of such for¬
midable character can only be avoided
through a universal agreement In true
confidence."
Already Niels Bohr foresaw the
perils that were being unleashed; he
foresaw that the necessary Internation¬
al agreement must be universal and
that It must breed true confidence.
His anxiety was shared by many of
his colleagues. In the same year,
1944, in the so-called Frank Report,
(1) Ralph E. Lapp, Kill and Overkill. See Ol
also footnote page 40 on his book "The ¿^ |
Voyage of the Lucky Dragon'.
(2) Senator Goldwater, The Times, 18 August
1964.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 68

SCIENCE AND DISARMAMENT (Continued from page 21)
58
Dr. Leo Szilard, Dr. Eugene Rabino-
witch and others dealt with both the
long-term and short-term problems
which the new weapon would create.
They urged, with Niels Bohr, that
in the long term the prevention of an
international race In nuclear arms
should be the prime objective of post¬
war foreign policy, both for the United
States and for all other powers.
They urged that this objective would
be easier to attain If, in the short
term, the first bombs were used, not
against targets such as Hiroshima and
Nagasaki, but in some unpopulated
place where the Japanese generals
could observe the stupendous power
of the new weapons, but where no
human casualties would be caused.
Szilard and Rablnowitch and others
fought for this short-term objective
with passion. But not all their col¬
leagues were agreed. In the event,
those who objected to the use of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki as the targets
were over-ruled by the President and
the Secretary of State, in whose hands
the final decision lay.
But when the bombs were used in
August 1945, the holocausts In the two
doomed cities convinced almost every¬
one throughout the world that Niels
Bohr was right all nuclear weapons
must be abolished under international
control. On the initiative of the British
Prime Minister, Mr. (now Earl) Attlee,
the General Assembly of the United
Nations set up a United Nations Ato¬
mic Energy Commission (UNAEC), and
charged this commission with the task
of drafting the necessary treaty.
At its first meeting, the United
States Government proposed the basic
principles on which a treaty might be
made. This proposal was put forward
by the United States delegate, Mr.
Bernard Baruch, and has always since
been known as the "Baruch Plan".
In fact, it was the work of Dr. Robert
J. Oppenheimer, who had been the lea¬
der of the team that made the first
atomic bomb.
It may be doubted whether the plan
in its original form would have been
adopted or proved workable; it propos¬
ed an International Atomic Energy
Authority, which would own and ope¬
rate all the world's nuclear plants.
At the time, however, most scientists
believed that something on these lines
was needed. The UNAEC adopted the
Oppenheimer plan as the basis of its
work, and for nearly three years many
of the most eminent scientists (1) In the
world debated every aspect of the pro¬
posal in the utmost detail. They showed
a persevering devotion which proved
their ardent desire to obtain a satisfac¬
tory result. Their final failure does
not alter the fact that eminent scien¬
tists in government employ had made
a bold effort to solve the problem
their war-time work had created.
Meanwhile, other scientists of the
Manhattan District team, who had left
government employ, were likewise
working on the problem. Some of
them, with Szilard and Rabinowltch in
the lead, formed the United States
Federation of Atomic Scientists. The
constitution of the federation said:
"The Federation of Atomic Scientists
is founded to meet the increasingly
apparent responsibility of scientists in
promoting the welfare of mankind and
the achievement of a stable world
peace."
Other scientific bodies did parallel
work on problems of the arms race.
The Pugwash
Movement
is born
Also in 1945 the Bulletin of the Atom¬
ic Scientists was founded by Hyman
Goldsmith and Eugene Rablnowitch.
For twenty years it has done solid
and brilliant work on armament prob¬
lems; it has mobilized the interest of
scientists in disarmament, and has
given them a platform for the serious
discussion of the issues involved.
But after the failure of the Oppen-
heimer plan, many of the scientists in
government employ came to accept the
nuclear arms race as an Inevitable fact
of life. They concentrated their efforts
on developing the fission-fusion, or
hydrogen, bomb and on bringing out
a large range of "tactical" nuclear
weapons of all kinds. Some of them
Professor Isidor Rabi, Dr. Hans
Bethe, Dr. Jerome Wiesner, Sir John
Cockcroft still preached the doctrine
of controlled disarmament; others
wrote and spoke against disarmament,
and against a test ban.
The latter category argued, first, that
deterrence by nuclear weapons was
the surest safeguard against aggres¬
sive war; and second, that nuclear
war was feasible, and would not obli¬
terate mankind, nor even the comba¬
tant nations involved (2).
It was in protest against this accep¬
tance of a nuclear arms race and
against the conception that nuclear
(1) The following were among those who
took part In the work of the commission:
Dr. R. Oppenheimer, Dr. Charles Thomas,
Dr. J. B. Conant, Sir James Chadwick, Sir
Charles Darwin, Sir George Thomson, Sir
William Penney, Professor F. Joliot-Curie,
Professor F. Perrin.
(2) Dr. Edward Teller has elaborated this
view in a recent book The Legacy of
Hiroshima, by E. Teller and Allen Brown,
New York, Doubleday, 1962.
war was feasible, that Dr. Albert Ein¬
stein and Bertrand (Earl) Rüssel made
their famous declaration In 1955:
"In the tragic situation which con¬
fronts humanity, we feel that scientists
should assemble in conference to
appraise the perils that have arisen as
a result of the development of wea¬
pons of mass destruction, and to dis¬
cuss a resolution In the spirit of the
appended draft. . .
" The general public, and even many
in positions of authority, have not rea¬
lized what would be involved in a war
with nuclear bombs. The general pub¬
lic still thinks in terms of the oblitera¬
tion of cities. It is understood that the
new bombs are more powerful than
the old, and that while one A-bomb
could obliterate Hiroshima, one
H-bomb could obliterate cities such as
London, New York and Moscow.
"No doubt in an H-bomb war great
cities would be obliterated. But this
Is one of the minor disasters that would
have to be faced . . .
"No one knows how widely such
lethal radioactive particles might be
diffused, but the best authorities are
unanimous In saying that a war with
H-bombs might quite possibly put an
end to the human race . . . Many
warnings have been uttered by eminent
men of science and by authorities in
military strategy. None of them will
say that the worst results are certain.
What they do say is that these results
are possible, and no one can be sure
that they will not be realized . . . Here,
then, is the problem which we present
to you stark and dreadful and Inesca¬
pable: Shall we put an end to the hu¬
man race; or shall mankind renounce
war?"
Impact on world opinion
This Einstein-Russell appeal ended
with a resolution urging the govern¬
ments of the world to find peaceful
means of settling all the then-existing,
and all future international disputes.
It was signed by other famous scien¬
tists: Max Born, Percy Brldgman, Leo¬
pold Infeld, Joseph Miller, Linus Pau¬
ling, Jollot-Curie, Joseph Rotblat, Cecil
Powell and Hideki Yukawa. It had an
enormous Impact on world opinion.
Among other results, the manifesto
led to the creation of the Pugwash
Movement. The Pugwash Movement
has been, and remains, the most
important collective effort of scientists
to arouse governments and people to
the menace of nuclear war, and to the
necessity for general controlled disar¬
mament as the only real long-term
safeguard for mankind. (See article,
Unesco Courier, Nov. 1964 - Editor.)
The novel and vitally significant fea¬
ture of the Pugwash Movement is
that it brings together the leading
scientists from both Eastern and West¬
ern Europe. The first meeting was

held In Pugwash, the birthplace and
one of the homes of Mr. Cyrus Eaton,
the Canadian-American millionaire,
who paid for the journeys of the parti¬
cipants and who entertained them dur¬
ing their stay. Those who took part
included leading men from the United
States, the United Kingdom, France
and other Western countries, together
with prominent members of the Acade¬
my of Sciences of the Soviet Union, of
Poland, and of other member states
of the Warsaw Pact.
The first conference was so success¬
ful that It has been followed by sixteen
others, held in different countries.
Each conference has made some new
and significant contribution to general
thinking about the armament problem.
Pugwash studies of the need for, and
the difficulties to be surmounted In,
a test ban helped to advance govern¬
ment action. Mr. Gromyko's proposal
for a "minimum nuclear deterrent"
(now usually referred to as nuclear
"umbrella") was based on a discussion
at a Pugwash meeting.
But the movement's greatest contri¬
bution was contained in the general
declarations made at the major con¬
ferences held in Kitzbühel and Vienna
in 1958, and in London in 1962.
'The risk of local
conflicts growing
into major wars
is too great...'
The Vienna Declaration is still
regarded as the Pugwash "credo". It
said, in part:
"We meet In Kitzbühel and in Vien¬
na at a time when it has become evi¬
dent that the development of nuclear
weapons makes it possible for man to
destroy civilization and, indeed, him¬
self; the means of destruction are
being made ever more efficient.
"It is sometimes suggested that loca¬
lized wars, with limited objective, might
still be fought without catastrophic
consequences. History shows, how¬
ever that the risk of local conflicts
growing into major wars is too great
to be acceptable in the age of wea¬
pons of mass destruction. Mankind
must therefore set itself the task of
eliminating all wars, including local
wars.
". . . if, in a future war, a substantial
proportion of the nuclear weapons
already manufactured were delivered
against urban targets, most centres of
civilization in the belligerent countries
would be totally destroyed, and most
of their populations killed. This would
be true whether the bombs used deriv¬
ed most of their power from fusion
reactions (so-called 'clean' bombs) or
principally from fission reactions (so-
called 'dirty' bombs). In addition to
destroying major centres of population
and industry, such bombs would also
wreck the economy of the country
attacked, through the destruction of
vital means of distribution and com¬
munication.
"We believe that,' as scientists, we
have an important contribution to make
toward establishing trust and co-op¬
eration among nations. Science is,
by long tradition, an international un¬
dertaking.
"The ability of scientists all over the
world to understand one another, and
to work together, is an excellent Ins¬
trument for bridging the gap between
nations. . .
". . . education should stress impro¬
vement of all forms of human relations
and should eliminate any glorification
of war and violence."
At the London Conference in 1962,
250 leading scientists from thirty-six
countries took part. They unanimous¬
ly adopted a declaration which said,
in part:
"Our chief concern is to prevent
war, and to relieve humanity of the
fearful anxieties and the grave econo¬
mic burdens caused by the arms race.
A general war with nuclear weapons
would be a disaster of unimaginable
magnitude. It would destroy a large
fraction of the people now alive, and
jeopardize the conditions of life of the
survivors.
"Throughout the world competition
in armaments absorbs an. immense
amount of talent and resources. This
is wasted, because, so far from giving
security, it increases the risk of
war . . .
"Disarmament and a stable peace
are essential conditions for making a
new society In which poverty could be
abolished. The prospect of such a
world is no longer Utopian. The tech¬
nical and scientific triumphs of our
times have already far outstripped the
boldest dreams of recent generations
and knowledge increases ever more
rapidly.
"In our Conference we have there¬
fore concentrated attention on the
complex problems of disarmament...
The experience of our Conference
leads us to believe that scientists have
a special contribution to make to the
solution of these problems. . . Scien¬
tists of all nations have a command¬
ing duty to help their fellow citizens
to understand that war is obsolete, and
what steps can ensure peace. They
should, we believe, recognize their
responsibilities to promote disarma¬
ment, and should invite Governments,
learned societies and other institutions
to support them in this task."
The London Conference ended its
declaration with these notable words:
"We are now at a stage in which gene¬
ral statements of principles are not
enough; action is needed. . .
"We re-assert our conviction that
the goal of full disarmament and per¬
manent peace is realistic and urgent.
This work is truly to be seen as part
of a long struggle for the progress of
mankind, and It Is one in which scien¬
tists have a responsible part to play.
We call upon scientists everywhere
in the world to join with us In this
task."
That the Pugwash Movement has
been managed with wisdom and skill
Is proved by the fact that its Influence
with governments has steadily increas¬
ed, while its standing with the general
public has improved. Many eminent
men have contributed to its success;
outstanding have been the services
rendered by its Secretary-General,
Professor Joseph Rotblat, of St.
Bartholomew's Hospital, London.
11,000 scientists
from 40 countries
petition for
a test-ban treaty
It would not be right to end this sec¬
tion without recalling the special con¬
tributions made by two individual
scientists contributions which are
particularly relevant to the theme of
this article.
In 1958, Dr. Linus Pauling of the
California Institute of Technology orga¬
nized a petition to the United Nations
on the subject of nuclear tests. The
petition urged that the "added amount
of radiation" resulting from tests cons¬
tituted a danger to human health, and
was liable to cause "an Increase In
the number of seriously defective chil¬
dren that will be born in future gen¬
erations."
It further argued that a test ban
"could serve as a first step towards a
more general disarmament" and the
"ultimate effective abolition of nuclear
weapons." This petition was drafted
by Dr. Pauling, together with a circular
letter Inviting scientists throughout the
world to sign it. All the secretarial
work was done by Dr. Pauling and
his wife and all the postage and sta¬
tionery were paid for from his pri¬
vate purse.
When the petition was presented a
few weeks later to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, it bore
the signatures of more than 11,000
leading scientists from more than forty
countries. They included thirty-six
Nobel Prize winners, and thirty-five
Fellows of the Royal Society. There
is no doubt that the petition helped EQ
powerfully to persuade President wV
Elsenhower to approve the Geneva
negotiation which began in 1958, and
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

SCIENCE AND DISARMAMENT (Continued)
60
which ultimately resulted In the Mos¬
cow Test Ban of 1963 (1).
The second Individual contribution of
which mention must be made is an
article published in the United States
journal Foreign Affairs, In January
1962.
The article is entitled "Judgement
and Control In Modern Warfare", and
it was written by Sir Solly Zucker-
man, who, as, already mentioned, was
then, Chief Scientific/ Adviser In the
British Ministry of Defence. Sir Solly
raised the fundamental question whe¬
ther any. nuclear weapon, "tactical" or
"strategic", could be used In a- popu¬
lated area without disaster to all .con¬
cerned, including the troops that used
it first. Discussing a British Army
Exercise known as "Spearpoint",
which took place In October 1961, in
Northern Germany, Sir Solly wrote:
"In a war game involving just three
NATO Corps, nuclear weapons were
used against military targets only, In
an area of 10,000 square miles which
contained no large towns or cities.
In this 'battle', lasting only a few days,
It was assumed that the two sides
together used a total of between 20
and 25 megatons In not fewer than
500 and not more than 1,000 strikes.
It turned out that 3.5 million people
would have had their homes destroyed
if the weapons were air-burst, and
1.5 million if ground-burst. In the
former case, at least half the people
concerned would have been fatally or
seriously injured (i.e., 1.75 million). In
the case of ground-burst weapons, all
1.5 million would have been exposed
to a lethal radiological hazard, and a
further 5 million to serious danger from
radiation" (2).
The strange apathy
of mankind
to the threat of
thermo-nuclear war
Sir Solly goes on to point out that
in a real land battle there would also
be nuclear "interdiction" attacks out¬
side the area of local engagement, and
that nuclear attacks would be made by
both sides on distant airfields or mis¬
sile sites. All this, he argues, would
create such chaos on the battlefield
that it would be impossible as,
indeed, it proved in "Spearpoint" for
the General Staff to keep control of
what was happening or to pursue any
intelligible military plan.
But Sir Solly foresees a still graver
peril. Stressing the danger, in the
context of a NATO land battle; of "trip¬
wires which unwittingly set Into opera¬
tion the whole panoply of strategic
deterrence", he continues:
"Let us be quite clear about this.
There are those In the West who
already believe that the use of
any nuclear weapons in a war involv¬
ing NATO would mean the opening of
a third World War. There are Indica¬
tions that the Soviet leaders believe
the same thing. If this view is right,
all freedom of choice may be lost, and
all possibility of exercising judgement
and control in a? future war between
the great powers."
Sir SofTy's* argument leads him to
the conclusion which has been quoted
above, but' which, In view of -its' crucial
. importance, will bear repetition:
"The very existence of nuclear."
weapons is thus the most urgent chal¬
lenge that has ever been presented to
military judgement and control. As
weapons to deter aggression, they
serve a very precise purpose; the con¬
text of field warfare in which they
might be. used is an entirely diffe¬
rent matter. . . One may fairly ask
what meaning there is to the Idea of
using nuclear weapons 'to defend our
territories and peoples'. One can
deter with nuclear weapons. Can one
defend?"
Sir Solly is here saying in polite lan¬
guage what Professor Rabi said more
crudely In 1958 : "There is a dan¬
gerous misconception which is glossed
over by the use of the word 'tactical'
in reference to bombs of the explosive
power of thousands of tons of TNT.
Such bombs used in profusion would
destroy the country which is the scene
of a battle as completely as Hiroshima
was destroyed. . . Although such
bombs can be used tactically in war
in a desert or at sea, or over very
sparsely populated territory, the situa¬
tion is quite different in Western
Europe or in some of the heavily
populated countries on the borders of
the Communist complex" (3).
The evidence given in the last sec¬
tion shows that many scientists, both
In government service and outside it,
have made genuine and sustained
efforts to bring home the dangers of
the present arms race to their minis¬
terial and military chiefs, and to the
public at large. Yet it Is obvious that,
so far, they have failed.
On the last day of 1957, Professor
Isidor Rabi said: "The facts about
modern warfare have just not pene¬
trated; and that goe.s for the heads of
governments, for otherwise they would
ponder these facts every day as the
daily number one problem" (4)	
The average citizen has been even
less concerned; his apathy and Igno¬
rance are one of the strangest myste¬
ries in the history of democratic
society. Writing five years after Rabi,
Professor Warren E. Olsen said: "Des¬
pite statements by such diverse figu¬
res as Norman Cousins, Herman
Kahn, Harrison Brown, and former
President Elsenhower concerning the
imminence of a third World War, the
unspeakable toll of lives such a war
would entail, and the probability of
killing untold millions who have no
part in the East-West quarrel, recent
surveys indicate that few Americans
are deeply troubled by the threat of
a thermonuclear holocaust" (5). The
same is probably true of almost every
nation, except the Japanese.
OPERATION
'VOX POPULI'
A call for a world
movement of opinion
Nor have the scientists made much
progress in their efforts to persuade
the governments to carry out disarma¬
ment, and to abolish war.
These depressing facts do not mean
that the Pugwash Movement should
give up its work, or that other scien¬
tists are justified in regarding that
work as useless or Utopian. On the
contrary, the challenge of the London
Pugwash Declaration quoted above is
even more topical than it was In 1962:
"Scientists of all nations have a
commanding duty to help their fellow
citizens to understand that war Is obso¬
lete, and what steps can ensure
peace. They should, we believe, rec¬
ognize their responsibilities to pro¬
mote disarmament, and should Invite
governments, learned societies and
other institutions to support them in
this task."
And again: "We re-assert our con¬
viction that the goal of full disarma¬
ment and permanent peace is realis¬
tic and urgent. This work Is truly to
be seen as part of a long struggle for
the progress of mankind, and it is one
in which scientists have a responsible
part to play. We call upon scientists
everywhere in the world to join with
us in this task."
Today with wars and crises in vari¬
ous continents, the task is even more
urgent than it was when the London
(1) Other notable contributions to dis¬
armament thinking and literature by Individual
scientists have Included books by Professor
Max Born, Dr. Ralph Lapp, Dame Kathleen
Lonsdale, Bertrand Russell and Sir Robert
Watson-Watt. Outstanding Is Sir Robert
Watson-Watt's Man's Means to his End. Sir
Robert makes a devastating analysis of the
present arms race and Its dangers, and sets
out the case for disarmament with great
cogency. Sir Robert Is the discoverer of radar,
which enabled the Royal Air Force to defeat
Hitler's Luftwaffe In the Battle of Britain.
(2) Foreign Affairs, New York, January 1962.
(3) News of the World, 15 July 1958.
(4) New York Times, 1 January 1958.
. (5) Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, March
1963.

This monument, erected
In memory of the
thousands of children
killed by the explosion
of the first atomic bomb,
on August 6, 1945,
stands in the Peace Park
at Hiroshima.
Photo © Siegfried Sammer,
West Berlin
Declaration was written. But if there
is to be any hope of practical success,
the task must be undertaken on a far
vaster scale, with far greater resour¬
ces, and with far more ambitious
hopes, than have Inspired the move¬
ments started since 1945.
What is the task?
It is to make the average citizen in
every country understand the urgent
danger In which he stands today; to
persuade him that the armaments which
create the danger must be abolished;
and to evoke, to lead, and to organize
his demand for swift and radical
action.
It is to rid the world of a threat to
civilization even greater than that of
Hitler's Nazism in 1939, and to do so
by creating a tidal wave of Informed
opinion. It might be called: "Opera¬
tion Vox Populi: The Challenge of
the Peoples to Militarism and Death."
The operation should be thought of as
having no less urgency and impor¬
tance than the Manhattan District Pro
ject had in 1939. It should have the
same claim on the services of scien¬
tists of the highest rank.
The international committee. An
International committee should be
formed of men of world repute, some,
if not all, of whom have themselves
played a prominent part in military
research, and in the application of
scientific methods to the conduct of
military operations in time of war. In
other words, they should be men who
will command the respect of their
fellow scientists, of governments, of
General Staffs, and of the public.
The committee should be widely
representative of nations from both
Eastern and Western Europe. It
should include, among others, repre¬
sentatives from the United States, the
U.S.S.R., France, the United Kingdom,
Italy, India, Japan, and if possible,
China.
The members of the committee
would, of course, have to give their
whole time and energy to their su¬
premely important task. They should
be given leave of absence from their
normal employment, whether it be in
government service, in the universities,
in scientific institutes, or in industry.
This leave of absence should be for
one, two, or more years, as the suc¬
cessful conduct of the operation might
require. Their posts should, of course,
be kept open for them, whenever they
desired to return.
The committee should have the same
freedom from financial restrictions as
the scientists who worked in the Man¬
hattan District Project; it should have
whatever sums of money it might judge
to be required. It should have at its
disposal whatever was needed in
qualified scientific personnel, in ad¬
ministrative and secretarial manpower,
and in other expert help.
Before these practical aspects of
the operation and its organization are
discussed, it may be useful to set out
in more concrete form the substance
61
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

SCIENCE AND DISARMAMENT (Continued)
62
of the message for which the opera¬
tion Is to mobilize support.
The substance of the case. The fol¬
lowing are the main Issues on which
world opinion requires a clear and
decisive lead from scientists:
1. The real nature of the present
weapons of mass destruction
nuclear, chemical and biological
and the scale of the casualties and
destruction which their use would
involve.
2. The question, raised by
Professor Rabi and Sir Solly
Zuckerman, whether any nuclear
weapons, even of the smallest
"tactical" category with which the
armies are equipped, can be used
without disasterdisaster both to
the civil population of the area
where the weapons are used, and
to the armed forces which use
them first.
3. The probable future develop¬
ment of weapons of offence if the
arms race goes on and military
research continues to receive the
vast resources now placed at its
disposal.
4. The possibility of active
defence against the weapons of
mass destruction, whether by anti¬
missile missiles, or in other ways.
This should include a study of the
cost of any possible system
of active defence, its probable
efficacy or inefficacy, and the risk
of increased fall-out which it might
involve.
5. The possibility of passive, or
"civil" defence against nuclear
attack, by shelters, evacuation, etc.
This should include a study of the
cost of such passive defence, of
its efficacy and its effect on the
social standards and industrial
efficiency of any country that made
a serious attempt to carry it out.
6. The danger of accidental or
unintended nuclear war, whether as
the result of mechanical failure in
the systems of weapon control and
command, or of human failure
(mental breakdown) in the officers
or ministers in charge of them.
Warnings of the possibility of
accidental war are often given in
general terms; but glib statements
of a reassuring nature are
also often made, based on the
infallibility of the "fail-safe" system,
of the "permissive link", etc. The
great complexity and cost of these
safeguarding devices proves in
itself how real is the danger of
accident; and no one who under¬
stands the matter denies that it is
possible that they may fail. This
is a subject on which the peoples
have been kept in almost total
ignorance. But they have a right
to know the risks they face; a
detailed and authoritative state¬
ment is urgently required.
7. The character of the new
strategic jargon in current use in
discussions of nuclear war. This
should include a study of the
psychological and political assump¬
tions (or fallacies) of most of the
so-called "analyses" of nuclear
strategy carried out by individual
"experts" or by "institutes" or
"corporations" of various kinds.
The study should examine the
assertion made by expert govern¬
ment "consultants" that the NATO
Command have approved a war-
plan which accepts 200 "mega-
deaths" (200 million dead), apart
from the more numerous victims
of fall-out.
8. A study of the so-called
"technical" difficulties of con¬
ventional, nuclear, chemical and
biological disarmament, with de¬
tailed technical proposals as to
how these difficulties can be
overcome in a general international
treaty. This should include a
study of the technical, political and
psychological problems of inter¬
national inspection and control,
and should suggest the detailed
methods, of whatever kind, by
which faithful observance of the
obligations of the disarmament
treaty can be reasonably ensured.
Ill-informed and tendentious debate
has obscured the whole subject of
inspection in a miasma of suspicion
and doubt.
9. A study of the short-term
effects of general disarmament on
the employment prospects of the
50 million men and women now
engaged throughout the world in
national armed forces or in the
manufacture of armaments.
10. A forecast of the gain to
human welfare if the brain power
and resources now given to arma¬
ments and preparations for war
were diverted instead to work for
the betterment of health, for the
promotion of intellectual and
artistic achievement, and for the
increase of usable wealth.
11. An estimate of the gain to
science, and therefore to humanity,
if all present restrictions on inter¬
national scientific collaboration
were removed by the disarmament
treaty, and if all scientific research
of every kind were open to the
world.
The four stages. There should be
a memorandum (or book) on each of
the eleven subjects specified above,
and on any additional aspects of the
armament problem which the interna¬
tional committee might judge to be
required.
The authors of each memorandum
should be specialist scientists, whose
authority on the subject with which
they dealt would be unchallengeable.
On each subject there should be co¬
authors from both Eastern and Western
Europe. The authors would be cho¬
sen by the International committee and
would work under the committee's
general direction.
Taken together, the memoranda
would make a detailed and unanswer¬
able case for the conviction expressed
by the participants in the Pugwash
Conference of 1962: "The goal of
full disarmament and permanent peace
Is realistic and urgent." They would
constitute a body of doctrine on which
the whole operation would be based.
The manifesto. When the prepara¬
tion of the memoranda was complete,
the International committee would
publish them and secure the widest
possible distribution for them.
The committee should then draw up
a relatively brief manifesto, setting
forth the main conclusions to be drawn
from the memoranda. The manifesto
would state succinctly the real dan¬
gers of the arms race; the urgent nec¬
essity of a world-wide disarmament
treaty under international control; the
conviction of the authors that a safe
and practicable treaty could be speed¬
ily drawn up; and the benefits to
all nations which such a treaty would
bring.
The committee should secure the
signatures of eminent scientists for
the manifesto perhaps 100 leading
men from each of the major countries,
and a corresponding number from
smaller countries.
The manifesto would then be pub¬
lished with the great collective author¬
ity of these famous personalities be¬
hind it.
The mass endorsement of scientists.
The international committee would next
endeavour to secure massive support
for the manifesto from the scientists of
all nations. Every man or woman with
adequate scientific training (e.g., with
a university degree in one or more
scientific disciplines) should be invited
to give his, or her, support. The pur¬
pose should be to attract the adhesion
of as large a proportion as possible
of the scientists of the world. A mil¬
lion signatures would not be too high
a target.

The world petition. The interna¬
tional committee would then proceed
to organize the world expression of
popular opinion, which it is the pur¬
pose of the operation to evoke.
It cannot be doubted that, if the first
three stages outlined above were sub¬
stantially successful, the greater part
of the intellectual leaders of every
country writers, politicians, univer¬
sity professors, the teaching profes¬
sion, lawyers, doctors, etc. would be
aroused by the scientists' warning
about the dangers of the arms race,
and would be ready to accept the
drastic, world-wide, internationally ins¬
pected disarmament proposed.
With the adhesion of these intellec¬
tual leaders, It should be possible to
organize a world petition far greater
and more comprehensive than any ever
drawn up before. There would be no
disposition among the ordinary citizens
of any nation to challenge the authority
of the scientists, or to reject their
appeal. The signatories of the world
petition, hundreds of millions of them,
would pledge themselves to support
their respective governments in any
action which these governments might
take to draw up and execute a treaty
of general disarmament without delay.
Towards a world
petition with
hundreds of millions
of signatures
Scientists' aversion to manifestos.
It has been suggested that the scien¬
tists of the world would be unwilling
to adopt the plan proposed above be¬
cause they have a natural and a
deeply ingrained aversion to mani¬
festos, and to other simplified exposi¬
tions of facts and arguments on which
they may feel doubts or reservations.
It is, of course, true that scientists,
more than other men, desire exact
precision, and that, faced with grave
political or social issues, they may
think it probable that there are refine¬
ments of argument that are not sus¬
ceptible of popular exposition.
But the scientists who drew up the
Vienna and London Pugwash Declara¬
tions felt no such doubts about the
armament problem. They saw it as a
naked choice between an intensifying
arms race in nuclear, biological and
chemical weapons, with constantly
recurring crises, on the one hand; and
peaceful co-existence based on disar¬
mament and world law, on the other.
Without hesitation, they chose
peaceful co-existence, disarmament
and world law. What scientist need
quibble about the niceties of the argu¬
ment, when It was Einstein who launch
ed the Pugwash Movement, and, with
his dying breath, called on mankind to
revolt against the use of nuclear
weapons, and to abolish all armaments
and war?
Long-term education. Some people
believe that general disarmament
under International control would make
such a revolutionary change In world
affairs, and in the relations of nations,
that all danger of war would disappear.
Others consider that the risk of inter¬
national conflicts would remain, and
that the ideas of militarist thinking
might revive.
Those who take the second view
hold that education in all countries
should be adapted to the changed
conditions of a disarmed world. The
Vienna Pugwash Declaration had most
important things to say in support of
this proposition.
Dr. Peter Hodgson has graphically
described what he thinks would be
required: "What is needed is some
continuing action that will steadily grow
In importance. Education is the key.
Is it not possible to arrange for all
this to be taught in schools? Could
not 'Survival in the Nuclear Age' re¬
place 'The Wars of the Roses' in Bri¬
tain's General Certificate of Education
history syllabus? It could well be
made a compulsory subject. Could
not more international schools be
founded to help the education of a
new generation who will work and
think In international terms? Could
not Studentships and Fellowships
and Colleges be founded to further
continuing studies and work on the
problem? This would ensure that the
impetus and interest generated by
'Operation Vox Populi' is not lost, but
forms the basis of a continuing effort
for lasting peace."
It may well be hoped that, if "Op¬
eration Vox Populi" succeeded, such
a reform of education could be
obtained. . .
The whole of this article has been
founded on the Vienna and London
Pugwash Declarations which have
been quoted above. Those declara¬
tions set forth the conviction of many
most eminent scientists from many
countries that the whole philosophy of
power politics is out of date; that the
arms race is a grotesque and very
perilous anachronism; that in the nu¬
clear age, and with modern means of
transport and communication, the vital
Interests of nations are not in conflict,
but are common Interests which they
share and which they can only promote
by common action.
This article is an attempt to show
how the new philosophy of the Pug¬
wash scientists might be made part of
the accepted thinking of civilized
mankind. It would require a supreme
effort from scientists themselves; a
massive acceptance of the Pugwash
assertion that they have a "command¬
ing duty to help their fellow scientists
to understand that war is obsolete",
and that, If they could be persuaded
to "recognize their responsibilities to
promote disarmament", they might
exercise a decisive Influence on the
course of history.
But is there
still enough
time?
(1) Professor Max Born, Bulletin of the
Atomic Scientists, April 1964. "Max Born
Is one of the founders of modern physics,
and was awarded the Nobel Prize In 1954",
the Bulletin says. Professor Born worked on
military research for Germany during the
First World War.
Everything depends on whether the
scientists are ready to undertake the
task. They, and they alone, can rouse
the nations from the "dogmatic sleep"
which allows the arms race to go on.
But they must recognize the revolu¬
tionary character of what they have to
do. One of the most eminent of them,
Professor Max Born, writing for fellow
scientists, said not long ago:
"Our hope is based on the union of
two spiritual powers; the moral
awareness of the unacceptability of a
war degenerated to mass murder of
the defenceless, and the rational know¬
ledge of the incompatibility of techno¬
logical warfare with the survival of the
human race.
"The only question Is whether we
have enough time to let these realiza¬
tions become effective. For the pre¬
sent situation is highly unstable, and
becomes, through its own mechanisms,
increasingly dangerous day by day.
The failure of an individual, or an appa¬
ratus, the blind passion of a leader,
the Ideological or national delusions
of the masses can at any moment lead
to a catastrophe. . .
"All of us must fight against official
lies and encroachments; against the
assertions that there is protection from
nuclear weapons through shelters
and emergency regulations; against
the suppression of those who enligh¬
ten the public about it; against narrow-
minded nationalism, "gloire", passion
for great power; and we must espe¬
cially fight against those ideologies
which pronounce the infaillibility of
their doctrines and thus separate the
world Into irreconciliable camps.
"There is still hope, but it will only
come true if we stake everything on the
battle against the diseases of our
time." (1).
"If we stake everything!"
"The only question is whether we have
enough time."
This text is a slightly abridged version of
an article published in Unesco's quarterly,
"Impact of Science on Society", No 4 1965.
63
