THE CHALLENGE
OF PEACE
by Vadim Ardatovsky
E
ARLY In June 1967, as
participants In an international meeting
of journalists held in Strasbourg, we
tried to forget the outside world and
spent an agreeable week discussing
the recent progress of technology and
Its growing impact on the press.
In our small way, we tried to make
a contribution to that increasingly
popular exercise which has been
VADIM ARDATOVSKY, a Soviet journal¬
ist, is a well-known commentator on inter¬
national relations In the U.S.S.R. He has
taken part in several international confer¬
ences of journalists devoted to studies
and discussions of world' affairs and on
world problems of mass communications.
termed "Futurology" and which some¬
times skims fairly close to Science
Fiction. We tried to visualize the
world of tomorrow and more espe¬
cially what a "Golden Age" of journal-
Ism might be like tomorrow. We saw
artificial satellites whirling through
space, transmitting facsimile news¬
papers to every corner of the globe.
Any family could select any of the
world's newspapers at the touch of a
button, and some of them were even
"talking newspapers" which added a
more personal touch. Stories by
news reporters on the spot were sent
directly to automatically operated
composing machines, while front page
dispatches were flashed instantan¬
eously via laser beams.
Our tiny international group, made
up of journalists from France, U.K.,
U.S.S.R., U.S.A., the Arab countries,
Japan, Yugoslavia, Ireland, Czecho¬
slovakia and other countries, even
went so far as to work out how long
it would take for such innovations to
be introduced, whether in the next
twenty, fifty or a hundred years.
By tacit agreement we omitted any
mention of politics despite the fact that
a war had broken out in the Middle
East that very week and no one could
then predict whether it would be
possible to circumscribe the conflict
that had erupted or whether it would
eventually spread to other countries.
Our discussions on the future progress
of the communications industry were
Weapons of war (left).
Tools for peace (right).
But a tank costs far
more than a tractor and
nations squander
astronomical sums to
maintain their arsenals
of modern weapons.
The cost of a new
prototype bomber with
full equipment, for
example, equals the price
of 50,000 tractors, or
75 fully equipped 100-bed
hospitals or 30 science
faculties each with
1,000 students (see
"Unesco Courier",
November 1964).

-A
based on what seemed a natural
assumption that the world would
develop peacefully in the foreseeable
future.
Clearly no one except a compara¬
tively small group of professional
military men can think of drawing up
vast plans for the future with the
perspective of a world war in front of
him. The architect breaking ground
for a new skyscraper, the gardener
landscaping a new park, the artist
starting on a new painting, all think
ahead to the future enjoyment and
benefit of their work to society for
years and even generations to come.
To put it another way, the need for
peace is as natural to man as his need
for oxygen, and the most important
instinct of man the instinct to stay
alive.
A Swiss scientist, Jean-Jacques
Babel, has recently calculated that in
the course of history man has waged
14,500 major and minor wars, and the
French sociologist, Gaston Bouthoul,
is the author of a study entitled 8,000
Traités de Paix (8,000 peace treaties).
Someone has worked out that man's
"Golden Age" when peace has
reigned throughout the world has
been of surprisingly short duration,
hardly more than a total of 220 yearsl
I wonder whether we shouldn't stop
and reflect on this a moment, and ask
ourselves how much those 14,500 wars
Photo © APN - Ivanov
have Impeded the advance of civiliza¬
tion.
People may differ widely in their
opinions about Karl Marx's philosophy
but no one, I believe, could argue with
the following statement he made about
war : "From a purely economic point
of view, it is tantamount to a nation
throwing a portion of its capital into
the sea."
In the course of the Second World
War, 60 per cent of the national rev¬
enue of the belligerent countries was
drained away and lost forever. In
addition, this terrible holocaust claimed
the lives of 50 million persons who
died in a sea, not of water, but of
blood.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
23

THE CHALLENGE OF PEACE (Continued)
The rocky road
to international agreements
It would hardly seem necessary
today to describe once again the
horrible consequences of a new world
war, a war fought with nuclear wea¬
pons. The destruction involved
would go far beyond what any of us
could possibly imagine. The world's
press has on various occasions quoted
a figure which is in no sense an
exaggeration : the death of 700 to 800
million people as a result of the first
nuclear attack.
c
24
LEARLY, therefore, neither
common sense nor the spirit of huma¬
nity give mankind any other choice
today than the establishment of a last¬
ing peace. Yet it is a secret to no one
that we live in a world of unstable,
uneasy peace. Time and again we have
seen the flames of war erupt In Korea,
Algeria, Suez, Vietnam and the Middle
East ... As dangerous for peace today
is the present tendency of the majority
of nations to stockpile armaments.
Professor George Schwartzenberger,
of London University, was certainly
right when he said that present-day
relations between nations are permeat¬
ed with mutual distrust and constant
fear of other nations' intentions.
It would therefore appear quite
logical that nations seek to perfect the
means for their own defence. But
there does not seem to be any formula
fordoing away with the "world Inarms"
and the suspicions which derive from
it, other than the elimination of the
material basis of this fear and distrust,
that is, the armaments themselves.
It is only since the end of the 19th
Century and in the brief Interludes
between wars in our own time that
world political thought has been led to
consider seriously the theory of gene¬
ral disarmament. In the past, disar¬
mament was applied to a country after
it met defeat ; it had to surrender its
arms, its fortifications were destroyed
and other measures of a similar nature
were taken. Bitter experience has
taught us that far from preventing new
wars and conquests this increased the
danger of war.
That is why, during the Second
World War with its untold destruction
and millions of victims, people every¬
where were made acutely aware of the
urgency of establishing a lasting peace
based on the one means of definitely
guaranteeing it, namely, disarmament.
Even before the war had actually
ended, Moscow, London, Washington
and Paris were already seeking ways
to build the peace of the future.
In October 1943 a meeting of the
Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the
Four Allied Powers was held in
Moscow. In the declaration they
jointly signed it was emphasized that
the problem of disarmament should be
resolved in the same spirit of unity
which had been displayed by the
Great Powers of the Anti-Nazi coali¬
tion.
The approach to the problem of
disarmament at that time was perhaps
somewhat naive : the soldiers would
return home after victory and would
abandon their rifles and uniforms
forever ; at the same time production
of guns, tanks and bombers would be
stopped.
The appearance of a new type of
weapon and its production by one of
the Powers changed the situation.
Disarmament became even more vital
than before, but the solution to the
problem became even more difficult.
At the first session of the United
Nations General Assembly In 1946,
the U.S.S.R. proposed a "draft inter¬
national convention to prohibit the
production and employment of wea¬
pons based on the use of atomic
energy for the purpose of mass
destruction." This plan called for the
destruction within three months of all
atomic weapons and, what Is often
forgotten nowadays, the setting up of
an international control body with very
wide powers. This body would have
had access to atomic installations In
all countries and made sure that no
state infringed the convention.
wI AD this project been
adopted, the atomic bombs in the pos¬
session of the United States would
have been destroyed, and neither the
U.S.S.R. nor Great Britain, nor France
nor any other nation would have been
able to produce their own Atomic and
Hydrogen weapons. The problem of
disarmament would have resumed its
"pre-nuclear" aspect and might have
been easier to resolve.
At the time, however, it was argued
that the Soviet Union was seeking to
destroy weapons it did not possess
and thus obtain a military and strategic
advantage. In view of the ideas
prevailing at that time, this attitude
could well be justified. But had it
been possible in 1946 to foresee the
situation twenty years later, this
argument might well have lost Its full
force and appeared politically short¬
sighted.
Scientific and technical progress is
governed by its own laws which are
often independent of politics. Even
in the days when Leonardo da Vinci
was designing his flying machines,
men vaguely foresaw the possibility of
rockets and supersonic planes. Had
the great atomic physicists and mathe¬
maticians whose names are now fami¬
liar to everyone (with a timelag of 10 to
20 years) never been born, there can
be no doubt that other scientists would
soon have discovered atomic energy
along with its immense potentialities
for destruction as well as for peace.
The spread of nuclear energy and
weapons to other countries was thus,
obviously, only a question of time.
T HE question of the control
of nuclear weapons has certainly been
the big stumbling block of all discus¬
sions on disarmament. There was
once a time when heated debates
occurred over the question "which
came first the chicken or the egg?"
In our present age we have seen
endless discussions on whether con¬
trol should precede disarmament or
disarmament precede control. It must
be obvious, however, that the only
rational formula must be : "No disar¬
mament without control, and no control
without disarmament." In theory every¬
one is in agreement on this, both in
the United States and the Soviet
Union ; but in practice	
In practice the means of war and
destruction continue to be stockpiled
and perfected. For this reason it is
more important than ever to do
everything possible to facilitate a
detente in international relations, and
to prepare the ground for eventual
total disarmament by an effort to limit
the present arms race.
The first successful attempts in this
direction was made in 1963 when the
Powers signatory to the Moscow
Treaty agreed to ban nuclear weapon
tests in the atmosphere, in outer space
and under water. Agreement came
following a whole series of discus¬
sions, all of which centered on the
major Issue of control.
Today, more than four years after

V MI ». .TIP*'
* .-v-.-.v *:
V'v.-* ; wK
gi-v*- r^*
«r .!
i
>. ' .'
»
. « 'V-Jv*$s
V-.
'.*.
The arms race,
the gravest issue of our time
prospect of averting great war by
mutual deterrence is a reasonably
good prospect."
Unfortunately, military conflicts have
their own laws, or rather, they do not
obey the laws of common sense. The
events of last June in the Middle East
are proof that recourse to arms
between states or groups of states Is
neither impossible nor infrequent.
Can we really therefore be sure that
if armed conflicts occurred between
"small" nations possessing nuclear
weapons that the deterrent factor
would hold true and that these nations
would not make use of every weapon
in their arsenal ?
I am more inclined to agree with
another American journalist, John
Günther, when he says that in the
event that all countries gained posses¬
sion of atomic weapons even the
smallest country could spark off a
world conflagration.
I
26
,VEN a tiny country with a
per capita revenue from 22 to 25 times
smaller than that of the United States
may soon be in a position, I believe,
to produce atomic weapons. Today
some 10 to 15 countries possess
nuclear reactors destined for peaceful
purposes. But technical advances
and the dissemination of scientific data
are such that, with the reduction in the
cost of producing nuclear arms, soon
there will be not just 10 to 15 countries
but 50 or more potentially capable of
undertaking the manufacture of wea¬
pons of mass destruction.
For these reasons the conclusion of
an agreement on the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons seems to me
particularly urgent. Most people are
familiar with the arguments for and
against this question. They have
been voiced repeatedly at the Geneva
disarmament meetings, in diplomatic
circles and In the world press. The
most telling argument against a non-
proliferation treaty stresses that such
a treaty would perpetuate the mono¬
poly in atomic weapons of the present
nuclear nations. This overlooks the
point that an agreement on the non-
proliferation of nuclear weapons Is not
an end in itself but only a first indis¬
pensable step towards the total
banning of these weapons and their
destruction in arsenals everywhere in
the world. Furthermore, should such
a non-proliferation treaty become a
reality, it is proposed that the non-
nuclear powers would be completely
guaranteed against any possible
nuclear attack by a nuclear power.
Another argument against non-pro¬
liferation holds that the banning of
production of nuclear weapons (as
well as the control necessary to
enforce the ban) would hamper tech¬
nical development in the contracting
countries by preventing them from
using atomic energy for peaceful
purposes. It should not be difficult,
however, to devise forms of control
that would not prejudice a nation's
industrial development. Furthermore,
the pooling of knowledge and research
in the peaceful use of atomic energy
would increase as the possibility of Its
being employed in the manufacture of
arms was eliminated.
It is easy to understand though not
always easy to approve the reasons
that prompt nations to keep arms in
their arsenals. But the sums spent
are staggering. In 1964 the world
poured down the drain the astronomi¬
cal sum of 120,000 million dollars for
armaments. The figure is consider¬
ably higher today. If some Imaginary
inhabitant of another solar system
was to visit our planet he would no
doubt find it hard to understand why
we Earthlings squander our resources
and energies so uselessly.
The examples of Vietnam and the
Middle East make it abundantly clear
that in this day and age no problem
can be resolved by resort to war.
And even less so by resorting to
nuclear weapons. The problem of
armaments today and their destructive
nature is thus the most poignant issue
of our time.
|N 1967, the U.S.S.R. will
spend 14,500 million roubles (13.2 per
cent of its budget) on defence. (1)
There are undoubtedly many ways in
which this money could be usefully
employed in the Soviet Union. The
United States spends even huger sums
on arms, including the war in Vietnam.
(/) Editor's note: The U.S.S.R. does not
include research and development costs in
its defence budget. Total actual defence
expenditure for 1966 has been estimated
at over 35,000 million dollars. (The
exchange rate of the rouble is one rouble
= 90 U.S. cents.)
And it too still has many social prob¬
lems to solve, bottlenecks in educa¬
tion, public health and science, where
these resources now spent on arms,
could be usefully employed. .
On the assumption that arms expen¬
diture remained at the present level
(which no one really wants), the Soviet
Union will spend 230,000 million rou¬
bles in the course of the next 20 years.
If general and complete disarmament
were to become a reality, and suppos¬
ing even that 20 per cent of the money
saved by disarmament were diverted
for the developing countries, the
U.S.S.R. would still have 230,000
million roubles left over for useful
purposes. The money could be spent
for an Infinite variety of purposes, to
raise the standard of living of the
Soviet people, to launch large-scale
development projects in Siberia, irri¬
gate desert lands, etc...
A look at a map of world
development shows us that entire
continents are in need of resources
and assistance to carry through their
full development. To cite only one
example, the harnessing of the world's
water resources could transform vast
regions of our planet. In Asia, the
Indus and the Mekong, the Tigris and
Euphrates ; in Africa, the Nile and its
tributaries, and the Congo ; in Latin
America, the Parana and the Amazon.
Mankind is only now becoming
aware of the great riches and possi¬
bilities at its disposal. Were these to
be effectively exploited, they could
eliminate hunger, sickness and many
other problems due to low living
standards, such as illiteracy which still
affects many hundreds of millions of
the Inhabitants of developing countries.
By the rational use of its energy and
intelligence, mankind could fulfil its
destiny at a much more rapid pace,
and even on a universal scale now
that man is moving beyond the limits
of the earth's gravity.
In ancient times, people used to
dream about the "Golden Age". But In
the times of Plato or Thomas More,
this was in fact a Utopia, a mere
dream of happiness. Today, with the
help of electronic machines we can
calculate the extent to which progress
in various spheres of human existence
would be speeded up should an epoch
of general peace and complete dis¬
armament be ushered in.

Photo © Henri Mardyks Detail of a study by Auguste Rodin (1840-1917) for "The Citizens of Calais", the famous f\"l
group of bronze figures on which the sculptor worked from 1884 to 1889. In 1347, during £f
a war between England and France, six burghers of Calais volunteered to give their
lives to save their besieged city. Though they were eventually spared, the event has gone
down as one of history's most outstanding examples of the spirit of self sacrifice.
