THE KATHAKALI
AND THE DANCE-DRAMA
OF INDIA
by C. Kunchu Nair
K
36
ATHAKALI is the principal
dance-drama form of Kerala, a narrow
strip of land lying on the coast of
south-west India. Though confined
thus to a small area, Kathakali is a
part of an all-India tradition of clas¬
sical theatre and shares with its sister
arts in other parts of India certain
broad features which sharply mark off
the Indian tradition from Its counter¬
part in the West.
It is neither possible nor necessary
to discuss here all these common
features relating to the growth of
unity in the Indian Theatre movement.
But, at the same time, one cannot
loose sight of certain striking factors
and circumstances which tended to
govern the content and form of this
traditional theatre.
One such factor was the most in¬
timate and enduring connexion the
theatre had maintained ever since its
C. KUNCHU NAIR began his studies and
training in the Kathakali dance-drama at
the age of 15. He has devoted the past
43 years of his life to the subject, studying
first under the late Pattikkamthodi Ravunni
Menon, the greatest Kathakali teacher of
modern times. He is now director of the
most important Kathakali dance academy
in Asiathe Keralakalamandalam, in Kerala,
south-west India, where he is also senior
professor. In 1959 he introduced the
Kathakali to Europe and this year his
troupe completed a smash hit visit to
Europe and Canada. Choreographer and
producer, he has studied every aspect of
the art of Kathakali.
birth with the religion of the land in
all its changing forms and with its
recorded and written literature. The
most important of this large body of
religious literature were and still are
the two very great and powerful epics,
the Ramayana and the Mahabharata
and the later Bhagavad-Gita.
Apart from their historical and liter¬
ary value, these bulky compilations
represented India's earliest memories,
collective wisdom ' and consciousness
and its religious and moral attitude.
Not only did they contain discussions
of various philosophical schools, codes
of morality and ethics and of abstract
qualities of virtue and vice, happiness
and sorrow and nobility and baseness;
but they also portrayed in bold types
and as the real embodiments of these
principles, noble heroes and heroines
and villains of all kinds.
They narrated stories of great bat¬
tles between good and evil and how
the former always triumphed over the
latter; they explained how the gods
often descended on the earth and
mingled and shared with human beings
their joys and sorrows; how the virtu¬
ous on the earth went to Heaven to
enjoy the fruits of their good deeds
and how the vicious were dragged
to Hell to answer and suffer for their
black deeds; if the gods sometimes
lapsed into human weaknesses, the
mortals often rose to the state of
godliness.
Always with ready answers to the
problems that troubled the suffering
human heart and with constant advice
through sweet persuasion and un¬
mistakable examples, these epics
seemed so near and dear that people
came to think of them as part of their
very selves.
No wonder, then, that these holy
books especially the Mahabharata,
Ramayana and Bhagavad-Gita exert¬
ed so powerful and lasting an influence
on the minds and dally lives of the
people and proved, over the ages, to
be inexhaustible sources supplying a
rich variety of themes for art and litera¬
ture in India. Rarely did any artist or
writer feel any compulsion to look
elsewhere for his subject matter.
Not that Indian Society remained
static. Changes there were in the
CONTINUED ON PAGE 39
KRISHNA AND ARJUNA
Two heroes of the Mahabharata, Krishna
(left) and Arjuna, as they appear in
a Kathakali dance-drama. In this
scene from the Bhagavad-Gita,
the God Krishna teaches Arjuna
the true virtues of the upright man.
The Kathakali theatre, which originated
in Kerala, south-west India, in the 17th
century, is part of an all-India tradition
of classical theatre in which poetry,
music and dance are closely intregrated.
The mythological characters are easily
identified by their highly stylized
costumes and make-up and their
characteristic miming and gestures.
Photo © Odile Montserrat, Paris



KATHAKALI (Continued)
Four-hour make-up for each dancer
Colour page
ARTIFICIAL JOWLS
OF PAPER AND PASTE
In the Kathakali theatre green make-up
and wide eyes (lotus eyes) accentuated
by thick black lines identify gods and
noble heroes (see page 36). Violent
characters such as the ruthless Duryodhana
of the Kaurava clan
(top left) wear green make-up variegated
with red and white, and grotesque
protuberances on their noses. Outright
scoundrels like Duryodhana's brother,
Dussasana (top, far left) have red beards
and are made up to look
repulsive and inhuman.
Kathakali dancers wear ornately
decorated crowns, those with the
largest circles being reserved for
the most evil and detestable characters.
The art of building up the elaborate
mask-like facial make-up of the Kathakali
dancers is a hereditary vocation and an
expert spends up to four hours on
each face. About 60 varieties of make-up
and costumes are used to portray the
different characters: god or demon,
woman or brahmin, and many others. A
facial border called "chutty" gives new
contours to the features. Made of paper
and rice paste mixed with lime, it is applied
to the cheeks, enlarging the face with
the aim of giving greater presence to
the character, just as thick-soled shoes
were once worn by Greek tragedians.
The form of the chutty depends on the
character being portrayed. Left, actor
completes the chutty he wears with
green colouring, to portray a hero of
the Mahabharata. Far left, top: an actor
Is given a "katti" (knife-shaped) make-up
for his role as Duryodhana. Far left, bottom:
putting the last touches to the basic
make-up. Designs on forehead also
serve to identify each character.
Photo © Odile Montserrat, Paris
social life, but not basic enough to
dislodge these great epics from their
supreme position. Any pressures from
the changing social and cultural values
were absorbed by a slight reworking
of the old materials.
This persistance of epic stories as
the recurring theme for the theatre had
tended to discourage realism. Leg¬
ends and myths, distortions and
exaggerations as they are from real
life, could hardly lend themselves to
realistic treatment without injuring
artistic unity and aesthetic propriety.
Besides, there was an important cir¬
cumstance that kept realism out of the
Indian Theatre. Never in the history
of its evolution could drama ¡n India
completely break loose from poetry,
music and dance as happened in the
West. Even as these three arts were
having their own indépendant courses
of development, they retained their
original connexion with drama. How¬
ever their development as separate
arts necessitated their reintegration
with drama at a higher level, the form
of integration depending on the pre¬
ponderance of one or other of the
three forms.
The heavy emphasis on poetry,
music and dance added to the almost
complete dependence on mythological
stories, ruled out realism. The only
logical and consistant direction the
development of Indian Theatre could
take from that position was evidently
towards an increasingly greater degree
of abstraction and stylization and
further refinement and rarefaction of
technique.
How did the art of acting stand in
relation to its three adjuncts poetry,
music and dance? To answer this,
we may introduce here the concept of
Abhinayam developed by Hindu theo¬
rists. This term has often been inade¬
quately translated as acting. In fact,
it is more than acting and if broadly
understood includes poetry, music and
dance.
Abhinayam is explained as the art
of conveying or communicating to the
spectator through suggestion the
thoughts and feelings of the charac¬
ters in relation to their causes and
effects. Feelings, emotions and moods
were analyzed and classified accord¬
ing to their intensity and permanence.
How these feelings are visually pro¬
jected all over the body through
changes in the colour, motion, position,
pose, gesture, etc., of the body, its
limbs and .features and changes in
the voice, was closely studied. The
movements and gestures and tonal
variation were abstracted, stylized,
condensed or enlarged and related to
definite feelings, moods and actions.
The Abhinayam consists primarily
in the actor's showing or "acting"
these elements thereby suggesting the
corresponding feelings, etc., which
become sublimated as aesthetic fla¬
vour or enjoyment in the spectator.
The Hindu theorists have recognized
four elements or aspects of Abhinayam
according to its means or media as
relating to (1) body (Angikam); (2)
speech (Vacikam); (3) mind (Satvi-
kam); and external means (Aharyam).
(1) Angikam - Proper use of artistic
gestures, actor's bearing, walk, move¬
ment of features and limbs.
(2) Vacikam - Use of proper pro-
nounciation, modulation of voice,
accent and rhythm, proper dramatic
delivery of the text (prose, poetry and
songs).
(3) Satvikam - Representation of
some of the basic psychic conditions
by such means as immobility, pers¬
piration, change of voice, etc.
(4) Aharyam - Make-up and cos¬
tumes and the stage decor and props.
In Its wider sense Angikam should
include dance, and Vacikam, music.
Considering these characteristic
features which are almost antithetical
to the Western concept of drama, it
will be more appropriate to call the
traditional Indian drama (including
dance-drama) a form of "lyrlco-drama-
tl.c spectacle." Incidently, it is inter¬
esting to note that this Is also true in
varying degrees of most of the
countries of the South-East Asia which
were once called "Greater India."
T
HE major forms of Indian
dance (of the interpretative type) and
dance-dramas like Bharatnatyam, Ka-
thak, Manipuri, Kathakali, Kuchlputi,
Bhagavatamela, Yakshaganam, etc.,
which were revived during the last fifty
years grew up in this all-India dance
tradition. However, in assimilating this
tradition each of these forms had its
own area of emphasis. Each is firmly
rooted in its local folk tradition which
Imparts and sustains its uniqueness
and justifies its independent existence.
Kathakali can be roughly translated
as danced play. A cycle of eight
plays based on the story of Rama,
the hero of the Ramayana, was written
between 1655 and 1661 A.D. (some
scholars say between 1484 and 1497
A.D.) by a ruler of a petty principality
called Kottarakara.
Many poets wrote Kathakali plays
during the last three hundred years,
but only some thirty of this large col¬
lection, numbering more than a
hundred, remained and still remain
popular on the stage. Of these nine
are based on the Ramayana, thirteen
on the Mahabharata and seven on the
Bhagavad-Gita.
In preparing the ground for the y\
emergence of this new form, the tra- ^^
dition of the older dance forms of
Kerala both folk and classical and
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

KATHAKALI (Continued)
Daily practice from 3 a.m. to 9 p.m.
religious and secular played a great
part. Many of the choreographic
patterns, the basic stance with the
feet planted wide apart and the out¬
stretched hands on either side, the
movements for fighting, dance sequen¬
ces and many of the elements of
the make-up and costuming all show
the strong influence of the Indigenous
folk arts.
Another art form on which Kathakali
has heavily drawn is Kutiyattam the
oldest classical form of drama for the
presentation of Sanskrit plays. This
form was developed during the ninth
and tenth centuries A.D. Kathakali is
heavily Indebted to Kutiyattam for its
technique of facial expression, hand
gestures and many of its stage
conventions. It was mainly through
it that the all-India tradition reached
Kathakali. Kathakali is thus a fine
synthesis between the indigenous Dra-
vidian tradition and the all-India tra¬
dition.
A
40
Kathakali performance
usually takes place in the open air and
occupies the whole night. Traditionally,
the acting area (12 feet square) was
not raised, but was on the same level
as the spectators who used to squat
on the ground, the stage being cover¬
ed with a pandal (a light roofed struc¬
ture on poles), which is at least 104
feet high.
Accompaniment: The musical accom¬
paniment consists of three drums, the
Chenda, Maddalam and Edakka, and
a gong, a pair of cymbals and a conch
shell. The Chenda is not played for
a female character and Edakka for
males. There are two vocalists, the
leading one holding the gong and the
other, the cymbals.
Preliminaries: On the day of the
performance, at about 6 p.m. a short
drumming announces the day's pro¬
gramme. This is called Keli.
At about 8.30 p.m. the programme
begins. A huge brass lamp with wicks
floating in oil placed at the front centre
of the stage is lit. Then follows
drumming on Maddalam called Aran-
gukeli.
Then two stage assistants hold a
curtain in front of the stage.
Behind the curtain one or two dan¬
cers perform a propitiary prelude call¬
ed Thotayam, ¡n praise of the gods
and accompanied on the Maddalam
alone. This is followed by a recital
of prayers by the two singers.
The next item is the conventional
introduction of the important character
or charactors of the play selected for
the night. In the full splendour of the
make-up and costumes and accom¬
panied by all the instrumentalists and
vocalists, they perform certain pure
dance sequences.
This is called Purappat.
Then the stage is given to the musi¬
cians alone and they give a recital
called Melappadam. Now they can
show their talents as soloists and more
freely explore the possibilities of their
arts without their playing being tailor¬
ed to the demands of the dance or
drama.
Story proper: The Melappadam conclu¬
des the preliminaries,- and the rest of
the night is taken up by either. one
full play or exerpts from several.
The Kathakali play, the literary
text composed by the playwright, is
the basis of Abhinayam. The text
is ¡n the form of verses and songs
written usually in highly poetic style.
The songs represent dramatic dialo¬
gues, the verses being generally the
words of the narrator and summariz¬
ing those sections of the theme which
are not represented on the stage. They
often act as the links between the
scenes.
Abhinayam (representation): One
peculiar feature of Kathakali which
differentiates it from most other Indian
dance dramas deserves special men¬
tion. In the other forms, all the four
elements of Abhinayam, mentioned
above, concern the actor-dancer alone.
In Kathakali, however, he does only
three, the Vacikam being entrusted to
the singers, except that the actor-
dancer in certain roles makes some
grunts. This suppression of Vacikam
has led to a remarkable development
and elaboration of the facial expres¬
sion of the actor-dancer to an extent
not often seen in any other school.
Vacikam (relating to speech or sing¬
ing): The singing of the verses and
songs forming the text of the play
constitutes the Vacikam. As the
singer sings the lines of the songs,
the actor-dancer interprets the ideas
and feelings contained in them. The
melody-moulds, the rhythms and the
tempi of the songs are of great sig¬
nificance. Their choice is so carefully
made as to create a variety of moods,
to retard or quicken the speed of the
action and to draw out or compress
the movement according to the need
of the particular plot situation or
feelings being projected. For instance
a song for a battle scene and one for
a love scene are entirely different In
their rendering, melody-moulds and
tempi.
Angikam (relating to the body): The
sole medium for Angikam is the body
of the actor. The silent artist suggests
the idea and related feelings contain¬
ed in the words and sentences of
the songs with the help of the move¬
ments of the body, its limbs and
features. They include hand-gestures,
mime, dance, etc.
In between the stanzas the actor
usually executes a sequence of dance.
This is not pure or abstract dance. It
reflects, by its tempo, quality and
nature the general purport of the
stanza which precedes or succeeds
the dance.
For hand gestures Kathakali mainly
depends on a short manual which
gives 470 gestures deriving them from
24 root gestures. They are classified
as single hand, double hand, mixed
hand (each hand forming different ges¬
tures from the other) and gestures
having more than one meaning. There
another division into eight types.
Each has its own different pose, direc¬
tion, movement of the body and way
of using space. Eyes normally follow
the gestures. The mode of showing
the gesture and the accompanying
movements of features and limbs are
determined by the context, the tempo
of the rhythm and the nature of the
character portrayed.
0
NE other feature is impro¬
visation and solo acting. There are
several occasions when there are no
textual lines to interpret and the actor
is required to fill in the gaps by Impro¬
visation. The character may be going
through a forest and describing the
wild life; or enjoying the sights of
Heaven. Here, without the help of
any scenic settings, the actor conjures
up a succession of visual ¡mages in
movement ¡n terms of which he tries
to explain and interpret the desired
theme.
The instrumental music provides a
powerful support. Its main function is
to simulate all kinds of movements of
m
C. Kunchu Nair (author of this article)
teaching at the Kathakali dance academy,
the Keralakalamandalam, in India,
of which he is director. Marks
in ash on his forehead and chest are
the signs of the Lord Shiva.

BHÜ
V »'
3¿&->
sir5?-
Photo © Pic, Paris
Introductory dance to a Kathakali drama based on the Mahabharata, performed
at the 1967 Theatre of the Nations festival in Paris. A Kathakali troupe
from the Keralakalamandalam in Kerala, India, made a highly
successful tour of Europe and Canada this year, with the collaboration of the International
Music Council and the International Institute for Comparative Music Studies.
the actor-dancer including gestures,
dances, etc.
Aharyam: This primarily relates to
the make-up, costumes and jewellery
of the actors and secondly to the stage
props. Kathakali does not make use
of any stage settings. But the make¬
up and costumes have a most impor¬
tant function in this dance-drama
which ¡s primarily to indicate not the
birth, age, status, or nationality of the
characters but the essential nature of
their mental make-up. The distortion,
abstraction and exaggeration of the
make-up and costumes reflect the
same qualities of the mythological
characters.
There are now about 6lxty varieties
of make-up and costumes. Major types
are the nine given below:
Pacca (Green) - Generally for the
noble and virtuous. Gods and heroes
like Rama; Katti (Knife) - Characters
having vices such as greed, lust and
vanity. Ravana the demon king of
Lanka who was killed by Rama; Tatl
(Beard) - Destructive forces in the
form of terrifying demons; Minukku
(Polished) - Females, Brahmins,
Sages etc.; Karl (Black) - Aborigines,
hunter etc.; Pazhuppu (Mixture of
yellow and red) - Brahma, Shiva and
brother Krishna; Chuvappu (red) -
Sun, Fire etc.; Teppu (Painted) - Bird,
Snake etc.; Poymukham (Masks) -
Masks of monkey, pig, old hag etc.
are sometimes used.
The process of make-up and costum¬
ing ¡n Kathakali takes much time as
long as four hours to complete in
respect of characters having Chutty
the facial border made of rice paste
mixed with lime and sometimes paper
as well.
First the actor himself draws an
outline of the make-up on his face.
Then he lies down face upwards and
the make-up artist forms the Chutty
on his face little by little. This takes
most of the make-up time.
Next the actor himself completes
the remaining details and puts in his
eyes a granule-like particle which
grows Inside the flower of a plant
belonging to the Solanaceae family.
The particle ¡s retained ¡n the corner of
each eye and is removed only after
the performance. It makes the eye
red and imparts a special glow add¬
ing to the expressiveness of the eyes.
Then one by one he puts on the
costumes and ornaments with the help
of dressing room assistants. Before
he goes to the stage he pays respects
to his teachers.
The materials used for the make-up
are: Red arsenic, Indigo cake, Dammar
resin, Collyrium, red powder, rice
paste, lime, paper, cork, Miea, Glngilly
oil and Cocoanut oil.
The technique of Abhinayam as used
¡n Kathakali and the endless variety
of highly stylized and sharply defined
movements that goes with it presup¬
poses a long course of hard and
rigorous training of the body and mind
of the would-be actor-dancer. The
training begins at the age of 10 to 12
and lasts for about 12 years. By a
long series of repeated exercises and
other practices the body is trained to
become a proper medium of dance and
expression.
After the second year, the student
takes part in actual performances
as an understudy for minor roles.
June to December is the season
for training proper. For the rest of
the year he participates in as many
performances as possible under the
guidance of his teacher. As part of
the training, he undergoes for three
months every year a treatment of oil
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
41

KATHAKALI (Continued)
massage to make his body mellow
and supple.
Along with this goes the training
of mind. The student learns the text
of the plays and tries to understand
the problems of characterization, struc¬
ture of the play and a host of other
theories. By the time he leaves the
school he has studied at least 15 plays
which form the basic core of the
Kathakali repertoire.
The modern tendency ¡s to reduce
the period of training by extending
the classroom work to the whole year
instead of limiting ¡t to six months as
¡n former times. But the period cannot
be reduced to below eight years. The
maximum number of students a teacher
can handle at a time is four. Girls
never act in Kathakali, one reason
perhaps being the length and rigorous
nature of the training required.
A typical time table of training in
the past was:
3.00 a.m. to 4.00 a.m. Practice in
the movements, of eye, brow, lip*, neck
and other facial features.
4.00 a.m. to 6.00 a.m. Oil is
applied to the body; a course of exer¬
cises, foot-work, dance movements
etc., lead to the massage in which
the student lies on a mat and the
teacher works his body over with his
feet.
8.30 a.m. to 11.30 a.m. and 2.30 p.m.
to 5 p.m. Practice in the preliminary
dances, Thotayam and Purappatu;
rehearsal of the plays.
7.30 p.m. to 9.00 p.m. Practice in
expressing emotions, feelings and
sentiments with the help of eyes, brow,
cheek, lips, neck etc., and interpreta¬
tion of important sections of the play.
Modern schools of Kathakali have
had of course to make some conces¬
sions to this long and rigorous
schedule to allow time for the general
education of the students.
As part of India's cultural -renais¬
sance which began in the last century,
Interest in our traditional arts, music
dance and drama has been revived.
One of the best representatives of
this renaissance in Kerala was the late
national poet, Vallathol.' With the help
of his friends he founded in 1930 the
Keralakalamandalam the first and now
the most well-known Academy to teach
Kathakali and other arts of Kerala.
Vallathol travelled throughout India and
visited many countries, popularizing
this art form and seeking help for his
Academy, which is now owned and
run by the Government of Kerala. A
troupe from the Academy made a
highly successful tour of Europe and
Canada from May to September, 1967.
In 1939 a second school Kottak-
kal Natyasangham was started. To¬
day Kathakali is growing as an art
form and several other schools offer¬
ing training in Kathakali have opened
in India.
Drawings © Peter Schumann, Archives of
the International Institute for
Comparative Music Studies, Berlin
LANGUAGE OF HANDS. In the Kathakali dance-drama, the songs and verses of the text
are sung by soloists. The actor-dancer remains silent, but speaks in a language
of gestures, or "mudras". Mudras are the movements and positioning of the hands
to represent a word, a person, an idea or an action, and so on. The language is enriched
by movements and' miming with the body, limbs and features that express the ideas and
feelings of the characters in the play. One manual on mudras lists nearly 500 of these
hand gestures a few examples of which are shown below.
Brahma, the Creator
Rama, the hero
Truth
The Goddess Parvati Indra, King of lleavun
C\
Certainty
Obeisance (greeting) The five Pandava brothers
Reason King Duryodhana
To kill
Beautiful girl
Chariot
The heavens
Gentle ^v
Disc
Loved one
Brother Sin Cuckoo Marriage Wife
42
Poison To see Combat Husband Tortoise Lion
