A DOWN-TO-EARTH APPROACH
TO LITERACY
A new strategy in the struggle against illiteracy has recently been
adopted by Unesco and many countries to meet the growing
challenge of economic development. Departing from past proce¬
dures of attempting to solve the problem of illiteracy on a world¬
wide scale, countries have adopted a more selective approach
with crash-training programmes aimed at groups where incentive
for literacy is high and the promise of results considerable. Here
Mr. Acher Deleon, director of Unesco's literacy programme, replies
to questions on these new experimental literacy projects which
have now been launched in many parts of the world.
ACHER DELEON has been
director of Unesco's De¬
partment of Adult Educa¬
tion and Youth Activities
since 1963. Former secre¬
tary of the Central Council
of Yugoslav Trade Unions,
Mr Deleon has been a
member of Unesco's Inter¬
national Advisory Com¬
mittee for Adult Education
since 1953.
QUESTION. Can you tell us,
Mr. Deleon, where we stand today in
the struggle against illiteracy?
ANSWER. In the last few years
I think we have reached a turning
point. Until recently countries the
world over were mainly interested in
investing in capital equipment or in
the upper echelons represented by
administrators and executives. Today,
national policy-makers and in fact the
whole international community want
to try to tap their vast manpower po¬
tential. To justify literacy campaigns
in the past the principles of human
rights, ethics and justice were always
invoked. But today when we speak
of investing in education we think in
terms of improved efficiency and pro¬
ductivity, in other words, economic
development.
Q. Does this mean that the ethical
aspects of literacy and human rights
are no longer important?
A. By no means. But let us not
forget that economic emancipation for
a country is basic to human freedom.
Q. What would you say are
Unesco's recent achievements in lite¬
racy?
A. In November 1964, Unesco's
General Conference launched the first
experimental programme for functional
literacy. This programme, covering a
period of five years, is both selective
and intensive. Selective, because it
operates in only a few countries and
concentrates on priority economic and
social areas. So you can see that this
is an entirely new approach that differs
sharply from the world-wide earlier
campaigns. It is intensive because it
operates in depth and is no longer
exclusively educational in character
but also aims at improving productivity,
the adaptability of a country's labour
force and indeed the whole labour
market.
A functional literacy programme is
directly tied to a country's economic
priorities, and literacy efforts are pin¬
pointed in areas of other heavy in¬
vestments. This is done advisedly as
CONTINUED ON PAGE 11
9

" " «iruiiîuif^ fr«
v[m*«rimiw»to'
»Uuii:n,r,lll!llirjiir
miliary
1 l	«I lllllllll ur
wr
'iHiiMirimm, Hl
" imimi im inr j,,
' luiiim iiiijiiii ,
' imum niiiiir ui
» lu« m iiif-mr «JH-
1 imuni huh» «r
i iiiH'iiriiiriH, »u
DIAMOND HUNTERS ON THE MIGHTY ORINOCO
"I know all the earth doth not
yield the like confluence of streams
and branches, the one crossing the
other as many times, and all as fair
and large and so like one another
as no man can tell which to take."
So Sir Walter Raleigh described the
huge delta of the Orinoco which he
visited on his search for El Dorado
in 1595. The mighty Orinoco, one
of the longest rivers of South Ame¬
rica winds west, north and east
across the centre of Venezuela be¬
fore entering the Atlantic through its
many-channelled fan-shaped delta
nearly as large as Sicily. In this
vast area the Venezuelan govern¬
ment is now engaged in a gigantic
programme to develop its rich min¬
ing and forestry resources as well
as its hydro-electric potential, and
with Unesco's co-operation has un¬
dertaken a programme of literacy
and training to raise the educational
and technical level of its manpower.
Above, diamond prospectors on the
banks of the Caroni, an affluent of
the Orinoco, who are participating
in the Unesco experimental literacy
programme. Right, intake system at
the Gurí hydro-electric project on
the same river being built with World
Bank funds. Left, street scene in
Caracas, Venezuela's capital
(1,200,000 inhabitants), one of the
world most rapidly developing cities
where slums are fast disappearing
before soaring skyscrapers.
Photo World Bank-Yukata Nagata

A DOWN-TO-EARTH APPROACH (Continued)
For the first time development funds for literacy
a means of speeding development of
the country as a whole.
Areas chosen for experimental pro¬
jects are not representative of average
conditions in a country. A functional
literacy project is by definition always
a selective project.
I think I ought to make clear at this
point that we still do not know the
exact correlation between literacy and
development. That is why we attach
so much importance to the evaluation
of our results. Once it is proved such
a correlation actually exists, the next
step will be to determine precisely
what effect literacy actually has on a
nation's economy in such domains as
agriculture, handcrafts, industry, trade,
etc.
Another objective of our projects is
to see to what extent literacy can help
to promote a more diversified eco¬
nomy.
Q. Does this mean that no two
functional literacy programmes are
alike?
A. Precisely. Each project is
conceived in terms of local conditions
within the framework of overall de¬
velopment needs and specific require¬
ments for skilled labour. At the same
time, action is clearly called for when
a development programme is ham¬
pered by illiteracy. In other words,
literacy is not an end in itself, since it
is not merely a matter of teaching
adults reading, writing and arithmetic
but a means of enabling people to
make practical use of their newly
acquired skills.
Q. What you are saying really
means that much depends on local
conditions within a country?
A. Yes. It was once believed
that the new literates lapsed into illite¬
racy because of the lack of reading
materials. But it's not as simple as
that. We now know that local condi¬
tions are the crux of the problem . It
is these conditions that must be
changed so that the new literates can
put their technical knowledge and
skills to good use.
Q. I suppose this means that the
teaching programme of every func¬
tional literacy operation will vary to
take into account these local condi¬
tions, which was not the case in the
past?
A. Yes of course. Today each
project is "tailored" to fit each commu¬
nity both as regards scope and timing.
In other words, each literacy pro¬
gramme varies depending on whether
we are dealing with textile workers or
rice farmers, fishermen or ground nut
producers, young people or older per¬
sons, men or women, city workers or
farmers.
Q. Is there any relationship be¬
tween national literacy programmes
and the Unesco experimental projects?
A. There are now two different
views on this. There are those who
feel that all the experimental projects
should be closely integrated with na¬
tional programmes, and those who are
opposed to this and want to keep them
completely separated. As a matter of
fact there is really no clash or mcom-
patability between the two approaches.
It is not unlikely that the experimental
projects will in due course affect natio¬
nal programmes even if they are not
fully integrated, so that the originality
and purpose of each is maintained. In
any event, the final responsibility for
the experimental projects always rests
with the national authorities.
Q. How are the experimental pro¬
jects financed?
A. In January 1966, the United
Nations Development Programme
agreed to contribute $3,600,000 for
functional literacy. Algeria, Iran and
Mali were the first countries selected
for the operation. In June of the same
year, a further $2,350,000 was set aside
for projects in Ecuador and Tanza¬
nia (1). This was the first time that
substantial international funds for de¬
velopment went to finance a literacy
programme. As M. René Maheu, the
Director-General of Unesco, stated at
the time: "The connexion between lite¬
racy and development which Unesco
has long advocated as a basic prin¬
ciple is now officially recognized and
unequivocally confirmed."
Q. Do governments also contri¬
bute towards the financing of these
experimental projects?
A. As a matter of fact they con¬
tribute the major share. Algeria is
putting in $2,960,000; Iran, $1,700,000;
Mali $3,000,000; Ecuador $1,740,000
Tanzania $5,216,000; Guinea $1,220,000
Ethiopia $2,057,000.
Here I should like to stress one
point. Literacy teaching is also a
social and political problem. It can¬
not be compared to the setting up
of a research laboratory where all
that is needed are the equipment and
staff.
There are people who think that lite¬
racy training is an uncomplicated affair,
for which only a modicum ,of com¬
mon sense is needed. How wrong
they arel Such notions have led to
disaster in the past. A functional lite¬
racy programme calls for careful,
complex planning and preparation
which go far beyond the confines of
mere reading and writing, as I have al¬
ready pointed out.
Q. Mr. Deleon, could I ask you
now to describe some of the experi¬
mental projects you've mentioned?
A. Well, let's take Algeria first.
(1) In January 1967, $1,273,000 was
approved for a project in Guinea, and in
January 1968 the UN. Development Pro¬
grammed accorded $1,586,000 for aid to
Ethiopia.
Algeria's population of persons over
15 years of age is 5,500,000. Of
these, 4,400,000 are illiterate. This
is a crippling handicap for a nation
that is determined to industrialize itself
and develop its agriculture. It urgently
needs qualified manpower, and for this
literacy is a vital first step. There are
three functional literacy projects now
in operation. The first at Staoueli, near
Algiers, in one of the country's richest
agricultural areas, where 5,000 per¬
sons working in autonomous agricul¬
tural estates are being trained. The
second is in the industrial zone of
Arzew, 40 kilometres from Oran; the
third in the district of Annaba, 600 kilo¬
metres east of Algiers, where training
must be provided for 70,000 workers
for the petro-chemical industry and a
vast metallurgical and steel-making
complex.
In Iran, the project involves two
operations: one in the irrigated area of
the Grand Dez (not far from ancient
Susa, in western Iran), where a large
dam has been constructed, and mo¬
dern farming methods have been in¬
troduced. The other is being carried
out at of Isfahan, where 300,000 people
live. In this ancient capital, famous
for its rugs, 26,000 textile workers are
to be trained.
In Mali, the pilot projects relate to
two priority sectors, one agricultural,
the other industrial. In the Ségou area
and in the Baracueli and Tamani dis¬
tricts, the literacy campaign affects
nearly 100,000 people working on the
land, and is designed to raise cotton
and rice production. In the Bamako
area, 6,000 illiterate workers employed
in a score of government enterprises
are involved.
Q. Can you tell us what a literacy
project consists of?
A. First, it is a centre where the
methods and curriculum of teaching
are carefully worked out; second,
where the technicians needed are
actually trained. But the project is not
confined to the centre and does much
of its work "in the field", that is, in
the actual areas where groups work¬
ing in agriculture or industry, are taught
to read and write and receive basic
professional training.
Let us take the example of Tan¬
zania, which has 10 million inhabitants
and is predominantly agricultural. The
farm population represents 85 per cent
of the consumer market but provides
only 45 per cent of the gross national
product. A pilot-project linking literacy
teaching to vocational training has been
started in a cotton and coffee producing
area south of Lake Victoria. It covers
four regions: West Lake, Mwanza,
Mara and Shmganga. Cotton output,
which with modern cultivation methods
rose from 38,000 bales in 1955 to
161,000 in 1960, should reach over all
million bales in 1980. I I
Ecuador, a country larger than the
United Kingdom, boasts vast, though
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

A DOWN-TO-EARTH-APPROACH (Continued)
50 nations ask to join experimental programmes
12
as yet not fully exploited, natural
resources. Ecuador's development
plan is aimed at every sector of the
economy from agriculture to fishing
and handicrafts to industry. But there
is a big shortage of skilled labour.
Almost 30 per cent of the workers are
illiterate. Furthermore, 65 per cent
of the population lives in the country¬
side where the illiteracy rate is as
high as 43 per cent. Illiteracy among
workers in the urban industrial areas
varies between 15 and 17 per cent.
Three pilot zones for development
have been set up in Ecuador. One at
Cuenca, in the highlands, where 6,000
adults are being trained in the literacy
project, and 9,000 artisans from pro¬
ducer co-operatives will be given
vocational training. The second, in
the Milagra area, where 16,000 pea¬
sants will be given literacy and voca¬
tional training. The third zone has
been set up north of 0u|to in a 10,000
hectare tract of land, in the Pesillo
district. This area feeds a population
of 2,000 which will benefit from a basic
literacy programme (virtually everyone
is illiterate) combined with vocational
education to develop local resources.
Q. A similar project is now under
way in Venezuela, but is it not quite
different from those you have just
described?
A. The Venezuelan project is part
of the experimental literacy pro¬
gramme but it is entirely financed by
Venezuela itself with no contribution
from the United Nations Development
Programme. The literacy campaign in
Venezuela is one of the most impor¬
tant in all Latin America. As many as
6,100 literacy centres were set up in
the country in 1958 with 40,000 vo¬
lunteer teachers; and special "Literacy
Legions" were created for 100,000
adult students. Yet despite this, the
educational level in both towns and
rural areas is far from adequate for
Venezuela's economic and social deve¬
lopment plans.
Let me give you a concrete case in
point. Venezuela's oil industry is in
full expansion and now accounts for
20 per cent of the national product,
60 per cent of public revenue and over
90 per cent of all Venezuela's exports.
Yet it employs a mere two per cent
of the working population because of
the grave shortage of skilled labour.
The situation is little different in the
iron mining and agricultural industries.
Three zones, each offering a differ¬
ent economic and social pattern, have
been selected for the experimental pro¬
ject; an industrial zone, an agricultural
zone, and a rural zone in the process
of rapid urbanization. The industrial
zone is located in the State of Bolivar,
in eastern Venezuela. Here a large
hydro-electric power station has been
built at Macagua on the Caroni river.
The Orinoco steel-works located in
this region have an enormous output
most of which is exported.
The second experimental zone has
been set up in the State of Portuguesa
where rice, sesame and cotton
production have already been in¬
creased through mechanization and
irrigation. The third pilot area lies at
the foot of the Andes, in the
State of Lara. This region has been
undergoing intensive development in
recent years accompanied by rapid
urbanization. This has led to the large-
scale migration of rural populations
into towns, the mushrooming growth
of "shanty towns" in the suburbs, and
a sharp rise in unemployment. It is
this untapped, wasted labour potential
that the experimental project hopes to
recuperate by offering the adults an
opportunity to learn a skill or trade.
Q. How many persons would you
say are involved in these projects in
Venezuela?
A. About 300,000. Furthermore,
to meet the needs of the country's
industrial expansion, Venezuela's Co¬
operative Educational Institute and
other adult education services plan to
raise the number of trained personnel
from 470,000 in 1962 to over 900,000
by 1970 and nearly 1,300,000 in the
next seven years, that is by 1975.
Q. Could we return just for a
moment to the question of financing?
Do other ways exist of helping a
country to set up functional literacy
projects?
A. Well, in addition to those
projects which receive multi-lateral
assistance and those financed
exclusively by national resources, we
also see the possibility of projects
receiving bilateral aid being incor¬
porated into the experimental pro¬
gramme. In fact negotiations are at
present under way between certain
donor and recipient countries for such
bilateral aid, with Unesco acting as the
intermediary.
Then too, there are a number of
projects where literacy is a component
of agricultural or industrial develop¬
ment. This is true in the case of Syria
where the Ghab Valley Authority
project, aided by the U.N. Develop¬
ment Programme and carried out in
co-operation with the Food and
Agriculture Organization, also provides
for functional literacy as an important
component of the project as a whole.
Q. Would you say that all these
projects we have been discussing have
some common denominator by which
the results achieved could be judged?
A. As I think I have already made
clear, the basic criterion for all the
projects is how well they contribute
to development. But in order to
gauge the effectiveness of these pro¬
grammes we must carefully study their
economic and social implications and
compare the different methods and
techniques used. This will enable us
with time to piece together all the data
needed to launch a much vaster and
more complex operation. The pilot
projects call for a lot of research and
investigation, all of it extremely
important, and should prove highly
valuable for our future operations by
helping to answer such questions as:
how to go about planning out-of-school
education, what the best methods
are, where they can be applied with
the best prospects for success, what
types of programmes to organize. On
the answers to these questions will
depend the measure in which the
struggle against illiteracy can be
broadened.
Q. What other projects are now
planned?
A. At least 50 countries have
asked for Unesco aid. Until now
Unesco preparatory missions have
visited 31 of them. New projects are
now being mapped out for Zambia,
Sudan, Madagascar, Brazil, Peru and
India. In India, the project is linked
with the question of increased food
production, where I might add in
passing, extraordinary advances have
been made in India in the past year.
This will be a five-year project to make
750,000 adults functionally literate.
But as I have said earlier, each project
is distinct and geared to a specific
purpose. In Nepal the programme
will cover a region in the transitional
stage of a subsistence and a market
economy. In Algeria, we have seen
that the project's aim is to promote the
expansion of an ultra-modern petro¬
chemical complex. Between these
extremes there are a host of variants.
Q. It has been said that creating
a population of new literates gives rise
to many new problems, that new
literates become dissatisfied with their
old way of life and get ideas of
grandeur. Do you think this is true?
A. Man has always sought to
better himself and rise above his
station. This desire for progress
deserves to be encouraged. As long
as country people find opportunity for
work in the cities they will continue
to abandon the countryside which often
lacks electricity, modern conveniences
and transport facilities. But this
problem cannot be solved by denying
or resisting such aspirations. I think
our programmes are facing the realities
of the situation squarely and in a down-
to-earth way, without rose-coloured
glasses, without side-stepping the real
issues by resorting to demagogy or
being swayed by false sentiments of
the exotic. But we make no bones
about our wish to change things.
Every one of our projects must there¬
fore carefully take into account not
only the educational patterns of each
country but its entire political and
economic structure. In other words,
each project must reflect the political,
economic and moral state of health of
each country if we are to have a good
chance of success.
