I
TO ELECTRONIC
COMPUTER
J APAN is the world's lead¬
ing shipbuilder, second greatest pro¬
ducer of motor vehicles and elec¬
tronics, and third largest producer of
steel. It is the leading exporter of
textiles and textiles machines: 20 per
cent of the world's staple fibres are
made there. And it is a major fishing
nation with an annual catch of 12 mil¬
lion tons.
Yet only 15 per cent of Japan is
arable, and below the surface of the
land, there are few mineral resources,
the basis on which most industrialized
countries are built.
The phenomenon of modern Japan
is due to many reasons, not the least
of which are the industry and intelli¬
gence of its people. But equally im¬
portant is their unique ability to rise
to the challenge of foreign culture,
while maintaining their own identity.
When the Meiji Reformation initiated
its open-door policy to the West, the
tools of Occidental civilization the
Japanese seized most eagerly were
science and technology. Using them
with skill and imagination, they built
Japan's electric power
industry is» now fourth largest
in the world, both in
generating facilities and in
volume of electricity
produced. Photo shows part
of giant electric turbine
which can generate
100,000 kilowatts. Japanese
turbines produce power
throughout the world: they
are installed in Asia's
largest hydroelectric power
station, the Bhakra dam of
India, the Dez Hydroelectric
Plant in Iran, and in the U.S.A.
their country into Asia's foremost in¬
dustrial nation, in just 30 years.
Despite the curtain of isolation arbit¬
rarily run down around the island
empire by its feudal government, West¬
ern science found its way into Japan in
1823, when Philip Franz von Siebold, a
German medical officer in the service
of the Dutch (the only Westerners
allowed to maintain contact during
Japan's national seclusion) opened a
school in Nagasaki to teach medicine
and botany.
He was expelled from Japan in 1829
when he was found in possession of
a map of the country, at that time a
serious offence for foreigners. How¬
ever, the seed of modern learning was
planted, and one of his students. Tak-
ano Chöei, became a distinguished
scholar of Western sciences, spreading
the new knowledge mainly through
his translations into Japanese of Eur¬
opean scientific works.
Near the end of the feudal govern¬
ment's rule, a research institute for
"foreign" sciences was established in
1853 where astronomy, geology, phy-

V "V '-"
Mb
V Wirrf f oV/i
¡Mr 'frit
Photo Ministry of Foreign Affalis, Japan
sics, mathematics and chemistry, as
well as Western languages, were
taught. Science instruction was also
started at two military schools. In¬
dustry, in the form of blast and rever-
batory furnaces, and iron and cotton
mills, was also begun.
When the Imaginative Meiji leaders
came to power In 1867, their approach
to science ana technology stemmed
from their policy of strengthening the
nation by "seeking knowledge far
and wide." They brought modern
science to Japan by importing not only
books but brains: almost 600 Western
engineers, lured by salaries as high
as $2,000 dollars a month, as well as
the challenge of modernizing a med¬
ieval country, came from the West
to direct new technological projects.
Although six government ministries
were involved in promoting science
and technology, the leading body in
the early years of the Reformation
was the Ministry of Technology which
established the railway and telegraph
services, managed government plants
and mines, built lighthouses, and
promoted the education of Japanese
engineers, mainly through its adminis¬
tration of the school of technology,
founded in 1871 and later amalgamated
with Tokyo Imperial University.
The Imperial University was Jap¬
an's first university in the true sense
that research as well as education was
carried out. Founded in 1877, it be¬
came the leading centre for training
modern scientists and engineers.
Foreign instructors were predominant
in the beginning, with 12 of the 15 pro¬
fessors of science coming from abroad.
Various countries influenced various
disciplines: mathematics, physics and
chemistry developed chiefly under the
Influence of the United States and
Great Britain, medicine under Ger¬
many, and agriculture, biology, geology
and mineralogy almost equally under
Britain, U.S.A. and Germany.
As science was being brought to
Japan by foreign experts, Japanese
students were being sent abroad to
study. The main aim of the govern¬
ment in sending the students abroad
was to train them as teachers, and in
1884 they started to replace foreign
instructors. By 1893, scientific educa¬
tion had passed completely into the
hands of Japanese professors.
Since the modernization of industry
was forcibly initiated by the Meiji gov¬
ernment, its role was important in
the development of science and tech¬
nology, especially the latter. Through
the national research institutes attach¬
ed to each government ministry, re¬
search and development was encour¬
aged, promoted and systemized,
especially with a view to improving
industrial technology.
Development at this time in the
various branches of science included:
calendar compiling and land surveying
by the Bureau of Geography, estab¬
lished in 1871 ; the founding of the
Tokyo Meteorological Observatory in
1875, which had twenty meteorological
stations in operation by 1900; the for¬
mation of the Japan Seismology Soc¬
iety in 1880, the first such organiz¬
ation in the world; and research work
in physics and biology.
Edward Sylvester Morse was a
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
25

Photo Japanese Embassy, Paris
FROM CHRYSANTHEMUM TO COMPUTER (Continued)
For 100 million people,
13 million telephones, 20 million TV sets
Photo © Holmes-Lebel, Paris
26
major contributor to Japanese biology.
He arrived from the United States in
1877 to find that "evolution," whose
principles had been ennunciated by
Charles Darwin twenty years before,
was an unknown concept. He introduc¬
ed it in his lectures and public meetings,
and the idea was spread further by
Japanese scientists.
In the early 1890s, about the time
Japanese professors were replacing
Westerners in the academic structure,
Japanese scientists began to come
into their own.
Perhaps the first creative Japanese
chemist was Takamine Jokichi who
discovered and synthetized adrenalin
In 19!/0, and the enzyme, Taka-Dias-
tase, in 1909; in 1910, another chemist,
Suzuki Umetaro, discovered vitamin B;
Nagoka Nantaro took Japan's first step
in the direction of nuclear physics
when he published his "Theory on
Atom Structure" in 1903; Kitazato Shi-
basaburo's Institute for Research of
Infectious Diseases, founded in 1892,
was regarded as one of the world's
three leading research Institutes. The
Japanese, although still striving to
reach the level of Western science,
began to reap the fruits of their intel¬
lectual industry and determination.
At the end of the 19th century, with
the development of the textile, ship¬
building and machine industries, the
manufacture of iron, coal mining, and
the electric power industry, Japan
gradually caught up with Western in¬
dustrial powers.
By 1919, manufacturing had sur¬
passed agriculture as Japan's most
important economic activity, and the
industrial "centre of gravity" shifted
to heavy and chemical industries.
World War One had a profound effect
on Japanese science. Until then, it
had developed in step with the West,
but with international relations disrupt¬
ed, Japan's scientists for the first time
charted an independent course. Re¬
search institutions were founded during
and immediately after the war and
through them science was finally har¬
nessed to technique and industry to
serve as a driving force for progress.
Post-World War One scientific
achievements were numerous: in phy¬
sics, research into metals, especially
new steels aided Japanese industry,
and nuclear physics made rapid pro¬
gress with Yukawa Hideki presenting
his "Theory of Mesotrons" in 1934 (for
which he received Japan's first Nobel
Prize in 1949). The second Nobel
Prize awarded to a Japanese went to
another physicist, Tomanaga Shini-
chlro in 1965.
In geophysics, Japan continued to
pioneer seismological research; in bio¬
logy, Fujii Kenjiro did outstanding re¬
search on chromosomes; in medicine,
advances in the study of cancer were
remarkable, beginning with the arti¬
ficial generation of cancer in 1915 and
later studies of liver cancer; in chem¬
istry and agriculture, diligent in¬
vestigations often had direct bearing
on industry and food production.
However, this new maturity was to
bear too little positive results in the
decades that followed: Japanese
scientific and industrial efforts were
subordinated in the early 1930s to the

Japanese welders and painters form a
striking pattern on the hull of the
big cargo vessel under construction,
far left. This giant ship will soon
be dwarfed by mammoth ocean tankers
of 500,000 tons which Japan, the
world's largest shipbuilder, will be
constructing by 1970. Japan's position
as an industrial colossus has been
attained despite its few mineral
resources. Every inch of the land is
exploited to the full, epitomized in
the extraordinary photo of tiny Hajima
Island (left) off the shore of
Nagasaki, where coal deposits under
the sea are being worked amidst
the serried ranks of multistoried
buildings, cliff faces and Erector
set-like cranes and pit-shafts.
military establishment, which led the
country to defeat in World War Two.
For several years after the war,
scientific and technological research
activities in Japan were virtually
suspended. American occupation
forces banned research on atomic
energy, armaments, and aeronautics,
and dismantled Japan's cyclotron.
In 1951, the peace treaty was
signed, and in 1954 research in atomic
physics and the development of
atomic energy were resumed. The
Science and Technology Agency was
established in 1956 to co-ordinate
activities in those fields, and in the
same year Japan's Atomic Energy
Commission was formed.
About 1955, Japan's post-war
prosperity began and, recognizing the
indispensability of science and techno¬
logy to the resurging economy, the
government and private enterprise
built new universities, faculties and
research institutes.
There was a conspicuous reliance
in Japan at that time on foreign tech¬
niques, but efforts were started, and
are being continued, by industry
to redress this situation through
financing scientific and technological
research at universities, and expanding
or establishing their own research
institutions.
Poor conditions for study impose
great restrictions on the development
of basic research. This has resulted
in a great many Japanese scientists
going abroad in search of better re¬
search facilities, a situation that has
hardly improved, especially in math¬
ematics, physics and chemistry.
Although there are many universities
in Japan, most of them were raised
to their present status during post-war
reforms . and they are inferior in
equipment to those founded before
the war. When the education reform
started in 1949, Japan had 172 science
and technological facilities: by 1963
they had increased to 263, 130 nation¬
al, 29 public, and 104 private.
In 1963, there were 107 research
institutes attached to the universities,
used jointly by all three types of
universities for basic research.
Apart from these centres, there are
about 80 national research Institutes,
attached to government ministries,
which do basic research as well as
conduct other investigations in such
fields as public health, disaster
prevention, industrial technology, etc.
Between 1953 and 1965, Japan
increased its expenditure on scientific
and technological research nine times
to $1,180 million. Private sources
provided more money than the gov¬
ernment, whose research spending
on defence is low, compared to other
countries, accounting for only about
one per cent. In fact, industry spent
almost three times the government
amount on research in 1963-64.
However latest figures show that the
Japanese government is increasing its
share: in 1967-68, official spending on
research and development rose by
almost 15 per cent.
The government, for the most part,
finances the national and public uni¬
versities since tuition fees and other
incomes amount to only five per cent
of their expenses. Private universi¬
ties, attended by 70 per cent of
Japan's students in higher education,
depend mainly on tuition fees for
their financing, and in order to secure
the necessary funds, they enrol many
students some maintain, too many.
Their facilities are not as good as
the national universities, so the
government has instituted special sub¬
sidies to assist them with equipment
expenses and student research.
A LTHOUGH science and
technology students have Increased
twice as fast (between 1954-64) as
students in other faculties, their num¬
bers need to be greatly increased,
and an enrolment of a further 170,000
is planned.
Possible reasons for the shortage
of students may be the comparatively
modest salaries and the system of
remuneration of Japanese scientists
and engineers, particularly early on in
their careers. Pay is largely based
on status and seniority, and there is
insufficient recognition of talent.
Recently, a new staff system was
introduced in industry, intended to
encourage higher knowledge and
creativity.
Despite these problems, Japan has
been able to develop into one of the
six most advanced technological
countries of the world. The key
industry in this prodigious rise has
been electronics, where Japan's
output is second only to the U.S.A.'s.
In 1966, Japan produced over three
thousand million dollars worth of elec¬
tronics, 30 per cent of which was ex¬
ported. In telecommunications, the
country's micro-wave networks are
second largest in the world, and handle
all television broadcasts and half the
telephone transmissions. Japan's 100
million people have 13 million tele¬
phones and 20 million TV receivers.
The best known product of Japan's
electronics industry is the transistor
radio, a now commonplace instrument
of communication that has had far-
reaching effects on listening habits
throughout the world.
Among Japanese electronic advan¬
ces have been the Esaki diode, and
the development of a novel computing
device called the "parametron"' which
performs logical and storing functions
in telephone exchanges, telegraph
printers, machine tools, and in digital
computers.
Computers, in fact, are the core of
Japan's electronics industry, in the
absence of any large defence or
space programme, and Japan uses
more computers than any other
nation. Its first automatic computer
was built in 1952, and a current
ambitious programme, to build an ultra¬
high performance computer system,
began with State aid in 1966.
Japan has also been a leading
nation in the development of peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. In 1967, the
Japanese Atomic Energy Commission
began a big new ten-year programme
of research, development and utili¬
zation, with an estimated budget of
over $1,200 million. Nuclear power
Installations are to be increased with
a target capacity of 6,000 megawatts
for 1975, and between 30,000 and
40,000 MW for 1985.
Also in 1967, the keel was laid for
Japan's first nuclear ship, an 8,300 ton
vessel which is to be launched
in 1969.
To keep Japan's economy vigorous,
a "Medium-Term Economic Plan" was
introduced in 1965. Among the
scientific measures which were
recommended in support of it were:
the need to couple the advancement
of science and technology with
Japan's economic growth, improve the
quality of scientists and engineers,
increase research in public welfare,
raise the level of technological work
in agriculture, forestry and fisheries,
and the smaller enterprises, assist and
encourage research by tax relief, and
improve the research environment.
This last mentioned is no mere
platitude. A complete new "Science
City" north of Tokyo, is to be com¬
pleted by the mid-1970s. Its residents
will be 52,000 scientists and engineers
working in 40 laboratories, to improve
the world around us.
This article is based on the following
sources: "Science Policy and Organization
of Research in Japan" (Unesco, 1967: price:
$7.75; 11/- stg), published in the series
"Science Policy Studies and Documents" ;
"Society, Science and Technology in Japan" ,
volume IX-2 of the Journal of World History,
a quarterly publication of the International
Commission for a History of the Scientific
and Cultural Development of Mankind, and
issued by Editions de la Baconnière, Neu-
châtel, Switzerland (1965); "Historical Dev¬
elopment of Science and Technology in
Japan", edited by Tuge Hideomi, and pub¬
lished by Kokusai Bunka Shinkokai (Japan
Cultural Society), Tokyo, 1968.
27
