UNESCO
AND
i,
RIGHTS
For a full report on Unesco's
work on behalf of human rights
the reader is referred to a study
prepared by the Director-General
of Unesco for the International
Conference on Human Rights
convened by the United Nations
in Teheran in April.
14
he purpose of Unesco, according to its Constitution, is "to contri¬
bute to peace and security by promoting collaboration among the nations
through education, science and culture in order to further universal respect
for justice, for the rule of law and for the human rights and fundamental
freedoms which are affirmed for the peoples of the world, without distinc¬
tion of race, sex, language or religion..."
Accordingly, all Unesco programmes are drawn up with these supreme
aims in view. In all sectors of its activity be it education or the natural
sciences, social and human sciences or cufture and communication
Unesco's ultimate purpose is founded on the defence of Human Rights
which is indissolubly linked with the defence of Peace.
Even those Unesco activities which are not aimed specifically and expli¬
citly at fostering one aspect of human rights or human rights in general,
nevertheless serve to create the material and intellectual, the moral and
cultural conditions which are indispensable if human rights are to become
a living reality for all human beings and not just principles and aspirations.
Unesco further believes that economic and social development must be
viewed as the achievement of those conditions that are essential to the
full exercise of human rights.
Education indirectly serves the cause of human rights as a sine qua non
of development, and promotes human rights directly by endowing every
human being with the faculties all men need in order to exercise and draw
benefit from these rights. Education, moreover, is one of the basic rights
specifically proclaimed in the Universal Declaration.
Modern scientific advances, adapted to the needs of development, are
radically transforming the material conditions of life today, and should
make it easier now to provide for man's everyday needs by increasing
government resources and thereby help to reduce many of the difficulties
that now hamper the achievement of economic, social and cultural rights
in many countries.
Moreover, as modern science and technology transform the face of our
planet and the conditions of life of its inhabitants, an understanding of
science and the scientific approach becomes a fundamental right for
everyone. An initiation into science is indeed indispensable if man is to
understand his world and his place within it, and to assess his own
potentialities and limitations.
The spread of culture, universal access to the literary and artistic master¬
pieces of all peoples, helps to promote mutual understanding and a keener
awareness of man's universal heritage with its rich diversity of cultural
treasures. Hence the immense value of cultural exchanges in fostering
international understanding and friendship.
Radio, television, films, newspapers, indeed, all the modern means of
communication are essential in promoting human rights, and are specifi¬
cally referred to in Article 19: "Everyone has the right to... receive and
impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of fron¬
tiers."
Unesco has striven to create or improve mass media channels in
countries where they are most needed. Of course, tha mass media can
be used to publicize all the human rights and the related principles laid
down by the United Nations.
The aid of the social sciences is often enlisted in the struggle to eradi¬
cate discrimination and racial or religious prejudices. These sciences facil¬
itate the study and analysis of the ideas which men may have concerning
their rights; and they can also help to overcome problems that arise in
securing certain rights, when local traditions and differing economic and
social conditions must be taken into account.
Thus, as much by its nature and the fields in which it operates as by its
aims and objectives, Unesco's entire activity is designed to promote the
whole range of human rights.
