STILL TIME TO
SAVE VENICE
by AH Vrioni
4
ITALY ¡s renowned not
only for the monuments and works of
art she has inherited from the peoples
and cultures of her historic past, but
also for the care she takes of them.
Authorities and individuals who, even
in normal times vie with one another
in caring for their country's art and
monuments, compel the admiration of
the world by the energy with which
they react whenever disaster strikes
their artistic heritage.
As the Italian Government is not in
the habit of appealing to others for
help in dealing with its own problems,
it must have considered the cir¬
cumstances to be truly exceptional,
when, on November 4, 1966, it asked
Unesco to appeal for international aid
for the relief of Florence and Venice,
victims of unprecedented floods.
Help did in fact come from all parts
of the world, enabling the cities to
overcome their immediate difficulties.
In Venice, however, it became clear
that the problems went beyond those
usually encountered in the restoration
and conservation of works of art, and
that the preservation of this ancient
city called for a special kind of co¬
operation. Why was this so?
One is tempted to reply simply that
Venice is unique, both in being a
microcosm of another age, paradoxi¬
cally surviving in our times, and
because of the profusion and richness
ALI VRIONI is Special Assistant to the
Director-General of Unesco. From 1961 to
1965, he was director of Unesco's Service of
Nubia Monuments, and from 1965 to 1967,
Director of Operations In the Department of
Culture.
of its art treasures. But is not this
more or less true, in all fairness, for
all great cultural centres, and can there
be any question of establishing a
hierarchy among them?
Consequently, it is not only because
of its aesthetic merits, nor because
of any sentimental leanings that the
national authorities and Unesco con¬
sider Venice to be exceptional: it is
because of the extreme complexity of
its situation.
In point of fact, the fate of Venice's
buildings and artistic heritage does not
depend solely on physical factors,
which, for the works of art to be
protected, would only have to be
modified by appropriate techniques.
A S is well known, the sur¬
vival of this heritage is threatened by
the storms which are causing more and
more flooding in the city; by the
currents which eat at the city's
foundations when they are too swift
and endanger its salubrity when they
are too slow; by the gradual and
apparently inexorable rise of the sea-
level, combined with the slow sub¬
sidence of the islands; by the micro¬
organisms which attack the wooden
piles on which the foundations are
laid (see article page 10); by humidity
and air pollution which eat into marble
and cause paintings to deteriorate.
But it is not a deserted city, in a
remote part of the world, that is
suffering from these ills. It is an
actively developing urban community
undergoing economic, social and
cultural changes which are, in many
respects, critical, and which in some
cases actually cause or at any rate
aggravate these troubles.
Technology is almost always able to
deal with problems when required to
do so by a healthy body in the process
of expansion. Experts are perfectly
capable of designing and constructing
dikes, sluices, meteorological warning
systems, systems for controlling the
flow of water in the canals and at the
entrances to the lagoons, for strength¬
ening the foundations, raising streets
and houses, protecting buildings and
their artistic treasures against damage
from air and water all things that
Venice needs urgently.
But in order to do this, it is essential
that the members of this community
should agree on the future they want
for the city and have the necessary
vitality to make such undertakings
possible.
Social and demographic studies
show, however, that the population of
the historic centre of Venice has been
steadily declining over the past
18 years, though factories and ultra-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 6
GOTHIC GEM. Dating from the first half
of the 15th century, the Ca d'Oro
(House of Gold) is one of the most
Imposing palaces overlooking the
Grand Canal, the "Main Street" of Venice,
nearly four kilometres long. With its
intricate stone tracery, the Ca d'Oro is a
masterpiece of Gothic architecture. It is
said to take its name from the gilding
which once embellished its façade.
Between the 12th and 18th centuries,
some 200 palatial mansions were built along
the Grand Canal.

a
i ,' 1 m * '
1 | |
taBîaMpipp^
mAi
U vv
o ,
__

STILL TIME TO SAVE VENICE (Continued)
The first full inventory of Venice's art treasures
modern harbour facilities have been
set up and are increasing in the part of
Venice situated on the mainland.
But this industrial expansion has not
so far led to any economic revival in
the historic centre. Some Venetians
indeed consider that it is detrimental
to the old town, and that the growth
of the new Venice threatens to destroy
the artistic and cultural values of the
old. Is this true?
No one can yet reply to this
question. One view is that the incom¬
patibility which some people see
between the modern spirit of industrial
enterprise and the old magic of Venice
is as real and irremediable as the
contrast between the factory chimneys
and cranes at Marghera and the
churches and ornamental façades that
give the islands in the lagoon their
poetry. If this is so, the Venetian
community will be split in two, and the
two parts will grow indifferent and
even hostile to one another.
The industrialization of the mainland,
which will proceed without being sub¬
jected in any way to the influence
of the traditional Venice we know,
will probably attract an increasing
proportion of the younger, more active
people from the historic centre. The
old city will find its intellectual and
spiritual life radically transformed, and
its possibilities of physical survival
affected: for it is not at all certain
that a city which has become a
museum, which is partially depopulated
and whose economic resources are
problematic, will be able to defend
itself against nature and the harmful
effects of human activity, as success¬
fully as a rapidly expanding city may.
The other answer is that economic
development is not a threat to Venice,
but its hope of salvation. The
inventive spirit, the knowledge, the
financial and technical resources that
it implies may be used to save the
Venetian heritage and generate a lively
upsurge of fresh ideas and initiative,
a new artistic movement in other
words, all the elements of the cultural
fertility that was for long the attraction
of Venice, and that may well return
(see article page 35).
The same big industrial and commer¬
cial concerns which are today digging
channels to make it easier for ships
to cross the lagoon, and which have
it in their power gradually to destroy
the beauty and atmosphere of Venice,
can, if they find it worthwhile, put
just as much imagination, energy and
money into protecting from floods and
damage by large-scale public works
and the regular maintenance of what
is to be kept from the past the noble
dwellings of the historic centre which
they could have chosen for their
impressive head offices.
Yc
OUNG people would no
doubt find life in an expanding city
attractive and would therefore be en¬
couraged to settle there and take part
in its activities, instead of leaving it
as they are doing at present. Provided,
of course, that they could live there:
economic and financial vitality, com¬
bined with appropriate legislative
measures, can assist in improving
residential zones and in providing
comfortable homes in an architectural
setting that has all the' charm of a
former age.
It is therefore probable that the fate
of the "historic monument" that is
Venice itself, and the art treasures
which enrich its chapels, salons and
narrow streets, will depend, in the last
resort, on the choice made between
these two opposing views.
But how will it be made? By
chance? By the luck of the draw?
When we consider the value of what
is at stake, would it not be more
worthy of our civilization that such a
decision should be taken well-
advisedly, on the basis of a sound and
thorough knowledge of the problems?
This is obviously the line that the
Italian authorities are following, by
setting up, among other things, various
national and local bodies to conduct
research, co-ordinate measures and
take action. And because the results
of this research are of interest to the
whole human race, which would lose
a dream if Venice were to perish,
Unesco has been asked to assist in
this long and complex task.
The first step taken by Unesco was
to make a systematic study of all the
work being carried out in Italy that
could throw light on the nature and
interrelationship of the problems, both
physical and human, which have arisen
in Venice. Out of this analysis and
reflection there emerged a voluminous
report, and, what is more significant,
a conviction the conviction that the
problems of Venice are so closely
linked one with the other, so totally
interdependent, that it is impossible
to understand one without knowing
the others, and impossible to solve one
without dealing with them all.
Experience has shown that satis¬
factory results in such circumstances
can be obtained only by using inter¬
disciplinary methods, and that to solve
the problems a comprehensive plan of
action is needed.
The possibility of carrying out such
a programme is in fact the problem of
Venice, whose technical problems
are only facets often deceptive in
appearance of this main difficulty.
Naturally enough, considering its
CONTINUED ON PAGE 8
Venice has been flooded to a depth of
over one metre at least thirty times In the
last ten years. Left, close to the celebrated
Rialto Bridge, gondolas take to the
sidewalks and pedestrians splash through
the flood waters in hip-length rubber
boots during a recent inundation. In the
lagoon city, the flood tides of winter now
come more frequently than ever before.
Bird's-eye view of Venice in the early
16th century, engraved on wood by Jacopo
de Barbari, one of the city's most famous
painter engravers. In the foreground is
St. Mark's Square. In the centre of
engraving, spanning the Grand Canal, is
the Rialto Bridge, which takes its name
from the Rivo Alto district, the heart of
Venice in the 9th century. At that time
a wooden bridge crossed the canal (see
photo page 23). The present bridge of
marble (photo left) was built at
the end of the 16th century.

Photo © Fulvio Roiter - Museo Correr, Venice

This remarkable map of Venice was engraved
in 1500 by Jacopo de Barbari. Displaying a
consummate sense of artistry, the engraver mingled
geographical detail and poetic fancy on the
six plates (each measuring no less than
27 by 33 inches) that make up this giant map
of the City of the Sea. Top of map, left, shows
the western end of the Grand Canal, facing
the mainland; then the northern shore with the
island of Murano in the background. Enthroned
in the clouds Is Mercury, symbol of the city's
supremacy in trade. Top right of map, Torcello,
one of the islands in the lagoon. Before Venice
rose to fame and prosperity, its archipelago
served as a refuge for people driven from the
mainland by invasions in the sixth century.
Bottom left: the island of Giudecca, on the southern
shores of the lagoon, bottom centre, the great
port of Venice, with Neptune, god of the sea.
In background, St Mark's Square and the
Doge's Palace; in foreground, the island of
San Giorgio. Bottom right shows the eastern
entry to the port of Venice through which flows
the sea. A modern visitor could still find his
way through Venice with this 16th century map.
In the historic part of the city most of the
monuments and buildings shown still stand.
STILL TIME TO SAVE VENICE (Continued)
Venice
its waters, winds
and gods
8
aims and the means at its disposal,
Unesco has offered to help the Italian
Government in drawing up and
carrying out a plan for the preservation
and restoration of Venice; this was
decided by Unesco's Executive Board
at its meeting in Siena, on August 30,
1968.
But a lot more information is needed
before realistic plans can be made for
useful measures. For example, until
now there has been no complete
record of the historical monuments,
palaces and works of art. Unesco has
therefore assisted, in agreement with
the Italian Council for Antiquities and
Fine Arts, in compiling the necessary
inventories.
At the end of the first survey, some
16,000 index cards had been drawn up,
complete with photographs specifying
the state of preservation of each
work of art, the restoration required,
and what this would cost. A second
survey produced similar files relating
to palaces and religious buildings.
A third survey is in progress, on
housing conditions in the historic
centre and ways of improving them.
Another is dealing with the structure
of the Venetian metropolis in 1980 and
the problems of communication.
Finally, Unesco is preparing to put
its scientific services at the disposal
of the Italian authorities, in order to
reach a better understanding of the
hydrography of the lagoon, the sea
currents, the phenomena of soil
mechanics and hydrobiological in¬
fluences all of which are indis¬
pensable to any protective action.
If Venice were content merely to
study its problems and Unesco to join
in that study, irremediable catastrophes
might well occur before the scientists
had agreed on their causes. While
paying due attention to the need for
research and objective thinking,
Unesco is therefore principally con¬
cerned with taking practical measures.
Yet another example of the com¬
plexity of the problem of Venice is
that treatment must be started while
the laboratory analyses are still being
carried out. This undoubtedly pre¬
sents risks, but is it not often the
same when the patient is a human
being, whose breathing might stop at
any moment? The historic monuments,
statues and altars which are being
attacked by "stone disease," the
frescos which are disappearing, the
paintings which are losing their
colours, cannot wait either: and the
sooner the deserted palaces are lived
in once more, the better (see article
page 20).
Unesco's campaign is therefore
designed, from now on, to present
these problems to people and insti¬
tutions all over the world, who
do not wish to see Venice disappear.
Universities, foundations and large
business concerns can purchase or
rent a palace, restore it and use it to

house branches of their activities, thus
enjoying the incomparable setting that
Venice offers, and at the same time
helping to restore the city to its
original splendour. All people, even
those with little money at their
disposal, can share in saving the works
of art by sending their contributions,
however modest, to the special fund
opened by Unesco for the protection
of the Italian cities stricken by the
flood disaster of 1966.
Help is coming already from all
quarters: more and more . will be
received, and will become increasingly
effective, as plans for the protection
and cultural development of Venice
take form and are carried out.
Obviously the final decisions must
rest with the Italian authorities them¬
selves and Unesco can give only
limited assistance in devising plans and
carrying them out.
Nevertheless, this assistance does
not only involve Unesco's committees,
its experts and consultants and the
services of its secretariat. It brings
into play the many powerful inter¬
national associations, both govern¬
mental and non-governmental, with
which Unesco co-operates, and the
learned institutions upon which it can
call for help in short, all the means
of communication and co-ordination at
its disposal, not to mention those in
whose establishment it has been
specially concerned.
One such example is the committee
that the Italian Government and the
Director-General of Unesco agreed to
set up to advise on what should be
done to save Venice. Outstanding
figures from Italy and other countries
have agreed to .take part in its work,
so that the knowledge and wisdom of
the whole world may serve the
threatened city.
Venice may perish: not perhaps as
in the apocalyptic predictions that
some people like to make, by sinking
beneath the waves but, just as tragic¬
ally, by succumbing to the complex,
insidious, hidden ills which sap her
strength and energy.
But Venice may also survive. It is
possible to save her: Unesco would
not devote itself to a hopeless cause.
Venice can only be saved, however,
on one condition: that its rescue is
conceived as a collective task, a great
common venture requiring organization
and concerning everyone.
The Venetians first of all: those who
love ancient things, as well as those
who are concerned for the achieve¬
ments of tomorrow.
And the people of all other
countries too so that in these islands
far from their own frontiers, yet near
to them in spirit, they may continue to
find not only a sanctuary of the past,
but the outpost of a world which,
despite the disillusions of history,
seeks to be truly universal.
9
