The hallucinogenic
properties of this
fungus, the Psilocybe
mushroom, were known
to the Maya priests
of ancient Mexico, and
used by them in
religious ceremonies.
Psilocybin, the active
principle of this
mushroom, Is now
produced synthetically
and used in
psychotherapy.
Taken for any reasons
other than therapeutic
ones, it is a highly
dangerous
hallucinogenic drug.
Photo Laboratoires Sandoz
% %
One of the great controversies of today evolves around the dangers
incurred by the use of LSD and other hallucinogenic drugs, the amphe¬
tamines and certain tranquillizers. On the following pages, the "Unesco
Courier" presents the views of three international authorities on these
questions. The authors' conclusions are based not only on their own
broad experience, but the- findings of scientific research in different
countries. Richard H. Blum is director of the Psychopharmacology
Project at Stanford University (U.S.A.). Karl Evang (page 18) is
Director-General of Public Health in Norway. Grigory Avroutski
(page 20) is head of the Psychopharmacological Section of the
Institute of Psychiatry, in Moscow.

MIND-ALTERING DRUGS
(LSD, Marijuana, Hashish, etc.)
A SCIENTIFIC APPRAISAL
RICHARD H. BLUM is director of the Psy¬
chopharmacology Project at the Institute
for the Study of Human Problems, Stanford
University, California, and lecturer at the
Center for Training in Community Psychia¬
try, Berkeley, California. A consultant to
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and
to the National Institute of Mental Health,
and recently consultant to the Presidential
Commission for Law Enforcement and the
Administration of Justice, he has written
widely in a number of fields, including psy¬
chopharmacology, public health, and crimi¬
nology. His books include "Alcoholism:
Modern Psychological Approaches to Treat¬
ment" (with Eva Blum), "Utopiates: The Use
and Users of LSD-25" (with associates).
h_ SYCHOACTIVE drugs,
those pharmaceutical and naturally
occurring compounds which affect
man's mind, have long been in use.
Alcohol was the earliest known, for
it was used at least by 6000 B.C. as
hunting and food-gathering peoples
settled into agricultural pursuits in Asia
Minor and the Middle East and learned
about fermentation and storage.
Opium also has an early history,
probably being used 2000 years B.C.
in the Eastern Mediterranean.
The range of such materials used in
healing, in religion, in ceremonies and,
sometimes, socially and individually,
by Richard If. Blum
was broad. A great compendium
showing just how many naturally-
occurring drugs were used medically
in the Eastern Mediterranean area in
early times is that of Dioscorides, a
Greek herbalist living in Asia Minor
in the first century after Christ.
In mid-Asia the literature of the
Vedas contains many medicinal refer¬
ences while in China there are early
pharmacopeias attesting to the wisdom
and extent of traditional medicine there
during early civilizations.
Indeed, much of the pharmacy of
today is derived from these early begin¬
nings; it is estimated that about half
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
13

Drug dependence
Therapy for the drug-dependent
patient has two distinct phases:
getting the patient off drugs, that is,
curing him of physiological
dependence, and rehabilitating him
so that his psychological dependence
on drugs is broken and he does
not relapse after completing the
treatment. Persons with strong
habituation to drugs have to be
withdrawn gradually, yet even so
withdrawal is often a disagreeable
experience. Photos here show the
mental and physical distress of a
young woman patient whose
reactions to ungratified craving for
her habitual drug range from violent
excitability to complete prostration.
Where there is physical dependence
there are withdrawal symptoms.
Where there is no physical
dependence, there are none. Recent
studies on morphine-dependent
patients have shown that the
"withdrawal syndrome", as it is
called, may persist for up
to 30 weeks.
MIND-ALTERING DRUGS (Continued)
The revolution in psychiatry
14
of all drugs prescribed in the United
States each year contain a naturally
occurring drug as the main, or one of
the main, ingredients.
Today, however, in medical use and
in social use as well there are many
more substances available than our
ancestors would ever have imagined.
Modern substances also tend to be
much more powerful than those known
in early times. Because of the great
variety of drugs in use today, it is help¬
ful to classify them by their most likely
effects on man.
The classifications developed are
guides only, since even within the
limits of normal dosage no psycho¬
active drug affects every person the
same way and, indeed, may well affect
the same person differently from one
day to the next depending on the
person's condition and his environment.
The classifications are also limited
because most of these drugs simul¬
taneously affect humans in a variety of
ways.
Indeed, scientists are not yet aware
of all the changes in human moods,
cycles of sleep and wakefulness, sen¬
sitivity to anxiety and pain, coherence
of thought, sensory and information-
processing capacities, social capabili¬
ties, learning and memory functions,
drive and motivational' levels, and bodi¬
ly performance capacities which are
affected by any one of the psycho¬
active drugs.
Thus, one must say that the science
of psychopharmacology which has as
its goal the understanding of the
effects of mind-altering drugs what
these drugs are and what they do,
how they act on and in the body and
what other influences affect drug
outcomes is just at its beginnings.
Keeping these limitations in mind, we
can set forth the following major
groups of psychoactive drugs.
Sedatives and tranquillizers
Although alcohol and opiates were
early used as drugs to produce
relaxation and sleep, it is to Asia that
we look for the earliest application of
tranquillizers as such, drugs which
reduce anxiety and excitability. There,
and in Africa too, natural plants have
long been used whose effects include
such relief.
The first pharmaceutical tranquillizer
used in the Western countries was
derived from research in India for, be¬
ginning in 1931, Indian scientists dis¬
covered the ability of Rauwolfia to
reduce blood pressure. After using
this drug for hypertension it was dis¬
covered, in the early 1950s, that it
was very beneficial in treating mental
illness. The resulting drug, reserpine,
had been synthesized in Switzerland
beginning in 1947.
The application of this drug in the
treatment of mental disorders marked
the beginning of a psychiatric revolution
and the birth of modern psychophar
macology. The introduction of reser¬
pine was shortly followed by chlor-
promazine, another tranquillizer, and
in the intervening fourteen years from
that date, several sub-groups have
evolved. Among the tranquillizers are
some characteristically termed the
minor tranquillizers such as mepro-
bamate, diphenylmethane, and ' chlor-
diazepoxide, etc., and others termed
the major tranquillizers (chlorpro-
mazine, phenothiazine, reserpine, per¬
phenazine, etc.).
Both groups of tranquillizers have
widespread application in medical prac¬
tice. The minor tranquillizers are
often prescribed for persons who are
tense or nervous. The major ones are
used in mental hospitals where the
results over the years have been so
successful, especially in combination
with new methods of community care,
that the number of persons hospitaliz¬
ed for mental disease has dropped
markedly. Many of these released
patients are helped to live nearly nor¬
mal lives by maintaining their intake of
tranquillizers. At present, minor tran¬
quillizers account for perhaps 15 per
cent of all medical prescriptions in the
United States.
These drugs can have unexpected
and undesired effects as well. Un¬
expected idiosyncratic outcomes are
called "side" effects; usually that term
implies unpleasant or dangerous results
in the person taking the- drug. Be¬
cause we shall soon be discussing

problems in the unsupervised or social
use of drugs, it is well to note that the
minor tranquillizers have been de¬
scribed as producing emotional de¬
pendence, physiologic dependence,
and drug tolerance, all of which are
components of what used to be call¬
ed "addiction" but which is now con¬
sidered more broadly under problems
of "drug dependence" as such. The
major tranquillizers can also produce
"organic" complications, that is neuro¬
logical disorder, but do not produce
psychic not physical dependence.
The minor tranquillizers are usually
considered closely akin to sedatives
in their action and effects, although as
the names imply, the former tend to
' relax and the latter tend to produce
sleep.
Sedatives as pharmaceutical pro¬
ducts are of earlier origin than tran¬
quillizers. The barbiturates are the
group of sedatives most commonly
prescribed: these were introduced
about 1913 and at present enough are
produced to provide several dozen
doses of sleeping pills per citizen per
year in the United States. Other se¬
datives which are less widely prescrib¬
ed include the bromides, chloral hy¬
drate, glutethimide, and certain other
compounds including anti-histamines,
belladonna, aspirin, etc.
The sedatives, as their name implies,
are useful in inducing sleep or in
slowing people down, but they can
have side effects too. Barbiturates
especially are associated with physical
and psychological dependence as well
as the development of tolerance. The
bromides, although not implicated in
physical dependence, can produce
psychoses when taken in large
amounts (as can many substances)
and, like any mind-altering drug, can
be (although they rarely are) a basis
for psychological dependence. .
The sedatives, as opposed to newer
tranquillizers, appear more dangerous
in that coma and death occur more
readily with small doses, especially
if there is another drug such as alcohol
present to add to their effects. Barbi¬
turates are also described as produc¬
ing more noticeable impairments of
judgement and motor (muscular) co¬
ordination, and as being associated
more often than tranquillizers with de¬
pendency reactions and, as a conse¬
quence, with convulsions, psychosis
or death should a person be with¬
drawn from his heavy doses of the
drugs.
Stimulants and
Anti-Depressants
We can distinguish five classes of
stimulants. There are those which are
minor stimulants in widespread social
use; these include coffee, tea, khat (in
the Arabian and East African areas),
betel nut, kola, kava, the cola bever¬
ages, and chocolate and cocoa to a
very minor degree. Caffeine is also
present in non-prescription stay-awake
preparations. The drugs present few
problems with the exception of khat
about which there is some debate as
to its effects. It is our view that these
effects are minor.
A second stimulant is nicotine
which is heavily used around the
world in cigarettes, pipes, cigars, snuff,
and chewing tobacco. It is a drug
with no recognized medical use but
which in social use can easily lead
to psychological dependency and the
development of tolerance. Physical de¬
pendency is also found in that the with¬
drawal symptoms of heavy smokers
can be substantial. The long-term
effects of smoking are clearly impli¬
cated in the development of cancer,
although nicotine itself may or may not
play a role.
A third class of stimulants are the
amphetamine compounds (there are
also pipradrol and methylphenidate
types). These are widely employed
to treat narcolepsy (a compulsive
tendency to attacks of deep sleep),
to combat fatigue and depression
(sometimes effective) and to assist
obese patients in reducing (very rarely
effective). They promote alertness
and activity and, in high doses, produce
irritability, excitement and toxic psycho¬
ses. Continued use can be associated
with psychological dependence, toler¬
ance occurs, and there are some
scientists who report mild physical de¬
pendence as well. In any event, such
physical dependence as there may be
is very minor as compared with
opiates or sedatives.
Cocaine, derived from the coca leaf
chewed in the high Andes, is also a
stimulant. The coca leaf itself is an¬
algesic, reducing sensations of cold^
fatigue, pain, bad taste, or hunger.
Cocaine is used medically as a local
anesthetic though much less so than
in former years.
However, in its non-medical (and in 1 H
most countries, illicit) use it is taken
intravenously or sniffed in order to
achieve feelings of pleasure and
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

MIND-ALTERING DRUGS (Continued)
'Hippies' and the dangers
of a drug-centered life
16
strength. Such use can lead to hallu¬
cinations, delusions, excitement, as
well as digestive disorders and possib¬
ly convulsions. Although very strong
psychological dependence can occur
there is no evidence for physical
dependence with cocaine.
A fifth class of stimulants are usually
termed anti-depressants and include
monoamine oxidase enzyme inhibitors
and tricyclic compounds (imipramine,
amitriptyline, etc.). These preparations
tend to reduce melancholy or chronic
depression and some, at the same time,
reduce alertness and produce confu¬
sion in thinking. There is no evidence
of dependency on these drugs develop¬
ing. The drugs are used almost ex¬
clusively in psychiatric treatment.
Hallucinogens
This classification includes quite a
range of drugs, some of which have
been used for many centuries mush¬
rooms, peyote, ergot, cannabis, and a
variety of South American plants and
some of which are dramatic recent
discoveries of which LSD-25 is the
best known.
Although the classification implies
that hallucinations are a most probable
effect, that is often not the case.
Changes in sensory experiences, eu¬
phoria, anxiety and anxiety reduction,
peculiar contradictory emotional ex¬
periences, altered perceptions of self,
increased but more narrowed alert¬
ness, reduced learning ability and, in
high doses, confusion and psychoses,
can all be outcomes.
Cannabis (marijuana, hashish) is the
substance about which there is the
most current debate, for even though
its use has been known for several
thousand years, a scientific assess¬
ment of its affects under varying con¬
ditions of dosage and administration,
or on subjects of differing nutritional
or psychological status remains to be
completed.
When used in mild doses by stable
persons, few ill effects are reported;
when used in heavier doses by mal¬
nourished or unstable persons there
are reports of bad outcomes, for exam¬
ple psychosis, apathy, and psycho¬
logical dependence.
Historically, most of the hallucino¬
gens have been employed in folk medi¬
cine, in religious ceremonies, and also
socially or by individuals to produce
altered states of consciousness or im¬
proved moods. At present cannabis
is, used in Asia in traditional medicine,
peyote and some mushrooms are em¬
ployed in healing and religion by
American Indians, and LSD and related
pharmaceutical preparations are being
tested as treatment aids for psychotic
children and for alcoholics. At the
moment, the greatest scientific poten¬
tial for the hallucinogens appears to
be in pharmacological and psycholo¬
gical research rather than in treatment
itself.
Trends in use
of psychoactive drugs
When we look at the historical
and anthropological evidence, certain
trends in the use of drugs emerge. In
the first place, almost every society
known to man and" there are only
three or four exceptions we have been
able to identify have used one or
several psychoactive drugs (alcohol
included). Secondly, small societies
or tribes which are themselves stable
or well integrated appear to use these
drugs without apparent ill effects. Use
in such settings is likely to be religious
and medical but also to be ceremonial
in the sense that drugs are foci of
attention and have symbolic value.
In spite of these "formal" purposes
in use, even in small tribes individuals
seem to enjoy drug use and to find
that drugs can alleviate distress and
facilitate sociability. Nevertheless, tri¬
bal use is almost always controlled
by custom and by the presence of
others.
As societies have become more com¬
plex, especially as agricultural societies
became urban or small tribal groups
experienced the impact (through con¬
quest) of contact with new cultures,
changes in drug use, in effects, and in
appraisals of drug significance appear.
Several thousand years before
Christ, alcohol was the first drug iden¬
tified with "abuse," which can mean
anything from moral or legal disap¬
proval of drug use to concern about
drug-induced behaviour to alarm over
damage to health.
During the period of Greek and
Roman medicine, there was awareness
of the health danger in certain drugs,
opium and hemlock for example, but
little evidence that people were taking
these dangerous substances except in
limited quantities for healing (or to
induce death as with Socrates).
The next drug to be the subject of
any public alarm was cannabis which
during the Crusaders' time became the
subject of the legend of the Assassins,
a story which held hashish capable
of making men killers. That myth is
current even now though it is unsup¬
ported by scientific evidence.
Mushrooms and ergot, a plant para¬
site, both containing alkaloids from
which modern hallucinogens have been
derived, were probably early identified
as producing illness (St. Anthony's
Fire, for example) but their use to pro¬
duce altered consciousness was not
a source of public concern until the
19th century at which time observers
of Siberian tribes using fly agaric
were alarmed about their conduct.
As for the concept of "addiction,"
that is recent, not arising until the late
18th and early 19th centuries when lite¬
rate users and curious physicians ob¬
served the effects of long-term use of
opium. Subsequent to those obser¬
vations, the potential "addicting"
qualities of other drugs were observed.
Very recently the World Health Or¬
ganization, recognizing that the con¬
cept of "addiction" has itself been
abused and is scientifically inadequate,
has recommended a new terminology
which rests upon descriptions of the
kind and quality of "dependency"
associated with drug use.
As a general statement one may
say that almost any psychoactive drug
which relieves pain, produces pleasure,
or enhances sensations or interperso¬
nal relations can become the object
of psychological dependency. Phy¬
sical dependency, which implies to¬
lerance and withdrawal symptoms,
occurs with fewer drugs but these
include barbiturates, some tranquilli¬
zers and possibly the amphetamines
as well as alcohol and opiates (nar¬
cotics).
At the present time we are wit¬
nessing the rapid introduction of new
kinds of drugs, most of which are
produced by the pharmaceutical
manufacturers, but some of which are
folk discoveries imported to the West¬
ern world.
The consumption of psychoactive
drugs is increasing rapidly. It is esti¬
mated that in the United States, for
example, enough psychoactive drugs
(excluding opiates, alcohol, etc.) are
produced to provide over 60 doses
per year per man, woman and child.
Illicit distribution and lack of ade¬
quate medical supervision constitute
a large but unknown proportion of the
use of these drugs; furthermore, in
the United States production and con¬
sumption appear to be rising at a rate
of perhaps 10 per cent per year.
Studies of normal populations show,
as would be expected, that most city
people use these . drugs, either on
tlirect prescription from physicians or
on a ho.me remedy basis. A growing
number, especially among young
people, also procure and use them
illicitly. The amphetamines, cannabis
and other hallucinogens are particu¬
larly popular in the United States.
College student studies suggest the
most common illicit pattern is experi¬
mentation and casual use rather than
any heavy use. We find so far that
something like 25 per cent of col¬
lege students have employed amphe¬
tamines, 21 per cent cannabis, and
5.6 per cent the hallucinogens.
In spite of widespread use of psy-

choactive drugs in the United States,
some of which is frankly illicit and
some of which is simply inadequately
supervised medically, the "bad results"
including dependency, illness or be¬
havior dangerous to oneself or others
are sufficiently frequent to be a cause
for concern even if such untoward
effects occur relatively infrequently
among casual users. Most people
seem to use them safely; those who do
not, seem most likely to be persons al¬
ready disadvantaged by personality dis¬
order, poverty, or other forms of social
or personal deprivation or alienation.
Nevertheless, even healthy persons
from adequate social environments can
experience either immediate or long-
term ill effects from use of psycho¬
active drugs which is one reason for
calling for medical supervision and
individual caution in their use.
The extent of use and kind of prob¬
lems occurring vary from one part
of the world to another. In technolo¬
gically advanced countries the trend
toward widespread consumption of
pharmaceutical preparations typically
is accompanied by some illicit use by
a few young people; Japan, Sweden,
England and Denmark have reported
amphetamine "abuse."
Most European countries have, their
"hippies" who illicitly use cannabis and
hallucinogens as well as amphetami¬
nes; in African cities cannabis and
amphetamine use among young people
is a matter of concern, and in remoter
nations such as Nepal and Afghanistan
local authorities are worried lest their
influx of hippie tourists expose local
youth to a drug:centered life which
many people around the world would
agree is socially unproductive, psy¬
chologically limiting and which poses
health dangers.
In evaluating trends it is important
to maintain. perspective. Psychoactive
agents are medically valuable and one
must expect more of these drugs to be
discovered and prescribed. The use
of pharmaceuticals is part of urban
technological culture as is at least
some of the despair and nervousness
which they relieve. Experimentation
by youth must be considered a normal
phenomenon. It is not surprising that
such experimentation with drugs is
quite frequent where these agents are
readily available. But experimentation
is not to be confused with heavy illicit
use, as in the case of hippies, chronic
hashish eaters (or alcoholics).
The latter patterns of "abuse" will
also continue, but the goal of most
public health authorities and policy
planners is to limit them by control¬
ling production and distribution of
drugs, to restrict use to medically su¬
pervised treatment, to provide treat¬
ment facilities for those suffering ill
effects, to support research, and to
provide, through education to physi¬
cians, citizens, and growing children
knowledge of the potential benefits and
dangers of the use of any powerful
substance which affects the mind.
Are you a cat or a mouse?
When LSD is given experimentally to animals it triggers off startling changes in behaviour.
Cat seen in top photo spits and shows its teeth when confronted by a mouse, but is in fact
terrified by the tiny creature and seeks refuge in a corner. LSD causes monkeys to panic
and carp to swim close to the surface instead of near the bottom of their tanks.
Mouse (photos below) lost power of agility when given a tranquillizer and was unable
to climb back on to the rope. Under the influence of mescalin, a spider spins webs
with many imperfections.
