VENICE
LINK BETWEEN
ORIENT & OCCIDENT
by Marcel Brion
of the Académie Française
On the façade of St.Mark's
Cathedral, four colossal
bronze horses (detail right)
stamp their hooves on a
platform overlooking the great
square. They have reached
Venice after a long Odyssey.
Probably Greek in origin,
they once surmounted the
triumphal arch of Nero
and later that of Trajan in
Rome. They were taken to
Constantinople by the
Emperor Constantine in the
4th century and brought from
there to Venice by the Doge,
Enrico Dándolo, in 1204.
Napoleon Bonaparte installed
them in Paris in 1797, and
in 1815 they were returned
to Venice.
A
40
THE GREAT DOGE LOREDAN. Several versions exist of this
famous portrait of Leonardo Loredan (1438-1521), Doge of the
Republic of Venice. One painting hangs in the Museo Correr in
Venice; another in the Academia Carrara at Bergamo; a third in the
Dresden Art Gallery; and a fourth in the Museum of San Francisco,
U.S.A. Painted in 1501, the work has been attributed to Carpaccio
or to Giovanni Bellini. But there can be no doubt that it was
painted by a great Venetian artist.
iT the time when the Huns,
following their unsuccessful attempt
to invade China, were turning their
predatory ambitions westward, abrupt
and violent movements of peoples .
occurred, setting off what is known in
German as the "Volkerwanderungen",
the Great Migrations.
From Central Asia to the Danube
and the Rhine, Teutons and Slavs,
retreating in confusion before the on¬
slaught of the Huns, drove one another
from the lands of their ancestors
and, drawn by the fascination of the
South which has always stirred Nor¬
dic peoples, crossed the great river
barriers and made their way down to
France and Italy.
The shores of the Adriatic and the
hinterland, which was linked to them
politically and economically, were
inhabited by the Veneti, who had
begun to take advantage of their easy
access to the sea by fitting out small
fleets of merchant vessels, and when
necessary, of warships.
When they were overtaken by the
influx of migrating Teutonic and Slav
tribes, who had been driven from their
homelands by the Huns, the Veneti
found that their best hope of safety lay
in retreating to the thickly-scattered
islands in the lagoon formed by the
delta of the Po.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 42
MARCEL BRION, member of the Académie
Française and art historian, has written autho¬
ritative works on the Italian Renaissance and
German romanticism. His work "La Résurrec¬
tion des Villes Mortes" (Ed. Pion, Pans,
1959), translated into most European languages,
:s considered one of the great classics of
archaeology. Its English edition, "The World
of Archaeology,", was published by Elek,
London (two volumes, 1962), and by Mac-
Millan, New York (1962). Other works by
Marcel Brion in English translation, are :
"Romantic Art" (Thames and Hudson, London,
1960; McGraw Hill, New York, 1960) and
"Leonardo da Vinci" (Heinemann, London,
1955).


LINK BETWEEN ORIENT AND OCCIDENT (Continued)
City of mariners, traders and artists
wedded to the sea
The ship carrying St. Mark
the Evangelist reaches Venice,
depicted as two,, tiny islands
with four trees in this 12th
century Byzantine mosaic from
the Cathedral of St. Mark.
Down the centuries the master
glass-makers of Venice have
won renown for the technical
and artistic perfection of their
work. In 1292, owing to the
danger of fire, the glass furnaces
in the Rialto district were
removed to the island of Murano,
still a flourishing centre of the
art today. This eleventh century
engraving shows a Venetian
craftsman blowing glass.
The "barbarians," excellent horse¬
men but not seafarers, out of their ele¬
ment when they were not in the
saddle, were forced to abandon the
pursuit and leave the Veneti at peace
in their island retreats. The lime¬
stone mountains walling in the hinter¬
land of the Venetian States had been
no obstacle to the hordes of Attila or
his Teutonic and Slav allies; but water
was an impassable barrier to peoples
who could neither build nor handle
boats.
Thus, secure from invasion in their
new homes on the islands of the
lagoon, the inhabitants of Aquileia,
Altinum, Concordia, and Heracleia
energetically developed a civilization
based originally on trade in salt
abundantly provided by the still waters
of the lagoon and on fishing.
New towns such as Torcello, which
had a population of 20,000 but flour¬
ished only for a brief period, and
Venice, smaller but destined to a glor¬
ious future, acquired economic im¬
portance from the advantages of being
situated on islands, free from trouble¬
some neighbours, and able to devote
themselves to trade at a time when
the major mainland States were contin¬
ually being shaken by serious politi¬
cal crises.
ISLAND civilizations born
and developing under such conditions
rapidly rise to prosperity and fame
which, because they are impregnable
to threats from any quarter, enable
them in turn to impose their pre¬
ponderant power and influence.
Crete, the centre of the great
Aegean civilization, acquired the mas¬
tery of the Mediterranean and impart¬
ed her culture to the peoples living
around it; England, never invaded
since the Battle of Hastings, when the
Normans established their footing on
English soil, early developed an imper¬
ial rôle; Venice became Queen of the
Adriatic in the early Middle Ages, first
with the consent of, and later in oppo¬
sition to, Byzantium.
All these are examples of what can
be achieved given the two balancing
factors of favourable geographical
"isolation" and considerable overseas
expansion by nations of bold sea¬
farers, astute traders, and statesmen
skilful both in using strong trading links
as a basis for building up the diploma
tic relations which help to stimulate
trade, and in using trade itself, with
the wealth it commands and confers,
to establish trading posts, open up
spheres of influence, and impose overt
or hidden forms of protectorate and
colonization on nations which earlier
had opened their doors to them
and become their trading partners.
Within the narrow limits of her archi¬
pelago, with its little islands linked by
bridges, Venice soon grew rich through
her self-conferred monopoly in salt.
Later she spread a network of sea-
routes throughout the Mediterranean,
conducting an active import-export
trade between the European States,
Africa, and Asia Minor.
E,VEN after she acquired
prosperity through the glass and silk
industries, her rôle remained essentially
that of an intermediary; she had agents
in Bruges, Antwerp, Amsterdam,
London, Bremen, Florence and Genoa;
she received manufactured goods from
France, Germany, the Low Countries
and England, and carried them to all
the Mediterranean ports, where her
merchants had special concessions
and even districts reserved for them,
enjoying privileges of self-government
and extraterritoriality.
Steadily pursuing this policy,
governed solely by considerations of
free and fruitful trade, Venice interven¬
ed in the quarrels of the Italian States
and their neighbours only so far as
necessary to prevent the free circula¬
tion of goods and money from being
impeded by wars, profitable only to
arms-makers and the condottieri, or
professional military captains, and pro¬
ducing catastrophic disturbances for
importers and exporters.
Her own overseas trading posts
were miniature Venices, forrrjing
enclaves in other countries, and the
Venetian Republic likewise placed at
the disposal of Turkish, Greek, and
German merchants trading near the
Rialto, buildings, known as fondachi,
from the Arab word fondouk, where
they had their dwellings, offices, and
warehouses, all free from local police
jurisdiction. The Greeks and Dalma¬
tians similarly had their scuole, or guild
halls in which to hold meetings, per¬
form their religious rites, and admin¬
ister the property of their trade-
guilds, which remained entirely inde¬
pendent.

The constant osmosis thus going on
between the Venetian Republic and the
European and oriental nations with
which she traded made Venice the
most cosmopolitan city in the world,
where every language could be heard
in banks and shops, and where any
traveller could walk about in his
national dress without surprising
anyone.
Art and culture also benefited from
the fruitful contributions lavishly be¬
stowed by foreign civilizations: first
Byzantium, which long dominated
Venice both aesthetically and politi¬
cally, then Pisan and French sculpture,
German, Dutch and Flemish painting,
with that piquant touch of the exotic
which was also to be found in Aegean
art at the period when the Sea Peoples
were settling in Egypt and the influ¬
ence of Crete was beginning to be
felt on the mainland at Argos and
Mycenae.
The symbolic "wedding of the sea",
renewed year by year by the Doge on
Ascension Day, significantly perpetu¬
ated this long-standing alliance, im¬
posed by geography, between the
great merchant city and the element
which favoured the movement of trade.
Casting his gold ring into the sea
from the gilded State barge, the
Bucentaur, the Doge would say, in
Latin, "Desponsamus te, Mare, in
Signum veri perpetuique dominii." (We
espouse thee, oh sea, in token of our
real and everlasting dominion.)
A S with everything subject
to the vicissitudes which affect the
lives of States, this everlasting do¬
minion over the sea, celebrated by the
yearly marriage, dwindled through the
centuries into a mere fiction. Increas¬
ingly frequent European wars severed
the trade relations between the Adriatic
and the northern countries; in Italy
itself, ports such as Genoa or Pisa
contested and tried to wrest from the
Venetian Republic her ancient hege¬
mony; pirates, fitting out whole fleets,
attacked and pillaged the squadrons
of Venetian merchantmen, in spite of
their convoying warships.
The growing power of Spain, France,
and the Holy Roman Empire gradually
eroded Venice's political prestige until
she no longer held her former place
of honour in the concert of great
powers. The French invasions cost
her the Romagna region, Apulia, and
the control of the southern Adriatic,
which passed to the Pope. She had
no territorial ambitions in Italy and
true to her trading interests, she inter¬
vened in European affairs only to keep
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
r^f -2J1 J
im! 'j _ A*3.- K~E>
-*» im *
MARCO POLO
VENERATED
IN THE TEMPLE
OF THE 50 GENIUSES
Marco Polo's epic journey lasting 24 years, which took
him across the face of Asia and back again to Venice,
and the account he wrote of the kingdoms and marvels of
the East in "The Book of Ser Marco Polo" have won
for this enterprising Venetian a place in history as one of
the most illustrious travellers of all times. He left Venice
in 1271 and arrived back in 1295 (above, an impression
of Venice at that time), after making known in the heart
of China the renown and splendours of his native city.
Below right, an 18th century copy of an effigy of Marco Polo
venerated in "The Temple of the 50 Geniuses" in Canton
(China). The first printed edition of Marco Polo's book
was published in Nuremberg in 1477. Below left,
an Impression of Marco Polo by a 15th century engraver,
which appeared in the book.

LINK BETWEEN ORIENT AND OCCIDENT (Continued)
To thine own self be true...
open her mercantile communications by
land and sea.
One by one her Mediterranean pos¬
sessions slipped from her grasp during
the sixteenth and seventeenth cen¬
turies: the Morea region of Greece,
Cyprus, Crete and her other key island
possessions. Islam and Spain rerout¬
ed the trade in spices and other
oriental merchandise which had
brought wealth to Venice.
T.HE Portuguese were also
dangerous competitors, and it was
with the idea of resisting them that an
ingenious Venetian suggested to the
Senate that a canal might be cut
through the Isthmus of Suez to link
the Mediterranean directly with the
Red Sea and India, thus securing the
"route to the Indies" which in later
times was to be one of the major aims
of British policy. But, as a magistrate
sadly acknowledged at a meeting of
the Senate on July 5, 1610: "We have
lost all our trade, and the sea routes
of the western Mediterranean, and the
routes of the Levant are now used
only by a few companies, liable to
financial loss, short of ships, and
steadily growing weaker."
How was it that Venice, notwith¬
standing her political and commercial
decline, preserved her rôle as a great
international city, a focus of world
intellectual activity? At the risk of
appearing paradoxical, it must be
admitted that what saved Venice was
her carnival. The Venice carnival last¬
ed six months, from the first Sunday
in October until Lent. Unbridled plea¬
sure reigned, with disguises and masks
providing cover for every kind of
licence and extravagant behaviour.
When Voltaire describes the meet¬
ing, in a tavern, of exiled kings come to
Venice for the carnival, he gives a
farcical but true example of the extra¬
ordinary attraction exercised on the
whole of European society by a city
where pleasure was so easy to come
by and so benevolently authorized by
custom and law.
Taking part in the Venice carnival
had become almost a social obligation
for distinguished society; as also for
the less distinguished, and indeed
doubtful, company of adventurers of
every race and colour, who thronged
to Venice and under cover of the
mask, committed their misdeeds with
impunity.
There too were the charlatans,
magicians, esoterics and cabalists who
swarmed the capitals of all countries
in the eighteenth century. Represen¬
tatives of every nationality, including
turbaned Arabs and brightly robed
Moors, jostled each other in the gam¬
ing rooms, or ridotti, which were decor¬
ated with the utmost refinements of
splendour by the fashionable artists
of the Republic.
Foreigners in search of subtler
With the start of the 14th century, the genius and character of the arts which
had always been an Inherent part of and profoundly Influenced the life of
Venice flowered anew. The traditional association of Venice with the arts is
reflected in this detail of an 18th century painting by the great Canaletto
(Giovanni Antonio Canale). It depicts the crowds of Venetians who each year
flocked on Ascension Day to the Fair of St Roch, where artists displayed
the works they wished to sell.
Photo © National Gallery, London

entertainment found it at the theatre:
every evening there were performances
in seven theatres of opera, tragedy,
comic opera, and the commedia
dell'arte, plays without written lines
in which the actors showed dazzling
virtuosity in improvising new words
every time from a simple one-page
scenario posted in the wings.
Music lovers listened to sublime
concerts in the charitable institutions,
nicknamed "nightingales' cages,"where
orphan girls were brought up, being
taught to sing and play musical
instruments by the foremost masters
of the day. Out of doors one could
listen, as Goethe loved to do, to gon¬
doliers singing Tasso's poetry, taking
up the melody along the canals.
V.ENICE thus offered the
traveller an unending festival: in the
streets and squares there were fetes,
acrobats, mountebanks, minstrels,
trainers with their performing animals,
charlatans offering their wares; on the
canals, regattas were held, the first
competitor to arrive winning a purse of
gold and the last a young pig, and
there were processions of boats
decked out as mythological palaces.
The aristocrats and their noble
foreign guests gave exquisite con¬
certs for one another in the enchant¬
ing gardens of Murano, and balls in
their palaces, so sumptuously decorat¬
ed that Gustavus III, king of Sweden,
dazzled by their splendour, confessed
that such luxury was beyond him.
Eighteenth century Venice, whose
arsenals no longer employed more
than a few workers, and whose once
flourishing silk and glass industries
were almost dead, seemed, in this final
blaze of her old opulence, to be cele¬
brating for the last time her glory and
prosperity.
Fortunately Venice remains Venice,
that is to say a city unique for her
grace, beauty, and strangeness, the
silence of her canals, where the black
prows of gondolas thread their way,
the palaces resembling some fairy
construction in the Arabian Nights,
with the reflection of their dream-like
façades quivering in the water.
Around Venice still lies the garland
of islands of the lagoon: San Lazzaro
of the Armenians, where Byron lived
in an eastern monk's cell; Torcello,
now fever-ridden and deserted, its
gardens overlooked by its campanile,
which the Huns saw long ago rising
like a mirage from the sea; Murano,
where glass is heated and shaped in
the furnaces; Chioggia, where the red
and yellow sails of fishermen's barques
With its festivities,
concerts, theatrical
performances, and
particularly the
famous "Commedia
deirarte" whose
actors displayed an
astounding
virtuosity in
improvising their
lines, the Venice
Carnival was an
unending feast of
pleasure and
amusement,
attracting visitors
from many
countries. Beneath
this engraving
of 1610, depicting
actors "treading the
boards" in
St. Mark's Square,
the artist, Giacomo
Franco, has noted
the nationalities of
several spectators:
Greek, French,
Spanish, Turkish
and English.
painted with stars and pictures of the
saints, dance over the water; Burano,
where the magic bobbins click in the
deft hands of the lace-makers.
The incomparable charm of Venice
lies in the combination of all these
beauties and marvels, unrivalled by
any other city in the world, filling the
tourist with wonder and captivating the
art lover.
|N the Romantic period,
Venice became a peaceful retreat
where lovers came seeking conceal¬
ment, blissfully happy, or luxuriating in
despair. Venice used to be called a
dead city to render it still more ro¬
mantic and alluring. In reality it is a
bustling town, with countless ships
berthing, coming and going; where the
passers-by in the street have a quicker
and lighter step than anywhere else;
where there is tremendous intellec¬
tual activity; a town whose music fes¬
tivals attract the elite of music lovers
from all over the world, whose Film
Festival selects and awards prizes to
the best films from the five continents,
and whose Art Biennale has for almost
a century brought together, every two
years, the boldest and most outstand¬
ing works of painting, sculpture and
the decorative arts.
In this way Venice is perpetuating
her international calling, a calling
which goes back to the early Middle
Ages and which has been carried on
throughout the centuries in varying
forms that have always maintained the
same level of vitality and inspiration.
How can this vocation be followed in
the future? Venice should remain as
she now is, receptive to all new intel¬
lectual trends; but she should also
preserve the appearance and character
of a town which is unique the beauty
of her scenery and architecture, and
the picturesque quality of the life of
her streets, all cast their spell on the
sightseer.
She should not strive to modernize
herself; this would destroy the match¬
less harmony of the shell in which she
dwells, with its network of countless
canals; and it would obliterate that
wonderful unity of spiritual essence
and harmonious forms successive cen¬
turies have left intact Byzantine, Go¬
thic, Renaissance, Baroque, each in its
turn falling under the irresistible sway A»\
of the spirit of the place, which has
always been so happily wedded to
the spirit of the time.
