by
René Maheu
Director-General
of Unesco
IOR several years now, the
flood-tide of youth has risen irresis¬
tibly, and youth has won an increas¬
ingly important position in society.
Youth represents more than one-third
of the total world population in some
countries nearly half the population
and the role of young people is mount¬
ing because of the increasing call
made upon them by our technological
civilization with its steady demand for
adaptation and inventiveness. Yet the
gulf separating young people from
adults seems to be growing bigger
every day.
SYMBOL OF
INTERNATIONAL YEAR
FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
The design above is the work of
Victor Vasarely and was
commissioned by the International
Association of Art to commemorate
the current International Year for
Human Rights. It has been officially
adopted by the Association (an
organization created and supported
by Unesco) and its member
organizations in 57 countries. The
International Association of Art has
called on artists everywhere to
support world efforts to give force
to the principles adopted 20 years
ago in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights.

'UNESCO SHOULD BECOME
THE ORGANIZATION FOR YOUTH'
A poignant appeal that the problems of youth cannot be ignored in the
world today, was made on June 24 by René Maheu, Director-General
of Unesco, in a special address to Unesco's European National Commis¬
sions gathered at a regional conference in Monaco. "Unesco should
become the organization for youth," Mr. Maheu declared, "where young
people can put their questions freelyall their questionswithin the
framework of the world perspective." We publish below all the passages
from this address which bear on youth.
Adults were at first surprised, some¬
times amused, and often shocked, by
the tendencies of some young people
to escapist or even withdrawal behav¬
iour, as manifested in the vogue for
certain types of songs, fashions in
clothes and hairstyles, sexual freedom
and, more seriously, the taking of
drugs.
, Just as they were beginning to resign
themselves to these " differences",
adults have again been caught off
guard this time by the revolts which
have struck the most venerable institu¬
tions of society and the strongest of
governments. And the ultimate paradox
is that these revolts have been sparked
by university students who, one would
have thought, had the strongest rea¬
sons to be satisfied with the established
order, since the most promising
careers lay ahead of them.
This revolt is sweeping across vir¬
tually every part of the world, but it
is particularly striking in Europe where,
in many countries, it has taken on the
form of an open dispute, not only with
the university but with society as a
whole.
The situation is very grave. A
society rejected by youth is by defini¬
tion a society without a future, and
therefore condemned, regardless of
the force of authority or constraint that
nrray temporarily be brought to bear on
the protests and aspirations of youth,
by the pride, fears and the interests of
adults already established in life. In
my view, we are now witnessing the
rejection of a certain type of society,
or indeed a certain type of civilization.
It is not, as is often said, just a
matter of giving youth an ideal. For
the most part, young people already
have their own ¡deal. Even if it
is confused and often expressed in a
naive way, this ideal is eminently wor¬
thy, it consists of an idea a dream if
you will of human relations without
violence and without deception.
In contrast to this ideal, the kind of
society we are preparing to bequeath
to them fills them with horror on many
counts (even if it can satisfy their
immediate wishes as no previous
society has) because it profoundly
shocks their demands for justice and
peace. To them it seems to be the
adults who are lacking in ideals.
I believe that this situation confronts
Unesco with a major duty and a unique
opportunity to carry out, with new
vigour and on a wider scale, the ethical
activities which make up its essential
role. In this year, 1968, Unesco must
approach young people as ten years
ago it approached the less-developed
world, with the same openness of heart
and mind. By this I don't mean the
strengthening of just those activities
in Unesco's programme of direct inter¬
est to youth. What I have in mind is
a total change in the whole orientation
of Unesco, affecting the nature and
activities and the methods of our orga¬
nization.
I recall the fundamental change that
took place in Unesco ten years ago
with the mass entry into the organiza¬
tion of the developing countries, which
had just acceded to independence.
Whereas Unesco's work had until
then been almost exclusively con¬
cerned with promoting intellectual co¬
operation between developed countries,
almost overnight, it was converted into
a field operation organization for help¬
ing the under-privileged nations of the
world. These countries quickly found
in Unesco a true understanding and a
dynamic, positive friendship that has
continued with unfailing vigour. For
their part, the developing countries
have shown full confidence in Unesco,
and that confidence has likewise never
wavered, and gave Unesco a new
humanistic dimension as well as
accrued possibilities of action.
A similar change in our thinking and
structure is needed today this time,
deeper and more radical than before.
Unesco should become the organiza¬
tion for youth, the organization where
young people should be able to put
their questions freely all their ques¬
tions in the worldwide perspective;
where they can give form to their
dreams by seeking their contribution
to human co-operation and where they
can bring to bear all their fervour and
the limitless fountain of their skills and
ideas on behalf of disinterested action
for peace.
This is my fervent wish, and the *
appeal I make today, with my mind u/
assailed by anxiety but my heart filled
with hope.
