SCIENCE AND FUNDAMENTAL
CONCEPTS OF THINKING
by Paul Couderc
Winner of the 15th Kalinga Prize for the Popula¬
rization of Science, awarded by an international
jury appointed by Unesco, the French astronomer
and science writer Paul Couderc outlines, below,
his views on the need for impartiality in science,
and for regular science information to be avail¬
able to everyone.
O
«i
T
HE triumph of science
must ultimately engender peace by
endowing all mankind with better
means of livelihood, more leisure,
more culture and reasoning powers.
Progress put an end to the age of
the cave-dwellers; why should it not
put an end and the sooner the
better to the age of the barrack-
dwellers?
The time is not long past when
science was regarded as suspect and
frightening. Opprobrium was poured
on its ruthlessness, on the "cold-
hearted scientist" and his materialism,
which was equated, unfairly, with the
negation of any ideal (instead of being
contrasted with professions of so-
called idealism, as it properly should
be).
The "cold-hearted scientist" is one
of the myths most widely propagated
by the enemies of science and
PAUL COUDERC, astronomer at the Pans
Observatory and lecturer in astronomy at
the Ecole Polytechnique (Paris), has written
widely on cosmography and the structure
of the universe. Many of his books have
appeared in the "Que sais-je V collection
published by Presses Universitaires de
France (Paris), among them: "La Relativité"
(1966); "Les Eclipses" (1961); "L'Univers"
(published by Arrow Books, London, as
"The Wider Universe", 1960); "Le Calen¬
drier" (1961); "Histoire de l'Astronomie"
(1961) and "L'Astrologie" (1957).
especially by the zealots of spurious
science and occultism. It is obviously
easier to deceive the multitude when
one is dealing with those who "respect
the mystery at the heart of things",
who can be fobbed off with pure
verbalism and who confuse irrational
belief with reasonable knowledge.
This bane of scientific illiteracy may
perhaps have lost its hold; people
nowadays seem increasingly conscious
of the handicap of insufficient
scientific knowledge in the modern
age. Henceforth, science is a factor
of vital social importance. It offers
man the only chance of building a
better future and breaking his fetters;
it is the only means of assuring man
a longer, easier and happier life.
In our vindication of science, we
are not confusing material comfort
with happiness. The individual rarely
owes his happiness directly to the
pursuit of research. Moreover, the
seat of happiness is in the emotions
rather than the intellect the joys of
the family, moral satisfaction, deep-
felt emotions aroused by music,
poetry, literature, films or the theatre.
Scientists are no more beyond the
reach of feeling than other men, nor
do they wish to be.
But obviously, art and enjoyment
demand freedom and leisure. When
prehistoric man spent all his waking
hours protecting himself and finding
food, he hardly had time for meditation
or amusement: this explains the
extreme slowness of early progress,
contrasted with its remarkable speed
today.
Those who belittle scientific achieve¬
ments have forgotten the advances
made in medicine and surgery, the
alleviation of pain and sleeplessness.
The expectation of life has doubled in
fifty years, and life has become less
arduous.
Science moves so fast and has
become so vast and complex that the
man in the street can no longer fully
participate in the life of his time
without some intelligent popularization
of knowledge. Even the scientist
needs popularization in fields other
than his own.
Popularization aims to make the
march of science intelligible to the
layman, in simple, clear, direct and
if possible vivid, but above all accurate
terms. The attempt can never be
completely successful, for over¬
simplification always entails some
deformation; especially as the pro-
foundest scientific truths, in nuclear
physics or cosmology, for example,
are now becoming so abstruse that
there is great danger in deviating from
them even slightly. In any event, the
popular science writer must take care
not to slip into sensationalism or
triviality. The reader must be pre¬
pared to make an intellectual effort:
he must want to understand.
Furthermore, the new ideas and
images of the universe must infiltrate
education as soon as possible and
become part of every schoolboy's
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
15

CONCEPTS OF THINKING (Continued)
The star in the suburbs
16
stock in trade, to ensure that the gulf
is not too wide between ordinary
thinking and the mental processes of
the research scientist. We call the
properties or relationships we learnt
at an early age "self-evident".
If steps were taken to keep
education up-to-date, everyone would
start on the same intellectual footing
in each country, or very nearly so;
and some inter-communication would
be possible between the privileged few
who wrest from nature her secrets and
the multitude who can now do no more
than benefit from the applications of
science.
The people will become an in¬
exhaustible store of new research
workers, provided they are informed
and instructed in a scientific spirit, not
one of mystery, and are shown the
hallmarks of real scientific proof,
instead of the vain pretensions of
spurious science. From the ranks of
those still barred from the high schools
and universities by a selective social
system that is deplorable, many men
of science might emerge, and once in
a while a genius.
Think of the cases (only too rare)
where a brilliant mind has been
rescued, by some lucky chance, from
an occupation with no future. Think,
for example, of Faraday, the book¬
binder's workman, who fathered the
prodigy of the present day electrical
industry; think of Alexander Fleming,
the son of poor Scottish moorland
crofters, who worked for five years as
a clerk in a shipping company, until
a small legacy enabled him to take
up medicine; but for that legacy, we
should probably still be without
penicillin and the other antibiotics.
1 should like to illustrate by
the example of astronomy how the
evolution of science can change the
laws of human reasoning.
For primitive tribes the world is a
frightening place. They have an
affective conception of the universe:
they people heaven and earth with
higher powers, capricious and menac¬
ing, whom they must endeavour to
placate. Meteorology is confused
with astronomy, and there is no inkling
of natural law.
This was undoubtedly the world of
prehistoric man. But little by little,
the alternation of day and night, the
unvarying sequence of the phases of
the moon, the succession of the
seasons, provided the primitive peo¬
ples with time units, and led to the
notion of regular cycles in the
universe.
In the sixth century before our era,
in the Eastern Mediterranean, the earth
was identified as a celestial body,
spherical and surrounded by space,
from the observation of its shadow
on the moon in eclipse and from the
progressive change in the field of
stars visible to the traveller.
The idea of a single vertical
dimension, and the notion of up and
down, were gradually superseded by
the concept of an infinite number of
vertical dimensions converging towards
the centre of the earth, and the possi¬
bility of being able to stand upright
at the antipodes. What a revolution
in thought!
Similarly, the concrete reality of
darkness, with the antithesis of light
and dark, was superseded by the
notion of shadow. Only light is real;
darkness is merely the absence of
light. This vital step forward was
also due to an understanding of the
eclipses and the phases of the moon.
N
EXT, the attempts of the
Greeks to account for the movements
of the planets geometrically mark the
final advent of scientific rationalism:
from then on, it is assumed that any
natural phenomenon can be explained;
the concept of natural law carries all
before it, ousting the supernatural and
fantastic. Mystical needs still have
their place, but as a thing apart, hardly
impinging on science.
Fifteen centuries later, Copernicus
and Galileo supplied the proof that
the earth is not the centre of the
universe. This changed the whole
face of philosophy; the inhabitant of a
modest planet revolving round the sun
cannot think along the same lines as
a privileged denizen of the centre of
the universe. A study of our galaxy
now shows the sun to be a star in
the suburbs of a multitude of hundreds
of thousands of millions of other stars
like it: and the giant telescopes
reveal that the universe is filled with
thousands of millions of galaxies
similar to our own.
Lastly, these galaxies are running
away from each other in an expanding
universe, where space itself is not
only curved but dilating. What, then,
is space? Matter? Gravitation? At
this very time, these questions are
moving from the metaphysical to the
scientific plane. Thus, science again
appears as the "power behind the
throne" in our philosophy, returning
the fundamental concepts of our
thinking to the melting-pot.
Astronomy is still in the forefront
of the natural sciences, and the most
abstract ideas are invoked in contenr-
porary cosmology. At the same time,
allying as it does the beauty of the
stars and the poetry of the heavens
to infinite scales of time and space,
it remains a particularly apt medium
for bringing the conquests of modern
science within the grasp of the general
public.
CHINA SEA
