'Our only realistic hope of achieving the
total eradication of illiteracy is by a
complete reversal of traditional attitudes
and by regarding eradication not only
as an end in itself, but as one which
must be attained at once and at all costs'
by Sir Charles Jeffries
We publish below the final chapter from a recent book, "Illiteracy: A World Prob¬
lem" by Sir Charles Jeffries (Pall Mall Press, London, Frederick A. Praeger,
New York, 1967). Sir Charles advocates a much broader frontal assault on
the world problems of illiteracy than Unesco does at the present stage. Never¬
theless the "Unesco Courier" feels that the reflections of this important world
personality will help to bring into sharper focus for world opinion the dramatic
situation created by the growing number of illiterates in the world today.
26
A
Text copyright © Pall Mall Press. Reproduction prohibited.
S one turns the pages of
the official reports and the news¬
letters of the organizations dedicated
SIR CHARLES JEFFRIES has had a dis¬
tinguished career m British Government ser¬
vice. He is now Secretary of the Ranfurly
Library Service, London, a non-profit or¬
ganization helping in the struggle against
illiteracy by sending books as free gifts
to developing countries where educational,
social and economic progress is ham¬
pered by a shortage of suitable reading
material. In addition to his latest book on
Illiteracy, Sir Charles is the author of many
books, including "Transfer to Power: Prob¬
lems of the Passage to Self-Government"
(1960) and "Ceylon: The Path to Indepen¬
dence" (1962).
to the war against illiteracy, it is im¬
possible not to be inspired by the
many efforts in so many parts of the
world pressing towards the same end.
To make a complete catalogue would
fill many volumes. I can only here
pick out a few illustrations at random.
For instance, in north-east Brazil,
where the illiteracy rate is about 75
per cent, there is the Cruzada ABC
which aims, with the support of the
Presbyterian churches in America, to
produce one million adult literates by
1970. There is, in Zambia, a similar
target set by the Ministry for Commun¬
ity Development and Social Welfare.
In Bolivia, there are "nuclear schools",
which have nothing to do with atomic
physics but are rural schools used as
the "nuclei" of intensive drives against
illiteracy.
In Delhi, capital of India, with a
quarter of a million illiterates,
thousands are being taught to read
in hundreds of classes organized by
the city's Adult Education Board; and
the same kind of thing is happening
in other cities of India. In Iran, the
army is on the march in this peaceful
war. In Kenya and the Ivory Coast,
television has been brought into the
battle. In Cameroon, thousands of
school teachers keep their schools
open after hours, teaching the mothers
the same lessons that their children
have learned during the day.

V^
Photo Unesco - J -C. Bols
Perched atop an electric pylon, a Mali technician explains to a member of an experimental literacy
campaign the Bambara and French vocabulary used by working electricians in this West African
country. The terms are being used, along with other technical vocabulary gathered from other
sources, in practical literacy courses now under way in Mali, aimed at about 6,000 adults
working' in government services and 100,000 persons employed in rice and cotton production.
Everywhere governments and mu¬
nicipal authorities, churches and volunt¬
ary bodies, professionals and amateurs
are engaged in the great work. Every¬
where people are learning to read by
the thousands a year. Again, to take
some instances at random from the
official statistics, the number of adults
taught to read and write in 1962 was
191,273 in Ethiopia, 4,000 in Malawi,
18,783 in Rhodesia. In 1963 nearly
400,000 learned in Iran, 116,000 in
Mexico.
Reading the many reports, with
their genuine record of success and
their heartening evidence of so much
good done to so many people, one
is tempted, despite the immensity of
the task, to take comfort from Clough's
well-known lines:
For while the tired waves, vainly
[breaking,
Seem here no painful inch to gam,
Far back, through creeks and inlets
[making,
Comes silent, flooding in, the
[main.
One is tempted: but it will not do.
While I have been writing this book,
the number of people alive in the world
has increased by something like the
whole current population of the British
Isles. In the six years 1961-66, the
number of illiterates in the world has
increased by something like 200
million. By how much (if at all) has
the capacity of the world to feed its
people increased in this period? The
inability of 1,000 million people to
read and write remains a millstone
round the neck of progress . . .
Up to now, men have been comforted
by the notion that, with the develop¬
ment of universal primary education,
the problem will solve itself, not as
quickly as the idealist might have
hoped, but still within a generation or
two. This, after all, is what has
happened in the developed countries.
"Among the various cultural, social
and economic factors related to illiter¬
acy, obviously the most important is
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
27

FOR TOTAL ERADICATION (Continued)
'Like learning to walk,
to talk, to plough,
to ride a bicycle or swim'
the education of children in primary
schools. If all children of school age
in any country attended school for a
sufficient length of time, there would
eventually be no adult illiterates in the
population, except those mentally
deficient and incapable of learning
to read and write. It follows, therefore,
that the best means of preventing
illiteracy is to provide adequate educa¬
tion for all children."
So stated an official Unesco publi¬
cation in 1957 (1). And a Committee of
the Commonwealth Education Confe¬
rence of 1964 declared: "The target for
the main long-term effort to eradicate
illiteracy is obviously in the schools."
T
28
HE word "obviously" is
recurrent and significant Punch used
to have a feature called "Glimpses of
the Obvious", in which it ridiculed por¬
tentous platitudes in public pronoun¬
cements. I have no wish to ridicule
these statements, which are "ob¬
viously" true, but the attitude they
express is based on an illusion which
has now been shattered
Quoting United Nations statistics,
the Population Profile issued by the
Population Reference Bureau Inc. of
Washington, DC, on September 26,
1966, revealed that, of the 373 million
school-age children in the world, only
about 115 million or 30 per cent are
in school; and of those who are, the
majority will not even complete the
primary course and will very likely
relapse into illiteracy.
Even in a relatively advanced country
such as Brazil, the average number
of years of education completed is
little over two and a half. In India
(to quote the same authoritative
source), there are 55 million children
in school, of whom 40 million are in
the elementary grades, and 132.5
million not receiving any formal edu¬
cation. The population of India is
growing by at least 12 million a year.
A parallel situation exists over vast
areas of Asia, Africa and Latin Ameri¬
ca. Nearly 85 per cent of the births
occurring in the world today take place
in the "developing" areas, and in many
of these countries something like half
(1) World Illiteracy at Mid-Century.
the total population is under the age
of twenty-one.
In the teeth of these stark and
inescapable facts, only the most
ostrich-like complacency could pretend
that any substance remains in the con¬
ventional assumption that the problem
of illiteracy will be solved in any
foreseeable time by the operation of
an expanded system of formal educa¬
tion.
The countries concerned already
devote a much greater proportion of
their national budgets to education
than do the developed countries on
an average some 15 to 20 per cent as
against some 10 to 15 per cent. Even
if there were no question of population
increase, existing educational budgets
would have to be doubled or trebled
at once in order to provide primary
schooling for anything like every child
in the world.
It is evident that this is simply not
practicable. The difficulty is not
merely financial. Schools have to be
organized, built and staffed. Buildings
might be improvised, but teachers can¬
not be produced by improvisation.
They can only be obtained from the
ranks of the relatively few people who,
in the developing countries, have
themselves had enough education to
enter the teaching profession. Such
people are naturally in great demand
for other and usually less exacting
and more remunerative or glamorous
kinds of employment.
Those who are willing to teach have
to be trained; training institutions have
to be arranged for, and this takes time
as does the training itself. Mean¬
while, the number of babies born con¬
tinues to increase, and the number of
infants who die continues to decrease.
To add the final touch of gloom, one
must recall that, in any case, a large
proportion of the children taught will
get no lasting benefit from their school¬
ing and will quickly reinforce the ranks
of the adult illiterates.
It is a losing battle, and the conclu¬
sion cannot be escaped that the world
will be lucky if it can keep the numbers
of adult illiterates from continuing to
increase above the thousand million
during the rest of the century, how¬
ever much it may succeed in reducing
the percentages of illiterates in the
population. Must the battle be lost?
I believe not, if the strategy and tactics
can be radically changed before it be¬
comes too late. But it is a very big
"if".
It took the U.S.S.R. from twenty to
forty years to break the back of its
problem of illiteracy. It took forty-four
years to raise the literacy rate in the
Philippines from something like 5 per
cent to something like 75 per cent; and
at that rate it continues to stand.
Since the number of adult illiterates
remains fairly steady round about
4 million, the islands after all the
effort still have to be classed as an
"area of illiteracy".
But the world has not now got forty
or even twenty years to indulge in the
luxury of illiteracy. The information I
have examined in the writing of this
book has led me to the firm conviction
that there can be no half measures in
tackling this problem. Nothing short
of an all-out effort to achieve 100 per
cent literacy (or as near as may be)
everywhere and at once is worth
doing.
I T is true that any literacy
campaign does at least benefit some,
perhaps many individuals, and that is
all to the good. If, however, it
succeeds only in making a proportion
of the population literate, experience
shows that at a certain level, varying
from country to country, progress slows
down or stops altogether, so that the
percentage of illiterates in the country
concerned remains stable or decreases
very slowly.
So long as that figure remains at,
say, 25 per cent or more (and in seve¬
ral areas it is more like 75 per cent),
the country is open to all the internal
evils which result from "two nations"
of first-class and second-class citi¬
zens; while in its external relations it
continues to be at a disadvantage com¬
pared with countries in which illiteracy
has ceased to exist to any significant
extent. The dangers of perpetuating
these divisions in the present explo¬
sive world situation do not need to be
demonstrated.
Of course, universal literacy cannot
in itself make the world better, richer
or more peaceful: that depends upon
people Literacy is a tool, and what
matters is how people use it. But it

Small traders and
artisans find it difficult
to make ends meet
in the large cities of
Algeria. Algeria
has a vast potential for
industrial and
agricultural expansion
and is determined
to transform its
economy, but its efforts
are hampered by
widespread illiteracy.
Literacy programmes
launched with Unesco's
help in two industrial
zones and a rich
agricultural area are
helping to provide
Algeria with the
qualified manpower it
vitally needs.
does give people a chance which,
without it, they do not have.
It is arguable that people would
have been happier if they had been left
to pursue a simple way of life outside
the turmoil of the contemporary world;
but the argument is pointless, because
the contemporary world is one world
and all the people are involved in it
together, whether they like it or not.
We have to accept that fact, and make
terms with the world as it is.
If it is agreed that an all-out effort
must be made, the first and basic need
is to get clear the relationship between
literacy and "education". However
right in principle it may be to regard
the eradication of illiteracy as an edu¬
cational problem, the practical fact is
that, in .this case, the best is the ene¬
my of the good.
Education involves much more than
teaching people to read and write.
That is the whole point. It is the
"much more" which the world cannot
afford. Learning to read and write,
whether by an adult or by a child, is
not in itself education. It is the acqui¬
sition of a skill. It is in the same cate¬
gory as learning to walk, to talk, to
prepare food, to sow seeds, hoe a
field, ride a bicycle or swim.
No one thinks of these things as
education. They are skills which peo¬
ple need in order to live as human
beings, and they are learned and
taught within the circle of family or
neighbourhood. Anyone who has
learned them can teach others and
does so as a matter of course, without
any organized system. "
s.IURELY it is evident that,
if the politicians, planners and admi¬
nistrators would accept this view of
the problem of illiteracy, an entirely
new and simpler approach to its solu¬
tion would at once become possible.
By all means let educational program¬
mes multiply and develop as fast as
they can: no sensible person would
wish to prejudice their progress. We
are not here concerned, however, with
those who can benefit from them. Our
concern is with the millions of children
who will never go to school and with
the millions of adults who have never
had the chance of going to school.
I yield to none in my respect for
educationists and their work, but the
fact that the problem of illiteracy has
usually been considered as part of
their department has tended to cloud
the real issue. With the best inten
tions, the Teheran Congress on the
Eradication of Illiteracy in 1965, and
other authoritative bodies have urged
the importance of not treating the era¬
dication of illiteracy as an end in itself
and of integrating it with programmes
of child and adult education.
Nothing else was to be expected;
yet I suggest that it is fundamentally
wrong, in the practical situation in
which the world is placed, to hold back
the teaching of literacy while educa¬
tional and social programmes are being
developed. It is only by a complete
reversal of traditional attitudes and by
regarding the eradication of illiteracy
not only as an end in itself, but as
an end which must be attained at once
and at all costs, that the world has
any realistic hope of achieving it.
Indeed, it offers the only hope of
ultimately securing the necessary ex¬
pansion of the educational system
proper, and of ensuring that the money
poured into it is not, as at present,
largely wasted.
It is surely self-evident that a com¬
munity in which everyone can read
and write whether or not it has a
developed educational system is in a
far better condition to maintain itself
and improve its position in the cir¬
cumstances of the modern world than
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
29

FOR TOTAL ERADICATION (Continued)
If the world wants its people to be literate,
it can have that
and the moon as well'
a community in which only a limited
number of people are literate.
Once people are able to read and
write, they can educate themselves,
provided that they have access to the
necessary literature; this is an absolute
condition of success. Not all will be
able or willing to take advantage of
the opportunities which literacy opens
up to them, but many will.
This is true of adults: it is even
more true of the young. Moreover,
the children who do go to school will
not afterwards suffer the fate of
those who return to an illiterate
environment. Thus, the eradication of
illiteracy will both make for greater
general prosperity, enabling more to
be spent on formal education, and also
be a potent factor in progress towards
the ideal of an educated society.
The target of concentrated effort
must, therefore, be the establishment
of a universal social custom by which
all children, whether they go to school
or not, will be taught to read and write
as certainly and as naturally as they
are taught to talk and walk.
Whenever adults are taught literacy,
they must at the same time have it
impressed on them that their first duty
is to pass the skill on to their own
families and children. For a literate
parent to have illiterate children should
be stigmatised as a social disgrace.
I
30
HIS will not, however,
entirely solve the problem, since there
are many communities in which there
is no early prospect of even a majority
of adults of the present generation
becoming literate. In such cases, it
will be necessary to extend the scope
of literacy programmes to cover out-
of-school children as well as adults.
But, if literacy is to be taken out of
the purview of the education or "com¬
munity development" authorities, who
is to look after it? If I were prime
minister of a developing country, I
would create a Ministry of Literacy and
give the minister full cabinet rank and
no other responsibilities. I doubt if it
could be done any other way for, of
course, it involves spending a lot more
money than has hitherto been thought
of as the suitable allocation for literacy
work, and the money will have to be
fought for at the highest level.
In theory, it could be argued that the
issue is so important that existing
educational or other programmes
should be cut back in its favour; but
such a proposition would hardly be
likely to receive general assent. It is
more practical and more in the inte¬
rests of the developing countries to
assume that the cost of expanding
literacy teaching for children and adults
will need funds over and above exist¬
ing budgets. What, then, would be
involved?
The whole basis of the approach
now suggested is that literacy instruc¬
tion needs no special expertise or pro¬
fessional qualification. Anyone of
average ability and intelligence can be
trained to do it, and, once it ceases
to be mixed up with other educational
and social activities, it can be entrusted
in the main to parents, relatives and
public-spirited volunteers. Paid staff
will be needed only for organization
and administration.
Primers, teaching aids and reading
matter at various levels will be essen¬
tial, and this will be the chief item of
expense; but for the most part it will
only involve making larger printings
of material already prepared in con¬
nexion with school or adult education
programmes.
It will be recollected that, in 1963,
Unesco estimated that it would cost
about £700 million to make 330 million
adults literate in ten years. If we
double this to bring in the children,
and add half as much again to the
total to cover rising costs, a figure of
£2,000 million may be taken to repre¬
sent the rough overall cost of eradi¬
cating illiteracy.
Though this is only a guess, I sug¬
gest that it may fairly be accepted as
a reasonable estimate of the money
required. £2,000 million is a huge
sum, but it does not look so large if
it is considered as £200 million a year
for ten years. In the 1963 estimate,
it was calculated that the developing
countries themselves could produce
75 per cent about £500 million of
the £700 million needed.
One of the reasons why it was not
practicable to proceed with the 1963
scheme was that those countries
found it difficult to see their way to
providing so high a proportion of the
cost from their own resources.
Nevertheless, it is fair to assume, for
present purposes, that they should be
able to find an average of £50 million
a year, bringing the amount needed
to be provided by the world collec¬
tively down to £150 million a year.
c ONTRIBUTIONS towards
this large sum which could be made
by charitables sources might be quite
substantial. Most fund-raising pro¬
jects in this context have so far been
initiated by religious bodies and mainly
supported by members of churches.
An appeal made on broad grounds of
humanity and the public interest might
well, if efficiently conducted, succeed
in attracting a considerable response
in the more affluent countries from
people who are indifferent or even
hostile to avowedly religious causes.
Even so, the bulk of the money
would certainly have to come from
government sources under interna¬
tional or bilateral aid schemes. It may
be said that this is asking for the
moon; it is precisely that. "Whether
we reach the moon is quite unimpor¬
tant in comparison to the question
whether we will help human beings to
live, and to live as human beings are
meant to live", says Dr Visser 't Hooft,
former Secretary of the World Council
of Churches.
I do not know, any more than any
other member of the public, how much
the world collectively is spending
annually on space research and travel,
let alone on producing weapons of
destruction which would defeat their
own object if ever used. One must
guard against the dangers of over¬
simplification, of course,' and it would
be naive to suppose that the great
powers are at all likely to reduce their
space and defence programmes in or¬
der to promote universal literacy, how¬
ever sensible they would show them¬
selves to be in doing so.
Yet there is really no need to pose
these as alternatives. In the scale of
public expenditure by the affluent na¬
tions, the cost of eradicating illiteracy,
if shared among them, would be trivial.
If the world wants its people to be
literate, it can have that and the moon
as well. Moreover, it is an important
consideration that, if the job is once

"l 1 I'll i ¡\ j
The Senate Building in Teheran where
the World Congress of Ministers of
Education on the Eradication of Illiteracy,
organized by Unesco, met from
September 8 to 19, 1965.
Representatives of 88 countries adopted
the strategy from which the present
Experimental Literacy Programmes
have developed. September 8 is
now celebrated each year as
International Literacy Day, to mark the
anniversary of the historic meeting
in Teheran.
thoroughly done, it will never have to
be done again. The expenditure will
not be recurrent.
It is beyond question that the estab¬
lishment of universal illiteracy would
enormously increase the human re¬
sources available for scientific and
intellectual as well as economic pro¬
gress. It would greatly improve the
prospect of finding solutions to the
problems arising from the growth in
the world population. It might even
affect that growth, for the undoubted
statistical connexion between popu¬
lation increase and low standard of
living may also indicate a connexion
with a high rate of illiteracy.
At any rate, it is a fact coinciden¬
tal or not that, leaving out of account
changes in population due to migration,
the rise in numbers in countries with
a low illiteracy rate tends to be appre¬
ciably slower than in those with a high
illiteracy rate.
The Teheran Conference of 1965,
"convinced that the struggle against
illiteracy, aimed at the total eradica¬
tion from our planet of the scourge of
ignorance, is a moral imperative for
our generation," concluded its recom¬
mendations with:
A SOLEMN AND URGENT APPEAL
To the United Nations, its Specialized
Agencies and, in the first place to
Unesco;
to regional bodies concerned with de¬
velopment in general and education
in particular;
to non-governmental organizations
which include assistance, direct or
indirect, to education in their opera¬
tional programmes;
to religious, social and cultural institu¬
tions;
to national and international founda¬
tions, both public and private;
to educators, scientists and scholars,
to economic and trade union leaders,
and to all men of goodwill:
to do everything in their power to
arouse public opinion with a view to
intensifying and accelerating the world¬
wide attack on illiteracy; and in parti¬
cular to exert their influence on all
responsible leaders:
to ensure that literacy work is an
integral and essential part of every
development plan in countries where
illiteracy is rife;
to increase, so far as may be prac¬
ticable and appropriate, the national
and international resources set aside
for the fight against illiteracy;
to make possible the provision of
additional resources for development
in general and for literacy work in par¬
ticular as and when further funds be¬
come available through a reduction of
military expenditures or for other
reasons;
to harness to the full all available
information media for propagating the
new concept of adult literacy;
to ensure that priority in the alloca¬
tion of available resources is accorded
to the fight against the great human
afflictions that constitute a major
threat to peace, namely hunger,
disease and ignorance, among which
illiteracy occupies a place of key im¬
portance.
"To arouse public opinion"... that
is the root of the matter. This is sup¬
posed to be the age of democracy,
the century of the common man. Yet
such is the fantastic paradox of the
times it is notorious that, in the great
public matters which most nearly affect
his life and welfare, the common man
too often finds himself inexorably
involved in programmes and policies
for which he must labour, pay and die,
but to which he is personally indiffe¬
rent or positively opposed.
T HE will of the people
cannot prevail unless it is founded on
knowledge, clearly stated and effec¬
tively communicated. An illiterate
people has neither access to know¬
ledge nor ability to formulate its wishes
and express them in the places where
decisions are taken.
If the common peoples of the world
once realize what they are needlessly
losing through the handicap of illiter¬
acy, they will demand that, in the
words of the Conference report, "like
all other forms of bondage, illiteracy
the enslaving of the mind must be
abolished".
If they once realize that, if only the
authorities will take the trouble, it can
be abolished, once and for all, within
a reasonable time and at relatively
moderate cost, they will demand im- 01
mediate, resolute and effective action, V I
and be ready to provide the necessary
money and manpower.
