36
GREAT MEN
GREAT EVENTS
KARL MARX
Born in Trier (Germany) in 1818, the
son of a jurist, the man who was to
become the founder of "scientific socia¬
lism" inspired many revolutionary move¬
ments that have marked world history in
the 20th century. In his early years
Karl Marx aspired to an academic career,
and studied law, history and philosophy
at Bonn and Berlin. He devoted his doctor's
thesis to Epicurus and Democritus, but
after his hopes for a university career
failed to materialize, he turned to jour¬
nalism. At the age of 24 he was editor
of a radical newspaper in Cologne, which
was suppressed a year later. He then
went to Pans where he began his life-long
association with Friedrich Engels, the Ger¬
man socialist theoretician. Together they
collaborated on numerous critical studies
and notably the "Communist Manifesto",
published in London in 1848. Marx, now 30,
had written that he would embark on the
"realization" of philosophy. Philosophers,
he affirmed, had only interpreted the world,
the time had come to change it. For
the rest of his life, Marx sought to explain
the workings of the economic system and
to change society. The vicissitudes of
politics led him to move from Paris to
Brussels and then to Cologne, but finally,
in 1849, he settled in London where he
remained until his death in 1883. Here,
in 1864, he helped to found the First Inter- ,
national and became its theoretician and
guide, and here, in 1867, after studies
that had engaged him for 15 years, he
published the first volume of his major
work, "Das Kapital". The second and
third volumes appeared after Marx's death
through the devotion of Engels, who spent
the rest of his life collating the various
manuscripts and supervising new transla¬
tions and editions. The written works of
Marx, books, essays', articles and his volu¬
minous correspondence, have never ceased
to stimulate a world-wide torrent of analyt¬
ical studies, commentaries and polemics.
To mark the 150th anniversary of the
birth of the great German thinker, the
International Council of Philosophy and
Humanistic Studies and the International
Social Science Council organized a sym¬
posium on "The Role of Karl Marx in the
Development of Contemporary Scientific
Thought", in Unesco House, Paris, last
month. "Whether we accept Marxism or
reject it", declared Mr. René Maheu, Di¬
rector-General of Unesco, at the open¬
ing of the symposium, "whether we adopt
it as a dogma or combat it as an evil,
whether we use it as a method or de¬
nounce it as propaganda. Marx lives on
among us by virtue of the questions he
makes us ask ourselves about the age
we live in, in. our twofold search for truth
and justice".
MUHAMMAD
IQBAL
Muhammad Iqbal, Pakistan's greatest
poet-philosopher, died at the age of 65 in
1938, nine years before the creation of
the State whose independence he was
amongst the first to advocate. But his
fame extends far beyond the frontiers
of Pakistan of which he was one of the
founders. He is revered as a spiritual
guide by millions of Muslims in the Indo-
Pakistan sub-continent and throughout the
Islamic world. A distinguished writer of
prose and a great lyric and philosophic
poet, he wrote with equal wealth of
expression in English, Urdu and Persian.
Some of his most profound works are
written in Persian because it is a lan
guage familiar to cultured Muslims in the
region, and lends itself admirably to the
expression of certain philosophical concepts
and the symbolism of poetry which is
in turn familiar ana transcendent. ,ln
a thousand forms, Iqbal expressed -the
free creative movement of life in time,
despite the inevitable approach of death.
"The possibility of changing the present
conditions", he wrote, "is the greatest
attribute and the greatest gift of man."
In his view the Koranic faith and the
evolution of science join forces in the
perspective of mankind's liberation. His
writing constantly attests to his belief in
the destiny of man whatever criteria may
be used by different civilizations in their
search for a more perfect world. As
one whose immense scholarship encom¬
passed all the philosophical systems of
Orient and Occident, he was pre-eminently
qualified to be a builder of bridges bet¬
ween East and West. His outstanding
works are those composing his trilogy
The Secrets of the Self, The Mysteries of
Selflessness and The Javid-nama. An
English translation from the Persian of
The Javid-nama has been published In the
Unesco Collection of Representative
Works (see Bookshelf, page 37).
JOHANN
GUTENBERG
Europe's father of printing was Johann
Gutenberg, who was born in Mainz (Ger¬
many) and died there just five centuries
ago (1468). Printing the art which serves
all arts actually began in China and the
technique of using movable type cut in
metal was developed and perfected there
early in the 11th century A.D. Several
centuries before this, the Chinese had
already been the first people to use
engraved wooden blocks for printing texts,
which were reproduced on rice paper.
Nevertheless, Gutenberg's achievements
amply justify his renown. The outstand¬
ing discovery he made was how to cast
movable type in quantity, accurately and
quickly. His invention freed the West
from its dependence on the laborious and
costly copying of manuscripts by hand
and brought about an economic and cul¬
tural revolution. A master glodsmith, Gu¬
tenberg was living in Strasbourg in 1436
when, it is believed, he conceived the
idea of speeding up the reproduction of
the texts that were hand copied by the
monks of St. Arbogast. A Dutchman,
Laurens Coster, had already had the idea
of printing from movable letters of wood,
but Gutenberg rightly considered that
letters engraved in metai would give
better results. On his return to Mainz
he published the so-called Fragments of
the Last Judgement, several editions of a
Latin grammar and some calendars. He
cast a full set of type from which in 1456
he printed the famous 42-line Bible, follow¬
ed by a 36-line Bible (1460). From then
on printing quickly spread throughout
Europe. Gutenberg's enterprises ran him
deeply into debt and he died a poor man
whose name remained unknown for cen¬
turies.
CARLOS
REYLES
The first outstanding novelist in modern
Uruguayan literature, Carlos Reyles, was a
cattle rancher who devoted himself to
writing. Reyles, who was born and died
in Montevideo (1868-1938), travelled widely
and spent the best part of his life In
Seville and Paris. In his first successful
novel Seba and In La Raza de Cain (Of
Cain's Stock) he strikingly depicts the
transformation of life in the countryside of
Uruguay at the end of the 19th ce,ntury.
And in El Gaucho Florido (1932), he recalls
his country's harsh . and austere past.
Carlo Reyles also wrote many short stories
and essays on the philosophical and
aesthetic trends he, found in Paris at the
turn of the century. His masterpiece,
inspired by his love for Seville, is El Embru¬
jo de Sevilla (Seville's Bewitchment).
