On June 25, 1967, satellites were
used to relay a live programme
simultaneously to television
audiences in Japan, Australia,
North America, Europe and
North Africa. Photo shows an
opening shot from this programme,
"Our World," presented via the
B.B.C. Television Centre in London.

Communication satellites
The new music
of the spheres
by Wilbur Schramm
24
With the latest advances in technology it
is foreseen that in the next 10 years our
TV screens will be able to receive world-wide
programmes via satellite relays. The real
problem today is not so much the need for
more perfected satellites as better plans for
using them for a vast exchange of educa¬
tional, scientific and cultural programmes.
Professor W. Schramm, a world authority on
mass media development, here looks at a
few of the major problems that call for
solution before the intercontinental exchange
of news and cultural programmes can become
a day-to-day occurence.
T
HE opportunity now exists
to share data over long distances as
never before in the history of mankind.
The development of computers of great
capacity has made it possible to store
enormous quantities of information in
digital form, and to search efficiently
for and retrieve any part of what is
stored. The development of related
arts and sciences of indexing, abstract¬
ing and programming has brought into
being a new force in human affairs
information science.
Fortunately for us, these develop¬
ments come at a time when many of
the natural sciences are experiencing
WILBUR SCHRAMM is director of the Insti¬
tute for Joint Communication Research at
Stanford University, U.S A. and the author
of many books on mass communication. A
number of his studies have been published
by Unesco "Communication Satellites for
Education, Science and Culture", 1967 ($1.00,
6/-), on which his present article is based;
"The Effects of Television on Children and
Adolescents", 1964 ($0 75; A\-), "Mass Media
and National Development (The Role of Infor¬
mation in the Developing Countries) 1964
($6 00, 30J-) Professor Schramm is now direct¬
ing publication of a series of studies on the
use of modern teaching techniques in the
developing countries, based on surveys made
by the International Institute for Educational
Planning.

Photo European Broadcasting Union
a glut of research information, when
information of great importance to
scientists is being produced at many
and distant places on earth, and when
rising educational levels and expanding
scholarships are creating new needs
for information world wide.
In this race between information
needs and new information capabilities,
communication satellites will play a
facilitating role, and probably an impor¬
tant one.
Indeed, some space scientists have
predicted that communication satellites
may be used more for data than for
telephone transmission. Their function
will be to extend the connexion bet¬
ween data sources and user.
Already computers have been con¬
nected to other computers or to data
consoles, over thousands of miles, by
means of land lines. They can also
be connected by satellite.
Weather data have been exchanged,
' by words, numbers and pictures, over
almost all the world, by satellite. Tele¬
metry and even television from satel¬
lites have been received on earth
from many hundreds of thousands of
miles away in space. Can we now
adapt these proved capabilities to the
needs of scientific and educational
information?
Men have dreamed of a new age of
information. Great data banks, estab¬
lished centrally, would be available
to the most distant users. Scientists
in developing countries or at isolated
locations would have as ready access
to scientific research as would their
colleagues in the great centres. A
sick man in a distant location could
count on the help of a great medical
centre. There would no longer be a
stultifying lag between new knowledge
and its dissemination. New findings in
medicine, for example, would be
promptly available to clinics and hos¬
pitals and medical schools everywhere.
The resources of a small town or
school library would no longer be a
few hundred or a few thousand volu¬
mes; there would be available by quick
data transmission, when needed, the
enormous resources of such great
information centres as the Library of
Congress, the British Museum, or the
Lenin Library.
National, and ultimately international,
information systems would come to be
realities, and computerized indexing
and cataloguing would take much of
the drudgery out of working with them.
Let us not mistake the dream for
present reality: we are far from being
able to make that kind of dream come
true. But we can already do remark¬
able things in using computers for
information storage and retrieval, and
it is safe to say that whatever we can
store on a computer we can transmit
and retrieve at the end of a satellite
circuit.
Present needs, as we move toward
full use of satellites for scientific and
educational data transmission, are to
establish the demand for such data,
the locations where it exists, the forms
in which it must be packaged in order
to be useful, and the institutions and
organizations which must come into
being in order to collect and dissemi¬
nate it. This is planning of a high order
which must involve many sectors of
the academic community and the infor¬
mation professions.
International data exchange will
require building up national capabi¬
lities for information exchange.
How can an organization like Unesco
best contribute to this growth toward
international data exchange, in which
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
25

NEW MUSIC OF THE SPHERES (Continued)
Libraries
in the sky
Photo © Keystone
26
A talk on Greek poetry in the
television series, "The Sense of
Poetry," produced by the
educational TV station in Boston
(U.S.A.). With the use of
communication satellites, completely
new possibilities are open to
educational radio and television in
every country and notably in the
vast areas covered by the
developing countries.
communication satellites will play a
considerable part?
It seems that the greatest contri¬
butions might come: (a) by helping to
share with the smaller and newer
countries what is being found out about
information technology and dissemi¬
nation, and (b) by facilitating in every
way possible the planning for truly
international data systems. The joint
International Council of Scientific
Unions (ICSU)-Unesco Project on the
Communication of Scientific Informa¬
tion and the Feasibility of a World
Science Information System is an
important step toward meeting these
objectives.
The central committee designed to
supervise the ICSU-Unesco Project
could serve as the nucleus of a com¬
mission or advisory group on infor¬
mation exchange.
International information exchange
will become a very large activity. It
may be that a new United Nations
Specialized Agency or bureau will have
to be organized to handle it.
Communication satellites offer an
opportunity to increase and even out
the flow of news in the world. It has
been amply demonstrated that news
flow falls off markedly with distance
(geographical or psychological) and
that the flow is overwhelmingly from
the more developed countries to the
less developed ones.
Experience has shown that whenever
cables have been extended to a
country there has been a notable
improvement in both the speed and
quantity of news available to readers
and listeners in that country. There¬
fore, there is reason to believe that
satellites can potentially make a real
difference in news availability through¬
out the world.
In theory at least, this should occur
at each stage of satellite development.
In the relatively distant years of direct
broadcasting we may be able to look
forward to facsimile newspapers broad¬
cast directly into the home, and
perhaps even to some choice as to
what part of the news one wants to
have printed on his facsimile machine.
That stage of development should
also make a difference m the kinds
of news organizations that serve
the home. For example, international
newspapers could become a reality,
and in very large countries national
newspapers could circulate much more
easily than now.
There might be a merger of some
newspapers and broadcasting news
units into a broader kind of news ser¬
vice, combining the sense of receiving
"instant news" that television offers
with the greater depth possible in print
and facsimile
Much of the effect on news trans¬
mission may be felt even at the early
stages when most satellite communi¬
cation is point-to-point.
One of the characteristics of satel¬
lite communication is that the use of
the space link should cost about the
same regardless of the distance the
message travels, providing that it is
within the satellite's effective coverage
area. This area can be as large as
40 per cent of the earth's surface.
This suggests the attractive idea that
perhaps something like a flat rate (or
an almost flat rate) for news, regard¬
less of distance, might be established
world wide thanks to the peculiar eco¬
nomic qualities of satellite transmis¬
sion. If this were possible, it would
help to even out the flow, and thus
help to equalize the chance for one part
of the world to know about others.
Similarly, satellites will sooner or
later offer a chance to develop reliable
teletype news service by radio to parts
of the world where radio reception is
not now reliable. They also offer an
invitation to experiment with facsimile,
a method which has been improved
and used for the transmission of
numerous kinds of pictural material,
including newspaper pages for offset
reproduction. Satellites extend these
capabilities farther and invite the news
media to review the question of what
news functions might in the future be
carried on by facsimile.
F OR television news, point-
to-point satellites offer an opportunity
to transmit news films and sound
tracks more quickly and probably more
cheaply. One major American net¬
work has announced that it plans
to establish "self-contained news
bureaux. . . complete with equipment
and production crews for transmitting
fully prepared stories" around the
"main gateways for satellite commu¬
nication" meaning chiefly the country
with ground stations.
The international news agencies and
many national press associations are
well aware of the potential of satel¬
lites for news transmissions, and ten
of these organizations have formed a
joint committee, with a secretariat, in
London.
One of the keenest observers of
the press has suggested that a joint
advisory board should be formed, in¬
cluding the committee just mentioned,
the International Telecommunications
Union, the Communications Satellite
Corporation, other organizations that
may be responsible for launching com¬
munication satellites, and Unesco.
This board, he suggests, should be
responsible for examining all means
by which the world flow of news could
be improved through developments in
space communication.
The contribution of Unesco to bring¬
ing satellites into use to assist the
flow of world news might take the form
of calling together such a group as
this, representing as broad as pos¬
sible a spectrum of news media, news
agencies, and space communication,
at first on a one-time basis, later on
a continuing basis if that proved
desirable.

It is reasonable to assume that most
cultural exchange via satellites will be
in the form of television, and that as
long as we have only point-to-point
satellites there will not be much of
it. Most programmes, except spot
news, sporting events of wide in¬
terest, or great historical events can
be exchanged just as appropriately on
films or videotape carried by jet aero¬
plane, as by satellite.
In fact many cultural programmes,
such as opera, ballet and drama, are
relatively timeless, and can be trans¬
mitted by almost any means. A com¬
plicating factor, however, is that if it
proves impossible to negotiate for
other than live transmission of certain
art and entertainment events (for
example some music festivals), an ex¬
change by films or videotape might
not be feasible.
Yet the televising 'of great events
by satellite, the occasional live pro¬
gramme (for example, the "Our World"
programme seen in Europe, North
America, Mexico, Tunisia, Australia
and Japan on June 25, 1967, and the
sporadic "Town Meeting of the Air"
programmes of discussion between
Europe and America), along with the
increasing amount of travel in the
world, are building appetites for
foreign television, and if satellite
charges continue to decrease we may
expect to see more foreign television
via satellite.
There may be still more of it when
distribution satellites come in, and
offer the opportunity to use evening
hours on an educational satellite for
general programming. But the real
impact of satellite culture exchange
will come, if at all, when direct broad¬
casting satellites are operative.
We can only speculate now as to
what these will do to television ser¬
vices. The opportunity will be there
for international television, if the bar¬
riers and objections to it can be over¬
come. It is not beyond belief that,
twenty years from now, television from
several continents, along with a fac¬
simile newspaper, might be readily
available in any home where there is
a receiver..
Satellite programmers will know less
and less about their audiences and
may be forced into more and more
innocuous programming in order to
meet a wide variety of tastes and
avoid offending a wide variety of sen¬
sitivities.
Furthermore, satellite broadcasting
over a very wide range is certain to
come up against the problems of na¬
tional sovereignty and national cultural
sensitivity. What is a documentary to
one country may be propaganda to
another country. What is great lite¬
rature to one country may be offensive
to another. What is history to one
country may be provocative to another.
Even what is education to one
country may be contrary to the norms
and beliefs of another. In any wide-
area satellite broadcasting there is
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
FIRST OPEN-HEART OPERATION
SEEN VIA SPACE
On a television screen in the University of Geneva (Switzerland),
below, doctors and students follow stages of an -open-heart operation
being performed at the same moment by U.S. surgeons in a hospital
at Houston (Texas) over 3,000 miles away. This first experiment in
Mondovision was made possible in 1965 by "Early Bird", a satellite
placed in orbit some 22,000 miles above the Atlantic. Above, television
camera records surgical techniques for transmission by closed
circuit to a medical congress.

Performer s rights in the era of satellites
likelihood of unintentional overlap of
coverage areas, as well as opportuni¬
ties for intentional propaganda to other
countries.
Along with this, consider the pecu¬
liar vulnerability of a satellite to hos¬
tile action. It is relatively easy to jam
the communication link to the instru¬
ment, and in some cases even to take
it over at times for one's own mes¬
sages. It is also within easy possi¬
bility to break the signal code by which
the satellite is turned on or off, or
by which the jets are operated to keep
it in position.
Therefore, it is conceivable that a
nation offended by a satellite's trans¬
mission might simply turn on the jets
to move the satellite out of orbit and
destroy it. It is clear that the world
can hardly enter into this direct broad¬
cast stage of cultural exchange until
the institutions and patterns of co¬
operation, the mutually agreeable
codes" of programme conduct, and the
arrangements for control of programme
content and redress of grievances, are
all carefully prepared.
Every public communication system
requires controlling patterns and ins¬
titutions so that its uses and content
will be consonant with the norms of
the society it serves. It is precisely
because different nations of the world
have different norms regarding free¬
dom of information that satellite com¬
munication represents a difficult con¬
trol problem.
I
28
HE more international com¬
munication the satellites carry, the more
necessary it will become to surround
the satellite system with a pattern of
law and orderliness and some institu¬
tional arrangements to manage the
control problems. If these arrange¬
ments are not in working order by the
time we are ready to begin direct
broadcasting from satellites, then we
shall face a very dangerous situation.
Point-to-point communication by sat¬
ellite is unlikely to challenge national
sovereignty, and domestic legislation
will provide recourse for individuals or
organizations who consider themselves
to be injured by satellite transmissions.
Some problems may arise from dif¬
fering national legislation on libel and
breach of privacy, and the rights of
performers may have to be redefined
or reconsidered on an international
basis if their performances are made
public in a number of distant countries.
At present these international arran¬
gements are typically made by the
broadcasting organizations of the na¬
tions involved. The more countries
involved, however, the more attractive
some broad, general arrangements will
come to seem'. Copyright, too, may
present some problems.
The closer we move toward direct
broadcasting, the more imperative it
will become to approach on an inter¬
national basis the problem of prevent¬
ing abuses of the new capability for
international communication, h is pre¬
dictable that efforts to establish an
international legal system for infor¬
mation will be resumed, at or near the
point where they were carried by the
1948 Geneva Conference. Some ins¬
titutional arrangements to carry out
control agreements will doubtless be
required.
Space law seems to be evolving
within long-accepted outlines of inter¬
national law. At the time of the Inter¬
national Geophysical Year, all nations
agreed by common consent to an evo¬
lutionary step of such importance that
it might be considered a part of the
"common law of mankind": that outer
space may be used for peaceful and
scientific purposes without restrictions
based on terrestrial sovereignty.
A second principle, the basic right
of a nation to defend itself from attack,
whether from the ground or from outer
space, is embodied in Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations. It
points to the obvious need of defin¬
ing what in the field of information
constitutes an "attack", and providing
controls and opportunity for redress.
A third principle is that of order¬
liness in space, illustrated by the in¬
ternational agreements already arrived
at for use of the radio spectrum which,
like space itself, is conceived as the
common property of mankind. It is
desirable now to devote major atten¬
tion to defining these developing norms
in practical terms.
But a professional code typically
requires a professional body to admi¬
nister it. A set of rules or regulations,
or a body of law, is of little value with¬
out enforcement and administration.
Therefore, it is necessary to consider
the kinds of international institutions
and arrangements that would be re¬
quired to maintain a rule of law and
order in space broadcasting.
The developing situation being what
it is, this institution should be designed
not only to administer an existing code,
but also to meet a series of unfore¬
seen problems and challenges as hu¬
man experience in space unfolds.
How can we begin to move toward
the goal of very wide exchange, even
where the pattern does not now exist?
The European Broadcasting Union has
its own exchange organization, Euro-
vision, and the nations of East Europe
have a parallel to it, Intervision.
One reason why the prospect of a
distribution satellite is so attractive in
Europe is that a firm basis already
exists 'there for the exchange of pro¬
grammes. There is also provision in
the Far East. No such regional ex¬
change organizations exist, however,
in Africa or the Americas.
In this problem, as in others we have
talked about, there is much to be done
on the ground before we leap into
space. Perhaps, the first step should
be to encourage mtercultural co-opera¬
tion among broadcasters, as it has
been encouraged in Europe, quite apart
from any consideration of space links
for this exchange.
A T the same time it would be
useful to try to understand some of the
problems involved in such co-operation,
and how they may be overcome.
Unesco has begun to collect some
of the experiences of regional
organizations with exchange of
programmes. This is a sound and
practical step and should furnish some
guidance both for new regional
organizations, and for co-operative
efforts on a world-wide scale.
The Chairman of the Board of the
National Broadcasting Company (Uni¬
ted States) has advocated a world-wide
association of broadcasters. Nothing
less than that, he says, "can provide
a wholly effective nerve centre to
serve emerging needs rising from tele¬
vision's rapid global growth. These
include the need, not only for a cen¬
tral file of programmes available for
purchase or exchange, but for a clear¬
ing house to deal with such factors as
time differentials, copyrights, union
arrangements, scheduling clearances
and simultaneous translation."
It is apparent that much international
exchange of cultural programmes can
and will take place without the use
of satellites, and therefore if regional
and then world-wide exchange can be
facihted in general a certain part of
the practice will merge into exchange
by satellite.
This would then be a step toward
meeting the problems of direct broad¬
casting by satellite. At least, the habit
of co-operation would be set up, and
various forms of it for example, the
joint planning and production of a
programme would be tried out. Such
difficult problems as performer's rights
and copyright would be aired.
Problems like these might be the

As the Winter Olympic
Games take place in
Grenoble (France) from
February 6 to 18,
transmissions via
communication satellites
enable millions of
televiewers as far away
as Japan and the United
States to watch the events
Photo shows Olympic
bobsleigh track
illuminated for night
race. Two satellites,
"Early Bird" and "Lanl
Bird", are retransmitting
27 hours of sporting
events during the Games.
During the last Olympic
Winter Games, held
four years ago in Austria,
each relay by "Telstar"
satellite was limited to
11 minutes duration.
Photo Photopress, Grenoble
next areas where Unesco or other
appropriate organizations could help
pave the way toward direct broad¬
casting of cultural programmes by sat¬
ellite. The question of copyright, as
affected by satellite transmission,
needs to be studied.
The Buenos Aires round table of
1964 on Legal Systems Governing Sat¬
ellite Communications, as reported by
Armando Cocea, concluded that an
extension of the present copyright
convention would provide adequate
protection.
The rights of performers will present
more complex and difficult problems
in the satellite age, and the Berne
Convention, as revised at Rome in
1961 and at Stockholm in 1967, clearly
needs re-examination. When it is
decided what modifications, extensions,
or replacements of these agreements
are desirable, then new instruments,
if needed, might be drafted by the
appropriate parties and brought to the
attention of governments.
Studies and possible agreements of
these kinds would be easier than the
ultimate problems of control and orga¬
nization which must be met before
direct broadcasting becomes a reality.
Yet at the appropriate time these too
can be faced. Whether the problem
of freedom and control, as applied
to space broadcasting, is taken up as
an extension of the 1948 United Na¬
tions sessions, or otherwise, it would
be desirable to stimulate preparatory
dialogue.
Practising broadcasters and inter¬
national legal scholars believe that a
high degree of co-operation, tolerance
and restraint, along with suitable agree¬
ments and administrative machinery,
will be required if direct broadcasting
from satellites is ever to be anything
other than a piece of science fiction
or a non-fictional fiasco. The reason
for approaching these problems today
is that they will certainly be far worse
tomorrow.
29
