Costumes with distinct local styles are still worn in the villages of Sardinia (Italy).
The womenfolk, who excel at craftwork of all kinds, make their own dresses (as these
young women from Orgosolo have done). In the past 20 years Sardinia has taken a big
step toward modernization, but many villages preciously maintain their ancient customs.
Photo © Pablo Volta
THE SHORTHAND CLASS
THAT STARTED
AN AVALANCHE
by Francesco Salis
We present here the remarkable story of Francesco Salis and the
work he has accomplished in transforming a small town in Sardi¬
nia. Italy is today one of the most advanced countries of Europe
both economically and culturally, but certain of its southern regions
and islands such as Sardinia have not kept pace with this remark¬
able growth. In recent years these poorer regions have been
making a determined effort to modernize and develop. In Sep¬
tember 1967, Francesco Salis was awarded the Mohammed Reza
Pahlavi Prize (honourable mention) for the many years of service
he has given to the town of Santulussurgiu (Sardinia) as a result
of which illiteracy was reduced from 37 per cent to 4.5 per cent.
The story was written in co-operation with "Unesco Courier" staff
editor, Lucio Attinelli.
s,»ANTULUSSURGIU is a
tiny town of four thousand inhabitants
in the province of Cagliari on the
island of Sardinia, perched on the
eastern slopes of Mount Ferro about
600 metres above sea-level. Over
the past ten years more than a
thousand persons have left the town
to emigrate to Argentina, Australia,
France or Switzerland. Every year a
few come back to spend their holidays
on the island, choose a bride and
then return to their adopted countries.
Most of the inhabitants of Santu-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20
17

ISLAND
OF POETRY
TOURNAMENTS
Island birthplace of one of the most ancient
Mediterranean cultures, the changing Sardinia of today
frequently reveals many unexpected facets of its antique
past. This is particularly true of the mountainous areas
where life for the pastoral inhabitants remains austere.
(Below, an elderly shepherd wearing a mastruca, or sheep¬
skin coat.)

«T *
Sardinia's great tradition is
the Sagra, a popular festival dur¬
ing which minstrel-poets travel
from village to village improvis¬
ing and reciting their verses at
poetry tournaments. These con¬
tests often take place after such
popular events as the ballu-
tundu, a dance performed to the
music of the launedda (photos
above), or the carnival-like pro¬
cession of masked shepherds at
Mamoida each of whom carries
some 50 small bells (left). Com¬
petitors in these tourneys may
be young or old, labourers or
shepherds, and many have an
extraordinary gift for improvised
versifying. In village squares,
venders offer the texts of
poems or narrative compositions
that have won particular acclaim.
Not surprisingly, one of the na¬
mes held most dear by the peo¬
ple of Sardinia is that of Grazia
Deledda, the Sardinian novelist
and 1926 Nobel Prizewinner for
Literature who drew inspiration
from the island's customs and
traditions.
Photos © Pablo Volta
19

THE SHORTHAND CLASS (Continued from page 17)
The magic of capturing
the poet's words
The men in many Sardinian villages still wear traditional costumes such
as those shown here, consisting of a black coat with open sleeves,
a kind of short kilt of black wool and short linen trousers coming a little
below the knee. PerhaDS by the time the little girl in the background
has grown up, they will have abandoned them for modern dress.
Photo Pablo Volta
lussurgiu live by sheep-farming or
stock-breeding, which until a few
years ago formed the basic pattern of
Sardinia's economy. Since 1840 the
town has been proud of its secondary
school which gave it a certain cultural
prestige over other towns in Sardinia.
Even so, widespread illiteracy, and
more important, relapse into illiteracy
were a marked feature of Santu-
lussurgiu when in 1951 a Centre for
Popular Culture was first opened in
the town.
The Centre for Popular Culture is
a unit of Italy's National Union for the
Fight Against Illiteracy founded in 1947
to promote literacy and community
development in certain areas of
southern Italy as a means of improving
the cultural, social and economic situa¬
tion of the people.
Today there are ninety such centres
in southern Italy, with 800 volunteer
helpers and over 30,000 pupils. Each
centre has its own story to tell. This
is the story of the Santulussurgiu
centre 1 have been in charge of for
the past seventeen years.
Early in 1951 a small group of ele¬
mentary school teachers, university
students and members of the liberal
professions got together to discuss a
problem which had been on all our
minds for some time, namely, our
duty and responsibility towards the
shepherds, stock-breeders, farmers
and craftsmen of our poverty-stricken
community.
All of us agreed that we could no
longer stand by doing nothing except
idle away our free time playing cards,
gathering for drinks in the cafes, or
discussing the latest fashionable
novel, which gave us the illusion of
being "active intellectuals". At the
time there were twenty of us who felt
that something could be done about
our town.
A PRELIMINARY survey had
revealed that at least 1,100 persons
out of our population of 4,000 (37 per
cent) were either completely illiterate
(that is, had never learned to read of
write) or had reverted to illiteracy
because our town made no provisions
for cultural or educational activities.
Once we had brought the problem
out into the open we decided to act.
Our first step was to organize such
activities that would enable us to
make direct contact with the villagers
and then gain their friendship and
confidence. This led to the creation
of the Centre of Popular Culture of
Santulussurgiu which ultimately grew
to be one of the most important in
Italy.
We started out in a flush of enthu¬
siasm, little aware of the many
complex problems we would be up
against. We had naively believed that
Adult Education meant nothing more

than applying to adults the experience
we had acquired in traditional ele¬
mentary school teaching.
We were in for a rude awakening.
We soon realized that adults could not
be treated like children or made to
submit to teaching designed for chil¬
dren. The adults balked at such treat¬
ment first as a matter of pride and
then because of the obvious fact that
they brought with them into the class
long years of knowledge and expe¬
rience.
Thus it was that we had not only
to revise our teaching methods but to
make radical changes in the traditional
classroom pattern. There were to be
no "benches", no "masters-and-
pupils" approach, but instead work-
tables and a mature, friendly relation¬
ship between teacher and "centnsti"
(as the students came to be called).
s,10 began our work for
literacy and for the renaissance of
culture and education in our com¬
munity.
But if we ourselves clearly saw the
advantages of such a cultural pro¬
gramme, limited though it was at first,
the adults we were trying to reach
did not share our enthusiasm, often
greeting our efforts lackadaisically or
with a shrug. In a sense, this is not
surprising. Grown-ups often react
this way to a new idea, and to lure
them to us we had to try to think up
off-beat approaches, some of which I
must say worked out surprisingly well.
One of the ideas we hit on which
met with striking success was a
course in shorthand! At first sight this
may seem an odd way to promote
"culture", but it worked like a charm
in our town.
To most of the people of Santu¬
lussurgiu, the ability to write down a
person's words at top speed, as fast
as they are spoken, was looked upon
as a feat of magic, or just about.
When the stenography course was
announced there was a rush of appli¬
cants. All of them wanted to register
in order to be able to transcribe the
"poetry tournaments" that take place at
Sagra time, the popular festival still
very much in vogue in Sardinia during
which the minstrel-poets travel from
village to village improvising and
reciting their verses in big contests.
Where I come from, there is never
a Sagra festival that does not feature,
besides modern forms of entertain¬
ment such as village dancing and a
football match, a poetry tournament.
These tournaments are quite un¬
usual. On a stage set up with laurel
leaf decorations, recalling those of
ancient Rome on the Capitoline hill,
the wandering poet recites his impro¬
vised verses, usually in octameter,
and to the accompaniment of a chorus
of four voices, on a host of themes
ranging from the religious to the
historical, the biblical to contemporary
social. The themes are chosen by a
jury appointed for the occasion.
These performances are highly
popular with both young people and
the older folk. The poets themselves
are usually labourers, cattle-farmers
and peasants with an extraordinary
gift for extemporaneous versifying and
narrative composition. Not infre¬
quently they are persons with practi¬
cally no education, but if the audience
likes the rhyme pattern of the poetry
it makes allowances if the subject
matter is not as good. However, when
a poet manages to combine lovely
words and ideas with exquisite
rhythm, rhyme and metre then the
audience goes wild.
In those days, tape-recorders were
unknown in Sardinia, and the short¬
hand idea was an immediate hit. I
remember the day the course started...
people began to arrive in droves, a
number actually clambering in through
the window!
Of course the classes were free.
That is how, way back in 1951, we
first began to reach the common
people and were able to convince
them that we had no religious or
political axe to grind. This non-parti¬
san approach soon won us the trust
and respect of the whole town, and
increasing numbers of people crowded
into our classes at the Centre for
Popular Culture.
We, of course, were perfectly aware
that the stenography courses were
only the first phase in our education
strategy. And so indeed it turned out
to be. After a while we were able to
reduce the number of shorthand
classes and introduce other subjects
like history, geography and mathema:
tics into our weekly teaching schedule.
All our- work was geared to the
problems of our town and the different
ways of meeting them. Everything we
did was directly linked to life in the
community; we never dealt with
abstract problems. Little by little our
centre assumed a shape which differ¬
ed sharply from the traditional school
approach in Sardinia... there were no
fixed hours, no fixed term, students
could arrive or leave when they
pleased with no questions asked, no
justification needed or permission
required.
At first our quarters were located in
the basement of the elementary
school, previously used as storage
space, and which we converted to our
purposes. Later we moved to a
ramshackle gymnasium which we
rebuilt with volunteer help from the
"centristi", the teachers and our other
colleagues.
In 1959, at the end of eight years,
four spent in the elementary school
basement and four in the gymnasium,
we acquired a magnificent 18th Cen¬
tury house. We were able to buy it
partly with funds made available by
the National Union for the Fight
Against Illiteracy, partly through the
generosity of the former owners who
let us have it virtually as a gift for a
ridiculously low price.
The adults drawn to the Centre by
the shorthand courses were not illi¬
terates but persons who believed they
were fairly well educated. I say
"believed" because little by little these
persons came to realize that their
many years away from school as well
as the environment they lived in had
left many gaps in their knowledge.
The true illiterates came only later,
after a survey enabled us first to iden¬
tify and get to know them and then to
persuade them to attend our classes
The first to be won over were the
women, the primary inducement being
their keen desire to be able to write
to their children living abroad.
Here is a typical conversation bet¬
ween the instructor and the women:
Instructor. Why should you
who have several sons abroad, have
to share your family secrets with a
stranger just because he can write
your letters for you? And what if that
person shoots his mouth off and lets
the whole town in on your private
affairs? Is that what you want?
Mother. What can I do about it?
I'm too old now to learn to write at
my age any more.
Instructor. What's age got to
do with it? Being old doesn't mean
you're dead. So don't act as though
you're dead and give up living and all
the joys of life. And besides, you're
not old anyway. Do you think being
forty or fifty or even sixty is old any
more? Come on now, you know very
well how it hurts you not to be able to
write your letters yourself. Isn't it
time you stopped belittling yourself
and being the slave of others. Just
think how happy your sons in Austra¬
lia, Argentina or Switzerland will be
the day they get a letter from you in
your own handwriting.
F,OR the women this kind
of discussion usually did the trick.
It also worked with the men, but in
their case we had another convincing
argument: a farmer who knew to read
no matter how small his plot of land
had a much better chance of learning
how to run his farm better, improving
his yield and making more money.
In our teaching, we paid special
attention to the various interests and
attitudes of our grown-up pupils, and
we found that our results were stri¬
kingly improved because of the
community spirit which we encouraged
at the Centre. Once an illiterate adult
joined our group, he knew he was no ft .
longer alone, no longer an outcast of V|
society, that by attending a literacy ^"
class he also took part in the planning
and running of the Centre.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

22
THE SHORTHAND CLASS (Continued)
The success
that spelled disaster
He became a member of our
community, took part in our cultural
visits and outings, mingled with those
who had learned to read, with the
instructors and their assistants who
had become his friends. More than
that, he participated in the democratic
life of the Centre, and as one the
members of the "Centristi" Assembly,
he had a voice in the adoption of
specific projects for the future. With
time, "Training in Democracy" thus
became the main feature of the Cen¬
tre's activities.
The pride taken in the Centre by the
participants was really quite extraordi¬
nary. Every day letters sent to us by
our former students arrived by the
bag-load from every continent. By
1956-1957, as a result of our methods,
illiteracy as such had virtually vanished
from Santulussurgiu.
But then we saw that something
had gone awry. It awoke us to the
fact that we could not sit back on
our laurels and be content merely
with our literacy and cultural pro¬
gramme. We found that despite the
devotion of our voluntary teams
(working hours were from 2 p.m. to
2 or 3 a.m.) the results were often
disappointing.
As our students learned to read
their judgement and critical faculties
developed and they became painfully
aware of the backwardness of their
environment. Instinctively they felt
an urge to emigrate, to get away
from such surroundings.
Thus, by sparking this feeling of
discontent and anguish we were ac¬
tually encouraging emigration, which
is after all a logical reaction of people
who aspire after something and find
it denied to them by conditions in
their own region. Our Centre, in a
sense, was like a railway station
waiting room where everyone is on
the point of departure.
Faced with this situation, we promp¬
tly undertook a careful re-appraisal
of the aims of our institution to see
how our work could be remoulded to
meet this broader social and eco¬
nomic dilemma. We wanted our
work to bring prosperity to our own
land and not of course to encourage
the migration of the population to
more favoured regions elsewhere in
the world.
But what could our Centre possi¬
bly do about it? As teachers and
members of the liberal professions we
were in no position to transform our
educational institution into an em¬
ployment bureau to provide work for
our students. For that, a miracle
would have been needed. But just
becoming aware of the problem was
in itself a miracle
Intellectuals are often so wrapped
up in their own professions and inte¬
rests that nothing else counts. Here,
on the contrary, something else did
count. And so, despite ourselves and
our rather abstract interests, we found
ourselves forced to descend to more
practical levels, into the slippery
arena of production, trade and other
business questions we had never
envisaged.
A ROUND the years 1957-
1958 the unemployment of women had
become one of the big social problems
of Santulussurgiu. In our town women
at home are usually divided into one
of two categories: married women
dependent on their husbands who
support the family; unmarried women
(many of whom never marry) depen¬
dent, on their parents or brothers.
We decided to try a new experi¬
ment the development of our local
crafts by transforming one of the
oldest traditions of Sardinia, the hand
weaving craft (carpets and textiles)
into a full fledged market industry.
In other words, to change a subsis¬
tence economy into a developed pro¬
duction economy.
The problem was how to go about
it. Our traditional looms were so
rudimentary in construction that out¬
put could never match the speed
required to ensure low, competitive
prices. The only answer was to get
rid of the old looms and bring in
modern ones like the Jacquard loom.
The opposition from the womenfolk,
accustomed to the traditional ways
for generations, can well be imagi¬
ned. In the end, however, we won
out. The changes were made, but
not without much psychological and
physical hand-wringing.
How well I recall the apprehensions
of the young women we brought
together to form our first weavers'
co-operative. After working for a
whole year without knowing what the
outcome would be, they awaited,
trembling with emotion, the news that
their efforts had really shown a profit.
Swatches and samples had to be
made and distributed, market research
had to be carried out, and prepara¬
tions made to fill the first orders.
But the women had faith in us and
in the Centre that had helped and
guided them over the years. At last
success did come. And when it did,
the attitude of the adult population
to education changed overnight.
To be an ordinary labourer working
only for the money it brings is one
thing; to be a member of a co-op¬
erative sharing responsibility for its
management is another. It demanded
much more from each individual: pro¬
ficiency in public relations, market
research, costing procedures, as well
as a constant effort to improve the
final product. All these new ideas
required a new spirit and a new
approach along with new knowledge
and know-how.
The demands on the Centre grew
steadily as the number of students
rose. There were requests for cour¬
ses in economics, accounting, the
history of art and many other subjects
It was no longer illiteracy that was
now our big problem but how to fill
the gap of ignorance that prevented
the citizens of our town from carrying
out their new activities.
The swift pace of modern life
demands of all of us, wherever we
live, that we keep abreast of the latest
developments -in our changing world.
It is this, more than anything else,
that has made the modern concept
of life-long education so vital today.
There are now five flourishing co¬
operatives in Santulussurgiu, one for
weaving, another for knitwear pro¬
duction, a third for the manufacture
of gloves (mass-produced and expor¬
ted abroad), the fourth for cabinet
making and wood-carving, and the
fifth and most recent one, a cattle-
breeding co-operative with 127 mem¬
bers. These are not simply commer¬
cial firms but true co-operatives born
out of our cultural activities and sus¬
taining these cultural activities.
After sixteen years of effort, I think
I can say that the evolution and
re-thinking that has marked our insti¬
tution has permitted us to set up
methods and instruments of produc¬
tion that are also methods and instru¬
ments of education.
In other words, by attacking illite¬
racy within our local framework we
have managed to attain a standard
of adult training to organize a num¬
ber of truly modern commercial enter¬
prises that are contributing to the
social and economic development of
our region, and thereby extracating
us - from the poverty and ignorance
that have plagued us for generations.
