
LI LACS
IN
THE COSMOS...
E
i VERY day mankind is gain-
in new knowledge. I am thinking first
of the tremendous accumulation of
new scientific data and the Increasing
flood of information available to and
enriching modern society. Knowledge
and achievement in all branches of
science have developed to such an
extent and become so highly specializ¬
ed that no one nowadays can hope to
become an Encyclopaedist like Diderot
Montesquieu or Lomonossov. The age
of the Encyclopaedists is long past.
And as one of our great Russian
scientists Timinazev, if I am not mis¬
taken has so rightly said, in our day
a really cultured man is one who knows
everything about a limited field and
a little about everything.
Be that as it may, the power of
world science has increased tenfold,
penetrating alike into the infinitely
great and the infinitely small, probing
the depths of the universe, the atomic
nucleus and the living cell. And as
the quality of human knowledge has
risen, so it has increased in volume,
if we consider the distribution of know¬
ledge among the inhabitants of our
planet. Yes, undoubtedly mankind as
a whole is growing more learned, more
cultured, more civilized.
But can we say that man is the hap¬
pier for it? Does knowledge alone
make him more sensitive to the joys
of living?
We know that if we are to be able
to draw freely from all the springs
that nourish human feelings, a know-
fry Lev Kassil
LEV ABRAMOVITCH KASSIL the Soviet
writer and ¡ournahst has a scientific back¬
ground (physics and mathematics). His
many articles and books for young people
are famous in the U.S.S.R.
ledge of physical laws alone is not
enough. We must also be able to
see the world in affective terms.
And here man cannot do without the
arts. Victor Hugo said very rightly:
"L'art c'est moi, la science c'est nous."
(I am art, all of us are science.) Ob¬
viously he did not intend by this
aphorism to lay stress on the specific
individualism of art as opposed to the
collective universality and levelling
effect of science.
No doubt he meant that science is
based on objective laws formulated
after analysis, experiment and research.
Once these laws have been demons¬
trated, confirmed and not contradicted
by some new hypothesis or discovery,
they are adopted in an identical man¬
ner by everyone.
A work of art, on the other hand,
however perfect it may be and how¬
ever universal its appeal, permits of a
certain variety of assessments. More¬
over, generalities apart, the artist's
creation always expresses something
of his own personal nature, reflecting
his aspirations, tastes, sympathies and
outlook.
I N any case, these are no
grounds for antagonism between
science and art. Nevertheless, from
time to time there are signs of a
recrudescence of the sort of debate
carried on recently in the Soviet
press. "Physicist or Poet?" was the
title of this discussion quite injus-
tified in my view which stirred up
young intellectuals all over the Soviet
Union where visitors on their first
trip are often astonished by the tre¬
mendous popularity of art and poetry.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
11

LILACS IN THE COSMOS... (Continued)
Supersociety' and the yearning
for beauty
12
It has been argued naively and even
somewhat crudely that today science
and technology give prestige to a
nation, the two enabling us to unravel
many of the mysteries of the invisible
world and to carry man far out into
space.
As for the arts, it has been maintain¬
ed that nowadays the human spirit
has little chance of expressing itself ;
and the advocates of science first
and last have mockingly exclaimed:
"Johann Sebastian Bachl... Alexanaer
Blok! . . . Who needs them today?"
I should like to say that this sporadic
episode met with little success except
perhaps in a few schools where certain
students ill-prepared for their literat¬
ure classes tried to justify their un-
preparedness by alleging that it was
no longer necessary to waste their time
on literature and the arts. This did not
save them from failing their course.
I might add that the very theme of
the debate Physicist or Poet was
hardly original. In the years following
the October Revolution, when part of
the country's youth was tempted to
join the hordes bent on destroying
everything connected with the past,
there were even some who denied any
value whatever not only to classical
art but to every form of art. I even
recall the flippant motto: "Art is the
opium of the people" and "Peace to
the chemists, war on the creative
artistsl" (the latter deriving from the
famous revolutionary slogan: "Peace to
the huts, war on the palaces!")
V
ERY quickly, however,
Lenin explained to the young that the
people who had undertaken to build
a new life could never attain this
objective except by absorbing all the
most precious products of human cul¬
ture and in particular by making use
of the countless treasures created by
the arts throughout the course of
human history.
But the final defeat of these scien¬
tific Savonarolas who proposed to
establish the primacy of practical
science over all other human interests
was completed when the cosmonauts
themselves those who we might well
expect to be the most forthright
spokesmen of the avant garde trends
of our age acknowledged the help
they had found in the great writers
of prose and poetry, as they prepared
their flights into space, and when the
world learned that during their most
trying moments, they found encoura¬
gement in music and song.
And so was born the lovely motto:
"In the cosmos, too, there is a place
for a spray of lilac." After all, science
gives man knowledge, art gives him
feeling. If there is a place in life
for knowledge, there is also a place
for feeling.
And here I might do well to recall
the words of Anton Chekhov: "I wish
people wouldn't see conflict where in
fact there is none. Knowledge is

.min i
The level and scope of
scientific knowledge is
greater today than at
any time in history. Yet
the attraction of art and
all forms of beauty has
in no way been sup¬
planted, and aesthetic
education which enri¬
ches the human perso¬
nality flourishes as
never before. Here,
happy children hurry
to their music lesson.
Photo © Keystone
always present in the world Ana¬
tomy and literature are equally noble in
origin. They have common aims and
a common enemy the Devil; there
are therefore absolutely no grounds
for conflict between them."
"There is no struggle for existence
between them. If a man knows about
the theory of the circulation of the
blood, he is rich; if he adds to that a
study of the history of religion and the
song 'I remember a wonderful mom¬
ent' (1), he becomes not poorer, but
richer, and this again is wholly to his
advantage. Men of genius have never
warred with each other and, in the
person of Goethe, we find side by side
the naturalist and the poet."
It may seem scarcely worthwhile
to have brought up all this at a time
when the question, theoretically at
least, seems to be settled once and
for all. It is not without value, how-
(1) Well-known melody by Glinka.
ever, to recall the efforts to divorce
knowledge from feeling because in
practice the answer is still a long way
off. Can we in fact honestly maintain
today that the human race, as it gains
in knowledge, is deepening and refin¬
ing its appreciation of the beautiful?
In this connexion I am reminded of
two conversations which I had with
people of sharply diverging spiritual
views. One of them, a devout Christ¬
ian representing a religious brother¬
hood, said to me during one of my
visits to the United States: "Beauty is
God. If from youth you teach a per¬
son to see the hand of God and the
will of God in everything around him,
he will finally understand the harmony
of all things, that is, perfect beauty."
The other, a Communist with whom
I was talking at home some time ago,
it is true, after one of my lectures on
the aesthetic education of young
people criticized me in the following
words:
"Why clutter up their heads with
that! The important thing is to foster
a revolutionary conscience in people, a
proper understanding of the laws of
social development, to teach them the
practical elements of social behaviour.
The rest, including the sense of beauty,
can come later."
I T is not my intention to
enter into a discussion of the factors
that have led to the great ethical and
spiritual flowering of the human per¬
sonality. I will simply say that in my
view the purpose of all education is to
give the individual the wherewithal
to find happiness suited to his nature
and to make his fellows happy.
As for the notion that our con¬
temporaries can be completely happy,
in the fullest sense of the term, that is
to say, appreciating all the wholesome
joys of life, without having had instill¬
ed in them a feeling for beauty that
is quite simply impossible. We are
speaking here of the education of a
human being completely and harmo¬
niously developed, able not only to
master knowledge but also to enjoy
beauty and to share it with others.
For this reason, when we seek to
achieve perfection as regards social
organization and the distribution of
material wealth, we must take great
care, earnestly and in good time, to
see that the future, does not merely
hold out the prospect of a high mat¬
erial standard of living and a fair
sharing of everything indispensable
for material comfort. We must see to
it that all society can participate in the
world of beauty, the aesthetic world,
the world of art. And this world must
be accessible to all. We must en¬
courage, foster and strengthen in each
of us the desire to seek and find real
beauty. And this cannot be achieved
with mediocre products or worthless
substitutes.
Why deny it: the man who lives in
material comfort but disdains the
world of art exhibitions, museums and
art galleries leads the life of blind
men. Little does he realize the joys
and beauty he is missing.
The man who is interested only in
the popular songs of the day, the
music of which, though catchy and
easily remembered, is nevertheless
extremely limited, is in fact half deaf.
For he has not learned to listen to and
appreciate really great music.
Again, the man who has never read
the great authors, the books which
have moved the hearts and minds of
millions of readers, if he has not
learnt by heart a dozen or so lines
of his favourite poet if indeed he has
one that man is condemned to
spiritual poverty, to live half-hearted¬
ly and to deprive himself of the greater
part of those joys which spring from
contact with beauty.
These contacts with beauty invite us
to improve our personality and to take
an active part in creating a life offering
joy, satisfaction and consolation. The
man who knows the meaning of beauty
can reap the reward that dreams afford
to help him to enjoy today and to face
tomorrow with serenity.
This is a far cry from the narrow
materialistic search for individual com¬
fort. It is a romantic quest, inviting us
to perfect our lives in all their pleni¬
tude. For the romantic approach is
the centrifugal force which propels
ideas and feelings beyond the horizons
of everyday existence; it is the dynamic
force which translates dreams into
reality.
During my visits to the United States
and Western Europe, I have been
confronted with most varied manifes¬
tations of modern art. These, I must
confess, have at times somewhat dis¬
concerted me. Perhaps because it is
an attempt to protect itself from the
invading cybernetics of our time, with
its yes-no and plus-minus responses,
that art sometimes seeks refuge in
the obscure realms of the subconscious
and even illogical artificiality.
B
UT years ago Tolstoy
wrote that the beautiful cannot be
devoid of meaning. Now that the
electronic computer is capable of
translating a book and even of writing
simple poetry, the artist, if he is a
true artist, cannot stand by with his
arms crossed and watch the human
factor disappear from the arts. On
the contrary, today more than ever,
art must reveal itself as in complete
possession of all potentialities of the
human spirit. The artist is the last
bastion of those great gifts of man
which can never be reproduced even
by the most complicated electronic
equipment. "I Q
At the same time it would be stupid **
to pit the power of modern science
and technology against sensational and
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

LILACS IN THE COSMOS... (Continued)
14
exaggerated notions of a "superman"
which a certain press has popularized.
True art, inspired by truth and beauty,
exalts the splendours of the human
personality, and seeks to help man
to find his place in life and society,
rejecting both the myth of the "super¬
man" and of the "supersociety" which
too often crushes the individual under
implacable and inhuman laws.
Aesthetic education, of course, is
inseparable from ethical education.
Aesthetics and ethics should go hand
in hand, both in the private world of
the individual and in his relations with
others. This unity must be created in
infancy and must be talked about at
home in the family circle. The har¬
mony between the sense of the beauti¬
ful and the sense of right should be
reaffirmed, strengthened and develop¬
ed at school.
Unfortunately the time allotted to
teachers in the school curriculum for
initiating pupils in the realm of aesthe¬
tics above all in literatureis
not being used to best advantage.
More often than not the great
authors included in the Soviet curri¬
culum are not properly studied; they
are given only cursory examination.
The children in class simply reel off
in haphazard fashion the plots of clas¬
sical masterpieces or of the best-
known modern works.
IT is all too rare to find
a schoolmaster, himself an enthusiast
for his subject, who is able to commu¬
nicate his personal admiration and
attachment to his pupils so as to
awaken in them a genuine love of the
beautiful. Far more often the class
repeats with indifference conventional
views with no attempt to penetrate
the reaí deeper sense or truth of the
work. They make no attempt to find
pleasure in a new experience so that
under the spell of the author, they
realize that what they were being
taught was not boring and being
forced upon them. Yet there can
be no true education without educa¬
tion in ethics.
The Soviet Union has already achiev¬
ed a great deal in the field of aesthetic
education. We feel, however, that
there is still much urgent work to be
done. We have an Institute of Aesthe¬
tic Education attached to the Soviet
Academy of the Science of Teaching
where many aspects of the problems
I have mentioned are being studied
both scientifically and pedagogically.
Moscow has a Publishing House of
Children's Books specially created to
study the requirements of young
readers, to guide and develop the
tastes of children, and to assess and
set aesthetic standards for children's
books. We endeavour to ensure that
radio and television should be not
the rivals but the allies and sup¬
porters of literature, in a word, the
auxiliaries of all who are concerned
with the aesthetic development of the
rising generations.
The Soviet Union comprises a large
network of amateur artist groups to
which millions of children and adults
belong. There are popular theatres,
literary circles, and art studios. Even
so, we must admit that the general
level of artistic taste and aesthetic
appreciation lags far behind that of
general technical education in the
Soviet Union. In this field we still
have a long way to go.
Painters, scientists, writers, musi¬
cians and teachers should combine
their efforts to enable society not only
to expand the scope of its knowledge,
but also to make it possible for every¬
one to take the bold step of explor¬
ing the world of aesthetics and the
world of the beautiful.
From the infinitely great to the infinitely
tiny, science is enlarging the bounds
of the universe and those of life itself.
Simultanously it probes the mysteries of
space and those of the living cell and
in the process uncovers hitherto
imperceptible forms of beauty. Below, a
symbolic model of the molecule of DNA
(desoxyribonucleic acid). Science has
shown that these molecules are the
fundamental building blocks of heredity.
©
