A
HEALTH
in the world
of tomorow
by Dr M. G. Candeau
Director-General
of the World Health Organization
4
PRIL 7 this year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the World Health Organization.
Looking back, WHO and its Member States have witnessed the
general improvement in world health which is largely due to their
combined efforts. There have been disappointments; there still
remain the inequalities between the developed and the developing
countries which it is the Organization's aim to reduce.
In general, however, the record is one of success and achieve¬
ment. Recent scientific advances have already contributed to these
achievements; they will do even more in the future. Therefore
on April 7 and throughout the Anniversary Year it is proposed
to concentrate on the theme: "Health in the World of Tomorrow".
T OMORROW clearly means the next ten or twenty
years. This is the period during which the scientific discoveries of
the past decade will become generally applicable, and the new
ones now germinating will prove their worth. These advances will
affect the health of people in every country. How will they operate?
We can assume that there will be some general improvements
in environmental conditions, the control of communicable disease,
nutrition, and in a greater availability of medical care. These will
certainly be beneficial. But the impact of the new discoveries will
be most dramatic.
We have been told that it is not unreasonable to expect from
the extensive research now being undertaken a break-through in
cancer. Similarly, more precise knowledge about certain common
diseases of the heart and blood-vessels and their relation to the
chemistry of the body opens up the prospect of controlling these
great killers of today.
Research into the chemistry of our tissues and organs may throw
light on the process of ageing and bring us nearer to the post¬
ponement of old age.
More will be learnt about the causes of the mental disorders,
and when we are able to classify them better, treatment will be
more specific and effective.
Drugs and antibiotics to cope with hitherto elusive viruses are
other possible additions to this incomplete but formidable list.
B UT mankind will still be exposed to a multitude of
influences which unless controlled can nullify these expected
advances. Some are old, some new, but all are potentially if not
actually harmful. The list includes the various chemicals with
which we live pesticides, food additives, radioactive residues;
the polluted air, soil and water; urbanization with its possible
squalor, disease and social maladjustments. In many countries
population growth will bring comparable problems. Add to these
the insidious evil of drugs and we have a grim catalogue.
Weighing the effect of these influences and remembering the
health promoting activities now in progress, I consider the balance
is favourable. The individual should benefit.. He will have better
health with which to enjoy the leisure and the longer life which
the future promises.
Finally what is the role of WHO in all this? It is not new. Much
of the Organization's current programme has foreseen these
developments. Indeed, many of its research activities have already
contributed to them. WHO will maintain and extend all these
interests, stimulating the advancement of knowledge and encou¬
raging its application for the benefit of all.
