THE GREAT MANIFESTO
OF FUKUZAWA
Encouragement
of Learning
Jifp
|l £X
In 1872, Yukichi Fukuzawa published his "Encouragement of Learning." The
essay first appeared as a pamphlet, and the public took to it "like the thirsty to
water." Some 200,000 copies were sold an extraordinary figure for the time.
Fukuzawa went on to publish a series of seventeen essays, all called
"Encouragement of Learning," between 1872 and 1876. They established him
as a thinker and an intellectual leader of the New Japan. The basic ideas in
his first essay, published below, are as fresh and virile to the men of today as
they'were to those of 1872. As Eiichi Kiyooka has written: "There were many
other scholars who advocated new thoughts, but Fukuzawa was foremost
in force and clarity of expression, and above all in reaching a wide circle of
people. It is certain that there has never been in all the history of Japan an essay
that compares with this one in its influence on the Japanese people."
Text copyright © Reproduction prohibited
"H EAVEN never created a
man above another nor a man below
another," It is said (1). Therefore, when
men are born, Heaven's idea is that
all men should be equal to all other
men without distinction of high and low
or noble and mean, but that they
should all work with body and mind,
with dignity worthy of the lords of
creation, which they are, in order to
take all things in the world for the
fulfillment of their needs in clothing,
food, and dwelling, freely but without
obstructing others, so that each can
live happily through life.
However, taking a wide view of this
human world, we find wise men and
ignorant men, rich men and poor men,
men of importance and men of little
consequence, their differences like
those of the cloud and the slime. Why
should all this be? The reason is
apparent. In the Jitsugokyo it is said,
"If a man does not study, he will have
no knowledge. A man without know¬
ledge is a fool." The distinction be¬
tween the wise and the foolish comes
from whether they have studied or not.
In society there are difficult tasks
and easy tasks. Those who undertake
difficult tasks are called men of high
standing and those who undertake
easy tasks are called men of low
standing. All the tasks In which one
must use his mind and which involve
much worry are difficult, and those in
which one labours with hands and legs
are easy. And so, physicians, schol¬
ars, government officials, or big mer¬
chants and big farmers who employ
many serving men are to be called
men of high standing and importance.
When a man is high in standing and
importance, his house will naturally be
wealthy and, from the viewpoint of
lowly people, he will appear to be high
beyond their reach. But looking into
the root of it all, we will find that the
difference comes merely from whether
the man has learning or not, and that
there are no Heaven-made distinctions.
The proverb says, "Heaven does
not give riches to men, but gives it to
the labour of men." Therefore, as I
have said before, a man is not born
with rank or riches. Only those who
strive for learning and are capable of
reasoning will become men of rank
and riches while those without learn¬
ing will become poor and lowly.
Learning does not mean knowing
strange words or reading old, difficult
literature or enjoying poems and writ¬
ing verses and such accomplishments,
which are of no real use in the world.
These accomplishments give much
pleasure to the human mind and they
have their own values, but they are
not to be valued and worshipped as
much as the usual run of scholars has
tried to make out.
Since time immemorial, there have
been very few scholars in Chinese
classics who were good household
providers or merchants who were
accomplished in poetry and yet clever
in business. For this reason mer-
(1) The word Heaven as used In the essay
has no religious meaning. Today the word
Nature would be used, but in 1872 the Japa¬
nese word for Nature had not come into
general use.
15
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

THE GREAT MANIFESTO (Continued)
The boundary
line between
freedom and
waywardness
lies in whether
one infringes on
others or not
MP=i
Ifi $£
HH ^3^
chants and farmers become concern¬
ed when their sons take to learning
seriously, thinking that their fortunes
will eventually be ruined. This is
natural in anxious parents, and proves
that this kind of learning is far remov¬
ed from and quite useless to daily life.
Therefore, this kind of learning
without real use should be left to other
days and one's best efforts should be
given to real learning that is near to
men's everyday use for instance, the
forty-seven letters of the alphabet, the
composition of letters, bookkeeping,
the abacus, and the use of scales.
A
16
DVANCING farther, there
will be many subjects to be taken up:
Geography is a sort of story of and
guide to Japan and all the countries of
the world; Natural Philosophy is the
study of the nature and the function of
all things under the heavens; History is
a detailed chronology and studies the
conditions of every country in the
world, past and present; Economics
explains the management of a house¬
hold and of a country and of the
world; Ethics gives the natural princi¬
ples for a man's conduct of himself
and with his fellow men and shows
how he should behave in society.
For the study of these subjects, one
should read the translations of West¬
ern books. In writing one may let the
Japanese alphabet suffice in most
cases. If there should be a youth with
a promise in scholarship, let him learn
the "letters written sideways" and let
him grasp the fundamentals in even
one field or one subject, and accord¬
ing to these let him investigate the
principles of things near him, and thus
let him fulfil the need of every day.
Such is Jitsugaku (Scientific Know¬
ledge or Real Learning) for all men,
which should be generally imbibed
without distinction of high or low in
society. Only after this, should men
pursue the separate ways of Samurai,
farmer, artisan, and merchant, and the
household business of each. In this
way a man may attain his independ¬
ence, a house its independence, and
the nation too will attain independence.
In the pursuit of learning, the impor¬
tant thing is to know one's proper
limitations. The nature of a man as
he is born is not bound or restricted;
a man as an adult man and a woman
as an adult woman should be free
and unrestrained in their actions.
However, by stressing freedom alone
without regard to one's proper limit¬
ations, one is most liable to fall
into waywardness and licentiousness.
What is. meant by limitations is to
conform to the reason of Heaven and
humanity and to attain one's own
freedom without infringing upon that
of other men.
The boundary line between freedom
and waywardness lies in whether one
infringes on others or not. For ins¬
tance, when one is using one's own
money, it may seem that one is free
to indulge in wine and women and to
abandon oneself to licentiousness.
But it is not so by any means. One
man's licentiousness will become the
temptation of many men, causing the
general degeneration of the society
and the disruption of education. Even
if the money he spends is his, his sin
cannot be pardoned.
The problems of freedom and inde¬
pendence exist with a nation as much
as they do with an individual man.
Since ancient times, Japan has been
an island country far to the east of
the Asian continent, not associating
with foreign countries, living on its
own produce, and never being sensi¬
ble of want.
But since the Americans came in
the Kaei Era, foreign trade and inter¬
course began and developed to the
state we see today. There have been
arguments of many kinds even after
the opening of the ports, some advo¬
cating loudly the closing of the ports
and the expulsion of foreigners.
However, these arguments take a very
narrow point of view like that of the
proverbial frog at the bottom of a
well; they are not worthy of our note.
T
AKE Japan, take any nation
of the West; every nation is under the
same heavens, illumined by the same
Sun, enjoying the beauty of the same
Moon, sharing the same ocean, breath¬
ing the same air, possessing the same
human sentiments. Therefore, what¬
ever we have in excess we should give
to them, taking to us whatever they
have in excess, teaching each other
and learning together, never ashamed
nor boastful, each fulfilling the needs
of the other, mutually praying for the
happiness of all.
So, according to the reason of
Heaven and the ways of man, a nation
should hold mutual intercourse with
all others, and when reason is against
it, it should bow even before the black
natives of Africa, and when reason
is on its side, it should stand In
defiance of the mighty warships of
England and America, or when the
honour of the country is at stake,

No longer will
a man's rank
be determined
by his birth
but only by
his ability
every man in the whole nation should
throw down his life to defend the
glory of the country. Such should be
the picture of a free and independent
country.
Since the return of the Imperial rule,
Japan's system of government has
come to be much changed. Externally
she associates with the world under
international law; internally she guides
the people to an understanding of
freedom and independence, permitting
the plain people to take family names
and to go on horseback, which one
may consider the finest act of all
times. One may say that the move¬
ment to make the four classes Samu¬
rai, farmer, artisan, and merchant
equal has here been placed on a firm
footing.
I
HEREFORE, henceforth
among the people of Japan there will
be no such thing as the rank to which
a man is born. Only by his ability and
the position he holds will a man's rank
be determined. For instance, it is
proper to pay respect to a government
official, but this is not the respect of
the man himself. We should pay
respect to the fact he holds his posi¬
tion because of his ability and admin¬
isters the precious laws for the
benefit of the people. It is not the
person that one is to respect; it is
the law that one is to respect.
All people remember that during the
Shogun's regime the August Jar of
Tea used to be carried along the
Tokaido Highway. Not only the Jar
of Tea but a hawk in the Shogun's
household was more precious than an
ordinary man; when a horse of the
Shogun's household came by, all the
travellers on the highway stood aside.
Everything, even a piece of stone or
tile, appeared awesome and precious
when the words "belonging to the
Shogun" were attached to it.
Though disliking it for many centur¬
ies, people had become used to it,
and thus the ugly custom came to be.
After all, this did not come from the
dignity of the law, nor from the value
of the things themselves; it was
simply a cowardly device of the
government to show off its power and
to restrict the freedom of the people.
One may call it an empty pretence
without substance.
Nowadays, as such miserable laws
and customs are to be discontinued
throughout the country, people ought
to set their hearts at ease, and if there
should be the least complaint against
the government, they should never
hold it against the officials in secret,
but they should seek a proper channel
to present the case and to argue about
it quietly and without hesitation. If
the case should be in accord with
Heaven's reason and with humanity,
one should fight for it even at the risk
of one's own life. Such shall be the
lot of a man who calls himself a citizen
of a civilized nation.
As I have said before, an individual
man and an individual nation are free
and unrestricted according to Heaven-
made law. And so, if this freedom of
the nation is in jeopardy, one should
not fear to stand against all the nations
of the world, if one's individual freedom
is in jeopardy, one should not stand in
awe of even the government officials.
Moreover, at the time when the
equality of the four classes has been
established, all men should feel secure
in giving free rein to their activities
as long as they follow the ways of
Heaven. However, as every man has
his position in society, he must have
ability and virtue appropriate to his
position. In order to give ability and
virtue to oneself, one must learn the
logic of things. In order to learn the
logic of things, one must study his
letters. This is the reason for the
urgent need of learning.
A;IS we look around today,
the position of the three classes-^-far¬
mer, artisan, and merchant has ad¬
vanced a hundred fold, and soon will be
on a level with the Samurai. Even now
the way has been opened for drawing
talented men from among the three
classes into government service.
Therefore, all men must reflect upon
themselves and realize that they now
occupy a high position, and therefore
must behave in a manner worthy of
that position.
There is no one more pitiful and
obnoxious than the ignorant and the
illiterate. In the extreme of ignorance,
they lose the sense of shame. When
they grow poor and hungry because
of their ignorance, they do not blame
themselves, but they envy the rich,
sometimes banding themselves to
force a petition or even taking to
armed rioting.
Shall I call them shameless, or shall
I call them lawless? They owe their
security to the law of the nation and
they carry on their household business
under the law. They take advantage
17
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

THE GREAT MANIFESTO (Continued)
18
of it when they may: Yet, when their
personal greed dictates, they break
the law. Is this not an outrage on
fair reason?
It sometimes happens that a well-
established man with some means
knows only how to accumulate money
but is entirely ignorant in educating
his children. Uneducated children will
be foolish, which is not to be wonder¬
ed at, and they will become lazy and
licentious, finally squandering away
like a wisp of smoke the fortunes
inherited from their ancestors.
To rule such foolish men, reason
will not do; the only way will be to
keep them in order by the show of
force. A proverb of the West says,
"Over foolish people, there is a harsh
government." It is not that the govern¬
ment is harsh of itself; it is the foolish
people who bring harshness upon
themselves.
If the government over foolish
people is harsh, reason requires that
the government over wise people
should be good. Therefore, in our
country, too, we have this kind of
government because there is this kind
of people.
Should our people ever sink into
deeper ignorance and illiteracy, the
government will become even severer
than today. Should people turn their
minds to learning, acquire an under¬
standing of logic, and advance toward
civilization, the government will move
toward freedom and leniency.
The severity or leniency of the
government are natural consequences
of the worth or unworthiness of the
people themselves. Who in the world
would prefer harsh rule to good rule?
Who would not pray for strength and
fortune for his own country? Who
would welcome humiliation from for¬
eigners? These are human sentiments
common to all.
The important thing for everyone
for the present is that he should
regulate his conduct according to
humanity, and apply himself earnestly
to learning in order to absorb a wide
knowledge and to develop abilities
worthy of his position. This will make
it easy for the government to rule
and pleasant for the people to accept
its rule, every man finding his place
and all playing a part in preserving
the peace of the nation.
The Encouragement of Learning" has
been included in the American edition of
"The Autobiography of Yukichi Fukuzawa" ,
published by Columbia University Press in
the Unesco Collection of Representative
Works.
