Photo USIS

Unesco mathematical model
to harness the Mekong
by W. J. Ellis
The Mekong Project, an historic international
enterprise in river development, seeks to
make full use of the waters of the lower
Mekong in terms of hydro-electric power,
irrigation, flood control, drainage, navigation
improvement, water management and water
supply. Map left, shows location of some
of the Mekong projects in Thailand, Laos,
Cambodia and the Republic of Viet-Nam.
Unesco has produced a Mathematical Model of
the Mekong Delta which has already played
a major role in proving the feasibility of
building a barrage across the Tonle Sap
River (Cambodia) and will be used to study
other projects. Above, a boat race along
the broad waters of the Mekong at Vientiane
(Laos). The occasion is the annual regatta
marking a Buddhist festival in October.
T,
HE 2,600-mile-long Me¬
kong, one of the great rivers of the
world, rises at an altitude of over
16,000 feet in the mountains of per¬
petual snow of the Tibetan plateau.
It is perennial and flows unrestricted
through Yunnan Province in China and
Burma before it enters the Lower
Mekong Basin, where, in Laos, Thai¬
land, Cambodia and the Republic of
W. J. ELLIS, of Australia, was formerly direc¬
tor of Unesco's Science Co-operation Offices
in South East Asia (Manila) and South Asia
(Delhi). He is now with the Unesco Secre¬
tariat in Pans. Before joining Unesco he was
a biochemist on the staff of the Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organization
in Melbourne, Australia.
Viet-Nam, it is influenced by the mon¬
soon rains collected mainly from the
enormous catchment of the Annamese
Cordillera. Only 14 per cent of the
river's water has its origin in Tibet
and China.
From the Burmese border, the river
follows a tortuous course for sixteen
hundred miles before it is lost through
the great delta into the South China
Sea.
It is estimated that the total drainage
area is 307,000 square miles (800,000
sq. kms.) and of this, 236,000 square
miles (600,000 sq. kms.), an area larger
than France, lies within the four coun¬
tries of the Lower Basin.
Nowhere in its long journey has
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20
17

Photos Ö Raymond Cauchetier, Paris
LIFE ALONG
THE MEKONG RIVER
Rice eaten with salted fish or
a fish sauce rich in protein
is the staple diet of the
population in the lower basin
of the Mekong. River fishermen
make their largest catches as
the annual flood waters recede
along the Tonle Sap, a tributary
of the Mekong, in Cambodia.
Improvised markets are set up
on the river banks to which
the rice farmers, travelling
from far afield, bring their
grain to exchange for fish.
Opposite, airview of the
Cambodian countryside reveals
a mosaic of flooded ricefields.
The proposed barrage on the
Tonle Sap would help to control
flooding, extend the fishing
season and improve soil fertility.
Below, countless numbers of
fish await processing at riverside
compounds. Left, rice farmers
encamped by the Mekong
prepare piles of fish for salting.
t&t&gdi
r<"/
"+ê*Èi


Photos USIS
MEKONG (Continued)
A 2,600-miles river
without a bridge
the river ever been crossed by a bridge
and at no time until recently has any¬
thing been done to derive greater
benefit from the river or to control
its many and unpredictable idiosyncra¬
sies, though these cause great losses
to the already over-taxed economy of
this area.
The Mekong has an annual cycle,
with a dry season from November to
June and then a regular flood which
usually reaches a single peak.
When the floods come, over 15,000
square miles (38,000 sq. kms.) in Cam¬
bodia and the Republic of Viet-Nam
are inundated. Herein lies the major
problem, that of introducing some
control over this yearly phenomenon.
One of the special features of the
flooding is that by the time the
enormous volume of water reaches
Phnom Penh, the capital of Cambodia,
sometimes reaching a height of thirty
feet, the head developed by the
Mekong is sufficient to reverse the
flow of one of its principal tributaries,
the Tonle Sap. This river flows back¬
wards into the Great Lake of Cam¬
bodia.
T.
20
HUS it may be seen that
the daily life of the inhabitants of the
Mekong basin has always revolved
around the vicissitudes of the mon¬
soon and the river. Over the centu¬
ries they have learned after a fashion
to adapt their way of life and their
livelihood to these difficult conditions.
It has therefore been necessary to
bear well in mind that any develop¬
ment plans call for careful co-ordi
nation of all factors concerned and to
ensure that what is planned will not
disrupt the present economy and the
whole ecology of the region. Since
rice and fish constitute the daily diet
of such a large proportion of the
population, even a brief interruption of
supplies could have serious conse¬
quences.
Of all the projects considered or
planned for the Mekong the most pro¬
mising and most complicated one is
the Tonle Sap project. Here, it is
proposed to build a great barrage, and
planning for it has called for the deve¬
lopment by Unesco of a mathematical
model.
Over the past seven years Unesco
and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) have been engag¬
ed on this highly sophisticated research
project the creation of a theoretical
model in the form of a computer and
programme of the Mekong River Delta,
as distinct from a physical model
which is built to scale and which is
usually used for the study of hydro-
logical problems of this sort. In the
present instance the term Mathema¬
tical Model is used by the specialists
and it has been made possible by the
use of an electronic computer.
While this model has made a special
contribution to basic studies of a
number of development projects being
undertaken in the Mekong Flood Plain,
it has also led to fundamental scientific
advances in the field of hydrology and
hydraulics.
This project is an example of Inter¬
national scientific collaboration at its
best. Born out of a spirit of co-opera¬
tion between the United Nations and
the four countries, Cambodia, Laos,
Thailand and the Republic of Viet-
Nam, which are most closely concern¬
ed with the Mekong, the new techni¬
ques developed will serve other states
far distant from South-East Asia. For
example, the study of many of the
flood problems of Italy may well be
assisted by the application of the
scientific knowledge resulting from
the Mekong studies, and thus a re¬
currence of the enormous damage
caused by the devastating floods of
1966 may be prevented.
D URING recent years the
experience of many has been sought
out to see how the Mekong as a vast
natural resource might be turned to
greater use and thus contribute to an
improvement in the economic situation
of the population of the great flood
plain.
The Lower Basin of the Mekong
River comprises approximately one
third of the total territory of Cambo¬
dia, Laos, Thailand and the Repub¬
lic of Viet-Nam, and within it live
20 million people. Eighty per cent of
them are farmers and fishermen and
all are dependent on the river.
Less than 3 per cent of the basin is
irrigated; much more of it could be
and will be under the development
plans. Only 86 per cent of the culti¬
vated land is under rice, and only one
crop a year is grown, but this could
be increased to three. With electric
power becoming available it will be
possible to produce nitrogenous ferti¬
lizer. Furthermore, large abandoned
areas like the Plaine des Joncs could

One of four U.N. Special Fund projects on tributaries of the Mekong
provides for the construction of a dam on the Nam Ngum River in
Laos. Far left, site chosen for the dam as it looks today. Left, artist's
impression of the future dam, 200 feet (66 metres) high and nearly
1,200 ft. (360 metres) long. The jungle spreading to the hills in the
background will be engulfed by a vast artificial lake covering
140 square miles (370 sq. kms.). The project should bring irrigation
to about 100,000 acres and generate 520 million kilowatt hours of
electricity a year. Right, lowering a current meter into the Mekong
during preparatory studies for the River Basin project.
Photo © SOGREAH. Grenoble
well be brought under cultivation if
they were desalinated.
The advent of power could also
make it possible to work the iron ore,
bauxite, copper, tungsten and zinc
which are found in the area, and to set
up new industries. These will call
for increased educational and exten¬
sion programmes for the people to
enable them to understand the new
development, to acquire new skills
and to adapt the existing social and
commercial structures.
The fishing industry, about 90 per
cent of it fresh-water, is extensive and
important, with the Great Lake pro¬
ducing about 50,000 tons per year.
But this production is very variable
and it is foreseen that if the proposed
barrage on the Tonle Sap could be
regulated the fish production might be
more balanced.
Whatever might be the sum total
of benefits from a barrage on the
Tonle Sap it is clear that there would
result a tremendous reduction in the
loss of lives and property. For exam¬
ple, in the 1961 flood, 164 lives were
lost and a population of over 300,000
affected; untold damage was done to
buildings, roads and bridges.
The problems of the Lower Mekong
Basin can only be solved as a whole:
there is need for a joint effort, but
not even the four countries involved
could assemble anything like the ne¬
cessary technical and material resour¬
ces required to carry through a pro¬
ject of this magnitude. This then was
a real project for study and assistance
by the United Nations.
In 1951, the Economic Commission
for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE)
established by the United Nations Eco¬
nomic and Social Council in 1947 took
up the study of the Lower Mekong.
The technical work was undertaken
by the Bureau of Flood Control and
Water Resources Development, a sub¬
sidiary body of ECAFE which is em¬
powered, among other things, to advise
and assist governments on flood con¬
trol and related river problems. The
first study, published early in 1952,
aroused keen interest and brought
forth favourable response.
I N 1957, a United Nations
mission planned a five-year program¬
me of surveys with a budget of $9 mil¬
lion. The first recommendation, which
received early approval of the United
Nations, was the creation of a local
authority to draw up a master plan
and to ensure proper co-ordination of
resources.
Thus was established the Committee
for Co-ordination of Investigations of
the Lower Mekong Basin, which is
composed of plenipotentiaries from
the four riparian states of Cambodia,
Laos, "Thailand and the Republic of
Viet-Nam. It is empowered to control
supervise and co-ordinate develop¬
ment projects. To handle the vital day
to day work between sessions of the
committee an executive agent was
appointed and, to assist him, a three-
member consultative committee. This
small operational body puts into effect
decisions taken by the Committee for
Co-ordination.
Pilot projects have been started,
and are well under way in each of
the four states. These are the four
Mekong United Nations Special Fund
tributary projects:
The Battambang Project in Cambo¬
dia envisages a diversion dam. But,
since the river is almost dry during
April and May, round-the-year irriga¬
tion cannot be ensured simply by pro¬
viding such a diversion dam. It is
proposed to solve this problem by
building an upstream storage dam and
reservoir, which should provide gra¬
vity irrigation for 150,000 acres. In
addition it is planned to generate
110 million KWh of electricity per year.
The Nam Ngum Project in Laos is
to provide irrigation for farming on
about 100,000 acres and will produce
about 520 million KWh of electricity
per year.
In Thailand the Nam Pong project
located in the north makes provision
for pumping and irrigation to about
95,000 acres and provides for the
drainage of soil which is sandy and
often very salty. It will also produce
some 90 million KWh. of electricity.
Finally, the Upper Se San Project
located in the plateau area of the
Republic of Viet-Nam is designed to
develop a large area for resettlement.
The project will provide gravity irriga¬
tion for some 25,000 acres down¬
stream and, by pumping and upstream
diversion, for an additional 35,000
acres. The production of 220 million
KWh. of electricity is planned.
These then constitute the four
UNDP Special Fund Component pro¬
jects which aim to irrigate slightly more n-i
than 400,000 acres; and additional tri- / I
butary projects will doubtless be built.
A number of mainstream projects
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

MEKONG (Continued)
The delta in the computer
are under way and are being assisted
under bilateral aid and the Colombo
Plan. (The British Commonwealth's
scheme for aiding its member coun¬
tries in South-East Asia.) Five of these
projects envisage providing irrigation
to an area of nearly 6 million acres
and an annual electricity output of
about 25,000 million KWh.
The Tonle Sap and Delta project is
one of especial interest to Unesco as
the organization entrusted by UNDP
with the making of the mathematical
model of the Delta.
Quite apart from these large-scale
land and water development projects
other work is in progress undertaken
by the four riparian governments
which are receiving bilateral assis¬
tance as well as aid from the United
Nations and other international agen¬
cies.
F
22
OR example the U.N. is
carrying out a survey of minerals and
the mineral processing industries in
the Mekong Basin. In agriculture, the
Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) is helping with the development
of a 740-acre experimental irrigation
and demonstration farm in the Vietiane
Plain, under the Special Fund Compo¬
nent Tributaries Project. FAO is also
assisting by directing the design of
a number of agriculture stations.
Because of great losses from forest
and grassland fires caused by shifting
cultivation, FAO is investigating ways
which may be used to restrain this
practice. Schistosomiasis (a disease
caused when the bloodstream is in¬
vaded by tiny parasites) and malaria
surveys have been carried out by the
World Health Organization, and pre¬
ventive measures suggested.
At the request of the Co-ordination
Committee, the International Labour
Organization has completed a prelimi¬
nary manpower survey of the Mekong
Basin.
The change of flow of the Tonle Sap
caused by the swelling of the Mekong
at flood time has already been men¬
tioned. This constitutes a major hy-
drological and hydraulic problem, and
a detailed scientific study was consi¬
dered to be fundamental to any plan
for building a barrage on the Tonle
Sap and indeed basic to most of the
projects envisaged for the whole
Lower Mekong Basin.
Having in mind the need for a
thorough basic study, Unesco consti
tuted a three-man mission to visit the
area and to look into the idea of
constructing a suitable hydrological
model.
Studies of hydraulic problems are
usually carried out by using a physical
scale model, but in this case the rela¬
tions between surface distances and
gradients were of an order that made
it almost impossible to reproduce such
small slopes in a model.
Such a model would have requir¬
ed an area of almost one hectare
(2è acres) with levels accurate to
1/10 mm. This important considera¬
tion, among others, led the Unesco
Mission to propose the development
of a mathematical model, to be pre¬
pared by using an electronic com¬
puter.
Accordingly, the Committee for Co¬
ordination, on behalf of the Govern¬
ments of Cambodia and the Repub¬
lic of Viet-Nam asked the UNDP
Special Fund Component for help in
building up a mathematical model of
the Delta. The project was approved
and in May 1961 the Governing Council
of the Special Fund entrusted Unesco
with the responsibility for building the
model.
The mission contemplated the build¬
ing of a model for two major reasons.
Firstly, they considered it necessary to
resolve the controversy existing be¬
tween experts about the total effect
of building the dam and also to prepare
a design that would provide the most
efficient control. Secondly they felt
it was vital to demonstrate clearly that
a dam built in Cambodia would not
in any circumstances adversely affect
the lower part of the Delta in the
Republic of Viet-Nam.
A T the time of the mission's
work a physical model had already
been ruled out. A new approach was
being made and new developments
were taking place which eventually
made it clear that a mathematical
model was more suited to the investi¬
gation. That the decision to use a
mathematical model was taken at a
time when the technique had not yet
been fully developed can be consi¬
dered as an important contribution to
fundamental hydraulic studies.
Very careful planning was required
in preparation for the model. First a
panel of consultants was appointed
three hydraulics experts and two
mathematicians who contributed the
expert knowledge and experience of
the four different countries from which
they came. Then a suitable laboratory
had to be found to undertake the
construction of the model. The one
selected, SOGREAHthe Société Gre¬
nobloise d'Etudes et d'Applications
Hydrauliques in Grenoble, France,
had had years of experience of
research in this field.
T HE model project was
planned to cover four phases:
The collection of all existing docu¬
mentation and data on the hydraulics
of the region;
The designing and programming
of a preliminary model on the basis
of these results which could determine
the possible deficiencies of the
eventual model;
A measurement campaign plan¬
ned on the basis of the preliminary
model, which would check the cri¬
tical data needed for improving the
accuracy of this model in preparation
for the final stage;
The construction of the eventual
model, in the form of a computer
programme accurately representing
the seasonal variations in water levels
and discharge rates.
In phase two, trial runs were made
to determine how faithfully the pre¬
liminary model reflected the natural
phenomena. The main purpose was
to determine which factors (discharge
rates and levels at particular points
for instance), were critical for the
operation of the model, adjustments
being possible to make it more
accurate.
Essentially the computer programme
constituting the Mathematical Model
involves the introduction of detailed
hydraulic data (topographic features,
water levels and discharge volumes
etc.) into an electronic computer in
the form of formulae embodying well
known physical laws. The computer
then determines the water levels and
their rates of variation at the points
and times of special interest in the
Delta plain.
The test area concerning the Tonle
Sap was divided up into more than
260 meshes covering dry land,
water or marsh from which the
natural phenomena could be faithfully
reproduced by definition of the
exchanges between them and the
average water levels in each of them.
Each mesh entailed a great number of
accurate and painstaking measure-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 32

Photo © Raymond Cauchetier, Paris
FISHING VILLAGE AFLOAT on the Great Lake that feeds the Tonle Sap River. In the rainy t\t\
season the rising waters of the Mekong reverse the current of the Tonle Sap and cause it £0
to flow back into the Great Lake, raising its level by some 30 feet. The fishermen and
their families live permanently on their boats and at high water periods cast their lines
and nets almost at tree-top level.

HOMES ON STILTS
are those of fishermen
who live in parts of
the Great Lake of the
Tonle Sap where the
least annual flooding
occurs. The projected
Tonle Sap barrage will
control the maximum
water level of the lake
and increase its depth
in dry weather, thereby
regulating fish production
which today fluctuates
according to the extent
and duration of floods.
^i-

Unesco mathematical model
tO harness the Mekong (Continued from page 22)
i/V^'jJF»*»/!
Photo © Raymond Cauchetier
32
ments and a certain co-operation on
the part of nature.
With this special Model hydraulic
and hydrological conditions in the
Delta, fromi Chlong to the South China
Sea and the Gulf of Thailand were
simulated, first without and later with
a dam: the data collected in the field
and those already available were
subjected to computer analysis taking
the two sets of conditions, without and
with the dam All these materials
will be carefully kept because, with
modifications appropriate to different
conditions, they can be used in future
investigations, perhaps for the study
of different problems.
At the SOGREAH laboratories,
where the computer work was done,
six specialists two from Cambodia
and four from the Republic of Viet-
Nam were given UNDP fellow¬
ships to be trained in the use of
the Model. Though unexpected va¬
garies of the monsoon caused delays
in the measurement campaign, the
first three phases of the project
were almost finished by the end of
1965. With all the essential data
collected at this time, it was thus
possible to complete the final model
by early 1966.
Coming to the end of this
programme after seven years, and
with a joint expenditure of slightly
more than $1,250,000 by the govern¬
ments concerned and UNDP, it is
logical to ask: has the project been
successful and has it been worth
while?
The completed .project demonstrates
a number of special achievements.
In the final plan the Mathematical
Model has enabled the technicians to
find answers to many questions
relating to the effect of the Tonle Sap
dam. It can now be demonstrated that
the control of the flood-water will be
effective, although less so than was
expected, but that great care will be
needed to avoid aggravating the flood
effect, mainly in Cambodia.
Taking the results of the programme
as a whole mention can be made of
three notable conclusions:
; There is now agreement between
the specialists on what could be
expected of the Tonle Sap dam;
The Mathematical Model is an
essential tool for effecting the best
control of the flood. It may also be
used for studies yet to be made on
possible dam sites in the upper part
of the Mekong Basin and may permit
the study of the effects on the Delta
of upper basin regulation;
In order to adjust the model, a
survey has been carried out which
has added to the knowledge of the
Delta. For example, the curve defining
the capacity of the lake as a function
of the water level is now accurately
known.
In the broader sense, the carrying
through of this project has contributed
new scientific techniques which can
and will be used in other parts of the
world.
The project has also an important
educational factor in that competent
senior personnel from countries of the
region have received high level training
in specialized laboratories in fields
such as programming, hydraulics,
computer mathematics, engineering
technology and administration.
Finally some comment is due on the
spirit of international technical co¬
operation which prevailed throughout
the project.
In an area where there were periods
of major political conflicts and strained
diplomatic relations, at no time was
it necessary to suspend or interrupt
the work of the committee. This fact
alone has instilled into the project a
healthy air of confidence which it is
hoped will carry on into the develop¬
ment projects that the creation of
the Mathematical Model has made
possible.
