This year marks the centenary of the Meiji Restoration
which ended Japan's isolation and led to rapid modernization
of the country. This event is being commemorated by Unesco
and its member states. The " Unesco Courier " devotes
this special issue to Japan and its century of dynamic
change which gave new impetus to Japanese civilization.
4
EMPEROR MEIJI
father of modern Japan
by Ki Kimura
Emperor Meiji (1852-1912),
below left, father of
modern Japan. Old woodcut
print below shows
horse-drawn trams in a main
street of Tokyo introduced
to Japan early in the Meiji
era. Opposite, a view of
modern Tokyo bus terminal
with car ramp leading to vast
underground parking area.
Funnels, foreground and
background, are ventilation
shafts which add artistic
note to plaza's architecture.
Close-up view is shown on
front cover. Above, the
symbol chosen by Japan for
the commemoration of the
Meiji Restoration: a stylized
chrysanthemum, designed by
the Japanese artist
Tadashi Ohashi-
WmK- »Klt-W^- .-^ " --jLjT~~-~" mL " -XlummkISi EM fin.*--T~^T /> 1'¡-Mr ^r -
E ARLY in 1868 a young man
whom the world was to know as the
Emperor Meiji emerged into history
from behind the curtain of courtiers
and ceremony that had for centuries
isolated the Japanese throne.
For more than 200 years Japan had.
remained a closed country, ruled by
Shoguns (military governors) who had
reduced the emperor to a figurehead.
Kl KIMURA is one of Japan's foremost
authorities on the history of the Meiji era.
Historian and novelist, he is president of
the Meiji Culture Research Association and
was formerly cultural adviser to the Tokyo
Metropolitan Government. Among his many
books on cultural and historical questions
are "Emperor Meiji" and "A Study In the
Cultural Intercourse between Japan and
U.S.A."
But by the middle of the 19th century
this self-enforced isolation of Japan
suddenly came to an end. Besieged
by foreign powers clamouring for the
country to open up to Western com¬
merce, and threatened by rebellious
.feudal lords,- the fifteenth Tokugawa
Shogun yielded power to the Imperial
house.
The youthful Meiji Emperor, Mitsu-
hito, and his dynamic advisers open¬
ed Japan not only to Western ideas
and commerce but to all the tempest¬
uous currents of the 19th century
world. The Meiji Restoration exactly
one hundred years ago was like the
bursting of a dam behind which had
accumulated the energies and forces
of centuries. Japan set out to achieve
in only a few decades what had taken
Photos Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Japan
centuries to develop in the West: the
creation of a modern nation, with
modern industries and political institu¬
tions, and a modern pattern of society.
Young Samurai changed their Japan¬
ese dress for top hats and dark suits
and sailed off to Europe and America
to study Western techniques of
government, industry and war. In a
tour de force of modernization, the
Meiji revolutionaries raised their
country to be a peer of the Western
powers, in less than 40 years and
without sacrificing Japan's traditional
culture.
The events leading to the Restora¬
tion started the year after- Meiji was
bom, when Commodore Matthew
Perry's "Black Ships" from the United
States steamed into Kurihama Bay in
CONTINUED ON PAGE 6

Photo © Japan Times, Tokyo

EMPEROR MEIJI (Continued)
From national
seclusion to
doors open
on the world
1853 on a mission of diplomacy and
commerce.
After Perry signed a treaty of amity
with the Shogun the next spring,
Russia, the Netherlands and Great
Britain secured similar agreements.
Hermit-Japan, after secluding itself for
over 200 years, slowly began to
resume contact with the outside world.
6
HEN Japan re-opened its
doors, it was stagnating under a feudal
system which had divided society into
four distinct castes: warriors, farmers,
artisans and tradesmen. So all-per¬
vasive was this caste system that it
exercised control over the very lives of
the people to the extent of prescribing
exact rules on all activities relating to
daily life and behaviour. Even the use
of language, both written and spoken
was determined by the individual's
social class.
The Confucian ethic, with its em¬
phasis on the practice and cultivation
of the cardinal virtues of filial piety,
kindness, righteousness, propriety,
intelligence, and faithfulness, consti¬
tuted the foundation on which all
relations between superiors and in¬
feriors, one's obedience to authority,
and the concept of master-servant
were formalized. Society was stable,
but totally immobilized.
The Japan of those days was more¬
over an impoverished agrarian state.
Even in the late 1870s, some 75 to
80 per cent of the employed popula¬
tion were engaged in agriculture. Per
capita annual income was estimated
at about 65 dollars. In other words,
Japan was a nation sustained by a
farming community working at a bare
subsistence level.
Right from the time of Perry and
the first treaties the Japanese were
interested in international relations on
the basis of independence and equal¬
ity. There was a danger, they felt,
that the Great Powers might dominate
them, and a way of thinking, not in
terms of the clan but in terms of the
state, was born from this feeling.
The confrontation between groups
advocating an open-door policy and
those who urged the exclusion of
foreigners was, for a time, bitter. Both
factions had the same goal: to pre¬
serve national independence. When
the champions of seclusion realized
that this freedom could be maintain¬
ed only through intercourse with
foreigners, they made common cause
with their former opponents.
Conflict also arose over whether
Japan should return political power to
the throne or continue the traditional
Shogunate system of government.
Again, national independence was the
determining factor.
In 1867, both the Shogun and Em¬
peror Komei, Meiji's father, died. The
young Emperor and the new Shogun,
Yoshinobu were duly installed in the
highest offices of the land.
Yoshinobu was a man of vision, con¬
vinced that Japanese Independence
hinged on the country being unified and
modernized. In late 1867, encouraged
by a coalition of fiefs led by the strong
provincial clans known as the "Satcho
Dohi," he surrendered his authority
to the Emperor and ended 700 years
of military rule.
In February 1868, the Reformation
began: Emperor Meiji assumed su¬
preme executive authority, and inform¬
ed foreign representatives that his
title should replace the Shogun's in
all existing treaties.
Encouraged by his counsellors,
many of whom he chose from the
Samurai, Japan's warrior class, Meiji
broke the strict prohibition which
barred foreigners from the capital,
Kyoto, and received the represen¬
tatives of the Great Powers in a New
Year's audience. He also cast away
the feudal edict against travel, and
journeyed the 27 miles from Kyoto
to Osaka to attend a naval review.
H IS major step in the first
year of the Reformation came when he
summoned his nobles to the royal
palace and,, in their presence, took
the "charter oath" by which he prom¬
ised that a deliberative assembly
would be formed, all classes would
share in the government, and that
justice, not ancient custom, would in
future be the guiding principle of the
administration.
In the same year, he separated
Japan further from its past by moving
the capital from Kyoto to Edo and
renaming it Tokyo, or Eastern Capital.
In the beginning, the Reformation's
leaders devoted almost all their
energies to developing a sound econ¬
omic base for the new state: the
monetary system had to be stabilized,
taxes levied, new industry developed,
and foreign markets opened.

THE GREAT
SHRINE
In 1868, Emperor Meiji
transferred Japan's capital
from Kyoto to the city of
Edo which was renamed the
Eastern Capital (Tokyo).
There, in 1920, the people of
Japan raised the Meiji Jingû
(Meiji Shrine) to the memory
of the great Emperor-reformer.
Left, the morning ceremony
at the shrine. People in
their thousands come to pay
homage every day and
especially on feast days
(right). Surrounding the
imposing edifice are splendid
gardens and thickly wooded
grounds planted with
hundreds of thousands of
trees from all over Japan.
Within the gardens is the
Meiji Art Gallery in which
hang paintings, by leading
Japanese artists depicting
the great events of Emperor
Meiji's reign.
One prerequisite change was the
abolition of the feudal system which,
with autocratic chieftains governing
and levying taxes over huge estates,
stood squarely in the way of econo¬
mic progress. No central government
could effectively unify Japan if it
continued to exist.
Feudalism had been a way of life
since the 12th century, and the clans
were strong. Yet such was the spirit
of the times that the four great Sat-
cho Dohi clans of the west returned
their estates to the Emperor in 1869,
and entreated him to re-organize them
under a uniform set of laws. The
lesser clans soon followed, and be¬
tween 1871 and 1872 the four classes
of warrior, artisan, farmer and trades¬
man were abolished.
The most important factor in Jap¬
an's economic development was a
strong and integrated control by the
central government. This strength was
needed to enforce three difficult deci¬
sions made in the first half of Meiji's
reign, and which were to have endur¬
ing effects on Japan's prosperity.
First, the government resisted the
temptation to unite the country through
foreign military adventures. Six years
after the young Emperor took power,
strong members of the government
favoured going to war with Korea
after Korean shore batteries had fired
on a Japanese gunboat. Despite the
fact that such action would have tem¬
porarily unified the country, which was
plagued by discontented elements at
the time, the proposal was rejected
in 1873, and the nation's energies were
turned to solving domestic problems.
The second decision was to deflate
the economy in 1881. Serious infla¬
tion at that time made it difficult to
promote modern industry and invest¬
ment. Disregarding public dissatis¬
faction, the Meiji government firmly
introduced stringent fiscal measures
that halted inflation in 1884, with the
result that the economic goals set in
1868 were achieved in 1885, as
planned.
T
HE third decision concern¬
ed the financing of new industry. The
Meiji leaders avoided the comparatively
easy solution of allowing foreign in¬
vestment, reasoning that ¡t might make
Japan dependent on foreign nations.
Instead, they raised the necessary
funds by instituting a land tax. Invest¬
ment from abroad was restricted.
Meiji Japan built its modern indus¬
try on a traditional foundation. Raw
silk and tea were the original main
stays of Japan's exports, and these
were encouraged (even the Empress
set up a cocoonery in the palace
grounds to promote sericulture) be¬
cause their foreign exchange earning
power helped establish new industries.
Hokkaido, then a vast virgin island
at the north of the Japanese archi¬
pelago, was opened up with American
assistance (see page 62). Agriculture
and Japan's chemical industry (today
the second in the world) were started.
Apple trees, never before seen in Ja¬
pan, were planted, and the first dairy
industry was begun.
After seeing its success in the West,
the Meiji leaders believed firmly in
private enterprise. But centuries of
feudalism had left the country with few
industrial traditions or skills, and Japan¬
ese investors were cautious about
risking their capital in new and some¬
times strange ventures.
To foster industrial growth, joint-
stock companies were encouraged,
with emphasis on foreign-exchange
firms, trading companies and transpor¬
tation companies; government sub¬
sidies were granted to key businesses
and industries, and favourable tax
concessions made.
The government also built model
factories in the steel, cement, plate-
glass, firebrick, woollen textiles and
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
7

EMPEROR MEIJI (Continued)
Far-sighted leader
of a peaceful revolution
spinning industries. They were set up
on a profit-making basis but with the
primary aim of introducing European
production methods and techniques
into Japan.
In all its efforts to modernize indus¬
try, the Reformation leaders were
aided and encouraged by Emperor
Meiji who travelled throughout the
islands, inspecting shipyards, opening
factories, and visiting development
areas.
Reforms in other fields were far-
reaching : education was made com¬
pulsory, all restrictions were lifted on
Japanese going abroad, Christianity
was permitted, vaccinations, postal
service, telegraphs, and steamships
were introduced, torture was abol¬
ished, European dress was prescribed
for officials (with the Emperor showing
the way by adopting Western military
dress), and European and American
advisors were freely employed.
Great efforts were made in the field
of education; the government knew
that for Japan to be wealthy and
strong, the intellectual level of the
people had to be raised. The Japanese
appetite for knowledge had already
been whetted under the Tokugawa
Shoguns when private temple schools
flourished, and the study of Western
science, primarily in the medical field,
was pursued through Nagasaki, the
only city open to foreign trade.
Before the Reformation, education
had progressed to the point where
50 per cent of the male population
and 15 per cent of the female popu¬
lation had received some formal
instruction.
A
8
policy of equal opportu¬
nity was established in Meiji Japan. To
draw gifted students from poor homes,
education was made free at military
academies and teacher training
schools and colleges.
Western learning was introduced
with the approval of the Emperor who
himself had studied Occidental books,
notably Johann Bluntschli's "Allge¬
meines Staatsrecht", a work on poli¬
tical science used by German, French
and British universities at that time.
In 1890, the Emperor ordered that
the guiding principles of school educ¬
ation be compiled in an "Imperial
Rescript on Education". It enjoined
all students to honour their ancestors,
respect their parents, be loyal to
superiors and serve their country.
That the educational policy was
successful can be seen from the fact
that by 1885, 42 per cent of the
students at Tokyo Imperial University
were commoners compared to 25 per
cent in 1878, and at the end of the
Meiji era, primary school attendance
was 95 per cent.
This love of learning of the Japan¬
ese people, coupled with an academic
level which was extremely advanced,
although limited to a narrow sphere,
provided the conditions necessary,
once Western instruction was intro¬
duced, to bring about an amazing dis¬
semination of general education, and
produced scholars of international
calibre.
Dr. Hideyo Noguchi, who was des¬
tined to become a world-famous bac¬
teriologist in tropical diseases, started
from humble beginnings as the son of
a very poor farmer. Other distin¬
guished scientists of the Meiji era were
Jokichi Takamine who synthesized
adrenalin, Shibasaburo Kitazato who
isolated the gangrene bacteria, and
Kiyoshi Shiga who isolated the dysen¬
tery germ.
Japan's modernization was carried
out to counter the impact of the West,
and the much needed reforms were
mainly instituted by the strong central
government. Yet, those outside the
government, including its critics, also
worked effectively for Japan's renewal.
For example, Yukichi Fukuzawa, a
pioneer educator, in expressing his
opposition to the tendency toward an
increasing governmental predomin¬
ance, established Japan's first private
institution of higher learning, Keio
University. Nevertheless, he was
always concerned with the indepen¬
dence of the state and, as an educator,
he worked for its betterment by
increasing the capabilities of his fellow
Japanese (see page 12).
Emori Ueki, a prominent liberal poli¬
tician, was another example of "crea¬
tive opposition". While severely criti¬
cizing the authoritarian Meiji govern¬
ment by preaching freedom and
equality, he declared that any person
who did not extend his capacities and
utilize his talents was failing the nation.
Taisuke Itakaki, another liberal of
the Reformation, was tireless in his
efforts to persuade the government to
institute a deliberative assembly, and
in 1881 it issued an edict declaring
that a national parliament would be
established in 1890 with the inter¬
vening nine years to be devoted to
government preparations for an orderly
change.
Hirobumi Ito, one of the statesmen
who played a major role in reshaping
Japan, was sent to Europe in the same
year to study Western governments,
and determine which one should serve
as the model for Japan. After evalu¬
ating the American, British, and
French systems, he chose the Imper¬
ial German constitution as best suited
for Japan's needs. It provided for an
elected assembly, but made the
government responsible to the throne.
In 1889, Emperor Meiji promulgated the
new constitution, and one year later
the legislature was convened.
P,
ARALLEL to governmental,
social and industrial progress, the Jap¬
anese took on the considerable task
of persuading their foreign treaty part¬
ners to revise the terms of their
agreements. The existing treaties,
which favoured the foreign signatories
with low import duties (mostly five per
cent), and gave their citizens exemp¬
tion from Japanese law courts, had
been signed under vastly different
conditions.
It took 11 years for Japan to get
the terms it wanted. The break came
when Great Britain finally agreed to
a new treaty abolishing extra-terntor-
iality, and giving Japan the right to
set its own import tariffs. Similar
treaties with other countries were soon
concluded, and the Emperor fixed 1899
as the year that they would come into
force.
During this time, foreign wars had
been avoided, but in 1894-1895, Japan
declared war on China over Korea and
defeated the Chinese on the battle¬
field. In 1904 hostilities broke out with
Russia, Japanese troops entering Man¬
churia. A peace treaty was signed the
following year.
During the remainder of Emperor
Meiji's reign, Japan moved within the
circle of great powers consolidating
its position as a vital component of
international politics and trade.
On July 30, 1912, Emperor Meiji died
at the age of 59. Under him, Japan
had emerged from behind the ritual
screen that had shielded It from the
rest of the world to become the leading
power in Asia and a peer of the West.
The revolution that Meiji presided
over was even more remarkable in that
it was orderly and controlled, and
enhanced the monarchy rather than
destroyed it, a result mainly due to the
capable leaders who, in this period of
"Enlightened Rule", shaped the new
Japan.
