The nations
harness the atom
Nuclear power on the high seas
Italy, the Federal Republic of Germany and Japan are
joining the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. as nuclear shipbuilders.
The National Nuclear Energy Commission of Italy and the
Italian Navy are building an 18,000 ton merchant vessel
equipped with an 80 MW experimental reactor. At Kiel,
the German bulk carrier, "Otto Hahn" will soon have its
advanced pressure-water reactor installed, and Japan's first
nuclear ship is now being designed. The Japanese expect
that in the next decade, 30-knot nuclear-powered "container"
ships and 500,000 ton nuclear-powered tankers will be
competitive with conventional ships.
Navigational warning devices flashing light beacons
and foghorn on this oil and gas drilling rig in the Gulf
of Mexico are powered by electricity from a nuclear
generator installed 40 feet below the water line.
Inherent reliability of the radioactive heat source (in this
case strontium titanate atoms) and absence of moving
parts to convert heat to electricity makes the system
almost foolproof.
The cup that cheers
The "tracer technique" (when radioisotopes, emitting
detectable radiation, are followed through a process) has
helped improve Soviet beer production. Brewers have
found the lifetime of latic acid bacteria which has allowed
them to reduce the fermentation process from five or six
days to one and a half days. The beer's quality has also
been improved. Different results in British research into
whisky may be bad news for illegal manufacturers. New
techniques can establish a dating method for certains spirits
and can be used to detect illicit stills. Radioactive carbon
in the atmosphere, as a result of its movement through
barley into whisky, can also be measured.
Dating by nuclear tracks
The age of minerals can be found from marks made on
crystals by the natural fission of uranium and thorium
isotopes. Now scientists have found other tracks, made
as a result of normal decay of the elements, which lead
to much greater dating accuracy. In normal decay, an atom
ejects an alpha particle. After throwing out the alpha
particle, the nucleus recoils like a gun firing a shot, and
the recoil atom also makes marks (known as nuclear tracks).
This discovery seems to have improved dating methods by
about three thousand times.
Nuclear medicine in New Zealand
New Zealand appears to have the highest density, in
relation to population, of therapeutic nuclear medical
facilities in the world.
Needles explore for oil
One way of finding oil-bearing geologic formations is to
lower radioactive needles into the ground or into test wells
and measure the changes in their radiation as they pass
through various types of rock. A geologist records the
amount of radiation at several places and draws a "profile"
of the underlying layers of earth. This profile tells him
if drilling would be justified.
Radioisotopes vs. malaria
The Arab countries, in their fight to control mosquito
vectors of malaria, are using radioisotope tracing to check
the flight range, longevity and mortality of mosquitos. The
same technique has been used to study other harmful pests,
like grasshoppers (see article, page 18).
Engine wear and friction
Using radioisotope tracers, Soviet scientists have studied
how dust contributes to wearing out tractor engines.
Studies show that dust particles whose average diameter
is 10-20 millionths of a centimetre cause most wear.
Unesco Courier atom-inspected?
The Unesco Courier like most paper products was
probably atom inspected. For several years, isotope gauges
have been used to "feel" the thickness of paper while it is
rolled out by machines at high speed. As the paper passes
between a radioisotope source and a thickness-gauge
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
<
CO
O
ra
O
XI
ra
-1
"(Ö - **^^
o r*' .^*^^i^H
»tu
Oi
1 v ^r- - ^m
O
o C^ TLddB
o.B9¡
A nuclear powered sea water conversion plant capable
of producing one thousand million gallons of fresh water
per day and the electric power needs of a city of 5 million
people might resemble this artist's conception. It
would be operated by three natural uranium reactors and
nine turbogenerators.
45

46
NATIONS HARNESS THE ATOM (Continued)
detector, the amount of radiation reaching the detector
varies according to the thickness and density of the paper
that separates it from the radiation source.
Nuclear-powered Northern Lights
Most of Sweden's additional power production in the
1970s and 1980s will come from nuclear plants. Nuclear
power production is expected to increase over seven-fold
between 1975 and 1985: by the late 1970s, at least one
new nuclear-powered unit will be added to the Swedish
power grid annually. In addition, combined production of
heat and electricity, based on nuclear power, may be
carried out in some major cities.
Isotopes on Mars
Radioisotopic tracers may help to find life on Mars.
The American Project Gulliver's space scientists propose an
unmanned device that will land on Mars, shoot out a string
covered with silicone grease, and then pull it back. The
retrieved string, covered with Martian soil, will be soaked
in a culture broth containing radioactive carbon. If bacterial
life is present in the soil, radioactive carbon dioxide gas
will be given off and automatically measured by a radiation
counter. From the counting rate sent to Earth by radio,
scientists will be able to tell whether there is life on Mars
and, if so, something about the kind of life.
Improved wood
Wood may be made harder and therefore more useful
by soaking it in a simple chemical and irradiating the soaked
piece so that the chemical molecules combine between
the wood fibres to make a plastic. The beauty of the wood
is unchanged.
Radioactive beads slow down cancer
Cancer is the runaway growth of cells. The secretions
of the pituitary gland stimulate cell reproduction so surgeons
sometimes remove the gland to slow down growth of a
tumour. Now, tiny yttrium-90 oxide beads, glasslike in
nature, can be implanted directly in the gland with much
less difficulty and risk. The beads destroy the gland with
little damage to its surroundings because yttrium-90 emits
beta rays whose penetrating power is limited to the
immediate area of the implant.
Gamma beam weight machine
In the U.S.S.R., a device has been perfected that
measures the weight of a heavy mass without coming into
contact with it. Operating on the principle that the ability
of material to absorb gamma rays depends on its density
and thickness, such devices have been used to determine
the weight of a loaded, moving train. A gamma source
(cobalt-60) is placed under the railway track and a
scintillation counter above. The gamma beam passing
between source and counter diminishes in intensity, as
the train passes through it, in relation to the weight of the
train's load. The readings are taken and converted
automatically into units of weight.
Labelling oil
Oil is commonly shipped long distances through pipelines.
Several companies often use the same pipeline, just as
ranchers used the same range for their herds. As ranchers
brand their cattle, oilmen use radioisotopes to mark different
oil batches. For example, some of the isotopes precede
company A's oil, and another tracer is carried ahead of
company B's shipment. A radiation monitor detects the
radioisotopes at the distribution point with the result that
A's oil is routed into tank A and B's products into tank B.
Radioactive dirt improves soap
Soap and detergent manufacturers want to know how
effectively their products remove dirt from soiled clothes.
Some manufacturers test new soaps by using them to wash
radioactive "dirt" from clothes; the resultant dirty water
is examined with instruments to measure the number of
radioisotopes that have been removed.
The roots of this
bean plant have
been injected
with 25 millionths
of a gramme of
a radioisotope
to find out how
a plant feeds
itself and grows-
Photo left,
taken by placing
a film in contact
with the plant,
shows how
radioactive
material has been
taken up to the
leaves. Such
experiments
also tell
botanists how
best use can
be made of
fertilizers.
Photo USIS
Fresh water through atomic power
A U.N. survey states that about 20 water-short areas in
the world need desalting plants, and 41 others may soon
need them. Nuclear power is already playing an important
part in alleviating this problem. The first Soviet nuclear
power station capable of desalinating 120,000 cubic metres
of sea water a day is under construction at Shevchenko
on the Caspian Sea; the United States is planning a large
electricity-desalination plant near Los Angeles (see article,
page 42) the United Arab Republic is interested in in¬
stalling a nuclear power-desalination plant near the Mediter¬
ranean; Israel is studying the possibilities of a plant to
produce 100 million gallons of water a day and 200 MV
of electricity.
Atomic detective
It is possible that Napoleon's death was due to arsenic.
After neutron irradiation analysis of a hair from the French
Emperor's head, scientists have concluded that he had
been given arsenic in large quantities. Neutron Irradiation
of the hair changed some of its atoms to radioactive
isotopes in which elements of arsenic were found.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 48

NATIONS HARNESS THE ATOM (Continued from page 46)
48
Better crops through radiation
In 1967, the IAEA and FAO were testing wheat mutants
in 12 countries and started studies in Africa and Latin
America to increase the resistance of wheat to diseases.
A mutant rice, produced by radiation is being put on sale
in Japan. It has a larger yield, a stronger straw and a
better response to fertilizers than existing varieties. In
North Africa and the Middle East, mutant wheats produced
by radiation give higher yields than local or common
varieties. In the Soviet Union, radiation has increased
cabbage crops by 5 to 10 per cent, cucumbers by 15 to
30 per cent, tomatoes by 10 to 15 per cent, carrots by 25 to
30 per cent and radishes by 6 to 11 per cent.
Krypton against smog
Krypton, a radioactive form of inert gas, has been pressed
into service in the battle against smog. In one type of smog
alarm', krypton is "caged" in a crystalline chemical. When
sulphur dioxide, a notorious air pollutant, enters the alarm
device, krypton is released through chemical action. It is
then scanned by a Geiger counter and the number of
radioactive disintegrations recorded show how much
sulphur dioxyde air pollutant displaced the krypton.
Latin America peaceful progress
All atomic work in Latin America is devoted to peaceful
uses, much of it in direct collaboration with the International
Atomic Energy Agency. Argentina, Brazil, Colombia
and Venezuela are operating, and Mexico and Uruguay
are constructing, research reactors; Brazil is working
to improve rice and Argentina is using nuclear radiation
in wheat experimentsboth studies linked with FAO/IAEA
programmes; Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Mexico, Nicaragua and Panama are working with the IAEA
and FAO to eradicate the Mediterranean fruit fly; Mexico,
Venezuela, Argentina and Brazil have set up radioisotope
production centres; Guatemala is developing industrial
gamma radiography; a radiological protection service has
been started in Chile; Cuba is establishing a film badge and
dosimetry service for hospitals; investigations of ground
water resources are being made in Chile, Brazil, Uruguay
and Ecuador; Mexico and U.S.A. are examining a nuclear
power-desalination project to serve parts of both countries.
British nuclear electricity
Nuclear power stations in Britain will be able to generate
some 15 per cent of the country's electricity when the
Oldbury station becomes operational later this year.
Britain, a nuclear power plant pioneer, operated its first
station at Calder Hall in 1956. In the next decade, it built
24 nuclear stations whose total capacity exceeded the
combined output of all other riuclear plants in the world.
Earthquake barometer
Geophysicists at the Seismology Institute at Uzbek,
Turkestan, have found a way to forecast earthquakes.
Radioactive radon, one of the heaviest gases known, filters
slowly and steadily upward from beneath the earth's crust,
but its journey is suddenly accelerated if there are sub¬
terranean rock disturbances. Scientists have measured
the radon content of the water in an artesian well,
2,000 metres deep, and when it changed, they could foresee
local earthquakes 15 to 20 hours in advance and get an
idea of their severity.
A SCIENCE OF PEACE
FOR THE ATOMIC AGE
"We can make better and better preparations for war,
our technical progress having given birth to titanic weapons,
but we cannot prepare for peace any better now than in
the age of bows and arrows." These words of Professor
Gaston Bouthoul, of the French Institute of Polemology,
state with sharp clarity why a science of peace is urgently
needed today when the warlike uses of the atom could
destroy civilization.
This science of peace, Peace Research, exists and is
being carried on in many countries of the world. It is still
very young, still somewhat unformed, still woefully under¬
manned and underfunded by comparison with the world's
expenditures of thousands» of millions of dollars annually on
arms research and with the fact that 18 per cent of all the
scientists who ever lived are today at work on arms research1.
It is nonetheless a rapidly growing field of study, a glint of
hope for the future establishment of a stable and permanent
peace.
The latest number of Impact of Science on Society,
Unesco's quarterly which examines the social consequences
of science, is devoted in full to the theme The Scientific
Basis of Peace.
This Impact number brings out why Peace Research is so
fundamental: because treating war and peace as purely
political matters, as is generally done, has resulted in but
limited success in containing wars. Any small war could
be the accidental trigger for nuclear war, because statesmen
and diplomats, the engineers of peace, who strive to pre¬
serve the present fragile structure of peace and eventually
to erect a strong structure, have less basic sound know¬
ledge available to them about the factors involved in war
and peace than have engineers who design buildings and
highways.
in the keynote article, "Peace Research, the Science of
Survival", Professor Bert V.A. Röling, of the University of
Groningen, Netherlands, broadly describes this vitally
important young science and the vast array of subjects it
studies: man himself, the role of the press and of prejudice,
national societies, the international system and the structure
of a stable peace, among a whole host of others.
"Why Is Man Aggressive?" is discussed in a round-table
article by seven British biological and social scientists and
Professor Bouthoul. Is man aggressive by nature? Most of
the Round Table participants say "yes". Mr. Philip Noel-
Baker, Nobel Peace Prize 1959, says. "no". Other factors
that exacerbate aggressiveness such as overpopulation,
the use of language, social deprivation are discussed and
parallels are made with behaviour in animal societies.
In still other articles, Professor Kenneth E. Boulding, of
the University of Colorado, proposes a "Data-Collecting
Network for the Sociosphere", to provide accurate informa¬
tion about the world social, economic and political climate
to national leaders to minimize the miscalculations that can
lead to war; Professor Bouthoul, "Polemology and the
Solution of Conflicts", discusses the scientific objective
study of war (in Greek, "polemos"); Professor Anatol Rapo-
port, of the University of Michigan, shows how "The Appli¬
cation of Game Theory to Peace Research", by dispassion¬
ately and logically showing how war is always an "unpro¬
fitable" activity, in terms of gains and losses, can eventually
help undermine the present legitimacy of war as an instru¬
ment of national policy; and Professor Ignacy Sachs, of the
Peace Research Committee of the Polish Academy of
Sciences, examines "Ethnocentrism Source and Aggravat¬
ing Factor of Conflicts".
(1) This statement is based on the knowledge that 90
per cent of all scientists who ever lived are alive today,
and of these, 20 per cent are at work on arms research
Editor's note.
