International Year
for Human Rights
MESSAGE
FROM
RENÉ MAHEU
Director-General of Unesco
T
32
HE Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the 20th anniversary of which is being celebrated
this year as International Human Rights Year, is the
first code of ethics adopted for all mankind. Our
modern world, marked by constant changes in living
standards and in its very structure, yearns for order
and unity in face of the ominous forces and dangers
that threaten us on this checkerboard planet of
progress and poverty.
The international community is no longer a cir¬
cumscribed society; it has become universal. Vast
numbers of peoples, differing greatly in origin,
traditions, religion, philosophy, culture, historical
development and economic systems have attained
independence, have entered on to the political scene,
and are now sharing in the elaboration of the moral
code and law of our time. The 1948 Declaration is in
accord with this fundamental transformation which it
foreshadowed.
The constitutions and laws enacted by the authori¬
ties of different nations define the rights and the
duties of their own citizens. Religious and philoso¬
phical doctrines find their following mainly among the
devout and the faithful. But the Universal Declara¬
tion is meant for all mankind and proclaims the equal
dignity of all human beings.
Its Articles provide that every person, without dis¬
tinction, of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, lan¬
guage, religion, political or other opinions, national or
social origin, means, birth or status, is entitled to all
the rights and all the freedoms which are set forth
therein, and which should enable every person to live,
to think, to express himself, to act, to create, to en¬
joy and to forge with others the future of all.
A code of ethics that seeks to inspire men's actions
in a changing world, and to engage individuals and
States of widely differing cultures, cannot advocate
any specific belief other than the inalienable right of
every person to his own freedom. But the practical
exercise of freedom that is conscious of its own
dignity and responsible for the dignity of others pre¬
supposes the fulfilment of certain conditions. That is
why the Universal Declaration sets out a number of
specific rights of man.
First and foremost every individual should be free
from the constraints of force, and at the same time
his most elementary needs must be satisfied. It
follows that every person has the right to a standard
of living adequate to the health and well-being of
himself and his family. He also has the right to
benefit from the general progress brought about by
scientific and technological development, and himself
to contribute to this progress. But the practical exer¬
cise of conscious and responsible freedom also
presupposes that every individual has had an oppor¬
tunity of acquiring, to the best of his abilities, the
intellectual and cultural training and the knowledge
necessary to understand the world around him. He
therefore has a right to an education which enables
him to develop his personality and to participate, both
in his work and by his exercise of choice, in the poli¬
tical, economic, social and cultural life of his commu¬
nity, and in the decisions which govern their evolution.
A Universal Declaration is both weaker and stron¬
ger than a national juridical text. It defines and speci¬
fies the duties of all men, and virtually places the
actions of all countries and statesmen before the court
of world public opinion. By defining the specific
rights of each individual the Declaration strengthens
the restraining force of world public opinion and acts
as a deterrent to those who would flout it. The
Declaration's effectiveness depends very largely on
the real existence and the strength of that common
conscience which has slowly matured through the
long years of man's history, and which must be
encouraged in the minds of all by making each indi¬
vidual aware of his fellowship with all mankind.
In a world where vast areas are still in the
grip of hunger and malnutrition, and where more than
700,000,000 illiterate persons are shut out from the
world of ideas mirrored in the written word, there are
many people for whom the provisions of the Universal
Declaration are still nothing more than empty promi¬
ses. But the tremendous resources of science and
technology now make it possible for those promises
to be fulfilled. Poverty, hunger and ignorance are no
longer inevitable. It is our duty to overcome them by
making education, science and culture available to all
as the essential pre-requisite for the progress of
society and the full development of the human per¬
sonality.
This is the plane on which Unesco is making its
contribution to the work begun by the United Nations.
Even those of Unesco's activities which are not
directly concerned with promoting respect for human
rights in general or certain specific rights, do never¬
theless help to create the material, intellectual, moral
and cultural conditions indispensable for lifting these
rights from the level of principles to that of living
realities for all mankind.
It is my fervent hope that the International Con¬
ference on Human Rights which opens this month in
Teheran, under the auspices of the United Nations,
will prove to be the occasion for the world to assert
with greater clarity and unity its determination to
achieve increasing respect for the full dignity of the
individual and the ultimate mastery of man over his
destiny.
