WANTED :
3.5 MILLION
DOCTORS
by Stanisiav Kavka
14
I F there is to be one doctor
for every 770 people, then the world
today is 3.5 million doctors short.
The figure is staggering, but what of
tomorrow when the number of people
in the world may have doubled?
In medical education one always has
to think of tomorrow's needs, if only
because it takes eight or nine years
to make a doctor about six years of
medical school and two or three years
of practical experience.
Population increases and changes in
the composition and distribution of
population are going to have great
influence on health services, and the
demand for professional health care
can everywhere be expected to
increase by leaps and bounds.
The economic aspect is important
new schools and teaching hospitals
will have to be built and equipped
but so is the question of human
resources, the question of attracting,
the right calibre of men and women
as teachers and students. Over and
above these considerations, the
explosion of information and of
scientific knowledge entails qualitative
changes in the style of thinking and
working: education will of necessity
change both in form and in content.
Modern society and the modern
style of life tomorrow call for doctors
who have thorough professional know¬
ledge, but also high moral qualities
and a serious attitude to their work.
Education in medical schools and
post-graduate institutes will have to
allow for the fact that the doctor in
his daily work will need to apply more
psychology and sociology. At present,
this is no doubt accepted, but the
general assumption seems to be that
the doctor will pick up the knowledge
he needs in these two fields as he
goes along rather than as the result
of systematic teaching.
The danger of specialization is that
the patient tends to become an object
of investigation, of therapeutic tech¬
niques, and that the psychosocial
factors are completely lost sight of.
DR. STANISLAV KAVKA is an official of
the Public Health Service in Prague, Cze¬
choslovakia.
This should not be. Specialization is
without doubt a higher professional
echelon than general practice, it is the
terrain on which new discoveries grow,
but too much specialization, eclipsing
the general practioner, can be detri¬
mental to community health care, and
if the family or district type of doctor
is an essential member of the health
team, then education in medical school
should be geared to producing him.
Though specialization may be
attractive to the young men and
women entering the medical profession,
they should not forget that the
generalist has important and fasci¬
nating tasks to perform in improving
general health conditions, in actively
promoting health, in disease prevention
and the early detection of cases, and
in the psychosocial field.
P OST-GRADUATE educ¬
ation is essential today if proper
professional standards are to be main¬
tained. The U.S.S.R. has 13 institutes
of post-graduate education and 13
post-graduate faculties in medical
schools. In the U.S.A., the American
Medical Association organized 1 600
post-graduate courses in 413 institutes
during one year (1966-1967). A new
centre for post-graduate medical
studies was opened in London in 1967.
In Czechoslovakia, all medical estab¬
lishments take part in post-graduate
education and a post-graduate medical
institute was opened in Prague in
1953. Such activities will need to be
intensified in the future to help doctors
keep abreast of the new knowledge
and new techniques that are going to
transform medicine in the future.
In conclusion it is probably justified
to give an optimistic prognosis on the
world's endeavour to secure the health
of the human race, provided effective
international co-operation is supported
by all countries.
The isolation of some countries
needs to be abolished by an intensive
international exchange of information
and the development of science.
Medical education on a level with
contemporary scientific knowledge is
an essential factor in the achievement
of better health for man tomorrow.
^
1
