Appeal
Addressed to Unesco's Member States
by the International Consultative Liaison Committee
for Literacy
T,he urgency and vital importance of one of the essential tasks
of our age elimination of the gap between the have and the have-not
countries are daily becoming increasingly apparent throughout the world. It is
also tragically obvious that one thousand million adults can neither contribute
effectively to nor profit fully from development. It is for our generation the gene¬
ration of the twentieth century to carry out this gigantic and vital task, the historic
significance of which will certainly be made abundantly clear during the celebration
of Human Rights Year.
The World Congress of Ministers of Education on the Eradication of Illiteracy,
held in Teheran from 8 to 19 September 1965, agreed that the scourge of illiteracy
affected all mankind, violated the dignity of man, impeded development and was an
obstacle to international understanding. It strongly emphasized the decisive impor¬
tance, for the eradication of illiteracy, of international solidarity and co-operation.
Although the tragic disproportion between the resources needed for this task
and those available has only been further confirmed since the Teheran Congress,
some grounds for hope have none the less emerged.
The appeals of the supreme spiritual and moral leaders of the international
community, the determination of many governments to devote great efforts to the
cause of literacy, the visible signs of international solidarity, that sacred duty which
this task imposes upon all countries, and the encouraging start to Unesco's World
Literacy Programme all these things open up new prospects and inspire confidence
and hope.
On behalf of Unesco's International Consultative Liaison Committee for
Literacy, I solemnly invite the governments of Member States of Unesco to follow
the example of those States which have already made voluntary contributions to
Unesco's Special Account for literacy work and to appeal to public opinion in their
countries with a view to fostering and encouraging action by public and private
organizations to increase that contribution.
The committee believes that the time is now ripe for the launching of a vast
movement of international solidarity that will contribute decisively to the eradication
of illiteracy throughout the world and will make it possible in the wake of the great
democratic gains of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, to ensure access to edu¬
cation for all men.
The committee is sure that all governments will wish to contribute to the
success of an entreprise of such capital importance for human dignity and progress.
Paris, 7 September ig6y Ashraf Pahlavi
Chairman of the International
Consultative Liaison Committee
for Literacy
