Dream come true?
A SECOND PANAMA CANAL
THANKS TO
NUCLEAR
EXPLOSIVES?
A
by Carlo Schaert
FTER a decade of costly
research on nuclear explosives for
military purposes, the countries most
involved in the production of atomic
weapons have begun to consider the
possibility of using nuclear explosives
for peaceful purposes in civil engineer¬
ing and industry.
The reasons for this are chiefly
economic. Since 1940, astronomic

4r-»-,>»
9
U&b h* ,*Vv\
T
»
-**
H
Photo Lawrence Radiation Laboratory
Above, the largest excavation ever produced by a single man-made explosion 1,200 feet in diameter and
320 feet deep gouged from the desert soil in Nevada, U.S.A. on July 6, 1962, by the use of nuclear
energy. Note size of lorries on lip and in bottom of crater. Left, this striking photo ,shows a huge dome
of earth, 600 to 800 feet in diameter, rising nearly 300 feet into the air three seconds after the detonation
of a nuclear explosion 630 feet underground. Explosion removed about 7.5 million cubic yards of earth. The
experiment, Project Sedan, was the first of a series of tests carried out by the U.S. Atomic Energy
Commission under Plowshare, à research programme on peaceful uses of nuclear explosives.
sums have been invested in the devel¬
opment of atomic explosives and in
the building up of nuclear arsenals.
The nuclear arsenals of the great
powers are believed to contain at
present an explosive power equal to
about one hundred thousand million
tons of T.N.T., that Is thirty tons per
head of the world population. This
tremendous destructive force, stock¬
piled in the form of atomic weapons,
has never been unleashed. The
nuclear powers have not only sought
to avoid direct military encounters
which might have resulted in nuclear
warfare, they have also abstained from
CARLO SCHAERF, of Italy, Is director of
an experimental project in nuclear physics
at the National Centre of Nuclear Energy
at Frascati, Italy. He has organized special
courses at the International Summer School
on Disarmament and Arms Control
sponsored by the Italian section of the
Pugwash Movement on science In world
affairs.
using "tactical" nuclear weapons in all
the local conflicts in which they have
become involved.
As nuclear energy has brought a
new dimension to the term "explosion",
man has begun to think in terms of
hitherto impossible things he can now
do with explosions. Using the wealth
of scientific and technological nuclear
data already acquired, he has begun
to develop a nuclear explosion tech¬
nology for peaceful uses.
In addition to the economic reasons
for this endeavour, there are psycho¬
logical and even political ones. Those
who had developed the technology of
nuclear explosives for military purposes
were anxious to demonstrate that it
could also be applied for the benefit
of mankind. Used constructively, it
could increase prosperity and thereby
help to ward off the danger of a
nuclear holocaust. "Plowshare", the
name given to the best-known Amer¬
ican programme for the peaceful uses
of nuclear explosives,
this attitude.
clearly reflects
The advantages of nuclear explosives
over the conventional chemical types
of explosives are their compactness
and low cost. Their disadvantage is
the possibility of radioactive contam¬
ination. ' So obviously, atomic explos¬
ives should be used only in relatively
uninhabited areas and when truly
massive blasts are necessary: for
instance in building new ports in
northern Alaska and western Australia,
for the construction of a sea-water
canal in Libya, or for tapping gas
deposits in New Mexico; but they
could hardly be used in Europe or in
other densely populated regions,
except with the greatest caution.
The U.S.S.R. was the first country
to officially announce its research
programme into the peaceful appli¬
cations of nuclear explosives. In 1949,
the Soviet delegate to the United
Nations, Mr. Andrei Vishinsky de-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
15

NUCLEAR EXPLOSIVES (Continued)
Operation 'Dragon Tail'
to exploit natural gas
dared: "The Soviet Union is today
using atomic energy for peaceful and
not for military purposes. We are
utilizing this energy for the benefit
of our economy. We are levelling
mountains, irrigating deserts, opening
ways through our forests and tundra.
We are bringing life, prosperity and
well-being to regions which had been
uninhabited for thousands of years."
The first comprehensive study of
the utilization of nuclear explosives
for excavations was published in 1956
by Soviet technicians.
In 1957, the United States launched
a programme of systematic research
into all the possibilities of the
application of nuclear explosions, on
the surface of the earth as well as
underground. This was the beginning
of the "Plowshare Programme."
Part of this programme was devoted
to investigating the possibility of large-
scale excavations with nuclear explo¬
sives. Ways of reducing, as much as
possible, the amount of radioactivity
released by these explosives were
examined, and the techniques of
nuclear excavation were studied:
placing of charges, depth of explo¬
sions, etc. The possibility of exploding
nuclear devices at a depth great
enough for the exploitation of minerals
was also examined.
The results of these experiments,
encouraging from a technical stand¬
point, have nevertheless confirmed
the serious risk of radioactivity.
Among the various possibilities of
using nuclear explosives in civil
engineering excavation of canals or
artificial harbours, opening of mountain
tunnels for roads or railways etc. the
one that is being most seriously
considered is the excavation of a
second Panama Canal. It is expected
that by 1970 the existing canal will
no longer be able to cope with all its
potential traffic, and even now certain
ships, such as mammoth oil-tankers,
are too big to pass through it.
V
16
ARIOUS projects have al¬
ready been put forward for the renova¬
tion of the existing canal. One project
provides for widening it without any
change in its height above sea-level,
but the number of locks would be
reduced. This project would cost
$1,000,000,000.
Another project envisages the
construction of a second canal at
sea-level. This raises the problem of
whether chemical or nuclear explosives
should be used for the excavations.
Using conventional excavation tech¬
niques, the construction at sea-level
of a second canal in the vicinity of
the existing one would cost about
$2,000,000,000 (taking into account the
need for keeping the existing canal in
operation while the new one is being
built). As the new canal would pass
through densely populated areas, there
could be no question of using nuclear
explosives.
A route particularly suitable for the
use of nuclear explosives engineering
exists in a sparsely populated area
about 160 kilometres to the east of
the present Panama Canal. This
route would be about 160 km. long
(the existing canal is 80 km1, long) and
it would pass through a chain of
mountains, some of which rise more
than a thousand feet above sea-level.
According to approximate es¬
timates, about three hundred charges
of nuclear explosives the equivalent
of about 200 million tons of T.N.T.
would be required. The total cost of
the excavation would be approximately
$1,000,000,000. Radioactive waste
from the nuclear explosion would
contaminate a vast area, so that some
25,000 people would have to leave
and settle elsewhere for a few years.
N
UCLEAR explosions con¬
tained underground offer the un¬
doubted advantage of not producing
any radioactive fall-out, and so can
be permitted in places relatively close
to inhabited areas. However, even
these explosions will need to be
confined at least pending further
studies to uninhabited areas, since
they may cause seismic shocks in the
vicinity.
Underground explosions are advan¬
tageous from the commercial stand¬
point, for they enable enormous
quantities of rock to be broken up at
little cost. This would make possible
the cheap exploitation of a low mineral
and natural gas content which it
would be uneconomic to develop with
conventional techniques.
These explosions should take place
at a depth of from 600 to 1,000 metres.
The final result is a cylindrical
funnel with a diameter of about one
hundred metres and a height of a few
hundred metres, filled with shattered
rock.
The volume of the cavity is roughly
proportionate to the force of the
explosion. Around the cavity, huge
clefts extend through the surrounding
rock. If rocks containing natural
gases are blasted, the gases will flow
through the fissures in the central
cavity where they can be contained
and brought to the surface by
conventional methods. The cavity can
also serve as a reservoir for the gas.
If copper-bearing rocks are blasted,
it will be possible to carry out a
lixiviation process on the spot by
circulating a liquid through the crushed
rocks filling the cavity and then
pumping it to the surface.
In the United States, numerous
projects are under study for the
exploitation of natural gas by using
nuclear explosives: Project Gasbuggy,
Project Dragon Tail and Project Ruli-
son. In addition, the Australian Atomic
Energy Commission has expressed in¬
terest in the exploitation, by nuclear
explosions, of its mineral and natural
gas deposits, in co-operation with the
United States.
The Gasbuggy Project in the U.S.A.
is already well advanced; the first
subterranean explosion was detonated
under the Leandro Canyon (New
Mexico) in December, 1967. No
radioactive fallout was detected im¬
mediately after the explosion, and
underground control apparatus has
revealed that the rock funnel that was
formed corresponds almost exactly to
the size and shape that scientists had
predicted. But ¡t will be eight months
(the time needed for short-lived radio¬
active products to decay) before
samples of the gas can be taken so as
to determine its level of radioactivity
and whether gas from the "well" will
flow freely and on a commercially
viable scale.

A,
NOTHER aspect of the
U.S. Plowshare Programme is the
Ketch Project whose purpose is to
investigate the use of nuclear explo¬
sions to create subterranean reservoirs
where natural gas could be stored.
Usually, natural gas is an economic
source of energy only in the region
where gas deposits are found, because
of the high cost of storage. However,
if large underground reservoirs could
be built to stockpile gas in regions
distant from its source, the gas could
be conveyed to these places and
stored.
There are densely populated areas
in the United States without any
natural subterranean areas for stock¬
piling. Project Ketch's first exper¬
iment will probably take place in
the Spraul Forest (Pennsylvania). The
state has authorized the experiment
only after obtaining satisfactory
assurances with regard to the security
of the population of the region.
To sum up, it can be said that
projects for the peaceful uses of
nuclear explosives are undoubtedly
worth-while, notably because of the
relatively low cost of such explosives
in relation to the tremendous quantities
of energy they produce.
