THE INTERNATIONAL CONTROL
OF NARCOTICS
by Vladimir Kusevic
INTERNATIONAL co-opera¬
tion in the control of narcotic drugs
has its origins' in the movement that
sprang up at the end of the last century
for nations to work together in several
economic and social domains, in the
wake of the principal effort to regulate
political differences by peaceful means.
In the 60 years since the first formal
attempt was made to circumscribe the
dangers that lie in non-medical use
of a drug like opium, the world
has reached a situation > today in
which governments have progressively
accepted limits on their sovereignty
in the common interest of them all.
The problem of narcotics control is
such that it makes wide co-operation
almost imperative. Lack of co-opera¬
tion in the field of narcotics control
could bring social degeneration and do
immediate mental and physical damage
to hundreds of thousands of people.
Opium, one of the most important
narcotic drugs, contains as alkaloids
not only morphine, which is among the
strongest of analgesics but also
codeine, which is the essential part of
most cough medicines, or anti-tussives,
sold in the world.
The great beneficial qualities of
narcotic drugs, whether analgesic or
anti-tussive, require that the drugs be
available to all those who, in the
opinion of their doctors, are in need
of them.
Narcotic drugs, however, also have
the harmful quality of producing drug-
dependence (addiction). A very small
proportion of persons who are drug-
dependent reach -the state out of
medical treatment during which they
are administered narcotic drugs in such
doses that they become dependent and
continue wanting to take the drugs
even after the medical need has
passed.
However, most of the drug-
dependence in the world has nothing
to do with medical use: persons started
taking drugs for a combined sense of
pleasure and well-being or to escape
6
VLADIMIR KUSEVIC Is director of the
Division of Narcotic Drugs (United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs),
In Geneva. He was formerly head of the
Pharmaceutical Service at the Yugoslav
Ministry of Public Health in Belgrade, and
later directed the Institute of Research and
Control of Medicines in Zagreb. A former
member of the Yugoslav National Commis¬
sion on Narcotics, he was also, from 1959
to 1967, a member of the U.N. Drug Super¬
visory Body.
from psychological or other problems
besetting their lives. The state of
drug-dependence can arise very soon
after the first administrations of the
drug; the need for the drug becomes
irresistible and it is taken in increasing
doses. The drug addict is led into an
artificial world in which his life centres
round obtaining and using the drug.
He progressively loses contact with
reality and his function in society is
impaired.
Heroin, made by the conversion of
morphine, is the most dangerous of
the drugs obtained from opium and
the abuse of heroin is a serious
problem in some countries.
The experience of the last century
with opium, with heroin between the
World Wars and with heroin and the
new drugs today, have shown again
and again that narcotics control must
be international.
This realization which dawned at the
turn of the century was progressively
reinforced, and given expression in
formal treaties binding all governments
to take measures to ensure that drugs
were available only for medical and
scientific use, and prohibited for non¬
medical use.
T
HE responsibilities impos¬
ed by treaty must, of course, be con¬
ditioned by the roles that different
countries play in the production,
manufacture or use of narcotic drugs
and substances. If a country produces
raw narcotics opium', cannabis or
coca leaf the treaties require that
such production be organized in a way
that the narcotic substances cannot
find their way into illicit channels.
The same responsibility is imposed
upon governments which manufacture
narcotic drugs, either from the natural
substances for example, morphine
from opium or cocaine from the coca
leaf or manufacture other narcotic
drugs such as pethidine or methadone
by processes of chemical synthesis.
These two aspects of international
control are specific to producing and
also manufacturing countries.
The third aspect is common to all
countries since all are medical con¬
sumers of narcotic drugs: this aspect
requires that the arrangements under
which narcotic drugs are traded or
supplied for medical purposes be
under such control that they cannot
be put to illicit use in the country
itself, and also that they cannot be
diverted to supply illicit requirements
in another country.
These controls were developed step
by step through nine conventions and
protocols dating from 1912 down to
1953. This corpus of international
treaties progressively refined and
strengthened controls on production,
manufacture and licit supply, and at
the same time it laid down lines for
combatting both drug addiction and the
illicit traffic in narcotic drugs which
sought to maintain this social ill. In
1961 the last of the narcotics treaties
was adopted, the Single Convention
on Narcotic Drugs, with the purpose
of simplifying the treaty provisions,
and replacing the older treaties.
An examination of this treaty gives
a comprehensive idea of all aspects of
international narcotics control. Taking
them one by one, it is seen for
example that countries which produce
opium are required to set up a state
monopoly or equivalent administration
which would license opium cultivation
and take delivery of all the opium
harvest.
As regards manufacture, the Single
Convention has provisions which
include, for example, that a concern
wishing to manufacture a drug
controlled by the Convention shall
obtain permission to do so, the
premises in which the manufacture
takes place shall be licensed, and in
addition that manufacturers shall
receive periodical authorization spe¬
cifying the kind and the amount of
drugs which they shall manufacture.
On the supply side, a cardinal
requirement is that any export and
import of narcotic drugs be specifically
authorized by the governments of both
sides in terms of the drug, the quantity
and the period by which the transaction
shall be completed.
The production, manufacture and
international trade in narcotic drugs is
supervised by an international body,
the International Narcotics Control
Board. The Board is elected by the
United Nations Economic and Social
Council.
Apart from controlling production,
manufacture and international trade,
the Single Convention requires that all
transactions in narcotic drugs on the
national plane are also restricted to
medical and 'scientific purposes.
Governments are required to ensure,
for example, that the trade in drugs
is conducted by wholesale and retail

DRUG
PRODUCING
PLANTS
From these four plants come
the main "natural" narcotic
drugs. They are cannabis,
from which hashish and
marijuana are prepared;
the poppy plant, which gives
opium and its derivatives,
morphine and heroin; the coca
bush, from whose leaves
cocaine is made; and the
Mexican Peyote cactus
(its hallucinogenic properties
were known to the Aztecs,
and it is still used in America).
Chemists recently isolated
mescalin from the roots
of this cactus and now produce
it synthetically for use
in psychotherapy.
PEYOTE CACTUS
WHO photos
establishments which are duly autho¬
rized; in the case of most drugs no
retail supply or issue is permitted
except against a medical prescription.
Arrangements are set out to ensure
that stocks held by traders or other
establishments are checked from time
to time, and prescriptions are matched
against quantities actually moved in
retail distribution.
The control on licit supply and
demand is completed by measures
against illicit supply and demand: the
Convention seeks the provision of
facilities for the medical treatment, care
and rehabilitation of drug addicts, and
sets down requirements of adminis¬
tration, international co-operation,
legislation and penal action in respect
of illicit traffic in narcotic drugs.
Governments are required to report
annually, in detail, to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations on the
narcotics situation in their territory and
keep him informed, for example, of
cases of illicit traffic.
Thus the treaty control extends from
the difficult aspect of controlling
agricultural production to the com¬
plexities of tightly supervising manu¬
facture in factories, proceeding there¬
from to meticulous checks on how the
drugs produced move through licit
channels to supply medical needs, and
includes attention to treating drug
addiction and combatting illicit traffic.
It is interesting to note that while the
philosophy of the Convention is
absolute i.e. to limit narcotic drugs to
medical and scientific use, transitional
concessions are made by the treaty in
respect of those countries where
the non-medical and quasi-medicai
use of opium and the non-medical use
of cannabis and coca leaf are practices
that have been ingrained for
centuries. The governments con¬
cerned in these cases have been
allowed a lapse of time during which
they undertake to put an end to such
uses by progressively restricting the
supply for such purposes.
The procedure for bringing new
drugs under control is that the World
Health Organization makes an expert
assessment of the danger of abuse
liability and ill-effects that the d-ug
presents, and recommends that it be
put under the appropriate control
regime of the Convention.
This recommendation is subject to
acceptance by the United Nations
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, which
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
7

8
CONTROL OF NARCOTICS (Continued)
is the international policymaking body
in this field, under the Economic and
Social Council. The Division of
Narcotic Drugs of the United Nations
Secretariat in Geneva, as part of its
duties, makes studies for the
Commission, and follows up decisions
and recommendations that the latter
adopts at its annual sessions.
In the last years a new danger has
appeared abuse of certain substances
which had hitherto not been abused
or were not known. These substances
are psychotropic (other than narcotics)
which have a stimulating or depressing
effect on the central nervous system1
or create hallucinations; among them
are included barbiturates, amphe¬
tamines, tranquillizers and hallu¬
cinogens. LSD belongs to the last-
mentioned group and seems to be as
dangerous as and even more dan¬
gerous in its effects than any of the
narcotic drugs including heroin.
These substances were outside the
scope of the Single Convention and
the earlier narcotics treaties but as
the problem of their abuse became
widespread the international bodies
have closely considered how the
problem could be resolved.
In the first instance recommendations
were made both by WHO and by the
U.N. bodies to put these substances
under national controls such as
limitation of manufacture and distri¬
bution. In spite of these recom¬
mendations, the problem has grown
apace, and it has become evident in
the last two or three years that more
international action is required which
will bind governments to apply
appropriate control measures.
The majority view seems to be that
the nature of the substances is so
diverse and the problems they pose so
variable, in gravity and manageability,
that the Single Convention conceived
for the established narcotic drugs
would not be suitable.
On the whole, it appears that a new
treaty instrument may have to be
adopted, but the final decision on this
point will be taken by the Commission
on Narcotic Drugs in the coming year
or two. However, it is clear that the
lacuna in international narcotics control
through which these substances have
been available for misuse is now
likely to be closed.
Narcotics problems are not static
and in the experience of more than
half a century their nature, incidence
and gravity has changed from time to
time and country to country.
Given the international machinery
established to oversee the manage¬
ment of the problem on a world¬
wide basis, and with reasonably
efficient administration and laws on the
national plane, every possibility now
exists for restricting the abuse of
dangerous drugs while allowing their
full and- increasing use for scientific
and medical purposes, as more of the
world's peoples come to enjoy the
benefits of modern therapy.
