OUTSIDE
THE WRITTEN
WORD
by Fernando Valderrama
I
4
he word "illiterate" has
become synonymous with "ignorant"
in common speech and even, some¬
times, has a derogatory sense; but
most illiterates are in no way ashamed
of their situation. Being illiterate, they
are not conscious of it, nor of what it
means to someone who is not. That
is why few feel any need to change.
According to certain surveys, 60 and
FERNANDO VALDERRAMA, of Unesco's
Literacy Division, was for 20 years principal
adviser on education in northern Morocco
Born in Spam, he is an authority on Islam,
and was professor of sociology in this field
at the University of Madrid and professor
of Arabic at the School of Higher Commer¬
cial Studies in Madrid The author present¬
ed a longer study on this question to the
6th World Congress on Sociology, m Evian
(France) in September 1966.
In the market-place of a
small Brazilian town, a
bookseller, microphone
in hand, reads to
an attentive group of
townsfolk. Most of them,
young as well as old, are
illiterate. Everyone
pays to hear the stories
read. There are more
than 700 million persons
in the world whose only
access to knowledge is
through the spoken word.
even 70 per cent of illiterates have no
wish to learn to read, and yet in some
countries the illiterate is not a full citi¬
zen and has no right to vote. He is
considered as living on the fringe of
society.
Illiteracy has come to be regarded as
a sickness or plague and we have
reached the point where illiterates
almost appear to belong to a hostile
group which must be wiped out. This
is shown by the extensive military ter¬
minology now used in connexion with
illiteracy. We speak of "campaign"
and "fight" against illiteracy; of "stra¬
tegy" and a "mass attack"; "liquidat¬
ing" or "eliminating" illiteracy and of
making the final "assault".
Presented in this way, the illiterate
bears more resemblance to a hunted
animal than a human being who should
be helped to better himself and be
come more useful to society. It might
be wiser to abolish these negative
expressions and to replace them by
others with a more positive and opti¬
mistic connotation.
A new idea is beginning slowly to
spread that of the "society outside
the written word." According to .this
notion, isolated social groups are illi¬
terate because they live "outside the
written word", and not because they
are ignorant.
The illiterate is not ignorant. In the
first place, all adults have some prac¬
tical experience of life, especially the
older ones who have had to look for
work, to feed a family and to assume
responsibilities however small.
A good example is the adult illite¬
rate's understanding of arithmetic.
When a child begins to learn arithme¬
tic, he can hardly count to ten without

making mistakes and even this succes¬
sion of figures represents nothing con¬
crete or practical to him.
At school he learns to count, to
write figures, to do abstract sums and
then to apply what he has learned
through problems. Arithmetic, like
other subjects, introduces him to a
new, unknown world which gradually
becomes familiar not only through his
classes but through the fact of grow¬
ing up.
For the illiterate adult, the question
is quite different. He has no general
culture; geography, history and science
are part of another world. Yet he
has perhaps sold, and certainly bought,
a number of things. He has received
money for his work and had to check
that the sum was correct. Conse¬
quently he has used rudimentary me¬
thods to solve simple sums. He has
made payments and been obliged to
calculate first; he has made plans on
the basis of money he owned or hoped
to earn; he might have measured a
piece of land.
In short, he has already lived "eco¬
nomic problems" and when he joins a
literacy class, arithmetic is not new to
him. True, he does not know written
figures, but as soon as he learns to
write 8, he will be able to give the
figure its true practical value.
While he may be illiterate, he prob¬
ably knows a trade; he is a farm la¬
bourer, blacksmith or carpenter and
in his own field knows more than an
educated person who is foreign to the
trade.
On the other hand, he is generally
distrustful of innovations and sceptical
when faced with new or "foreign"
ideas and skills, and he may well adopt
this attitude towards literacy. His tra¬
ditional way of life is familiar to him
and has so far proved successful to a
certain extent.
An old woman in a little village once
said: "You think you have to teach
us everything. If, as you say, we had
eaten unhealthy food all this time, cul¬
tivated our fields wrongly and brought
up our children against all the rules,
we would all be dead by now. But
as you can see, we are not."
The rural inhabitant, for whom tra¬
dition goes deeper, distrusts the city
dweller. For him, superstitions often
mixed with religious beliefs form a
solid basis to social life and discou¬
rage change. If nothing exceptional
occurs (like the opening up of a mine,
the building of a road, the introduction
of a new industry), life keeps on its
monotonous way. But if change
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
5

ALPHABET
MATCHES
Right, even a matchbox can
help to promote literacy.
These are used as teaching
aids in Ecuador. On each
is the picture of an object,
its name and the first letter
of the name: "I" as in
"luna" (moon); "e" as in
"escoba" (broom); "s" as in
"sapo" (frog) and so on.
Left, a farm worker in
Ecuador confirms the truth
of the saying "never too
old to learn". He has joined
one of the classes of a
functional literacy pilot
project run for 16,000 adults
in the Milagro area
of Ecuador.
In all parts of the world,
literacy campaigns are today
reaching hundreds of
thousands of adults who
live "outside the
written word."
Photo Unesco - Dominique Roger
OUTSIDE THE WRITTEN WORD (Continued)
Streets without a name
cities as open books
6
occurs and the small farmer at last
sees in it something of use to him
and his family, his little rural society
will have found a powerful motivation.
If the rural dweller learns to read,
he has no written material on which to
apply his learning. There are isolated
villages where streets when they
exist have no name and not a single
signpost is to be found, not even at
the entrance to the village. No news¬
papers reach them and the villagers
lead a monotonous existence, bereft
of hope or ambition.
If the city dweller learns to read he
will find written material everywhere
in shop windows, on walls and posters;
the town itself is a wide open book
where the new literate can continue his
education.
In any country illiterates can be
divided into four main groups:
Those who live in towns or urban
centres and who, of necessity, are in
contact with others to whom reading is
commonplace (fellow workers in a fac¬
tory, soldiers in the same regiment,
etc.) These illiterates know the
advantage of being able to read and
write; they know that if they acquire
this knowledge, their situation will
improve, and so it is not difficult for
them to make the necessary effort.
Illiterates in this group hardly need any
encouragement at all. They are al¬
ready convinced and only wait for an
opportunity to be offered to them.
A second group consists of illite¬
rates living in an urban or rural area
where a community development pro¬
gramme is being carried out or where
an agricultural or industrial concern
has just been established. Here they
need to be stimulated, because for
them the relationship between work
and the value of knowing how to read
and write has not yet been established.
In such a totally or largely illiterate
community, the establishment of a de¬
velopment nucleus has created a new
atmosphere which needs to be defined
and evaluated frankly. It is up to the
leaders of the new industry or busi¬
ness concern to weigh the advantages
of having literate workers whose out¬
put is far higher than that of illiterate
workers and to co-operate in helping
them.
If these leaders act in good faith, it
will not be difficult to shake off the
long-standing inertia through intelligent
and well-planned action and to show
the workers the advantages they would
gain from learning to read and write.
The third group consists of non-sala¬
ried farm workers who are paid in
kind. Some countries have consider¬
able numbers of these underprivileged
workers in whose welfare their em¬
ployers show no interest. Without
sufficient administrative power, the
authorities find it difficult to persuade
employers to create an atmosphere
conducive to the education and devel¬
opment of their workers. Given the
facilities, however, this group could
soon reach a more advanced stage in
society and would be m a position to
increase and improve production.
The last group of illiterates belong
to isolated communities. They live in
areas with no means of communication
and where the written word is practi¬
cally unknown. Here, any attempt at
literacy teaching must be accom¬
panied by a change in the economic
and social structure. To shake off the
centuries-old lethargy and to hold out

to these people the hope of a new life,
new interests, motivation and stimulus
have to be created. This is an extre¬
mely difficult task.
Though far from exhaustive, this
classification could form the basis for
the planning of a literacy programme.
Those responsible would need to have
sufficient information concerning the
illiterates belonging to each group
their whereabouts number, sex and de¬
gree of illiteracy.
Top priority should be given to the
first two groups. With inhabitants
of towns and urban areas, the work of
stimulation and motivation is so easy
that literacy teaching can begin without
any preliminary stage. Once the illi¬
terates in these groups have learned
to read they will make rapid strides, as
towns are full of reading matter.
Other courses should help them to
improve their professional skills and
thus to become competent workers
capable of serving their own interests
and those of their community.
The illiterates in the second group
have been faced, perhaps for the first
time, with a change in the structure of
their society. It is this change which
should be used as a starting point for
motivation.
Prepared intelligently, the pro¬
gramme should be geared so as to
best serve both personal and collective
aims. The task is straightforward
work is available and jobs are offered
according to applicants' qualifications.
Those who can read and write
obviously get the best jobs and the
best pay.
The last groups are similar as re¬
gards their material and social life, but
there is one essential difference bet¬
ween them. While one group depends
on employers who, though fully aware
of the value of reading and writing,
do not help their workers to learn, the
other has neither example nor guide.
However in both cases there is an
obvious need to create new social
structures, to produce economic chan¬
ges which revive an apathetic society
without incentive. All these factors
must be considered.
To be effective any literacy pro¬
gramme must have clearly defined
aims. It is because this study has
been neglected that we still find in
some countries a common curriculum
for urban and rural schools, with no
distinction made between regional and
local characteristics.
In other cases, an incomplete rural
school exists next to a complete urban
school. In some schools of Asia and
Africa where there is a shortage of
textbooks adapted to the country, tea¬
chers use books written for Europeans
where neither names, illustrations nor
subjects have any connexion with local
conditions. In adult education pro¬
grammes, we have even seen teachers
use books written for children because
of lack of planning or money, and this
has soon proved discouraging to adult
students.
In isolated rural areas the three main
problems of under-development illite¬
racy, poverty and sickness are so
inter-related that it is difficult for the
planner to decide on which to concen¬
trate first. It is useless to concentrate
on health, for example, while ignoring
soil erosion which aggravates malnu¬
trition and poverty in themselves an
unsurmountable obstacle to the impro¬
vement of health standards.
Similarly, it is useless to teach peo¬
ple to read and write without giving
them a reason for learning and the
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
7

OUTSIDE THE WRITTEN WORD (Continued)
Learning to read
in order to read to learn
opportunity to use their newly acquired
knowledge to improve their living con¬
ditions.
Nor can agricultural development be
pursued if sickness and illiteracy keep
the agricultural worker in a state of
mental inertia.
Consequently what is called for is
concerted action by specialists in the
various fields to solve these problems
simultaneously with a view to econo¬
mic and social development since the
success of literacy programmes is
tied up with measures such as agra¬
rian reform and the development of
co-operatives and with many other fac¬
tors of social, economic and cultural
development to which are sometimes
added political reasons, which should
not be under-estimated.
Literacy training is not an end in
itself but a means to an end, and as
such should constitute an essential
element of development and be plan¬
ned in consequence, being adapted to
each case and with clear and well
defined aims in view. It must respond
to needs.
T
8
HE day of literacy for
literacy's sake is long past. It is there¬
fore inadvisable to launch a literacy
programme as an isolated project be¬
cause the very absence of adequate
planning on a broad scale and of
foresight is bound to lead to failure.
It would also be absolutely wrong
to undertake a mass literacy pro¬
gramme in a country which has not re¬
solved, at the same time, to trans¬
form its social structure and its deve¬
lopment plans; this would only lead to
the raising of new hopes without pro¬
viding the means of satisfying them.
In this case, it would be preferable to
concentrate the effort on limited sec¬
tors where development plans are
already in operation or about to be
undertaken. As a general rule, lite¬
racy should be included in all commu¬
nity development programmes (indus¬
trial, agricultural, housing, health, etc.)
This selective system of literacy
training may not be appealing from a
political point of view because it is not
spectacular, but on the other hand it
is realistic and positive and its results
are more effective and lasting.
It soon becomes clear that while
investment in primary education yields
a long term return, investment in func¬
tional literacy work with adults gives
a much quicker yield because of the
age of the persons involved and of the
rapid improvement in the quality of
manpower.
Literacy can be an important step
towards vocational training and play a
fundamental role in changing the
milieu. It opens the door to learning,
and literate adults are thus better
informed both as citizens and as pro¬
ducers.
It is obvious, therefore, that the sel¬
ection of reading material is of pri¬
mary importance. Not only must the
content be related to the normal activi¬
ties of the newly literate but the style,
too, must be simple and attractive so
as to develop a taste for reading.
Someone once said that in a literacy
programme adults should begin by
"learning to read" and finish by
"reading to learn". This is the mo¬
ment at which the adult chooses his
own reading matter, either to increase
his knowledge or for relaxation and
enjoyment.
But not simply any book or news¬
paper is suitable for a person who has
just learned to read. A gap exists
between his elementary knowledge and
the books or papers which might be
the only things available for him to
read. This gap must be filled by lite¬
rature which is especially adapted to
his level so that he can gradually pro¬
gress towards more advanced texts.
This is one of the most important
aspects of any adult education pro¬
gramme and the new literate's very
future depends on the quality of the
reading matter made available to him.
As we know, literacy is a complex
problem. It is a matter of national
concern and consequently a country
has to be informed about it. There
are technical and organizational details
of which the public is generally
unaware and regarding which some
explanation is needed. The people
need to be told the purpose of literacy
training, the aims which the authorities
hope to achieve thereby and the gene¬
ral and specific problems involved.
In preparing to "launch a cam¬
paign" it has been customary to pre¬
pare posters in which an allegorical
illustration is accompanied by some
catch phrase or slogan, but as these
posters are directed at the illiterate
who cannot read or understand them,
they are perfectly useless. There is
one sector of the public, however,
which should be better informed
those in positions of responsibility,
employers, directors, and all those
most directly concerned with the deve¬
lopment of their country. The role of
the press and other mass media is
thus of paramount importance.
I N countries where more
than one language is in common use,
it is up to the government to choose the
language to be used in literacy train¬
ing. However the various meetings
and conferences so far devoted to
literacy have been unanimous in recom¬
mending that the first stages of all
literacy programmes should use the
vernacular as a means of penetration,
understanding and affinity.
Where a language does not exist in
any written form, a different problem
arises and special research has then
to be undertaken to establish an alpha¬
bet and to determine appropriate lin¬
guistic rules.
Literacy teaching for adults calls for
a varied and extensive teaching body
elementary schoolteachers, both
active and retired; well educated non¬
professionals; technical experts in
specific fields (agriculture, handicrafts,
etc.), group leaders and discussion
guides, operators for audio-visual
equipment, etc., all of them either full
or part time, paid or voluntary.
Most adult educationalists were
trained to teach children, or lack peda¬
gogical experience. In any case, they
need special training to fit them for
their new job. The community has to
be studied as a whole so as to iden¬
tify the many problems confronting
adults, and literacy classes should be
used as an opportunity to help people
become aware of their problems and
to cope with them.
Obviously, in speaking of adult edu¬
cation, the widest meaning is given to
the word "education", taking in the
concept of the complete development
of the human being. We often use
the expression "literacy tied to devel¬
opment" because it is in this sense
that it has to be conceived if it is to
prove useful and show positive results.
But it should be made clear that this
"development" is social as well as
economic, cultural as well as moral.
Literacy within the context of adult
education must be a means of integra¬
tion in the total dynamics of human
betterment.
