A prize-winning essay from Uruguay
THE WORLD
WE HOPE FOR
by Maria Cristina Costa Diaz
B
30
Y "The world we hope for"
I mean the world hoped for not only
by the present generation to which I
belong, but by future generations.
Aspirations to a better world cannot
be fulfilled in a single life-span, which
is but a moment in the immensity of
time.
The world we hope for, then, should
bring:
Lasting peace: no more wars bet¬
ween nations or groups of nations; no
expansionist countries using their su¬
perior material, military or economic
strength to abuse or violate the rights
of weaker countries; an end to the
causes of strife within nations; no
endless class struggles; international
relations governed by clear, just prin¬
ciples which always respect the peo¬
ple's rights; a lasting peace, free from
fear and oppression.
Concord and solidarity among all
men: no infuriating disparity between
those who make millions and those
who have not even enough to feed
their families properly. The sight for
ever banished of the destitute begging
for charity in the streets, when what
they need, as our equals in rights, is
work, a chance to improve their lot and
to restore their confidence and faith in
themselves. To be spared the sight of
ragged children selling band-aids, tran¬
quilizers and matches in public buses,
when their parents should be the ones
to work; and to be rid of the selfish
and miserly whose very existence
means that many of their fellow-beings
go hungry. The benefits would be
universal if men acted upon feelings
of friendship and mutual respect,
instead of merely paying lip-service to
them!
The spread of education and know¬
ledge throughout every continent so
that the light of learning may disperse
the shadows of illiteracy. Education
made available to all an education
no longer theoretical and largely di¬
vorced from life; all the cultural
resources of society at the service of
of the whole community.
The aim of teaching and education
to be a training for life, providing
instruction rooted in life itself and in
the fundamental problems of the day.
To this end, industrial and agricultural
education should be developed and
intensified, as should scientific and
technological research. In other
words, the aim should not be to
make (or rather deform) to measure
persons whose professional skills
serve merely to plead the cause of
privilege and to uphold the privileged;
on the contrary, professional training
should be dedicated to the service of
society as a whole.
The printed word is the most power¬
ful instrument of man's development:
it satisfies the infinite thirst for know¬
ledge and is unmatched as a medium
of intellectual communication; it main¬
tains the continuity of history and
culture, the common heritage, animat¬
ing force and living essence of a
people, which it behoves us all,
as cells of the social organism, to
conserve, defend and cherish. Books
train and cultivate the mind. All men
must be educated and taught their
civic rights and duties so as to enjoy
a real freedom of decision, without the
risk of being cheated or defrauded in
their aspirations.
Study as a corner-stone of life, so
that when literacy becomes universal,
everyone may find opportunities of
applying, in their community and
especially in their work, all they have
learned.
The promotion of science and tech¬
nology, symbolic of the present and
the future, to enable man to explore
infinite space, and allow human intelli¬
gence to penetrate far and deep in
its insatiable thirst for knowledge.
The Uruguayan scientist, Clemente
Estable, addressing the Uruguayan
Chamber of Representatives, which
held a session in his honour on Octo¬
ber 3, 1960, declared : "In our time,
when even astronomy has become,
amazingly, an experimental science,
with artificial satellites and planetoids,
scientific research is an absolute and
imperative necessity, and any invest¬
ment in such research is of great
significance for democracy."
The paths of science and technology
lead to the realm of energy, light and
speed. A stimulus must be given to
all speculative pure or applied thought
(in philosophy or the sciences) and to
every concrete expression of the
concept of beauty (in the realm of the
arts, whether sculpture or painting,
music or literature.) The essential
aim is to enhance the meaning of life
through art, and thus hallow the
triumph of spiritual over material
things.
Increased production, and the abun¬
dance that will result from compulsory
work, whose effects will be chiefly
felt in the productive sectors; by
planning and rationalization of produc¬
tion; by the contribution of techno¬
logy; by economic development. All
this should make for abundance;
enough food for all, an end to malnu¬
trition; lower death rates; prevention
and eradication of sickness; the gua¬
rantee of a better life for future gen¬
erations; a fair distribution of the
national income.
The concept of work as a law of
life, in accordance with the following
principles: compulsion to work for all
the mentally and physically fit; a nor¬
mal work day to satisfy not only the
needs but the reasonable and legiti¬
mate desires of all; elimination of
social parasites so that each can and
must live by his own resources, not by
the effort and sacrifice of others.
Freedom from crime. The . minds
of men purged of criminal thoughts
by vigorous campaigns of education

A regular programme on Uruguayan television,
"The Questions of Man", is entirely devoted to
themes from the "Unesco Courier". Last year,
the programme's director. Señor Eduardo Adrian,
and the Losada Publishing House in Montevideo
organizeda nation-wide essay contest for Uruguay's
high school students on "The World We Hope
For". We are pleased to publish here the text of
the winning composition written by 16-year-old
María Cristina Costa Diaz, a student of the Sacred
Heart Institute, in Montevideo, whose prize was
a collection of 30 books and a three-year subscrip¬
tion to the "Unesco Courier". Photo shows Señorita
Costa Diaz with (on her left) Salvador Valle (second
prize), and Juan Carlos Mondragón (third prize).
and re-education from the social, psy¬
chological, moral, individual and pro¬
fessional viewpoints. Creation of eco¬
nomic and social conditions which will
do away with the socio-economic roots
of crime. Penal laws with humane and
social aims that concord with the
most progressive recommendations
adopted by specialists at international
congresses, always bearing in mind
that a prison should not be a place of
torment and retribution, but of re-edu¬
cation, rehabilitation and work. And
measures should be taken to prevent
criminals from buying immunity from
the law through influence.
Proper housing for all. The "right
to a roof" is a primary, elementary and
essentiel right which must be guaran¬
teed by the State. It is one way
of giving self-respect to the citizen
and promoting a better standard of
living.
An end to man's exploitation by man,
that appalling evil which still persists
in various hidden forms: all men to be
of equal standing, with neither exploi¬
ters nor exploited; work as a social
force used to further the general in¬
terest, creating wealth for all; the
fashioning of a new mentality, taking
for granted that man should be the
brother and friend of man, not his
plunderer, and that everyone should
support and help his neighbour.
Strong feelings of solidarity, dead¬
ened under the present competitive
system, would be aroused, and "all
for each and each for all" would
acquire real meaning as a principle
of work, with a full, human, fraternal
relationship uniting all mankind as
artisans of progress.
Full development of "fundamental
rights". I will refer to only one of
these: freedom. This implies, in insti¬
tutional and material terms, the right
of everyone to fulfil a vocation and
to develop his personality; and in the
expression and communication of
ideas, the right to meet together and
to form associations, freedom to
express political, philosophical, moral
and religious ideas of any kind and
the right to exercise any profession
or occupation, as well as to develop
any manual, scientific or cultural skill.
Freedom of work, certainly, but also
for everyone the right to work, to
do an honest job without being exploit¬
ed; and for the State, the duty to
provide it. In short, freedom unimped¬
ed by economic, social or political
barriers.
Ethical principles put into practice,
shaping man's thoughts and acts.
Fulfilment of moral precepts estab¬
lished by general consensus; man's
thinking and actions guided by pure
and worthy motives.
Justice for all, giving to each
according to his needs, encouraging
each to give according to his abilities,
wiping out oppression and the exis¬
tence of privileged groups which place
themselves above the law.
Achievement of real equality, as all
will have the same rights and duties,
and the same economic, social, poli¬
tical, cultural and vocational opportu¬
nities.
The reign of truth and sincerity with
men speaking from the heart, in purity
of intent and action, and an end to
lying, hypocrisy and dissimulation.
Governments worthy of civically
mature peoples: upright, loyal, honest
defenders of the general interest;
neither corrupt nor corrupting, nor
venal; neither enriching themselves in
office, nor betraying the people. Poli¬
tics practised with a moral sense of
civil guidance and conduct, without
suborning or purchasing the cons¬
cience of men with money or favours;
in other words, politics based on matu¬
rity and enlightenment, instead of
ignorance.
The disappearance of existing colo¬
nies and the incorporation of their
peoples in the concert of free nations.
In our century of satellites and space
rockets, in this atomic and thermo¬
nuclear age, colonies are a blot to be
wiped from the face of the planet once
and for all. We Uruguayans finally
threw off all foreign yokes in 1828.
Shame on the human race that colo¬
nies should still exist in our world
today.
The world we Uruguayans hope for
fits into the pattern already outlined
(conceived not as a vision of tomor¬
row but of a future time), yet has
some special features of its own.
In the reality we expect for Uruguay
and the other Latin American countries,
the following aims should be achieved:
land must be put to better use, redis¬
tributed to serve the whole community,
exploited rationally and with the help
of modern technology; sources of
employment must be created, as the
only effective weapon to attack enforc¬
ed idleness; commerce and industry
must be planned to take account of
national needs; the various branches
of national legislation must be reno¬
vated and adjusted to current ways
of life and to the pace and demands
of our time.
Education and instruction must be
available to all, with priority for those
living in the countryside; a vast literacy
campaign should be promoted, and
school-building accelerated. Higher
agricultural, industrial and technical
education must also be developed.
All public services must be
reorganized, to prevent the irrational
distribution of specialists, technicians,
office staff and manual workers.
Their knowledge and ability should be
used to the best advantage, with
agricultural engineers and specialists
working in rural agricultural schools,
not in offices in the capital; and in Q1
general, all professional men, doctors, J |
lawyers, architects and others should
devote their efforts to the work for
which they were trained.
