Photo © William R. Coe. Colirtesy "Expedition," The Bulletin of
the University Museum of the University of Pennsylvania, U.S.A.

MAMMOTH TEMPLES OF GUATEMALA
I N 1853, the ruins of an immense Maya city
(Tikal) were discovered deep in the rain forest of Guate¬
mala. Tikal is one of the most remarkable centres of the
great civilization which spread over Central America many
centuries ago, and whose origins are still a mystery.
Until recently these origins were never placed earlier than
the 3rd or 4th century A.D., but new discoveries at Tikal
suggest that they go back much farther. Since 1956, when
the Government of Guatemala and the University of Penn¬
sylvania jointly launched a full-scale programme of exca¬
vation and restoration, the astonishing riches of the city
buried in the tropical forest have slowly been revealed.
Clearing the jungle and debris that obscured Tikal for
1,000 years has confirmed the extent of Maya knowledge
in mathematics, astronomy and architecture, and the wealth
of their artistic creations. In the 16 square kilometres
covered by the city, 3,000 temples, colonnades, triumphal
arches, ball courts, observatories, houses and other struc¬
tures have been brought to light. Most impressive, by the
sheer magnitude of their architecture, are the mighty
limestone temple-pyramids, from 47 to 70 metres high.
Photo shows a 9-storey temple, uncovered in 1957, with
a single stairway climbing unbroken to the sanctuary at its
summit, 47 metres above the ground. Tikal's pyramids rise
above the treetops of the surrounding jungle of El Peten.
Most structures uncovered on the site of this ancient city
were built between 500 and 900 A.D. in the "Classic
Period," when the Maya civilization was in full bloom. But
excavation of temple foundations has revealed a series
of superimposed platforms which show that people were
living and building at Tikal by at least 600 B.C. As the
U.S. archaeologist, William R. Coe, of the University of
Pennsylvania, has said, "Tikal is like an iceberg with only
a tiny part showing compared to the mass still hidden."
33
