A talk with
Princess Ashraf of Iran
Her Highness Princess Ashraf, sister of His Imperial Majesty the
Shahinshah of Iran, recently accorded an exclusive interview to the
"Unesco Courier" on the problems of illiteracy. Chairman of Unesco's
International Consultative Liaison Committee for Literacy, Princess
Ashraf has for many years played a leading role in the struggle against
illiteracy both in her country and in other parts of the world.
Princess Ashraf Pahlavi (on left) sister
of His Imperial Majesty the Shahinshah
of Iran, presents the 1967
Mohamed Reza Pahlavi Prize for
outstanding work in literacy to Rose
Omari, a Tanzanian schoolgirl,
representing the Tabora Girls Secondary
School (Tanzania). Girls at the school
were awarded the prize
at Unesco's H.Q. in Paris, on
International Literacy Day, September 8,
1967, as volunteers who taught 400
adults to read and write.
Iran's Army of Knowledge an education corps of young soldiers
who spend their entire military service as teachers in villages and
country hamlets is now world famous. Recruits are used to teach
parents and children to read and write Persian and improve their living
conditions. Here as an adult class in a school courtyard near Kazvin
(north-west Iran) is about to end, a little boy crosses the threshold for
the next class.
QUESTION. For years you have
played a leading role in the world
struggle to wipe out literacy. Can
you tell us Your Highness, what led
you to take an active part in meeting
this problem?
ANSWER. For that we have to
go back 25 years to the early 1940s.
At that time I became interested in the
social and health problems of my
country and this opened my eyes to
the magnitude of illiteracy in Iran.
One step soon led to another, and
then about nine or ten years ago our
big literacy programme began to take
shape. It was launched a good four
years before the Teheran Conference
of 1965 on Illiteracy.
After the conference, the campaign
became one of our primary objectives.
A National Literacy Committee was
set up with the Empress as President
and myself as Vice-President and
many prominent Iranians as members.
It is difficult to say at this stage how
successful we have been thus far, for
up to now our work has been more or
less exploratory. Iran is a big country
with many traditions and customs and
these do not always allow for quick
change. We have found that the
poorest, most backward parts of our
country are the hardest to make lite¬
rate. Many adults, especially women,
are not interested in going to school,
and we have a big job in trying to
persuade them to do so. Nevertheless,
1 am convinced that within the next 20
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
23

A TALK WITH PRINCESS ASHRAF (Continued)
The dam alongside
the blackboard
Photo KWPA, Iran
24
The ruins of Susa, a city which flourished 7,000 years ago, stand near the
Dez River in Western Iran, its palaces and monuments recalling the splendours
of the ancient kingdom of Elam. One of the world's oldest cities, Susa was
destroyed on several occasions. Darius I and Artaxerxes built magnificent palaces
there, and adorned it with innumerable art treasures including ceramics and
bronze and stone sculptures. The royal audience hall of King Darius covered
no less than two and a half acres. Down the centuries the broad, fertile lands
surrounding the city became parched and arid. Today, fed by waters from a vast
irrigation network supplied from a 650 ft. high dam across the Dez River, they
are producing up to seven crops of alfalfa a year. Built with aid from the
World Bank, the dam (shown here under construction) is part of a major economic
development project, incorporating literacy programmes for the local people.
or 30 years illiteracy will no longer be
a problem in Iran But as long as
illiterate persons exist anywhere in the
world the struggle must go on for
everyone.
Q. Is it not true that the Army
of Knowledge has achieved some
rather remarkable results which are
now world famous?
A. Yes it has. The Army of
Knowledge has done and is doing
an extraordinary job. But this does
not mean we have solved our prob¬
lems. As long as Iran's 6 to 12 year
old children do not attend school,
illiteracy will remain a problem. If we
really wish to eradicate illiteracy we
must strike at the root of the problem,
the education of our children.
Iran is now spending as much as
30 to 35 per cent of its national budget
on education. In about five years,
99 per cent of the children in our
towns will be going to school, but in
the villages only one child in two will
be attending classes. This means that
many of our children who are now
seven or eight will add to the number
of illiterates tomorrow. We are plan¬
ning a complete overhaul of our educa¬
tional system to try to meet this
situation, but at the same time our
Committee is tackling the problem of
our 14 and 15 year old teenagers who
have never been to school.
Q. I believe that Iran has had an
important role to play in the new idea
of functional literacy linked to dev¬
elopment, has it not?
A. Like many countries we in
Iran first thought that literacy by itself
was the answer to progress. But it
doesn't always work that way. And
we found ourselves asking the ques¬
tion: "Literacy for what?" Let me give
you an example. Our Literacy Com¬
mittee appointed a team of educators
and asked me to participate, to outline
a programme for one of the poorest
regions of our country where 97 per
cent of the women are illiterate.
Well, after investigating conditions
there we decided to use most of our
budget to build a dam and a roadl
Only then would the blackboards and
chalk be useful. You see, we had long
talks with the inhabitants in their tents.
When we told them they had to learn
to read and write they thought we
were madl They told us they had
barely enough food and water or
medicine for their children. We
understood that if we wanted to make
any real progress we had to view
the whole problem of illiteracy in
terms of development.

Q. As President of the Union of
Iranian Women, would you say that
the women of your country present
a special problem? Are they inte¬
rested in learning modern ways and in
education generally?
A. I do not think it difficult to
convince women to adopt modern
ways. In our country, as elsewhere,
women have not been emancipated
for very long. Schools and univer¬
sities have been opened to them
only in the past 40 years. But even
today women find themselves at a
distinct disadvantage from every point
of view when compared to men. This
is especially true in the rural areas.
In our villages a girl still has difficulty
attending the same class as the boys
when the teacher is a man.
Despite this, I place my greatest
hopes in the women of my country.
Their influence in the home is enor¬
mous. They can persuade their hus¬
bands or their fathers that it is no sin
for a girl to get an education. The
Koran, you know, makes no distinction
between men and women. In fact it
says that every man and every woman
must read, that it is their duty to learn
to read. But over the centuries the
words of the Prophet have been dis¬
torted by prejudice. No one can deny,
however, that the Prophet's mission
started with the one word READ.
And our people are fully aware of this.
Yes, women are perhaps our most
valuable asset: they are eager to learn,
they want their children to be edu¬
cated, they understand the great
changes the literacy campaign hopes
to bring about. I need hardly add that
those women who have had an edu¬
cation are among our strongest and
most vocal supporters. In Iran, as in
most countries, 75 per cent of the
educated women choose teaching as a
profession.
Q. How would you describe the
present role of literacy within the
framework of a nation's economic
development?
A. Literacy is the ladder or
springboard. The goal is the develop¬
ment of the country, the development
of every man and woman. It is not
literacy for literacy's sake. The ulti¬
mate aim is to equip people to work
better and live a better life. Once
men and women have had even a
little education their life changes. A
literacy campaign acts like a catalytic
agent; it encourages a'person and the
community he lives in to want to
improve standards of living which are
no longer compatible with the modern
world.
RUGGED
PEDESTRIANS
Say the word Persian and
you immediately think of rugs.
Masterpieces of colour and
design, they reflect the pride
of designers and artisans
who cherish their
centuries-old craft. A good
-rug improves in quality
when the wool is compact
and well flattened. So it is
often a surprise to visitors to
find newly-made rugs spread
across the pavement where
the feet of passers by help
achieve the desired result
(photo below). Right, a
woman textile worker from
Isfahan. A Unesco
experimental literacy
programme has been started
for the benefit of the 26,000
persons employed in Isfahan's
textile industries.
Photos © Atlas Photo - C. Lénars
