30 QUESTIONS
ON HUMAN RIGHTS
O What are human rights?
Human rights are based on mankind's increasing demand
for a decent, civilized life in which the inherent dignity of
each human being will receive respect and protection. This
idea reaches beyond the comforts and conveniences that
science and technology can provide. We do not speak
merely of biological needs when we talk about human
rights; we mean those conditions of life which allow us
fully to develop and use our human qualities of intelligence
and conscience and to satisfy our spiritual needs. Human
rights are fundamental to our nature; without them, we can¬
not live as human beings.
To deny human beings their rights is to set the stage
for political and social unrest wars, hostility between
nations and between groups within a nation and leads
to urgent demands for a better life in larger freedom.
Human rights, far from being an abstract subject for philo¬
sophers and lawyers, affect the daily lives of everyone
man, woman and child.
Broadly speaking, two kinds of rights are recognized in
the Universal Declaration. First there is the traditional
kind, civil and political rights, which gradually evolved over
centuries during the long development of democratic so¬
ciety. Then there are economic, social and cultural rights,
which started to be recognized more recently when people
realized that possession of certain political and civil rights /
would be valueless without the simultaneous enjoyment
of certain rights of an economic, social and cultural
character.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

30 QUESTIONS ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Continued)
8
»3 What are civil and political rights?
First, we should all have the right to life, liberty
and the security of our persons. We must not be held
in slavery, or punished in an inhuman or degrading way.
All of us should be equal before the law. We must not
be arrested or exiled purely because of someone's whim.
We should be entitled to a fair hearing if someone charges
us with a crime, and we must be presumed innocent until
proved guilty.
Our privacy, family , home and correspondence must be
protected against arbitrary interference. If we are perse¬
cuted, we should be able to seek asylum in another country.
We should have the right to a nationality. We should be
able to marry and found a family, and our family should
be entitled to protection. We should have the right to
own property.
Then there are the well-known fundamental freedoms:
freedom of thought, conscience and religion, freedom of
opinion and expression, and the freedom to join with others
in peaceful assembly and association. Also, everyone
should have the right to take part in the government of
his country, through elections and through equal access
with anyone else to jobs in the public service.
Q What are economic and social rights?
They include the right to work, to free choice of jobs,
to just and favourable conditions of work and to protection
against unemployment. Every man or woman should be
entitled to the same pay if he or she does the same
work. All of us should have the right to rest and leisure.
An adequate standard of living is another of our rights,
and this means enough food, clothing, housing, medical and
social services, and social security. Mothers and children
should be entitled to special care and assistance. Every¬
one should have the right to education, and the right freely
to participate in the cultural life of the community.
Q Who says these are our rights?
Philosophers and the greatest figures in world history
have been stressing and developing the concept of human
rights from the beginning of civilized life, and the United
Nations has reaffirmed them. All of the political, civil,
economic, social and cultural rights mentioned here are set
out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
the United Nations General Assembly adopted on Dec¬
ember 10, 1948, with not a single country voting against.
The Declaration itself states that it is a common standard
of achievement for all peoples and all nations, and not
a binding set of rules. But the mere fact that the
Declaration was solemnly accepted by so many countries
of such varying cultural, economic and political back¬
grounds implies that those countries are ready to promote
the rights they have themselves proclaimed. The Decla¬
ration has been incorporated in the constitutions of a
number of countries and its wording is reflected in many
other constitutions.
^ Why doesn't the United Nations go beyond the
Declaration and try to write these rights into law?
It has done just that, by drawing up two International
Covenants on Human Rights the Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and the Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. Both of them were adopted unanimously
by the General Assembly on December 16, 1966.
Each Covenant will enter into force when 35 states
have ratified or acceded to it. The Protocol to the Cov¬
enant on Civil and Political Rights (see question 10)
requires 10 ratifications or accessions. As of November
1967, no government had yet ratified or acceded to
any of these three instruments. However, 19 states had
signed the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, 18 had signed the Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and eight of these had also signed the Protocol.
Once the Covenants come into effect, they will be legally
binding treaties between the states which ratify them.
They contain arrangements for international review of how
states carry out their obligations under the Covenants.
The Covenants define the various rights more precisely.
The article dealing with guarantees for the person charged
with a crime lists seven minimum guarantees, including the
right to a prompt trial and to legal assistance. A few rights
mentioned in the Declaration are not dealt with in the Cov¬
enants, while some rights not mentioned in the Declaration
are set out in the Covenants notably, the right of self-
determination, the right of all peoples to determine their
political status and to pursue their economic, social and
cultural development.
Q Are all of the rights set out in the Covenants to
be given effect immediately?
By and large, all of the obligations which a state assumes
under the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights are meant
to be implemented as soon as that state ratifies the Cov¬
enant. The Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, however, states that its provisions are to be carried
out progressively. There is a difference between a right such
as freedom of thought and expression, which can be put into
effect immediately by any country, and a right like the right
to education, which requires money, teachers and buildings
before everybody can enjoy it.
Q Isn't there too much stress on rights and too little
on duties?
Rights and duties are opposite sides of the same coin.
When the U.N. or anyone else calls for respect for human
rights, they mean not only that our rights must be observed
but also that we must respect the rights of others.
Q How can the United Nations be sure that all states
live up to their promises under the Covenants?
By obliging them to report to an international body
on the measures which they have taken and the progress
they have made. Both Covenants provide for such a
reporting procedure. In the case of the Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the United Nations
Economic and Social Council is the body which will study
these reports. It may rely on the Commission on Human
Rights and the specialized agencies of the United Nations
for expert assistance. In the case of the Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, a special Human Rights Commit¬
tee will be set up to deal with the reports.
Q What happens if two states disagree on whether
one of them is fulfilling its obligations?
The Covenant on Civil and Political Rights provides for
a special procedure in case such a disagreement should
arise. Suppose State A thinks that State B is not allowing
an ethnic or religious minority to enjoy its own culture or
practise its own religion. If a solution cannot be reached
by direct negotiation, State A may contact the Human
Rights Committee about the matter, since such minority
rights are provided for in the Covenant on Civil and Poli¬
tical Rights. The Committee may look into the complaint
and take it up with State B to try to work out a settlement.
If no agreement is worked out, the Committee may report
on the facts of the case.
This procedure will apply only between two states which
agree in advance to allow the Human Rights Committee to
deal with such questions affecting them.
(¿) Will individuals be able to complain about
violations of their rights?
Only if their countries have ratified another legal instru¬
ment which the General Assembly adopted at the same
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10

mg*m
.Mm
.#
-
MX
.A
¿rrm
*< IT
r' ».
*A2
H
>'wt:
:&»
31 ^
... *?
P
,a.*»i
,«% .-.
y .v
ft*"
/i
Photo © Holmes Lebel - Camera I
NO ONE SHALL BE HELD IN SERVITUDE
No one shall be held in slavery or servitude ; slavery and
the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms.
No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment.
Articles 4 and 5 of the Universal Declaration

30 QUESTIONS ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Continued)
time as the two Covenants the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The
procedure under the Protocol works this way: suppose
Mr. Smith, who lives in Country A, claims that his right
to freedom of expression has been violated by his own
Government. If his country is a party to the Protocol and
to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and if he
has tried without success to obtain satisfaction within his
country, Mr. Smith may complain to the Human Rights
Committee. The Committee may then take up the com¬
plaint and forward its view to the country concerned and to
Mr. Smith. The Committee is to report annually to the
General Assembly on its activities under the Protocol.
(P Will the United Nations be able to order a country
to comply with its human rights obligations?
Each country will have the final say in human rights
questions, and no international organ will be able to over¬
ride the authority of the supreme organs in each state.
It is logical and expected, however, that states will find
inspiration for their attitudes and actions, as regards the
human rights of their nationals, in the standards elaborated
by the international community as represented by the United
Nations.
(^ What use is the international machinery for imple¬
menting the Covenants if countries are. to have
the final say ¡n individual cases?
The main instrument at the disposal of the international
community and it can be a most effective instrument
is exposure to world public opinion. The reporting pro¬
cedure under the International Covenants Is designed to
publicize the progress made by each country in achieving
human rights, and the obstacles encountered by each
country. The conciliation procedure is intended to help
countries iron out disagreements in particular cases, and
governments will be able to make use of this procedure
in the knowledge that, if conciliation fails, an issue which
they consider important will be aired before the world.
True, the international machinery will be far from1 all-
powerful; but this should not obscure the fact that the
implementation of the Covenants will mark a giant step
forward in giving effect to international concern about
human rights.
(J) What other human rights conventions has the
United Nations adopted in the past 20 years?
Once the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was
proclaimed In 1948, the United Nations immediately set
out to adopt treaties on a number of specific rights. These
deal with genocide, racial discrimination, refugees, stateless
persons, the rights of women, slavery and freedom of
information. These conventions are in effect between the
states which have become parties to them.
(£) What has been done about genocide?
The crimes perpetrated against whole groups of innocent
people during the Second World War led the General
Assembly, in 1948, to adopt the Convention on the Preven¬
tion and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. Genocide
is defined in the Convention as the committing of certain
acts with intent to destroy a national, ethnic, racial or
religious group. Genocide is characterized as a crime
under international law, whether committed in time of
peace or of war. Seventy states have become parties
to this Convention.
10© What about racial discrimination?
The United Nations has been especially concerned about
racial discrimination in recent years and has devoted much
of its action to its consideration. Many newly Independent
countries, with vivid memories of colonialism, have been par¬
ticularly concerned at the continuance in power of regimes
in southern Africa and elsewhere which are based on the
dominance of a white minority over a black majority.
In taking political action to try to change the policies
of the regimes in South Africa, Southern Rhodesia and the
territories under Portuguese administration, the United
Nations is aware that racial discrimination and theories of
racial superiority underlie many of the political problems
with which it has to deal. The General Assembly has
frequently condemned those racial policies.
In 1965, It adopted the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. When
states become parties to this Convention, they undertake
to pursue without delay a policy of eliminating racial discrim¬
ination in all its forms and promoting understanding among
all races. The Convention will come into force when
27 states ratify or accede to it. As of October 16, 1967,
16 countries had done so.
One of the most effective ways in which the United
Nations can combat racial discrimination is by exposing it
to world opinion. The United Nations cannot force govern¬
ments and peoples to comply with its wishes in this field,
but it can bring to their attention the evils and danger
of discrimination and suggest ways of eliminating it. This
is the objective of the International Day for the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination, which was commemorated for the
first time in 1967.
dp Is the United Nations concerned with other types
of discrimination?
Yes. The U.N. Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, set up in 1947,
has been studying discriminatory practices based on other
grounds than race and colour, including religion and political
opinion. The General Assembly took up a draft Conven¬
tion on the elimination of all forms of religious intolerance
at its 1967 session.
Agencies related to the United Nations have also acted
against discrimination in their respective fields. Unesco
has adopted a Convention against Discrimination in Educa¬
tion. The International Labour Organization (ILO) has
approved a Convention concerning Discrimination in Em¬
ployment and Occupation. Both Conventions call for
periodic reports by governments on what they are doing
to carry out the provisions. There are also arrangements
for settling disputes.
(¡) What about discrimination against women?
The Commission on the Status of Women prepared a
draft Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, which the General Assembly adopted on Novem¬
ber 7, 1967. But long before the idea of such a decla¬
ration arose, the United Nations began promoting women's
rights through a series of measures.
A Convention on the Political Rights of Women, adopted
by the General Assembly in 1952, provides that women shall
have equal rights with men in voting, election to public
bodies and the exercise of public functions. (As late as
1966, while women had equal voting rights with men in
114 countries, they were denied those rights in eight
countries.)
A Convention on the Nationality of Married Women,
adopted in 1957, provides that a woman's nationality shall
not automatically be affected just because she marries
a man of another nationality. Another United Nations
Convention, adopted in 1962, says that no marriage shall be
legal without the full and free consent of both parties,
expressed in person.
The U.N. Commission on the Status of Women has sought
to encourage the participation of women in vocational, tech¬
nical and training programmes, it has recommended steps

to promote the access of girls and women to higher educa¬
tion, and it has asked that mothers be given equal rights
with fathers in the upbringing of their children.
The International Labour Organization (ILO) and Unesco
have also actively promoted women's rights, ILO through a
Convention intended to ensure that, when men and women
perform equal work, they receive equal pay, and Unesco
through its efforts to promote equal access to education
for women.
(£) What has the United Nations done
to help refugees?
Some of the most practical work done by the United
Nations in the entire field of human rights is its assistance
to refugees. The fate of more than three million victims
of war, persecution and other upheavals concerns the
United Nations today. Some of these are fed from United
Nations rations mainly, hundreds of thousands of Arab
refugees from Palestine, who are cared for by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA). Many of these refugees
UNRWA had more than a million on its rolls at the begin¬
ning of 1967 are housed, clothed and educated by the
Agency, at least in part. A large number of them were
displaced for a second time by the Middle East fighting of
June 1967.
More than two million refugees elsewhere in the world
come under the mandate of the United Nations High Com¬
missioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The High Commis¬
sioner's Office was able to report the closing in 1966 of the
last refugee camps in Europe. However, more than half a
million new refugees in Africa are outside their home coun¬
tries, and the High Commissioner is helping to repatriate
or resettle them.
(£) Is anything being done about the problem of
stateless persons in general?
The 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless
Persons sets out the standards of treatment for persons
who do not have a nationality of their own. To deal with the
problem of reducing future statelessness, the United Nations
has adopted a Convention to help people acquire a nation¬
ality at birth and limit the circumstances in which they
lose a nationality without acquiring another. However this
Convention, adopted in 1961, is not yet in force. The
complexity and variety of nationality laws makes this a most
difficult subject to deal with.
^) What about freedom of information?
The General Assembly has recognized that this freedom
is the touchstone of all freedoms. However, efforts to
embody in a written text a precise definition of this free¬
dom have not yet been successful. One of the main
problems Is that different countries have different ideas
about the role of the Press in society. Nevertheless, the
Assembly keeps the question of freedom of information
constantly under review, including proposals for both a
declaration and a convention on the subject.
Meanwhile the Assembly has adopted a Convention on
the International Right of Correction. This Convention,
which came into force in 1962, is designed to enable states
to have publicized in another country corrections to news
dispatches published in that country which they consider
false or distorted. Eight states had become parties to
the Convention as of September 21, 1967.
Q) What is being done about the rights
of the worker?
This subject is the principal concern of ILO, which has
adopted more than 250 Conventions and Recommendations,
making up an International Labour Code that deals with
everything from hours of work and minimum wages to
maternity protection, from industrial accidents to night
work for women. Among its Conventions is one on the
abolition of forced labour and another to protect freedom
of association and the right of workers to organize trade
unions.
The ILO also gives advice to Governments on ways to
ensure that labour standards are adhered to by employers
and employees. It has special machinery for considering
violations of trade union rights. Almost all of the work
of ILO is concerned with safeguarding the human rights
of the worker.
ÇQ Does slavery still exist and is it still being fought?
Slavery and practices similar to slavery are still to be
found in some parts of the world, and the matter is still
actively before the United Nations. The parties to two
Conventions on slavery pledge themselves to prevent and
suppress the slave trade and bring about the complete
abolition of all forms of slavery. One of these Conventions
outlaws certain institutions and practices similar to slavery
such as debt bondage, serfdom, purchase of brides and
exploitation of child labour. Further measures to put an
end to slavery are being studied by several United Nations
bodies (see page 32).
^ Is special consideration being given to the rights
of children?
The rights and well-being of the world's children are
the prime concern of one of the best-known United Nations
agencies the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
which promotes the rights of the child by providing medicine
and medical equipment, jeeps and bicycles for public
health and community development workers, science kits
for pilot schools, tools for vocational training, pipes and
pumps for village sanitation, stipends to pay for the training
of teachers. UNICEF is the oldest of the post-war United
Nations agencies set up to provide direct assistance where
it is most needed and still working for the welfare of
mankind. To focus the world's attention on goals, the
General Assembly in 1959 unanimously adopted a Decla¬
ration of the Rights of the Child.
KQ What about youth and human rights?
The General Assembly in 1965 adopted by acclamation
the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of the Ideals
of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding between
Peoples. The Declaration sets out the principles which
should guide not only young people but also the adults who
are concerned with their education and welfare to develop
attachment to the ideals of peace, liberty and the dignity
and equality of all men, and stresses the role of the
family in achieving these aims.
^) What about the right to education?
In a world where almost one child in two grows up
without any education because schools are lacking, and
where four out of ten adults cannot read or write, a massive
effort is needed to give substance to the right to education.
Unesco is helping the developing countries to plan their
educational programmes, train teachers, build inexpensive
schools, modernize their curricula and produce good text¬
books.
In 1965, Unesco launched an international literacy cam- *u
paign. With funds supplied by the United Nations Develop- I I
ment Programme and by the governments concerned, six
major pilot literacy projects are now under way. The
Director-General of Unesco has proposed that the world
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

30 QUESTIONS ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Continued)
12
set itself a target: to wipe out illiteracy, and assure every
child at least six years of education by the end of the
century.
^) Do means already exist for individuals to
complain to the United Nations if they consider
their rights have been violated?
The United Nations receives many complaints from
individuals and groups alleging violations of human rights.
However, it can take little action on such complaints.
These communications are made available every year,
for information purposes and on a confidential basis, to
the Human Rights Commission and its Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minor¬
ities. Specific complaints are brought to the attention
of the Governments concerned. There is a special proce¬
dure for dealing with petitions from individuals or groups
concerning conditions in United Nations Trust Territories.
Qf) What does the work of the U.N. Trusteeship
Council and the Committee on the ending of
colonialism have to do with human rights?
The Trusteeship Council, in overseeing the administra¬
tion of Trust Territories, looks into political, economic,
social and educational conditions in each one of them. It
may call for greater participation by the local people in
government, more job opportunities, improved welfare
schemes of better schools all concerned with human rights.
There are three Trust Territories left Nauru, New Guinea
and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. Once there
were eleven; the eight others have already attained the
main goal of the Trusteeship System independence or
self-government. In a number of cases, this came about
as a result of referenda supervised by the United Nations.
Implementing the right of self-determination is the main
concern of the Committee on the ending of colonialism.
The Committee may call for general elections with universal
adult suffrage, the handing over of powers to an elected
government, the holding of a constitutional convention, the
organization of a referendum, or the granting of indepen¬
dence by a certain date.
^) What is being done to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights?
The General Assembly has designated 1968 as Inter¬
national Year for Human Rights. Many activities, ceremonies
and observances have been planned by the United Nations,
by regional organizations, by national governments and
by private organizations.
But the General Assembly wants the occasion to be
much more than a celebration of past events. It has
suggested that 1968 be devoted to national and internation¬
al efforts in the field of human rights and also to an
international review of achievements in this field. Speci¬
fically, it asked that states become parties to the existing
human rights conventions and it decided to hasten the
conclusion of other such instruments.
In April 1968, a world-wide meeting, the United Nations
International Conference on Human Rights, will be held
in Teheran, Iran, to review progress since the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights was adopted in 1948. It will
evaluate the effectiveness of the methods used by the
United Nations in the field of human rights, and prepare
a programme of further measures to be taken after 1968.
^) How will the U.N.'s human rights activities
develop in future?
First, the coming into force of the Convention on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination and of the International
Covenants on Human Rights, when enough states ratify
them, will bring into existence new international machinery
and confer new responsibilities on existing United Nations
bodies.
Second, besides the important advances in setting human
rights standards, significant steps are being taken to
enable the United Nations to play a role complementary
to that of governments in extending respect for human
rights and in preventing gross violations. Recent decisions
of the Economic and Social Council permit a study by the
Commission on Human Rights of situations that reveal
consistent violations of human rights, such as policies of
apartheid and racial discrimination. The General Assembly
is studying a proposal to appoint a United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (see page 26).
This resurgence of activity in the promotion and defence
of human rights, coupled with the reassessment of United
Nations work in this field during 1968, could lead to ever-
greater responsibilities for the international community in
the protection and promotion of human rights. Whether the
United Nations will, in fact, be given this wider role depends
on the decisions of the governments and the support of
peoples.
© What can the individual do?
The first duty of the individual citizen with regard to
human rights may seem so simple and obvious that many
of us neglect it: it is to understand what our human rights
are, so that when they are violated, we can recognize the
act as a violation.
To take one example: when a youth of obvious ability is
unable to go to college because he lacks the financial
means, our reaction may be no more than mild sympathy.
When we recognize, however, that such a situation may be
contrary to the principle that higher education shall be equal¬
ly accessible to all on the basis of merit, as proclaimed in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we may take
a more serious view of the situation and try to find
remedies.
Once we understand our rights, our next responsibility
is to promote them for others as well as for ourselves.
And that responsibility begins with the people around us,
for it is in our local communities that we have most influence.
Acting on our own and in concert with others in non¬
governmental organizations, we can remedy human rights
violations and promote respect for rights at home. We
can each strive to enable our own countries to set a good
example for the rest of the world. And we can learn from
the experiences of others by reading about what other
countries are doing to promote human rights for their
own peoples.
The problem of protecting and promoting human rights,
in the broadest sense, is the main concern of the United
Nations. Since rights cannot be enjoyed fully if a person
cannot earn a living and feed a family, all of the economic
and social development programmes of the international
community are essentially programmes to advance human
rights. Since a person cannot be free if the nation to
which he or she belongs is not allowed to decide its own
destiny through the exercise of the right to self-deter¬
mination, the efforts of the United Nations to promote the
granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples
are basically human rights efforts.
Our world consists of diverse political ideologies and
racial origins, various religious beliefs and different degrees
of economic development. When, out of this diversity, we
develop common standards of human rights and respect
for human dignity everywhere, we create a profound bond
between men which is essential for maintaning peaceful
relations among nations and for fruitful economic, social
and cultural co-operation.
These 30 questions on human rights are taken from "The United
Nations and the Human Person Questions and Answers on Human
Rights', a U N. pamphlet to be published this year in English, French
and Spanish.

Photo WHO - Paul Almasy
THE RIGHT
M
WELL-BEING
Everyone has the right to a standard of living
adequate for the health and well-being of
himself and of his family, including food,
clothing, housing and medical care and
necessary social services...
Article 25 of the Universal Declaration
