The International Atomic Energy Agency
THE TAMING
OF THE... ATOM
FOR PEACE
T,
HROUGHOUT a world beset by growing problems of over¬
population, lack of food and limited traditional resources, nuclear energy
is emerging as a most powerful force for the benefit of man.
World leaders and scientists of vision realized this well over a decade
ago. Due to their foresight, the International Atomic Energy Agency of the
United Nations was founded to find ways of harnessing atoms for peace
and preventing their use for war.
4
After the World War Two bombings
of Hiroshima and Nagasaki had shown
the terrible destructiveness of atomic
power, the world was desperately
anxious to turn over the nuclear coin
and investigate its beneficial side.
However, until 1953, no acceptable
formula could be found to establish the
tool for these investigations.
Then President Eisenhower of the
United States urged the establishment
of an international organization through
which the technically developed
countries "would dedicate some of
their strength to serving the needs
rather than the fears of mankind."
This proposal marked the turning
point in the postwar evolution of
nuclear energy from its military
applications to its peaceful applications
for the benefit of everyone.
In 1954, the United Nations General
Assembly unanimously adopted an
"Atoms for Peace" resolution expres¬
sing the hope that the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) be
established without delay. In October,
1956, the Statute was approved unan
imously at a conference of 81 nations:
on July 29, 1957, the Agency officially
came into being. Today it has
98 member states.
The IAEA was conceived with two
broad aims: to actively promote the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and
to ensure that these applications are
carried out without risk to world peace
and to world health. These are still
vital considerations, but since the
agency's beginnings in 1957, its
scientists have widened their scope of
activities to include other related areas
affecting practically every walk of life.
By 1958, scientists were already hard
at work in their first laboratory In
Vienna; the first symposia were
organized; experts were appointed for
technical assistance; and the first
fellowships for research were awarded.
It was immediately recognized that
one of the main factors to encourage
wider use of nuclear energy is the
spreading of scientific and technical
know-how. Accordingly, the first
major enterprise was the fellowships
programme.
Fernand Léger, the famous
French painter executed
the painting shown here
(measuring a giant
8 metres by 5 metres) for
the Paris science museum,
Palais de la Découverte.
It represents man's
harnessing of energy for
peaceful purposes.
Over 3,000 fellowships have been
awarded to date. In addition, a
thousand persons have been trained
in Agency-organized courses and
120 visiting professorships provided.
Something like 15,000 scientists have
met at 100 conferences and symposia
to discuss 5,500 scientific papers.
Furthermore, nearly 200 panels,
40 study groups and 13 other meetings
were convened.
Knowledge of the properties of
stable isotopes and radioisotopes has
led to great advances in research and
technology.
Isotopes and instruments associated
with them can be turned to useful
purposes easily, often cheaply and
with relatively quick and practical re¬
sults, many of them particularly valu¬
able to developing countries. Here are
some of the ways that they are being
used by the IAEA and other organiza¬
tions with which it collaborates:
In Agriculture: Improvements of
yields through collective research
efforts to make better use of fertili¬
zers, as for rice, studied in 12 coun¬
tries, and for maize in eight countries;
production of better rice, wheat and
barley through radiation-induced muta¬
tions; control or eradication of insect
pests; protection of food against con¬
tamination; preservation of stored food
by irradiation; studies designed to
make fullest use of water In the soil;

preparation by radiation of vaccines
for animals.
In Hydrology: For six years a con¬
tinuing world survey of the content
of tritium (the radioactive isotope of
hydrogen) as well as some stable iso¬
topes has been carried out jointly with
the World Meteorological Organiza¬
tion to determine the water turn-over
on earth; more than 20 countries have
been helped to estimate their local
water development problems; studies
of 20 large rivers in various parts of
the world were carried out jointly with
Unesco as part of the programme of
the International Hydrological Decade
now in progress, with which the tri¬
tium survey is also linked.
In Medicine: Goitre research ranged
from the heights of the Andes in Peru
to those of the Himalayas in Nepal;
arrangements were made for the pro¬
vision of equipment for radiological
treatment of cancer in seven countries.
Radioisotope techniques and charts
for medical diagnosis and treatment
have been developed and standard¬
ized. The highest priority has been
given to four groups of subjects
anaemia, endemic goitre, malnutri¬
tion and the effects of parasitic infec¬
tions on human beings and re¬
search has been promoted in 44 coun¬
tries ; a training programme provides
the majority of qualified personnel
working in nuclear medicine in dev¬
eloping countries.
A programme aimed at making
snakebite serum generally available as
a result of radiation treatment of
venom has been initiated in the hope
of saving many of the 3,000 lives lost
annually. Sterilization of tissues and
hospital equipment is being developed
to facilitate surgical work and reduce
dangers of infection.
In Industry: Increasing efforts have
been made to acquaint nations with
radioisotope techniques for improving
the quality of production of manufac¬
tured goods; process, wear and tear
and flow control; sterilization of medi¬
cal products, all ways of saving hun¬
dreds of millions of dollars a year as
well as leading to more rapid indus¬
trial development.
Nuclear energy's greatest contribu¬
tion to human welfare ^will probably
be power production. At present, the
Agency acts mainly as an international
adviser. Its experts counsel individual
countries and regions on the feasibility
of their nuclear power proposals,
provide information enabling a choice
to be made, help In choosing sites,
make cost evaluations and give
guidance for safe operation.
These services are especially im¬
portant for countries whose size or
present state of development preclude
them from taking on these tasks alone.
Another, increasingly important appli¬
cation of nuclear energy is in the
large-scale desalting of sea water.
Glenn T. Seaborg, chairman of the U.S.
Atomic Energy Commission, under¬
lined its importance when he said,
"1 know of no more exciting prospect
for the future a future which I be¬
lieve is not distant than that of
nuclear reactors producing unprece¬
dented amounts of energy for the
production of electric power and the
desalting of water in some of the
earth's most arid regions."
Since 1963, the IAEA has served
as a clearing house for the interna¬
tional exchange of information on nu¬
clear desalting- as well as bringing
together technical experts and policy¬
makers from all parts of the world
during eight meetings of its Panel on
Nuclear Desalting. Now it is adding
to this work the exciting idea of link¬
ing the nuclear power/desalting oper¬
ations with chemical and fertilizer
plants to create new agro-industrial
centres.
,The Agency has also sponsored a
tripartite study into the possibility of
a huge dual-purpose nuclear power
and desalting plant to serve the arid
regions of Mexico and the United
States surrounding the Gulf of Cali¬
fornia. If it proves feasible, it might
produce as much as one thousand
million gallons of water a day.
The IAEA is acting as an observer
for a similar project between Israel
and the U.S.A., and power and desalin-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
5

TAMING THE ATOM (Continued)
Electric power and desalted water
for the earths arid regions
ation missions have been sent to
Chile, El Salvador, Finland, Republic
of Korea, Pakistan, Peru, the Philip¬
pines, Thailand, Tunisia and Turkey.
Apart from nuclear power and de¬
salting, the Agency is helping to ad¬
vance reactor technology through the
direct support of research on a
regional or international basis.
The IAEA's scientists recognized that
applied and basic science are indivis¬
ible and have planned their pro¬
gramme accordingly. The first pro¬
visional' laboratory, setup in 1958, dealt
with physics and some chemistry
involving low radioactivity. It is still
maintained although Its role has
changed: today it is used partly for
investigations into radiation acci¬
dentally or medically introduced into
the human body.
S
6
INCE 1961, a functional
laboratory has been in operation at
Seibersdorf, about 20 miles south-east
of Vienna. It has sections for nuclear
and medical physics, chemistry, agri¬
cultural research, hydrology and elec¬
tronics. Among the wide range of
subjects dealt with have been food¬
stuffs, the age and content of meteor¬
ites, and the quality of ores and
sedimentation in rivers. Furthermore,
8,000 of its radioisotope standards
serve to calibrate Instruments and
check research work in 56 countries.
Also created in 1961 was the Inter¬
national Marine Radioactivity Labora¬
tory at Monaco. It studies the effects
and dispersal of radioactivity in the
sea, its living creatures and its plants.
Its work will give guidance on the
future disposal of radioactive waste
from the growing number of nuclear
.installations, including ships.
The best example of the IAEA's
contribution to basic research is its
International Centre for Theoretical
Physics in Trieste, inaugurated in 1964
and headed by one of the world's most
brilliant physicists, Professor Abdus
Salam of Pakistan. Its main value has
been to encourage scientific thinkers,
especially from developing countries,
who previously found it difficult to
maintain contacts and standards of
work.
Over 400 special reports have been
produced; 600 physicists from 53 coun¬
tries have participated in the work;
seminars, training courses and re¬
search groups have resulted in useful
publications; scientists from dev
eloping countries are drawn to the
Centre by a system of associate
membership, fellowships, senior and
junior physicists positions, and a
scheme of affiliations with other
institutions. A symposium on contem¬
porary physics which has just ended
was one of the most important events
in theoretical physics for many years.
Nine Nobel Laureates were among
250 leading scientists of many discip¬
lines who took part.
The IAEA's basic research pro¬
gramme also promotes the effective
use of research reactors in developing
countries by providing experts to
advise on their efficient utilization.
As the value of nuclear power is
accepted by more countries, the need
for health and safety measures is
increased. The Agency has evolved
basic safety standards for radiation
protection and regulations for the safe
transport of radioactive materials.
These rules are mandatory for all
activities with which the IAEA is
connected and, although it does not
have the power to impose them on
nations, there is a growing trend to
adopt these or similar health and
safety standards.
To ensure that IAEA assistance is
not diverted for military purposes and
to apply safeguards at the request of
the parties to any bilateral or multi¬
lateral nuclear agreement, a system
of safeguards procedure has been
established which «applies to reactors
and to installations Where used nuclear
fuel is reprocessed. The system will
be extended to plants for conversion
and fabrication of nuclear fuel. It now
covers the entire fuel cycle except
isotope separation plants.
The first country to accept the safe¬
guards was Japan, which in 1959
obtained three tons of fuel through
the Agency's intermediary. Twenty-
eight other countries have since
accepted Agency safeguards, some
of which are supplied with their nuclear
materials by the Agency.
The number of installations now
subject to control is 120, including
70 reactors. Often these installations
represent the sole or major nuclear
activity in the country concerned.
Under the system, Member States
maintain records of the materials
under safeguards and report periodi¬
cally. An important element is on-site
inspections by a team of inspectors
with broad powers of access and
investigation.
ATOMIC RICE. The International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has
set up a plant mutation laboratory
at Seibersdorf, Austria, where
scientists have successfully used
radiation to produce better varieties
of rice, with higher yields, quicker
maturity and greater resistance to
disease. Seeds from many
rice-growing countries are irradiated
and grown in paddies under plastic
tents on an experimental basis.
Here, an IAEA fellowship holder,
Mr W.C. Li, from the Republic of
China, studies a new rice strain
produced by radiation.
As this team gains more experience,
it is called upon to fulfill more tasks.
The Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America,
the so-called Tlatelolco Treaty, signed
by 21 nations in 1967, nominates the
Agency to apply its safeguards to the
nuclear activities of the contracting
nations.
However, a danger remains. Nations
are still free to manufacture nuclear
weapons if they desire. And if more
countries decide to do so, the present
trend to non-proliferation could be
broken with possible disastrous
results.
The Non-Proliferation Treaty, spon¬
sored by U.S.S.R. and U.S.A. and
adopted in June 1968 by the U.N.
General Assembly with a very con¬
siderable majority, opens more opti¬
mistic perspectives for ensuring
greater safety for the world. Non-
nuclear weapons states, which are
parties to the treaty, accept not to
produce atomic bombs. It is foreseen
that the IAEA will carry out the inter¬
national control, ensuring that the
treaty is followed.
The treaty was signed by the U.S.,
Soviet Union and U.K. (three of the

ARID
REGIONS
¡extremely arid
isemi arid
NUCLEAR THIRST QUENCHER. The desalting of seawater by nuclear
energy holds out untold promise for the world's agriculture of tomorrow.
Deserts reach down to the sea along some 18,000 miles of the world's
coastlines. Installation of water desalting nuclear plants would transform
thousands of acres of parched soil and permit the setting up of
agro-industrial complexes. Cheap electricity from nuclear power plants
could also make inland deserts, bloom with water pumped from deep
underground natural reserves. The critical problems of certain arid areas,
where no rain may fall from one year to the next, are underlined by the
fact that 37 gallons of water are needed to make one slice of bread and
3,750 gallons to produce one pound of beef.
world's five nuclear powers) and
53 other nations in Washington, Mos¬
cow and London on July 1, 1968, and
other signatures brought the total to
64 by July 4. A total of 40 nations plus
the three signatory nuclear nations
must ratify the treaty before it be¬
comes international law.
An essential aspect of the IAEA's
approach to both its task and its
success to date is international co¬
operation. We have already indicated
projects involving different countries.
There are others.
One, the NPY agreement with
Norway, Poland and Yugoslavia, is
aimed at improving knowledge of
reactor physics, using experimental
facilities in all three countries. Another
joint programme of research in reactor
physics uses the NORA reactor in
Norway. It has provided useful data
for the development of power reactors
and has given experience to scientists
from many nations.
In South-East Asia, a regional train¬
ing and research programme, using
a neutron crystal spectrometer, was
established In 1965 at the Philippine
Atomic Research Centre, Quezon City,
administered by the Philippines, India
and the IAEA. India built the spectro¬
meter and provided scientists and
technicians. Indonesia, Korea, Repub¬
lic of China and, of course, the Philip¬
pines, whose research reactor is also
used, have been taking part.
The Middle Eastern Regional Radio¬
isotope Centre for the Arab countries,
set up under Agency auspices in
Cairo in 1963, trains specialists for
work and research. Participants come
from Algeria, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Saudi
Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia, United Arab Republic and
Yeman, and have included trainees
from Nigeria and Ghana.
T HE IAEA also co-operates
with the United Nations and some of
its specialized agencies such as the
Food and Agricultural Organization,
the World Health Organization, Unesco,
the World Meteorological Organization,
the International Labour Organization,
and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP).
In fact, the Agency was the exe¬
cuting body of some of these joint
IAEA-UNDP projects. One of these
showed the value of nuclear power in
the Philippines; in India the use of
atomic energy will be intensified to
increase agricultural production; in
Central America, the campaign against
the Mediterranean fruit-fly is being
carried out, and in Yugoslavia, valuable
work to assist agriculture and animal
husbandry has been accomplished.
In all its work, the Agency has
taken as guiding principle the urgent
need to help improve standards of
living in developing countries. A
review made in 1967 showed that
30 per cent of the money spent goes
directly to projects for this purpose,
and that a large proportion of the
remainder is spent on activities of
interest to such nations. As techniques
develop, the trend is to concentrate
increasingly on practical rather than
advisory tasks.
These widespread and diverse activ¬
ities, in co-operation with nations and
organizations throughout the world,
illustrate how the International Atomic
Energy Agency, born out of a reali¬
zation that the promise and problems
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
recognize no national boundaries, has
moved steadily towards the great objec¬
tives for which it came into existence.
7
