HUMAN
RIGHTS
	 TOMORROW by Hanna Saba
Assistant Director-General of Unesco
Í
4
VERY day we hear with growing concern of new acts committed
in open violation of human rights and disregard for human dignity. The
countless victims of these acts are not only men and women whose
rights are denied them, systematically or unwittingly, by their own govern¬
ments. In many instances, violations of human rights are the direct or
indirect consequence of war or of the "military actions" which some states
feel obliged to take in defence of their interests. The full development
of the individual human being, with due respect for the rights which
safeguard human dignity, would appear to be incompatible with the
defence by states of what they consider to be their supreme national
interests.
The present situation has thus bitter¬
ly disappointed those who believed
that we were close to an era when,
progressing beyond the status of prin¬
ciples proclaimed by international as¬
semblies, human rights would be incor¬
porated in the laws of nations, respect¬
ed by governments, and guaranteed by
the provision of legal recourse to
appropriate national and international
bodies.
Instead, the situation seems to have
justified the pessimism of those who
maintain that human rights have be¬
come meaningless and without value in
an age of revolutionary change such
as that of our present civilization, and
that it is normal to sacrifice the justice
and happiness of today to the virtue
and prosperity of tomorrow.
But these disappointments should
not make us lose sight of the progress
already achieved. The magnitude of
the reactions aroused by violations of
human rights is in itself a reason for
hope and confidence. To condemn a
violation is to recognize a right. And
the depth to which the world's con¬
science is outraged and revolted is a
measure of its attachment to a prin¬
ciple that has been violated.
As the Proclamation of Teheran,
adopted in April 1968 by the Inter¬
national Conference on Human Rights,
has noted, substantial progress has
been made in defining standards for
HANNA SABA is Assistant Director-Gener¬
al of Unesco for International Standards
and Legal Affairs. He is a jurist and has
written numerous studies on legal ques¬
tions. He was formerly a member of the
Egyptian diplomatic service.
the enjoyment and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms since
the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights was adopted in 1948. Important
international covenants defining civil,
political, economic, social and cultural
rights have been unanimously adopt¬
ed by the member states of the United
Nations.
Moreover, while it is true that the
reign of justice is one of man's oldest
aspirations, we should remember that
the Universal Declaration and the co¬
venants, conventions, recommenda¬
tions and declarations that clarify and
implement the principles it proclaims
are new and important developments
in the field of human rights.
We have only to cast back our minds
to the recent past to see how far
the ideas that then prevailed differ
from those now embodied in the Uni¬
versal Declaration. In place of the
principles of equality for all and the
elimination of discrimination of any
kind, notably in terms of race, religion,
sex or social status, which the Decla¬
ration proclaims and which today we
consider as imperatives, ancient, trad¬
itional concepts held sway, based on
a hierarchical system embracing
states, peoples, races and social cate¬
gories, with women in many countries,
accorded the status of a minor, if not
of a slave.
These age-old concepts continue to
influence the minds of many, and a
considerable gap exists between the
"principle" of equality for all before
the law and the "fact" that many
distinctions and discriminations have
survived from ancient times and are
still practiced today.
Furthermore, the individualistic con¬
cept of human rights found in the great
American and French declarations,
from which the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights drew inspiration, does
not always correspond with concepts
of society that are based on the pre¬
eminence of the group.
The governments of certain newly-
independent countries warmly en¬
dorsed rules that should put an end
to the idea of hierarchies of states
and races on which colonialism was
based, but are now finding it extremely
difficult to enforce these rules, largely
because of deep-rooted prejudices
against the idea of equality for women
or because of tribal hatreds which,
even today, result in the massacre of
innocent people.
Similar prejudices have existed for
centuries in other, older states where
two ethnic groups live together only
at the price of the domination of the
one by the other. Even differences in
religion are sometimes the cause of
discrimination, although far less so
than in the past.
F,INALLY and in the pre¬
sent state of affairs this may perhaps
be the most important consideration of
all the ignorance, disease and poverty
which afflict hundreds of millions of
human beings, and the obvious inade¬
quacy of the resources available to
governments to combat these evils,
are preventing entire peoples from en¬
joying the conditions of life com¬
patible with human dignity.
To give reality to human rights is
thus an immensely difficult under¬
taking. It calls for prolonged effort,
and one of the first tasks must be
to educate, to teach, to persuade, to
win over all mankind to believe in
and adhere to principles that may con¬
flict with certain deeply-ingrained ways
of thinking and ways of life, and with
powerful vested interests.
Thus, in order for man to truly in¬
tegrate his freedom and responsibility
in the realities of everyday life, he must
CONTINUED ON PAGE 6


HUMAN RIGHTS (Continued)
6
first be liberated from the misery of
hunger and the servitude of ignorance,
so that he may understand the world
around him, communicate with his
fellowmen, and receive, transmit and
compare experience, knowledge and
ideas.
For this he must first be able to
read. Therefore, one of the imperative
tasks in the promotion of human rights
is to free' over seven hundred and fifty
million adult illiterates from the dark¬
ness of ignorance and draw them into
the mainstream of modern life.
But so deeply-rooted is the egoism
challenged by the Universal Declara¬
tion and so powerful are the prejudices,
outmoded traditions and practices it
seeks to eradicate, that the principles
of the Declaration will never become
realities until they are profoundly im¬
planted in the hearts and minds of
each and everyone. The demand for
human rights to be respected must
become so universal, so natural and
so imperative that no authority would
dare to evade its obligations. And to
bring that about, it is vital that the
principles be explained, justified and
taught to all.
From this standpoint, it is far more
important to help people grasp the
general concept of inalienable rights
than to analyze the provisions of any
one right in particular. Above all, we
need to understand and make others
understand that to be effective, respect
for human rights must be unconditional,
absolute.
No reason, be it blatantly bad or dis¬
sembled with false arguments and
there are sometimes honourable rea¬
sons, advanced on patriotic, family,
religious or ideological grounds
should be allowed to prevail against
them. The Idea of a right implies that
it can be claimed unconditionally, and
the concept of respect for every human
being as one In whom that right is
vested inevitably compels us to
acknowledge its universality.
It cannot be repeated too often that
no constraint by force, other than that
of the law, no intimidation, no fear is
compatible with this essential require¬
ment, nor is any system of humiliation
or segregation, nor the reign of chaos
or despotism.
The International Conference on
Human Rights, in Teheran, unanimous¬
ly adopted a resolution on the educa¬
tion of youth in the respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and
urged that this education should be
given to children at an early age. It
called on states to ensure "that all
means of education should be employ¬
ed so that youth grows up and
develops in a spirit of respect for
human dignity and for equal rights of
all men and all peoples without dis¬
crimination as to race, colour, lan¬
guage, sex or faith."
The Teheran Conference also Invited
Unesco "to develop its programmes
aimed at making children aware, from
the time they start school, of respect
for the dignity and rights of man and at
making the principles of the Universal
Declaration prevail at all levels of
education, particularly in institutions
of higher learning where the future
cadres are trained."
Since its inception, Unesco has de¬
voted considerable effort to promoting
the spread of education throughout the
world. It believes a belief with which
all economists concur that education
is not only a basic human right, but
at the same time a prerequisite of
development, which alone will permit
all men to attain human dignity in its
widest sense, by freeing them from the
servitude of poverty.
Unesco believes that education,
which enables everyone to exercise
his rights to the full and gives sub¬
stance and reality to those rights,
should be based on certain fundamen¬
tal ethical principles. Since 1948, when
it met in Beirut, the Unesco General
Conference has urged that the Univer¬
sal Declaration of Human Rights
should be incorporated in all school
teaching programmes and that know¬
ledge and understanding of its prin¬
ciples should be promoted as widely
as possible.
IHE undertaking of so vast
an enterprise obviously requires the
collaboration of all those who can use
their influence to promote its aims,
and in this connexion I would like to
pay tribute to the non-governmental
organizations for the outstanding work
they have accomplished in fostering
civic education.
It Is not only in schools and univer¬
sities that human rights must be taught.
And whether they are concerned with
education itself or with one or another
of the professions, whether they are
striving for improvements In the status
accorded to women or for the protec¬
tion of moral or religious values, these
organizations go directly to the indivi¬
dual, whom they can reach more easily
than intergovernmental organizations
such as Unesco.
These organizations can exert a
decisive influence on public thought
and opinion. In all the countries where
they are active, they can make known
and understood the principles of the
Universal Declaration, and thereby help
to make respect for human rights the
imperative demand of all citizens and
the specific obligation of governments,
in other words, an integral part of
national life in all countries.
The road ahead will doubtless be
long, the difficulties great and the dis¬
appointments many. But hope and
constancy can never fail those who
have faith in Man.
This address was delivered to the Inter¬
national Conference of Non-Governmental
Organizations on Human Rights, held at
Unesco headquarters, In September 1968.
