LSD
NEW MENACE
TO YOUTH
by Karl Evang
P
18
eople who indulge in
psychedelic drugs like to claim that
LSD, mescalin, psilocybin, marijuana
and hashish fill them with joy and rap¬
ture and enrich their inner life. They
call such drug-taking a soul-revealing
experience that permits the individual
to discover new and subtler aspects of
his personality, and to distil the impres¬
sions from the external world filtering
through the effects of the drug.
The truth is that all of these substan¬
ces are dangerous. What, for example,
is their effect in biological, chemical
or medicinal terms? Are they habit
forming? Are they harmful for the body
or the mind? Do they cause mental
illness or other serious disturbances?
Can they provoke a person to committ¬
ing suicide? When questions such as
KARL EVANG is Director-General of Public
Health in Norway. This article Is based
pn a series of three talks recorded by the
author for the International University of
the Air, and broadcast recently by the
French radio network (ORTF) as part of
a special presentation on "psychedelic
drugs."
these are raised the problem is placed
in its proper perspective, attention is
focussed on the reactions that occur
from taking psychedelic drugs as much
as on the individual who takes them.
Many people do not fully realize that
the problems raised by psychedelic
drugs not only directly affect the indi¬
vidual who takes them, but have much
wider, social consequences. Man is
not simply a two-dimensional being
made up of just a body and a mind.
This becomes much more obvious when
a person falls ill, and the third dimen¬
sion his role in society is clearly
affected.
Human beings cannot function in
isolation, for isolation is tantamount
to stagnation, the death of the spirit,
the destruction of the body. Man is
the product of his environment, for
the most part, and is entirely depen¬
dent on the impressions and stimuli
that reach him from the world around
him. And as the great Pavlov rightly
put it, man is a being made up of
reflexes.
The World Health Organization has
clearly stated that any evaluation of
the effects of psychedelic and similar
drugs that does not take into account
all aspects of man is incomplete.
Psychedelic drugs, whether habit
forming or not, all seem to have one
characteristic in common in that they
weaken the need for human contact
and social relations. They lower the
overall quality and degree of social
relationships which every person as a
member of society must share. They
limit and impoverish his range of inte¬
rests, make him self-centred and a
prisoner of his own ego.
The individual loses interest in his
former friends and the life of the
community, and loses all desire to take
part in the events of his time. Nor
is there evidence of any artistic acti- .
vity being released by the use of psy¬
chedelic drugs despite the violent
sensory manifestations, including vi¬
sions and hallucinations, that are
experienced.
To justify their indulgence in psy¬
chedelic drugs the argument is often
advanced that it helps the individual
to escape from established society, to
break out of the straightjacket, to be
liberated from social conventions, to
assert his discontent at being a mere

To warn the public of the effects
of hallucinogenic drugs, the
Czechoslovak TV network recently
re-enacted the tragic death of a
young girl who hurled herself from
a window under the influence of
modern drugs (photos left and
below). Hallucinogens have been
known to create "illusions of
grandeur", individuals believing
that they have superhuman powers
and can fly through the air. After
taking LSD, a handsome American
actor dowsed himself with petrol
and set himself afire. Though he
did not die, he is so disfigured
that his career is ruined.
pawn in what they term "the big, cyni¬
cal game of world politics", and so
on. Let us take advantage of life
they say, before it is too late. This
is all very fine but it adds up to noth¬
ing more than organized alienation
and renunciation.
The tragedy is that psychedelic drugs
find their adepts not only among young
people who have been deprived of love
and affection or. who suffer from per¬
sonality disorders, and hence present
. problems of adaptability, but also
among a portion of the youth of .today
who do not present such problems,
who are our hope for the future and
could work to build a better world
for tomorrow than the one we have
today. Luckily, the number of young
people who fall victim to these prac¬
tices is very small indeed.
What has caused concern among
public health authorities, social secu¬
rity officials, criminologists and in the
home is that these potent pharma¬
ceutical products, especially LSD, are
not subject to legislation in many
countries and are now freely used by
people who are not ill.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

LSD (Continued)
20
It was not clear at first whether the
problem really merited attention, but
as the number of tragic cases increas¬
ed, the outcry became louder and
louder.
In the autumn of 1966, a special
committee set up by the Economic
and Social Council of the United Na¬
tions to deal with this question,
expressed "its deep concern over the
excessive and growing use of LSD
with its serious consequences, both
for the health and safety of the indi¬
vidual and that of society, and invites
governments to take the necessary
measures to impose strict controls on
the importation, exportation and pro¬
duction of LSD and similar products
and place the trade in this product
under the control of competent autho¬
rities."
The committee recommended that
LSD should be used only for medical
research and under strict medical
control. It urged governments to take
the necessary steps to prevent any
other use being made of this sub¬
stance. This is an unusual step to
take with regard to a pharmaceutical
product and unusually harsh language
for an International official committee.
But it is not the medical use of
LSD and similar products like psilo-
cybin, mescalin, etc. which made
these drastic measures necessary.
Over the past 20 years the use of-
the drug for medical purposes has
declined sharply. It is now limited to
the diagnosis and treatment of certain
serious nervous disorders, particularly
neuroses.
It is possible that at some future
date the use of these substances may
prove of use for patients who are too
ill to live in society and who have
had other treatments without success.
A growing number of countries
(22 as of January 1968) have taken
action on the recommendations of the
U.N. special committee and have plac¬
ed LSD in the same category as other
outlawed drugs such as marijuana,
hashish, heroin and similar substances.
This means that the unauthorized
possession, sale, distribution and use
of these drugs is illegal and punishable
by law.
Let us therefore examine the dan¬
gers that the use of LSD represents.
The effects of LSD can be divided
into four main groups, but in all of
them the reactions can occur suddenly
and within a very short time after the
drug is taken. (These effects may
occur in varying intermixture.)
In the first group, LSD stimulates a
sensation of unlimited power and
strength of virtual omnipotence. We
call this state "the megalomaniac
reaction". There is the example of
a girl of 19 who, after taking LSD,
was convinced that she could fly like
a bird. She jumped out of a window
and fell to her death. A young man
of 21 announced that all motor traffic
would respond to his command. He
stepped into the middle of the street,
raised his arm, shouting "Stop", and
was killed instantly.
In the second group, the use of
LSD has a completely opposite effect.
It produces a state of deep depression,
of despair and discouragement. The
overwhelming feeling of being worth¬
less, sinful and incompetent often leads
to suicide.
The reactions to LSD in the third
group are paranoid disorders. The
subjects surfer profound anxiety and
believe they are being threatened by
others who wish to kill them, in most
cases by persons in their immediate
surroundings. And as attack is the
best method of defence, they Often
inflict serious injuries and even go as
far as murder, in the belief that they
are defending themselves.
The fourth group of severe reactions
is characterized by a state of general
confusion, the symptoms of which
resemble mental diseases or insanity,
illusions, hallucinations, incoherence,
irrational feelings, little or no sense
of time, etc. These conditions are
usually short-lived, but can sometimes
continue for long periods. A little girl
of five lost her mind after eating a
lump of sugar which she found in the
refrigerator and on which a drop of
LSD had been placed. It took nine
months for her to regain her normal
health.
. In other words, a normal healthy
person who takes LSD runs the risk
of mental illness, of becoming funda¬
mentally irresponsible, of resorting to
murder or committing suicide.
How then can we explain the cult
of LSD and the eager publicity given
to its "prophets"?
The answer seems simple: there is
no limit to human curiosity, to the lust
for new sensations of any kind. All
of us feel more or less frustrated by
social conventions, tied to hierarchical
values not of our making which put
us in situations where we feel ill at
ease. Then there is our work which
for the most part is a dull routine.
Throughout history there have been
intoxicants to break these bonds,
either for short periods or long ones.
LSD and similar substances like
psilocybin, mescalin, Indian hemp,
and other hallucinatory drugs can free
a person from all constraints by
intoxicating the sensory faculties. For
a moment there may be a feeling of
liberation, renewal, freedom from the
bonds of life. But afterwards one
quickly finds that everything was an
illusion. Drunkenness is no liberation;
it is a dungeon immuring its prisoner.
The so-called "prophets" have pre¬
dicted that important new knowledge
concerning the human soul will come
from experiments carried out with
psychedelic drugs such as LSD. So
far nothing remotely like this has
happened. Not one single fundamen¬
tally new thing has appeared. The
only result has been to confirm the
grave dangers which the ignorant
invite when they tamper with the vol¬
cano which is the sub-conscious mind.
