The transmutation
of matter once the
dream of every
alchemist of
antiquity is now
an everyday
occurrence thanks
to the powerful
accelerators built
by atomic scientists
to bombard atoms
with enormous
bursts of energy.
Such experiments
have made possible
the discovery of
hitherto unknown
elements.
Strange-looking
"horned" apparatus
shown here supplies
electric current to
one of these giant
nuclear research
accelerators,
a synchrotron.

THE TWILIGHT LIVES OF
MAN-MADE ATOMS
by Ceorgi Flerov and Vladimir Kuznetsov
GEORGI NICOLAEVICH FLEROV is director
of the Laboratory of Nuclear Reactions
of the Nuclear Research Institute, at
Dubna, U.S.S.R., and a corresponding
member of the Academy of Sciences of
the U.S.S.R. He is co-discoverer of the
phenomenon of spontaneous fission of
heavy nuclei (with K. Petrzhak). He direct¬
ed the research team which synthesized
and studied elements 102, 103 and 104,
and whose continuing research is devoted
to the synthesis and study of new trans¬
uranium elements and isotopes.
VLADIMIR IVANOVICH KUZNETSOV is
chief engineer of the Laboratory of Nuclear
Reactions at Dubna, and was one of its
first staff members. He was a member
of the research team which discovered
element 101.
L
IFE on earth evolved
through the absorption of nuclear
energy. The campfire of primitive
man, the coal consumed by blast fur¬
naces, the propellant that drives a
space rocket all these are products
of the nuclear energy of solar matter,
transmitted to earth by means of
sunlight and stored at different times
by plants and animals in the form of
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
37

MAN-MADE ATOMS (Continued)
The reincarnation of extinct' nuclei
chemical energy the energy of the
electron clouds of atoms and mole¬
cules.
The atomic nucleus, that inexhaust¬
ible accumulator of the world's energy,
ceased being an indivisible entity only
in the twentieth century. The very first
investigations of it led to the discovery
of vast sources of unheard of power.
The practical applications of nuclear
physics are not, of course, restricted
to power production. They also com¬
prise investigations of the structure of
materials such as metals and alloys,
methods of analysis billions of times
more sensitive than ever before, and
the increasing use of "tracer" atoms
in biology, agriculture and metallurgy;
nuclear physics has in fact become an
essential element in many modern
industries.
And yet, for all its applications, our
knowledge of the structure of the
atomic nucleus is still far from com¬
plete. A penetration into its mysteries
may well yield much in the most unex¬
pected-spheres of science.
Man has long been intrigued by the
history of the origin of the earth, the
sun, the universe. A reflection of this
is the account of the creation of the
world with which the Old Testament
commences. It would seem that man
could hardly hope to draw a definitive
picture, or even a general outline, of
the beginnings of the world, but nuc¬
lear studies in the last, few decades
have contributed substantially to our
knowledge in this field too.
According to present-day concep¬
tions, the chemical elements of the
solar system were synthesised out of
protons the nuclei of galactic oxy¬
gen. The fundamental bricks of mat¬
ter, protons and neutrons, yielded a
great diversity of agglomerations as a
result of the compression of the prim¬
ordial hydrogen and the resulting
nuclear reactions.
Besides the nuclei of isotopes of the
chemical elements which comprise
the earth today or which have been
synthesized in the laboratory, there
were other isotopes and elements
now unknown to us (1).
It has been calculated that, theoret¬
ically, there are some 5,000 proton-
neutron associations that can hold
together long enough to allow them
to be validly considered as atomic
nuclei. Only 1,500 of these have been
studied to a greater or lesser extent.
The number of isotopes of "natural"
nuclei surviving on earth since the
birth of the universe, some 5,000 mil¬
lion years ago or more, is no more
than 450; the lifetime of all the others
is too short for them to have lasted
to our day.
One can imagine the sensation that
would be caused by the resuscitation
of a mammoth or dinosaur in a bio¬
logical laboratory. Yet physics labora¬
tories all over the world have
recreated nuclei that became "extinct"
thousands of millions of years before
the first dinosaur appeared on earth.
So far, some 1,200 have been
produced, and some of these isotopes
are being manufactured on an indus¬
trial scale.
(1) Isotopes are variant forms of one and
the same element. All the isotopes of a
given element have the same atomic number,
that is, the same number of protons in their
nuclei, but they have different numbers of
neutrons in their nuclei. Isotopes thus differ
only in their atomic weight or mass numbers
which express the total of both protons and
neutrons in the nucleus.
Drawing from "L'Energie Nucléaire",
published by the French Commissariat of Atomic Energy, Paris
ATOM AS BIG AS A
FOOTBALL FIELD. If
an atom were enlarged
to the size of a football
field, as in diagram
left, its nucleus would
be no bigger than a
marble! The inside of
an atom between the
nucleus and the
electrons in orbit
around it is all empty
space. In a single
drop of water there
are 60 million million
atoms of hydrogen and
30 million million atoms
of oxygen. Electrons
whirling around the
nucleus, circle it
7,000,000,000,000,000
times a second.
The study and systematization of
the properties of synthetic nuclei have
provided the fundamental empirical
data on which contemporary notions
of nuclear structure are based. But
the synthesis and study of two or
three thousand additional nuclear
"dinosaurs" would substantially contri¬
bute to our knowledge and concep¬
tions In this important scientific
domain, especially as some of the still
unsynthesized nuclei possess highly
interesting properties with an excess
or shortage of neutrons and with high
atomic numbers.
Nuclear matter in such nucleonic
associations must be in unusual, "limit¬
ing" states, investigation of which
usually yields considerable results.
We already know that revolutionary
changes in scientific thinking have
resulted from discoveries made during
studies of the behaviour of matter in
extreme conditions of temperature and
pressure.
Especially dramatic is the history of
the discovery of the isotopes of the
transuranium elements, that is, iso¬
topes with atomic numbers higher than
uranium number 92 in the Periodic
Table (2). None of these isotopes is
stable enough for it to have survived
till our time.
Of all the synthetic elements the
"most important" is plutonium, or
rather its isotope with mass number
239, which is capable of sustaining a
nuclear chain reaction. In fact, pluto¬
nium-239 has proved the most suitable
material for nuclear weapons as well
as for the peaceful production of nuc¬
lear energy.
But though nuclear bombs are today
made of plutonium, it would hardly
be right to say that the only result of
the discovery of this new element
was the creation of one more threat to
humanity. It is plutonium that opens
up the prospects of the peaceful utili¬
zation of the energy of heavy nuclei
on a substantial scale, since plutonium-
239 Is derived from uranium-238, the
uranium isotope which exists in com¬
paratively abundant quantities, but
which cannot be directly used as a
nuclear fuel.
The Isotope uranium-235, which can
(2) The "table of organization" of the dif¬
ferent varieties of atoms, called the chemical
elements, of which 104 some natural, others
man-made are now known. The Periodic
Table was established in 1869 by the Russian
chemist, Dmitri I. Mendeleyev. After studying
the chemical and physical properties of
the 63 elements known in 1869, Mendeleyev
was able to show that these properties tend¬
ed to repeat themselves in periodic fashion
as one went up the scale of atomic weights.

Photo © Paris-Match
ATOM BUSTER. Above the control panel of a synchrotron particle accelerator at the
Institute of Nuclear Physics, in Akademgorodok, Siberia (U.S.S.R.), a diagram shows the
shape of the "race track," along which scientists boost atomic particles to fantastic speeds
(hundreds of thousands of kilometres in a few seconds). The particles then strike atomic
nuclei targets and smash them open, releasing their component parts for scientific analysis.
Accelerators are like "super microscopes" which permit scientists to see the formerly
invisible world within the atom. Increasingly powerful accelerators, now used by scientists
on every continent, are vital for peaceful nuclear research (see "Unesco Courier", Mar. 1966).
be directly used in nuclear reactors,
exists only in very limited quantities,
being 140 times less plentiful than
uranium-238. There would simply not
be enough uranium-235 for the peace¬
ful uses of the atom.
The energy reserves contained in
the nuclei of uranium-238 are suffic¬
ient to supply human needs for tens
of thousands of years, even allowing
for vastly increased demands in the
future. Thus, the production of the
first synthetic elements and the in¬
vestigation of their properties may
play a decisive role In the extremely
important field of providing for the
energy needs of mankind.
The elements from numbers 95 to
100, which do not have the practical
value of plutonium, have been synthe¬
sized. The process of the production
of new elements, which is done by
subjecting heavy atomic nuclei to high
intensity irradiation by neutrons, can
to some extent serve as an indication
of how heavy elements are naturally
synthesized in the universe.
Data thus obtained have served as
the basis for postulating many attrac¬
tive theories of the origin of chemical
elements, and nuclear experiments
tend to confirm that these hypotheses
describe processes not so different
from those that actually take place.
Nuclei with atomic numbers of over
100 must be synthesized by the fusion
of two complex nuclei. Usually, one
of these, the nucleus of the heavy
element, is a component of the target
bombarded by oxygen, neon or argon
nuclei accelerated to one-tenth the
velocity of light. Nuclei colliding at
such speeds overcome the forces of
repulsion existing between them and
produce the nucleus of a new element.
The half-life of the isotopes of ele¬
ments with atomic numbers greater
than 100 is very short, and the quan¬
tity produced in nuclear reactions is
very small. Nevertheless, in 1955, the
101st square in Mendeleyev's Periodic
Table was occupied by a new synthetic
element produced by a team of Amer¬
ican physicists and chemists headed
by Glenn Seaborg, which they named
mendelevium (in honour of Mende¬
leyev).
The next step was the synthesis of
element 102. Within a year, its dis¬
covery was announced in scientific
journals. However, the early works
abounded in errors, and it was ten
more years before the new element
was finally identified.
The difficulties of studying element
102 stem from the small half-life of
its isotopes, which is at best measured
in minutes, and more often lasts sec¬
onds or fractions of a second. That
is why the traditional chemical method
of identifying the element could not
be applied.
New methods based on other phy¬
sical principles were required- They
were developed at the Lawrence
Radiation Laboratory at Berkley, Cali¬
fornia, and the Joint Nuclear Research
Institute, an international scientific
centre of twelve socialist countries
located at Dubna on the Volga, not
far from Moscow.
It was in the Nuclear Reactions
Laboratory at Dubna that in 1966 the
first reliable data on the properties of
five isotopes of elements 102 were
obtained. A year later, the findings
were confirmed by American scientists.
Undaunted by the difficulties they
had to overcome, the scientists follow¬
ed up the synthesis of element 102
with elements 103 and 104. Of special
scientific value was the investigation
of element 104 discovered at the
Nuclear Reactions Laboratory and
named kurchatovium, after the out¬
standing Russian physicist, Igor
Kurchatov.
In initial experiments, physical
methods were used to measure the
half-life of one of the isotopes of
kurchatovium, which was found to be
around 0.5 seconds. In the synthesis,
a nucleus of kurchatovium had to be
detected amongst thousands of mil¬
lions of "ballast" nuclei bred in accom¬
panying reactions. This is something
like the task one would face if one
were given a few moments to locate
a particular grain of wheat in a hundred
sacks of a 100 kilogrammes each.
Then a method was devised for
studying the chemical properties of
individual atoms, taking advantage of
the very fast chemical reactions that
occur in the gaseous state. The devel¬
opment of this method was made
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
39

MAN-MADE ATOMS (Continued)
The physicist's magic numbers game
40
easier by the marked difference be-
twen the chemical properties of kur¬
chatovium and other transuranium
elements.
On an average one nucleus was re¬
gistered in each six hours of experi¬
ments.
The difficulties of studying elements
with such high numbers derive both
from their very short half-life and from
the meagre production of new nuclei.
The difficulties increase with the rise
in atomic numbers, and after element
106 or 107 they may well prove to be
insurmountable by present methods
of nuclear physics. Does this mean
that the problem of studying elements
with high atomic numbers will face an
impasse?
Element number 83, bismuth, is fol¬
lowed by polonium, astatine, radon and
other isotopes with a very short half-
life. Yet isotopes of thorium, uranium
and plutonium have much greater half-
lives Following the sharp drop in
longevity after bismuth, the half-life of
higher elements at first increases
(thorium, uranium, plutonium) before
decreasing again, with americium,
curium, ... nobelium (102), lawrencium
(103), kurchatovium (104), . . . Perhaps
there will be a new rise. Perhaps
durable elements with atomic numbers
above the hundred mark do exist.
E ARLY in the 1930s, at the
_dawn of nuclear physics, a strange
periodicity was observed: atomic
nuclei in which the numbers of protons
or neutrons are 2, 8, 20, 28, 50, 82 or
126 are distinguished by their high
stability. It was found that the abund¬
ance of such elements as tin, with 50
protons in the nucleus, barium, with
82 neutrons, and lead, with 82 protons,
is much greater than that of their neigh¬
bours in the Periodic Table.
No explanation for this was offered
at the time, and physicists began to
call these proton or neutron numbers
"magic numbers". If the proton or
neutron number in a nucleus is a
"magic number", that nucleus is un¬
usually stable. A "doubly magic", nu¬
cleus is the lead isotope 208, which
contains 82 protons and 126 neutrons.
Modern theory has now provided an '
explanation of the law of "magic num¬
bers". It has been found that, just as
the electrons that orbit about the
nucleus form electron shells, the nuc¬
léons within the atomic nucleus form
neutron and proton shells. Their
structure is, of course, quite different
from those of electron shells. But, as
in the case with electron shells, the
more stable nuclei are those of iso¬
topes in which the nucleón shells are
completely filled.
Theoretically, the 114th and 126th
elements should be "super-elements"
with closed proton and neutron shells.
As "doubly magic" nuclei possess
extra stability, in the domain of the
114th and 126th elements there may
be isotopes with a relatively long
half-life.
We cannot be absolutely sure that
the postulated stability will in fact be
found to exist. This, however, does
not detract from the importance of
the quest, for if no new domains of
stability exist then it will be necessary
to revise many concepts of modern
nuclear theory. If, on the other hand,
the prediction of stability domains is
found to be valid, this will open up
new roads for the study of atomic
nuclei.
To reach the domain of the 126th
element, the atomic number of the
target nuclei must be increased by
many units, thus bypassing many
squares of the Periodic Table. An
example of such a reaction which
could yield a nucleus of element 126
is the fusion of thorium and krypton
nuclei with the emission of several
neutrons.
Another possibility is the fusion of
two uranium nuclei. The resultant
nucleonic structure will be unstable
and will decay into nuclear fragments
among which the isotopes of elements
with a high atomic number may occur.
Reactions like this require heavy
nuclei such as uranium to be acceler¬
ated to one-tenth the speed of light.
In this case, their energy will be
sufficient to overcome the electric
repulsion forces of the target nuclei
and form a super-heavy drop of nu¬
clear matter the disintegration of
ATOMIC BUBBLE BATH. To see what happens inside an atom, scientists
place a sort of "nuclear eye" called a bubble chamber to trap high energy
particles discharged from an accelerator. Shooting into a superheated liquid,
each particle forms a trail of bubbles. In this way, particles whose lives-
may be as brief as a hundred million million millionths of a second can be
photographed for identification and analysis (example seen on cover photo).
Bubble chamber shown here is used in laboratory at the European Organization
for Nuclear Research in Geneva.

MICRO-PORTRAIT.
This- unusual serrated
pattern is a
photomicrograph of a
fragment of purified
uranium. It was
photographed through
a microscope under
polarized light and
enlarged 400 times
during research into
techniques for purifying
uranium.
which would result in the appearance
of new super-elements. It must be
said that technologically this is a
quite feasible task which, furthermore,
does not call for the heavy capital
outlays required for high-energy proton
accelerators.
Such projects are being considered
in many countries. It is hard to say
when the super-elements will be syn¬
thesized, but then it is not so long
since the synthesis of elements 102
or 104 seemed a fantastic undertaking.
How far can we advance in nuclear
synthesis; what are the limits set here
by nature?
The nuclei of kurchatovium were de¬
tected from the tracks of their frag¬
ments produced in spontaneous fis¬
sion. Incidentally, similar tracks
found in components of the earth's
crust can provide interesting informa¬
tion about the changes of temperature
of rocks at the time when the earth
was cooling. These tracks were made
by the fragments resulting from the
disintegration of the unstable elements
which were created at the same time
as all other atomic nuclei when the
universe originated some thousands of
millions of years ago.
The process of spontaneous fission
becomes of growing importance with
the increase in the atomic numbers of
elements, and starting with the 98th
element, californium, it is the main type
of radioactive decay for many iso¬
topes.
It is 'this that sets the limit to our
advance in studying the higher elem¬
ents. All nucleonic structures with
atomic numbers exceeding 126 must
apparently decay so fast as to make
it impossible to investigate them, and
even if some means is devised, it is
hard to designate as an atomic nuc¬
leus a drop of nuclear matter that
disintegrates in, say, a hundredth of
a nanosecond (a nanosecond = one-
thousand millionth of a second).
IHE methods used for
synthesizing and identifying atomic
nuclei are employed in solving a great
many purely applied problems, such as
studying the structure of materials,
mineral prospecting, the detection of
very low concentrations of substances
in mixtures (highly important in the
production of semiconductors used in
electronic equipment), and the use of
"tracer" atoms.
Further prospects of practical appli¬
cations are connected with the de¬
velopment of methods of synthesizing
new elements and isotopes. They
will depend fundamentally on the
creation of accelerators for nuclei of
the heavier elements in the Periodic
Table, up to and including thorium and
uranium.
In all likelihood, such accelerators
will by built in the next few years.
This will make it possible to synthe¬
size, within the coming ten or twenty
years, three or four thousand new nuc¬
lear entities including "super-ele¬
ments", such as numbers 114 and 126-
Will these studies yield discoveries
of an importance comparable to that
of the discovery of plutonium? Un¬
doubtedly. The synthesis and study
of thousands of isotopes possessing
highly significant nuclear properties
will enable scientists to gain a deeper
understanding of the structure of nuc¬
lear matter, and hence, provide broad
possibilities for the practical appli¬
cations of nuclear research.
What destiny awaits the future great
discoveries in nuclear physics? This
will depend on the men in whose
hands they will be placed. Discoveries
as such are neither useful nor harmful.
It is their utilization that brings ethical
problems to the fore. New energies
should serve for strengthening the
social basis and prosperity of mankind,
not for destruction. This is what
ethical scientists have always hoped
for, scientists who fully realize the
value of their research for man, for life
on earth.
41
