Unrest and promise of
JAPAN'S YOUTH
s,ITUDENT unrest is a pheno¬
menon that has been sweeping across
virtually every part of the world in
the past few years. But it seems
to have had its first violent mani¬
festations in Japan eighteen years
ago. In 1950, Tokyo students, in a
burst of violence, took over the main
university buildings and locked up their
faculty deans, to protest their fears
that "Japan would again become in¬
volved in a war."
This article, which discusses some of the
major problems of youth in Japan today, is
based on commentaries by several authori¬
ties who have studied these problems af first
hand. Among these observers are the Japa¬
nese writer, Michio Takeyama, author of the
prizewinmng novel, "Harp of Burma", and
the well-known Japanese youth leader, Sa-
buro Nagai, who is a member of the Japanese
National Commission for Unesco.
With these and subsequent de¬
monstrations, the notion of "student
power" was born in Japan. These
events occurred when Japan was still
a poor country barely recovering from
the Second World War, and it is
consequently difficult to agree with
the statement often made that "student
power" is the product of an affluent
society. Moreover, other nations, re¬
cently shaken by student uprisings, are
still a very long way from prosperity.
Japanese student unrest may per¬
haps be traced to the drastic changes
that took place in Japanese society
after the end of World War II. During
the war, every effort had been made
in Japan to build up a monolithic sys¬
tem of society. The vast reservoir of
moral power, springing from the depths
of Japanese history, was mobilized in
this effort. Then, with defeat, came an
agonizing atmosphere of shame. It
became the fashion for Japanese to
reject every aspect of their own
country, to compare it unfavourably
with the Utopian concept they had of
other nations. For a time, the Japan¬
ese people almost completely lost
their mental balance.
Japanese society has since righted
itself, but so far it has not found a
formula to guide youth in a rational
manner . The problems of Japan's
young people, therefore are in a
sense the problems of Japan's adults.
The difficulties and perplexities of
youth stem from the world shaped by
their elders. And if adults cannot
properly pave the way for the younger
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
65

JAPAN'S YOUTH (Continued)
In search of peace and a better world
66
generations, youth can hardly be blam¬
ed for the deterioration of society.
At a time when the older genera¬
tions are unable to find common
grounds for understanding in the in¬
volved international relationships of
modern societies, it is small wonder
that the young are agitated and con¬
fused. They aspire to the ideals of
friendship and peace which are natural
to all mankind. But when they seek
to attain these ideals promptly and
find the road blocked, they react
sometimes violently against the ob¬
stacles which stand before them.
No single person has the answers
to the big problems of today; no
curriculum can be devised that would
eliminate all the impatient misgivings
of youth, Nevertheless, we must strive
to understand what is behind youth's
dissatisfaction, and give them confid¬
ence that society will make every
effort to solve the , difficult prob¬
lems ahead.
At the same time, this sympathetic
understanding of adults does not nec¬
essarily mean giving way to "appease¬
ment" or total abandon, nor that viol¬
ence as such can be countenanced as
a part of this "understanding" process.
The emergence of this generation
with its own values and culture is
making communication between older
and younger generations, teachers
and students, parents and children,
employers and employees, increasing¬
ly difficult. Instead of the dialogue
that is needed, conflicts take place
that intensify the differences rather
than resolve them.
Such estrangements deepen youth's
sense of insecurity, and when conflict
between older and younger genera¬
tions is complicated by irreconciliable
ideological views or the dissensions
that divide the present-day world, the
situation worsens, as is often the case
in Japan.
Part of the explanation for the speed
with which the current wave of student
unrest has radiated throughout the
world might be attributed to our rapid
means of communications. Nowadays,
television and other media transmit
the news to all parts of the world
immediately. Youth in different coun¬
tries, influenced by what they have
seen, read or heard, react in similar
fashion even though the conditions
may be essentially different from those
where the original spark was struck.
In this way a sort of chain reaction of
disturbances may be set up in many
societies where resort to violence is
considered likely to produce results.
For the Japanese college freshman,
participation in a virile student move¬
ment often has an aura of coming
of age attached to it. It is, as it
were, a "rite de passage," a stage
in the awakening to the world around
him. But when, after graduation, he
leaves the university to pursue his
professional or business life, he usual¬
ly settles down within the framework
of the society he had so recently
attacked. This, at least, is what has
happened in Japan.
T HE number of students
now engaged in violent manifestations
in Japan is on the decline, but those
who remain are campaigning more
aggressively than before, no doubt
encouraged by similar movements in
other parts of the world.
The causes to which they rally more
often than not touch their deep human-
itarianism; they demonstrate against
atomic weapons and war in all its
aspects, reflecting not only their own
aspirations for a better world but also
the general aversion of the Japanese
to armed conflict. There can be no
doubt, however, that political elements
and ideologies play an important role
too. The stormy "Zengakuren" (Nation¬
al Federation of Student Self-Govern¬
ment Associations), which has astound¬
ed the world with its extremely violent
demonstrations, is a case in point.
Police intervention on university
campuses, which the students regard
as a sort of sanctuary, has become
an acute issue in present-day Japan.
University authorities who have called
in the police to counter student
demonstrations of violence, have been
denounced even by many moderate
elements of the student body for what
Is considered "a violation of the
students' extra-territorial rights."
Recently, the entire student body of
Tokyo Imperial University went on
strike. The trouble began in the
Faculty of Medicine. Medical students
are required to take a six-year study
course followed by one year of
internship. After passing the national
examination, the intern becomes a
qualified doctor.
In the past Interns worked without
payment, and the medical students
asked the government authorities to
work out a fair compensation scale.
A new system of Registered Doctors
has been worked out for students who
have passed the national examination
to intern for two years at one of
216 designated hospitals in the coun¬
try with an allowance ranging from
12,500 to 25,000 Yen ($40 to $70) per
month.
The medical students consider this
very meagre, and ara also demanding
better equipped hospitals and facilities
for research work. With these and
other questions still unsolved, the
chances of classes opening on
schedule for the autumn semester
seem doubtful.
The increase in the number of uni¬
versity students has given rise to
many problems. The phenomenal jump
in the birth rate immediately after the
war created a population wave that is
now cresting at the college level. In
Mïï ' M
Photos <0 Orion Press-Satoshi Ohkoshi

spite of tremendous efforts made by
the Government to increase classroom
capacity and the number of teachers,
the student-vacancy ratio in the spring
of 1968 was about five to one. A
leading newspaper predicted earlier
this year that about 280,000 candidates
would be denied admittance to colle¬
ges and universities in March 1968,
and that most would probably try
again next year, further swelling the
number of candidates.
Thus far, reference has been made
to problems affecting students and
of the "student power" movement. As
far as other young people are
concerned, there are relatively fewer
problems. Japan has its juvenile delin¬
quency headaches just as other coun¬
tries have. But for the first time in
recent years the country has achieved
a state of full employment, and the life
of working people has improved and
stabilized to a remarkable degree.
If one judges everything by a Utop¬
ian yardstick (as students are often
inclined to do), measures which par¬
tially improve a situation are Insuffi¬
cient because they never close the
gap between reality and the ideal. In
other words, anything less than
complete improvement has no signifi¬
cance. However, for the working
youth of Japan, the -yardstick is a
concrete measure to be used to im¬
prove reality.
Japan has undergone important
changes in the past twenty years, but
the people's traditional sense of
values continues to form the basis for
the country's development. The Em¬
peror remains the symbol of national
unity; the old family system has been
abolished, but the family remains an
important unit of society; allegiance to
the company or organization one works
for, not unlike the feeling towards
one's family, is still considered
a characteristic of Japanese society
today. Women, who have had the
right to vote since the end of the war,
and are playing an increasing role in
many domains, remain faithful to the
family. Girls wearing bikinis at the
beaches shock no one except very
old-fashioned people. Everything,
including the relationship between men
and women, has become free and open.
Hence, it is possible to say that
the way of thinking and fundamental
approach to life of the Japanese people
has not undergone as total a change
as some persons think. The tradition¬
ally industrious character of Japan has
developed and strengthened in the
past twenty years. This homogeneous
island nation with few parallels in the
world has been formed over several
thousand years, and this tradition is
unlikely to crumble easily.
w
I T H the growth and
expansion of Japan's industrial society,
young people have converged upon
the big cities and industrial areas of
Japan as never before. Half of Japan's
youth are now concentrated in these
areas, and two-thirds of the total stu¬
dent population are enrolled In univer¬
sities and colleges in six big cities
Tokyo, Yokohama, Nagoya, Kyoto,
Osaka and Kobe. Along with urbani¬
zation and industrialization, the occup¬
ational distribution of Japan's youth
has also radically changed, with 95
per cent employed in industry and
commerce.
Often the newly urbanized youth
lose their roots and lead solitary lives.
Many seek new meaning in political
and religious ideologies (the Increased
interest in religion has been wide¬
spread; one Buddhist sect, the Soka-
gakki, has attracted a tenth of all
Japanese to its faith). But the "fin de
siècle" mood said to prevail in Eur¬
ope, is not yet noticeable among
Japanese youth today.
Parents are not shocked or fright¬
ened by the younger generations.
Nihilism, hallucinating stimulants, free
sex, and the cult of violence have not
taken root in the thinking and behav¬
iour of Japanese youth. In the United
States young people may shout
"Make love, not war". In Japan, they
simply shout "Don't make war". The
"make love" is not voiced so openly.
People faced with the uncertainties of
life have built up abiding moral princ¬
iples, and this may become a strong
point for the Japan of the future.
The war dealt a devastating blow
to Japan both physically and mentally.
But now it has recovered to a remark¬
able degree. For the generation which
stood stupefied amidst the rubble
at the end of the war, the vigorous,
youthful pace of present-day Japan
seems like a dream. The mood of
pessimism that many thought would
last forever has vanished completely.
Nobody is bored. And nobody is des¬
pondent or aimless.
One need only look at the throngs
of well dressed young people going
to their offices and factories early in
the morning to realize that Japan is a
lively nation with no axe to grind.
This liveliness is free and spontan¬
eous. When one thinks of the fate
that has befallen some nations it is
perhaps better for Japan to have no
axe to grind. For out of this freedom
something unknown and very valuable
may indeed be born.
The youthful vigour of Japan has,
in a sense, served to restore
national pride, and through her young
people, whose vision has been broad¬
ened in the last two decades, Japan
Is bound to make a growing contribu¬
tion to the world in the years ahead.
In Japan, as in other countries, student
agitation seeks to speed reforms in
universities that have been overwhelmed by
the population explosion and the
rapid expansion of modern knowledge.
Another cause of unrest is the anxiety
felt by young people over current
national and international problems.
Far left, students demonstrate outside
the Faculty of Science at Tokyo University.
Left, microphone in hand, a student leader
addresses demonstrators.
67
\<^úh
