The author of the first draft
of the Universal Declaration recalls
HOW THE CHARTER
ON HUMAN RIGHTS
WAS BORN
Twenty years ago on December 10, 1948, the United Nations General Assembly
adopted and proclaimed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. To mark this
event the U.N. General Assembly has unanimously designated the whole of this year,
1968, as International Human Rights Year.
In this issue, the Unesco Courier reviews the events which led to the final prepa¬
ration of the Universal Declaration and examines some of the significant devel¬
opments in the field of human rights during the past twenty years which have
made it "a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations". Much
has been accomplished since 1948, but no country in the world has yet fully imple¬
mented the rights affirmed in the Universal Declaration.
In the article below, Professor René Cassin, former president of the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights, who prepared the first draft of the Universal Declara¬
tion, recalls how the historic document was drawn up and reaffirms the profound
significance of the Declaration today.
by René Cassin
HEN, in the name of racism
and bigotry, Adolph Hitler launched
his remorseless juggernaut against
the rights of man in Germany and other
countries, and against the principles of
Liberty, Equality and Fraternity pro¬
claimed in 1789, many were the voices
raised in angry protest.
When his acts of aggression plunged
the world into a new global war, still
more numerous were those who saw
the conflict as "a crusade for funda¬
mental rights and freedoms" and
vowed that, even before the war was
ended, the respect and protection of
human rights should be inscribed
alongside Peace itself amongst the
fundamental aims of the new world
organization already foreseen, thereby
eliminating the weaknesses of the
4
RENE CASSIN is one of the great names in
the modern struggle for human rights. He
drew up the first draft of the Universal
Declaration. French representative to the
League of Nations (1924-1938) and to the
United Nations (1946-1958), he took part in
the preparatory meeting in 1944 which led
to Unesco's foundation. Former president of
the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, he is
now president of the European Court of
Human Rights (Strasbourg) Among his many
works is "La Déclaration Universelle et la
Mise en des Droits de l'Homme"
(The Universal Declaration and the Achieve¬
ment of Human Rights). He is a member of
the Institut Français and president of the
Académie des Sciences Morales et Poli¬
tiques, Paris.
Covenant of the former League of
Nations.
The San Francisco Conference,
convened in the spring of 1945 to
draft the United Nations Charter,
unanimously endorsed this view.
The discovery of Hitler's extermin¬
ation camps at that time aroused such
horror that governments were com¬
pelled, by the weight of public opinion,
not only to bring to trial and punish
those guilty of war crimes and crimes
against humanity, but to solemnly
pledge to draft an International Bill of
Rights. With this in mind, a special
organ of the U.N. the Commission on
Human Rights was established in
1946 as laid down in Article 68 of the
U.N. Charter. Charged with the task
of promoting human rights generally,
the Commission was asked, on a
priority basis, to prepare a draft
Charter of Human Rights for sub¬
mission to the U.N. General Assembly.
This was the atmosphere in which,
in 1946, a special Division of Human
Rights was set up under Henri Laugier,
Assistant Secretary-General of the
United Nations, and in which the views
and recommendations of various civic
and other non-governmental organiz¬
ations were first heard by a preparatory
group. They met under the chairman¬
ship of Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, widow
of the deceased American President,
and agreed to undertake the simul
taneous drafting of two documents
an International Declaration of the Prin¬
ciples of Human Rights, inspired by
famous precedents from many
countries; and an International
Covenant which would define human
rights in precise, concrete terms and
be legally binding.
An eight-member drafting committee
then called on me to prepare a pre¬
liminary draft Declaration, on the basis
of material assembled by Professors
John P. Humphrey and Emile Giraud,
and proposals submitted by certain
governments (Panama and Cuba). This
draft was presented to the Committee
on June 3, 1947.
The discussions at this stage made
good progress, especially in regard
to the fundamental rights and freedoms
of the individual, already incorporated
in the famous English, American and
French declarations, and later enshrin¬
ed in almost every national consti¬
tution drawn up during the 19th and
20th centuries.
It was at the second session of the
Human Rights Commission, held in
Geneva in November 1947, that the
definite decision was taken to draw up
the future Charter on Human Rights
in three sections : a central Declar¬
ation, a legally binding Covenant, and
Measures of Implementation, that is,
arrangements for international review
of the way in which States carried out

WfÊw
Mil
Member States
have pledged
themselves
to achieve,
in co-operation
with the United
Nations,
the promotion
of universal
respect for
and observance
of human rights
and fundamental
freedoms...
& .«
Preamble of the
Universal
Declaration
_i«
Photo United Nations
their obligations under the Covenant.
The most rapid progress, however,
was made on the Declaration itself,
and special attention was given, at the
suggestion of the Soviet delegate,
Ambassador Alexander Bogomolov, to
those Articles dealing with economic,
social and cultural rights, since these
had been accorded particular attention
in the new constitutions drawn up
during the first half of our century.
The third session of the Human
Rights Commission, in the spring
of 1948, was the really decisive
one. It was then that the Preamble
and the final Articles of the draft
Declaration were adopted, due account
being taken of the views of the U.N.
Commission on the Status of Women,
and most important of all, that the
Commission decided to give equal
emphasis to two sets of rights : civil
and political rights (often known as
"rights of option") on the one hand,
and economic, social and cultural
rights (or "rights of claim") on the
other. It further specified in a cover¬
ing Article (Article 22) that the realiz¬
ation of the economic, social and
cultural rights was dependent on the
organization and resources of each
State as well as on international co¬
operation.
Once the draft Declaration had been
prepared, it was up to the Economic
and Social Council (ECOSOC) to
decide whether it should be submitted
to the General Assembly at once, or
held up pending completion of the
draft Covenant, an initiative of the
United Kingdom. Lord Attlee, then
Prime Minister of Great Britain, rallied
to the majority view, realizing that if
advantage were not taken of the then
favourable international atmosphere,
neither the Declaration nor the
Covenant might ever be approved.
Accordingly, the Economic and Social
Council, without debating the draft
Declaration, forwarded it to the
General Assembly for consideration
at its regular session in 1948.
The session opened at the Palais de
Chaillot in Paris in the presence of
M. Vincent Auriol, the President of the
French Republic. The Social, Humani¬
tarian and Cultural Committee (known
as the Third Committee) examined the
draft Declaration, while the Legal Com¬
mittee discussed a draft Convention
then under consideration on the pre¬
vention and punishment of genocide.
The ensuing discussions often
reached a high pitch of emotion, with
every delegation taking part, includ¬
ing those from Asia, Africa and Latin
America. The debate continued for
87 sessions in the Third Committee
of the General Assembly, presided
over by Mr. Charles Malik, of the
Lebanon, and for 10 meetings in
special committee.
The general form of the initial draft
supported by Mr. Peng Chun Chang,
of the Republic of China was
maintained; so also was the balance
between the two sets of rights estab¬
lished by the Commission on Human
Rights in Article 22. The Declaration
was abridged, however, to 30 Articles
preceded by the Preamble and the
Introduction. But it was also improv¬
ed and completed, especially as
regards the condemnation of all forms
of discrimination (Article 2), the right
of everyone to an effective remedy
by competent tribunal (Article 8), the
right to asylum (Article 14), the right
to a nationality (Article 15), the right
to marry, the rights of intending
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
5

HOW THE CHARTER WAS BORN (Continued)
Two great Covenants to reinforce the Declaration
6
spouses and the right to found a
family (Article 16), and the right to
take part in public life (Article 21).
Toward midnight on December 10,
1948 the General Assembly formally
adopted the Universal Declaration.
There were 48 votes in favour,
8 abstentions and not a single vote
against. After the adoption delegates
went to the rostrum to speak on their
vote. Few were the delegations that
failed to point out that the Declaration
was not binding on States in the same
manner as a Covenant. Six of the
eight abstaining countries were from
the Socialist countries of Eastern
Europe. They explained that they
found the Declaration "inadequate",
and one even termed it "old-fashion¬
ed". Mrs. Roosevelt described it as
an act of historic significance. The
President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Herbert Evatt, of Australia,
declared:
"Millions of men, women and chil¬
dren all over the world will turn for
help, guidance and inspiration to this
document."
The author of this article also took
the floor and spoke of the nature of
the Declaration, and particularly its
universality.
To my mind, the dominant feature
that characterizes the universality of
the Declaration is its broad scope and
content. The Declaration embraces
all the rights and freedoms essential
for the dignity and development of the
human personality, the right to life
and to physical and juridical freedom;
to spiritual and political freedom such
as freedom of conscience, opinion and
information; the right to work, to own
property, to education, to leisure, to
the benefits of culture, and to engage
in intellectual and artistic creation.
Originally conceived as an inter¬
national Declaration produced by
States for the benefit of the citizens
of those States, the Universal Declar¬
ation focussed increased attention
directly on man's relations with his
fellows and on a wide range of social
patterns such as the family, religion,
employment and professions, the city
and State, and society as a whole.
All members of the family of Man are
consequently encompassed within the
Declaration insofar as they are directly
subject to international law (¡us
gentium), irrespective of their original
or present status, and without dis¬
tinction of race, sex, creed, language,
birth, fortune, social condition or opin¬
ion. The Universal Declaration applies
to all States or territories regardless of
the political, juridical, economic or in¬
ternational status of the country, or
whether or not it is a member of the
United Nations.
Although the authors of the Declar¬
ation in no way attempted to avoid
direct references to the contempt for
human rights that had resulted in
barbarous acts which had outraged the
conscience of mankind, they refused
to turn the Declaration into a document
of acrimony and bitterness harking
back to the past. Instead, they sought
to erect the foundations for the
building of a better future.
The Declaration voices the deep-
rooted, enduring aspirations of all men
for liberty, equality and at least a
measure of security, whether the
society people live in is more advanc¬
ed and provides certain basic rights,
or underdeveloped and deprives them
of proper food, liberty and education.
In short, the Declaration sets forth
an ¡deal of achievement and marks out
the guide-lines for a vast programme
of positive action.
But a glance at the realities of life
today is enough to show that they
fall far short of the ¡deal. No country,
not even the most advanced, can
pride itself on fulfilling all the Articles
of the Declaration. Once the memory
of a war fought for certain principles
has ended or new countries have
acceded to independence, govern¬
ments are inclined to settle internal
problems without due regard for
human rights.
Repeated violations of the right to
life, killings and massacres left
unpunished, the exploitation of women,
mass hunger and starvation, the
perpetuation of slavery, lack of proper
education, disregard for freedom of
conscience, opinion and expression,
widespread racial discrimination and
segregation, arbitrary government all
these and many other abuses are far
too frequent to be denied.
I ET the Universal Declara¬
tion clearly indicates, in the final para¬
graphs of the Preamble, the prin¬
cipal measures that can be taken to
counter such abuses. Foremost
amongst these are teaching and
education, not only of the young but
of persons of all ages. Here Unesco
has had a vital role to play.
But this is not the only road open
for action. There are national measures
that are the primary responsibility of
governments but which can be carried
out with the support and co-operation
of different agencies of the United
Nations Family; there are many inter¬
national measures measures of pre¬
vention, measures of review, and if
need be, measures of censure and
punishment.
It took the Commission on Human
Rights six years (from 1948 to 1954)
and the General Assembly a further
thirteen years (from 1954 to December
16, 1966) first to draft and then to
consider and adopt the two great
Covenants which complete the United
Nations Charter of Human Rights.
The provisions contained in these
Covenants are not only binding on each
State party thereto but provide for
international machinery to ensure that
all States live up to their obligations
under the Covenants, as well as
appropriate machinery for action on
violations following complaints by
States or individuals (1).
But here too it will certainly take
a long time before these Covenants
are ratified by enough countries to
enter into force (35 ratifications are
needed for each Protocol), unless
public opinion in each country is
mobilized to bring strong pressure on
governments to speed ratification.
Nor can the Charter of Human Rights
become a real force unless persistent
efforts are made by world public
opinion to render its application effect¬
ive everywhere.
Despite the many difficulties that lie
ahead of us, we must not allow our
faith in the Universal Declaration, as
an instrument of power and action, to
flag. In the course of the past 20 years
it has grown in stature with the
access of more than 60 countries to
independence and membership in the
United Nations. It has served as a
banner for all persons who have
suffered mistreatment or persecution
in any form, and for non-religious as
well as religious groups everywhere.
But the influence of the Declaration
will certainly continue to grow in the
years to come, for it is founded on the
principle of the unity of mankind and
the dignity of the individual person.
Though regarded by some as little
more than an adjunct to the United
Nations Charter, the Universal Declar¬
ation of Human Rights incarnates the
moral principles of our time, and as
such, stands as a lasting monument
towering above national constitutions
and the statutes of all international
agencies which must now perforce
evolve and change.
The birth of the Universal Declar¬
ation marks a turning point in world
history. No longer can we allow the
cries of the oppressed to be stifled by
brutality or be lost in a maze of red
tape. All the more reason why the
court of man's conscience, though
besieged by many appeals, must not
allow itself to turn a deaf ear to these
pleas, and must organize its counter¬
action with increased vigour.
Now that we possess an instrument
capable of lifting or easing the burden
of oppression and injustice in the
world, we must learn to use it. As two
Director-Generals of Unesco, Jaime
Torres-Bodet and René Maheu, have
said, the Universal Declaration invol¬
ves the responsibility of all of us and
the responsibility of each one of us.
(J) The author is here referring ta the
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, and the Covenant on Civil and Poli¬
tical Rights. Individuals can complain about
violations of their rights if their countries
have ratified another legal instrument adopted
at the same time as the two Covenants.
This document ¡s known as the Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights. Editor.
