By the start of the 21st century, it Is
estimated that some three-quarters of the
world's population will be living in cities, which
in many cases will have become vast
conurbations that have exploded from their
present confines and have bitten deep into the
countryside. Big modern cities are already
plagued by air, water and noise pollution, which
will pose even more challenging problems in the
cities of tomorrow. Photo right shows haze
and smoke on New York's Manhattan
Island rising almost as high as its skyscrapers.

MAN AGAINST
NATURE
by Frank Fraser Darling
The havoc wrought by modern man and civilization against nature is
graphically described in the four articles that follow, based on a study by
Prof. F. Fraser Darling, with comments and additions by Vladimir Sokolov,
of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences; Dr. François Bourlîère (France),
president of the International Union for Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources; Frederick Smith, professor of zoology, University
of Michigan (U.S.A.); and specialists from Unesco and FAO. This
far-reaching study was one of the important papers submitted to the
Unesco "Man and the Biosphere" conference last autumn.
Ti
24
HE world as it existed
before man used tools and fire was
one of immense riches of natural
resources, organic and inorganic. But
FRANK FRASER DARLING, of Great Britain,
and specialist on animal ecology, is vice-
president of the International Union for Con¬
servation of Nature and Natural Resources,
and vice-president of the Washington Conser¬
vation Foundation. Professor Fraser Darling
has written widely, and among his most
Important publications are: 'Pelican in the
Wilderness; a Naturalist's Odyssey in North
America" (Random House, New York, 1956),
"A Herd of Red Deer; a Study in Animal
Behavior' (Doubleday, London, New York, In
co-operation with the American Museum of
Natural History, 1964), "Wild Life in an
African Territory (Rhodesia)' (Oxford Univer¬
sity Press, London, 1960), 'Man and Nature
In the National Parks; reflections on policy",
written in collaboration with Noel D. Eichhorn
(Washington Conservation Foundation, 1967).
to say that is to put the cart before
the horse; natural resources were
not resources at all until man was both
present and able to make use of them.
For a long time man may not have
been much else than the equivalent
of an indigenous animal of limited
change-producing activity, but even at
the advent of that great thrust, the
Neolithic Revolution, hunting and food-
gathering man had changed parts of
his world more or less unintentionally
by the use of fire.
Men were so few and the world
apparently so large that it would have
been strange had man dwelt philo¬
sophically on his own numbers and
the fate of natural riches. The student
of the human condition, albeit he may
hold to the philosophy of conservation,
accepts the loss of much natural
wealth as the price of civilization.
When was the moment critical that
man should have arrived at conscious¬
ness of that fuller kind that would have
led him to call a halt to bald exploit¬
ation, and to match exploitation with
rehabilitation? It is possible we have
reached that moment now, though
overall the planet is still losing out.
The fear now is whether we can
rehabilitate, or are causes and conse¬
quences setting up their own per¬
cussive oscillations to an extent we
cannot control?
It is worthwhile attempting some
classification of man's impact on the
biosphere. This impact is not to be
thought of as being wholly to the
detriment of- man's ultimate welfare
though it may be preponderantly so.
Certain man-modified habitats may

represent ecosystems of equal or
greater production and wealth-building
power than the natural condition.
Fire has been used for animal hunt¬
ing, destroying forest incidentally and
preventing much regeneration. But
production of savannas as in parts of
Africa with a rich spectrum of ungulate
species (hoofed animals), may lead to
a rich habitat for organic production.
However, savannas of Brazil and
Guiana seem definitely to lose out as
to their qualitative potential. Is this
because of a limited array of ungulates
as compared with Africa? Again, in
North America, the Indians extended
the prairie rangé of bison by burning
forest and the resulting humid prairies
were an immense store of rich soil.
Sometimes the terrain is also burned
intentionally to produce fresh young
grass; this leads to impoverishment of
the array of plants present originally,
which upsets flexibility of the grazing
complex in face of seasonal climatic
variation. Examples are production of
stretches of grassland in the Scottish
Highlands; and the gradual elimination
of grass, giving way to gall acacia and
lantana bush in parts of Africa, and
mesquite in North America's south¬
west.
Settled cultivation, in opposition to
shifting cultivation, leads to soil
exhaustion if replenishment is not
understood or is impossible, or
possible aridity if active counterworks
are not used. The English "breks" or
broken lands are thought to have
developed from Neolithic cultivation.
The "Dust Bowl" of the United States
in the 1930s showed what continuous
extractive cultivation without adequate
replenishment could do when a cycle
of drought years was encountered.
Broadly, cultivation must manage to
sustain the level of organic matter,
or the soil either bakes or blows away.
But many examples can be given
where settled agriculture, under various
ecological conditions, had been suc¬
cessfully carried out for centuries,
namely in the Far East, the Near East,
the Mediterranean area and Central
America. The ancient Negev demon¬
strated efficacy of counterworks for
conservation of water; abandonment
of these resulted in almost complete
degradation of the habitat.
Conservation-minded people, as a /Q
whole, tend to have an absolute anti¬
pathy towards shifting cultivation as
being wholly deleterious to habitat.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
si*CHfl$'

MAN AGAINST NATURE (Continued)
Ferdinand and the sheep
26
Instances could be given of this prac¬
tice, however, that produce variety
and valuable "edge-effects" so long
as the human population is low.
The chitemene system in Central
Africa is a good example: the gardens
are not larger than an acre or so and
being surrounded by bush on fairly
level terrain soon return to bush after
3 to 5 years of use, and are not used
for a further forty years. Immediately
after being relinquished these gardens
are taken over by colonies of Tatera
rats while the soil is loose and friable.
The rats, caught by small boys, form
a secondary protein crop for a year or
two. Following this, the bush slowly
recovers and replenishes the soil.
Shifting cultivation is the bane of
central and northern South America
and land hunger, with rapidly increas¬
ing human population, creates a vicious
circle from which it is difficult to break.
Erosion is having long-term effects on
far greater areas of country through
interference with the water relations.
Irrigation has a long history and is
still a popular line of development, but
in large-scale irrigation projects, im¬
provement or maintenance of soil
fertility over a long period raises many
problems. As they are so often sited
in arid areas where a high evaporation
rate has kept salts in the soil, irrig¬
ation tends to redissolve the salts and
deposit them again as a crystal crust.
Re-use of irrigation water from sources
such as the Colorado River can
mean good ground being made saline
and useless at the lower levels of
operation. This also happens on the
Bear River, Utah, and on the great
Sind scheme in Pakistan.
Wise irrigation, or possibly fortunate
irrigation, uses rainwater, and if this
is adequate in supply, it can wash the
more saline ground of the arid parts
where the water is used. The Gesira
scheme in the Sudan is an excellent
example. The country's economy has
been much strengthened by non-saline
water from the Blue Nile (which runs
at a higher level than the White Nile)
which is taken off and spread over the
triangle of the Gesira. The used water
drains into the White Nile on the lower
side of the triangle, the volume of
which renders insignificant any salin-
ization suffered by the Blue Nile water
passing across the Gezira.
aINCE domestication has
occurred sedentarization limits move¬
ments of stock which often leads to
over-grazing. Different species of
domestic stock cunningly used in dif¬
ferent climatic conditions make for
maintenance of habitat, but well-under¬
stood balances can be easily upset by
natural fluctuations of conditions.
The technique of successful graz¬
ing has to be learned and even when
learned may not be generally followed.
Even the sophistication of a modern
research station can fall short, as in
the case of the reindeer era in Alaska,
where deterioration outpaced research.
As a result, grazing land deter¬
iorated and reindeer herds diminish¬
ed. Modern examples of extractive
grazing, as in European Africa, parts
of Australia and New Zealand, and the
shortgrass prairies of North America,
have caused rapid soil deterioration.
Nomadism of pastoral origin de¬
serves special mention because it can
be so easily upset or broken, to the
detriment of the habitat. Nomadism
is . at best a pursuit of the steppe
regions of the world and produces
least deterioration. It is utterly bound
up with movement if habitat is to be
conserved. Any undue lingering
punishes the vegetational complex,
reduces its numbers of species and
therefore impoverishes it.
The finest nomadic areas of the
world were the chernozem plains, like
those of the Kuban where the Scy¬
thians roamed in the time of Hero¬
dotus (see page 2). Nomads depend¬
ed on animal products for sustenance
and warmth, and as protein consumers
were an ecological élite, at the top
of the food chain or pyramid.
The chernozem soils of America and
Europe have stood up well to the
extractive agricultural methods impos¬
ed upon them, and it is likely that
good farming methods will maintain
them in the future. But a revolution
of the plough of this kind always goes
farther than those lands best able to
bear it. Higher, poorer and more arid
steppes have been "dry farmed" with
disastrous results.
Wherever sedentary populations
have impinged on nomad grazing there
has been degradation of habitat for
which the nomads are invariably blam¬
ed. Yet nomadism as a careful pastor¬
al process is the least traumatic
of human influences and as a form of
husbandry utilizes areas which could
not be utilized by man in any other
way. It is essentially ecological in
structure, relying on movement and

MAGIC CARPET IN THE SAND. Tenacious desert trees,
whose roots can hold shifting sands, will soon flourish
in this hollow (left) among the dunes of the Kara-Kum
desert in the Soviet Turkmen Republic in Central Asia.
The Repetek Desert Afforestation Centre uses the large
cane mats seen here to hold the sand in place to give fast
growing trees a firm start in life. When they have
grown through the mat, the trees will anchor the sand.
The Masai, pastoral nomads of East Africa, are an
outstanding example of a people who have learned to
adapt their way of life to the environment, by co-operating
with nature instead of despoiling it. With the introduction
of Western veterinary techniques, however, grazing lands
are now overstocked, and nature's delicate balance is
threatened. Below, a Masai shepherd tends his flock of
goats. For the Masai, a man's prestige Is measured
by the abundance and quality of his cattle, sheep or goats.
Photo © A. Lobov - APN
seasonal use, a wide spectrum of
grazing animals adapted to well-un¬
derstood differences in habitat and
producing much energy without loss of
organic matter.
Nomadism is always brittle: appar¬
ently small changes reduce it to habi¬
tat spoliation. The Masai in East
Africa are a Nilotic tribe moved from
a humid homeland into high, dry step¬
pe country. Yet their knowledge was
good and accurate and they did not
deteriorate their habitat until the white
man brought veterinary magic which
prevented the full incidence of mortal¬
ity which formerly kept the herds to
a proper level for the stock-carrying
capacity of the ground.
The Masai and their country are a
good example of integration of nomad¬
ism with the indigenous animal popu¬
lation. Wild game existed alongside
domestic herds, tolerated and respect¬
ed. In the Bahr-el-Ghazal, the Dinka
accept giraffes as part of the herd.
Even in this paradise of symbiotic
cattle culture, the march of modernity
and the hungry mouths elsewhere are
demanding rice culture.
History records a striking example
of nomadism having become allied
with political power and made so
powerful by law that a whole country
was devastated. This is what happen¬
ed with the society of the Meseta in
Spain. Ferdinand and Isabella allied
themselves with it for the profit of the
crown. The flocks of Merino sheep
were driven through cultivated areas
and it even became illegal to fence
against them. It took the folk of Spain
nearly 200 years to beat the Meseta,
but the bare hills of Spain remain today.
