UNEMPLOYMENT OR EXILE
is there a third choice
for the migrant worker?
by Samuel Parmar
IHE international movement
of labour may denote a mutually advan¬
tageous matching of "need" and
"ability" between industrialized and
less industrialized nations. The former
have work but not enough workers;
the latter have a surplus labour force
but insufficient employment opportuni¬
ties. Thus through migration it be¬
comes possible for each to help the
other, and, in the process help itself.
This is, however, a deceptive mutuality
as is evident from the complex social
and economic problems that have come
in the wake of migration.
Labour is generally looked upon only
as a factor of production. Its move¬
ment tends to be governed by cost and
output considerations. This is a purely
economic criterion. Movement of lab¬
our involves a movement of the lab¬
ourer as well. The "human" factor
becomes important. Consequently a
simple input-output calculation is an
inadequate . criterion. Considerations
of social cost should acquire primacy
over economic cost.
In his paper on the international
migration of labour, Prof. Kuin
examines some of these problems and
suggests certain lines along which
their solution should be sought. He
emphasizes the importance of both
short-term and long-term measures;
the former essentially ameliorative, the
latter structural...
I am in general agreement with some
of his suggestions, such as the need
for social planning; co-operation and
consultation between the parties con¬
cerned ; a judicious dispersal of eco¬
nomic activity internationally; etc.
However, as one looks at the question
from the viewpoint of less industrialized
nations, there is bound to be some
difference in emphasis, and, therefore,
in the priorities within a given frame
of policy.
International migration of labour has
always contained elements of exploita-
32 SAMUEL PARMAR is Professor of Eco¬
nomics at the University of Allahabad,
India, and formerly Assistant-Director of the
Ecumenical Institute of the World Council
of Churches, Bossey, Switzerland.
tion, with greater gain accruing to the
stronger partner, obviously at the cost
of the weaker. This is clearly seen in
historical migration. It may be less
evident in contemporary situations but
exists nonetheless.
Migrant workers face a two-pronged
disadvantage: economic and socio¬
political. As they generally come in at
the "basement" of the labour hierarchy
they start as underdogs in the labour
market. They may be the last to come
and first to go. Where new techno¬
logy displaces labour, the incidence of
change is more likely to fall on them.
Thus in an era of rapidly changing
technology they have a high redund¬
ancy-quotient.
Social prejudices, narrow nationalist
sentiments, antipathy to foreigners,
ethnic stances, etc., combine to impose
social and political handicaps on this
group. These may range from mild
disapproval to acute xenophobia and
bear a direct correlation to the size and
economic importance of the migrant
working force.
Therefore, in dealing with problems
and prospects of international migra¬
tion of labour, it is necessary to trace
the genesis of most of the problems to
the exploitation inherent in the process
of migration. Remedial action would
then take the form of comprehensive
social planning whereby the generators
of prejudice and exploitation could be
brought under control.
Some of the measures for improving
the condition of migrants deal with
symptoms and not with causes. It is
not enough to provide improved wel¬
fare facilities and introduce more
"humaneness" in dealings with mi¬
grants. This is an important first step.
But more important is the need to work
for a new climate which would be con¬
ducive to greater acceptance and
equality of the outsider.
That would mean special efforts to
instruct and inform nationals so that
prejudices are gradually eroded. So
far, there has been insufficient empha¬
sis on this aspect. Measures for im¬
provement are aimed at the migrants.
This is as true of private groups and
organizations as of governments. To
the extent to which the problems of
migrants result from their own defi¬
ciencies (lack of skills, negative attitu¬
des etc.) such measures will help.
But what about problems for which
people and structures in the receiv¬
ing nations are responsible? Unless
efforts are directed towards nationals,
those problems will remain even when
the migrants have acquired skills and
developed more positive attitudes.
Some of the current welfare work
with migrant labour appears paternal¬
istic precisely because good-intention-
ed people have failed to see clearly
the responsibility of nationals. Instead
of improving matters, such efforts
tend to become fresh irritants to mi¬
grants who, not unjustifiably, may feel
that they are being treated as objects
rather than subjects.
P.ERHAPS a brief analysis
is necessary at this point to indicate
how migration denotes exploitation.
If one looks at the international migra¬
tion of labour in the perspective of the
former slave trade, the picture is clear.
Men were reduced to mere means of
production in response to the demand
for cheap labour for new products like
cotton, plantation crops, minerals, etc.
Indentured labour was a step for¬
ward from the inhuman system of
slavery but it almost invariably repre¬
sented using cheap labour for the
advantage of dominant powers. Even
when workers moved from one un¬
developed nation to another (India to
West Indies, or India to South-East
Asia, or India to Africa, etc.), the gains
accruing to these countries were less
than those to the colonial power which
had initiated the movement...
A significant by-product of the
process was the emergence of exploi¬
tation at new levels. Generally, the
migrant workers were more diligent
and skilled, and gradually gained eco¬
nomic ascendancy over the easy-going
local working force. They became a
new class which took advantage of the
economic weakness of local people.
Here one can already see the emer¬
gence of a sub-proletariat. The prole-

tariat consisted of the migrants and the
sub-proletariat of the nationals. This
is in striking contrast to the position
in Western Europe today where
national workers are the proletariat
and migrants the sub-proletariat. The
difference is important.
Where nationals are the underdogs
their resentment against alien workers
(who are economically stronger)
expresses resistance to exploitation.
But where nationals are the stronger
group and yet resent alien workers,
their attitude has little economic justi¬
fication and is tantamount to additional
exploitation.
Contemporary migration may have
less exploitation but is by no means
free of it. Labour shortage in indus¬
trial nations shows their economic
strength; hence their need for more
workers flows out of their strength.
Existence of unemployed labour in less
industrial nations is a sign of their
economic weakness; hence migration
in search of jobs arises out of their
weakness. To say that economic
relations stemming from such unequal
positions represent mutuality and a
fair distribution of benefits would be
erroneous.
There is a tendency to emphasize
what the migrant workers receive rather
than what they contribute. It should
not be forgotten that their presence
Is vital to the growth and stability of
industrial nations which absorb them.
In fact if migrants are portrayed as
beneficiaries who would have been in
dire economic distress in their own
countries, one could easily rationalize
a lack of concern for their welfare.
For if they are already much better
off than in their national situations are
they not enjoying unaccustomed wel¬
fare? To some extent the general lack
of concern for and resentment against
migrants may result from such an
approach.
On a nation to nation basis the
relatively greater advantage of indus¬
trial nations is more evident. Gener¬
ally, the more enterprising and poten¬
tially efficient workers are the first to
migrate. A substantial portion of their
earning is spent in the country of work,
either directly by them or indirectly
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
MODERN MARINERS AND THE ILO
About 90,000 Asian seamen sail in foreign ships but until recently their
system of recruitment gave them no guarantee of working conditions
and welfare services. To assure minimum standards of employment,
official recruiting offices have been established with ILO assistance
in the ports of Calcutta, Karachi, Chittagong, Hong Kong and
Singapore, and welfare facilities have been considerably expanded.
Protecting sailors on foreign ships is only one aspect of the ILO's work on
the seven seas. Since it was founded in 1919, it has campaigned
to improve working conditions for crews everywhere: in all, 27
conventions and 15 recommendations affecting seamen have been
adopted by the ILO, more than for any other group of workers.
Every ten years, the maritime session of the International Labour Conference
takes place, and in 1970 its agenda will include the modernization
of ships, welfare of sailors on board and in port, minimum
wages, accident prevention and professional training. Above, sea
cadets swarm up the rigging of an Indian training ship.

MIGRANT WORKERS (Continued)
Last to be hired, first to be fired
by their countries where a part of the
earnings are transferred. Thus their
contribution to the industrial economy
is twofold: to its production and to
its demand.
The argument that migrants return
to their countries with newly acquired
skills and thereby assist the process
of economic development, is an over¬
worked argument. Firstly, because a
majority of migrants are performing
unskilled jobs in the host country and
have few opportunities to learn new
techniques. What they learn is not
enough to make them instruments for
a technological break-through when
they return to their countries.
D
34
UE to a number of favour¬
able factors such as influence of trade
unions, interest of nations in their
emigrants, growth of a new world
conscience, etc., there is less overt
exploitation of workers today, espec¬
ially in Western industrial nations. But
the migrant worker's enhanced sense
of identity and self-awareness intensi¬
fies the psychological exploitation
which he now suffers by being relegat¬
ed to a sub-proletariat.
Because he is conscious of his
rights, because he sees a prosperous
working class (consisting of nationals)
all around him, and because he senses
the resentment and hostility of this
class from which he had expected
solidarity, he feels a strong sense of
deprivation.
It may not be unusual to find the
local labour force joining hands with
the management to safeguard its sec¬
urity and privileges against the en¬
croachment of a less-skilled group of
foreign workers. The idea of workers'
solidarity and class homogeneity seems
to be fading. It almost seems that
economic prosperity in Western Eu¬
rope is moving the national labour
force away from the magnetic field of
the proletariat and into that of the
petit bourgeois. This strange identity
of interest of various national groups
as they face the migrants is new...
Welfare measures can better the lot
of migrant labour but cannot by them¬
selves eradicate the exploitation which
is present under current patterns.
More radical structural measures are
necessary. Therefore, if Prof. Kuin's
suggestions for social planning and
inter-governmental co-operation incor¬
porate an "engagement in depth" with
the issues, one would fully agree.
But one gets the impression that
he has not given sufficient weightage
to the element of exploitation and is
relying on remedies which deal more
with external expressions of the prob¬
lem than its root causes. He seems
to emphasize the mutuality of gain from
migration and favours the idea of
recognizing migration as a basic
human right. This is an oversimplifica¬
tion. The basic human right is
protection against exploitation.
Since migration allows exploitation,
it may be more realistic to support
regulated migration rather than an
open door policy. But this regulation
will be very different from the kind
which various elements of the host
nation press for in defence of the
privileges of domestic workers. Regu¬
lation must be for the weaker section
and not for the stronger.
A few comments now .about Prof.
Kuin's suggestion for a dispersal of
economic activity. In the West Euro¬
pean situation, especially within the
Common Market this sounds workable.
Since efforts are being made to remove
obstacles to a free movement of
factors of production between "the
Six" it should be possible for capital
and technique to flow to regions with
surplus labour...
The most significant reason for the
feasibility of "dispersal" within the
Common Market is that free movement
of goods precedes the free movement
of factors of production. An industry
can be set up where factor costs (jud¬
ged in terms of social cost) are lowest
and its produce can move to all parts
of the Common Market.
Such unhampered sale possibility
will allow for full expansion of the
industry, growth of subsidiary indus¬
tries, and economic development of
the erstwhile less-developed regions.
Since these are the areas of surplus
labour, their development will obviate
the need for workers to migrate to
industrially advanced regions. A more
rational allocation of resources and a
healthier pattern of specialization and
exchange will grow. The crux of the
matter is unhampered sale possibility
for goods produced in the less-
developed region.
Now let us apply this to the inter¬
national situation, especially as obtains
between developed and developing
nations. Supposing that capital, tech¬
nique and entrepreneurial skill go to
nations with an unemployed working
force, and industries are set up. What
about the sale of the produce? Dev¬
eloped nations are notoriously shy
of importing semi-processed and
manufactured goods from the less
industrial nations.
This is the major bottleneck in trade
and aid relationships today. Without
adequate markets these new industries
will not absorb an appreciable portion
of unemployed labour. Hence the
problem of surplus labour will remain
as before...
The growth of export industries
(which are "islands of development")
in underdeveloped countries was based
upon capital, technique and enterprise
coming from developed nations. But
it should be remembered that these
products had an assured market in
the investing country. Today a satur¬
ation point has been reached in the
sales of traditional exports of develop¬
ing nations. Hence these are not
attractive areas for foreign capital and
have a limited potential for absorbing
surplus labour.
Another problem is that techniques
emanating from industrial nations are
generally capital intensive and can
seldom make a dent on the problem
of unemployment in developing na¬
tions. On the contrary, such techni¬
ques tend to convert disguised un¬
employment into actual unemployment
by attracting many people from villages
to industrial centres in the hope of
jobs, only to find that there are few
jobs, and those mainly for skilled per¬
sons. In many new industrial areas of
Africa and Asia the existence of a
fast growing urban unemployed force
has resulted from such tendencies...
If dispersal of economic activity is
suggested as a method for increasing
employment opportunities in develop¬
ing nations, it has to be shown that
it is development-oriented and not
geared to some limited self-interest
of developed nations. This calls for
an elaborate form of regulation and
international economic planning and is,
therefore, beyond the competence of
private capital and enterprise...
F,INALLY, as regards the
problem of inadequate human resour¬
ces or lack of qualified people (which
Prof. Kuin stresses in his last para¬
graph) this is only one of a number of
expressions of insufficient develop¬
ment. The history of economic de¬
velopment and industrialization shows
that productive processes begin even
without a reservoir of qualified people.
As the processes make headway,
conditions are generated which facilit¬
ate the emergence of skilled and
qualified people.
If this could happen under the
"trial and error" pattern of unplanned
economic growth, the prospects of
building up human resources is certain¬
ly better today. First, because govern¬
mental and private bodies can function
more responsibly through planned
action, and second, because of a better
climate of international co-operation.
Our effort should be to overcome
negative factors such as narrow nation¬
alism, economic and political self-
interest, etc., that come in the way
of effective international co-operation.
In the context of the problem of migrant
labour, this implies taking steps nation¬
ally and internationally to eradicate
elements of exploitation which are at
the root of the problem.
