Oriental Music - Occidental Music
THE
NON-ACCEPTANCE
OF
THE UNFAMILIAR
by Tran Van Khê
A,
TRAN VAN KHE, seen here playing the dàn
tranh, a 16-stringed Vietnamese instrument,
comes from a family which has produced
several generations of musicians. He is
himself an accomplished musician in both
western and eastern music. After studying
medicine at the University of Hanoi, he
devoted himself to musicology, and at the
Sorbonne in Paris took his doctorate in
Vietnamese music. He now teaches at the
Institut de Musicologie de Paris, heads a
music research team at the Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique (Paris), and
directs the Vietnam section at the Interna¬
tional Institute of Comparative Music Studies
and Documentation (Berlin). He is also a
member of the Unesco-sponsored Interna¬
tional Music Council. He has written widely
on musical questions and is the author of
"Viêt-Nam" (published by Editions Buchet/
Chastel, Paris, 1967.)
26
i PART from a handful of
wjstern musicologists who have
learned to understand and appreciate
the different musical traditions of the
East, and travellers who have spent
many years in eastern countries, the
western listener is usually puzzled by
"eastern music".
Even Hector Berlioz, one of the
world's great musicians, found it
disconcerting. In 1851, while in
London as France's official representa¬
tive to the Universal Exhibition, he
heard the performance of a Chinese
air. Berlioz set down his impressions
in a book he wrote three years later,
"Les Soirées de l'Orchestre".
"The song, grotesque and horrible
to a degree," he wrote, "ended, like
any vulgar ballad, on the key-note;
and never varied from the tonality and
mode indicated at the outset. The
accompaniment consisted of a rapid
and monotonous rhythmic pattern
executed on the mandolin (1), totally
discordant with the notes sung."
Berlioz concluded with a severe
stricture on Chinese and Indian music:
"The Chinese and the Indians would
have music like ours, if they had any
at all; but in this domain they are
plunged in the uttermost darkness of
barbarity and childish ignorance, in
which a few ineffective, groping
aptitudes are barely perceptible. The
peoples of the East call music what
we would call a din; to them, as to
the witches in Macbeth, 'Fair is foul,
and foul is fair'."
And in his "A Travers Chants", he
wrote: "The Chinese . . . sing as dogs
yawn, or as cats throw up when they
have swallowed a fish-bone."
It should not surprise us, therefore,
to learn that an Indian musician of
Lahore, according to H. Popley in
"Music of India", described western
music as "the howling of a jackal in
a desert". A few years ago when
I asked a teacher of musicology at the
University of Madras, what he thought
of the music of the West, he replied
"It's noise!".
Mohammed Zerrouki, writing on
Arab music in the "Revue Internation¬
ale de la Musique", has pictured the
reactions of a person from an eastern
country listening to western music.
"Accustomed as he is to monody,
in which all the players perform in
unison, as if they were all reciting
the same poem, he is completely
baffled by this criss-cross of con¬
flicting and superimposed sounds.
His distracted mind wanders from one
musical phrase or instrument to
another, in an attempt to understand
what is going on.
"He sees a western orchestra as a
group of musicians all babbling
different languages. Each performer,
completely independent, is free to
express himself as he chooses. They
all seem to turn their backs on each
other, and a deaf ear as well. While
the music is in full swing, some put
down their instruments, leaving the
(1) Probably the p'ip'a, a pear-shaped lute
with four strings.

Photo © Bill Homan - Camera Press
VARIATION ON A THEME. Although belonging to one of the traditional categories of
Indian stringed instruments, the Vichitra Veena was developed only 100 years ago.
Formed in the shape of a peacock whose tail is represented by the instrument's strings
stretched over its neck, it has two spherical resonators. Very popular today, the
Vichitra Veena plays an important part in Indian musical ensembles.
others to carry on; then realizing it
is their turn, they frantically try to
catch up on the rest. Above them,
gesticulating wildly, is the conductor,
whom no one seriously thinks of
following" . . . "This, broadly speaking,"
says the writer, "is the inevitable
reaction of an eastern listener who
is completely uninitiated in European
music."
Eastern and western listeners are
generally unable to pass a valid
judgement on music which is un¬
familiar to them, for the reason that
they base their opinion entirely on
the artistic values and criteria applying
to music in their own country or
continent.
They also fail to appreciate the
basic notions and principles governing
music other' than their own, and in
particular, in the case of eastern
traditions, the notions of scales,
CONTINUED ON PAGE 29
In the 19th century,
the French composer
Hector Berlioz
breathed new life
into harmony and
enriched western
music by expanding
the expressiveness
of wind instruments.
But for most of his
contempories, he
was only a noise
maker, as shown by
this caricature of
him conducting.
Misunderstood
genius that he was,
Berlioz in turn could
not understand the
music of the East:
he spoke of it with
the same contempt
as the neo-classicists
mocked his work.

Ifl
. jfi
Ê
m
' i'
o
¡i» 1
X-'iM
V^2k-
Photo © Pic, Paris
KOREAN HARMONIES
Traditional Korean music, which inherited its rules and forms from
the music of China, has brought down to the. present time the essence
of an ancient musical art of the Orient. It is called "graceful music"
(see also back cover) and is performed in its purest and most
orthodox forms in Korea's Confucian temples. Played on traditional
instruments, some of which were invented several centuries
before our era, Korean music continues to figure prominently in
secular and religious ceremonies. Above, an orchestra with stringed
instruments placed in the foreground and bamboo flutes behind,
plays a piece of "graceful music". Left, a dance traditionally
performed by Buddhist nuns. The dancer provides a rhythmic
accompaniment to her movements by striking the zua-go (a type of
gong invented in China over 2,000 years ago) with sticks (below).

NON-ACCEPTANCE OF THE UNFAMILIAR (Continued)
modes, rhythm, the principles of
instrumental and vocal execution, and
aestnetic conceptions.
Yet music, whatever its origin, is
basically the same everywhere. In
the West as in the East, it is, as Jean-
Jacques Rousseau put it, "the art of
combining sounds in a manner
agreeable to the ear." The Yo-ki, or
Journal of Music, a major chapter in
the Chinese book Li ki (The Journal
of Rites), defines it as "an artistic
combination of sounds."
Originally music was related to the
image of a mythological god or super¬
natural being. The music played on
the flute by the Indian god Krishna,
or that composed by the legendary
Chinese emperor Fou hi and played
by Confucius on the Ch'in, had a
semi-divine origin; so had the music
of Orpheus, the prophet of Apollo,
who with the strains of his lyre
succeeded in taming wild animals.
Not only in China was the belief
held that music had power, as the
Yo-ki says, "to encourage the emula¬
tion of good examples, to deeply
affect the emotions, change customs
and transform morals and manners."
Marcel Belviannes, in "Sociologie
de la Musique", writes that Plato
believed music had a calming and
moderating influence on human nature.
According to Tseu Hia, the disciple
of Confucius, quoted in the Yo-ki,
"the songs of Cheng stimulated
debauch and licentiousness; those of
Song, womanizing and sloth; and
those of Tsi, arrogance, depravity and
overweening pride, and should be
forbidden on ceremonial occasions."
Belviannes says that in Homer's
view, "evil music and lascivious airs
corrupt morals and weaken character."
And according to the same author,
Socrates proscribed "the effeminate
music played at banquets, in the
Ionian and Lydian modes, which he
considered too flabby. He admitted
only the Phrygian mode, as approp¬
riately rendering the temper and
virile accents of a warrior in the midst
of the fray."
If we consider the form rather than
the content of music, we are struck
by the great variety of musical tech¬
niques and the differing conceptions
of what is art. This is the cause of
the mistaken judgements passed by
the listener accustomed to one par¬
ticular tradition, on music of other
traditions.
A person from the West thinks that
Indonesians sing out of tune because
the intervals of the Indonesian slendro
and pe/og scales are quite different
from those of the equally tempered
scale. A musician in the Indonesian
tradition judges a piano to be out of
tune, since not one of its 88 keys
exactly reproduces any of the notes
in the slendro scale.
Even two Asian musicians, if they
belong to different musical "families,"
are bound tö disagree on the accuracy
of scales. An Indonesian musician
who once heard me play a piece of
music in the bac mode of Viet Nam,
transposed into the pentatonic scale
(do, re, ta, sol, la), said with a smile,
"It's the slendro scale, but not quite
in tune." This is understandable, since
the slendro scale is theoretically
obtained by dividing an octave into
five equal intervals.
In this connexion it should be
remembered that in a number of Far
Eastern countries the limits within
which a sound is considered to be
in tune are very wide. Oscillations
in pitch are often used for ornamental
effect. A musical performance should
not be considered out of tune merely
because it does not exactly reproduce
the notes of the equally tempered
scale.
L,ET us suppose that a piece
of music is played to an audience of
musicians with different traditional
musical backgrounds. The western
musician tries to identify the tonality
of the passage, project an underlying
harmonic structure, trace a theme and
its variations, and study rhythm and
tempo; but not in the same way as
would an Indian. Chinese, Japanese,
Korean, and Vietnamese musicians
are more interested in melodic line.
An Indian listener will try to situate
a passage in the framework of a given
raga (melody-type), or attribute a
modal feeling. Each member of the
audience has his own listening habits,
and judges a passage in the light of
the criteria and rules typical of his
own tradition.
The notions which serve as guide¬
lines in fact vary considerably from
one tradition to another. Alongside
the equally tempered scale of western
music are to be found countless other
scales used in other countries. These
include the five varieties of the Chin¬
ese pentatonic scale, the Japanese
scales in the ryo, ritsu, yo sempo and
in sempo modes, the Vietnamese sca¬
les in the bac and nam modes, and
the modal scales of the music of
India, Iran, and the Arab countries.
The major and minor modes of
western music have their counterpart
in hundreds of modes belonging to
other traditions. For example there
are the Chinese tiao, the Japanese
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Photo <D Paolo Koch - Rapho
Precision and skill in execution
distinguishes a performance by
the gamelan orchestra of Indonesia,
which consists chiefly of percussion
instruments of different pitches,
and sometimes flutes or oboes. g*n
The orchestra, of varying size, yQ
is grouped to play a given theme £U
in unison or at the octave, on
which individual musicians can
improvise variations.

NON-ACCEPTANCE OF THE UNFAMILIAR (Continued)
To each tongue its own grammar
sempo, the Vietnamese dieu, the
Indian ragas, the Iranian dastgah, and
the Turkish and Arab maqamat modes.
Ornamental notes, which in the
western tradition are considered simp¬
ly as grace-notes superimposed on
a given harmonic system, are an
essential part of the Indian, Iranian,
and Arab traditions. In Indian music
an unornamented note is likened to
"a moonless night, a garden without
flowers, a river without water." In
the Vietnamese tradition, set orna¬
ments are one of the elements govern¬
ing the mode.
While in the West a performer must
not stray from his score, in India, Iran,
and the Arab countries, improvisation
is the rule; it is the musician's per¬
sonal contribution during the actual
performance.
In the West, one listens to music
in the same way one looks at a
cathedral. One begins by admiring
the architecture, symmetry, and the
balance, before passing on to the bas-
reliefs. In the East, greater emphasis
is placed from the outset on the most
minor details; music is perceived
aesthetically in the same way as one
contemplates a Persian miniature.
Thus each tradition has its own
particular way of creating, executing
and listening to music. Aesthetic
conceptions may be entirely different
according to whether they are occi¬
dental or oriental. For example, a
western audience finds falsetto gro¬
tesque, whereas it is highly appreciat¬
ed by lovers of the traditional Chinese
and Vietnamese theatre. Criticism of
unfamiliar music should be made
with the utmost circumspection.
In the age of jet planes and transis¬
tor radios, the western public has
greater opportunities for listening to
the great traditional masters of India,
Iran, and Japan. Conversely, village
homes in the most distant parts of the
globe may be invaded by western
music, broadcast daily by powerful
radio stations. East and West meet
much more frequently than in the past
in the world of music.; yet how many
musicians, eastern or western, have
been able to turn this to their advan¬
tage?
It must be admitted that most east¬
ern musicians, dazzled by the tech¬
nological and material civilization of
the West, and by the "wealth" and
"scientific" nature of western music,
have learned to handle the musical
idiom of the West, and have repudiat¬
ed, despised or even abandoned their
own musical heritage, of which they
are often totally ignorant.
This may be acceptable where they
acquire such a thorough knowledge
of western music that they are capable
of creating works whose merit is uni¬
versally recognizable. Often however
they produce hybrid music modelled
on broadcast "pop" songs, contribut¬
ing nothing to western culture and
merely debasing their own music.
Frequently they try to "modernize"
their traditional music by imposing a
harmonic structure on basically melod¬
ic or modal music. This is the same
kind of error a linguist would make
were he to apply to his own language
all the rules of English grammar,
because he found them more practical.
1 F only the younger gener¬
ation of eastern musicians would make
themselves more familiar with their
own traditional music, before trying to
renovate or modernize it on western
lines. I strongly believe in preserving
musical traditions, but "preservation"
is not the same as conservatism or
stagnation. I am all for progress, but
"progress" does not necessarily mean
westernization.
Westerners should get rid of the
superior attitude that so many display,
and try to understand music other
than their own, which they are too
often inclined to describe as "exotic"
or to dismiss as "folk tunes."
A number of musicians, it is true,
have looked to the East in their search
for elements to renew their own
musical language. Let us hope that
they will succeed in capturing the
spirit of eastern music, finding in it
not a hybridization, but a wellspring
which will richly nourish their own
music.
While, as we have seen, similarities
exist on the theoretical level between
oriental and occidental music, this
should not blind us to their funda¬
mental differences. There can be no
justification for criticizing unfamiliar
music on the basis of criteria which
are valid only for one's own tradition;
nor for attempts to "modernize" one's
own musical language by borrowing
from foreign music elements which
are totally out of keeping with it.
One of India's greatest figures,
Rabindranath Tagore, defined the
essential difference between the music
of the Orient and of the Occident in
these words:
"The world by day is like European
music: a flowing concourse of vast
harmony, composed of concord and
discord. . . And the night world is our
Indian music; one pure, deep and
tender raga. They both stir us, yet
the two are contradictory in spirit.
But that cannot be helped. At the
very root nature is divided into two,
day and night, unity and variety, finite
and infinite."
This does not mean that eastern
music will forever be a closed book
to the western public, or that western
music cannot be understood in the
East. But if Europeans are to enjoy
the music of the East, and Asians to
acquire a taste for western music,
cultural exchanges will be needed as
well as a period of initiation. As
Romain Rolland wrote in "Jean-Chns-
tophe": "In spite of the claims made
for it, music is not a universal lang¬
uage. Only the archery of words
can pierce the heart of each of us
with the arrow of sound."
African virtuoso
30
An oboe player of Chad. This type of oboe, varying only in size
and form of decoration, is found throughout Islamic Africa. In numerous
African villages, talented and often self-taught oboe players delight
their friends and neighbours with traditional local melodies played,
in many instances, on instruments of their own making. A remarkable
oboe solo by a young boy from the Kanem area of Chad figures
in a record entitled "Music of Chad (Kanem)", in the Unesco series
"An Anthology of African Music" (see inside back cover).

v.
^^"_
Photo © Afrique Photo
