THE NEW SCIENCE
OF ART CONSERVATION
by Harold J. Plenderleith
IHE temple, the statue and
the totem pole have to withstand the
action of wind and rain, heat and cold.
Old ships such as the Vasa (raised
from the sea bed in Stockholm har¬
bour); or the Victory (preserved at
Portsmouth, England), provide special
problems concerned with the control of
humidity, prevention from shrinkage
and protection from insect attack.
Mural paintings are normally sheltered
from extremes of temperature but may
be invaded by capillary moisture and
attacked by mould.
Science in our generation is at last
working in the service of monuments
and of museums in co-operation with
the art critic and the archaeologist.
Synthetic materials have been dev¬
eloped that can be used as an impreg¬
nating medium on tempera painting
without imparting any residual shine.
It can also be used to consolidate
pottery from salty deserts whilst the
salts are being washed from it and is
readily removed afterwards if desired.
It is now possible by soft X-rays to
record through a painting the original
crayon sketch made by the artist on
his canvas. Only a few years ago
this would have been regarded as
miraculous. It is also possible to re¬
move a fresco from the wall and leave
behind the mural painter's original
drawing, thus exposing for the art critic
a stimulating new world of interest.
Hundreds of
thousands of rare
books and
manuscripts were
damaged by the
floods that
overwhelmed
Florence, Italy, In
November 1966.
Here, a roomful of
volumes that were
taken apart, washed
page by page and
injected or fumigated
to combat mould,
their worst enemy.
Inestimable damage
was also caused
to countless art
treasures In
Florence during the
flood, which led
Unesco to launch
an International
rescue operation.
In Moscow, certain painted icons
have been found to be built up in a
series of strata on one and the same
wooden panel, and a special technique
has been evolved whereby it is
possible to recover the lower and older
ones without losing those above. Pic¬
tures can be transferred from worm-
eaten panels and mounted on sound
ones, and in other cases rotting can¬
vases are replaced by new ones. In
fact, the most delicate material and
most complex structures can be saved
by the skill of the modern restorer.
In the field of archaeology, the
mechanism of metallic corrosion, a
universal cause of deterioration, is now
well understood and means have been
devised to remove it or, at option, to
arrest its advance without necessarily
destroying the aesthetic character of
the piece.
There is hope that many of the
world's monumental treasures that are
threatened by exposure to atmospheres
polluted by industrial fumes may be
saved objects universally acclaimed
such as the splendid gilt bronze horses
of St Marks, Venice, or the lion and
griffon of Perugia whereas, in the
absence of these recent advances in
the service of conservation, their years
were numbered. The threat will remain,
however, as long as we are content to
breathe air that is polluted with
sulphur compounds. The cumulation
action on metals is as devastating as it
is on the human subjectl
An altogether new field has been
opened up by the physicist in the
application of his methods, of non¬
destructive testing, and these have
already made notable contributions to
the conservation of monuments. An
example that immediately comes to
mind of modern science in action is
the discovery and excavation of an
Etruscan tomb.
First the scientist applies his steth¬
oscope to mother earth. The detec¬
tion equipment of the Lerici Foundation
in Italy, famous for its discoveries of
Etruscan tombs, can be compared
with a stethoscope in sensitivity.
When the scientist detects a discon¬
tinuity beneath the surface he can pin¬
point the centre of a subterranean
chamber and fix his instruments with
such care that on drilling vertically and
inserting a special tubular periscope
with appropriate lighting, he has a
HAROLD J. PLENDERLEITH is director of the
International Centre for the Study of the
Preservation and Restoration of Cultural
Property, in Rome.

complete view of the interior. All that
has been done to make this possible
is to drill a little hole in the ground
10 cm. in diameter.
That, however, is no more than the
beginning. He has located the tomb.
He now proceeds to insert a small
camera into the tube and he takes a
series of colour photographs, rotating
the camera through 60° between each.
When these photographs are laid out
in orderly succession, there is a com¬
plete record of the paintings that
commonly adorn the walls, of any bas-
reliefs and of grave goods, etc.
Here is the monument disclosed for
study yet without a sod being turned.
A decision has now to be taken and
an important deduction made. Is the
tomb worthy of the time, care and cost,
necessary for its scientific excavation?
If not, it can be sealed and concealed
and we are the richer for the docu¬
mentation that has already been
obtained.
If, however, it is decided to exca¬
vate, the photographs will show how
to go about it for they will disclose
the position of the entrance door: the
location of the entrance passage can
be deduced, and instead of breaking
in through walls or ceiling, as happen¬
ed in previous generations, the exca¬
vation can be so conducted as to
avoid all damage by entering the tomb
from the side by its own passage and
CONTINUED ON PAGE 78
Photo © Solvay, Paris
This wooden statue Is being
injected against a scourge that
could reduce It to powder.
About 80 per cent of works of
art In wood are invaded by
Insects which thrive on a diet of
dry old -wood, in which they
live and proliferate, boring out
innumerable tunnels in the
process. Today, special
chemicals are injected to kill
the insects and prevent
reinfestation. Objects seriously
weakened by wood-boring
insects can be consolidated
by deep Injections of plastic
solutions or emulsion.
57

78
THE NEW
SCIENCE
OF ART
CONSERVATION
(Continued from page 57)
doorway. But this is not the end.
The monument will be destroyed unless
humidities are maintained, at least
until the mural paintings can be remov¬
ed and conditioned to the drier envir¬
onment above ground.
We have learnt much from our war¬
time experience of fire and pestilence
and, not least, that the slow decay of
susceptible material by exposure to
damp can be quite as destructive as
the damage from high explosives.
A picture may disappear from a wall
eaten up by mould growths, leaving
only a nondescript stain. But even
here science may have the last word.
I know of paper bearing invisible draw¬
ings having been nursed into shape
and successfully doctored by chemi¬
cals so that the drawings were actually
brought back to life again.
Things that are invisible to the naked
eye can be photographically recorded
by using the methods of ultra-violet
fluorescence, and in every police labor¬
atory there are several methods by
which it may be possible to recover
and decipher on charred or burnt
documents writings or drawings when
the ink seems to have been com¬
pletely burnt away.
The Italians are past masters at what
might be called preservation medicine
and surgery. This is born of a natural
facility in the studio and laboratory and
the untold wealth of their cultural heri¬
tage which demands incessant atten¬
tion. For it is not true that a monu¬
ment having survived from antiquity,
will necessarily go on surviving. Na¬
ture is always in a condition of change
and the change may be either sudden,
through excavation, or slow, through
neglect.
First come the rains, then growths
appear of moss, lichens or algae, and
the mortar is loosened. Ivy grows
over the ruin, attacks the structure
with its penetrating suckers. Humus
is formed, plants root themselves, the
level of the surrounding earth rises and
capillary moisture weakens the founda¬
tions so that the building becomes
derelict, and in this condition it is liable
to be used as a source of stone for
building or agriculture.
How different is the picture when the
aids of science are involved. The
modern architect and chemist knows
how to exclude moisture, prevent or
destroy damaging organic growths with¬
out contaminating the stone, introduce
a hidden armature of ferro-concrete,
grout walls with an approved cement.
THE SAME STATUE BEFORE AND AFTER RESTORATION. Left, ravaged features
of a 16th century painted stone statue of the Virgin, from St. John's Hospital,
Bruges, Belgium. Cracks and wrinkles have rendered the work almost unrecognizable.
Right, statue after it had undergone cleaning and restoration.
And, if the foundations are unsatis¬
factory or unstable hydrologically,
there are simple means by which
consolidation is possible using the
methods of electro-osmosis as applied,
for example, in Warsaw by Ceberto-
wicz to prevent the Church of St. Anna
from destruction due to the movement
of the clay slope on which it rested.
The clay was consolidated, the move¬
ment was arrested and a rock-like
basis for the structure provided by the
electro-deposition of calcium silicate.
G.I REAT advances have been
made in methods of conditioning the
air of museums and galleries to give
constant figures of temperature and
relative humidity and to remove dust
and noxious contaminents.
At least one war-time repository was
constructed in an underground mine
where, beforehand, the dew-point had
been continuously exceeded and mush¬
rooms were farmed commercially!
Control methods were put into opera¬
tion with the result that this mine,
though far below the surface of the
ground, became the perfect store room
for the most sensitive materials arch¬
ives, textiles, books and even salt-laden
Egyptian stele and other monuments:
no single object suffered damage.
But major problems remain. How
can one hope to deal with a monu¬
ment carved in crumbling latérite
exposed in a monsoon climate to
alternatives of fierce heat and torrent¬
ial rains? We do not know, but we
can do some calculated guess-work
which, in the scientific field, is often
the precursor of the pilot-experiment
that leads to an eventual solution.
Not long ago waterlogged wood was
considered to be practically beyond
. redemption. Now, the position is
much brighter, thanks to a concerted
attack by museum scientists working
in several countries, e.g. in Poland, at
the pre-Slav village of Biskopin which
is gradually being recovered from its
watery grave, on iron-age settlements
in Switzerland and on the frail but in¬
teresting timbers from mines and from
wells in the United Kingdom..
Each country has something to con¬
tribute. National museums take pride
in the quality of their conservation
work and friendly exchange of infor¬
mation in all such matters takes place.
The conservation of monuments is of
world importance, so much so, that an
intergovernmental organization exists
for the study of the preservation and
restoration of cultural property, the so-
called "Rome Centre" and this serves
all nations with up-to-date information
regarding methods and equipment and
materials and helps to train young
curators and museum technicians.
Its activities are known in many
countries throughout the world. It has
worked in collaboration with Unesco
for the protection of the Buddhist
temples of South Korea from destruc¬
tion and staining by water and lichen
growths, etc., and on Pakistan's
Mohenjo Daro, being seriously damag¬
ed by salt crystallizations.
It has also worked on Indian cave
paintings darkened by shellac, on the
painted tholos of Kasanluk in Bulgaria,
whose colours were flaking off in
layers, and on the Mayan site of
Bonampak in Mexico, where wonder¬
ful frescoes have miraculously survived
in the heart of the rain forests.
Work has also been done In Mor¬
occo, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt and on
many Middle East sites, and on
medieval gold crosses in Vienna. Bib¬
lical scrolls have been studied, dissect¬
ed and made available to scholars.
Patiently, continuously, this labour of
conservation goes on, a constructive
service to preserve for posterity the
monuments of the past that have serv¬
ed through the ages as a solace and
an inspiration to mankind and will
do so in generations to come.
January 1965
