THE CHALLENGE
OF THE SPACESHIP
By Arthur C. Clarke
This is a historic article. It was written ten years before the launching
of the world's first artificial satellite in October 1957, and shows the
remarkable foresight of this world-renowned science writer. Arthur
C. Clarke, former chairman of the British Interplanetary Society, won
the Unesco Kalinga Prize for the Popularization of Science, in 1962.
Article < Copyright. Reproduction prohibited
flN historian of the twenty-
first century, looking back past our
own age tö the beginnings of human
civilization, will be conscious of four
great turning points which mark the
end of one era and the dawn of a new
and totally different mode of life.
Two of these events are lost, prob¬
ably forever, in the primeval night
before history began. The invention of
agriculture led to the founding of sett¬
led communities and gave man the lei
sure and social intercourse without
which progress is impossible. The
taming of fire made him virtually inde¬
pendent of climate and, most important
of all, led to the working of metals and
so set him upon the road of techno¬
logical development that road which
was to lead, centuries later, to the
steam engine, the Industrial Revolu¬
tion, and the age of steel and petrol
and surface transportation through
which we are now passing.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Protective dome of a giant antenna at Pleumeur-
Bodou in Brittany (France). It was one of the two
European receiving stations that picked up the first
Transatlantic television programme transmitted
via communications satellite Telstar in 1962.
VlÑÉSC©*
s2*CH1Ví^.

CHALLENGE OF THE SPACESHIP (Continued)
The third revolution began, as all
the world knows, in a squash-court in
Chicago on December 2, 1942, when
the first self-sustaining nuclear reac¬
tion was started by man. We are still
too close to that cataclysmic event to
see it in its true perspective, but we
know that it will change our world, for
better or for worse, almost beyond
recognition. And we know too that it is
linked with the fourth and in some
ways greatest change of all the
crossing of space and the exploration
of the other planets.
The first spaceships capable of rea¬
ching another world may still lie half
a century ahead, but the giant rocket
is already with us and will soon be
carrying men to the limits of the atmos¬
phere and beyond. Nor will it be many
years before a guided missile reaches
the moon and blazes the trail along
which men will travel a generation later.
An attempt to construct a philoso¬
phy of astronautics is therefore far
from premature: it is, if anything, a
little belated. In the last few years
we' have seen the political and ethical
chaos produced when a great technical
development comes into a world which
is unprepared for it.
If our civilization is to have a future,
then we must see that it does not
repeat its earlier mistakes. I do not
suggest as some have done that
lawyers need start worrying immedia¬
tely about the ownership of the moon,
but the ownership of space will soon
be a matter of acute practical impor¬
tance. This problem will be of grave
concern in another decade, when long-
range research projectiles begin to
travel far outside the atmosphere with
a supreme indifference to the geogra¬
phy beneath them.
I
26
HERE was a time not long
ago when those who advocated
interplanetary travel were always
being asked, "How?". It is amusing
to recall that in those days which
now seem so remote there were many
people who refused to believe that a
rocket could work in a vacuum or
would ever be able to rise more than
a few miles from the earth.
Today, the power of the rocket has
been demonstrated, only too thorough¬
ly. "How" is a question one seldom
hears in discussions concerning space¬
flight: the commoner query is now
"Why?" And it is much more difficult
to answer, for it involves the motives
underlying all human conduct.
The urge to explore, to discover, to
"follow knowledge like a sinking star",
is a primary human impulse which
needs, and can receive, no further jus¬
tification than its own existence. The
search for knowledge, said a modern
Chinese philosopher, is a form of play.
If this be true, then the spaceship,
when it comes, will be the ultimate toy
that may lead mankind from its clois¬
tered nursery out into the playground
of the stars.
It is not hard to think of entirely valid
"practical" reasons why one should
wish to cross space. There is no doubt
that eventually sheer necessity would
bring about the conquest of the other
planets. I do not believe that it is
possible to have a virile, steadily-ad¬
vancing culture limited to a single
world, and taking the long-term view,
we know that our earth will one day
become uninhabitable.
In his book, The Birth and Death of
the Sun, the physicist George Gamow
points out that before its evolution has
finished, our sun will become 100 times
as luminous as it is today. I am glad
to see that he draws the obvious con¬
clusion and visualizes the migration of
humanity to the outer planets before
our earth's oceans have begun to boil.
But the human race will not wait
until it is kicked out. Long before the
sun's radiation has shown any measu¬
rable increase, man will have explored
all the solar system and, like a cau¬
tious bather testing the temperature of
the sea, will be making breathless little
forays Into the abyss which separates
him from the stars.
To support my argument, I now have
to develop some sort of time-scale.
I do this with much reluctance, since
prophecy is a dangerous and thankless
business, frequently fatal to those who
practise it. We have, however, learned
by past experience that even the most
extravagant forecast seldom overtakes
the truth.
The advances in rocket research
since the 1940s have been phenome¬
nal, but they have merely laid the foun¬
dations for what is still to come. Dur¬
ing the next decade, the techniques
necessary to send small, radio-control¬
led rockets to the moon will become
available.
There is no reason why such flights
should not take place by 1960. The
public, not realizing the problems still
to be faced, will expect human beings
to follow in a very short time. It will
be disappointed. During the subse¬
quent years there will be innumerable
short-range flights beyond the atmos¬
phere by man-carrying ships reaching
heights of a few thousand kilometres.
But if we have to rely on chemical
fuels, it may require at least 20 years
of further experimenting before the first
true spaceship lands on the moon and
returns to earth.
That brings us to the late 1970s. Any
chemically fuelled spaceships will be
unwieldy, fabulously expensive ma¬
chines with fuel consumptions measur¬
ed by the thousand tons for a single
voyage. Not more than one or two
countries will be able to build them,
and they will be of scientific value only.
There will be no question, for a very
long time, of colonization or of voyages
to the other planets. But and it is a
very large but any prophet would in¬
deed be rash if he based his predic¬
tions upon the use of chemical fuels
alone.
question-mark is atomic energy. In
theory, a few kilogrammes of uranium
could take a ship weighing 1,000 tons
to the moon and back. In practice, we
have a very long way to go before this
can be done.
The fact that it is not possible for
any spaceship to carry enough fuel for
a voyage to another planet and back
has long focused attention on what
have been called "orbital techniques".
Once a rocket is above the atmosphere
and therefore no longer subject to air
resistance, it becomes theoretically
possible for it to turn itself into a sort
of "artificial moon". It could wait
effortlessly until "tanker" rockets were
sent up to refuel it: then, when its
supplies had been replenished, it could
continue on its way.
In this manner any interplanetary
journey can be broken down into a
number of stages, with refuelling bet¬
ween them, and this procedure is be¬
lieved to be the key to space-flight.
It seems likely that we may use the
present-day "chemical" rockets to
climb up from earth into the refuelling
orbit, and then continue from there
using atomic or "ion" rockets.
A,kTOMIC power is hardly
likely to advance the conquest of
space by more than 10 years, but it
may make it practical almost from
the beginning which otherwise would
certainly not have been the case.
What is equally important, it will mean
that the whole solar system, and not
merely the moon, will be immediately
accessible to man.
It requires little more power to reach
the planets than it does to go to the
moon, but the most economical voy¬
ages involve months or event years of
free "coasting" along orbits curving
halfway round the sun. With atomic
power these journeys could be cut to
a fraction of the time. For example,
the "cheapest" journey to Mars as far
as fuel is concernedlasts 258 days.
With an atomic ship, travelling by a
more direct route at quite a moderate
speed, it need take only a few weeks.
The last quarter of this century will
be an age of exploration such as man
has never before known. By the year
2000 most of the major bodies in the
solar system will probably have been
reached, but it will take centuries to
examine them all in any detail.
Those who seem to think that the
moon is the goal of interplanetary tra¬
vel should remember that the solar
system contains eight other planets,
at least 30 moons, and some thousands
of asteroids. The total area of the
major bodies is about 250 times that
of earth, though the four giant planets
probably do not possess stable sur¬
faces on which landings could be
made. Nevertheless, that still leaves
an area 10 times as great as all the
land surface of the earth.
Here, as In other fields, the great This, then, is the future which lies

before us, if our civilization survives
the diseases of its childhood. It is a
future which some may find terrifiying,
as no doubt our ancestors found the
hostile emptiness of the great oceans.
But the men who built our world cros¬
sed those oceans and overcame those
fears. If we fail before the same test,
our race will have begun its slide into
decadence.
When the great explorers of the past
set sail into the unknown they said
goodbye for years to their homes and
everything they knew. Our children
will face no such loneliness. When
they are among the outermost planets,
when the earth is lost in the glare of
the sun and the sun itself is no more
than the brightest of the stars, they
will still be able to hear its voice and
to send their own words in a few hours
back to the world of men.
The most obvious and direct result
of the crossing of space will be a
revolution in almost all branches of
science. One can never predict the
outcome of any scientific investigation
and the greatest discoveries the ones
which will most influence human life
may come from sciences as yet
unborn.
Astronomy and physics will, of
course, be the fields of knowledge
most immediately affected. In both
these sciences there are whole areas
where research has come to a dead
end, or has never even started,
because our terrestrial environment
makes it impossible.
The atmosphere, which on a clear
night looks so transparent, is in reality
a coloured filter blocking all rays
beyond the ultra-violet.
An observatory on the moon, work¬
ing with quite small instruments, would
be many times as effective as one
on earth. Far greater magnifications
could be employed, and far longer
exposures used. In addition, the low
gravity would make relatively simple
the building of larger telescopes than
have ever been constructed on this
planet.
/ In physics and chemistry, access to
vacua of unlimited extent will open up
quite new fields of investigation. The
electronic scientist may well look for¬
ward to the day when he can build
radio tubes a kilometre long, if he
wishes, merely by setting up his elec¬
trodes In the open! We may learn
more about gravity when we can
escape partially or wholly from its
influence.
The prospect of building stations in
space, circling the earth like tiny moons
in orbits beyond the atmosphere, is
one that has a peculiar fascination.
Meteorological observatories in space
could see at a glance the weather over
half the planet, could watch in detail
the movement of storms and rain
areas. Indeed, really accurate fore¬
casting may have to wait until meteor¬
ologists get out into space.
The space station has one other
application of the greatest importance,
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
<l
col
zl
4*» *
«*¡E **
*W rvff- i
4«
* »» < , « i
»** ft* i
tu -m h\
" *T**^'
* *.
* ' -*
The earth, shaped like a
crescent moon, and part
of the moon's surface
photographed by the
unmanned American
spacecraft,
Lunar Orbiter I,
on August 23, 1966.
LUNAR INTERNATIONAL LABORATORY
The moon's great potential for science can best be realized if investigations are conducted
as an international enterprise and in an international laboratory. This idea gave rise
to the Lunar International Laboratory Committee of the International Academy of Astro¬
nautics. The committee came into being in August 1960 when the concept of a lunar
international laboratory (LIL) was put forward at Stockholm during the 11th Congress of
the International Astronautical Federation. As Dr. Frank J. Malina, Chairman of the
LIL Committee, has stated: "lust about every branch of science will find the moon,
with its unique environmental conditions no atmosphere, a gravity only 1 /6th that of
the earth, very weak or non-existent magnetic field a great laboratory for a host of
experiments and observations essentially impossible to perform on earth." The foundations
for a Lunar International Laboratory may well have been laid on December 13, 1963 when
the General Assembly of the United Nations unanimously declared: "The exploration and
use of outer space shall be carried on for the benefit and in the interests of all mankind."
May 1966

CHALLENGE OF THE SPACESHIP (Continued)
for it provides perhaps the only means
of world-wide television broadcasting.
Three relay stations circling the earth
could provide a steady, reliable service
from pole to pole with no more power
output than that of a single present-
day station.
However, the first direct results of
astronautics may be less important
than its indirect consequences. This
has proved true in the past of many
great scientific achievements. Coper¬
nican astronomy, Darwin's theory of
evolution, Freudian psychology these
had few immediate practical results,
but their effect on human thought was
tremendous. We may expect the same
of astronautics.
With the expansion of the world's
mental horizons may come one of the
greatest outbursts of creative activity
ever known. The parallel with the
Renaissance, with its great flowering
of the arts and sciences, is very sug¬
gestive. Interplanetary travel is now
the only form of "conquest and em¬
pire" compatible with civilization.
Without it, the human mind, compelled
to circle forever in its planetary gold¬
fish bowl, must eventually stagnate.
We all know the narrow, limited type
of mind which is interested in nothing
beyond its town or village, and bases
its judgments on parochial standards.
We are slowly perhaps too slowly
evolving from that mentality towards
a world outlook.
Few things will do more to accel¬
erate that evolution than the conquest
of space. It is not easy to see how
the more extreme forms of nationalism
can long survive once men see the
earth in its true perspective as a
single small globe among the stars.
Ti
28
HE solar system is rather a
large place, though whether it will be
large enough for so quarrelsome an
animal as Homo sapiens remains to be
seen. But it is surely reasonable to
hope that the crossing of space will
have a considerable effect in reducing
the psychological pressures and ten¬
sions of our present world.
Much depends, of course, on the
habitability of the other planets. It is
not likely that very large populations
will, at least for many centuries, be
able to subsist outside the earth.
There may be no worlds in the solar
system upon which men can live
without mechanical aids, and some of
the greatest achievements of future
engineering will be concerned with
shaping hostile environments to human
needs.
We must not, however, commit the
too common mistake of equating mere
physical expansion, or even increasing
scientific knowledge, with "progress"
however that may be defined. Only
little minds are impressed by sheer
size and number. There would be no
virtue in possessing the universe if it
brought neither wisdom nor happiness.
Yet possess it we must, at least in
spirit, if we are ever to answer the
questions that men have asked in vain
since history began.
Every thoughtful man has asked him¬
self: is our race the only intelligence,
or are there other, perhaps far higher,
forms of life elsewhere? There can be
few questions more important than this,
for on its outcome may depend all
philosophy yes, and all religion too.
The first discovery of planets revolv¬
ing round other suns, which was made
in the United States in 1942, has
changed all ideas of the plurality of
worlds. Planets are far commoner
than we had believed: there may be
thousands of millions in the galaxy
alone. Few men today would care to
argue that the earth must be the only
abode of life in the whole of space.
It is true it is even likely that we
may encounter no other intelligence in
the solar system. That contact may
have to wait for the day, perhaps ages
hence, when we can reach the stars.
But sooner or later it must come.
If the universe does hold species
greatly in advance of our own, then
why have they never visited the earth?
There is one very simple answer to this
question. Let us suppose that such
races exist: let us even suppose that,
never having heard of Einstein, they
can pass from end to end of the galaxy
as quickly as they wish-
That will help them less than one
might think. In 10 minutes, a man may
walk along a beach but in his whole
lifetime he could not examine every
grain of sand upon it. For all that we
know, there may be fleets of survey
ships diligently charting and recharting
the universe. Even making the most
optimistic assumptions, they could
scarcely have visited our world in the
few thousand years of recorded his¬
tory.
The desire to give a comprehensive
picture of the outcome of astronautics
has compelled me to range not
unwillingly over an enormous field.
However, I do not wish anyone to
think that the possibilities we have
been discussing need come in this
century, or the next, or the next. ... Yet
any of them may arise, at any time,
as soon as the first ships begin to
leave the earth. Man's first contact
with other intelligent races may lie as
far away in time as the building of the
Pyramids or it may be as near as the
discovery of X-rays.
Of this, at least, we may be fairly
certain: barring accidents the most
obvious of which I need not specify
the exploration of the planets will be
in full swing as this century draws to
its close. To examine them in any
detail, and to exploit their possibilities
fully, will take hundreds of years. But
man being what he is, when his first
ship circles down into the frozen
wastes of Pluto, his mind will already
be bridging the gulf still lying between
him and the stars.
November 1957

