The article below ¡s a
condensation prepared by
the staff of the "Unesco
Courier " of a study
prepared by Jean de Givry
on the development of
labour-management
relations in the past 50
years. Mr de Givry is head
of the Social Institutions
Development Department
of the ILO. On page 20 we
present major passages
from the conclusions by the
author himself, in which he
sums up the lessons and
prospects that emerge from
this half century of
developments in industrial
relations.

The new language
of labour-management relations
'LA PARTICIPATION'
IHE world of labour-man¬
agement relations has been marked
by many changes in the course of the
past five decades. Three major devel¬
opments stand out above the others.
First and foremost, is the new atti¬
tude toward the worker as a human
being in his own right, as an individual
or recognized member of a working
group rather than an impersonal unit
in a production schedule. With this
has come the encouragement of per¬
sonal initiative, the decentralization of
responsibility and increased efficiency.
The second major development has
been the series of important changes
in the basic structure of industry it¬
self or steps leading thereto. The
nationalization of certain industries
and public utilities, the participation
of workers in running publically-owned
enterprises, worker-management and
joint-management systems as well as
other formulas for giving employees
a voice in management all point to a
new interest in structural reforms that
have modified the wage earner's rôle
and indeed the capitalist system itself.
The third major development in
worker-management relations has been
the institution of various procedures
to prevent arbitrary action on the
part of management, such as the right
to organize and bargain collectively,
the right to strike, the right to air
grievances freely and without fear of
reprisals, the right to be protected
against dismissal without due cause,
and the right to a voice in running
an enterprise. All these add up to
a virtual Bill of Rights for working
people in industry.
Like the present-day monarchies,
modern industry has gradually evolved
from the absolutism of the past to a
"constitutional" system under which
authority is exercised in accordance
with a set of principles, criteria and
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
13

PARTICIPATION' (Continued)
A share in responsibility at all levels
14
rules that have been discussed and
agreed upon in advance.
These basic principles are funda¬
mental to any lasting improvement in
human relations in industry. David
Morse, Director-General of the ILO,
underlined this when he told the Inter¬
national Labour Conference in 1954
that, "The essential thing is to give
men a sense of purpose in their work...
Only when they understand how by
their work they contribute to the well-
being of society can they have that
confidence in their own true worth
which is the mark of freedom."
Over the past 50 years, a great deal
of thought and ingenuity has gone into
creating a more human atmosphere
in industry and improving day-to-day
relations between management and
employees. Working people now
know more about such things as their
company's policy and its position in
industry because managers increasing¬
ly recognize that a worker's respect
for his employer and his achievements
has a definite bearing on how efficient¬
ly an enterprise can be run, and
employees who take pride in the know¬
ledge that their work is worthwhile and
who know what their products will be
used for have a better attitude toward
their jobs and get more satisfaction out
of them.
Such a climate of understanding and
confidence, which increases plant effi¬
ciency and improves the worker's sit¬
uation, was emphasized by the Inter¬
national Labour Conference in 1967,
when it urged management to co¬
operate with employees in drawing up
policies of intercommunication that
would ensure a complete and objective
exchange of information.
A successful intercommunication po¬
licy cannot be an afterthought; it
should permeate industry at all levels,
instilling in all concerned the feeling
that they are working together with
a common aim. According to socio¬
logist Richard F. Behrendt of the
Federal Republic of Germany, "Men
living in the last third of the 20th cent¬
ury cannot be expected to do any more
than obey their orders in a mechanical
way unless they understand them and
feel they are justified." They will
respond to leaders with whom they
feel they can work together, and the
ability to kindle this kind of collabor¬
ation is a major quality of success¬
ful management today. Carried further,
this team spirit becomes "participative
management," a concept that stimulates
individual creativity and initiative by
encouraging workers to participate in
company activities.
P,ARTICIPATIVE manage¬
ment flourishes when industry is organ¬
ized so that as many people as possi¬
ble, at every level, share in responsib¬
ility. Two principles often used by
modern industry as guidelines are that
decisions should be taken at the
lowest possible level where the
problems are encountered and that
those who shoulder responsibility
should also be given corresponding
authority. This approach calls for
some basic rethinking by many execut¬
ives who still tend to hoard their
power.
Nevertheless, private enterprise is
undergoing far-reaching changes, and
the promotion of the status of workers
and their increased influence in man
agement are firmly established prin¬
ciples, although it is still not clearly
understood how they should be
applied.
A totally different approach to
labour-management relations has oc¬
curred in countries which have either
done away with private enterprise
altogether or at least made far-reach¬
ing changes in its character. In the
U.S.S.R. and the countries of Eastern
Europe, for example, industry and com¬
merce operate under a system based
on a centrally planned economy and
a unified trade union movement. Yet,
several of these countries differ con¬
siderably in the way they run their
industries.
In the U.S.S.R., the director bears
sole responsibility for the plant's
operation although in most personnel
matters he shares his authority with
the trade unions, and the workers have
a say in planning and production.
Yugoslavia introduced a system of
employees' self-management in 1950
with all workers sharing in manage¬
ment through their elected delegates
a fundamental right that is embodied in
the Yugoslav constitution of 1963.
Poland has had a worker-manage¬
ment system since 1958. The worker-
management conference, made up of
members of the works trade union com¬
mittee, the Communist party executive
committee and the Workers' Council
(elected by the employees), super¬
vises the overall running of the in¬
dustry, and takes general policy de¬
cisions.
Since 1968, industrial management
boards in Romania have been compos-

AGAINST RACIAL
DISCRIMINATION
For 50 years, the ILO has fought to win equal
pay and conditions for all workers irrespective
of race and colour. In 1958, it adopted
a convention against discrimination in
employment that has been ratified by 67 member
states. Similar action by Unesco led to the
adoption of a convention against discrimination
in education, now ratified by 50 member states.
Photo International Labour Office
ed of the manager, senior supervisory
staff, engineers and other specialists,
as well as the chairman of the trade
union committee and workers' repre¬
sentatives elected for two years.
But in other countries, workers are
assured a place on managerial or
supervisory boards of industry, some¬
times on an equal basis with share¬
holders, such as in the coal mining
and iron and steel industries of the
Federal Republic of Germany. And
in the United Arab Republic, employees
have equal representation on the
boards of public industry.
In other cases, workers have the
right to occupy only a minority of the
seats on boards of management or
supervision, such as under the general
system in force in the Federal Repub¬
lic of Germany, in Austria, and in the
French nationalized industries. Other
schemes guarantee worker representa¬
tion in the management of public in¬
dustries in the Syrian Arab Repub¬
lic and Mali.
In the past few years, industrial
reform has been widely debated in
many countries, particularly in Western
Europe. Trade unions in the Federal
Republic of Germany have run into
stiff opposition from employers, as they
call for the extension of joint-manage¬
ment to ail large companies. In Austria,
despite the efforts of the unions, joint-
management in industry has not yet
been introduced, while in the Nether¬
lands, the three main trade union
organizations urge that boards of
management should reflect the in¬
terests of investors and labour alike.
And in the United Kingdom, the Trades
Union Congress has gone into this
problem in a number of proposals
to the Royal Commission on Trade
Unions and Employers' Associations.
In France, the whole question of
workers' participation has been in the
forefront of political discussion for
some years. After the événements
of May, 1968, and the announcement
of widespread reforms which followed,
there was strong reaction to a plan
to introduce a new approach to in¬
dustrial organization. It involved three
separate elements: a worker's co¬
operative, an associated shareholders'
company, and a board of management
which would be responsible to a super¬
visory board representing both the
shareholders and the workers.
T,HE French National Em¬
ployers' Council opposed the plan,
stating that participation was insepar¬
ably bound up with efficiency and did
not include sharing control of the
company or becoming embroiled in
arguments which would hopelessly
mire efficiency. They felt that effi¬
ciency required one chain of command
under the control of the head of the
firm, who either owns it or is res¬
ponsible to the shareholders. They
admitted, though, that he had to de¬
legate a great deal of authority to his
supervisory staff and keep his em¬
ployees informed at all times.
Despite the fact that these some¬
what tentative developments have rais¬
ed the working man to a new position
in industry, the question of his parti¬
cipation in management has not yet
been completely settled.,.
In tackling the problem of labour-
management relations, the International
Labour Organization has been able to
isolate certain constant factors, despite
political and economic differences in
various countries. Over the past
50 years, it has played a decisive rôle
in promoting labour legislation through
international labour conventions and
recommendations. Most of these legal
instruments have set down minimum
standards of protection for workers
which, in the case of conventions,
must be followed by member states
that have ratified them, or which serve
as guidelines if incorporated in re¬
commendations.
The problems raised by changing
employer-worker relations are of
direct concern to the International
Labour Organization which, since it
was established, has stimulated recog¬
nition of the trade union movement and
contributed to its growth: international
standards adopted in 1948 and 1949
(the first ratified by 76 States, the
second by 84) were conceived to
protect freedom of association and
promote the right to organize and
bargain collectively, and in 1970, the
International Labour Conference will
draw up regulations to protect workers'
representatives in industry and pro¬
vide facilities for them.
Today, workers in industrial countries
are anxious to find new methods of
collective bargaining which would
strengthen trade union influence in
industry. The Royal Commission on
Trade Unions and Employers' Asso¬
ciations (1965-1968) went into the ques¬
tion in some detail, pointing out that
the United Kingdom has two systems
of industrial relations.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
15

'LA PARTICIPATION' (Continued)
Protection against unjustified dismissal
One is the formal, industry-wide col¬
lective agreement concerned with
settling pay, hours of work and
employment conditions, while the other
is an informal system born of the
actual behaviour of trade unions and
employers' associations, of managers,
shop stewards and workers. These
systems are often at odds with each
other since bargaining that takes place
within factories is mainly outside the
control of employers' associations and
trade unions.
The Royal Commission strongly
favours collective bargaining at the
factory level to regulate pay, form
negotiating committees and draw up
grievance procedures according to
local conditions, as well as deal with
such questions as reductions in per¬
sonnel, discipline and the rights and
obligations of shop stewards.
T,
16
HERE is a tendency in
some countries with long experience of
collective bargaining at this level like
the United States and Canada to
extend negotiations to include matters
that used to be decided exclusively by
management, such as the introduction
of technological change. When the
employees of Canadian National Rail¬
ways went on strike in October, 1964,
the investigating commission re¬
commended that management should
postpone technological changes until
the unions had been informed and
given the opportunity to negotiate
on them.
The right to strike is not dealt with
specifically in international labour
conventions. However, it is clearly
affirmed in the legislation and even
the constitutions of a number of
countries, and it is embodied in the
European Social Charter, drafted in
co-operation with the ILO and signed
in 1961 by the member states of the
Council of Europe. It is not surprising
that there are no international regula¬
tions on the right to strike: even on
a national level, they are difficult to
formulate.
The concept of the strike is difficult
to pin down in precise legal terms
because of the variety of situations
and purposes that can be involved.
And in addition to strikes called by
unions in support of claims put for¬
ward in collective bargaining, there
are "wildcat" or "unofficial" strikes,
not backed by trade unions.
To exercise the right to strike,
especially where essential services
are involved, presents problems which
are sometimes out of proportion to the
issues at stake. Because of the lack
of universally binding standards to
postpone or settle industrial strikes,
there is a great deal of interest in the
methods used in different countries,
and the International Labour Office is
preparing a comparative study of
these procedures.
Labour legislation and trade union
efforts have not only secured certain
rights for workers' representatives to
negotiate with management on an
equal footing, but they also shield the
workers themselves against arbitrary
action and defend their right to fair
treatment and protection against undue
loss of their jobs.
In 1967, the International Labour
Conference formally recognized that
any worker has the right to submit
his grievances without fear of reprisals,
and have them dealt with according to
accepted procedures.
The second point that no worker
should be arbitrarily deprived of his
job was internationally recognized
in 1963 when the International Labour
Conference adopted a recommendation
stipulating that no employee should
be dismissed without a valid reason
connected with his capacity or
conduct, or based on the operational
requirements of his employer.
This was a major step forward from
the traditional belief that an employer,
having hired a worker for an indefinite
period of time, did not have to justify
firing him, so long as he gave sufficient
notice.
The principle that dismissals must
be justified, already written into the
laws of countries like the Federal
Republic of Germany, Norway and the
U.S.S.R., has made definite progress
since the 1963 recommendation was
adopted and has been incorporated
in new laws passed in Italy and Cyprus.
In the United Kingdom, the Royal
Commission on Trade Unions and
Employers' Associations, in outlining
the safeguards that workers should
have to protect themselves against
unjustified dismissal, felt that voluntary
procedures should be developed and
extended. In addition, a majority of
the Commission members also re¬
commended passing legislation similar
to the ILO recommendation against
unfair dismissal.
This recommendation maintains that
any working man "who feels that his
employment has been unjustifiably
terminated" should be entitled to
appeal within a reasonable time "to a
body established under a collective
agreement or to a neutral body such
as a court, an arbitrator, an arbitration
committee or a similar body" with
the power to examine the case and
decide if the dismissal was justified.
If it decides against dismissal, it
should also have the authority to order
that the worker concerned, unless
reinstated (and, where appropriate,
with back payment of wages), should
be paid adequate compensation or
awarded some other form of relief.
However, the ILO recommendation
does not advocate that such bodies
should have a say in determining the
size of a firm's work force. In other
words, even if an employee's conduct
and work are satisfactory, he can be
dismissed simply because the work
he does is no longer necessary.
At a time of accelerated technical
change and increased competition, it
is generally recognized that an
industrial society must extend its
manpower mobility in order to keep
expanding: under a social policy
aimed at the greatest good for the
greatest number of people, the
principle that a worker must be kept
in the same job is no longer considered
justified; guaranteed earnings and
employment security in general are
more important than job security.
According to the International Labour
Conference of 1964, structural changes
should be made for two reasons:
"to obtain the greatest benefit from
economic and technical progress; (and)
to protect from financial or other hard¬
ship, groups and individuals whose
employment is affected by structural
changes."
To help unneeded workers to
maintain their incomes, find new work
and, if necessary, acquire the skills for
a different type of work is now
becoming an essential objective of
employment policy.
IN the industrial battle that
goes on in modern society where
groups of workers may suddenly be¬
come innocent victims just because
they are "surplus" or their skills have
become obsolete, there is a humane
obligation to help the unemployed on
the grounds that "we owe it to them".
The new principle of social justice that
now seems to be gaining acceptance
is that since society as a whole bene¬
fits from economic progress it is only
fair that it should also bear the social
cost.
The right of workers to participate
in running the firm they work for is
another feature of their improved
position in industry. Employees have
become more closely associated with
plant operations through such bodies
as works committees or councils
which are usually advisory in character,
at least in economic matters. In some
European countries, laws on such
worker-participation were passed after
the First World War, but it was only
during and after the Second World
War that the movement developed on
a large scale.
In 1952, the International Labour
Conference adopted a recommendation
which called for the promotion of
consultation and co-operation between
employers and workers at company

level on matters which did not fall
within the scope of collective bar¬
gaining or that was not normally dealt
with by other existing methods of
settling terms and conditions of
employment.
Some years later, in reviewing this
recommendation, the ILO predicted
that consultation and collaboration
schemes in industry could be expected
to grow and play an increasingly
important part in management.
L,.EGISLATION now provides
for such collaboration in Austria, Belg¬
ium, the Congo (Kinshasa), Finland,
France, the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many, Iraq, the Netherlands, Spain,
Tanzania and Tunisia. In other coun¬
tries where there are no binding laws
on the subject, there are nation-wide
agreements between central trade
union organizations and employers'
confederations as in Denmark, Norway,
Sweden and Italy, or agreements on
a voluntary basis, as in the United
Kingdom, Canada and India.
The workers' right to a share in the
profits of industry, safeguarded in a
number of countries by law, collective
agreements or on a voluntary basis,
is further proof of the change in
relationship between employers and
employees. One method is to assist
them to buy shares either in the firm
they work for or in another company
so that they can join the ranks of
shareholders and further the spread
of "people's capitalism".
A recent example of this trend is
a French law passed in 1967 which
makes it compulsory to give wage
earners a share in the benefits of the
expansion of any industry employing
more than 100 persons. This gives
the workers a "new right" based on
the idea that progress through common
efforts should be for the common
benefit if an employer uses the need
to plough back profits as a reason for
refusing wage increases, workers have
a certain claim to the resulting
increase in assets.
This legislation is similar to statutory
and contractual schemes introduced in
the Federal Republic of Germany to
encourage workers to invest.
There is a strong reaction against
the dehumanization of the worker
caused by conditions In modern
industrial plants. But if the ration¬
alization of production contributes to
reducing the working man to the level
of a tool, then his new rights help to
guarantee his dignity and a genuine
human existence.
Many observers acknowledge that
it is not necessary to abolish private
enterprise in order to improve the
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Photo © Ethel - Snark International
FREEDOM TO ORGANIZE
AND THE RIGHT TO STRIKE
Over the past few decade«, labour legislation and trade union action
have combined to win recognition for the working man's rights so
that he can bargain with management on an equal basis. Workers now
also have safeguards that protect them against arbitrary action
such as unjustified dismissal, job insecurity and excessive working hours.
There are no international regulations governing the right
to strike, but the ILO has implicitly recognized the right
to an unlimited strike when negotiations break down.
17

'LA PARTICIPATION' (Continued)
workers' lot fundamentally. The
French sociologist, Pierre Drouin,
maintains that "The evidence goes to
show that it is not the system of
industrial ownership that alienates
man . . . but quite simply the system
of production itself." Despite the fact
that some recent reforms have been
enacted to make shareholders out of
employees, the problem nowadays in
labour-management relations is as
much, if not more, a question of
"power" as of "ownership", and there
is a growing feeling that workers
should have a certain power in industry
by virtue of the fact that they are
employees.
But the problem remains whether
additional power for workers should
be exercised from outside the plant
through trade unions, or from inside
through worker representation on
management or supervisory bodies, or
by both methods simultaneously.
Once trade unions begin to operate
at the plant level and are able to
conclude collective agreements cover¬
ing questions formerly considered the
sole concern of management, the
workers' influence on management's
decisions will be much the same as
if they sat on managerial or super¬
visory boards.
H.
18
IOWEVER clear-cut it may
seem at first sight, the choice between
sharing responsibility and defending
the workers' interests does not. mean
that the two alternatives are strictly
separated. The fact that workers take
part in management does not rule out
the need for machinery to defend their
interests as employees. The emphasis
now placed in Yugoslavia on the
autonomy of the trade union movement
and on the fact that its chief responsi¬
bility is to protect the workers'
interests vis à vis the state and mana¬
gement, clearly shows that the aboli¬
tion of private enterprise and the
transfer of managerial power to the
workers do not necessarily exclude
conflict between those who give
orders and those who take them.
Even when trade unions are con¬
cerned only with their members'
interests, they tend to enlarge the
scope of bargaining to include prob¬
lems whose compexity forces them
to take the interests of industry into
account: if they didn't, the success of
future bargaining would be impaired.
One conclusion that clearly emerges
from the analysis of the three major
developments that have marked
employer-worker relations in the
past five decades is their growing
interaction. In order to bring about
more lasting improvements, isolated
measures are usually not enough; what
is often needed is to operate on all
three levels at the same time: the
reorganization of industry, better
methods of protecting the worker and
the human factors involved.

SAFETY AND HEALTH
ON THE JOB
The ILO continues to wage, a world campaign for more
and better safety devices and health precautions
on the job to meet new problems caused by today's
technological development. Since 1930, the ILO has
adopted a series of recommendations aimed at
eliminating silicosis, an occupational disease of miners.
Below, miners take a break at the pit bottom.
Measures proposed by the ILO have effectively reduced
other industrial hazards including lead poisoning,
a menace to painters and typesetters, and phosphorus
poisoning, once a threat to workers in the match-making
industry. But each year, the production and use of
new chemical substances creates fresh toxic dangers.
New measures are needed also to control noise
and improve poor working and living conditions which
cause tension and increase psychic and cardiovascular
illness. On the other hand, many dangerous jobs
have become safer: In the construction industry, rivetters
working on skyscrapers are protected by security
nets (photo left), and in the iron and steel industry,
special heat-resistant suits protect workers near
to high temperature steel furnaces (below left). An
international occupational safety and health information
centre was set up under the auspices of the ILO in
1960, and this summer it is organizing an international
congress to study fire protection in the factory,
safety and health in small firms, on farms and in the timber
industry, and safety and health training.
Photo © Ernst Haas - Maanum
d
