^

Man against Nature - 3
POLLUTION
-THE NUMBER 1
PROBLEM
p,
The dead pike (left) symbolize the
destructive effects of pollution in
our rivers, lakes and waterways
today. Throughout the world, water
pollution is bringing untold havoc
to fish and plant life, as well as
ruining these areas for swimming
and other recreational activities.
At the turn of the century,
50 species of fish could be found
in the lower reaches of the river
Seine. Today, only a few diseased
eels survive. It has been estimated
that the pollutants in French rivers
and lakes would fill 10,000 trains,
carrying 6,000,000 tons. Thousands
of lakes in Finland are now totally
polluted. Lake Zurich In
Switzerland is biologically dead:
pollution has exterminated all its
fish and other forms of life.
Photo © Yves Lanceau - Jacana, Paris
OLLUTION is the greatest
problem of our age. No longer can
we think of England's industrial north,
Germany's Ruhr, the U.S.S.R.'s Don¬
bass mining area, and a few other
places, as being the polluted areas
where money is to be made, but places
not to be lived in if possible.
In the last quarter of a century we
have polluted the whole planet so that
the fat-storing creatures of the remote
Antarctic continent, penguins and
seals, carry appreciable quantities of
organo-chlorine compounds in their fat,
the compounds we commonly allude to
as pesticides and which have not been
used within many hundreds of miles of
any part of the Antarctic continent.
We have learned now of the virtual
cessation of reproduction in some
species of birds which have not been
the objects of any hard feelings, only
of love and pleasure. We carry these
pollutants in the fat of our own bodies
and as yet do not know of any effects
on us, good or bad, but most thinking
people are concerned about the pos¬
sible effect of accumulations of these
compounds over the years.
Some developed countries have
regulated the use of pesticides and cut
down dosages, but this has meant the
economic dumping of large quantities
in tropical countries where there are
pests enough and little control over
the use of pesticides. The informed
among us know that to regulate use in
some countries but not on a world¬
wide basis does not prevent pollution
of the biosphere. We are world citi¬
zens willy-nilly now.
Dumpipg of wastes into rivers is an
obvious and well-documentated way
in which we are bringing about change
in the biosphere. The trouble arises
from the primitive notion that a river
is a natural sewer. Paper-making is
a modern industry in terms of cent
uries which has been responsible
for fouling many rivers of the forest
countries. The U.S. State of Maine
has a relatively low human population,
but its rivers are polluted to an extent
that precludes most of them receiving
a run of salmon. Where human popul¬
ation is dense, sewage is the main
problem.
Knowledge is being gained all the
time of how to deal with industrial
wastes, but regulation lags. Recent
production of pesticides has had a few
tragic sequels in the poisoning of
rivers and ditches. In comparison, the
carelessness of shepherds in draining
out baths of sheep dip is a small thing,
perhaps, but indicative of the thought¬
lessness that spreads man's deleter¬
ious influences over habitats beyond
the immediate vicinity. There has not
been sufficient realization that much
marine productivity on the continental
shelf has an estuarine basis.
Much could also be said on radio¬
activity. In the recent past, the radio¬
active level has been increased in air,
soil, water and living organisms over
large areas of the world. Experimental
atomic and hydrogen bomb explosions
and some other works with radionu¬
clides represent one of the greatest
dangers for all living organisms on
earth.
What might be the planetary profit
and loss account in relation to expen¬
diture and production of oxygen? We
believe our atmospheric figure of 20
per cent oxygen has been built up
through evolutionary time by the photo-
synthetic power of plant life, and the
slow deposition of organic matter in the
deep ocean sediments. So we may
ask, when we hear that a jet plane
crossing the Atlantic burns 35 tons of
oxygen, is industrial process and com¬
bustion dipping seriously into the mar¬
gin of production over consumption,
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
35

THE NUMBER 1 PROBLEM (Continued)
especially when we think of the rate
of destruction of forest growth and
other plant life.
Oxygen consumption and carbon
dioxide production are to some extent
linked; we know that the carbon
dioxide content of the atmosphere is
rising and that this could lead event¬
ually to such raisings of temperature
of atmosphere and oceans that there
could be a substantial ice melt which
would appreciably raise the level of the
oceans. Pollution, , combustion and
destruction are combined here in their
ultimate power of bringing change to
the biosphere.
The deposition of sewage into rivers
is of course age old. Lakes receive
this effluent, and eutrophic conditions
are being reported from as far apart
as Lake Erie and Lake Baikal. Life in
some lakes is being asphyxiated by
lack of oxygen and too great a deposi¬
tion of organic matter. Our river banks
and lake sides are becoming over-
populated.
In order to be able to live at high
densities we must process all sewage
and wastes. We are definitely trying
to mend our ways but not fast enough.
London's River Thames is improving
by civic action, and we must thank the
sport of trout fishing for saving from
pollution many streams that feed the
Thames and other rivers in England.
The wreck of the "Torrey Canyon"
focussed the attention of everyone on
the growing hazard of heavy oil pollu¬
tion of the sea and the secondary evil
of detergents used to combat the oil,
which kill more marine life than the
Photo © John Craven - Fotogram, Paris
oil itself. Responsible oil firms are
taking the dangers of oil transportation
by sea as a major task of research.
Half the world's ocean cargo weight is
oil 700 million tons of it in 1967, in
3,218 tankers.
Separators of improved design at
ports, plastic booms round oil har¬
bours, flocculants for spillage at sea,
jelling agents to solidify oil in threat¬
ened tankers and new methods of
loading and ballasting giant tankers,
show a willingness on the part of the
oil firms that we would be glad to see
more commonly in shore-based indust¬
ries that are potential pollutors of the
environment.
Smoke, smog, sewage and deter¬
gents, these are the pollutants pro¬
duced by modern man. We might also
add noise. It is one more addition to
bad environment engendering psycho¬
somatic disease, that hidden fifth col¬
umn in the sum total of our spoliation
of our world. How long will it be be¬
fore the individual has amenity rights,
and the burden is laid on those
offending?
ON THE WAY
TO A GLOBAL DUMP
More than 200 million automobiles now use
the world's roads. In cities, they
dangerously pollute the air we breathe.
Travelling 1,000 kilometres (600 miles), a
car consumes as much oxygen as a human
being does in a year, and in addition to
lethal carbon monoxide, it emits annually
about one kilogramme of lead. Certain
countries now oblige motorists to install
filters that reduce the amount of toxic
gases given off. Another problem created
by the proliferation of motor vehicles is
how to dispose of wrecked and worn-out
hulks. Increasingly they pile up (below) in
hideous "cemeteries" which blight the
countryside. The situation is so serious
that certain countries have built huge
scrap-metal plants that grind up old cars.
Even the deserts do not escape the
pollution of nature by man. Above, a
dump of petrol cans deep in the Sahara.
