THE BIOSPHERE
a delicate balance
between Man and Nature
by René Dubos
The Biosphere is a new word which every thinking individual today
ought to make part of his vocabulary. It means the thin layer of air,
water and land on our Planet Earth where life exists. The article below
describes how man's exploitation of nature and his environment has
affected the delicate balance of the Biosphere. It is based on an
important study prepared by the American biologist, René Dubos,
who benefitted from the findings of an international panel of experts
including Dr. François Bourlière, professor of gerontology at the Faculty
of Medicine, Paris, and president of the International Union for
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources; Marion Clawson,
director of the Land-Use and Management Programme for Resources
of the Future, Washington; the British ecologist Frank Fraser Darling
(see page 24), and specialists from Unesco, the Food and Agriculture
Organization and the World Health Organization. The study was
presented as a basic text to the international conference on Man and
the Biosphere, held in Unesco, Paris, in September 1968.
A,ILL men are migrants from
a common origin. Their various races
have undergone minor modifications
during prehistoric and historic times
as a result of the migrations that
exposed them to different environ¬
mental factors and led them to adopt
different ways of life.
But on the whole, their genetic
endowment is still much the same as
it was several tens of thousands of
years ago. Furthermore, there is no
indication that it will change signifi¬
cantly in the near future, because
the normal process of genetic evolu¬
tion is much too slow, even though
natural selection is still at work. For
this reason, human life can be sus¬
tained only within the fairly narrow
range of physical and chemical limits
that fit the anatomic and physiological
characteristics of Homo sapiens.
The fact that modern man is
constantly moving into new environ¬
ments gives the impression that he
is enlarging the range of his biological
RENE DUBOS has devoted his entire life
to the effects of the environment on man
and the impact of human life on the environ¬
ment. Professor of microbiology and experi¬
mental pathology at Rockefeller University,
New York, he is the author of a score of
books and studies on the subject, including
"Man, Medicine and Environment' (Praeger,
New York, 1968), "Man Adapting" (Yale Uni¬
versity Press 1965), "Unseen World" (Rocke¬
feller Institute Press, 1962), "Dreams of
Reason: Science" and Utopias" (Columbia
University Press, 1960), 'Mirage of Health"
(Harper, New York, 1959; George Allen and
Unwin, London, 1960; In paperback, Double-
day, New York, 1961), 'So Human an Animal'
(Scnbner, New York, 1968).
adaptabilities and thus escaping from
the bondage of his evolutionary past.
But this is an illusion. Wherever he
goes, and whatever he does, man can
function only to the extent that he
maintains or creates around himself a
micro-environment similar to the one
within which he evolved.
He moves at the bottom of the sea
or in outer space only if he remains
linked to the earth by an umbilical
cord or is confined within enclosures
that almost duplicate the terrestrial
atmosphere. He can survive in
environments polluted with chemicals,
noise, and excessive stimuli, but he
retains physical and mental health only
if he protects himself by devices that
shelter him from these environmental
pollutants.
Granted these biological limitations,
it remains true on the other hand that
man is today as adaptable as he was
during the late Stone Age when he
established settlements over much of
the earth. During the past few
decades, countless persons have sur¬
vived the frightful ordeal of modern
warfare or of concentration camps.
Under normal conditions, the bio¬
logical mechanisms of adaptation
are powerfully supplemented by
mechanisms that do not require any
change in man's biological nature.
All over the world, the most crowded,
polluted and brutal cities are also the
ones which have the greatest appeal
and in which population is increasing
the fastest. Economic wealth is being
produced by men and women working
under extreme nervous tension amidst
the infernal noise of high-power
equipment, typewriters, and telephones,
in atmospheres contaminated with
chemical fumes or tobacco smoke.
Because man is endowed with such
remarkable ability to tolerate conditions
profoundly different from the ones
under which he evolved, the myth has
grown that he can endlessly and safely
transform his life and his environment
by technological and social inno¬
vations; but this is not the case. On
the contrary, the very fact that he
readily achieves biological and socio-
cultural adjustments to many different
forms of stress and of undesirable
conditions paradoxically spells danger
for his individual welfare and for the
future of the human race.
Man can achieve some form of
tolerance to environmental pollution,
excessive environmental stimuli, crowd¬
ed and competitive social contacts,
the estrangement of life from the
natural biological cycles, and other
consequences of life in the urban and
technological world. This tolerance
enables him to overcome effects that
are unpleasant or traumatic when first
experienced. But in many cases, it is
achieved through organic and mental
processes which may result in the
chronic and degenerative disorders
that so commonly spoil adult life and
old age, even in the most prosperous
countries.
Man can learn also to tolerate ugly
surroundings, dirty skies, and polluted
streams. He can survive even though
he completely disregards the cosmic
ordering of biological rhythms. He can _
live without the fragrance of flowers, 7
the song of birds, the exhilaration of '
natural scenery and other biological
stimuli of the natural world.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

THE BIOSPHERE (Continued)
How many square feet per inhabitant?
This loss of amenities and elimina¬
tion of the stimuli under which he
evolved as a biological and mental
being may have no obvious detrimental
effect on his physical appearance
or his ability to perform as part of
the economic or technologic machine.
But the ultimate result can be and
often is an impoverishment of life, a
progressive loss of the qualities that
we identify with humanness and a
weakening of physical and mental
sanity.
Air, water, soil, fire, the rhythms of
nature and the variety of living things,
are of interest not only as chemical
mixtures, physical forces, or biological
phenomena; they are the very in¬
fluences that have shaped human life
and thereby created deep human
needs that will not change in the
foreseeable future. The pathetic week¬
end exodus to the country or beaches,
the fireplaces in overheated city apart¬
ments, the sentimental attachment to
animal pets or even to plants, testify
to the persistence in man of biological
and emotional hungers that developed
during his evolutionary past and he
cannot outgrow.
Like Anteus of the Greek legend,
man loses his strength when his feet
are off the ground.
We
8
1 HILE the genetic endow¬
ment of Homo sapiens has not under¬
gone any significant alterations since
the late Stone Age, it is obvious that
man's interaction with his environment
has greatly changed with time and
differs from place to place. The reason
is that mankind as a whole possesses
a wide range of genetic potentialities,
most of which remain unexpressed
under ordinary conditions. These
potentialities are developed through
the creative effects of the responses
that each person makes to environ¬
mental stimuli.
Man cannot modify significantly the
genetic constitution of the human race,
but he has a large measure of control
over the quality of human life because
he has learned to manipulate the envir¬
onmental factors which condition
the detectable expressions of his
genetic endowment. Individually and
collectively, man makes himself
through responsible choices at each
moment of his existence.
In theory, all human beings have
much the same essential biological
needs; but in practice actual needs
are socially conditioned and therefore
differ profoundly from one human
group to another. Even food require¬
ments cannot be defined without
regard to historical and social factors.
The value of an article of food is not
determined only by its content in
protein, carbohydrate, fat, vitamins,
minerals, and other chemical com¬
ponents.
A particular food has, in addition to
its metabolic values, symbolic values
which make it either essential or
unacceptable to a particular group of
persons depending upon their beliefs
and past experiences. These symbolic
aspects of nutrition are not of im¬
portance only among primitive people.
Americans are even more reluctant to
eat horse meat than Frenchmen are to
eat cornbread.
Furthermore, needs are not unchan¬
geable. Some which appear almost
essential today may become trivial in
another generation, not because man's
biological nature will change, but
because the social environment usually
undergoes rapid and profound modi¬
fications. It may turn out for example
that the individual motor car will
progressively disappear if driving
loses its appeal because of traffic
congestion or boredom, and if people
learn to use more of their leisure time
within walking distance of their homes.
The individual detached house so
characteristic of the North American
continent may also become obsolete
once home ownership loses its sym¬
bolic meaning of economic and social
independence by reason of more gen¬
eralized prosperity and financial secur¬
ity. Changes in automobile usage and
in housing habits would probably have
enormous effects on the fate of land
areas, as would of course changes in
the methods of food production.
The phrase "essential need" is there¬
fore meaningless because in practice
people need what they want. As
technological civilization develops,
needs are determined less and
less by the fundamental biological
requirements of Homo sapiens and
more by the social expectations.
These expectations are created by
the environment in which man lives
and especially in which he has been
brought up. The members of a given
social group generally come to desire,
and consequently develop a need for,
whatever is regarded as most desirable
by the group. The good life is identi¬
fied with the satisfaction of these
needs whatever their biological utility.
Wants become needs not only for
individual persons, but "also for whole
societies. Elaborate religious in¬
stitutions and ceremonies were ap¬
parently a need for the 13th century
European towns, which devoted to the
creation of churches and monasteries
a percentage of their human and
economic resources that appears
extravagant to us in relation to the
other aspects of medieval life.
Our own societies seem particularly
concerned with creating a middle-class
materialism with a veneer of uplifting
platitudes. This creates its own pattern
of costly demands irrelevant to biolog¬
ical necessity for example costly
carbonated beverages and narcotizing
television programmes.
IHE environments men
create through their wants constitute to
a very large extent the formula of life
they transmit to succeeding gener¬
ations. Thus, in addition to affecting
present-day life, the characteristics of
the environment condition young
people and thereby determine the
future of society. It is unfortunate
therefore that we know so little and
make so little effort to learn how the
total environment affects the physical
and mental development of children,
and how much of the influence persists
in adult life.
There is no doubt that the latent
potentialities of human beings have a
better chance of being realized when
the total environment is sufficiently
diversified to provide a variety or
stimulating experiences, especially for
the young. As more persons find the
opportunity to express a larger per¬
centage of their biological endowment
under diversified conditions, society
becomes richer and civilizations, con¬
tinue to unfold.
In contrast, if the surroundings and
ways of life are highly stereotyped, the
only components of man's nature that
can become expressed and flourish
are those adapted to the narrow range
of prevailing conditions.
Historically, man was very slow to
expand his horizons and develop his
full genetic potential. Thus, sur¬
rounding early man with nature does
not seem to guarantee a rich, diverse
existence. Furthermore, in some
present rural areas of the developed
countries, man has produced a
monotony of both crops and culture
that stifles human development.
The present trends of life in
prosperous countries are usually
assumed to represent what people
want; but in reality the trends are
determined by what is available for
choice. What people come to want
is largely determined by the choices
readily available to them early in life.
Many children growing up in some of
the most prosperous suburbs of
industrialized countries may suffer
from a critical deprivation of ex¬
periences and this determines the
triviality of their adult lives. In
contrast, some poor areas of the world
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10

/' ' i
¿ m
W:
Photo C) Andreas heininger
By 2000 A.D. it is estimated that the world's population will reach the 7,000 million mark.
Many cities which today have several million inhabitants will grow into vast megalopolises.
Already afflicted by incessant noise, fumes and stress, modern city dwellers increasingly
feel the need to escape from these "unnatural" living conditions and seek relief in the
tranquility, clean air and open spaces of the countryside that have still been spared.
9

THE BIOSPHERE (Continued)
Man in a fish bowl &.~+3
10
provide human environments that are
so stimulating and diversified that
many distinguished adults emerge from
them despite the economic poverty of
their early years.
There is no doubt, in any case,
concerning the sterilizing atmosphere
of many modern housing developments
which are sanitary and efficient, but
inimical to the full expression of
human potentialities. All over the
world, many of these developments
are planned as if their only function
was to provide disposable cubicles
for dispensable people. Irrespective
of their genetic -constitution, most
young people raised in such a fea¬
tureless environment, and limited to a
narrow range of life experiences, will
suffer from a kind of deprivation that
will cripple them intellectually and
mentally.
In judging the human quality of an
environment, it is essential to keep in
mind that passive exposure to stimuli
is not enough to elicit individual
development. The stimulus becomes
formative only if the organism is given
a chance to respond to it actively and
creatively. Amusement parks and
zoological gardens, richly endowed as
they may be, are no substitute for
situations in which the developing child
can gain direct experience of the world
through active participation. Juvenile
delinquency is probably caused to a
very large extent by the failure of
the modern world to provide oppor¬
tunities for the creative expression of
physical and mental vigour during a
human being's most active period of
development.
Man has been highly successful as
a biological species because he is
extremely adaptable. He can hunt or
farm, be a meat-eater or a vegetarian,
live in the mountains or by the
seashore, be a loner or a team
member, function under aristocratic,
democratic, or totalitarian institutions,
but history shows also that societies
that were once efficient, because highly
specialized, rapidly collapsed when
conditions changed. A highly-spec¬
ialized society, like a narrow spec¬
ialist, is rarely adaptable.
Cultural homogenization and social
regimentation resulting from the
creeping monotony of over-organiz¬
ed and over-technicized life, standard¬
ized patterns of education, mass
communication and passive entertain¬
ment, will make it progressively more
difficult to exploit fully the biological
richness of the human species and
may handicap the further development
of civilization.
We must shun uniformity of sur¬
roundings as much as absolute
conformity in behaviour and tastes.
We must strive instead to create as
many diversified environments as
possible. Richness and diversity of
physical and social environments
constitutes a crucial aspect of function-
alism, whether in the planning of
rural and urban areas, the design of
dwellings, or the management of
individual life.
Diversity may result in some loss
of mechanical and administrative
efficiency and will certainly increase
stresses, but the more important goal
is to provide the many kinds of soil
that will permit the germination of the
seeds now dormant in man's nature.
|T is often assumed that
progress depends on man's ability to
conquer Nature. In reality, there exist
throughout mankind biological and
emotional needs that require not
conquest of Nature, but rather har¬
monious collaboration with its forces.
The ultimate goal of conservation
policies should be to manage the en¬
vironment in such a manner that it
contributes to the physical and mental
health of man and to the flowering of
civilization.
Unfortunately, while there is much
know-how concerning certain limited
aspects of conservation practices, there
is little understanding of what should
be conserved and why. In fact, the
goal should not be to conserve but
rather to guide the orderly evolution
of Man-Nature interrelationships.
Conservation certainly implies a
balance between the multiple com¬
ponents of nature including man.
This is a doctrine difficult to reconcile
with the present trends of modern
civilization, built on the Faustian
concept that man should recognize
no limit to his power. Faustian man
finds satisfaction in the mastery of the
external world and is engaged in
endless pursuit of success for success'
sake, even when he tries to reach the
unattainable. No chance for balance
here.
To be compatible with the spirit of
modern civilization, the practices of
conservation cannot be exclusively or
even primarily concerned with saving
parts of the natural world or man-
made artifacts for the sake of preserv¬
ing individual specimens of interest or
beauty. Their goal should be the
maintenance of conditions under which
man can develop his most desirable
potentialities.
Since man relates to his total en¬
vironment and especially is shaped
by it, conservation implies a quality
of relationship rather than a static
condition. Man must engage in a
creative interplay with his fellows,
animals, plants, and all the objects
CONTINUED ON PAGE 12
mm

THE PATIENT
FISHER TAKES
HIS STAND...
"It is an art worthy the
knowledge and patience of a
wise man," observed the
English writer Izaak Walton,
in his 17th century classic
"The Compleat Angler".
Above, thousands of
fishermen gather on the ice
of White Bear Lake
(Minnesota) U.S.A. for an
annual ice-fishing contest
This airview shows anglers
concentrated within the igloo
design on the ice, around
which is a vast circle of
competitors' cars. Left,
piscatorial pleasures in the
city. A Japanese angler tries
his luck in one of Tokyo's
indoor fishing pools. For the
men, right, fishing Is not a
sport but their livelihood.
Perched on stilt-like platforms,
they are waiting on a south
coast beach In Ceylon for the
sardines to bite.

THE BIOSPHERE (Continued)
A countryside adjusted to human limitations
of nature that directly or indirectly
affect him, and which he affects.
From the human point of view, the
total environment, including the re¬
mains of the past, acquires its full
significance only when harmoniously
integrated with the living tissues of
man's life. It can even be demonstrat¬
ed that because they shape irreversibly
all aspects of human development,
environmental forces are, so to speak,
woven in man's physical and mental
fabric.
The ill-defined meaning of the word
Nature compounds the difficulty of
formulating a scientific basis for the
philosophy of conservation. If we
mean by nature the environment as
it would exist in the absence of man,
then very little of it survives. Not
even the strictest conservation policies
could restore the primeval environ¬
ment; nor would this be necessarily
desirable if it could be done. Nature
is never static. Physical forces and
living creatures alter it continuously;
animals especially modify parts of it
to fit their biological and behavioural
needs.
12
F<OR animals as well as for
men, the kind of environment which is
most satisfactory is one with which
they are familiar and in which they have
introduced modifications that facilitate
their biological and social life, such
as territorial marks, trails for explora¬
tion, access to water supplies, re¬
treats for mating, sheltered areas to
protect the young. In general, the
ideal conditions imply a complementary
cybernetic relationship between a par¬
ticular environment and a particular
living thing.
Civilized nature should be regarded
not as an object to preserve unchang¬
ed, not as one to dominate and exploit,
but rather as a kind of garden to
develop according to its own poten¬
tialities and in which human beings
develop according to their own genius.
Ideally, man and nature should be
joined in a non-repressive and creative
functioning order.
Nature can be tamed without being
destroyed. Unfortunately, the word
taming has come to imply subjugating
animals and nature. Like men and
animals, landscapes tamed in this
manner lose their real essence, and
become spiritless. To be biologically
successful, taming demands the estab¬
lishment of a relationship that does
not deprive the tamed organism-man,
animal or nature of the individuality
that is the sine qua non of survival.
There are two kinds of satisfactory
landscape. One is a landscape as
little disturbed as possible by human
intervention. The other kind of
satisfactory landscape is one created
by man and in which he has achieved
harmony with natural forces. Most
commonly, this has been achieved
through centuries of interplay between
human societies and the land on which
they have settled.
What we long for most often is not
nature in the raw, but a landscape
adjusted to human limitations and
expressing the aspirations of civilized
life in its many different forms. For
this reason, each people has its
preferred landscape, constituting an
integration and synthesis of natural
forces and of cultural traditions.
Indeed, much of what we regard
today as natural environment is in fact
a product of history. The valleys of
the Nile and Euphrates were shaped
by human labour during the Neolithic
period. And much of the arable land
all over the world is also the product
of man's management of the primeval
forest.
Many of the plants now considered
typical of the Mediterranean landscape,
the olive tree for example, were in fact
introduced from Iran. The tulip, which
is now such a characteristic of the
Netherlands, was first brought there
from Turkey as late as the 16th century.
Irrespective of social changes, cities
and their streets, the highways link¬
ing them, as well as the countryside
surrounding them, also retain traces
of the character imposed on them by
early historical influences. The future
development of new cities, especially
in the U.S.A., is bound to be constrain¬
ed by the grid-iron pattern and the
network of highways that shaped their
early growth.
Since most of the environment as it
exists today is a creation of man, and
in turn influences the subsequent de¬
velopment of human societies, environ¬
mental quality must take into consid¬
eration not so much the preservation
of the natural state, as the effects of
the environment on the future of civi¬
lized life.
From this point of view, the situation
looks very dark in most parts of the
world. Everywhere, societies seem
willing to accept ugliness for the sake
of increase in economic wealth.
Whether natural or humanized, the
landscape retains its beauty only in
the areas that are not valuable for
industrial and economic exploitation.
The change from wilderness to dump
heap symbolizes at present the course
of technological civilization. Yet the
material wealth we are creating will
not be worth having if creation entails
the raping of nature and the destruc¬
tion of environmental charm.
O
MR. OTTER
AND THE UNWITTING
FISHERMAN
What happens when man upsets one
of the delicate balances in nature ?
This little story gives one example of
the boomerang effect of man's spo¬
liation of wildlife, in this case the
harm caused by killing off the Offer.
Mr. Otter loves fish and thus seems to
be a big rival of the fisherman.
Mr. Fisherman thinks he is acting in the
interests of all by killing the otter.
Mr. Fisherman finds his catch has
dwindled seriously.
Mr. Otter caught mostly old or sick
fish. When he was killed off, there were
more sick fish to spread disease and the
fish colony was decimated. Moral:
Mr. Fisherman had unwittingly destroyed
one of nature's safeguards against
degeneration and epidemics, without
which rivers vould soon be depopulated.

In the past, the primeval wilderness
progressively evolved into a humanized
form of nature through the continuous
"wooing" of the earth by peasants,
monks, and princes. We must now
learn to convert the drab wilderness
generated by technology into a new
kind of urbanized and industrialized
nature worthy of being called civilized.
In the huge urban areas of the
modern world we must supply the
inhabitants with something more than
amusement parks, highways for
sightseers and paved grounds for
weekend campers. No social philo¬
sophy of urbanization can be success¬
ful if it does not deal with urban man
as part of the highly-integrated web
which unites all forms of life.
There have been many large cities
in the past, but until recent times their
inhabitants were able to maintain fairly
close and direct contacts with the
countryside or with the sea, and thus
could satisfy the physiological and psy¬
chological needs acquired during the
human past. Historical experience,
especially during the 19th century
shows that urban populations are apt
to develop ugly tempers when com¬
pletely deprived of such contacts.
Saving nature in both its wild and
humanized aspects is thus an essential
part of urban planning.
Wherever man has been successful
in "wooing" the land and assuring its
biological viability, success has result¬
ed from his ability and willingness to
plan his creations within the con¬
straints determined by climate, top¬
ography, and other local characteristics
of Nature. In the past, this was also
true of cities which were planned
in accord with certain geographical
imperatives.
Modern cities are in contrast devel¬
oping without any regard to physical
and biological constraints and only
under the influence of economic and
political imperatives. The belief that
man can "master" the environment and
achieve independence of his innate
biological limitations has generated
the impression that there is no need
for disciplines in the development of
cities. Most urban problems derive
precisely from such a misapplied inter¬
pretation of freedom.
Town planning as well as country
planning will not be successful until
we learn again to recognize and accept
the restraints that are inherent in man's
biological nature and in geographical
conditions. In fact the whole concept
of planning the use of our environment,
or perhaps what is better described in
French as "aménagement du territoire,"
is only emerging as a new discipline
and it is high time that it be developed
all over the world on sound ecological
principles.
Rational environmental planning
cannot be done by acting under
the pressure of emergency as is now
the general practice. Unfortunately,
the construction of great dams all over
S
to
o.
-"
Lu
O
CL
C
O
HOW BIRDS OF
PREY PROTECT
OUR CROPS
s
c
o
E
3
O
O
Q
a>
-o
o
o
O
¡J
«lt*-4rt-«^<iiW-*»-*-i*u*-rtí>^rf» I
-o
<u
m i
a.
a>
a
a.
(0
£ i
Locusts which destroy crops and
vegetation are devoured by frogs.
Frogs are preyed on by snakes, and
snakes are hunted by birds of prey.
a
t¿
i
zl
I
<D i
"O
c
o
tí
o
a
CD
e
o
©
«
o
o
-C
a.
If birds of prey are destroyed, the
snakes multiply and wipe out the
frogs. The locusts then proliferate
and devastate croplands. All birds
of prey thus deserve protection.
the world is prompted not by compre¬
hensive, integrated programmes of
water and land use but by the threat
of floods or of water shortages. Poli¬
cies for the control of soil erosion
are enacted only after irreversible dam¬
age has been done.
There is a general awareness of the
dangers posed by noise, environmental
pollution, and the misuse of drugs, but
effective measures are rarely taken
before some catastrophe creates an
atmosphere of panic. In fact, most
environmental programmes emerge as
empirical adaptive responses to acute
crises and usually take the form of
disconnected palliative measures de¬
signed to minimize social unrest or
the depletion of a few natural re¬
sources.
For lack of adequate knowledge,
the environment is being manipulated
almost exclusively on the basis of
technological criteria without much
concern for its biological and psychol¬
ogical effects. These effects should
be considered not only in the here
and now, but in their long-range conse¬
quences and in their relevance to
mankind as a whole.
Before long, all parts of the globe
will have been occupied or exploited
by man and the supply of many natural
resources will have become critical.
Careful husbandry of the spaceship
Earth rather than exploitation of natural
resources, will then be the key to
human survival.
Developing stations in outer space
or on the bottom of oceans will not
modify significantly if at all the physical
limits of human existence. Man
emerged on the earth, evolved under
its influence, was shaped by it, and
biologically he is bound to it forever.
He may dream of stars and engage in
casual flirtations with other worlds,
but he will remain wedded to the earth,
his sole source of sustenance.
As the world population increases,
the topographical limitations of the
spaceship Earth and the inevit¬
able exhaustion of its natural resources
will inevitably require that its economy
be based on strict ecological principles.
This imperative necessity however, is
not yet widely recognized. The very
word ecology (the interrelationships of
qrganisms and their environments) was
introduced into the scientific language
only 100 years ago by Ernst Haeckel,
the German biologist, so recent is the
awareness that all components of
nature are interwoven in a single
pattern and that we too are part of
the pattern I
Until now, man has behaved as if
the areas available to him were un¬
limited, and as if these were infinite
reservoirs of air, soil, water, and other
resources. He could do this with relat¬
ive impunity in the past because there
was always some other place where
he could go, start a new life, and
engage in any kind of adventure that
he chose.
Since the evolutionary and historical
experiences of man are woven in his
mental fabric he naturally finds it
difficult not to behave as a nomad
and hunter. It is not natural for him
to rest quietly in a corner of the earth
and husband it carefully. His thought¬
lessness in provoking ecological situa¬
tions that are potentially dangerous
originates partly from the fact that he
has not yet learned to live within the
constraints of his spaceship.
The ecological attitude is so unfam¬
iliar, even to many scientists, that
it is often taken to imply acceptance
of a completely static system. Stud¬
ents of human sociology have ex¬
pressed concern lest the ecologist's
professional interest in the well-ba¬
lanced smoothly-functioning, steady-
state ecosystem of the pond be
extrapolated uncritically to the whole
earth and its human population. They
are right in emphasizing that man's
relation to his total environment cannot
be regarded as a steady-state ecosys¬
tem because this would imply that the
human adventure has come to an end.
The physical forces of the environ¬
ment are forever changing, slowly
but inexorably. Furthermore, all forms
of life including human life are contin¬
uously evolving and thereby making
their own contribution to environmen¬
tal changes. Finally it seems to be
one of man's fundamental needs to i Q
search endlessly for new environments | <J
and for new adventures. There is no
possibility therefore of maintaining a
status quo.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

THE BIOSPHERE (Continued)
The challenge of the urban landscape
Even if we had enough learning and
wisdom to achieve at any given time
a harmonious state of ecological equi¬
librium between mankind and the other
components of the spaceship Earth, it
would be a dynamic equilibrium, and
this would be compatible with man's
continuing development.
The important question is whether
the interplay between man and his
natural and social surroundings will be
controlled by blind forces as seems
to be the case for most if not all animal
species, or whether it can be guided
by deliberate, rational judgements.
Admittedly, all of man's biological
evolution so far and much of his his¬
tory have been the result of accidents
or blind choices. Many deliberate ac¬
tions have had consequences that had
not been foreseen and often proved
to be unfortunate. In fact, most of the
environmental problems which now
plague technological civilization derive
from discoveries and decisions made
to solve other problems and to enlarge
human life.
The internal combustion engine,
synthetic detergents, durable pesti¬
cides and medicinal drugs, were intro¬
duced with a useful purpose in mind,
but some of their side effects have
been calamitous. Efficient methods of
printing have made good books avail¬
able at low prices, but are cluttering
mail boxes with despicable publications
and useless advertisements; these
burden waste baskets with mountains
of refuse which must be burned and
thus pollute the air.
14
ASTE disposal is becoming
as critical as resource production. It is
obvious, from the law of the conserva¬
tion of matter, that waste is produced
exactly in the amount that resources
are used. What is not so obvious is
that, in the long run, the reverse must
also be true: resource production
depends upon the utilization of waste.
Otherwise man will convert the bio¬
sphere into a global dump.
Waste that nature cannot process
accumulates and pollutes the environ¬
ment. Converting such waste into a
usable form not only solves a problem
of pollution, but also contributes posi¬
tively to environmental quality and the
production of future resources.
Like animal life, human life is affect¬
ed by evolutionary forces that blindly
fit the organism to its environments.
Human history, however, involves also
the unfolding of visionary imagin¬
ings. Creating a desirable future
demands more than foresight; it
requires vision.
The 18th century philosophers of
the Enlightenment had imagined new
ways of life long before there was any
factual basis for their vision. They
prepared the blueprint for most of what
is new and desirable in modern soc¬
ieties on the faith that objective
knowledge, scientific technology, and
social reforms, could some day liber¬
ate human beings from fear and des¬
titution. Throughout human history,
progress has b'een a movement toward
imagined Utopian goals; the realization
of these aims has in turn inspired new
goals.
Mankind's greatest achievements
are the products of vision. One need
think only of the marvellous parks,
gardens, and monuments that have
survived from all great civilizations to
realize the creative force of a long-
range view in shaping desirable
humanized environments.
The great parks and gardens all over
the world originated from that extra¬
ordinary sense which is peculiar to
man, the imaginary vision of things to
come. For example, several books by
European landscape architects of the
eighteenth century show drawings of
parks as they appeared at the time
of their creation, with the naked banks
of newly-created brooks and lakes,
among puny trees and shrubs.
In these drawings, the landscapes
have an abstract and cold elegance,
but lack substance or atmosphere.
One has to assume that the landscape
architects had composed the expanses
of water, lawns, and flowers to fit the
silhouettes of trees and the masses
of shrubbery not as these components
of the landscape existed when first
organized but as they were to become
with the passage of time.
The architects had visualized the
future appearance of their intellectual
imaginings and planned their actual
designs and plantings so as to give
scope to the creative effects of natural
forces. Similar visionary anticipations
account for most of the great urban
sites and vistas throughout the world.
While the great gardens, parks, and
urban vistas created by past civili¬
zation still delight our senses and
minds, other kinds of landscapes must
be conceived to meet present and
future needs. The old country roads,
lined with stately trees, provided poetic
and practical shelter for the man on
foot or horseback and for slow-moving
coaches.
A modern highway, however, must
be designed in such a manner that
horizons, curves, trees and other ob¬
jects of view are related to the physio¬
logical needs and , limitations of
motorists moving at high speed. The
evolution from parkways and super
highways involves aesthetic factors
based on physiological imperatives, as
much as economic and technologic
considerations.
Envisioning an environment satis¬
fying the needs of an immense techno¬
logical society is of course vastly
more complicated than visualizing the
future appearance of a park or
designing a super highway. But
certain principles hold true for all
environmental planning, because they
are based on the unchangeable and
universal aspects of man's nature.
0,IN the one hand, the
genetic endowment of Homo sapiens
has. changed only in minor details
since the Stone Age, and there is no
chance that it can be significantly,
usefully, or safely modified in the
foreseeable future. This genetic per¬
manency defines the human race, and
determines the physiological limits
beyond which human life cannot be
safely altered by social and tech¬
nological innovations. In the final
analysis, the frontiers of cultural and
technological development are deter¬
mined by man's own biological
frontiers and therefore by the genetic
constitution he acquired during the
evolutionary past.
On the other hand, mankind has a
large reserve of potentialities that be¬
come expressed only to the extent that
circumstances are favourable. The
physical surroundings condition not
only the biological aspects of pheno-
typic expressions but also their mental
aspects. Environmental planning can
thus play a key rôle in enabling human
beings to realize their potentialities.
One can take it for granted that there
is a better chance to convert these
potentialities into actual realizations
when the physical environment is suffi¬
ciently diversified to provide a variety
of stimulating experiences and oppor¬
tunities, especially for the young.
Any change in mental attitude and
in ways of life becomes incorporated
in the human group concerned through
socio-cultural mechanisms, and from
then on it conditions the future devel¬
opment of the group. Socio-cultural
evolution is as much under the influen¬
ce of the environment as is biological
evolution, and almost as irreversible.
Planning for the future demands an
ecological attitude based on the
assumption that man will continuously
bring about evolutionary changes
through his creative potentialities. The
constant interaction between man and
environment inevitably implies contin¬
uous alterations of both alterations
that should always remain within the
constraints imposed by the laws of
Nature and by the unchangeable bio¬
logical and mental characteristics of
man's nature.

V
rol
*
S
>>ï
T V
(
All that remains of Nimrud (in modem Iraq), one of the ancient cities of the Assyrian Empire,
built on the Tigris River, are the skeletal forms of its once noble palaces and
temples, hidden by the drifting sands. Erosion and progressive salinization ravaged great
areas of Mesopotamia, where for thousands of years successive civilizations had
maintained the soil with highly-developed irrigation. The famous historian, Arnold Toynbee,
uses the Tigris-Euphrates basin as an example to support the belief that loss of command
over the environment is the determining factor in the breakdown of civilizations.
Photo © Hunting Aerosurveys Ltd., London
Modern technological developments
give man the means to Increasingly
influence and even control his
environment. Already, architects and
town planners in Sweden, U.S.S.R.
and U.S.A. have put forward ideas
for enclosing cities in enormous
transparent domes which would permit
total control of the climate. Left,
a project by the American architect,
R. Buckminster Fuller for the "partial
enclosure of Manhattan Island",
shows mid-town New York
encompassed by an aluminium dome.
15
