THE HERITAGE
OF
H.M.S. BOUNTY
by Harry L. Shapiro
The rugged shoreline of Bounty Bay on Pitcairn Island. Here nine of
the mutineers of the "Bounty", led by Fletcher Christian, and 18 Tahitian
men and women found refuge and established a colony which still
stands as a remarkable example of racial harmony.
P,ERHAPS the most widely
known of all cases of race mixture is
the small group of Polynesian-English
origin that lives on Pitcairn Island, in
the South Pacific. Here, on a tiny
volcanic island only about two miles
long and about half as wide were
resolved the train of events that the
mutiny on the Bounty set in action.
This episode, famous in British nav¬
al annals, occurred in the year 1789
shortly after "H.M.S. Bounty" had de¬
parted from Tahiti where she had been
dispatched under the command of
Lt. William Bligh to collect bread fruit
plants.
After six successful months in Tahiti,
with the ship's hold full of potted trees,
the return trip was interrupted by the
mutiny of twenty-five of the crew of
forty-four. The mutineers were led by
Fletcher Christian, one of Bligh's
officers.
The mutineers seized the ship, put
Bligh and those faithful to him adrift
in a small open boat and reset the
Bounty's course for Tubuai, an island
300 miles south of Tahiti. Here an
abortive attempt was made to estab¬
lish a settlement, which failed because
of the hostility of the islanders.
Returning to Tahiti, the mutineers
split into two groups: one, consisting
of sixteen men, remained in Tahiti; the
other nine, headed by Christian, to¬
gether with twelve Tahitian women and
six Tahitian men. set sail from Tahiti
in September 1789 to find an unknown
island where they could hide.
For 19 years, until 1808, they were
virtually lost to the world. In the latter
year, their retreat on Pitcairn, some
20 HARRY L SHAPIRO is curator and chairman
of die Department of Anthropology at the
American Museum of National History, New
York, and professor of anthropology at
Columbia University.
2,500 miles south-east of Tahiti, was
discovered by Captain Meyhew Folger.
During this interval much had hap¬
pened on the island. All the Tahitian
men and all but one of the Englishmen
had died most of them violently and
after only a short sojourn in their new
home. In addition, Folger found eight
or nine surviving Tahitian women and
twenty-five children, offspring of six
of the Englishmen and their Poly¬
nesian wives. None of the Tahitian
men had left issue.
From this handful of children, half
Polynesian half English, the little colony
increased until fifty years later there
were almost 200 inhabitants on the
island. Fear of over-population and
the recurrence of water shortages in¬
duced them to request of the British
Government the use of Norfolk Island,
some 4,000 miles to the west, as a
new home. This considerably larger
island was uninhabited.
In 1856, the entire colony moved
there, but subsequently several fami¬
lies returned to their beloved Pitcairn.
In 1864, there were 45 descendants of
the mutineers living on Pitcairn, the re¬
mainder having continued on Norfolk.
At present, there are on both islands
about 1,000 descendants of the original
colony, not counting those who have
married out of the community or settled
elsewhere.
As an example of race mixture the
Pitcairn Islanders are far from typical.
But it is the very singularity of the
colony that is full of meaning in inter¬
preting race mixture as we commonly
see it. Simply as a cross between
Polynesians and English they can be
matched in many parts of Polynesia
where the same kind of mingling has
occurred, often with notable results, as
in New Zealand.
But unlike all other mixtures of this
kind in Oceania, and indeed unlike
virtually all race mixture wherever it
occurs (1), the Pitcairn Islanders have
lived and developed their common life
completely separated from the socie¬
ties from which they were originally
derived.
The entire community was of the
same mixed origin, was free of any
social structuring imposed upon them
by a larger society and escaped the
influences that prejudice subtly works
upon its object. This, then, is a
community where social prejudice, at
least, is not a factor to be considered
and where we can study the con¬
sequences of race mixture divorced
from the concomitant effects that
being a part of a larger group might
impose.
For the first eighteen years of its
existence, the Pitcairn colony remain¬
ed unvisited by any ship. The child¬
ren growing up in the first genera¬
tion of the community had never seen
anyone not a member of their little
family, for the early colony lived
as one extended family with John
Adams, the surviving mutineer, as
their pater familias.
Even after 1808 when their existence
became known, callers were rare and
their visits very brief. Not until the
1820s did ships begin to call at Pit¬
cairn to obtain water and fresh foods.
As American whaling became in¬
creasingly active in the Pacific these
visits increased in number, reaching
their highest frequency in the 1840s.
With the decline of whaling, Pit¬
cairn once more reverted to its
former loneliness. These contacts,
although important in bringing to the
islanders the goods of the outside
world for which they had acquired
(1) The only parallel to Pitcairn known to
me Is Tristan da Cunha where a community
of mixed Negro-Europeans have lived in
Isolation for well over 100 years.

a taste, were brief and had little or
no influence on the social structure
of the colony.
To anyone visiting the island, it is
evident that here is a well-organized
settlement, conducting its own affairs
successfully under a system devised
by the islanders themselves. There
is no trace of a people conscious of
inferiority.
Remarkable in so small a commun¬
ity, especially one cut off from the
developments of the outside world,
are some of the social institutions
which were established on Pitcairn
and maintained there ever since.
A democratic rule developed early
with all men and women enjoying
equal political rights, long before poli¬
tical rights were granted women in the
Western World and indeed before they
were even seriously discussed there.
Education was from the first recog¬
nized as a necessity and all children
were required to attend school until
their sixteenth year. The various fami¬
lies on the island were taxed for the
maintenance of the school. Teachers
were selected from the students and
supported by the revenue levied on
the people. Here, too, the Pitcairn
Islanders were in advance of educa¬
tional developments in greater cen¬
tres of civilization.
IHE culture that emerged
on Pitcairn also reflected the mixed
origin of the colony and in a rather
striking way illustrates the decisive
rôles that sex and environment may
play in creating a new society. The
cultural resources available to the new
colony were, of course,. English and
Tahitian. But it is obvious on re¬
flection that not all the content of
either of these cultures could or
would be drawn upon since one cul¬
ture, the English, was accessible only
through men who were sailors by
occupation, and the other,, the Tahi¬
tian, was represented by women who
were familiar with the crafts and
skills traditionally exercised in Tahiti
by their sex.
In addition to this, the colony on
Pitcairn faced an environment unlike
the seats of either people, and in
transplanting their traditional ways
both the Tahitian women and the
English sailors found themselves with¬
out the usual technical equipment need¬
ed to practice whatever skills and
arts they knew. Even such a basic
and necessary object as a nail was
not available, not to mention a var¬
iety of common tools that could not
be fashioned on Pitcairn.
Thus, we find tata cloth universal¬
ly used by the colony in its early
days. The making of this bark cloth
is traditionally a woman's job in Tahiti
and could be carried to Pitcairn intact.
Similarly, cooking being a woman's
concern, the Tahitian technique of an
underground oven was standard on
Pitcairn.
House building, on the contrary,
was the result of a complex of in¬
fluences. The Tahitian style of house
would have been unsuitable in the
colder climate of Pitcairn, but in any
event it probably could not have been
built by the women who in Tahiti
leave the framing of a house to the
men. The Englishmen, probably only
as adept in carpentry as sailors of
those days might be expected to be,
were handicapped by the lack of
essential building materials and ham¬
pered by the lack of tools.
We find them as a consequence
building houses ingeniously put
together, the frame mortised, the
walls constructed of roughly hewn
planks fitted into slotted uprights,
the interiors provided with bunks
as in a ship's cabin. The roof,
however, was thatched in the Tahi¬
tian manner since roof thatching is
prepared in Tahiti by the women and
this was a contribution the Tahitian
women on Pitcairn could make to this
novel house.
One of the common allegations
made about race mixture is that it
produces inferior human beings. This
belief is stated in various ways that
all come to the same thing: mixed
bloods combine the worst features
of both parental groups, they are
inferior to both stocks, or, at best,
they are intermediate and therefore a
debasement of the superior group.
In the mid-1 9th century the typical
reaction was delight in finding so
moral, upright and virtuous a colony
sprung from mutineers, from violence
and from murder. Nowadays, being
less concerned with religious matters,
with on the whole rather different
values, the present visitor is less
impressed by these qualities and is
likely to prize other aspects of their
character.
For my part I can report that,
allowing for their isolation and for a
consequent lack of sophistication, I
found the Pitcairn Islanders an
intelligent and attractive people. And
I was struck by the number of men
and women of impressive character,
possessed of the qualities that make
for leadership.
Although biologically rather more of
what might be called objective infor¬
mation is accessible, still it can only
be used for comparative purposes
with caution. Even such standard
criteria as physical vigour, longevity
or health cannot be properly used for
such purposes without reference to
diet, climate and various other environ¬
mental conditions.
Both on Norfolk and Pitcairn Islands
the physical condition of the islanders
was excellent. In spite of the
inbreeding, which has especially
characterized Pitcairn, I found no
physical deformities or obvious signs
of degeneration.
On Pitcairn with a population of
200 (1936) there were no cases of
serious mental deficiency. This is
an excellent record compared with
the frequency of such cases in Europe
and the United States, especially in
remote, inbred villages.
In view of the fact that neither on
Pitcairn nor Norfolk is there any
resident medical service or even
trained nursing aid, the longevity of
the population is impressive.
There have been some claims that
children of race mixtures are smaller
and weaker than their parents. The
Pitcairn and Norfolk evidence is quite
the contrary. Indeed, there is evi¬
dence here of hybrid vigour compar¬
able to the vigour that can be
demonstrated experimentally in a
large number of animal and plant
crosses and which is real enough
to be commercially valuable to seed
companies.
For example, if we take size as a
measure of heightened physiological
vigour as is done for maize or
crossbred domestic animals, we find
that the average stature of the
parental groups is 171.4 centimetres
for Tahitian males and 170.6 centi
metres for the mutineers (based on
British Admiralty records). The modern
Englishman averages around 172 cms.
The first generation descendants,
averaged 177.8 centimetres (minimum
5 feet 9 1/2 inches, maximum 6 feet 1/4
inch). This represents an average
increase of over two inches, with the
shortest male exceeding the average
of his parental groups by a consid¬
erable margin. Although this striking
increase has not been fully main¬
tained in the present generation, it is
still almost an inch above the parental
average.
As far as the evidence goes, then,
the Pitcairn experiment lends no
support for the thesis that race mixture
merely leads to degeneration or at
best produces a breed inferior to the
superior parental race. In fact, we
see in this colony some support for
heightened vigour, for an extended fl-f
variation and for a successful issue ¿ \
of the mingling of two diverse strains.
August-September 1953
