THE WAY
OF BAPU
by Humayun Kabir
..lOHANDAS KARAM-
CHAND GANDHI was born at a
time when the West like a Colossus
bestrode the entire world. Not only
were western powers politically domi¬
nant, their supremacy in the economic,
cultural and intellectual fields was
equally unquestioned. India and in¬
deed the whole of Asia and Africa
suffered from the loss of political
independence, economic buoyancy and
spiritual energy.
In India, the last attempt of the
Mogul Emperor and his adherents to
revive past glory was defeated after
the revolt of 1857. Turkey was looked
upon as the sick man of Europe and
its empire was in the process of
rapid disintegration. New burdens
had been imposed upon China after
her defeat in the Opium War. Japan
had received a rude awakening from
the incursions of the emerging United
States. Russia was pushing her
frontiers into the heartlands of Asia
and pressing east and south in search
of an opening into the warm seas.
The imperialism of the western world
was active on all sides and, for the
first time in recorded history, many
Asians and Africans had begun to feel
as if there was something pre-ordained
in the supremacy of the West.
Before Gandhi died, this mood of
despondency had vanished. In its
place was a new expectancy and hope,
eager, confident and at times impatient.
All countries of Asia and Africa stirred
with a new life and claimed their
rightful place in the mansions of Man.
Not a little of the credit for this
22
HUMAYUN KABIR, the distinguished Indian
writer and educator, died in August, 1969.
Professor Kabir held several ministerial posts
in the Indian government, and was the author
of many works of philosophy, poetry and
short stories, as well as several books on
Gandhi. The article published here appears
in "Mahatma Gandhi: 100 Years", a collection
of essays published in New Delhi by the
Gandhi Peace Foundation to mark the
centenary of Gandhi's birth. Professor
Kabir's works include: "Men and Rivers",
'The Indian Heritage", "Education in New
India", "Science, Democracy and Islam", and
"Immanuel Kant".
transformation belongs to Gandhi.
He was chiefly instrumental in restoring
the self-respect of the Indian people
and making the ordinary man feel a
new sense of dignity. The awakening
of India evoked a new thrill from far-
flung regions of Asia and Africa.
Rarely has a member of a subject
nation achieved such position and
prestige in his contemporary world.
Within ten years of his death,
imperialism was everywhere on the
retreat.
Gandhi's revolutionary significance
for the world lies in his success in
releasing the energies contained in the
endurance and patience of the Indian
people. The Indian masses had sub¬
mitted to wrongs and suffered hard¬
ships against which a more active
people would have revolted long ago.
Their passivity and inertia had been
regarded as a source of weakness by
friends and foes alike. Even Indian
leaders held that the character of the
Indian masses ruled out the possibility
of an open and active revolution.
Gandhi was not blind to the
fatalism and passivity of the Indian
people but found for them a new
political function by turning them into
reserves of hidden power. Instead of
an aggressive and militant struggle,
he built up a movement of non-
co-operation in which the passivity and
endurance of the Indian masses were
turned into sources of strength and
energy. As the Indian masses moved
forward to political action, the static
forces inherent in the Indian character
became dynamic. The people regained
their self-respect and this was in
itself a restoration of the values of
spirituality.
Gandhi was one of the leaders of the
new challenge to Western domination
but did not deny the values the West
had brought to the human heritage.
The scientific revolution in Europe had
opened to man a new world of
immense possibilities. On the material
plane, it had led to an unprecedented
development in technology which
promised freedom from hunger and
disease. On the political plane, its
finest expression seemed to be
liberal democracy in the Nation State.
On the intellectual plane, it gave rise
to rationalism and held out the
hope that all human ills would be
resolved through the spread of
education. Europe was full of the
spirit of expansion, buoyancy and faith.
Wherever Europe led, the rest of the
world followed.
Gandhi recognized the contribution
of science to the solution of human ills,
but protested against the materialism
which was following in its wake. He
felt that Europe had fought for political
freedom but connived at economic
slavery of the worst type. The machine
in its simpler forms might be essential
to human well-being but the way
Europe had used machinery had
reduced men to near slaves.
GlANDHI saw that the tradi¬
tional modes of western thought had
led to a dead end and sought a way
out of the prevailing political and social
impasse through his experiments with
truth.
The abuse of the machine had
led to the concentration of wealth
and the growth of a soulless industrial
civilization. Gandhi sought an escape
from both these evils by his emphasis
on the autonomous and self-contained
village as the unit of society. In such
small units, the human relationship
between individuals cannot be ignored.
Impersonal relationships replace human
contacts when the social unit grows
so large that individuals can no longer
know each other as persons. The
stress on human relationship would on
the one hand ensure against the
danger of licence or anarchy and on
the other provide conditions for the
growth of individual freedom. The
small village community would thus
avoid the risk of dictatorship of the
State and anarchy of Statelessness.
Gandhi was keenly aware of the im¬
portance of the economic independence

of the individual. Without economic
independence, political independence
becomes a mockery and democracy
a mere farce. Undue concentration
of wealth undermines the economic
independence of man and yet follows
almost inevitably from large-scale
production under private proprietory
rights.
Gandhi's analysis so far is almost
the same as that of the socialists.
His solution is however very different.
The socialist remedy is based on the
elimination of private property while
retaining large-scale industrial units.
Gandhi sought the solution in the
dispersal of industry which would
automatically limit the accumulation of
wealth in the hands of individuals.
The difference in the socialist and
the Gandhian solution is not difficult
to understand. It is derived from the
difference in their attitude to the
individual.
Gandhi held the individual to be of
supreme importance. Any imposition
on his freedom was therefore to be
avoided as far as possible. Equality
which is the basis of economic
independence must therefore be
achieved through peaceful and non¬
violent methods.
Socialists hold that political liberty
may be and has often been achieved
through bloody revolution. In Gandhi's
opinion only the form but not the sub¬
stance of freedom can be achieved
in this way. The results of a violent
revolution are always liable to be lost
by a more violent counter-revolution.
Besides, those who have taken to the
sword have more often than not
perished by the sword.
It was because of his awareness of
this danger that Gandhi urged that
the economic and political freedom of
man must be attained without resort
to violence. All violence is, according
to him, born of hate and hence the
only way of resolving human conflicts
is through a conquest of hatred.
Gandhi's attitude to violence makes
his message of special significance to
the modern age. The fact that he
developed his philosophy, not by
denying current trends of thought, but
by drawing upon various elements in
them and forming a new combination
compels both attention and respect.
He was an inheritor to the liberal
tradition and regarded personal liberty
as one of the greatest values of life.
An Indian Punjabi village.
At the start of the 20th century,
80 per cent of India's population
lived in the country's
700,000 villages, which Gandhi termed,
"The true face of India."
With the philosophical anarchists he
believed that the State should interfere
as little as possible with the individual.
He also believed in the tradition of
collectivization inherent in socialist
thought.
He imbibed all these teachings but
gave a new turn to everything he
learnt. He believed in personal liberty
but felt that rights accrue only from
the performance of duties. He was in
favour of decentralization but not in
favour of the abolition of the State.
He pleaded that the good things of life
must be shared but he was not
prepared to advocate the use of
violence for achieving this end.
Religious teachers have from the
earliest times preached that man
cannot live by hate. Practice of non
violence has however in the past been
mainly the concern of the individual.
Gandhi for the first time showed the
efficacy of non-violent action by groups.
He was a successful politician and
cannot be dismissed as a visionary.
His advocacy of non-violence as an
instrument of political action has
therefore aroused interest throughout
the world and made the most diverse
groups attempt to use it for solving
their problems.
Technology has unified the world
today by overcoming the barriers
created by time and space. In ancient
times an idea could travel only as fast
as man could move. Till the middle
of the last century, this could not be
more than two hundred miles a day.
Today a man can go round the world
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

THE SAGE
OF THE
SPINNING
WHEEL
In the context of his efforts
to improve conditions in the
villages of India, Gandhi is
perhaps best known (and has
often been criticized) for his
cult of the spinning wheel.
For Gandhi, hunger took pri¬
ority over independence, and
the aim of his campaign to
revive hand spinning and
hand weaving was to put
bread Into the mouths of
millions of landless farmers.
These neglected crafts reviv¬
ed and transformed hundreds
of villages. At the same
time, the boycott of foreign
fabrics, which he urged, gave
India greater autonomy over
its own production of cotton.
Gandhi himself set the exam¬
ple by spinning for several
hours each day, even while
In prison. Left, Gandhi seat¬
ed beside his spinning wheel,
which he regarded as a sym¬
bolic bond between all who
practised the craft and a
means to self-reliance and
self-respect. It Is often stat¬
ed that Gandhi was opposed
to mechanization and indus¬
trialization, but this Is not
completely true. In 1921, he
wrote: "I would favour the
use of the most elaborate
machinery if thereby. . . pau¬
perism and resulting Idleness
be avoided."
Photo Margaret Bourke-White, Life Magazine © Time Inc
24
THE WAY OF BAPU (Continued)
in less than two hours. An idea can
be flashed simultaneously throughout
the world. Even twenty years ago all
these were beyond the scope of man's
wildest imagination.
Mountains and oceans no longer
divide man. He travels over both and
launches into outer space. Technolo¬
gical unification of the world demands
economic, political and cultural unity.
Such unity can however be achieved
only by safeguarding the diversity and
autonomy of the constituent units.
Modern technology has created
conditions where war can and must be
discarded. In ancient times, nations
fought one another for pastures and
living room. Later they fought one
another for raw materials and markets.
They lived under a constant fear that
without political control over territories,
they would face starvation and death.
The development of science and
technology has for the first time
eliminated that fear. Today everybody
can be assured the necessities of life.
This is feasible provided the energies
of man are directed to productive ends
and the wealth so produced distributed
equitably among all members of
mankind.
Conflict or war for assuring survival
is therefore no longer necessary. On
the contrary war today threatens the
very existence of man. Weapons of
destruction have been fashioned which
can destroy not only the warring
parties but the entire world. The
U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. have enough
atomic weapons to destroy themselves
and everybody else. Today, any
large-scale war may become global
and lead to the annihilation of man.
Science and technology have created
conditions where mankind must feel
and act as one or perish.
Major powers have withdrawn from
the brink time and again because of
their realization that a full-scale global
war will destroy mankind. There is
today a balance of terror which
maintains an uneasy peace.
This is some gain but there is still
lack of realization that violence within
the community may pose an equal
threat. One reason is that no
internal conflict today remains wholly
internal. There are so many affilia¬
tions within and among nations that
an internal conflict in one place may
and does attract interference from
outside.
The Spanish civil war began, as a
conflict between two Spanish groups
but soon developed into a rehearsal
for the second world war because of
intervention by major powers. Vietnam
is a cruel reminder that great nations
cannot refrain from interfering in the
affairs of less powerful states. In
western Asia, the problems can be
resolved if the Great Powers do not
intervene. There can thus be no
assurance for the future unless
violence, internal and international, is
eliminated.
Human conflicts began when Cain
repudiated his responsibility for his
brother. Today the logic of events
has compelled an increasing number
of men and women throughout the

Photo © Bern, Paris - Rune Hassner
world to realize that everyone must
accept responsibility for everyone else.
Gandhi's major contribution is an
attempt to put into practice non-violent
programmes for fighting evil. Even
politicians who are averse to the use
of force do not generally rule it out
as an instrument of policy. Gandhi
declared that the method of persuasion,
whether in internal or external affairs,
is the only human and civilized way
open to man. He wanted to rule out
resort to physical force and substitute
in its place the use of moral pressure.
The essence of his method is non¬
violent resistance to evil. He believed
that this must begin with action by
the individual to influence other indivi¬
duals. Such a programme would ease
tensions both within an individual and
among individuals.
International tensions are very often
the reflection of intra-national tensions
just as tensions within society are often
due to tensions within the individual.
Every individual who resolves his in¬
ternal tensions becomes an integrated
personality. He then becomes a
dynamo of power and radiates energy.
Gandhi's answer to the problem of
violence, internal and international,
was to train a body of men and women
who would have no internal tensions
and would help to resolve tensions
within society. Once tensions within
society are reduced, international
tensions will automatically diminish.
Searching for causes, Gandhi
concluded that injustice and inequality
among individuals and nations are the
basic causes of tensions and hatred.
The State seeks to reduce causes of
internal tension by assuring equality
of all in the eye of law. Progressive
taxation to reduce inequalities in wealth
is intended to serve the same purpose.
The growing contacts among nations
demand the application of similar
methods to ensure justice and reduce
glaring inequalities. It is a paradox
of the modern age that the more the
world is coming together through
technological advances, the more
barriers are being set up by Nation
States to prevent the free intercourse
of men.
The world is irresistibly impelled
towards unity today but two conditions
must be satisfied before a world order
can emerge. The first is the guarantee
of full cultural autonomy and freedom
to even the smallest constituent unit
of mankind. One of the most fascinat¬
ing developments in the last fifty years
has been the emergence of giant
powers accompanied by an insistent
demand for greater autonomy by
smaller and smaller constituent units.
The second condition is the creation
of a body of enlightened opinion
throughout the world. Civil authority
gained in power as its impartiality was
increasingly recognized. The world
authority will also acquire greater
acceptance by assuring justice and
equitable consideration for all.
Gandhi was a revolutionary who
sought to transform human nature
itself. He was also a realist and knew
that people would judge his recipes by
their results. He therefore began
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
25

THE WAY OF BAPU (Continued)
with the individual and sought to
change him first. He believed that the
smallest beginning may lead to the
most far-reaching consequences.
Gandhi's technique is therefore
suited for operation by small groups
and through programmes,. which are
initially modest. He rejected the
theory that ends justify the means and
believed that the means are just as
important as the end. When the
individual acts according to this
principle he achieves not only personal
excellence but also changes the course
of history by adoption of pure methods.
The supreme example of Gandhi's
faith in non-violence and the im¬
portance of the individual is found in
his own thought and action in the last
days of his life.
The years 1937-47 were years of
stress and strain in India. As political
independence drew nearer, the clashes
of interest among different sections
of the people reached a new intensity.
India became free, but at the cost of
her unity. The transition to freedom
was marked by violence and murder
on a large scale.
Gandhi stood firm against the rising
tide of communal bitterness and
passion. After helping to assuage
tempers at first in Noakhali and then
in Bihar and Calcutta, he came to
Delhi where communal riots had
broken out in the aftermath of the
partition of India.
26
ITH characteristic courage,
Gandhi faced the fury of the mob and
preached the message of reconciliation
and friendship. His prayer meetings
became a source of strength and
solace to countless men and women
in the capital and outside.
Passions had become so inflamed
that some misguided men tried to
prevent these meetings but in spite of
opposition, threats and attacks he
continued fearlessly. There had been
a murderous attack on him in Calcutta
In September 1947. There were
further attacks in Delhi and continuing
threats. Nothing however could daunt
him. With exemplary courage and
patience, he pursued his chosen path
of understanding, compassion and
brotherhood.
There was a stamp of greatness on
everything he did from the time he
opposed tyranny in South Africa, but
perhaps even Gandhi had never
reached the heights he achieved in
his last six months. A new sweetness
and strength welled out of all his
words and action. Everyone who came
in contact with him came away a purer
and better man.

