Photo © Tasa Kochetkov

ANTARCTICA INTERNATIONAL LAND
OF SCIENCE
Above, Soviet tractor convoy
sets off on 1,300 mile journey
to the Pole of Inaccessibility,
the point farthest removed
from Antarctica's coasts,
where the lowest temperatures
on earth have been recorded
(-83.3° C). Enormous chasms,
large enough to swallow up
entire convoys, are a serious
threat to trans-Antarctic
expeditions. Left, Sno-cat
tracked vehicle remains
suspended across a deep
chasm like a bridge,
Explorer-technicians have
devised scout tractors
equipped with electronic
detectors which reveal
presence of invisible
crevasses.

AiINTARCTICA is a true landmark in history as well as in
geography. It is as international now as science itself. The whole
continent is inhabited only by scientists who have come from 12 nations
with no purpose of conquest or possession. They share their data
and discoveries, their equipment and supplies as well as their hard¬
ships with men from other lands. The continent is a vast area of
nearly 6,000,000 square miles, approximately circular, and 3,000 miles
in diameter nearly twice ae large as Europe, almost as large as
South America. Over it all is the endless monotony of the age-old ice
sheet, in places 10,000 feet thick. Here six thousand scientists are
studying how the Antarctic influences world weather conditions, the
world water balance, glaciers, ocean currents, etc., and are making
measurements of the earth's magnetism, cosmic rays, the aurora and
other phenomena of the upper atmosphere and of the earth's interior.
The exploration and study of Antarctica is one of the major aspects
of history's greatest global operation in science the International
Geophysical Year (IGY) which began in 1957 and set out to observe
and measure features of the earth and its vicinity, heretofore beyond
man's reach. None of these problems can be investigated in the
laboratories or from observatories of a single country. The winds
on high, the rivers in the sea, the forces of gravity and magnetism,
the radiations that bombard the earth from outer space, know no¬
thing of national frontiers. If they are to be understood, it must be
by the joint action of many nations. For the first time in history,
this is now possible. It will change our concepts of the universe and
our understanding of the forces that play upon and within the earth.
A new age begins with the concerted action of many peoples and by
the carefully organized researches of many thousands of scientists
the world over. For the first time, the peoples of the earth have joined
to study their common and fundamental scientific problems together.
September 1957
GERALD WENDT
Science writer
Photo USIS - U.S. Navy
Scientists working in Antarctica wear full face mask and
dark goggles as protection against wind, snow and ice.
A nose can freeze in seconds under Antarctic temperatures.
Another problem is perspiration which can cause a kilo or
more of water to accumulate In clothing which later
evaporates to chill the wearer or turns into Ice.
r. /v
Photo © Keystone
Research stations at the four "Poles" of Antarctica were set up
during the International Geophysical Year. France established
one near the Magnetic Pole, the Soviet Union had one at the Pole
of Inaccessibility and another at the Geomagnetic Pole, and the
U.S.A. set up a station at the Geographic South Pole (air view right)
Exact site of Geographic Pole is marked by circle of barrels
(top of photo). Above, emperor penguins, largest of
Antarctica's flightless birds (3 1/2 ft. high), warming chicks
between their feet.
