IN THE CENTRE OF THE MAP
by Marshall G. S. Hodgson
54
|N the sixteenth century the
Italian missionary, Matteo Ricci, took
with him to China a European map of
the world showing the new discoveries
in America. The Chinese were glad
to learn about America, but one point
in the map offended them. Since it
split the earth's surface down the
Pacific, China appeared off at the
right-hand edge; whereas the Chinese
thought of themselves as literally the
"Middle Kingdom", which should be
in the centre of the map. Ricci pacifi¬
ed them by drawing another map,
splitting the Atlantic instead, so that
China appeared more central; and
maps are still commonly drawn that
way in that part of the world.
Europeans have clung to the first
type of map, showing Europe in the
upper centre; while the commonest
maps in North America show the
U.S.A. in that post of honour, even at
the cost of splitting a continent in
two. The temptation not only to put
one's own land in the centre of the
map, but one's own people in the
centre of history, seems universal.
The most famous case of this is
indeed that of the "Middle Kingdom".
Many Chinese used to suppose that
the Temple of Heaven at the Emper¬
or's capital, Peking, marked the exact
centre of the earth's surface.
Chinese scholars even in the Middle
Ages were aware that China could not
be said to be mathematically central;
they knew the general lay of Europe
and Africa and the Indian Ocean, and
a writer could remark that the "centre"
of the earth was along the equator.
Nevertheless, even for sober histor¬
ians the pivotal fact of human history
was the condition of the great Chinese
empire, in which was concentrated all
the splendour of polished civilization.
For the medieval Hindu the world
was a place for the purification of
souls. Kings and their empires came
and went, the gods themselves arose
and perished time was infinite, space
immense, with unlimited opportunity for
every soul to reap in birth after rebirth
what it had sown.
As a given cosmic cycle wore on,
disorder increased and justice faded.
Our own age (the Hindus explained)
was in the latter part of such a cycle;
only in the central parts of the earthy
regions in India, that is was society
still well ordered: there Brahmins still
offered sacrifices and the other castes
ruled or served according to their
status.
In the benighted lands to the east
and west so tainted already with
decline that pious Brahmins dared not
set foot there souls were doomed to
be born as barbarous Mlecchas; there
they lived unhallowed lives till they
earned the right to be born in India.
As our degenerate age drew on,
even in India itself the social order
was upset, rulers rose from the basest
castes, and finally even Mlecchas
entered as conquerors Muslims from
the west, and even remote Europeans.
Through all this outward humiliation,
however, the Hindu could know that
there in the central lands where the
sacred Ganges flowed he could still
live the way of truth and holiness
inaccessible to lesser breeds of men
and aspire to the highest degrees of
rebirth.
To the medieval Muslim, Moham¬
med's birthplace, Mecca, was the cen¬
tre of the earth's surface; here was
the very throne of God, where heaven
and earth were nearest.
To be sure, scholars knew that the
earth was a sphere, and God equally
present everywhere in the hearts of
the believers. But their more sober
picture of the world was equally effec¬
tive in supporting the eminence of
Islam. They thought of the inhabited
quarter of the globe as a land mass
lying between the equator and the
North Pole, and between the oceans
to the west and to the east roughly
Eurasia and northern Africa.
T.HIS was divided into sev¬
en "climes" from south to north, and
from extreme heat to cold. Muslims
writing in the latitude of Syria or Iran
explained that in the hot south men
grew lazy and so remained backward
in civilization; and likewise in the far
north where it was too cold in nor¬
thern Europe, for instance men's
skins were pallid and their minds
sluggish.
Hence it was that only in the central,
moderate climes, like the Mediterran¬
ean lands or Iran, were minds most
active and civilization most advanced;
from there the blessings of Islam were
gradually being brought even to the
remotest areas, among the Negroes
in the hot south and the white men in
the cold north.
The West-Europeans of the same age
had many of the same ideas of history
and geography as the Muslims, getting
them from the same Greek and Hebrew
sources; but their interpretation was
very different. For them history was
the story of God's progressive dis¬
pensations of law or of grace to his
favoured people. Out of the descen¬
dants of Adam, God had first chosen
the Hebrews, but with the coming of
Christ it was a "new Israel", the Chris¬
tians, that received His favours.
Even among the Christians God
had made a further selection casting
aside those of the Levant and Greece
as heretics or schismatics, in favour
of the West-Europeans under the Pope
at Rome. The favoured peoples
of each age lived under a succession
of great monarchies: in earlier times
Chaldean, Persian, and Greek, which
all conquered the Hebrews; but last
and greatest, under which Christ Him¬
self was born, the empire of Rome in
the west, which should endure till
Judgment Day.
EST-EUROPEANS allowed
that the centre of the world's sur¬
face was Jerusalem (by exaggerating
the length of the Mediterranean, their
maps could show Spain and China as
equally distant from it); but they assur¬
ed themselves that, just as at the be¬
ginning of history Paradise was in the
east where the sun rises, so in these
latter days the centre of God's vicar-
ship on earth was in the west, where
the sun sets; henceforth Rome was the
centre of all authority, spiritual and
temporal.
With the discovery that Earth is a
tiny planet in an immensity of space,
that mankind has been upon it hun¬
dreds of thousands of years and is
still a newcomer, we have had to
rethink our situation. The great ideals
of faith and of culture have to be
seen in spiritual terms rather than as
reflected in the map of the universe.
The West-Europeans were the first
to be really faced with the new dis¬
coveries and have consequently led
the way toward creating a new picture
of the world. But they have not yet
escaped the temptation to make geo¬
graphy and history centre upon them¬
selves.
One need only examine the table
of contents of any proper Western
"world history". Civilization began in
Mesopotamia and Egypt (with perhaps
some local variants in India and Chi¬
na); but (it would seem) soon history
was almost a monopoly of the Greeks;
and though other peoples might still
be curious, in their quaint ways,
hereafter it was really Europe that

We reproduce here a burlesque
map of the fortifications of Paris
drawn by Mark Twain and published
in the "New York Herald" of Sunday,
October 2, 1870. At this time the
siege of Paris during the Franco-
Prussian war had just begun and
newspapers the world over were filled
with maps of Paris as is Journalistic
practice. Below we publish the text
written by Mark Twain for his map.
August 1957
MARK TWAIN'S MAP OF PARIS
TO THE READER
The above map explains itself.
The idea of this map in not original with me, but is borrowed
from the "Tribune" and the other great métropolitain journals.
I claim no other merit for this production (if I may so call
it) than that it is accurate. The main blemish of the city paper
maps, of which it is an imitation, is that in them more attention
seems paid to artistic picturesqueness than geographical
reliability.
Inasmuch as this is the first time I ever tried to draft and
engrave a map, or attempt anything in the line of art at all,
the commendations the work has received and the admiration
it has excited among the people have been very grateful
to my feelings. And it is touching to reflect that by far the
most enthusiastic of these praises have come from people
who know nothing at all about art.
By an unimportant oversight I have engraved the map so
that it reads wrong-end first except to left-handed people. I
forgot that in order to make it right in print it should be drawn
and engraved upside down. However, let the student who
desires to contemplate the map stand on his head or hold
it before her looking-glass. That will bring it right.
The reader will comprehend at a glance that that piece
of river with the "High Bridge" over it got left out to one
side by reason of a slip of the graving-tool which rendered
it necessary to change the entire course of the River Rhine
or else spoil the map. After having spent two days in digging
and gouging át the map, I would have changed the course
of the Atlantic Ocean before I would have lost so much work.
MARK TWAIN
OFFICIAL COMMENDATIONS
It is the only map of the kind I ever saw. (U.S. Grant)
It places the situation in an entirely new light. (Bismarck)
I cannot look upon it without shedding tears. (Brigham
Young)
My wife was for years afflicted with freckles, and though
everything was done for her relief that could be done, all
was in vain. But, sir, since her first glance at your map, they
have entirely left her. She has nothing but convulsions now.
(J. Smith)
If I had had this map I could have got out of Metz without
any trouble. (Bazaine)
It Is very nice, large print. (Napoleon)
I have seen a great many maps In my time, but none that
this one reminds me of. (Trochu)
It is but fair to say that in some respects it Is a truly
remarkable map. (W.T. Sherman)
I said to my son, Frederic William, "If you could only make
a map like that, I would be perfectly willing to see you die
even anxious." (William III)
counted and after the rise of Rome
only Western Europe; here was the
home of truth and liberty.
If during long centuries it was hard
to find either truth or liberty in
Western Europe, this period was re¬
gretfully labelled the Dark Ages of
mankind; but in modern times the
West-Europeans have duly gone forth
to enlighten (and subdue) the world
so that the history of a henceforth
"Westernized" world may be safely
reduced almost to that of the West
itself.
In European "world atlases" each
European country has its own map,
with the rest of the world In a few
pages at the end. The map ordinarily
selected to show the world as a whole
Is ideally suited to reinforce this way
of seeing mankind.
On the Mercator world map not
only is Europe in the upper centre: it
is represented as a good deal larger
than the other great culture areas.
Most of these lie south of the fortieth
parallel, while Europe is almost wholly
north of it, where Mercator's projection
begins to exaggerate the size of things
enormously.
Accordingly even on the world map,
which ought to provide a sense of
proportion, there is space to name a
great many places in Europe, while in
other populous centres like India or
China, shown on a much smaller scale,
only a few chief places need to be
indicated.
Although equal-area projections of
the world have long been available,
in which shapes as well as sizes are
much less distorted, Westerners
understandably cling to a projection
which so markedly flatters them. They
explain (as if they were engaged in
nothing but sailing) that the true angles
given on the Mercator map are of
convenience to navigators; and in
atlases and wall-maps, in books of
reference and in newspapers, when
Westerners turn to see what the world
looks like as a whole, their precon¬
ceptions are authoritatively gratified.
The story is often told of a small
tribe whose word for "mankind" was
the name for the tribe itself. Other
tribes were merely incidental in their
picture of the world perhaps not
even fully human. Chinese, Hindus,
Muslims, and Westerners alike have
smiled perhaps too quickly at the
rather perilous naïveté of that small
tribe.
March 1956
55
