THE GREAT
CIVILIZATION
OF THE KUSHANS
The Kushan Empire of Central Asia ranked with
Rome, China and Parthia in the first centuries of
our era. It is now emerging from the shrouds of
mystery to take its rightful place in world history.
by Bobojan Gafurov
I
4
WO thousand years ago
central Asia, northern India, West
Pakistan, Afghanistan and eastern Iran
formed a single vast state which
stretched all the way from the shores
of the Aral Sea to the Indian Ocean.
This empire, which had given itself
the name of Kushan, ranked with the
other great empires of the time Rome,
Parthia and China and formed one
of the most important links in the
political system of the ancient world.
The empire of the Kushans was the
setting for a number of crucial events
in the history of Asian civilization. It
not only stands as a symbol of the poli¬
tical unity of many peoples and races
of the East but also represents a new
stage in the cultural development of
Asia and the world as a whole.
The great period of Gandhara
art coincides with the reign of
the Kushan Dynasty. From India,
Buddhism spread rapidly throughout
the Kushan Empire and from there be¬
gan its penetration and conversion of
China. Kushan artists enriched Bud¬
dhist sculpture by the most important
innovation of the period: the rendering
BOBOJAN GAFUROV, of the U.S.S.R. Acad¬
emy of Sciences. Is director of the Acad¬
emy's Institute of Oriental Studies. He is
chairman of the Soviet committee collaborat¬
ing in the current Unesco protect, "Studies
on the Civilizations of the Peoples of Centra/
Asia', in which Afghanistan, India, Iran and
Pakistan are also participating. A specialist
in the history of the Kushan civilization. Acad¬
emician Gafurov is of Tajik nationality and
is a deputy in the Supreme Soviet of the
U.S.S.R.

The Kushan Empire occupies
a unique place in the
history of the ancient
world, and recent
archaeological discoveries
have produced new
evidence to show that
several distinctly different
art schools flourished in
different parts of the vast
kingdom that stretched
from the Aral Sea to the
Indian Ocean. Kushan art
first developed in ancient
Bactria. Left, head of
warrior found at a Bactrian
site on the north of the
Hindu Kush range. Right,
fresco unearthed at
Pendjikent, near Samarkand
(Uzbekistan), painted in the
style that characterized the
region of Sogdiana at the
end of the Kushan period.
of the Buddha in human form. The
Kushans not only sponsored great in¬
tellectual and artistic achievements in
their dominions but were also in close
contact with the leading cultural cen¬
tres of the ancient world, and control¬
led the important overland routes bet¬
ween China and Rome.
At the beginning of the Christian era
the powerful Kushan Empire bordered
on China in the east and Parthia in
the west and linked the previously
disunited centres of the ancient world
into a single whole. For several cen¬
turies, all the countries of the ancient
world from the British Isles to the
shores of the Pacific Ocean were under
either Roman, Parthian, Chinese or
Kushan rule, and these four great em¬
pires were themselves interlinked by
a complex system of close ties and
communication.
The first trans-continental trading
and diplomatic route known as the
Great Silk Route ran from China to the
Mediterranean across the Parthian and
Kushan dominions. More than a
thousand years before Vasco da
Gama, ships were sailing regularly
over the Indian Ocean and the Red
Sea between Egypt, conquered by
Rome, and the ports of western India
which served the Kushan empire.
At the same time the important land
route over the steppes was apparently
opened from central Asia to eastern
Europe and the ancient towns of the
northern Black Sea coast. Coins of
Kushan rulers have been found in Kiev,
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Photos © APN

Rectangle on map,
right, marks major
territories of the
ancient Kushan
Empire, which
stretched across a
vast expanse of
Asia, shown In
detailed map below.
Detailed map is
taken from
"Dynastic Art of
the Kushans" by
John M. Rosenfield,
the most
comprehensive
study on Kushan
civilization thus far
written In a
Western language,
published in the
U.S.A. In 1967.
KUSHAN CIVILIZATION (Continued)
An empire created by
in Ethiopia and Scandinavia as well as
in towns of the former Roman Empire,
while Roman coins of Augustus and
Tiberius have been discovered in
western and southern India.
Kushan coins from the Kama area
(southwest of the Urals) and a silver
vessel from Khorezm in the eastern
Urals point to links with northern neigh¬
bours. Dishes produced by craftsmen
in the town which once stood on the
same site as present-day Dushanbe
(capital of the Soviet Tajik Republic)
show pictures of the god Dionysius.
Indian bone carvings of the Kushan
period have been discovered in Pom¬
peii, and Roman glassware has been
unearthed in the palace of the Kushan
rulers at Begram, north of Kabul.
In the Roman Empire, the Asiatic
cult of Mithra extended as far as Brit¬
ain, oriental spices and silk were
fashionable in Rome, and Roman arti¬
cles have often been found in western
Asia, the Caucasus, Hindostán, central
Asia and Indo-china. Kushan ambas¬
sadors were present in Rome at the
celebrations held by Trajan after his
victory over the Dacians at the end of
the 1st century A.D.
Thus the Kushan period was not
simply the continuation of previously
established relations between East and
West but qualitatively a new stage in
the development of this important his¬
torical and cultural process.
L.ITTLE more than a century
has passed since scholars first began
their investigations of the Kushan
epoch. The origins and birth of the
Kushan civilization are still shrouded in
much mystery despite the early
accounts and chronicles left to us by
the ancient Greeks, Romans and Chi¬
nese. The patient effort of many
scientists and scholars from different
countries, combined with recent
archaeological discoveries, is slowly
helping to unravel the secrets of their
past.
Here it is encouraging to note that
one of the themes of a new Unesco
project, "Studies on the Civilizations
of the Peoples of Central Asia" is
devoted to the history of the Kushans.
Last year, Unesco organized an inter¬
national conference at Dushanbe on
the history, archaeology and culture of
Central Asia during the Kushan per¬
iod, attended by scholars from many
countries, which has given new im¬
petus to the study of this important
aspect of world history.

former nomads
The history of the Kushans covers a
period of about five centuries, between
the downfall of the Graeco-Bactrian
kingdom in the second or first centur¬
ies B.C. and the rise of the empire
of the Ephtalites, or White Huns, at the
end of the fourth or early in the fifth
century A.D. (1).
Very little is known about the early
years of the Kushan State. It is now
generally agreed that it was created by
a nation of former nomads whose ruling
princes gave themselves the dynastic
name Kushanas (Kuei Shuang, in Chi¬
nese chronicles). Who these nomads
were is still not absolutely certain, but
current evidence clearly points to
tribes from the northern regions of
Central Asia who formed a confederacy
with other tribes called Yueh-Chih, Wu-
Sun, and the Sakas, a Scythian people
of Central Asian origin.
s.I OME time between the se¬
cond and first centuries B.C., these
tribes joined together to overthrow the
Greek kingdom of Bactria. In the
struggle which ensued the Kushans
must have headed all the other nation-
tribes of the confederation since they
gave their name to the new state in
Bactria.
The first ruler whose name is re¬
corded in history is Kujula Kadphiz
(there are many spellings of Kushan
names), who proclaimed himself "King
of Kings" and carried out the first
great policy of Kushan unification,
uniting Bactria and Sogdiana (whose
capital city was Samarkand), and
extending his influence over the Ka¬
bul valley and Kashmir to the south.
His successor, Vima Kadphiz, contin¬
ued to expand the kingdom to the
south and south-east, spreading its
cultural influence as far as Benares.
In the north, the ancient kingdom of
Kangha (later known as Khorezm) was
also united into the empire.
It was under Kanishka that Kushan
reached the zenith of its cultural in¬
fluence. Although Kanishka's name
scarcely figures at all in the histories
intended for the general reader, there
CONTINUED ON PAGE 11
(1) Kushan chronology has tantalized scho¬
lars for generations, and very few events
can be dated with any precision or certainty.
Even the dates of the reign of Emperor
Kanishka, the best-known personality of
Kushan history, Is sharply disputed, with
different schools fixing the beginning of his
reign at A.D. 78; A.D. 110-115; A.D. 128; and
A.D. 144. Editor's note.
Photo © Dominique Darbols, Paris
This monumental headless statue Is thought to represent Kanishka, the great ruler
of the Kushans. It was discovered at Surkh Kotal (north-eastern Afghanistan)
In the ruins of the acropolis raised by Kanishka towards the end of the first century A.D.
An almost Identical headless figure, now In the archaeological museum at Mathura
(Afghanistan), bears an inscription clearly identifying it as a statue of Kanishka.
French archaeological missions have made numerous excavations at Surkh Kotal
under the direction of Professor Daniel Schlumberger. Among Important remains
they have brought to light is a massive stone Inscription (detail below) which has proved
to be one of the most significant discoveries of the past twenty years in historical
and philological studies of this part of Asia. This Kushan text is composed of 25 lines
written in Greek characters. Though not yet fully deciphered, It has thrown
new light on the construction of the Surkh Kotal acropolis by the great Kanishka.
Photo © Dominique Darbols, from 'L'Afghanistan et son Art" by Jeanine Auboyer,
published by Ed. Cercle d'Art, Paris 1968, and ARTIA, Prague
r
Ç
J\<
^U'OfXrí^hv^o-roM. *m? .6rtf ^o.Pirl
^fO.^0lkí^P^hp¿^^^c|cj>:p^Jxc3^b>.T7
^£q f> Kol ¡H. rOjp- ofcfeÂJx d&c c ¡&< /

Kushan portrait
gallery of
2,000 years ago
All the Kushan sculptures on these pages,
with the exception of photo 10, are recent
discoveries made in southern Soviet
Uzbekistan. Number 10, unearthed near
Begram (Afghanistan), is believed to represent
a water goddess. Carved in ivory, this
outstanding work of the Gandhara school
(see photos page 10) is now in the Kabul
museum. Most of the sculptures shown on
these pages were modelled in clay and then
painted. They were recovered from the main
hall of a Kushan palace at Kalchayan,
excavated a few years ago by an expedition
led by the Soviet woman archaeologist,
Professor Galina Pugachenkova. Character
portraits par excellence, the sculptures depict
a cross-section of people in one area of the
Kushan Empire 2,000 years ago. The portrait
gallery includes an almost complete figure
of a Kushan prince (3), a warrior and a
bowman (4 and 8), a jester (5) and a
satyr (12). The woman's head (9) was
unearthed at Dalversin-tepe, another Kushan
city excavated by the same expedition in
southern Uzbekistan. Discoveries at the two
sites have given scholars new insight into
Kushan culture and particularly the monumental
statuary art of this region which formed
part of northern Bactria.
Photos © APN


This extraordinary piece of
sculpture, which could
easily be taken for one of
the saints gracing the
medieval cathedrals of
Europe, is an example of the
Gandhara art school that
flowered In Central Asia,
In the first centuries of
our era, during the Kushan
period. Gandhara art was
influenced by the styles of
many countries Including
Greece, Rome and Persia.
The sculpture Is a detail of
"A Pilgrim's Offering to
Buddha", below, now in
the Peshawar museum
(Pakistan).
Photos © Roland Michaud - Rapho

Kanishka, one of the great sovereigns of Antiquity
can be little doubt that he was one of
the greatest sovereigns that ever held
sway in the ancient world.
Kanishka is remembered as one of
the great patrons of art and religion,
who turned Gandhara into a veritable
holy land of Buddhism (although as we
shall see in a moment religious toler¬
ance was the hallmark of Kushan
civilization). Kanishka convened the
Fourth Buddhist Council, and it is gen¬
erally believed that the Buddhism of
the Great Vehicle made its appearance
under his reign and patronage.
II HE overthrow of Greek rule
by no means led to a decline In the
cultural and political importance of
Bactria and its neighbouring regions.
Greek, dynasties in Bactria and India
had already become isolated from
Mediterranean civilization by the sec¬
ond and first centuries B.C. and had
degenerated into warring groups.
However strange it may seem, it was
not until the Greek rulers had been re¬
placed by Kushan kings that the ancient
local traditions received a new impetus.
The mutual influence of Greek and
local Bactrian cultures goes back as
early as the Achaemenian epoch in the
fourth century B.C. when the first set¬
tlers from the Hellenic world appeared
in the area and founded their colonies.
Bactria also played an important part
in Alexander the Great's plan to unite
the Hellenes with the peoples of the
East. The fact that the Kushans
adopted the Greek script to record
the ancient Bactrian language is also
an event of great cultural significance.
Thus, three different historical and
cultural components, I. e. the local Bac¬
trian, the Hellenic and the nomadic
combined with the traditions of the
neighbouring peoples in Central Asia,
Afghanistan, Pakistan, India and Iran
to create that complex and unique com¬
bination of ethnic, cultural, social and
political phenomena we know as the
Kushan civilization.
Central Asia thus came to play a
tremendous role in the dissemination
of Greek, Roman and Indian culture in
the Far East. The evidence of written
records and archaeological findings
suggests that the whole eastern part
of the Great Silk Route was entirely
in the hands of the Sogdians by the
fourth century A.D. The Sogdians had
founded their colonies and settlements
in the heart of Asia for trade with
many peoples. Sogdian silks, com¬
peting with those from China and the
Far East, later penetrated into Byzan¬
tium and western Europe. This is
supported by recent finds of silk bear¬
ing "old" Sogdian inscriptions among
European church treasures.
This union of the peoples of Cen¬
tral Asia, Afghanistan, Pakistan, India
and eastern Iran within the framework
of a single state, and their comparative
security from foreign invasions, led to
a flourishing in trade and great pros¬
perity in that part of the world.
The Kushan period is furthermore
marked by a very significant fact: the
prolonged and fruitful co-existence of
the traditions of the various peoples
who inhabited the empire and of their
different religious systems and beliefs.
The Kushan pantheon bears witness
to this religious tolerance and the co¬
existence of different cultural tradi¬
tions. Coins struck In the second
century A.D. during the reign of Kan¬
ishka bear the names and effigies of
gods from the Indian, Persian and Hel¬
lenic pantheons: Mithras the defender
of truth; Ordokhsh the goddess of
fertility; the mighty god of war, Vere-
tragna; the Indian Shiva as well as
Buddha; Helios, Selena and even
Serapis whose cult was well-known
in Hellenic Egypt.
The syncretic character of the Ku¬
shan religious pantheon reflected the
ethnic and cultural diversity of the
population of this vast empire, and the
many standards and traditions which
had developed through close mutual
contact, and had formed a common
bond throughout the kingdom.
This tolerance, in the broadest sense
of the word, was an important factor
in the flowering of culture, making it
possible to preserve the essential fea¬
tures of local traditions and ways,
while it helped to mould new cultural
values for the entire nation.
IHE Kushan Empire, as we
have seen, was instrumental in the wide
dissemination of Buddhism in Asia.'
But this did not lead by any means to
the disappearance of local religions
and traditions. It was a fruitful,
complex process of mutual influence
and acceptance of new ideas.
The history of Buddhism in Central
Asia offers us some interesting
insights in this respect, despite the
fact that Buddhism was never the pre¬
vailing religion there. The followers
of Buddhism in Bactria not only learn¬
ed to read the Buddhist texts and
translated them into Sanskrit but also
prepared careful commentaries and
explanations of the texts.
This approach can also be seen in
religious architecture. The design
and structure of the Buddhist temples
in Bactria (and later in Central Asia
generally) did not as a rule correspond
to the Buddhist sanctuaries of the pre-
Kushan and early Kushan periods in
India, but rather to the religious archi¬
tecture of Near and Central Asia with
its enclosed sanctuary surrounded by
narrow circular corridors.
Central Asia became the centre from
which Buddhist culture spread across
the face of Asia to China, Japan and
Korea. Chinese manuscripts contain
the names of more than ten Buddhist
monks from Bactria, Sogdiana and Par¬
thia who wrote religious texts and
translated them into Chinese. And
some authorities have rightly asserted
that China would not have known
Buddhism in the 2nd-4th centuries A.D.
had it not been for the Central Asian
monks.
cI ENTRAL Asia thus became
the direct link between the Near and
Far East. This was no mechanical
link implying the mere transfer of one
people's culture to another. It involved
a total mastery of different cultural
values and their fusion into a new and
higher synthesis.
It was during the Kushan period that
the peoples of the East first became
aware of the tremendous importance
of relations between peoples as well
as states, and created common cultu¬
ral values which served to cement
together all the peoples of this vast
region. And no less important, in the
course of this process of assimilation
the local traditions and features of
each component part of the common
culture were preserved.
These features, common to all the
people of the Kushan Empire, have
become clearly apparent over the last
few years in the field of art, where at
the same time the unique character of
local art trends and schools can be
readily discerned.
For several decades scholars have
been arguing over the origins and
nature of Kushan art. Specimens of
Kushan art found in Gandhara (West
Pakistan) were examined to establish
their link with ancient Roman traditions
or Buddhist art. The discovery of 1 1
Kushan works belonging to the Ma- ' '
thura school of India, finds in Pakis¬
tan (Taxila and Butkara), Afghanistan
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

KUSHAN CIVILIZATION (Continued)
The influence of Kushan civilization was
prolonged in Central Asia well after
the Empire had ceased to exist Traces
of its artistic legacy are seen in these
two paintings copies of sections of
a 7th-8th century fresco discovered
near Samarkand (Uzbekistan) in 1965
by a Soviet archaeological expedition
led by Professor V. Shishkin. These
details show two richly garbed bearers
of gifts (above) and a horseman (below).
12
(Begram, Hadda and more recently
Surkh Kotal) and in Central Asia (Air-
tarn and the recent discoveries in
Khalchayan and Dalverzin-Tepe) have
completely revised earlier ideas about
the origins and nature of that complex,
many-sided phenomenon that was
Kushan art.
Today we can definitely state that
several different artistic schools and
trends existed during the Kushan per¬
iod, which though often inter-connect¬
ed were also artistically independent.
Bactrian art occupied a special position
in Kushan art as a whole, and amazing
specimens have been found recently in
northern Afghanistan and Central Asia.
It was in Bactria that Kushan art first
emerged to be developed later by
other schools.
The art of the Kushans survived long
after the downfall of the empire and
became an inspiration for many paint¬
ers and masters from the early
medieval countries and regions of Cen¬
tral Asia, Hindostán and the Far East.
Its influence is clearly discernible in
the sculpture of the Guptas in India and
in wall paintings and reliefs in Sog¬
diana (Pjanjikent, Varakhsha) and east¬
ern Turkestan.
IHE cultural and historical
ties which developed during the
Kushan period continued to be felt for
centuries in this vast area, and Kushan
art has made a particularly important
contribution to the medieval art of Af¬
ghanistan, Iran and Central Asia.
Scholars are now tracing Kushan in¬
fluences in the later religious philo¬
sophies and thinking of India as well as
in the culture of the peoples of north
India, West Pakistan, Afghanistan and
Central Asia. It is quite obvious that
Kushan culture forms an integral part
of the history and cultural heritage of
the descendants of these peoples
today.
By virtue of their high level of dev¬
elopment, their originality and grace,
Kushan art and culture stand on a par
with the culture of ancient Greece and
Rome. Each decade, every year, con¬
tinues to provide new finds. The 1960s
were particularly rich and fruitful.
Thanks to the joint efforts of schol¬
ars from Afghanistan, India, the
U.S.S.R., Pakistan and Iran, the French
archaeological mission in Afghanistan,
Italian and Japanese expeditions, and
the work of scholars from the U.S.A.,
Great Britain and other countries, im¬
portant new material has come to light
on the Kushan period. And perhaps
the day will soon come when the key
will be found to unlock all the mysteries
of this remarkable and unique period
in human civilization.

COINAGE OF THE
KUSHAN RULERS
«# i.J
Images of Kushan rulers have come down to us on the coins struck
during their reigns. Portrait on coin, above left, is that of Kujula Kadphiz,
first unifier of the Kushan Empire. Above right, reverse of same coin.
Below right, coin bearing the image of King Kanishka, a great patron of the
arts, under whom the Empire reached the zenith of its cultural influence.
Below left, reverse of same coin. The documentary evidence of Kushan
coins, unearthed in large numbers from many sites, has been of great
value to historians and scholars seeking to reconstruct the history
of the Kushan Empire. Near Begram (or Kapisa), the former summer
capital of the Kushan Empire, north-east of Kabul (Afghanistan),
no less than 30,000 coins dating from various periods were discovered
in 1830. Other rich archaeological finds made at Begram include a great
hoard of luxury objects: Syrian glass, Chinese lacquer ware, Indian ivory
carvings, Hellenistic bronze figurines, plaster models for silver plaques
from the Graeco-Latin West. The Begram finds are evidence
of the many contacts and exchanges which the Kushan Empire
promoted between the peoples of the Ancient World.
s
>
\
w fb-'
Ik
&
.-
\*
f/if.
jr
«t-
\
13
Photos © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
