THE MYSTERIOUS
HIEROGLYPHS
OF EASTER ISLAND
by Alfred Metraux
I,VER since a Dutch vessel
chanced across it two centuries ago,
Easter Island, no more than a speck
in the vastness of the South Pacific,
has intrigued the world with myster¬
ies which have so far been only par¬
tially and tentatively explained.
For long the principal mystery of
Easter Island lay in the colossal sta¬
tues which still dot the bare slopes
of the Rano-raraku volcano and which
once stood in far greater numbers like
sentinels over the mausoleums along
the seashore.
In my opinion the greatest "mystery"
of Easter Island is not to be found in
the many colossal statues erected
there. There is no doubt that the
ancestors of the present Polynesian
inhabitants hewed out these statues
and dragged them to their present
sites, abandoning the workshops where
they carved them perhaps only three
or four centuries ago.
However, no one has yet been able
to give a satisfactory explanation for
what appears to be a form of writing
developed on the island.
This writing first came to light about
1860 when the people of the island,
newly converted to Christianity, sent
the Bishop of Tahiti, a Monsignor
Jaussen, a long cord braided from
their own hair, wound around an old
piece of wood. Looking casually at
the improvised spool, the Bishop was
surprised to see that it was covered
ALFRED METRAUX, noted anthropologist and
writer, won international fame for his work
on Easter Island and amongst the Indians of
South America, and his efforts on behalf of
racial equality. He died In 1963.
with small figures, all of the same
height and carefully arranged In
straight lines. These reminded him of
Egyptian hieroglyphics, and he wrote
to the missionaries on Easter Island
asking them to look for other tablets
and to try to decipher them.
Seeing how interested he was in this
object, one of the islanders brought
in a large tablet, perfectly preserved.
Since then, other tablets have been
found on the island and now total 24,
including one large wooden rod cover¬
ed with hundreds of symbols.
At the time when. the first tablets
were discovered, it' would probably
have been possible to obtain the key
to the mystery from the surviving
members of the priestly caste. The
old civilization of Easter Island had
only recently collapsed but there were
still a few "wise men" alive who could
have explained the meaning of the
strange symbols on the tablets had
they been questioned.
Unfortunately, the missionaries were
not skilful Investigators. They queried
the islanders who, at the sight of the
tablets, began to intone chants, instead
of "reading" them. The missionaries
treated them as frauds and lost interest
in the matter.
Mgr. Jaussen, however, was more
persevering. In Tahiti, he found an
Easter Islander named Metoro, who
had learnt the mysteries of the tablets
under a famous master. The Bishop
handed him a tablet and asked him to
"read" it. Metoro turned it this way
and that and suddenly began to chant.
He "read" the tablet from right to
left, without bothering io turn it round,
although in each line the signs are
upside down in relation to that preced¬
ing or following.
Jaussen took down the text as Me¬
toro recited it, and his manuscript
was recently published. If each phrase
is compared with the corresponding
symbols, it appears that what Jaussen
had taken to be a connected text is
simply a disjointed succession of brief
descriptions of the symbols viewed by
his interpreter, and a series of isolated
words or phrases suggested by those
symbols. There is no logical develop¬
ment or general sense in the chant or
recital. Mgr. Jaussen ended by losing
heart himself and abandoned his efforts
to get to the bottom of the mystery.
Other attempts were made to extract
from the ¡slanders information which
might have made it possible to de¬
cipher the symbols. On a visit to East¬
er Island in 1886, an American paymas¬
ter, Mr. W. Thomson, was taken to the
house of an old man called Ure-Vaeiko,
who, in his youth, had attended the
school of the Tangata rongo-rongo,
(singers or bards) and learned to read
the tablets.
Ure-Vaeiko consented to "read"
photographs of the tablets, if not the
tablets themselves. He recited their
contents from end to end without a
moment's hesitation. It was noticed,
however, that he was paying no atten¬
tion to the number of symbols in each
line and, worse still, did not notice
that the photographs had been sur¬
reptitiously changed. He went happily
on reciting hymns and legends until
he was accused of being a fraud.
Responsibility for these lost oppor¬
tunities lies, not with the islanders,
who appear to have acted in good
faith, but with the early investigators,
who were incapable of imagining a
system of writing different from their
own and were bent at all costs on
having the tablets "read".
During my stay on Easter Island
in 1934-35, I tried to discover, in the
memories of my informants, some indi¬
cation, however vague or apparently
insignificant, which might have put me
onto the right track; but it was all
useless. The inhabitants had, it is
true, assured me that the tablets were
similar to the "cat's cradle" patterns,
each suggesting a chant to the viewer.
I concluded that the tablets were
The strange "hieroglyphs" discovered
on Easter Island are mostly engraved
on wooden tablets or othei wooden
objects, like this fish. They depict
stylized human forms, birds, fish, plants,
shellfish and ceremonial objects, or
sometimes geometrical designs. Easter
Islanders can no longer read this
ancient script or system of notation,
and scientists have been unable to
decipher it until now.
Photo © Musée de l'Homme, Pans

i
JH
«
* «Mn
wr
.^
f'i
¿
}jj-
w
-+~-
PIERRE LOTI AT
EASTER ISLAND
On January 3, 1872, the French frigate "Flore"
dropped anchor in Cook's Bay at Easter Island.
On board was a 22-year old midshipman, Julien
Viaud, who was later to become a famous
novelist under the pseudonym Pierre Loti. The
"Flore" had stopped at Easter Island to bring
back to France the head of one of the huge sta¬
tues, carved from soft volcanic stone, for which the
island is famous (the head is now in the Musée
de l'Homme in Paris). A skilled artist, Loti was
assigned to make a series of drawings of the
statues, the ¡slanders, their dwellings and their
tools and artifacts. He also did a number of
drawings of the islanders' tattoo patterns. Loti
drew two types of statues found on Easter Island:
the now familiar bust type standing on the slopes
of the crater of the volcano, Rano-raraku; and
a long-bodied type which formerly surmounted the
funerary cairns (ahus) that fringe the coast in
an almost continuous procession. It was believed
that, as a result of fierce inter-tribal wars, all
the "ahu" statues were toppled over after 1838.
This drawing by Loti, under which he wrote,
"Easter Island, 7 January 1872, about 5 a.m.;
inhabitants watching me arrive," shows that at
least five of the statues were still undamaged
in 1872. The sketch also shows inhabitants with
Easter Island tattooing, a Janus-headed dance
paddle or club, and various hair styles: tuft or
pompom arrangement and diadem of rooster
feathers. Human skulls (foreground) were then
found everywhere on the island. Loti also drew a
group of five statues atop a burial platform made
up of four superimposed terraces; each statue
wore a cylindrical head-dress of volcanic tufa.
August 1957
mnemonic pictographs used in reciting
the genealogies and sacred hymns
which form a large part of the Poly¬
nesian liturgy. I was all the more
inclined to this interpretation because,
in the Marquesas, which are probably
the original home of the Easter Island¬
ers, the singers or bards associate
their liturgical poems with small fibre
pouches from which hang thin knotted
cords. It was thus possible that each
symbol on the tablets represented a
sentence, a line or even a stanza.
This, then, was the hypothesis I had
arrived at and which was accepted
by other anthropologists. But I am less
sure now that my interpretation is
right since receiving a letter from a
German anthropologist, Dr. T.S. Bar-
thel, suggesting that the system used
by the Easter Islanders was far more
complicated than mere picture-writing,
and could be a real script, part ideo¬
graphic part phonetic, using the rebus
somewhat in the fashion of the Mexi¬
can and Mayan scripts. According to
this interpretation, the script consisted
of symbols indicating the general mean¬
ing of a sentence by the use of a num¬
ber of key words.
A Hungarian linguist, G. de Hevesy,
has pointed out similarities between
some of the Easter Island symbols and
the undeciphered script of the Mo-
henjo-Daro and Harappa civilizations
which existed in the Indus Valley some
six thousand years ago.
The Austrian scholar, Professor
R. Heine-Geldern, considers it doubt¬
ful that a direct link exists between
these two scripts since there are far
more symbols that are different than
symbols that are the same. His ar¬
chaeological research led him to be¬
lieve that the Polynesian civilizations
originated in China, and it was there
that he sought the origins of their
system of writing.
Heine-Geldern compared the sym¬
bols of Mohenjo-Daro and Easter Island
with those of the earliest Chinese
writing found on oracle bones and
shells dating back to the second millen¬
nium B.C. He found that some of the
symbols were common to all three
scripts and concluded that the writing
of Easter Island had been transported
to the Pacific by a people from
southern China possessing a system
of writing that may have originated
in central Asia or Iran.
Heine-Geldern also compared the
Easter Island writing with the picto¬
graphs still used among the Cuna In
dians in Panama. The famous pre-
historian. Dr. G. von Koenigswald, has
pointed out similarities between the
Easter Islands symbols and certain
drawings on fabrics in Indonesia.
I think it is fairly easy to discover
curious similarities between scripts of
the pictographic type. The very fact
that it is so easy should put us on our
guard. Whatever the true nature of
the symbols on Easter Island's tablets,
I believe that the scribes who made
them sought their models in the Is¬
land's natural and cultural environment.
To me, all the indications seem to
be that the writing of Easter Island
was invented on that remote little
island itself, probably on the basis of
some mnemonic system brought by
the ancestors of the Easter Islanders
from their original home.
If it is ultimately proved that these
symbols are indeed hieroglyphics which
can be "read", then the Easter Island¬
ers, who have already amazed the
world by the quality of their art and
the impressive proportions of their
monuments, could claim the additional
honour of having by a stroke of genius
taken a decisive step in the develop¬
ment of civilization.
July-August 1956
17
