by György Marx
QUASARS
AND THE BIRTH
OF THE UNIVERSE
Text copyright © Reproduction prohibited
L OOKING upwards on a
clear night, we see myriads of stars,
thousands upon thousands of them
twinkling in the dark sky. The bright¬
est stars are visible to the naked
eye up to some thousands of light-
years away. With the aid of tele¬
scopes they can be distinguished at
distances thousands of times greater,
up to some millions of light-years.
At a greater distance still, individual
stars can no longer be distinguished,
although they can be seen as galaxies,
similar to our own of which the sun
is part. These galaxies comprise
thousands and hundreds of thousands
of millions of stars. The total light
emitted by such galaxies can be
recorded up to distances of some
thousands of millions of light-years.
The light we register on a photo¬
graphic plate began its journey at a
time when life had barely commenced
on earth.
And yet we can probe In this way
only a minute portion of the universe.
We should have to penetrate much
further into the depths of space and
time to discover the structure and the
history of the universe. The heavenly
bodies, stars and galaxies we can see
now began to form more than ten
thousand million years ago. It would
therefore be necessary to go back at
least ten thousand million years into
the past in order to understand the
history of the genesis of matter.
Before Copernicus, man had a
simple picture of the universe. Its
32
GYORGY MARX is professor of theoret¬
ical physics at the University of Budapest
and chief editor of the Hungarian scien¬
tific publication "Fizikai Szemle" (Physics
Review). For his studies on the quantum
theory of particles he was awarded the .
Hungarian Kossuth Prize in 1955. This
article Is condensed from a' series of
six talks recorded by the author for the
International University of the Air.
centre was the earth, the natural focus
for the condensation of matter.
Copernicus removed the terrestrial
globe from this privileged position.
The Neapolitan philosopher Gior¬
dano Bruno, an admirer of Copernicus
and friend of Galileo, had already
conceived the notion of an infinite
number of worlds all of equivalent
importance. From then on the
universe was represented as being
full of heavenly bodies distributed
uniformly in space and time and of
homogeneous density, in the same
way that the molecules of gas are
distributed in a storage tank.
.At first the stars and our sun were
taken as being the molecules of this
cosmic gas. But, following the work
of the U.S. astronomer, Edwin Hubble,
the galaxies those islands of matter
containing thousands of millions of
stars have become the molecules of
cosmology.
However, things are not quite so
simple. Galileo taught that the same
laws of physics are applicable in the
heavens as on earth. If we attempt
to apply the laws of universal
gravitation to a gas of infinite extent,
like that in which the galaxies are
molecules, a simple calculation shows
that this gas could not be in a state
of equilibrium. Either the force of
attraction will prevail or the cosmic
repulsion will predominate. A gas
formed of galaxies must of necessity
either expand or contract.
In 1926 observations made by
Hubble showed that the universe is
receding. The further into the depths
of space we look the faster are the
galaxies we can see receding from us.
All these observations have con¬
firmed Hubble's law that the speed of
recession of galaxies is proportional
to their distance from us.
Galaxies at a distance of a thousand
million light-years have a recession
speed of 30,000 kilometres per second,
that is a tenth of the speed of
light. Those that are twice as far
away two thousand million light-
years are receding from us twice as
fast, and so on. The universe is not
a static, invariable formation. It
unfolds before us a picture that
changes with time.
Living in an evolving universe we
cannot but speculate as to what took
place in the past and what is to happen
in the future. How long will this
recession, this expansion of the
universe continue? If it is to continue
indefinitely the galaxies will end up at
such vast distances one from the
other that the light emitted from one
galaxy will no longer be able to reach
even those galaxies that at one time
were closest. Is our own galaxy, the
Milky Way, destined then to float like
a solitary island in the void?
s>IUPPOSE that we, as it
were, run the film backwards towards
the past. We should then see the
galaxies getting closer to one another,
and it can be deduced that about ten
thousand million years ago all the
matter of the universe was very highly
condensed. Expansion must have
taken place from an extremely dense
state and have begun in a manner
similar to an explosion.
Many astronomers, relying on the
Friedman calculations, have adopted
this hypothesis of an original state in
which matter was very dense and have
attempted to deduce from it, by
calculation, the various conditions
observable in the universe as it now
is. Others have had some reserva¬
tions about this, pointing out that a
chain of deduction going so far back
is at the mercy of the slightest cir¬
cumstance that might have been over¬
looked.
In the midst of this sea of specula¬
tion, a first point of reference became

t.
Quaiar 3-C-9 *.
8.000 MILLION LIGHT YEARS
Photo © National Geographic Society
Palomar University, California
available with the discovery In 1965-
1966 of radio waves coming from the
depths of space.
In the range of metric waves and
above, we can distinguish radio
emissions from galaxies and various
extra-terrestrial bodies. In the milli-
metric wave range, emissions originate
from our atmosphere and the iono¬
sphere. But in the intermediate, centi-
metric range there was silence.
In probing this silent range more
closely weak thermal radiation was
discovered. This incoherent radiation
does not originate from known
heavenly bodies nor from a particular
sector of the sky. It ¡s a background
noise that fills the entire universe in
a homogeneous manner and Is identi¬
cal In all directions. It corresponds
to a temperature of 3 degrees
absolute, that is to say 270 degrees
below zero centigrade (1).
This background radiation is appar¬
ent as a weak radio noise, but when
it is considered that it is present
uniformly throughout the universe its
importance becomes evident. It con¬
tains a thousand million times as many
photons as there are atoms in the
universe and the energy density of
the radiation is a hundred thousand
times greater than that of the light
coming from all the stars.
If we make the deduction that in
the past the universe occupied a
smaller and smaller volume of space,
the further we go back in time, we
find greater and greater intensities of
radiation and higher and' higher
radiation temperatures. Since the
temperature today is three degrees
absolute, then five thousand million
years ago it must have been six
degrees absolute, and thirty degrees
absolute 7,000 million years ago.
MESSAGES 8,000 MILLION YEARS OLD
Six years ago, a lively new branch of astronomy was born with the publication in the
March 1963 issue of the English journal Nature of four papers by Australian and American
scientists reporting the discovery of mysterious celestial objects, now known as quasars
or QSOs (quasi-stellar objects). Since that date our knowledge of quasars has grown
steadily. Above left, Quasar 3-C-9 (arrowed) a tiny luminous dot in space visible through,
a powerful telescope. Its light, reaching earth after 8,000 million years (at a speed of
300,000 km. a second), is helping scientists to reconstruct cosmic events as old as the
birth of our own galaxy. Comparative distances shown in drawings above and below help
us to visualize the awe-inspiring dimensions of the universe.
(1) Absolute zero is approximately minus
273 degrees C.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Nebula of Orion
.
Solar system
i i
1,000 LIGHT-YEARS
3
it- ''! ..."
Andromeda, nearest galaxy to our own
i
'>-
Our galaxy .*"
2 MILLION LIGHT-YEARS
5
4 '
c
'ûtij'-V--'' .i¿"
' '
Our galaxy
i i
i	-t
100.000 LIGHT-YEARS
>.
1 * , * ' X 1 »
' ' / s m
* ' * . ., / r \
/ 5
* / x J
1 Á ' »
' * * ' -*. ' N ' *
* * 3 - * * \ '
' #" i'*.
Range of cosmic observation with the most
powerful photographic telescopes (continuous line)
and with radiotélescopes (dotted line)

QUASARS (Continued)
There is only one possible ex¬
planation for such a large number of
photons in space. They were produc¬
ed in the heart of matter that is highly
condensed and extremely hot, just as
it must have been 10,000 million years
ago when the universe began to
expand.
From this starting point, with the
radiation spreading over a greater and
greater volume, the temperature
diminishes. At three degrees abso¬
lute, radiation today bears witness
that the starting point for the expan¬
sion of the universe was a special
state of matter with the temperature
doubtless exceeding a billion degrees
and with radiation predominating over
atomic matter (1).
A<
34
ICCORDING to Jacob Zel-
dovitch's calculations, during the first
second of expansion the temperature
dropped to ten thousand million de¬
grees, and, at the end of the first mi¬
nute, to some millions of degrees. At
this point matter began to dominate
with the formation of the first atomic
nuclei. During the first ten million
years the temperature dropped to four
thousand degrees and, in the heart of
the ionised plasma, neutral atoms, that
is to say atoms having their full com¬
plement of peripheral electrons, were
able to form.
After that, vast clouds of gas were
able to develop, each of them forming
the basis of a galaxy. Gradually the
universe took on the aspect that we
know today and we move from the
realms of misty speculation to those of
scientific research based on observa¬
tion.
Naturally, the residual radiation at
three degrees absolute gives only a
confused picture of the birth of atoms
and galaxies without providing any
details. The information that can be
drawn from the present state of atomic
matter gives a no less distorted pic¬
ture.
Heavy elements are being formed
continuously in the universe of today.
It is, then, almost impossible to deduce
from our present knowledge the origi¬
nal proportion of the elements and,
hence, the density and temperature
conditions prevailing at the beginning.
This is why astronomers would find it
of inestimable value if direct undis-
torted evidence, providing specific
information about the initial phase of
the universe, were to be discovered.
In fact we should need beacons
visible at enormous distances, a billion
times brighter than the stars and a
hundred times brighter than the
galaxies, to find our way far enough
into the depths of space and time to
be able to discover there the structure
of our universe.
Now it is precisely such beacons
that astronomers believe were dis¬
covered during the early years of this
decade. These stars have been
named quasars, a word formed from
the contraction of the phrase "quasi-
stellar". In fact they are galaxies of
a particular kind which were at first
mistaken for stars.
Quasar 3-C-9, which has been iden¬
tified both optically and by radio-
telescope, has a light spectrum whose
rays are displaced 215 per cent
towards the longer wave lengths. If,
as is generally accepted, this "red-
shift", as it is called, is due to the
velocity of recession, and if this
velocity is proportional to distance
(in other words, if our universe is
expanding), this redshift corresponds
to a recession velocity of 240,000 kilo¬
metres per second and to a distance
of eight thousand million light-years.
The astonishing thing is that these
stars emit enough light or radiation
energy to be discernible at such
distances. Their output of energy can
be estimated at more than a billion
times the light of the sun.
Beyond this distance the objects
are too pale for it to be possible to
measure their redshift and our optical
telescopes can probe no further. But
eight thousand million light-years
indicates that the light from Quasar
3-C-9 has been travelling for that
length of time. To look at this
quasar- is, therefore, to look eight
thousand million years into the past,
that is to say, to cover about 80 per
cent of the history of our universe.
I
(1) In this text "Billion" is used In the
English sense to mean a million million.
though at present
eight thousand million light-years
appears to be the extreme limit for
optical observation, radio-astronomy
can take us further. In fact, radio
sources of the same type as quasars
and weaker than 3-C-9 have been
detected by radiotélescopes. If we
assume that all these radio sources
have the same absolute intensity, their
apparent intensity allows us to estimate
the range of our radiotélescopes as
being nine thousand million light-
years. This range is largely exceeded
by the new giant radiotélescope sited
in a natural bowl at Arecibo, Puerto
Rico (See "Galaxies Caught in a Steel
Mesh," "Unesco Courier", Jan. 1966).
It is expected that the new radio-
telescope will be able to record
emissions from radio galaxies and qua¬
sars situated at distances of ten to
twelve thousand million light-years. This
means that it will be possible, so
to speak, to listen to a direct broad¬
cast of the beginnings of the universe.
This possibility, which just a few
years ago would have been consid¬
ered fantastic, has become a reality
thanks to the extraordinary intensity
of the quasars' output both of light
and radiation. Their radio emission
is the result of one or several
explosions which, at the same time,
heated the central nucleus in such
a manner that it could shine like a
million suns for a million years or
longer. Radio emission from the
radio galaxies is due to an explosion
of a similar kind, but perhaps less
intense.
These beacons in space can be
used as triangulation points from
which to map the entire stellar field
in space and in time. This is not just
a hope for the far off future. The
map-making venture has already begun
and the results obtained are of
enormous interest.
w HAT can we assume about
the behaviour of quasars throughout
time? During the hundred thousand
years that followed the first flash, ra¬
diation must have been of constant
intensity. From then on the strength
of the radiation began to decrease ex¬
ponentially. A million years after this
spark-off the power of radiation was
already only a thousandth of what
it had been at the start, and after ten
million years it had again diminished
a thousand times. At this point the
quasar fades to the extent that it
is no longer discernible. No quasars
have been detected whose age has
been assessed at more than a few
million years.
Their distance and their distribution
in space can be calculated by their
apparent intensity. It then becomes
noticeable that their density in space
is more or less homogeneous within
the limits of one to two million light-
years. Beyond this distance the
number of quasars appears to increase
in all directions. Their density
doubles (Tver a spherical layer with
a radius of some thousands of millions
of light-years. Beyond that it dimin¬
ishes again strongly and, at the radio
horizon, nine thousand million light-
years away, the density is only a
fiftieth of that observed in the close
range.
In reality, this arrangement in space
expresses evolution in time, the
quasars being observed at distances
that correspond to the date of their
existence. If quasars seem to us
to be more numerous at a distance
of some thousands of millions of
light-years, this is because in that
distant period of time their eruptions
were more frequent.
If we look further still, we see
scarcely any quasars, despite the fact
that our radiotélescopes are now
powerful enough to detect radio
sources even further away. This is
because we are reaching back into
an era preceding the first quasars.
If we can liken quasars to the
nuclei of galaxies burning themselves
CONTINUED ON PAGE 41

QUASARS AND THE BIRTH OF THE UNIVERSE (Continued from page 34)
out and aging rapidly, the date that
they flared up must be related to
the birth of the galaxies The quasars
must be contemporary with the birth
of the galaxies or have followed at
a limited interval of time. They
therefore situate in time the
birth of the galaxies which in
turn denotes a critical state of the
matter of the universe, already con¬
siderably cooled down after the initial
explosion. Thermal turbulence must
already have reduced sufficiently
to allow gravitational forces to
accumulate the vast mass of the
proto-galaxies, that is, the galaxies
in the process of condensation.
From these observations it seems
to follow that the period in which
quasars flared up reached its cul¬
mination eight to nine thousand
million years ago. It is unlikely
that more than nine thousand million
years ago there were many quasars.
We are living in a comparatively
calm period of the development of
the universe, at a time when matter
has long been gathered together in
galaxies or stars. But with our
radiotélescopes we can survey the
past and reach back to an earlier
stage in the life of the universe to
an epoch in which thermal flux and
not the accumulation of matter was
the dominant factor. We are on the
point of having access to the very
dawn of the world at a time when,
perhaps, there were no stars and all
that existed was amorphous matter.
The initial results of this investiga¬
tion are still far from precise. The
given facts of time and distance will
have to be checked and verified. This
will be the task of larger telescopes
that are today planned or under
construction. The results they supply
will enable astronomers and astro¬
physicists to re-constitute the history
of our universe.
The first radiotélescope was built
scarcely a quarter of a century ago
and the first optical telescope three
centuries ago. Man has existed on
earth for a million years and life for
a thousand million years. The sun,
the earth and the planets are six
to seven thousand million years old
and the galaxy of which we are part
goes back eight to nine thousand
million years. The expansion of the
universe, which can still be observed
today, may have begun ten to twelve
thousand million years ago. But the
further back we go into the past
the more uncertain become the events
that marked the prehistory of the
universe.
It is not so long since scientists
began their enquiry into the past of
man and of the earth. To avoid
straying in the labyrinths of specula¬
tion or losing their way in the mists
of space and time, they now have
as guides the quasars, those beacons
whose light and radio signals travel
towards us across thousands of
millions of years.
41
