VERNACULAR
LANGUAGES
IN CHANGING
AFRICA
W,|E have become so used
to talking about Africa's countless lan¬
guages that we have lost sight of the
fact that Africa is, after all, a whole
continent. A more than cursory exami¬
nation of the languages of this conti¬
nent reveals first, that the number has
been vastly exaggerated, and second,
that the situation is hardly different
elsewhere. Europe possesses dozens
of languages and dialects; and "Stan¬
dard African" is as much of a mis¬
nomer as "Universal European" would
be. French and Italian exist as separ¬
ate languages, so why not Swahili,
Hausa and Yoruba?
Despite the existence of local varia¬
tions, the number of linguistic zones
in Africa is really quite small. Within
each zone there is a linguistic unity
which is not only historical but also
a living fact.
Let us take the case of the zone
comprising the so-called Bantu lan¬
guages. Here we find not various
distinct and separate languages but
different dialects of the same language.
The common features are so extensive
that one can pass quite easily from
one dialect to the other.
In the Congo practically everyone
is multilingual. In addition to their
local dialects, the Lari, the Vili, the
Bateke, the Bangala and the Kikongo
all speak Lingala, Monokotuba or some
other language.
From the number of dialects the Vili
of Pointe-Noire understand one might
assume that they have a special apti¬
tude for foreign languages. A Vili, for
example,\can easily understand or get
along in Lari, Teke, Swahili and Chilu-
ba. This is simply explained by the
fact that they are all dialectal varia¬
tions of one and the same language.
The slight differences in these dialects
is evident from the following renditions
for the word TO EAT: KULIA in Vili;
PATHE DIAGNE of Senegal is a specialist in
linguistics and African history and sociology.
by Pathé Diagne
Photos © Gisèle Freund, Paris
KUDIA in Kikongo; KUDIA in Lari;
KOLIA in Lingala; KULIA In Swahili.
As can be seen, the differences are
merely a matter of one consonant or
vowel, and serve to Illustrate the Idea
that the whole Bantu linguistic zone
could today be unified around one of
these dialects. This unification would
affect some 100 million persons.
What is true of the Bantu linguistic
zone also applies to other parts of
Africa. In the Sudanese belt of coun¬
tries stretching across Africa just
below the Sahara, the same pheno¬
menon can be observed with regard
to Hausa, the Mandingo language
group (Bambara, Dioula, Malinke), the
Akan Baoule languages of Ghana and
the Ivory Coast, and the Fulani (or
Pular) languages.
All over the world a process of
linguistic unification is now under way.
In Africa the same thing Is happening.
Differences in speech are being worn
down, and are giving way to a limited
number of major languages of commu¬
nication. This is occurring as a result
of various factors. Urbanization, the
cultural» renascence and the develop¬
ment of great trading centres have
enabled a few languages to unify whole
areas.
This has completely transformed the
linguistic map of tropical Africa so that
many of the splinter dialects of the
past are now being absorbed by about
a dozen dynamic, hard-core languages
today spreading across the continent.
Most of these languages are now
used by groups of 1 million to 12 mil¬
lion persons. But some are spoken
by over 50 million people. For exam¬
ple, there Is the Bantu group, spoken
by 100 million people; Swahili, spoken
by over 50 million persons in most of
East Africa (Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania,
Zambia and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo); the Lingala-Kikongo-
Monokotuba language family, spoken
by about 30 million persons over most
of Central Africa (Central African Re-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

VERNACULAR LANGUAGES (Continued)
32
public, Congo-Brazzaville, Cameroon
as well as the Democratic Republic of
the Congo).
The establishment of a common
language for those who speak Swahili,
Lingala-Kikongo-Monokotuba, or even
Shango and certain Bantu dialects of
South Africa and the Cameroon, is
a task that could well be accomplished
within the reasonable future.
The languages of West Africa are
more varied. Here, Hausa, spoken by
some 40 million people in Nigeria,
Niger and Chad, could become a
unifying element for a vast area of
Africa.
Yoruba (Nigeria), Malinke - Dioula
(Eastern Senegal, Mali, Upper Volta,
Ivory Coast, Niger), Fulani (Senegal,
Mali, Guinea, Upper Volta, Niger,
Nigeria), and Arabic are all linguistic
groups spoken by from 10 to 15 mil¬
lion people.
Tamashek (Mauritania, Mali, Niger),
Ibo (Nigeria), Akan-Baoule-Bulu-Fang
(Ghana, Ivory Coast), Fon-Ewe-Mina
(Togo, Dahomey, Ghana), More (Upper
Volta), Wolof (Senegal), Sarakhule
(Mali, Mauritania, Senegal), Kanuri
(Nigeria, Niger, Chad), and Djerma-
Songhoi (Mali, Niger) also form lin¬
guistic areas in process of unification
and are spoken by 1 to 5 million
people.
Thus we see that a veritable pyra¬
mid of languages exists in West Africa,
with several languages spoken in the
same country in Nigeria, for instance,
Hausa, Ibo, Yoruba and Kanuri are all
spoken.
But it is clear that language unifica¬
tion, not dispersal, is the dominant
factor in Africa today.
Efforts to try to adapt African lan¬
guages to modern change have been
in progress for many many years.
These were given new impetus with
the establishment of institutions of
European origin.
In 1820, a French schoolteacher set
up West Africa's first secular, bilingual
school at St. Louis, Senegal, where
both Wolof and French were taught.
This pioneer attempt was followed by
the missionaries who first used African
languages to spread the Gospel and
then gradually introduced them for the
teaching of a few new techniques in
agriculture and the crafts.
The bilingual school in the Congo
was the outcome of this development.
In the countries under British rule, a
similar approach, based on the prin¬
ciple of "native administration", helped
the spread of African languages. The
status and Influence of these lan¬
guages can be observed today in the
Democratic Republic of the Co.igo,
Uganda and Tanzania. These countr¬
ies, with a literacy rate of 45 per cent,
have been able to establish an excell¬
ent political, social and technical infra¬
structure by using African languages
for newspapers, school books and
other publications.
The interesting features here are
the new possibilities thus opened.
The development of a script in Swahili
hastened the stabilization of the lan¬
guage and its literary growth which
had begun long before colonization,
as attested by the Kilwa dating from
the 17th century as well as an abun¬
dance of other great works of great
antiquity.
This is equally true of other African
languages, particularly those of West
Africa, where Fulani and Wolof litera¬
ture, Hausa works (those by Dan Fodio
are an outstanding example) and the
writings of the Kanuri and Dendi chro¬
niclers bear comparison with Swahili.
Other languages like Lingala or Chi-
luba are entering the writing stage,
thanks chiefly to contemporary efforts.
T,HE adaptation of African
languages to modern change is not yet
very far advanced. In this sense most
of them have not yet become languages
of advanced scientific knowledge or
vehicles of modern literature, reflect¬
ing either in original creative works or
translations from non-African lan¬
guages, the intellectual ferment of con¬
temporary thought.
Although many attempts have been
made along these lines, they are
mainly isolated cases. Nevertheless, a
number of notable examples by out¬
standing African thinkers can be cited.
The Senegalese writer, C. Anta Diop,
has played a pioneer rôle here. The
second part of his Nations Nègres
contains a series of chapters which
illustrate how Wolof can be adapted
to modern scientific writing. Anta
Diop chose literary as well as scientific
themes and produced translations in
his native tongue of extraordinary
precision and clarity. His rendering
into Wolof of Einstein's Theory of Rel
ativity as interpreted and explained by
the French scientist Langevin, is su¬
perb.
He also offers us translations of
poems and excerpts of plays from
French literature that retain all the
exquisite beauty of the original. The
terminology of modern mathematics
and physics which he uses opens the
way for elaboration of a modern scien¬
tific culture In the Wolof language.
Wolof, it is true, is a language with
a long literary tradition. C. Anta Diop
makes this abundantly clear in his book
with a judicious choice of texts. Nev¬
ertheless what he has done for Wolof
can be done for any language, African
or not. Even more recently, the Presi¬
dent of Tanzania, Julius Nyerere, dem¬
onstrated the vitality of African lan¬
guages by his series of literary works,
including a translation of Shake¬
speare's Julius Caesar.
For all languages there is a problem
of adaptation, but not of adaptability.
Linguists know that no language lacks
the ability to mould itself to a new
environment. Every language has its
own built-in system that meets the
needs of its people. The integration
of new knowledge is a matter of voca¬
bulary; it does not affect the system,
which is the structure of the language
on which the vocabulary rests.
Moreover, the need for adaptation
is not a problem exclusive to the lan¬
guages of Africa. It is world-wide.
Japan established its economic and
scientific force by assimilating modern
skills and knowledge into its own
language, and by introducing new tech¬
niques into its culture to which it gave
Japanese words or transliterated the
original foreign ones.
No language escapes this process.
Why is there a "Franglais" or a
"Japenglish" if not because English has
I	The alpha
Words or ideas
represented by Meaning
original signs
bet of th
1907
ie King of B
1911 1916
amum
1918
Existing
phonetic
value
ncha fis'i vO? w
/
W ch, tch, cha
fom king I ¥ /
+ f. fo
ngou country * fj T, g, gou
II adult t & i it i.ii
A remarkable example of the development of written language is that of an African
ruler, King Njoya of the B< mum (Cameroons) who invented a form of picture writing
at the end of the 19th century and within a few years transformed it into a syllabic,
phonetic alphabet, independently and without previous knowledge of alphabetic
scripts. After devising his writing system, King Njoya launched a large-scale campaign
to teach the alphabet to his people. Examples above show how reforms and simplification
during 11 years gave the Bamum script a more systematic form.
November 1950

become the leading language of the
world as a result of the contribution of
American science and technology?
The best answer to the question
regarding the adaptability of African
languages to modern change is to
remind ourselves how easily modern
techniques are being assimilated into
African languages. It is a truism that
people do not accept all foreign words
indiscriminately. Train, ship, television,
mathematics, drugs in a word all the
elements of the new environment are
spontaneously translated, especially
by the women who often find graphic,
picturesque equivalents for them.
In Wolof, for example, the word for
train is saxar, for mathematics wann,
for drugs garab, all terms drawn from
the language itself. For words like
television, radar or atom, common-
sense operates in Africa as it has in
Japan, Germany or India, and the same
words are incorporated into the lan¬
guage with minor modifications or
none at all.
Today the great problem in Africa
is that of translation. School books
from the primary to the university level
must be translated to make them
available to students. This will faci¬
litate the broad diffusion of science
and technology in Africa. It Is easier,
cheaper and will reach more people.
A
nation's linguistic policy is
not decided by the individual. The indi¬
vidual can make known his suggestions,
his desires and his needs; but the final
word rests with the State. Specialists
agree that the use of the vernacular
for literacy campaigns and schooling
is certainly the best way to show one's
regard for the culture and traditions of
a people, and the most effective for
making the language the vehicle of
modern change; but the politician does
not always see things the same way
as the specialist.
However, an increasing number of
countries are exhibiting a refreshing
degree of understanding in this matter,
and this is encouraging. In addition
to those countries of Africa that have
traditionally practiced bilingualism bas¬
ed on the use of both an African lan¬
guage and a European one such as
Nigeria, Ghana, the Democratic Re¬
public of the Congo, Tanzania and
Uganda others like Niger, Guinea
and Mali have shown new interest in
the question.
Unesco's programme in Africa which
gives priority to the question of African
languages, shows that Unesco is
keenly aware of this problem and Its
effect on the continent's educational
and development policy.
Many details have as yet to be
worked out in agreement with Unesco's
African member countries; but the
proposals elaborated at the Unesco-
sponsored Congress of Bamako in
1965 for unification of certain African
scripts is a step in the right direction.
June Î967
With the world's oceans a convenient dumping ground for radioactive waste,
scientists are on the alert for signs of contamination which could spread
for millions of square miles and ultimately endanger man through the food
he harvests from the sea.

