NUCLEAR WEAPONS
AND WORLD SANITY
by Linus Pauling
Nobel Peace Prize 1962
Nobel Prize for Chemistry 1954
D.I URING the Second World
War there were some great bombing
raids on German cities. In one such
raid, on one night, one thousand aero¬
planes each carrying four tremendous
one-ton blockbusters destroyed much
of the city of Hamburg and killed an
estimated 75,000 people. If there were
to be such a raid on, say, Paris today
and another such 1,000 plane raid
tomorrow, and then another the next
day and so on day after day for
fourteen years, the explosives de- .
livered would have the power of one
20-megaton bomb.
Now, one 20-megaton bomb test in
the atmosphere or at the surface of
the earth liberates radioactive materials
into the atmosphere which will, accord¬
ing to the best estimates that we can
make, cause gross damage or death to
550,000 unborn children. This is the
probable sacrifice of the testing of a
single H-bomb by any one nation.
Everyone must understand this.
If the human race survives and world
population continues at a reasonable
level, then I have calculated that the
bomb tests carried out thus far, and
amounting to 600 megatons, will in the
course of time affect sixteen million
children so severely that they will
suffer gross physical or mental defects
or embryonic, neonatal, or childhood
deaths.
We know that large amounts of high
energy radiation produce cancer. If
we accept the principle that high
energy radiation even in small amounts
is also cancerogenic as I believe it
is then it is possible to calculate the
sacrifice of human beings now living to
the bomb tests.
The estimated figure is that two
million human beings now living will die
Opposite : This wooden statue
(35 cm.; 14 in.), carved by an unknown
artist of the Caroline Islands in the
south-west Pacific, is remarkable for the
simplicity of its form and features. The
way the artist has reduced the human face
to a mere outline recalls the more
sophisticated treatment of modern day
western sculpture.
December 1965
Photo © Musée de l'Homme, Paris
five, ten fifteen or twenty years earlier
than otherwise because of cancer or
other diseases produced by the high
energy radiation liberated in the bomb
tests carried out so far. This is about
one person in fifteen hundred in the
world, and it gives us some idea of the
nature of atomic weapons in so far as
the tests go.
Of course there would be a tremen¬
dously greater amount of contamination
with radioactive materials all over the
earth if there were to be a nuclear war.
In addition to the destructive and lethal
effects of blast, fire, and immediate
high energy radiation, there would be
the effects of local fall-out.
Survivors within hundreds of miles of
where the bombs exploded would
generally be exposed to about half of
the lethal dose that causes acute
radiation sickness and death within a
few days, and the survivors would have
their portion of the pool of human
germplasm seriously affected. Their
lives would be shortened considerably
on the average by some ten or
fifteen years by exposure to this high
energy radiation.
The standard nuclear bomb today is
the 20-megaton bomb. (One megaton
equals a million tons.) The Soviet
Union has detonated a 60-megaton
bomb, which was apparently only the
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Of what was once a
man there is left only
a shadow on the
wall. For a single
instant, on August 6,
1945 at Hiroshima,
the man's body
absorbed the
radiation and heat
from the atomic blast
and traced the
outline on the
building behind. The
man vanished. The
ladder remained.

NUCLEAR WEAPONS (Continued)
first two stages of a 100-megaton
bomb. A 100-megaton bomb involves
only about three and a half tons of
explosive material and probably can be
carried in a single large rocket from
one continent to another. But 100-
megaton bombs don't make very much
sense because a 20-megaton bomb
can destroy any city on earth.
A 20-megaton bomb exploded over
any city on earth would destroy it
completely and kill most of the people
in it. It would produce a crater of
twenty kilometres in diameter; it would
set off fires 50 to 100 kilometres away,
producing a tremendous fire storm and
would damage people by the immediate
high energy radiation and by the radio¬
active fallout. Even people 300 kilo¬
metres away would be killed.
My estimate is that the stockpiles
of the world comprise about 16,000 of
these 20-megaton bombs or the equi¬
valent of them. Now, there aren't
16,000 large cities in the world and
one might well ask why this irrationally
great amount of explosive material has
been produced.
I shall answer this by saying that it is
because the system of science edu
cation has been faulty in the past so
that the people who were making the
decisions could not have had a clear
understanding of what they were doing
if indeed anyone did make the deci¬
sions, for there has been some doubt
as to whether the development of these
tremendously great stockpiles was the
result of decision-making rather than
some sort of accident and shifting of
responsibility primarily in the United
States and the Soviet Union and per¬
haps in Great Britain to some extent.
And yet in the Franck Report written
by scientists working on the atomic
bomb project in the U.S. in 1945, a
prediction was made of the future
nuclear situation in the world which has
turned out to correct up to the present
time.
Three hundred and twenty thousand
megatons is my estimate of the size of
the world's present nuclear stockpiles.
If ten per cent of the stockpiles (32,000
megatons) were to be used in a nuclear
war with the bombs exploded on the
average within a hundred and fifty
kilometres of the targets (you don't
have to hit the target in order to get
the result) then 60 days after the day
on which the war was fought and we
assume that it would cover Europe as a
whole, all the Soviet Union and the
United States of the 800 million
people living in these regions, 720
million would be dead, 60 million
severely injured, and there would
be 20 million survivors with only minor
injuries.
But these survivors would have to
cope with the problems of complete
destruction of all cities, metropolitan
districts, and means of communication
and transportation, complete disruption
of society, death of all livestock, and
gross radioactive contamination of all
growing foods. This would be the
end of this part of the world, and how
great the damage would be to the rest
of the world no one has been able to
estimate in a reliable way.
The partial test ban treaty signed at
Moscow in 1963 was a great step
forward. I regret very much that this
treaty was not made three years earlier,
during the long period when no bomb
tests were carried out by any nation
except France, which only made very
small bomb tests.
Of the total of 600 megatons tested,
CONTINUED ON TAGE 46
140,000 MILLION DOLLARS A YEAR. The annual world expenditure on arms was roughly $140,000 million dollars
according to an estimate made in 1964. Since then the figure has considerably increased. Expenditure on arms is
equivalent to about one-tenth of the world's annual output of goods and services. It represents at least
two-thirds of the entire national income of all the developing countries. It is close to the value of the world's
annual exports of all commodities.
November 1964

NUCLEAR WEAPONS (Continued)
450 megatons or three-quarters of the
total were tested In the last three years.
Millions of unborn children were sacri¬
ficed because of the inability to see
that the test ban solution could have
been accepted three years earlier. I
hope that further mistakes of this sort
are not made. I am grateful for the
bomb test treaty, but of course we
must move forward. The test ban
treaty is just the beginning.
I should like to see some action
taken in the meantime that would
decrease the chance of outbreak of a
devastating nuclear war, perhaps
through some psychological or techno¬
logical accident or through some com¬
bination of circumstances such that
even the wisest of national leaders
could not prevent catastrophe.
In my Nobel lecture in Oslo In
December 1963 [delivered on the occa¬
sion of the award to Prof. Pauling of
the Nobel Prize for Peace] I proposed
that the American stockpile of nuclear
weapons and the Soviet stockpile of
nuclear weapons should, separately, be
put under joint national and interna¬
tional control, so that the Soviet
nuclear weapons could not be used
except with the permission both of the
Soviet Premier and of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, and that
the American nuclear weapons could
not be used except by permission both
of the President of the United States
and of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
I also proposed that there should be
In authority in the control stations in
both . countries, United Nations per¬
sonnel as well as Soviet personnel in
the U.S.S.R. on the one hand and
U.N. personnel as well as American
personnel in the U.S.A. on the other.
I believe that even a first step in this
direction, the step of having United
Nations observers in these control
stations, would be of much value in
increasing our security and decreasing
the chance that these weapons would
be used.
I look forward to the time
when there is in existence In the world
a satisfactory system of international
law taking the place of war. In working
to abolish war from the world we are
working also for human freedom, for
the rights of individual human beings.
It is war, militarism, and extreme
nationalism that are the great enemies
of the individual human being in every
country. I believe that as we achieve
the goal of peace in the world and
disarmament, we shall see great
improvement in the social, political
and economic systems of all nations
and in the rights of individual human
beings all over the world.
The idea of replacing war by world
law is an old one and it has continued
to be advanced up to the present time.
Only now has the time come when it
will be accepted.
November 1964

