Photo © Andreas Feininger

How will radio communication be
established between the hidden
face of the moon and the earth?
How will research stations
established on the moon
communicate with each other?
T.
by Georges Phélizon
26
GEORGES PHELIZON Is director of long-term
planning of the new applications of electro¬
nics at the Central Telecommunications Lab¬
oratory in Paris. From 7965 to 1968, he direct¬
ed the development and construction of the
European scientific satellite, ESRO I, launch¬
ed into orbit on October 3, 1968, for the
European Space Research Organization.
Mr. Phelizon made a special study of the
problem of communication on the moon for
the conference of the International Academy
of Astronautics, In New York in October 1968.
HE recent success of
Apollo 8, which circled the moon with
three U.S. astronauts on board, was
largely due to the power and quality of
the remarkable telecommunications
system planned and built by the U.S.
civilian space agency, NASA.
The most spectacular feature of the
service provided by the system was
undoubtedly the direct transmission to
the world's television networks of live
shots showing life in the astronauts'
cabin, the low altitude flight across the
face of the moon, and the earth as
seen from its natural satellite.
All this seems little short of miracu¬
lous when it is realized that the trans¬
mitter on board the spacecraft was no
more powerful than that of a radio-taxi-;
at under 20 watts, it consumed hardly
more power than an ordinary electric
razor.
Just as the reflector in a car head¬
lamp beams the light forward, the

reflector of Apollo's transmitting aerial
beamed the radiated energy to the
earth, and thus magnified its intensity
about 500-fold.
But the moon ¡s a long way off
(240,000 miles, or nearly 10 times the
earth's circumference) and over that
distance radio waves are dispersed; so
that they are so weak at the receiving
end that they cannot be captured with
an ordinary aerial.
With the aid of a parabolic dish
85 feet in diameter at the NASA
station, at Goldstone, California
their intensity was multiplied about
100,000 times. This dish is mounted
on a swivelling base, and can be
aimed with great accuracy. Two iden¬
tical ground stations were set up at
Madrid in Spain and at Canberra in
Australia.
Because of the rotation of the earth,
the moon appears to be revolving
around every point of our planet, and
the geographical location of the listen¬
ing posts was therefore chosen to
ensure that at all times at least one of
these posts would be able to pick up
Below, a spectacle never before seen
by man: the "rising earth" viewed over
the sharply curved lunar horizon,
photograph taken on Christmas Eve,
1968 by Apollo 8 astronauts. Left, radio
telescope trained on the night sky.
the signals. The three stations were
linked by a high-reliability network to
the Mission Control Centre at Houston,
Texas, which was thus in constant
touch with the spacecraft as it moved
across the moon.
Apart from the transmission of TV
images and cross-talk between the
astronauts and the flight controllers
at the Houston mission direction
centre, the telecommunications system
played a vital part in ensuring the safe
and successful accomplishment of the
mission by keeping track of the space¬
craft's position and speed with a high
degree of accuracy.
The data it provided was fed to a
battery of computers which, by compar¬
ing the spaceship's actual flight path
with the flight plan, could immediately
signal any correction needed to keep
Apollo 8 on correct course. And
indeed, one aspect of the success of
this intricate earth-moon mission, i.e.,
the precision with which the whole
operation was executed, is a triumph of
the computer; credit is due to the
scientists and technicians who built
and programmed the computer units.
Thus, with the vital part played by
radiocommunications in a reconnais¬
sance mission such as that of Apollo 8
in mind, let us now look a few years
ahead when man has established him¬
self on the moon.
The short trips of 1969-1970 have
been succeeded by longer and more
sophisticated scientific expeditions.
Lunar tourism, of course, is still a thing
of the future.
The lunar environment is hostile to
man; there is no atmosphere, and man
can move about only ¡f garbed in a
space-suit. During the lunar day, which
lasts a fortnight, the temperature rises
to something like 150° C; by night it
falls to about minus 150° C. From the
moon, the "full earth" appears four
times as large as the "full moon" fami¬
liar to us all.
L UNAR bases will probably
be built in greater part underground,
partly to offset the changes in tempera¬
ture and partly to give protection
against radiation or falling meteorites.
Exploring parties of scientists will
travel about in curious, highly func¬
tional vehicles.
For adequate scientific coverage, a
number of bases will be needed on
both the visible and the hidden sides
of the moon.
Here again, the role of telecommuni¬
cations in linking up the various bases
and exploring parties as well as in
connecting these lunar outposts with
stations on earth will be of vital import¬
ance.
Radiocommunication conditions un¬
fortunately are rather different from
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

COMMUNICATION ON THE MOON (Continued)
The moon's fickle gravitational field
those we are used to; while it is easy
on earth to arrange for a caller in Paris
or New York to talk by short wave
radio-telephone to a passenger on a
liner crossing the Atlantic, the same
equipment would have a range of only
a few score miles on the moon.
The chief reason is the absence of
atmosphere on the moon; the earth's
atmosphere plays an important part in
using radio waves for communication
purposes; the lower density of the air
at higher altitudes acts somewhat like
a prism, curving radio waves back to
earth, and extending their range
beyond the horizon. (There may well
be planets where the atmospheric
pressure is much higher than on the
earth, in which case the prism effect
would be so marked that radio or light
waves would go right round the globe;
this seems to be the case for Venus,
in particular.)
However, the most important factor
for long distance communication on the
earth ¡s undoubtedly ionospheric
reflection; under constant bombard¬
ment by various particles and radia¬
tions (especially ultra violet rays)
emanating from the sun, gas atoms in
the upper atmosphere are robbed of
some of their electrons.
When released, the electrons form
conductive layers known as the iono¬
spheric layers. These were deduced
as early as 1910 and experimentally
confirmed in 1925; they reflect back
towards the earth the radio waves
which would otherwise escape.
Fortunately for space communi¬
cations, the ionospheric barrier is not
insuperable, and chiefly affects wave¬
lengths of roughly over six metres,
that is, frequencies under 50 mega¬
hertz per second.
It can thus be understood why the
radio-telephone which makes it pos¬
sible to reach a liner in mid Atlantic
\
t
m
Ï
s
5j

s/S
i L1
^ea°
This diagram shows how two communication satellites, S-1 and S-2, could enable stations on the hidden
face of the moon to communicate with the earth, and provide a radio link between research stations
anywhere on the moon. These relay satellites could be established at certain points where the earth and
moon cancel out each other's gravitational attraction (known as libration points), requiring only minimum
corrections from time to time to keep them in position. The relay satellites would be placed in orbit
at about 60,000 kilometres from the moon. At L-1, the lunar attraction LA combined with the centrifugal
force of the satellite CF would balance the terrestial attraction TA. At L-2, the lunar attraction LA and
the terrestial attraction TA offset the centrifugal force CF and would maintain the satellite in position.
(Diagram is not drawn to true scale).
would be useless on the moon, where
there is neither atmosphere nor iono¬
sphere, so that all radio waves on the
moon would escape freely into space.
This is precisely one of the reasons
why scientists are interested in install¬
ing radio-astronomy laboratories on the
moon, as the "radio sky" would be
clear for all frequency ranges.
Does this mean that lunar explorers,
will be completely cut off from the
earth ? The answer, fortunately, is no,
since communications satellites provide
a solution. Waves reflected by the
Scientific expeditions travelling across the
moon's surface will need specially-designed
vehicles. Conventional lubrication would be
useless since oil evaporates in. the prevailing
vacuum. Rubber tyres would crack or fry in
temperature extremes. Above all, mobile
machines will have to negotiate difficult terrain.
Photo left, two British designs by Peter
A. E. Stewart for lunar surface vehicles. Top,
mobile lunar laboratory moves on tracks and
has observation domes and living quarters for
crew. Below it, a mobile radio station with
disc antenna. Photo right shows model of an
American lunar scientific station: the large
metal roof protects it from meteorites which
hit the moon at extremely high speeds. In fore¬
ground, observatory under transparent dome.
ionosphere cannot ensure the regular
transmission of high quality TV images
whereas satellites can do so even for
intercontinental programmes.
It will thus suffice to put a number of
satellites in orbit round the moon to
link up the scattered bases; but here
again, conditions are not the same as
on earth. The first TV relay satellites,
placed in terrestrial orbit a few thous¬
and miles up, girdled the earth in a
few hours; they could therefore
connect only two stations at certain
times and for very short periods. It
was then decided to "increase the
height of the orbit and with it the orbit¬
al period, i.e. the time taken to make
one complete revolution.
The Molnlya satellites developed by
the Soviet Union, for example, follow a
pronounced elliptical orbit thus consid¬
erably extending the time available
for transmissions, which in the case of
a link via satellite between Paris and
Moscow can be maintained for up to
six hours.
If the orbit chosen is a circular one
at an altitude of 22,500 miles the orbital
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

COMMUNICATION ON THE MOON (Continued)
Sail-powered satellites operating on solar radiation
period will be 24 hours; such a satel¬
lite, launched on an east-bound equa¬
torial orbit, will take just as long to go
round the earth as the earth takes to
spin on its axis: it will thus appear
stationary. This is the case for "Early
Bird" stationed above the Atlantic at
27 degrees West. A stationary satellite
will thus permit permanent connexions
to be established, and it is very tempt¬
ing to transpose this solution to the
moon.
But, as everyone knows, the moon
takes 28 days, not 24 hours, to rotate
on its axis, which is why it always
turns the same face towards us, the
other side remaining invisible from the
earth; for a satellite to revolve round
the moon ¡n 28 days, it would theoreti¬
cally have to be placed in orbit nearly
62,500 miles up. In actual fact, this
would be possible only ¡f the moon
were isolated in space, as the attrac¬
tion of the earth completely alters the
situation. A satellite placed in such an
orbit would rapidly escape from the
moon's gravitational field.
0,
30
I NE possibility would be to
place our lunar communications satel¬
lite near enough to the moon for its
attraction to exert a greater pull than
the earth's; a suitable height would be
something over 3,000 miles, giving the
satellite a revolution of about 12 hours.
The satellites would then revolve much
faster than the lunar stations, and for
quasi-permanent liaison, a dozen satel¬
lites would be needed.
Another conceivable solution which
has great appeal, as it leads back to
almost stationary satellites, utilizes a
relatively simple phenomenon of celes¬
tial mechanics known as libratlon
points. If a body is close to earth it
feels the gravitational pull of our planet
(this is what we call weight). If the
same body finds itself in the proximity
of the moon, ¡t is similarly attracted by
the force of the moon.
It is not difficult to imagine, there¬
fore, that there is some intermediary
point where the force of. attraction of
the earth and the moon are equal in
both directions, and therefore cancel
each other out. In determining this
point, actual calculations made also
take into account an additional factor:
centrifugal force which tends to pull an
object away from the earth, since the
body together with the moon rotates
around the earth in 28 days.
Diagram on page 29 shows the first
libration point L-1, at about 34,000
miles from the moon in the direction
of the earth. It also shows a second
point L-2, off the hidden side of the
moon, where the centrifugal force
counteracts the combined attraction of
the moon and the earth. If a satellite
S-2 is placed at L-2, it will thus be
able to serve nearly all the bases
established on the hidden face of the
moon, but will not allow communication
with the earth which ¡s not visible
from this point, since it is hidden by
the moon.
Man's creative genius has overcome
this difficulty: satellite S-2 will not be
placed exactly at L-2; it will be shifted
a few thousands miles sideways, so as
to be in sight of the earth; and even
perhaps of L-1, where a second
satellite S-1 will relay communications
to the stations on the visible face of
the moon.
For both S-1 and S-2 to remain sta¬
tioned near the selected positions will
require the use of an extremely low-
powered position-correcting device

(less than 1 milligramme force per kilo¬
gramme of satellite).
Such a low thrust can be produced
by ion engines, but another possibility
is to stabilize the satellites with sails.
In "The Planet of the Apes," by
Pierre Boulle, the two chief characters
roam across interplanetary space, pro¬
pelled by the pressure of the sun's
rays on the sails of their spacecraft.
Some American scientists have seri¬
ously considered equipping satellites
placed near the libration points with
sails which would maintain them in
position thanks to the pressure of solar
radiation.
The satellites would in fact describe
a small individual orbit around the
libration points to allow for the changes
in the moon's and earth's position in
relation to the sun in the course of the
year. Calculations have shown that a
sail area of one-third of a square metre
per kilogramme of satellite would be
sufficient to produce the force needed.
To install on and around the moon
all the components of the communic¬
ations networks briefly described here
will demand many years, but this does
not mean that the first scientific
missions will be deprived of the means
of communication. The powerful
AWAY FROM
THE EARTH
"Away from the
Earth II", kinetic
painting by Frank
J. Malina, showing the
trajectory of a
satellite leaving the
earth and orbiting
the moon (right).
Left, boosted aloft
by the tremendous
power of its rocket
engines, a spacecraft
blasts off from a
Soviet cosmodrome.
communications system installed on the
earth to keep in touch with spacecraft
could provide similar services to moon
stations on the visible face of the
moon, and could also be used even
to interconnect them. In that case,
since the velocity of radio waves is
187,500 miles per second, a lapse of
about five seconds between question
and answer would have to be allowed
for in telephone conversations between
two points on the moon via the earth.
Of course, other means of commun¬
ication used on earth before the
satellite era began could also be used
on the moon. But it appears unlikely
that they will be used to link points
more than a few dozen kilometres
apart.
T,HE most simple idea would
be to lay a telephone cable on the
lunar surface, but the operation would
be far from easy.
Another possibility would be to use
pylons brought from earth, or the
mountains of the moon to install radio
relays similar to those first used around
1950 as boosters for long distance TV
transmissions through microwave radio
links. But as the moon's radius is
only a fourth that of the earth, the
transmission range would be only half
that on earth, and a larger number
of relays would be needed. Each relay
would also have to contain its own
long-duration unattended electric power
supply. This of course will be rather
difficult in the lunar environment.
Finally, we must not forget that every
piece of equipment used on the moon
will have to come "from the sky." As
the moon has no atmosphere, the only
way to slow down a lunar-bound
spaceship is to brake it by firing a
rocket engine. So it may be more
economical to use equipment placed in
lunar orbit rather than land it on the
moon. Another consideration is that
climatic conditions in lunar orbit may
well be far more temperate than those
on the moon's surface.
Both these factors point to satellites
as the best solution, and in our opinion
the full scale use of lunar bases, parti¬
cularly on the hidden side of the moon,
will not be feasible until such time as
communication satellites have been set
up in the vicinity of the moon.
31
