CYMATICS
THE SCULPTURE
OF VIBRATIONS
This photo shows neither a duck
nor a swan about to plunge. It is
one of the extraordinary patterns
sculpted by high-frequency sound. It was
produced by placing a plastic mass in
a magnetic field and subjecting it to
vibration. The masses form sculptural
shapes reflecting the characteristics of
the magnetic field.
Photo © J.C. Stuten, Dornach, Switzerland

by Dr. Hans Jenny
Photos J. Christiaan Stuten
Hans Peter Widmer
Throughout the living and non-living world we find patterns of recurrent
rhythms and periodic systems in which everything exists in a state of continual
vibration, oscillation and pulsation. These rhythmic patterns can be observed
not only in the beating of the heart, the circulation of the blood and the
inhaling and exhaling of breathing, but also in the recurrent formation of
cells and tissues, in the rhythmic movements of the oceans, the wave motion

of sound and hypersonic vibrations, and in the vast universe extending from
the cosmic systems of solar systems and galaxies down to the infinitesimal
world of atomic and nuclear structures. In the following article. Dr. Hans
Jenny, a Swiss scientist and artist, describes some of the experiments he has
carried out in a long study of these rhythmic vibrations and presents some of
the extraordinary results which this new field he has termed "Cymatics"
(from the Greek kyma, wave) already reveals to us. Dr. Jenny believes that
these experiments will give us new insight into the world of vibrations
terrestial and extra-terrestialand eventually serve fields of research as
diverse as astrophysics and biology.

CYMATICS
1 - Patterns of a world
permeated by rhythm
OiPUR world is permeated
throughout by waves and vibrations.
When we hear, waves travelling
through the air impinge. on our ears.
HANS JENNY was born in Basel, Switzerland,
and studied natural sciences and medicine.
For many years he has been in medical prac¬
tice at Dornach, near Basel. He is a natur¬
alist and painter and has undertaken exten¬
sive research into zoological morphology.
The problems of modern physiology and bio¬
logy led him to study the phenomena of
experimental periodicity, a field of research
that was extended to include the effects of
vibration, a new field he has termed "Cyma¬
tics.' Dr. Jenny's article reports on more
recent experiments carried out since he
published his original study, "Cymatics, the
Structure and Dynamics of Waves and Vibra¬
tions," highly illustrated with bilingual Ger¬
man-English text, published by Basilius Presse,
Basel, Switzerland, 1967.
When we speak, we ourselves generate
air waves with our larynx. When we
turn on our radios and televisions,
we are utilizing a waveband.' We talk
about electric waves and we are all
familiar with waves of light. In an
earthquake the whole earth vibrates
and - seismic waves are produced.
There are even whole stars which
pulsate In a regular rhythm.
But it is not only the, world we live
in that is in a state of vibration (atomic
vibrations are another example) for our
body itself is penetrated by vibrations.
Our blood pulses through tis in waves.
We can hear the beat- of the heart.
And above all our muscles go into a
state of vibration when we move them.
QUARTZ
QUARTET
How cymatic experiments
visualize sound is shown in
photos left. Quartz sand
strewn on a steel plate Is
"excited" by vibrations from a
crystal oscillator.
Approximately the same
configuration is seen in all
four illustrations, but the
pattern becomes more
elaborate as the pitch of the
acoustic tone rises.
Frequencies used here, left
to right and top to bottom,
are: 1,690 hertz (cycles per
second), 2,500, 4,820 and 7,800.
(See also centre colour pages,
photo No. 5).

Photo <Q J.O. btuten
BIRTH OF A VORTEX
This photo, with its graceful curves and shimmering movements, is a detail of
a vortex in the course of formation. The pattern of flow of the vortex is clearly
visible because of the use of coloured dyes by the experimenter
which delineates each current sharply (see colour photo No. 7).
When we flex the muscles of our
arms and legs, they actually begin to
vibrate. It is even possible to hear
these muscle sounds and record them
with a telephone. All this means no¬
thing more or less than that the many
complicated chemical, energetic, bio¬
electric processes in the muscle fibres
take place in a series of vibrations.
This raises a problem: What tan¬
gible effects do wave and vibrational
processes produce in a specific mat¬
erial, in a particular milieu? The pur¬
pose of the studies reported here is
to provide an answer to this question.
Experiments have been devised to
display a whole world of curious phen¬
omena in which figures appear, cur¬
rents and eddies are formed, struc¬
tures take shape, harmonically pulsat¬
ing patterns can be seen, and so
forth.
Our first reaction to this whole world
of wave phenomena is one of astonish¬
ment; its features excite the wonder
of both the scientific investigator and
the artist. In studying all these phen¬
omena, however, we are concerned
not only with completed forms but
also with the ways in which they
come into being. Movement is annex¬
ed to form. Thus we may be said to
have the whole phenomenon before
our eyes.
This is something that can have a
particularly productive effect on the
mind of the creative artist. Not only
does the realized form appeal to us
through its beauty, but it also presents 7
itself to us as a living pattern of motion
which is revealed in, say, a heap of
sand. The vibration lays hold of the
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

Photos © J.C. Stuten
8
WEAVING
BY SOUND
When liquids are made to
vibrate, very unusual
patterns result Above, a
cellular pattern, not unlike
those found in nature.
Right, scale-like structures
(technically know as
imbricate). When the
materials and frequencies
are changed the patterns
change and we see
beautifully structured
arrays, hexagonal,
rectangular and overlapping
patterns In the form of
honey-combs, networks and
lattices. Sometimes the
texture itself undergoes a
marked change and the
most astounding
displays result.
CYMATICS (Continued)
grains of sand and transports them in
a way determined by the arrangement
of the vibrational field.
Those artists in particular who are
interested in kinetic art will find here
a domain of nature in which kinetics
and dynamics have free play until a
configuration emerges. This high¬
lights a very important characteristic
of wave and vibrational processes: on
the one hand, there is movement and
an interplay of forces; on the other, the
creation of forms and figures.
But invariably both the kinetic and
the structural elements are sustained
by the vibrational process. Thus we
are always confronted by these three
components: vibration or wave which
is manifested in figures and in dyna¬
mics and kinetics. It is hardly an
exaggeration, then, to speak of a basic
triple phenomenon of vibration.
How are such experiments perform¬
ed. The German scientist E. Chladni
(1756-1827) was the first to show how
solid objects vibrate. He scattered
sand on a metal plate, making it
vibrate with a violin bow, so that the
sand formed a definite pattern of lines
characteristic of the sound heard. The
vibration transports the sand from spe¬
cific areas called loops into certain
linear zones. But the conditions of
the experiment could not be selected
at will nor could the results be seen
as a whole until new methods were
found.
One of these will be described by
way of example. What are known as
crystal oscillators were used. The lat¬
tice structure of these crystals is de¬
formed when electric impulses are
applied to them. If a series of such
impulses is applied to the crystal, it
begins to oscillate and the vibrations
actually become audible. These vibra¬
tions can be transmitted to plates,
diaphragms, strings, rods, etc. (photo
page 6 and colour photo number 5).
By means of this method conditions
can be freely selected, and accurately
determined: the number of vibrations
per second (frequency), the extent of
the vibratory movement (amplitude),
and the exact point of excitation are
all known with precision. Several
acoustic tones can be experimented
with at one and the same time; the
scope of the experiment can be extend¬
ed at will and, above all, each ex¬
periment is precisely reproducible.
With the aid of such methods, re¬
search can reveal a whole phenomen¬
ology of vibrational effects. The name
"cymatics" was chosen for this field
of study (kyma, Greek for wave, kyma-
tica, things to do with waves).
CONTINUED ON PAGE 10

SPIRALLING
SANDS
Photos right and below show
how vibration produces rotational
effects. Here we have a steel
plate strewn with quartz sand.
On right we see piles of sand
rotating under vibration. Sand
is flowing river like, toward the
centre pile, in long, narrow
arms coming from various
directions. These forms strangely
recall the rotating, spiralling
masses observed by telescopes
in nebulae and other galactic
phenomena. Below, two
disc-shaped piles of sand have
been formed by the flow of
the sand streams. Each disc is
constantly rotating and has a
nipple of sand like a nucleus
in the centre.
m
^**ï
* ,. ..¿,«1-
.. .. r*. '"V*'
Photos © J.C. Stuten
* 7

CYMATICS (Continued)
2 - Music made visible
in a film of liquid
|T is possible to generate
vibrations systematically through a
continuous series of tones and to
transmit them to any object at will.
Consequently sonorous figures are not
the only phenomena produced (photos
page 6). Vibrational conditions are
found, called phases, in which the
particles- do not migrate into stationary
figures but form currents. These cur¬
rents run side by side in opposite dir¬
ections as if in obedience to a law.
The whole vibrational pattern is now
in motion.
These continuous waves also pro¬
voke rotary movement. The sand be
gins to turn round a point. These
rotary processes are continuous. The
masses are not ejected. If coloured
grains of sand are used to mark rotat¬
ing piles, the movement pattern re¬
vealed is continuous and due entirely
to vibration (photos page 9).
It is interesting to note that all the
phenomena of cymatics have not only
been photographed but, since move¬
ment is invariably involved, also film¬
ed. Still and motion pictures com¬
plement each other as documentation.
Just as vibration can be transmitted
to solid particles (sand, powder) it can
also be communicated to liquids. Once
again we find the whole spectrum of
cymatics. A richly diverse field of
structures appears. Delicate lattices
are generated. Then hexagonal, im¬
bricated (scale-like) and richly curved
patterns (photos pages 8 and 28) ap¬
pear. If the exciting tone Is removed,
all the formations naturally vanish.
Currents also occur in liquids. In a
film of liquid, bilaterally symmetrical
pairs of vortexes like those discovered
in the ear by Georg von Békésy rotate
in contrary directions (photo page 7
and colour photo number 7). These
pairs of vortexes are formed charac-
CONTINUED ON PAGE 12

MOZART'S 'DON GIOVANNI'
Pattern (left) ¡s a musical sound from the 27th
bar of the overture of Mozart's opera "Don Giovanni".
The sound has been made visible by impressing the
sound vibration patterns on a film of liquid. Not only
the rhythm and volume become visible but also the figures
which correspond to the frequency spectrum exciting
them. The patterns are extraordinarily complex in the
case of orchestral sound. See also Bach photo next page.
CRESTS OF THE WAVE
Above, suggestive of gaping mouths in some bizarre mask of
Antiquity, these orifices are actually a series of wave crests
(photographed from above) produced when a viscous liquid
is irradiated with sound. When poured onto a vibrating membrane,
the fluid becomes a flowing, pulsating mass in which wave
formations soon appear. Changes in the amplitude and frequency
of vibrations and modifications to the viscosity of the liquid
produce further strange effects (see photos pages 13, 14, 15).
11

CYMATICS (Continued from page 10)
teristically in the cochlea of the ear
by the action of sound. The vortexes
appearing in the liquid can be made
visible by adding a few drops of
marker dye. They rotate continuously.
The louder the tone, the more rapid the
rotation.
Turbulences or unstable waves de¬
serve special mention (bottom photo
page 16). In the marginal areas of a
wave field or when two trains of waves
are contiguous, agitated wave for¬
mations appear which are constantly
changing. Vibration causes "turbu¬
lence" in liquid. It is a characteristic
of such turbulences that they sensitize
a medium (liquid, gas or a flame) to
the action of sound.
For example, it is only when a gas
flame is made turbulent that it becomes
receptive to irradiation by sound, i.e.
it is only then that it forms into son¬
orous figures. These turbulences are
important in the design of wind in
struments, e.g. the mouthpieces of
trumpets.
Since these experiments entail the
transmission of vibrational processes
in conformity with natural laws, it was
a logical step to attempt to visualize
music (photos pages 10 and below).
It is in fact possible with the aid of
diaphragms to make the actual vibra¬
tional patterns of music visible in films
of liquid. One and the same vibrat¬
ing diaphragm is used to radiate the
music and also to visualize the musical
processes in the sonorous figures ap¬
pearing in the liquid. In this way, we
see what we hear and we hear what
we see.
The eye is, of course, unaccustomed
to "seeing Mozart or Bach"; if films
of this visible music are shown with¬
out sound, it is by no means apparent
that what can be seen is, say, Mozart's
Jupiter Symphony. It is only when the
music is switched on that the aural im
pression can be experienced visually.
The question whether it is feasible
to visualize the human voice is a
particularly interesting one. A specially
designed apparatus called the tono-
scope (sound-seer) makes it possible
to produce without intermediate agency
the actual vibrational pattern of a vowel
(see colour photo number 6). The
figures reveal characteristic features
which reflect the spoken vowel and
its frequency spectrum, the pitch of
the vowel, and the individual voice of
the speaker. If conditions are con¬
stant, precisely the same form appears.
For deaf-mutes this visible speech
is a substitute for the normal person's
ability to hear himself. The deaf-mute
sees what he says. He can practise
producing in the tonoscope the same
forms as those made by persons with
normal hearing. If he succeeds in
doing so, this means he is producing
CONTINUED ON PAGE 16
* .".
WÊ&P3ÜH8
mmmm
* '-
.. «c,.r ;*»»'*»: ;
;»* w»^«- "w--.,-
r," - ' .
' - .
SP '%
'k¿: . . . .
V " : K i ----'"lié.
»£#*>>>¿¿*fi?fi
y, , ; - -**
^ .* t*W
' k S ft
» 	 ..
'.Z*K k "#i*
»T* t* .- »
>: ' S - » |
/ , . . -,-
f* I
FRENZY OF A
CYMATIC BALLET
Photo © H.P. Wldmer
These shapes, leaping and gyrating like dancers in a frenzied ballet, are some of the
dynamic "sculptures" created during a series of experiments that demonstrate the amazingly
diverse effects produced by vibration under certain conditions. In these experiments,
a viscous fluid is poured onto a vibrating membrane, producing first one and then a series
of annular waves. By modifying the frequency, and the viscosity of the liquid, a changing
world of new forms is created, some of which are shown on the following page.
13

CYMATIC BALLET (Continued)
THE SOUND
AND THE FURY
Suggesting the storm-tossed waves of
an ocean or a sea of molten lava .
surging under the Impact of
volcanic forces, these remarkable photos
show a laboratory-size storm, created
by vibrating a liquid with the
aid of sound waves. Increasing
the vibrations produced
by an oscillating diaphragm
conjures up iceberg-like waves (right).
When the liquid is made more fluid
and greater vibrations are used, the waves
rise still higher, lifting into plates,
pillars and peaks (below left). ' Finally,
the mass of liquid, filled with pulsations,
currents and turbulences, flings up
with dynamic force tiny droplets that
form a curtain of flying spume
(below right). The experiment can be
continued until the liquid is completely
transformed into spray.

15

IRON FILINGS AND SMOKE IN HIGH PITCH
Iron filings when vibrated in a magnetic field produce the craggy peak effect
seen above. Oscillation reduces the adhesion between the particles, providing
them with extra freedom of movement. Filings thus strewn in a magnetic field
subjected to vibration form mobile shapes which seemingly dance in the vibrational
field. Here, camera has temporarily frozen the dance of the Iron filings. Below,
a downward stream of smoke takes on a fabric-like appearance when irradiated
by high frequency sound. Becoming turbulent, the gas is sensitized to sound;
structures appear, their form depending on the sound waves.
CYMATICS (Continued from page 12)
the sounds correctly. In the same
way he can learn to pitch his voice
right and consciously regulate his flow
of breath when speaking.
To give some idea of the richness
and diversity of cymatic effects we will
look at one example more closely. If
vibration is applied to lycopodium
powder (spores of the club moss), the
results are curious and specific. The
particles of this powder are very fine
and of even consistency. If a plate
or diaphragm on which the powder has
been uniformly strewn is excited by
vibration, a number of circular piles
of powder form (photo below right).
This clumping in circular heaps is
extremely characteristic of cymatic
effects. These piles are in a constant
state of circulation, i.e. the particles
are transported from the inside to the
outside and from the outside back to
the inside by the vibration. This cir¬
culation is particularly typical of the
action of waves.
If the tone is intensified, which is
perceived by the ear as a crescendo,
the circular heaps gravitate together
and unite in a larger heap, which, how¬
ever, continues to circulate (photo
above right and centre spread, colour
photo number 4). If the tone is intens¬
ified still more, the masses are flung
into very violent motion. They are
thrown or even hurled out, yet the
process of circulation still continues.
A,ICTUAL currents can also
be produced in lycopodium powder.
The powder rushes along precisely
defined paths (photo page 30). If new
material is cast into such an area of
currents, the result is not chaos; in¬
stead the freshly added masses are
immediately assimilated into the system
of the vibrational field. Throughout all
the changes and transformations the
dynamics of the figure and the figura¬
tion of the dynamics are preserved.
When these conglobations move,
they do so in a characteristic manner.
They invariably move as a whole, and
if a process is put out, the rest of the
heap creeps after it just like an
amoeba. There- is no crumbling or
disintegration. Whether the heaps
unite to make larger ones or whether
they break up into a number of smaller
piles, they invariably form whole units.
Each of them is participative in the
whole in regard to both form and
process.
This brings us to a particular feature
of vibrational effects: they may be said
to exemplify the principle of whole¬
ness. They can be regarded as
models of the doctrine of holism: each
CONTINUED ON PAGE 18

CO
ü 7fr. TT
\
MIGRATION
TO THE CENTRE
When the spore powder of the club moss
(lycopodium) ¡s spread evenly on a
vibrating diaphragm, it forms a galaxy
of tiny piles (photo below). Each pile
rotates on its own axis and also rotates
as a single body like the elements of
our solar system. When the vibrations
are increased the piles migrate towards
the centre (photo left) in which the paths
of migration can be seen as streaky
lines. While forming large central pile,
they continue to rotate on the diaphragm.

CYMATICS (Continued from page 16) COLOUR PAGES
single element is a whole and exhibits
unitariness whatever the mutations and
changes to which it is subjected. And
always it is the underlying vibrational
processes that sustain this unity in
diversity. In every part, the whole is
present or at least suggested.
To study vibrational effects in space,
first of all drops were made to vibrate.
Experiments with mercury showed that
the oscillating drops moved in regular
forms. Systems in arithmetical series
of 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc., appear, so that
it is legitimate to speak of harmonics
and symmetry. Pulsating drops of
water also reveal this polygonal ar¬
rangement with the difference, how¬
ever, that the liquid travels regularly
from the centre to the periphery and
from the periphery back to the centre.
It must be imagined, then, that these
vibrations take place roughly in sys¬
tems with 5, 4, and 3 segments. The
pictures formed are strikingly reminis¬
cent of the shapes of the flowers of
higher plants. Thus a true harmony
becomes apparent in the series of cy¬
matic processes.
18
E are taken still further
into the three-dimensional when soap
bubbles are excited by vibration (colour
photo number 8 and photos page 27).
These reveal a regular pulsation and
might be visualized as "breathing
spheres" The higher the tone produc¬
ing the oscillation, the larger the
number of pulsating zones.
Curious phenomena result from the
fact that adhesion between materials
and the supporting surface of plates
or diaphragms is reduced by vibration.
The particles or masses acquire a cer¬
tain freedom of movement as a result
of the reduced adhesion. If, for
example, iron filings are placed in a
magnetic field on a vibrating diaphragm,
adhesion between the filings and the
surface Is reduced and they become
to some extent mobile. They form
figurines which appear to dance in the
magnetic field and by their motion
reveal its density and configuration
(top photo page 16).
Changes in the state of matter are
also strangely influenced by vibration.
For instance, if a blob of hot, liquid
kaolin paste is allowed to cool while
being vibrated, it does not solidify in
a uniform mass but is so twisted and
churned that curious branch-like struc¬
tures are formed which are due simp¬
ly and solely to vibration.
The experiment results in a whole
array of structured elements which
eventually solidify (colour photo
number one).
CONTINUED ON PAGE 29
1. KAOLIN CAKE
Curious configurations occur when a material is vibrated while it
is changing from liquid to solid. Here a blob of heated kaolin
paste forms a ribbed cake-like structure as It cools and solidifies.
The ribbed pattern pulsates and pushes currents of plastic kaolin
up the sides and down through the centre of the "cake". As the
kaolin grows rigid, branch-like formations begin to appear on the
outer ribs of the vibrating mass.
2. THE RHYTHM OF INDIA INK
These flowing whorls and meandering currents, made by drops
of red emulsion placed in a solution of black India ink, show a
periodic process in which no outside vibration Is used. The
emulsion slowly diffuses into the Ink with a periodic, rhythmic
to and fro movement, creating a pattern of thick serpentine
spurts and delicate formations that vanish like wisps of mist. It
must be imagined that everything is not only flowing, but
actually flowing in patterns and rhythms.
mm
3. PHANTOM POTTER
This perfectly shaped double ring is not a finished design In
porcelain turned on a potter's wheel. It is a "fluid figure" formed
when highly viscous liquid Is vibrated on a diaphragm. Its static
appearence is deceptive. The entire structure Is in movement,
constantly rotating, with material flowing to the centre
and back again, the whole- generated and sustained" entirely
by vibration. (Other shapes created in this experiment are shown
on pages 11, 13, 14 and 15.)
4. LANDSCAPE IN THE ROUND
This dusty, petrified looking landscape,
recalling photos of the moon's surface, Is
composed of spores of the club moss
(lycopodium powder) set in motion by
vibration. Each circular mound of fine
powder, both large and small, is rota¬
ting on its own axis and the whole sur¬
face Is in Itself rotating and pulsating.
Patterns change according to the fre¬
quency of vibration. Increasing it can
create "sand storms" or unite tiny mounds
into a single large one, as seen In photos
on page 17.
5. THE SOUND OF COPPER
Inspired by the research of Ernst Chladnl, the 18th century Ger¬
man physicist and musician, who first demonstrated the modes of
vibration of solid objects, Hans Jenny, using more sophisticated
techniques, has assembled a collection of "sonorous" figures.
Sound pattern shown here was created on a steel plate strewn with
copper filings, and corresponds to a frequency of 2,200 cycles
per second.
6. VOWEL 'O'
The vowel "O" produces this vibrational pattern when spoken
into the tonoscope, or sound-seer, an apparatus designed to
visualize the basic components of human speech. Using the
tonoscope, deaf and dumb persons can familiarize themselves
with normal patterns of speech and practise producing the same
sound forms.
7. SOUND PATTERNS IN THE EAR
In these vortex patterns we see a vibrational model of the
hydrodynamlc behaviour of the cochlea, (the conical spiral tube
where hearing takes place In the Inner ear, and where vortexes
are formed by the action of ¿ound). Vortexes, made visible by
adding marker dye to liquid, are rotating continuously In opposite
directions. The louder tone, the more rapid the rotation.

3MC-
V
*

-j^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^E^ ^Q|K"^
iff II '
VVVh r i i
^ yMhF fm\ S WE \
LjÍH^SÍ^HBErl&W<rV.'. 1 s .
^^^ * -*rya. ^mii«i
tag^MWE
fafe f\ ^^
^^fc^fVv ^ iK^^^^^^Bfl^^^^^^^^^^^^^lr'>9J^r^^^^ ^P
; 1 Jta v ^H
' ¿aß







BUBBLE DANCE
Some strange things can
happen to an ordinary
soap bubble when it is
made to vibrate on a
diaphragm. One can almost
say that it starts to "breathe"
as rhythmic pulsations
gather strength inside its surface.
The original sphere begins
to change shape. Photo
right shows an early
stage of pulsation,
becoming more complicated,
below, as vibrations increase.
Pulsations occur in
regular zones.
Colour photo, opposite,
shows whole soap
bubble, resembling a lovely
crystal wine-glass, in
full oscillation. They show how
three-dimensional shapes are
structured by vibration.
Phot09 © J.C. Stuten

DOES SOME UNIVERSAL LAW
GOVERN FORMS IN NATURE?
The forms and configurations resulting from experiments in varying
the pitch of vibration often bear so strong a resemblance with
structural patterns found in nature, be it in plant or animal life
or the world of minerals, that one is tempted to see here some
fundamental law governing the creation of all forms In our universe.
The perfect honeycomb structure, left, was obtained by vibrating
a liquid with high frequency sound waves. The sculptured form
resembling a growing bud or coral formation, below, was creat¬
ed by varying the frequency of vibration of a viscous liquid. The
fishbone pattern, bottom right, was made by sound vibrations
in a film of glycerine. Cowrie shell or bean . shape, bottom left,
was produced when a paste-like substance was made to vibrate.
Photos © H P. Widmer

o.
I
CYMATICS (Continued from page 18)
Nature is permeated by periodic and rhythmic processes In
many of which no actual vibration is involved. Circles,
left, known as "Liesegang rings", demonstrate one well
known periodic process in the field of chemical reactions.
When potassium bichromate is combined with silver nitrate
it forms silver Chromate in a remarkable, way: concentrating
the silver Chromate in a series of concentric rings proceeding
from the centre to the periphery in ever larger circles.

3 - The vast spectrum
of cosmic vibrations
iHE examples we have
given will afford some idea of the
wide field of research opened up by
vibrational effects. By scrutinizing
these curious structures, figures, flows
and movements, we widen our range
of vision. We are alerted to many
things which had hitherto gone un¬
noticed. Suddenly we realize to what
extent nature is permeated by rhythms
and periodicities.
It will be recalled that periodicity is
characteristic of organic cell tissue.
The elements of organisms are repeat¬
ed as fibre networks, as space lattices,
and quite literally as woven tissues
with an infinite diversity. The rhythms
of these forms are apparent to the
naked eye. The leaf patterns of plants
are an example. But in both the
optical and the electron microscope
the law of repetition still prevails.
In everyday life we meet with other
examples of rhythm, seriality and
periodicity. Every water jet, every
water surface, every drop of water
reveals complexes of a cymatic nature.
Whole oceans of wave trains, wave
fields and wave crests appear in cloud
formations. The smoke rising from a
chimney forms vortices and turbu¬
lences in a periodic manner. Wave
formation, turbulence, pulsation and
circulation are to be found throughout
the fields of hydrodynamics (colour
photo number 2) and aerodynamics.
By seeing all these phenomena as
an integrated whole the observer
comes to develop what is really an
intuitive faculty for rhythmic and perio¬
dic things. He begins to appreciate the
cymatic style of nature. This applies
with particular force to the creative
artist. Numerous contacts with archi¬
tects, painters, graphic and industrial
designers have shown that for them
cymatics cannot be merely a matter
of copying sonorous figures or adopt¬
ing them purely as'. decoration.
A .productive confrontation with
cymatics lies rather in this: let us sup¬
pose that someone is working with
geometrical shapes, say with squares
or circles. Using these elements he
constructs his designs. But the forms
he is handling are finished and com¬
plete: the nascent element is absent.
Yet he must be aware that everything
has its origin and genesis.
Now this generative process is one
that he can experience particularly well
in the field of waves and vibrations.
On seeing a sonorous figure take
shape, one cannot help but say: the
creative process is just exactly where
"nothing" can be seen, and the points
whither the particles of sand and
powder are carried are the very places
where there is no movement. The
figure must take shape out of its
environment; bound up with the finish¬
ed form is the circumambient space
creating it. With each thing shaped
goes the experience of that which
shapes it; with each thing fashioned,
of that which fashions it. In this way
the space round things becomes vital¬
ized for the sculptor, the architect and
the painter. The rigid form is seen
in terms of that which gave it birth.
But the converse case is also illum¬
inated by the study of cymatic pro¬
cesses. Let us suppose someone's
interest is focused on kinetics, on
moving elements and the interplay of
forces. Then he is confronted by the
problem of how a configuration can
emerge from such a mobile system.
How is a dynamic process related to
form, to a specific figure? Here again,
thinking of the problem in terms of
vibration provides the answer, for
however great the changes and trans¬
formations, precise figurai aspects
prevail in the vibrational field. Even
turbulences, for all their instability,
have a formative, repetitive element.
Hence wave phenomena and vibra¬
tional effects form a kind of totality
(colour photo number 3, and photos
pages 11, 13, 14 and 15). They throw
an explanatory light on the process
of formation as much as on that
which ultimately takes shape; they
illuminate movement as well as the
stationary form. And here again it is
a question of looking behind these
fixed forms to see what generative
process leads to them. The obvious
procedure is to find out what stages
precede the figured shapes and to
scrutinize them closely. And this
brings us to the significance of cyma¬
tic phenomena.
First of all it must be said that mere
similarity between natural phenomena
and the results of experiments do not
warrant the conclusion that there is
any essential identity. Undoubtedly
many wave effects look like various
natural phenomena. But interpreta¬
tion and analogizing lead nowhere;
they miss the heart of the matter.
What is involved here is this. The
observation of vibrations and waves
yields a whole series of specific and
particular categories of phenomena.
It also shows that these diverse ele¬
ments appear in a vibrational system
as a whole. In one and the same
vibrational system we find structural,
pulsating, and dynamic-kinetic fea¬
tures, etc. Thus we can say that
when dealing with vibrational systems,
. there will appear in them, appropriately
transformed, the cymatic effects
we have observed in our experiments.
Experiments thus provide us with
conceptual models which can stimul¬
ate research. Needless to say, each
field must be understood in its own
terms. However, experience with
cymatics tutors the intuitive faculty
in such a way that attention is drawn
to many interrelated facts which would
previously have gone unheeded. Thus
while it must be firmly reiterated that
all interpretation is pointless, it must
be borne in mind that in actual fields
of experience the effects of natural
cymatics must be apparent.
Let us take the example of astro¬
physics. There can be no doubt that
in this field specific vibrational effects
must appear on the lines we have
indicated. A compilation of cymatic QQ
phenomena embraces a whole range £j
of features and relationships for
which appropriate verification must be
discoverable in astronomy, whether
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

CYMATICS (Continued)
planetary, solar, or galactic. From
this point of view it is self-evident that
in the vast energy processes of the
cosmos, oscillating and vibrating sys¬
tems must become manifest in conglo-
bations, rotations, pulsations, circula¬
tions, interferences, vortexes, etc.
In this connexion, for instance,
experiments have been made in which
materials reacting to magnetic influen¬
ces have been observed under the
action of vibration in the magnetic
field (photo page 4). Thus in magneto-
hydrodynamics remarkable elements
appear which owe their character
entirely to vibration. In both structural
and dynamic respects these magneto-
hydrodynamic events are characterized
by vibration. It would be legitimate to
speak of magnetocymatics. What has
to be done is to find corresponding
phenomena in cosmic magnetic fields.
It is certainly not our intention to
encroach on the preserves of astro¬
nomers and astrophysicists. Our only
purpose is to report on the results
of this or that series of experiments.
How the corresponding patterns take
shape in the cosmos can only be
determined by research in that par¬
ticular field.
Biology might also be adduced as
a further example of the way in which
conceptual models can be abstracted
and serve for research purposes. In
particular, cymatic research can pene¬
trate into the very heart of the bio¬
logical field. The phenomena reported
in this study are all macroscopic.
However, it has proved possible to
demonstrate cymatic effects in the
microscopic dimension, i.e. it is pos¬
sible to apply the cymatic method in
all its variations to cell processes.
These current investigations open
the way not only to observing cell
processes with respect to their rhyth¬
mic and oscillatory characteristics but
also, and more importantly, to study¬
ing the influence of vibration and its
effects on healthy and sick tissues
and on normal and degenerate cells.
That the carcinomatous (cancer) pro¬
cess should loom large in the field of
study follows inevitably from its very
nature.
The task confronting us, then, is to
induce specific vibrational effects in
cellular events and to scrutinize the
* structural and functional results with
respect to cell division, cell respira¬
tion, tissue growth, etc. selectively.
In this way the models and basic
phenomena of experimental physics
are brought into conjunction with ideas
of vibration as a cosmogenic element
which Rudolf Steiner, inspired by his
research in the sphere of the mind
and spirit, formulated 60 years ago
regarding astrophysics and biology.
The work summarily reported here
is in full swing. One series of experi¬
ments is followed by another. It lies
in the character of the subject that
each experiment points the way to
the next; the investigator is led by
ml
ci
Nature from one stage of study to
another. And on the way he observes
a number of periodic phenomena
which are not produced by vibration
in the strict sense of the word.
In this connexion we might single
out rhythmic chemical precipitations,
the so-called Liesegang rings (photo
page 29) rhythmic crystallization, rhy¬
thmic processes in colloidal solutions,
the periodic formation of semi-per¬
meable membranes, etc. Thus there
is evidence that periodicity is also
active in the field of chemical reac¬
tions. (It might be intimated that this
line of research is bringing us close
to the problems of catalysis).
Where do all these experiments
lead? What significance can they
have for human life in general? 0uite
apart from all the many practical
applications adumbrated by these stud¬
ies, one aspect is paramount: they
teach us Lo observe the world in such
a way that our experience of it is
stimulated, enriched and deepened.
But besides its richness, this exper¬
ience enables the scientist and the
artist, the investigator and the design¬
er, and thus basically every /nan, to
develop his own essential being and
personality.
These two photos (above
and left), are not only
interesting graphically in
themselves, but show a most
extraordinary phenomenon
of our vibrating whirling
universe. In each photo
granulated substances
quartz sand above,
lycopodium left have
been made to vibrate on a
steel plate. Note especially
the arrows showing small
round ateas and streams of
particles rotating and
flowing in clockwise and
counterclockwise directions.
Vibrated at 8,500 cycles
p/sec, the lycopodium formt
into moving streams.
Vibrated at a higher
frequency, 12,460 cycles
p/sec, the quartz sand
moves into round heaps
that rotate. The reason
for the contrary rotations
and flow is not precisely
known, but the currents
would seem to be moving
as if in obedience to a
law of physics.

DEATH OF A BRIDGE
BY VIBRATION
SJtm
7-
1
Like a violin string vibrated by a bow, a suspension bridge strung
between its high towers is vibrated by winds. Soldiers crossing a
bridge in column always break step to prevent the bridge from "entering
into vibration" as the second prong of a tuning fork does when the
first prong is struck. Vibrations can reach the point where they set
up strains and stresses powerful enough to bring a bridge crashing
down. These spectacular photos show in sequence the disastrous
effects of the Tacoma bridge in vibration (State of Washington, U.S.A.),
when its main span collapsed on November 7, 1940. (1) A 70 km.
(45 mph) wind sets the bridge vibrating, causing it to twist and sway.
Twisting effect worsened Swhen a suspension cable came loose.
(2 3) As vibrational forces increase, roadway is twisted and wrenched
upwards (about 35 degrees from the horizontal) as shown by automobile
being tilted first one way then the other. (4/5) Vibrations have built
up to a critical pitch, tearing away the whole centre span. Below, the
main span has disappeared; only a jagged section of side wall remains.
Another spectacular example is Venice, where vibrations from waves
and tidal currents during many centuries and more recently from
ocean-going ships and power boats have inflicted grievous damage
on the city's ancient buildings and monuments.
a I
fl
li-l.r
Photos r F.B. Farquharson, Engineering Experiment Station,
University of Washington, Seattle, U.S.A.
