THE
ROYAL
HIGHWAY
OF THE
INCAS
Indians leading llama caravans laden with gold along the great Inca Highway
in the Andes. An engraving made shortly after the Spanish conquest.
by
Jorge Carrera Andrade
IHERE are many paradoxes
in history, and one of the strangest
is surely that the Incas, who had never
heard of the wheel, should have built
the greatest road system the world
has known. Their network of high¬
ways covered some 10,000 miles,
stretching from Colombia all the way to
Chile and from the shores of the Pacific
to jungle forests of the Amazon, criss¬
crossing almost all the territory now
included in the Republics of Ecuador
and Peru, as well as portions of Bolivia,
Chile, northern Argentina and southern
Colombia.
The Inca Empire began as a tiny
kingdom on the shores of Lake Titicaca
about the year 1,000 A.D. For five
hundred years it grew and expanded
until, after conquering the Kingdom of
Ouito, it was the most powerful civi¬
lization of South America and adopted
the name "Land of the Four 0uarters
of the World" (Tahuantinsuyu) to
signify its control of the four cardinal
points of the compass.
JORGE CARRERA ANDRADE of Ecuador is a
leading poet and author of Latin America.
The Inca road system was built to
preserve the unity and safeguard the
economic life of the Empire. Its con¬
struction is one of the wonders of
human history, defying all natural
obstacles in one of the most rugged
terrains existing anywhere in the world.
Though far less known than the cele¬
brated roads of Rome and other
ancient empires, the Inca highways are
in many ways even more remarkable.
The backbone of the network was a
broad highway the "Great Royal Road
of the Incas" running the entire length
of the Inca Empire from north to south,
between the two branches of the for¬
midable Andean mountain range. In
certain places the road rose sharply
to as much as 15,000 feet; in others it
dropped steeply in mountain valleys
and gorges, traversed broad fertile
plains and bleak stretches of desert
wasteland.
From the main highway branch roads
cut through the mountains in all direc¬
tions, especially to the west, where
they linked up with another mighty
highway known as the "Coastal Road",
which ran parallel to the Great Royal
Road along the sandy coastal plains
and forests from Tumbez to the north
of Chile where it joined up with it.
It should not be imagined that the
Inca roads were mere mountain tracks
or desert trails. The Great Royal
Highway was 25 feet in width and ran
straight as an arrow, without curves or
detours of any kind, for 3,000 miles
more than the distance between
Gibraltar and Moscow! Paved with
stones along almost its entire length,
it traversed only the principal cities of
the empire, like Cuzco and 0u¡to, the
other towns being linked up with the
Royal Highway by secondary roads.
On both sides of the highway the
Incas built walls of stone and packed
earth on top of which they planted
agave cactuses at regular intervals. In
addition rows of trees lined the road to
provide shade for travellers. Living in
a bleak landscape the Incas attached
great importance to their trees and the
empire enacted stringent laws for their
preservation. The penalty for cutting
them down was death.
A,ILONG the side of the
Great Royal Road ran a rivulet of fresh
water to quench the thirst of both
wayfarers and draft animals. At
intervals of about twelve miles along
the entire stretch of 3,000 miles there
were wayside houses known as tampus
where travellers could rest or spend
the night. There were also chains of
granaries and royal depots stocked
with food and all kinds of supplies for
the army, including clothing and leather
footwear. Grain and manufactured
products were stored in huge earthen
jars. Strangers were accommodated
with the utmost hospitality in hostelries
called corpahuasis and were provided
with food and drink free of charge.
Every mile or so along the Royal
Route the Incas built edifices for a
special category of imperial function¬
aries, the chasquis or relay couriers,
who raced on foot from one end of
the kingdom to the other bearing royal
messages by word of mouth. Some¬
times messages were conveyed by
specially painted sticks or beans m^
painted in various colour combinations j j
which had specific meanings. The
Incas resorted to these devices since
they had no written language.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

INCA HIGHWAY (Continued)
72
This postal service was so efficient
that it covered the 3,000 odd miles of
the Great Royal Highway in a matter
of 20 days or sofour times faster
than the "pony express" service intro¬
duced by the Spaniards after the
Conquest. In the best season of the
year, the Chasquis covered the dis¬
tance between Cuzco and Ou¡to in five
days a feat they continued to perform
clandestinely during the Colonial era
to the amazement of the Spaniards
who dubbed this fleet-footed news-
transmission system "post office of the
sorcerers."
The astounding network of Andean
roads and highways was the achieve¬
ment of three Inca emperors: Pacha-
cutec, Tupac Yupanqui and Huayna
Cápac, the manpower for the con¬
struction work coming from the tribes
of peoples they subdued.
Pachacútec, know as the "Reformer,"
was particularly fond of stone and for
the Royal Highway he had enormous
blocks of stone tranported hundreds of
miles, particularly from the Kingdom of
Quito, using the Indians of that region
and a tribe called the Chancas.
The treatment meted out by the
imperial guards (they were called Big-
Ears) was such that the Indians finally
revolted and almost overthrew the Inca
kingdom. The earliest chroniclers
relate how the huge stones (some
weighing 10 tons) were carried such
great distances and tell a story of how
one such block fell and crushed a
thousand Indians to death. It passed
into legend as "the stone that wept
blood."
Fifty years after the Conquest, a
Spanish missionary, José de Acosta,
visited the New World and noted that
the Indians who worked on the roads
-" used no mortar, had neither iron nor
steel for cutting and working the
stones, no machines or instruments for
transporting them, yet so skilful was
their work that the joints between the
stones were barely noticeable."
Tupac Yupanqui was the son of Pa¬
chacútec and carried on his father's
work. He extended the Royal Highway
as far as Chile In the south and beyond
Quito in the north, thus opening up new
territories for trade and development.
To consolidate the empire he built a
chain of fortresses near the Great
Highway, and instituted a system of
"population transfers," shifting newly
conquered tribes to Peru and replacing
them by loyal subjects.
Huayna Cápac, his successor, sur¬
passed his father in the field of public
works. He built Temples of the Sun
and Inca Watchtowers along the Royal
Highway. He repaired the old roads
and built new ones, and had platforms
and terraces made to prevent erosion
of the soil.
But above all, Huayna Cápac was
responsible for the repair, strength¬
ening and consolidation of the suspen¬
sion bridges. These bridges are one
of the greatest feats of the Inca road
network. They appear frail and deli
cate but proved astonishingly resistant.
Flung across raging torrents and formi¬
dable mountain chasms, they were
made of six-inch fibre and bamboo
cables anchored into stone piers, and
were covered with a floor of wooden
laths solidly lashed together to resist
the wind and other ravages of the
elements.
Alexander von Humboldt was one of
the many explorers who gazed in awe
and amazement at the Inca suspension
bridges. His description of one of
them the Bridge of San Luis Rey
was the source of inspiration for novels
by Thornton Wilder and Prosper Méri¬
mée. Humboldt considered the whole
Inca road system far superior to that
built by the Romans in Italy, France
and Spain, and pronounced them "the
most stupendous and useful works ever
executed by man."
But the Incas" passion for roads went
much further than building and engin¬
eering. They also set up a smooth
running system of road maintenance.
A "Royal Commissioner of Inca Roads
and Bridges" supervised a staff of road
inspectors whose duty it was to tour
the realm and check on road conditions
and on the toll-gate keepers controlling
the heavy traffic of Warna trains laden
with produce.
Large crews of yanakonas were
always on hand to sweep and clean
the paved highways with brooms made
of vegetable fibre. Yvar Lissner did
not exaggerate when he said (in his
book How Our Ancestors Lived) that
at the time when the roads of Europe
were no more than muddy, pot-holed
ditches, the Incas had the finest
highways anywhere in the world.
cIAPTAIN Pedro Cieza de
Leon, writing between 1533 and 1545,
was the first European to give a
detailed description of the Inca roads
"which surpass those of the Romans
as well as the road Hannibal built over
the Alps."
As they penetrated the land of the
Incas, the Conquistadores stared at the
scene they saw with incredulous
amazement: down the wide, spacious
highway came groups of Indians
carrying hammocks or litters contain¬
ing personages of note. Other Indians
drove trains of llamas laden with sacks
of coca leaves or ears of corn. The
very sight of these animals half ewe,
half ass left the Spaniards open-
mouthed.
It soon became clear to them why
the roads were in such excellent condi¬
tion: the only traffic on its paved
surface consisted of sandal-shod
pedestrians and gentle-footed llamas.
Later, when the Conquistadores landed
horses in the country (the Incas had
never seen any before) their iron-shod
hooves and the wheels of the .heavy
oxcarts were to cause havoc to the
Llama Road and irreparably damage
the Great Royal Highway of the Incas.
THE SIGNS OF STEINBERG
Their conquest completed, however,
the Spaniards realized the advantages
of the Inca road system and tried to
preserve it by following the Indian
example, at least in part. They adopted
the llama caravans for carting off the
gold they collected either as booty or
tribute or which they extracted from the
mines.
The Inca road system was thus not
only an artery of blood but also of the
gold of South America which went to
raise the standard of life of Europe and
to add splendour to the Renaissance.
The Royal Highway of the Incas,
which cannot be dissociated from the
llama, the postal network, the granaries
and roadside inns, was in fact the
direct instrument in the economic
expansion of the Inca State (Inca
society vested the entire wealth of the
soil and sub-soil in the State and there
was no private ownership of land).

As a result of the later neglect of the
Spaniards, the inefficiency of Colonial
organization, the ravages of time and
above all, the excesses of the enco¬
menderos (settlers) who used the Inca
roads as a quarry for the stone they
sought for their building, the whole
highway network finally disintegrated.
Nevertheless, traces of this unparallel¬
ed feat of engineering still remain
today.
The Azuay region of Ecuador pro¬
vides proof of the amazing solidity of
the Inca Highway and of the skill with
which the stones were fitted together.
Despite the passing of centuries, and
notwithstanding the continual, torrential
rains prevalent in the area, water has
not succeeded in filtering through the
joints between the stones. Instead, the
water has hollowed out a channel
beneath the stones and flows away
like a river under the arches of a bridge.
Further evidence of the Incas' skill,
foresight and practical turn of mind is
seen in their secondary roads which
served as supply lines for the products
vital to the kingdom. Thus Huayna
Cápac built a road from Quito to the
Coca valley in the eastern slopes of the
Andes for the transport of the prized
coca leaves; another road knifed
throught the mountains to the coast and
became the supply route for shrimp
and other sea food.
This coastal road also supplied
platinum, mined in the region, and salt
extracted from the nearby island of
Amortajada close to the coast of
Ecuador. Another road, running later¬
ally from Cuzco to the coast, made it
possible to have fresh fish (considered
one of the greatest delicacies) in the
Inca capital within two days.
A. . striking example of the
ingenuity and foresight of the Inca
engineers is visible today near Macu-
sani in the Carabaya gold country
north-west of Lake Titicaca. In his
book on the Inca roads, Highway of
the Sun, Victor von Hagen describes
how the Royal Road climbs to a
dizzying height of 14,800 feet and then
passes under a glacier.
"Here," he writes, "the engineers,
anticipating the glacier's movement,
had raised a retaining wall to catch the
cascading rocks and to divert the
snows high above the road. Here and
there the eternal sweep and retreat of
the glacier had sent rock crashing into
and destroying a part of the road, but
generally speaking it was in a good
state of preservation."
Despite the passing of centuries and
the inclemencies of nature, the general
lines of the Royal Inca Highway can still
be discerned and stretches of it are
still intact. The suspension bridges in
particular have withstood the assault
of time and are to be seen in Ecuador,
Peru and Bolivia where they are in
use in districts where the wheel is still
unknown even today.
June 1959

