Oil may eventually provide man with major
new sources of food. Scientists have found
that bacteria, particularly yeast organisms,
fed on petroleum can produce a protein
flour that can be processed into a variety
of tasty foods. Who knows ? The oil pumps,
left, may one day give forth chicken-à-la
king or pâté de foie grasl Today, at any
rate, oil-based yeast protein is already
being used to feed new-born chicks, below.

THREE-STAR
SYNTHETIC CUISINE
by Alexander Nesmeyanov
and Vassily Belikov
IT is already possible to
foresee the day when man will be
freed completely from all recourse to
animals for his food and clothing,"
wrote the distinguished Russian
chemist Dimitri Mendeleyev, in 1875.
Subsequent achievements of science
have confirmed the validity of this bold
prediction by the scientist who
established the Periodic Table of
chemical elements. To a large extent,
synthetic fabrics have today replaced
natural textiles, and the next task for
science is to increase and change
man's food resources by creating
synthetic foods.
ALEXANDER NESMEYANOV, former presi¬
dent of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences
and member of Its Praesidium, Is founder
and director of the Academy's Institute of
Elementary Organic Compounds. For his
achievements in chemistry and research he
was awarded the State Prize in 1942 and the
Lenin Prize in 1966. Professor Nesmeyanov
¡s a member of many foreign scientific
societies, including the Royal Society, London,
the Royal Society of Edinburgh and the
American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
VASSILY BELIKOV is a specialist in the
field of amino acid synthesis and theoretical
organic chemistry. He is head of the laboratory
for the synthesis of nutritional substances at
the Institute of Elementary Organic Com¬
pounds (U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences).
So far, chemistry has made no
attempt to compete with agriculture.
Instead, ¡t plays an auxiliary role,
seeking to provide agriculture with
chemical fertilizers, pesticides, growth
agents and products designed to
preserve natural foodstuffs and Im¬
prove their taste, appearance and
digestibility. But basically, food
production today is in no way different
from what it was in the primitive
communities of hunters and farmers.
And yet the rolé which organic
chemistry could play in providing man
with a profusion and variety of foods
has long preoccupied many of the
world's leading scientists.
Dimitri Mendeleyev (1834-1907)
declared: "As a chemist I am con¬
vinced that we can obtain nutritive
substances by a direct combination of
elements contained in the air, water
and soil, not by the ordinary methods
of agriculture, but in special factories.
If the need for this has not yet been
felt, it is because unused land still
abounds everywhere . . . and I believe
that the day when the density of the
world's population reaches alarming
proportions, man will learn to use the
colossal mass of sea water around
him to provide abundant food, before
resorting to the manufacture of
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
21

SYNTHETIC CUISINE (Continued)
More nourishing and cheaper
synthetic food. In all probability, the
first factories will be for the cultivation
of primary organisms, similar to yeast,
by the use of water, air, minerals and
solar heat."
A similar idea was advanced by the
French scientist Marcelin Berthelot,
a 19th century pioneer of chemical
synthesis. "The day will come," he
said, "when everyone will take for
their meals a tablet of nitrogen, a small
amount of fat, a little starch or sugar,
and a bottle of aromatic flavouring,
mixed according to taste. All these
ingredients will be manufactured
cheaply and in unlimited quantities in
our factories. Food will thus be un¬
affected by good or bad seasons,
neither by rain nor drought, neither
by heat which withers plants nor
frost which destroys all hope of
their bearing fruit. Finally, all these
products will be free from the patho¬
genic microbes which cause epidemics
and threaten human life. When that
day comes, chemistry will have brought
about a revolutionary transformation
in the world, the effects of which no
one can foretell." ("Science et Mo¬
rale," 1897.)
IS it still too soon to tackle
the problem of creating synthetic foods?
Let us take a look at a basic factor
in the global equation of food and
people: the needs of the individual
human being in terms of nourishment?
Apart from water, man needs five
groups of basic elements proteins,
carbohydrates, fats, vitamins and
mineral salts. As dally nourishment,
an adult should have, on average, two
litres of water, 80-100 grammes of
protein, 400-500 grammes of carbo¬
hydrates and 80-100 grammes of fats.
As for vitamins (0.1 gr. a day, excluding
choline, of which 0.1 gr. is also
needed) and salts (20 gr. in all,
including 10 gr. of cooking salt), the
needs are small and can be easily met.
Synthetic foods must obviously
include all the indispensable salts
and vitamins which are already
being produced on a large scale
through chemical and microbiological
processes. And with the present
industrial manufacture of vitamins, it
is clear that man has already entered
the age of artificial, non-agricultural
production of nutritious substances.
The role of the other three groups
of elements is to provide the human
system with energy and "building
materials." The first function is largely
carried out by carbohydrates and fats
and the second by proteins. Here we
have a major distinction between
groups of nutritious substances.
The carbohydrates and fats which
provide energy are burned up during
assimilation and lose their original
chemical identity. Certain components
of these two groups are interchange¬
able and the groups themselves can
largely be replaced and transformed
one into the other, by the human
organism.
Proteins are completely different.
Turned Into amino acids by the
digestive system, they provide the
body with the "bricks" which it needs
to build its own proteins, of which
eight out of a total of 20 (9 in the case
of children) are indispensable. Food
should contain all these amino acids
in strictly controlled proportions.
Proteins are thus the most expensive
and deficient items in our human diet,
their most valuable and rarest elements
being the indispensable group of
amino acids.
Any pronounced protein deficiency,
particularly if it is due to the absence
in the diet of one or more indis¬
pensable amino acids, results in
specific vitamin deficiency diseases
such as kwashiorkor. Once restored,
the missing amino acid re-establishes
the balance and leads to a striking
increase in the nutritive value of many
proteins of vegetable origin.
It should be noted that the
synthesis of the protein component
of food bears no relation, contrary to
what one might expect, to the highly
complex problem of synthesis of
natural albumin. This is because the
alimentary proteins undergo complete
hydrolysis in the digestive system and
go into the blood in the form of amino
acids.
0 NE can readily see, then,
that the problem is reduced to either
the microbiological synthesis of protein
or the microbiological or chemical
synthesis of amino acids which can
then be used, in suitable doses, in the
composition of synthetic diets.
Such synthetic diets, consisting of
amino acids, vitamins, minerals, glu¬
cose and linoleic acid ether, have been
prepared by a U.S. scientist, Dr. Milton
Winitz and tested on human beings
over extended periods. They are used
especially in the intravenous feeding
of patients who, for one reason or
another, cannot be fed normally.
Here we have a true model of
synthetic nutriment. Apart from its
strictly medical application, its real
significance is in showing that it is
possible to be nourished by a proper
mixture of synthetic substances each
ingredient of which can be obtained
by synthesis.
Unfortunately the cost price of many
WHICH CAME FIRST,
THE CHICKEN OR
THE BACTERIA ?
Diagram below shows process used to convert petroleum into edible protein
concentrate at a refinery in Lavera (France). Yeast organisms (single cell
bacteria) feed from waxy paraffins in aerated tanks of crude oil. Yeast
cells produced are then spun rapidly to separate them from the de-waxed
oil which is returned to the refinery. Drying and extraction process
then turns protein into a white and nearly tasteless powder, which can be
incorporated into food. Extensive trials made by adding it to animal
feed have been highly successful.
Petroleum
refinery
Yeast culture
Paraffin
separation
Drying of yeast Purification
Protein
concentrate
Animal food
22
c*a
s*^

of them is still prohibitive which is
explained by their limited production.
Produced on a large scale and by
more efficient methods, their price
could easily be reduced, as has been
the case with methionine, lysine and
glutamic acid, the annual world
production of which now exceeds
100,000 tons at a price of only a
few dollars per kilogramme.
If all the other amino acids were
manufactured at the same price, the
daily needs per person would be met
for about 50 cents. There ¡s no
reason why the reduction in cost could
not be even greater the present
technique of producing amino acids,
which is based on the cheap substance,
nitromethane, seems very promising.
The Institute of Elementary Or¬
ganic Compounds of the U.S.S.R. Aca¬
demy of Sciences and the Pedagogical
Institute of Leningrad, among other
research institutes, have developed
the synthesis of all the amino acids
from this substance. No less en¬
couraging possibilities are offered by
the microbiological method, especially
if the micro-organisms which produce
amino acids can be switched from
carbohydrate foods to hydrocarbons.
A number of achievements ¡n this
direction have already been recorded.
A PART from agriculture,
another technique exists for the pro¬
duction of proteins on an industrial
scale : that provided by microbiology.
Scientists in a number of countries
(including France, U.K. and U.S.S.R.)
are already working on the production
of fodder yeasts for which the raw
material is provided by paraffins, one
of the cheapest by-products of petrol¬
eum. Hydrocarbon yeast is exception¬
ally rich in protein. It contains over
40 per cent compared with the
30 per cent protein content of soya
beans, the most nourishing of all
agricultural products.
The French scientist, Alfred Cham-
pagnat, director of a Marseilles
laboratory specializing in this research,
was first to draw attention to the
extraordinary possibilities of these
yeasts in making up for the present
protein deficiency: "The annual world
shortage of animal protein can be
estimated at three million tons. This
corresponds to 15 million tons of beef
cattle. For an annual production of
1,000 million tons of petroleum it can
be assumed that 700 million tons are
paraffin based. The production of
7 million tons of protein-vitamin
concentrate, equivalent to 3 million
tons of protein, would consume only
1 per cent of these 700 million tons
of petroleum."
Why is it that researchers are more
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
Proteins as everyone knows are fundamental to life. Every minute
in each of the hundred million million cells in the human body,
protein molecules perform thousands of complex reactions to keep
the cells alive and healthy. Scientists have closely studied
the structure of proteins and their building blocks, the amino acids,
which enable living organisms to synthesize proteins. This
model from the Paris science museum, the Palais de la Découverte,
shows the complicated chain-like molecular structure of a protein.
1	
^f
ff/t
3\
\
{///. r
*&/
\X/^i\
"' / ' / /
S^^s ff
f -È
*&If,
" Fill'er up I, please.
'
^~~~^LwJf
23

Wafers, below, are one of the scientists'
answers for more nutritious food produced in
the laboratory. They are made from
powdered milk, sugar and protein-rich oil.
They are tasty too.
Photo © Pierre-André Pittet. Geneva
YUM, YUM I CHEMICAL CAVIAR.
Only one of the dishes below is
natural caviar (sturgeon eggs). The four
others were produced in the laboratory
from chemicals, yet few gourmets
could tell which is which by taste or
appearance. In recent years scientists
have made phenomenal progress
in duplicating natural flavours in
artificially made foods. Right, a catch
of sturgeon on the Don River, U.S.S.R.
SYNTHETIC CUISINE (Continued)
The new chemistry of the gourmet
24
interested in food for human consump¬
tion than in animal fodder? Here
again, figures provide an explanation.
Six million tons of synthetic protein
are required annually to meet the
needs of 250 million people; to
nourish the same number of people
with protein produced by stock farming
would require the production of from
50 to 100 million tons of dehydrated
protein to feed the animals themselves.
The problem facing chemists is the
following: is it possible to transform
a daily diet consisting of 100 grammes
of protein, 450 grammes of carbo¬
hydrates, and 100 grammes of fats
into food which, far from being less
good and less varied, is even better
and more varied than the usual fare?
In other words, the problem ¡s one of
taste, smell and consistency.
In their original state, practically all
natural proteins are odourless and
tasteless due to the fact that they are
macromolecular substances and con¬
sequently non-volatile and odourless.
The same applies to starchy macro-
molecular carbohydrates and to fats.
It is what is added to and mixed with
our food which gives it a special smell
and taste, and especially the sub¬
stances formed in the process of
cooking.
As we all know, the taste of any
substance can be broken down into
four main categories sweet, salty,
sour and bitter which we Identify
through the taste-buds on our tongue.
If we consider taste separately from
smell, it is clear that any taste can be
reproduced by a suitable addition of
say, sugar, salt, acid and caffeine.
However, the question of smell is
a much more delicate problem because
smell combines with taste to form
flavour, which is really what makes
food appetizing. In our everyday fare,
flavour is obtained by heating or the
addition of local spices (onion, garlic,
paprika, parsley, celery) or tropical
ones (pepper, ginger, cloves, etc.).
The action of these substances is
well known and corresponds to a
simple principle. The effect of heating
food is to form a mixture of substances
giving off an attractive odour formed
by dozens of volatile ingredients of
which only a few are responsible for
the specific smell. This aroma can be
reconstituted either by mixing the same
quantity of ingredients or by heating
certain amino acids and their mixtures
with different sugars.
We have found that the smell is
enhanced when an unsaturated fatty
acid is added to the mixture of amino
acids. The characteristic odour of
boiled beef or chicken casserole can
be obtained in this way. Adding a
trace of trlmethylamino oxide produces
the smell of salt water fish, and amino
valeric aldehyde imitates the smell of
boiled fresh water fish.
The final problem ¡s that of the
consistency of food. A variety of
methods now exist for making sophisti¬
cated imitations of standard human
foods from synthetic proteins. In the
United States, certain firms are selling
soya protein products which simulate
various parts of chickens and different
cuts of beef. Our Institute has
developed a technique for making
sturgeon caviar whose quality is
practically indistinguishable from the
real thing. In both cases, the methods
used are borrowed from other bran-

Photo © I. Kogan - APN
ches of physics and the chemistry of
macromolecular combinations. It can
thus be seen that any alimentary
protein can be turned into food which
has the consistency and flavour of
any animal protein.
Let us imagine the day when a
country's economy is based on the
manufacture of synthetic food instead
of on traditional methods of food
production. A few huge factories
sited in different parts of the country
where coal and petroleum are to be
found, prepare all the food required
by the population. Altogether, these
factories occupy barely a few hundred
square miles. Agriculture with its need
for a vast labour force and its limited
capacity for progress, has been
abolished, with the exception perhaps
of market gardens and horticulture.
There is no longer any need for the
vast industry which formerly provided
agriculture with its equipment tractors,
machines, tools. Nor for the metal
used in making them, nor for the fuel
used to power them. Nor for chemical
fertilizers, pesticides, etc. A large
proportion of the population previously
engaged in these industries and ¡n
agriculture itself is thus freed for more
productive work. Only a minute part
of this manpower is needed for the
production of synthetic food.
The old food industry gives way to
an entirely new industry, infinitely
more compact. No more bad years,
poor harvests, unproductive land. No
more calamitous losses due to climate,
natural, catastrophes, parasites, plant
diseases, all of which today still take
their toll of a considerable part of
every harvest.
All the conditions are to hand for
the transformation of villages into
towns and towns into garden cities.
Food products, ready to eat, packaged
or tinned like the products on sale
today, but with the fundamental
difference that they contain the normal
amount of vitamins and have the
highest nutritive value, have only to
be heated.
The appearance of these dishes
leaves nothing to be desired. With a
standard composition (proteins, carbo¬
hydrates, fats, salts, vitamins) adapted
to each age need, these foods are the
best source of health and energy
the human system can have, infinitely
better, at all events, than the best
natural products.
No more obesity, no more fatty
degeneration of the heart, liver and
other complaints of the kind. At the
least sign of physical abnormality,
special diets can be composed with
more or less of one or other ingredient.
Vast tracts of land previously
reserved for crop growing give way
progressively to forests and parks.
The silting and drying up of rivers is
stopped and the abundance of food
products leads to the solution of the
world shortage of drinking water which
at present is steadily worsening.
The society of the future gain's on
all fronts: economic, social and also
moral, as the slaughter of animals, a
cruel vestige of the past, is pro¬
gressively done away with.
Naturally, this is only a brief
glimpse of stimulating problems for
which solutions will need to be
found by the joint efforts of chemists,
biologists, doctors and economists.
Whatever success, even partial, is
achieved in this direction, those efforts
will be repaid a hundredfold.
25
