THE ARTS
AND MAN
Nine of the world's most respected authorities in the plastic
arts, architecture, the crafts, industrial design, literature,
theatre, cinema and music discuss the rôle and functions of
the arts in society, in a forthcoming Unesco book, "The Arts
and Man". In the article below, d'Arcy Hayman tells why
Unesco has felt the need for a book of this kind which
describes the many functions of the arts, explaining these
functions in terms of the art disciplines, professions, tradi¬
tions and art forms which have evolved throughout man's
history. She quotes salient passages from chapters written
by Sir Herbert Read (U.K.), Pier Luigi Nervi (Italy), Basilio
Uribe (Argentina), Richard Buckminster Fuller (U.S.A.), André
Maurois (France), William W. Melnitz (U.S.A.), Grigory Ko-
zintsev (U.S.S.R.), and Yehudi Menuhin (U.S.A.). On page 15,
we publish the chapter by Mme Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay
on The Crafts as an Embodiment of the Great Folk Tradition.
by d'Arcy Hayman U,
4
D'ARCY HAYMAN has been head of the Arts
Education Section, Department of Culture,
Unesco, for the past nine years. Author and
painter, she taught art history, aesthetics and
art education at the University of California,
New York University, and Columbia Univer¬
sity between 1950 and 1960.
INESCO will shortly pub¬
lish an unusual book entitled "The Arts
and Man" (1). It must be understood
at the outset that this is not an "art
book" in the ordinary sense of that
term. What this book ¡s about is that
aspect of man's nature, that facet of
his Intuition and inventiveness which we'
can call the aesthetic realm. This un¬
ique work concerns itself with the arts
inasmuch as they are the natural
manifestation of the human spirit, and
conversely as they provide the forms,
symbols and languages which serve
man in endless ways.
"The Arts and Man" is about the
(1) "The Arts and Man", to be published
shortly by Unesco, has 196 pages, including
64 pages of black and white Illustrations and
20 pages in full colour. Cloth bound, it will
appear in the U.S A. as a co-publication with
Prentice-Hall Inc.; provisional price: $12.95.
(Fuller details will be given In a forthcoming
issue of the "Unesco Courier").
aesthetic nature of man, the aesthetic
sense of men, women, youth and
children, of all nations, socio-economic
and ethnic groups, every human individ¬
ual on this earth. A major objective
of this publication ¡s to give evidence
in words and visual images of the way
¡n which the arts embody the universal
qualities of mankind as well as the
endless individual and cultural differ¬
ences which exist within the family
of man.
The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights affirmed for all mankind by
the General Assembly of the United
Nations states that "Everyone has the
right freely to participate in the cultural
life of the community, to enjoy the
arts." The fundamental need for per¬
sonal involvement in the aesthetic level
of human existence is the underlying
principle on which this right has been
based; it is to this end that Unesco
directs the attention of its world-wide
public to the significant contribution

Blown up reproductions of paintings by Wassili Kandinsky are used
here by a television producer to create a striking stage backdrop.
made by the arts to every part of
man's life.
Unesco's book attempts to analyse
and describe the ways ¡n which the
arts in their various aspects and man¬
ifestations serve the human objective.
At the same time, it is concerned with
making a comprehensible description
of the many functions of the arts, ex¬
plaining these functions in terms of
the art disciplines, professions, tradi¬
tions and art forms which have evolved
throughout man's history.
The book covers a vast area-, it gives
attention to the whole range of arts
disciplines, including drawing, painting,
sculpture, crafts, architecture, indus¬
trial, graphic and environmental design,
literature, theatre, cinema, and music.
It examines and documents these
art areas at many different levels
of production and participation, includ¬
ing that of the professional artist and
consumer and audience for arts, the
art of the child, folk arts, and other
cultural forms
a vital rôle.
in which the arts play
Unesco, which reflects and acts upon
the trends and directions of its 125
member nations, publishes this book
in a time of great change within all
of man's activities. Einstein gave
words and numbers to the cosmic prin¬
ciple: "the only constant is change."
Our own time is marked not only by
constant change, but by what may
some day be seen as a period of
more rapid and profound change than
man has ever before experienced. Let
us consider here a few of the funda¬
mental changes now taking place which
directly affect the arts and man.
. We live ¡n an age of melting fron¬
tiers, of dimming boundary lines; this
¡s true within socio-political contexts
and also applies to nations, religions
and surely to those human disciplines
which for an artificial time in our recent
history have been Isolated one from
the other.
Man has actually made a circular
journey through time; he came from
integrated tribal units in which the
arts and sciences were fundamental
and Inherent qualities of his everyday
life; he went through a time of ever
increasing specialization, compartmen-
talization, in which city-states and then
nations, religious sects and even the
various human disciplines were at
war with one another; and now he
begins to search for ways of find¬
ing a new form of Integration: Inter¬
nationalism, universalism, ecumenism,
interdisciplinary, inter-cultural action.
It is quite obvious that the techno¬
logy of our time, sometimes produced
as the result of certain specialization,
leads us with almost a will of its own
towards generalization. Man intuitive¬
ly accepts the rôle of specialist only
as a transitional measure which will
allow him to make the technology that
will liberate him from the necessity
of doing the repetitive, monotonous
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
5

THE ARTS AND MAN (Continued)
A circular journey through time
tasks which until now have kept him
enslaved. The electronic and mass
produced "brain" of the computer, will
(let us hope) allow man to return
to his original rôle of creative, compre¬
hensive thinker.
The arts do not exist ¡n a vacuum:
they reflect and embody even the most
subtle change experienced by man.
New forms of transportation and com¬
munication give to man the power to
penetrate cultural and intellectual bar¬
riers which in other times remained im¬
penetrable by all but a precious few.
wE
6
[E live in exciting times and
we see amazing things: the young gen¬
eration of artists is especially blessed
by the riches laid at Its feet. Spring¬
ing from Liverpool, the Beatles were
first nourished by American Rock and
Roll and folk music, the source of
which was African and Elizabethan
rhythms and songs Interpreted by
Negro slaves and Ozark mountain
dwellers; then they were touched by
the electronic music and sound of their
time as well as by such ancient class¬
ical musical forms as the Indian Raga.
The resulting music of this young
group as well as of other Inventive
"pop groups" throughout the world to¬
day is often startling, sometimes shock¬
ing, but always rich and rewarding in
its creative Imagination and revolu¬
tionary musical ecumenism.
The new film makers in Czecho¬
slovakia are experimenting with dram¬
atic art forms born of the union be¬
tween the traditional theatre arts and
products of modern technology. Their
recently Invented Polyvlsion produces
its fantastic effects with twelve cinema
projectors and twenty-eight slide pro¬
jectors working simultaneously to pro¬
duce a single image.
The Intricate system of Diopolyecran
involves one hundred and twelve mov¬
able cubes, each cube making use of
two slide projectors simultaneously and
all ¡n all requires five thousand elec¬
tronic signals to operate it each
second.
The Kinoautomat extends its dimen¬
sions to vast audience participation in
the actual creation and direction of
the story or plot of the programme
by taking into consideration the
thoughts, feelings and desires of each
member of the audience attending the
performance. This audience partici¬
pation and direction is made possible
through the use of the computer.
The architects of today are influenc¬
ed by many historical periods and cul¬
tures other than their own, the strong
and monumental styles of feudal Japan,
the ornate and elegant forms of Arabic
architecture, are some of the sources
of inspiration ¡n contemporary Western
architecture.
Structural elements which can be
assembled overnight into such forms
as the geodesic dome reaching the
size of skyscrapers and beyond, point
to new directions and provide solutions
to architectural problems in the Space
Age, at the same time producing radi¬
cal aesthetic change and Innovation.
And the architect himself is chang¬
ing: he can no longer be confined to
the designing of isolated buildings; he
has become concerned again with
man's total environment, expanding
into the fields of city planning and
environmental design.
The painter and sculptor too are
reaching out beyond their canvas
frames and marble blocks. It becomes
ever more difficult to label a work
of art in our time; one can hardly
distinguish between the new three-
dimensional paintings and sculpture,
between walk-In sculptures and archi¬
tecture, or between painting and music,
sculpture and theatre, as the visual
arts take on audio and theatrical di¬
mensions and vice versa. The bound¬
ary lines are dimming, the labels are
fading.
Marshall McLuhan reminds us that
we are entering a "post literate" and
"post linear" stage in our evolution.
As our thought is conditioned, to some
extent, at least, by the medium through
which Information comes to us, we can
quickly see that these multiple visual
¡mages, these inter-media contacts,
these total environments and spontan¬
eous "happenings", make differences
in the way we learn, think and finally
act.
Other changes are taking place
which also affect artists, the arts and
the relationship between these and
what we call the general public, the
consumer, the audience for the arts.
In traditional societies, there is no
separation between the public and the
arts: all members of the tribe or the
village community take part in the
popular theatre, participate ¡n the
dance, sing and play musical instru¬
ments, decorate the home and uten¬
sils. There is no need here for mus¬
eums in which to appreciate the arts,
¡n which to view the arts behind glass
partitions; for art objects are the
objects of everyday use and are famil¬
iar as ceremonial forms and symbolic
images.
In modern technological societies,
man is now searching for ways to re¬
integrate the arts in society, to assoc¬
iate the public more closely with the
cultural life of the community. This is
needed as a result of the long and
artificial separation between the arts
and their public which began with the
age of specialization.
The point at which man finds himself
today ¡s a point of departure. In man's
future home among the stars and
galaxies, his measurements, his hori¬
zon, his entire perspective will be
altered. The universal environment
will bring changes in man's relation
to earth and man's relation to man.
Human communication will become
ever more complex and difficult. Soc¬
ial structures will change and all of
the established human institutions will
be altered in some way.
Because man's aesthetic nature is a
reflection, a manifestation of all of
the other aspects of his personality,
it is especially important that an exa¬
mination now be made of those ways
in which the arts function in the life
of man and contribute to his well-
being and continuing evolution.
|T ¡s ¡n this time of profound
and rapid change in the history of man
that Unesco's book, "The Arts and
Man," ¡s required and issued. It is a
book which speaks about the arts
and man, telling its story in both
verbal and visual images. The words
are spoken by some of the world's
most respected contemporary author¬
ities in the arts and in some cases by
the artists themselves.
Sir Herbert Read, the distinguished
British art historian and critic, who
completed the opening chapter of the
book for Unesco not long before his
death, envisages art and society as
the view that contemporary civilization
¡s ¡n danger of becoming "aesthetical¬
ly impotent" due to "alienation" or the
progressive divorce of human faculties
from natural processes, scientific ra¬
tionalism which tends to destroy the
mysteries of holiness and beauty, and
growing mass systematization which
is Inimical to art, the arts being the
products of individuals.
The author here offers one solution:
"education through art," which recog¬
nizes that art ¡s a binding force in
society, and that the absence of this
element has fatal consequences for
civilization. Sir Herbert says:
yr ". . .Very few philosophers, though
Plato is one of them, have seen
that art and society are inseparable
concepts that society, as a viable
organic entity, is somehow depend¬
ent on art as a binding, fusing
and energizing force. . . Art ¡s
eternally disturbing, permanently
revolutionary. It is so because the
artist, ¡n the degree of his great¬
ness, always confronts the un¬
known, and what he brings back
from that confrontation ¡s a novelty,

a new symbol, a new vision of life,
the outer image of Inward things. . .
I believe that there ¡s only one way
of saving our civilization and that
is by so reforming its constituent
societies that, in the sense of the
phrases already defined, the con¬
crete sensuous phenomena of art
are once more spontaneously
.a. manifested in our daily lives. . ."
Kamaladevl Chattopadhyay, who
once worked with Gandhi and Nehru
to develop India's great Indigenous
arts, speaks of the crafts as the
creation of ordinary people, part of the
flow of events of the common life.
She sees no real dividing line between
the so-called "fine arts" and the crafts,
both being expressions of the human
spirit in material form. Drawing upon
the ancient traditions of the East, she
points out that the craftsman, like any
other artist, is engaged ¡n a total
operation involving the emotions, the
mind and the body, and that he is
seeking rhythm, form and harmony for
life through art (her text appears on
page 15).
Pier Lulgl Nervi, the noted Italian
architect-engineer, speaks of the
architect and his rôle ¡n contemporary
society, and he calls for a return from
what he describes as architectural
discussion and theory, which has little
to do with the physical world and
human need, to the appropriate and
responsible job of the architect: the
art and science of constructing
buildings which are adequate ¡n terms
of durability, beauty and economy.
Nervi says:
"^ "... Architecture ¡s construction
and as such it cannot evade obed¬
ience to all the objective limitations
imposed by the materials it uses
and to those laws, not made by
men, which govern their equilibrium.
Yet I firmly believe that implicit in
this obedience are to be found the
real seriousness and that inde¬
pendence of passing fashion that
have always characterized true
architecture, whether Imposed by
the specific qualities of the marble
in the Greek temples or the massive
brickwork of the Romans, the
delicacy of Gothic, or the great
structural possibilities of the mat¬
erials and techniques of today that
take up so marvellously well the
daunting challenge of the problems
of contemporary social and techni-
^, cal development."
Photo Unesco - Cart
The Argentine poet and director of
Argentina's National Institute of Tech¬
nology, Basilio Uribe, expresses his
views about the twentieth-century
discipline of industrial design which he
sees as having a structural rôle to play
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
"Man's ultimate leap, when approaching his God, is through music",
writes the celebrated violinist Yehudi Menuhin in "The Arts and Man".
"Man's ultimate release of exuberance can be through music,
from drinking songs to dances... Music begins where words end", as
this minstrel playing in a street of Cuzco, Peru, seems to be saying.
7

ART
ON THE
MOVE
Photography enabled modern man
to record fixed images of objects,
persons and events to which motion
pictures later restored natural life
and movement. In nature all is
movement and change, and even
a motionless object such as a stone
is subject to the varying interplay
of light. Kinetic art has now taken
its place alongside traditional art,
with its use of mechanical movement
and other elements such as air,
light and water to achieve actual
motion. Analysis of movement, from
that of the stars to a hand using
a tool, offers the artist a new vision
of forms to incorporate in his
compositions. Left, a kinetic work
by the Soviet sculptor, A. Volgulne,
exhibited in Moscow in 1966.
Right, photographic study of dance
movements by the French
photographer Max-Yves Brandily.
THE ARTS AND MAN (Continued)
The new aesthetics of our Space Age
8
in the establishment of necessary
relationships among the human
environments: technical, economic,
aesthetic, cultural. Uribe points out
that:
"* "... It is customary to speak of
twentieth-century aesthetics in the
same way as we might speak, for
instance, of fourteenth-century
aesthetics, although in fact it is
evident that, in our century, the
whole question has assumed differ¬
ent dimensions. If absolute time
Indeed exists, we are not aware of
it; we apprehend it only ¡n relation
to space.
"As long as man journeyed on
foot or on horseback and the world
could not be encompassed, there
was a sense in which one could
talk about the sensitivity and per¬
ceptivity of a century as a whole;
but things have now changed. Now
that the impact of events is no
longer confined to the region ¡n
which they occur, but is felt simul¬
taneously over the whole face of
the globe, now that traditional
frontiers have been swept away by
artificial satellites circling the earth
every sixty minutes, now that
computers can solve in a moment
equations that once would have
taken more than a lifetime to work
out, what is the sense of talking
about the aesthetics of a period
whose extent can only be defined
in relation to the space that can
be traversed in that time?
"There is no one aesthetic
pattern, no one way of under¬
standing and appreciating the twen¬
tieth-century: the first fifty years of
the century saw many such patterns,
there have been countless others
in the fifteen years or so that have
elapsed between then and now, and
many more will emerge ¡n the years
to come. The aesthetic theories of
yesterday are already out of date,
those of today are born obsolete,
those of tomorrow will cease to
apply even before they emerge."
Richard Buckminster Fuller, the
American designer-philosopher-scien¬
tist-poet, who refuses to be put into
any one professional category and
prefers to be known as a "compre-
hensivist in an age of specialists",
believes that all human beings are born
"artist-scientist-inventors", but that life
progressively squelches the individual's
innate drives and capabilities. He
calls for a new kind of education and
social structure which encourages the
development of man's intuitive-inven¬
tive-aesthetic powers. Richard Buck¬
minster Fuller feels that:
". . . Children are all born with
the equipment and capabilities of
what is called 'genius'. They be¬
come sub-genius or de-geniused by
virtue of the progressive frustrations
of so-called 'growing up' (there
being neither 'up' nor 'down'
directions in the universe!) . . . Aes¬
thetics and intuition are the same
but the first is the subjective and
the second ¡s the objective phase
of the conscious-subconscious,
threshold-crossing, communication
system ...
". . . The artist-scientist-inventors
are the men who have gradually
and now almost completely trans-

Photo <S Max-Yves Brandi ly, Paris
formed the environment of man, by
virtue of whose activity about half
of all the problems to be solved to
make 100 per cent of humanity
physically and economically suc¬
cessful, have already been solv¬
ed. .. I intuit that artist-scientist-
inventors who have reached
maturity without critical impairment
of their original faculties will now
become responsible for initiating
and industrializing the remainder of
technology-advancing Inventions,
for realizing the comprehensive
physical and economic success of
world man, and that with universal
abundance, the warring, official and
unofficial, will subside to innocuous
magnitude. With that artist-scien¬
tist-inventors' accomplishment, hu¬
manity may, for the first time ¡n
history, come to know the meaning
of peace . . .
"...At this moment in history,
heretofore preponderantly innocent
and ignorant humanity, operative
only with subconscious success, is
being required by universal evolu¬
tion, and led by the artist-
scientist-inventors, to participate
¡n increasingly conscious degree in
humanity's evolutionary transition
from a very local parasite on the
planet earth to an energy-conserving
Intellectually effective universe
man."
An author read and loved by a public
far beyond his native France, André
Maurois points to the great contribution
made by the literary arts to the life of
man, and demonstrates how the great
authors, poets and playwrights have
provided substance for the imagination,
order for the mind, and a model for
life. In this text which was among the
last words he wrote ¡n his long and
productive life, André Maurois says:
"...The superiority of literature
over reality lies ¡n the fact that a
work of art allows what real life
almost always forbids, that ¡s,
objective contemplation. True, we
men and women of this frenzied
age have, like the heroes of our
novels, lived through war and
peace; we have experienced love,
jealousy and pity; but in what
conditions? Doomed to immediate
action, a prey to anger, fear or
anxiety, we have lived our life
without really understanding ¡t.
We have been constantly goaded
on by the necessity for choice or
action . . .
"...The classical theatre of the
ancients stirred the emotions of all
the citizens of Athens or Rome.
Everyone understood, everyone
recognized himself. Great literature
purified men and made them,
I believe, better . . . Literature makes
Intelligible for us emotions which
are not understood in real life.
"We spend our whole lives along¬
side parents, children, husbands or
wives whom we scarcely know.
Sometimes we imagine we do know
them and suddenly their behaviour
¡n a crisis reveals that our judge¬
ment of them was completely
mistaken. We do not even know
ourselves.
"Reality is shrouded ¡n mist and
eludes our grasp. I turn to analyse
the reflection of some emotion on a
well-loved face, but already that
reflection has vanished like a ripple
on the waters. Our own emotions
are as changing as an April sky.
But a well-constructed novel offers
us characters who, though some¬
times mysterious, are nevertheless
always more intelligible than those
of the real world, because they have
been created by the mind of a man."
William Melnitz, who worked in the
great theatrical movements of Berlin
in the twenties, sees the theatre as a
synthesis of many arts and skills which n
had their origins in the rituals, myths, H
religions, education and entertainment
of all peoples of the earth. Melnitz
puts forth the idea that:
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

THE ARTS AND MAN (Continued)
10
"...The ancient theatre was
exalted because it was Inspired by
religion. The theatre offered an¬
other realm of religious experience
in terms of dramatic art. There are
all /sorts of theatre today, as there
are all sorts of literature. Theatre
has become very powerful in its
Influence on society. The theatre
has always a social function,
whether its apparent purpose be
religious, artistic, educational or
merely commercial. Its social
function is to unite people ¡n a
shared experience. The audience
is as much a part of theatre as are
the play, actors, singers, musicians,
dancers and a place in which to
foregather and share the perform¬
ance. Theatre and society are
firmly wedded . . .
"...Theatre is a complicated
medium; it ¡s an organism that
continually renews Itself ... it should
be ¡n constant confrontation with
modernity. In this respect theatre
creates and reflects the society of
an age . . .
"...Through a hundred centuries
theatre has never died. It will
continue to exist as 'a school of
weeping and of laughter", as Garcia
Lorca so felicitously called ¡t and
"a rostrum where men are free to
expose old and new standards of
conduct, and explain with living
examples the eternal norms of the
j^ heart and feelings of man'."
In the short space of half a century
the cinema has developed from a
simple form of entertainment particu¬
larly marked by its technical novelty
to an art form which, with television,
has become an Integral part of our
culture. This evolution is presented in
a concentrated picture by Grlgory
Kozintsev, the Soviet film maker and
director who has both participated in
it and notably influenced its course.
Kozintsev believes that:
"^ "...while a film is a work of
art, it is not only the artist who
speaks to the audience but one
people which speaks to another.
Akira Kurosawa brought Japan to
Europe; Satyajit Ray has enabled
people in many countries to know
India better. The spectator today
follows a wholly different route.
The film paints a chronicle of the
times People see new generations
arriving and the old fading away,
they see the unravelling of past and
the genesis of future tragedies.
Seeing both themselves and their
age, they come to know more of
ja. both."
The musician, composer, educator,
Yehudi Menuhln, who makes his home
in Europe as well as ¡n the U.S.A.,
speaks of music and shows that it is
an art intimately connected with the
very physiological functions of man,
CONTINUED ON PAGE 13

y
DREAMS
AND
INVENTION
Photo © Hans Namuth, from "The Arts and Man'
"Really great artists are scientists and the really great scientists
are artists and both are inventors. I call them artist
scientist-inventors," writes Richard Buckminster Fuller in the
Unesco volume "The Arts and Man." The weJI known American
designer-scientist-philosopher has consistently spoken out against the
divorce of aesthetic intuition and scientific objectivity. His
geodesic dome (above, Buckminster Fuller behind one of these
structures of interlocked curved triangles) has been used for
over 3,000 structures in 50 countries. As an original aesthetic
solution to specific technical problems, it has an ancient counterpart
in the Islamic "stalactite" domes, such as that of the Palace
of Ali Qapu, near Ispahan, Iran (detail left). There, the architect
ingeniously built up a series of small pointed niches to join the
circular ring of the dome to the square shape of the building.
When Buckminster Fuller gives free rein to his intuitions, his vision
transcends the apparent bounds of present-day technology,
as in the case of his "Project for Floating Cloud Structures"
(top left). His photo montage recalls a 1932 work by Belgian
surrealist painter, René Magritte, "Voice of the Wind" (far left),
one of his variations on the theme of the bell.
11

THE SYMBOL
AND
THE MIND
Not satisfied simply to portray
reality, the artist feels he
must evaluate it and interpret
it for others. Depending on
the era, place, or need, this
interpretation can take infin¬
itely diverse forms as it
seeks to reconcile images
and symbols with cultural
and scientific truths. Left, a
functioning model of a human
brain showing the sensory
mechanisms of sight and
hearing. Illuminated impulses
travelling over nerve pathways
from the eyes and ears and
photographic images on a
symbolic "consciousness
screen" illustrate how the
brain experiences and res¬
ponds to the sight and sound
of an opera singer. Right,
a 14th century Japanese
sculptor has etched into the
carved head of a monk, "My
name is Koshun. I am a
master of Buddhist art from
the Kofuki-ji temple in the
The two-headed
mace of the
Marquesa Islands
In traditional societies, there is no
division between art and the people;
art objects are an intrinsic part of
everyday life and the symbolic
meanings of the forms are familiar
to everyone. The head-mace, left, of
the Marquesa Islands is a striking
example. The head is composed of
two faces back-to-back and is con¬
ceived by the islanders as a micro-
SOLAR EYES: they see in all directions, the three dimensions of
space and the magic dimension of the Mind. Each eye has a head:
the spirit of sight is located in the centre of the power of sight.
NASAL HEAD: a tiny mask emerging from the centre of the face
symbolizing the sense of smell. This is the spirit of odours, which
represent the secret language of the forces of Nature.
MAGIC ARMS: vibratory arms capable of capturing all currents
and fluids of nature. The magic arms or hands direct and canalize
the flow of waves, acting as transformers of energy to meet the q
needs of the Spirit.
MOUTH EYES: a spirit of taste. This taste has eyes and sees as
well as interprets, judges or classifies. It conveys the idea of
conscious contact, assimilating all, revealing all.
THE PEDESTAL or CHIN: symbol of matter, matter in its primeval form,
in the first stage of plasticity, the still raw elements untransformed by
the Spirit. These are the available forces, Beginning and End. Perfect
harmony resides in the dual existence of Beginning and End.

THE ARTS AND MAN (Continued)
r
su
5-°< c
©<
o n
0.5
southern capital." A remark¬
able example of the harmony
that can be attained between
man and his environment is
the double-faced mace (below)
from the Marquesa Islands.
relating the musical elements of
rhythm, tension, counterpoint, etc. with
man's heartbeat, breathing, blood
pressure. Thus he illustrates his
thesis that music penetrates directly
to the subconscious mind, and becomes
an immediate revelation requiring little
interpretive effort. Music begins
where words end, it is devotion to the
timeless and" the infinite. Yehudi
Menuhin writes:
"... It is no wonder that ancient
sages sensed music in the move¬
ment of the heavenly spheres.
Thus the fundamental relationship
of one-to-one as man to woman,
or yin to yang, finds its audible
rendering in musical forms: expos¬
ition-recapitulation, a form which
gradually extends around its seed
to produce and embrace a content
the development section . . .
"...The more rapid frequencies
find their musical counterpart in
the tidal, as ¡t were, increase and
decrease in volume and in the
contrasting characters of the musi¬
cal elements. The physiological
frequencies of breathing and pulse,
of pressure and relaxation, of work
and rest, find their musical counter¬
part in the basic pulse and counter
rhythms, in the rise and fall of a
phrase and Its interweaving counter¬
point, and in the Increase and
decrease of tension. The faster
frequencies of pitch and the simul¬
taneous sounds and the changing
relationships of notes at different
pitches affect us deeply and
irresistibly as they penetrate and
reveal the subconscious and the
intangible . . .
". . . Man's ultimate leap, when
approaching his God, is through
music; man's ultimate release of
exuberance can again be through
music, from drinking songs to
dances. . .; he falls in love to music.
Music serves the shepherd, as a
companion ¡n his solitude or to
communicate with other shepherds,
as it serves the Tibetan lama, the
sovereign of England, to solemnity
great public ceremonies. . .
"Through music we share and
become part of all great occasions.
We are welded into one group
sharing each other's sense of
sorrow or exhilaration. Music can
also reveal more penetratingly the
nature of peoples alien to each
other: our understanding for
instance of the African temperament
and character has come about more
through their Influence upon our
dally music than through any In¬
tellectual, social or other contact . . .
"...Art is an effort to express
through our senses all that is
within and beyond our reach. Art
is a call, a union like love with
that which, while within and part
of ourselves, is also and by this
same token greater than ourselves.
This ¡s why art and deep religious
feeling have so often been in¬
separable. . .
". . . Our civilization ¡s almost a
vicious circle of which the driving
force is denial denial of the
creative moment, the creative act.
Fig leaves were perhaps the first
such denial and led the way to ever
more elaborate, subtle, tantalizing,
deceptive and sublimating forms of
art and artifice; creative art and
growing consciousness always went
hand in hand, not without some
embarrassment . . .
". . . Until we can restore the
spontaneous elation that comes of
one's efforts with one's own
capacities upon a piece of wood,
a sheet of paper, a length of cloth
or leather, or upon one's own
mind, as does a philosopher, or
upon one's own physique as does
a dancer, until a substantial pro¬
portion of our population is
acquainted with the sensations of
artistic endeavour, we will not
successfully overcome the debase¬
ment of human values."
These are but a few of the Inspired
words that speak from the pages of
this new Unesco book, and there is
more: Three hundred and twenty-five
photographs, some in colour, form a
remarkable collection of visual informa¬
tion about the arts and man.
These illustrations coming from
eighty-five countries offer a continuing
parade of images from Africa, the
Americas, Asia, Europe, the Middle
East, all parts of the world; they make
visible the creative artist at work in
his studio, the performing artist and
the artisan at their craft, as well as
the public which becomes the art
audience, consumer, amateur and
patron of the arts.
The photographs were contributed
to this Unesco publication by some of
the most outstanding photographers of
our time: Edward Steichen, Marvin
Lazarus, Wayne Miller, Hans Namuth,
Gar Lunney, Marc Riboud, Van Lukas,
Dagmar Hochova, K.M. Lee, E. Molnar,
A. Drago, are but a few of the great
names in photography represented.
The pictures in this book tell their
own story about the arts and man.
There is the Peruvian street musician
in affectionate embrace with his harp,
who brings the joy and warmth of his
music to the village square; there are
the two Australian Aboriginal boys
following the tradition of their
ancestors by making drawings in the
sand, and the very young Czecho¬
slovak girl who expresses amazed
delight as the picture she is drawing
reveals some untold wonder to her.
There are glimpses of the pro¬
fessional painters ano- sculptors at
work in their studios Arp, Appel,
Miró, Pollock and many others. And
then we see the craftsmen and women
in Togo, Chad, Tunisia, Mauritania, the
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
13

THE ARTS AND MAN (Continued)
The spark within all of us
Sudan, Mali, Ivory Coast, Ethiopia,
Central African Republic, Jordan, Iran,
India, Ecuador, and Mexico involved
in the art which has been theirs for
centuries.
There are next the great architectural
monuments of Nubia, of the Incas, of
Cambodia alongside the more humble
but equally beautiful dwellings of the
people of Morocco, Niger, Cameroon,
Malaysia. And too, the works of the
great architects of our own and recent
times Gaudi, Le Corbusier, Frank
Lloyd Wright, Nervi, Kenzo Tange,
Buckminster Fuller and two examples
of city planning: one made not long
ago for the reconstruction of Skopje
(Yugoslavia) and the other which
pictures a traditional village in Uganda
planned according to social, cultural
and personal aspects of the lives of
the village members.
Then come the colourful objects
born of the union between the arts and
the technological sciences, Industrial
and graphic design; we view a Japanese
record player, an Italian sewing machi¬
ne, a Swedish television set, an English
sailing boat, an American computer, a
poster from Poland.
From the world of letters we can
examine photographs of pages from
original manuscripts by Proust, Tolstoy,
Hugo and compare them with Egyptian
In the tradition of city children, this little girl draws with chalk on the
pavement, recording familiar images within the structure of her childhood games.
In this way, artistic expression helps the individual to bring into a coherent
pattern the fragmentary experiences of everyday life.
hieroglyphics and Chinese writing.
The theatre comes to life with scenes
from the traditional dramatic arts of
Chile, Bulgaria, Libya. And then we
are presented with great moments
from the film classics: Griffith's "The
Birth of a Nation", Chaplin's "Modern
Times", Wiene's "The Cabinet of
Dr. Caligari", Kurosawa's "Rashomon",
Fellini's "La Strada", Bergman's "The
Virgin Spring", and we see in other
pictures Buñuel, Truffaut, Satyajit Ray
directing the cinematic works of our
time.
And at last music and dance are
brought to life as we can hear the
Pan Pipers of Bolivia, the Tibetan
trumpets from Nepal, the Gamelan
orchestra of Indonesia, the sitar and
tablas of India and Pakistan, the
Ghanaian drummer, Tyrolean bag¬
pipers, the American negro saxo¬
phonist, the Indonesian Kenong player
and the majestic sound of a full
symphony orchestra in the U.S.S.R.
And we can see the dance in all
aspects of Its glory: the flamenco
dancers of Spain, traditional dances
of Greece, Panama, Senegal, the
Russian ballet, the classical temple
dance of Thailand. And hundreds
more images that fill the eyes and the
mind's ears with the magnificence that
is The Arts and Man.
IHERE have been times and
places in our human history where the
arts were neglected or made so pre¬
cious and remote a commodity that few
were allowed to partake of their riches.
The concept of the arts belonging to an
élite, an aristocratic few who had the
time and the money to spend on life's
luxuries while a mass labour force
performed the "less cultivated tasks"
¡s no longer valid; this attitude is at
the peril of man himself. The arts
belong to all men. If we make them
an arbitrary addendum to life, if we
consider them non-essential, a refine¬
ment only, we lose a great part of that
which makes us human.
The artist's act has moral signifi¬
cance because he not only discovers
reality, but evaluates it, interprets it
for others. The arts are products of
purposive activity, and the artist
accepts the responsibility of affecting
the basic pattern of others' conduct.
To put man in touch with himself,
to make him fully aware of his innate
ethical-aesthetic inclinations at a time
when spontaneous individual decisions
can determine the fate of millions of
lives and perhaps the destiny ' of
mankind, ¡s the urgent and unique task
of the humanities and the arts in our
time. Unesco, dedicated to this task,
is publishing "The Arts and Man."
