Map (left) shows location of the
Mongolian People's Republic,
in the heart of Asia. Below, shepherd
on horseback tends his flock of sheep
on one of Mongolia's vast pastures
on which graze 23 million head
of livestock. Opposite page,
a kindergarten class out for a stroll
among the impressive new
buildings of Ulan Bator, Mongolia's
burgeoning capital.
Photo © Réalités - J.P. Charbonnier
..-.A*.* &

This year a mission of the United Nations
Development Programme, composed of specialists
from the U.N. and its Specialized Agencies, including
Unesco, went to the Mongolian People's Republic to
discuss with the authorities the expansion of a pro¬
gramme for technological, scientific, educational and
social development. We present below an article on
Mongolia today written specially for the "Unesco
Courier" by two of these specialists. (See page 20
for details of some of the U.N. Development Pro¬
gramme projects now under way).
by Konrad Facknitz and Lev Kostikov
L,YING in the very heart of
Asia between the Gobi Desert and Lake
Baikal, Mongolia has always seemed a
remote and mysterious land. Even to¬
day most people know little about the
country, its inhabitants and its way of
life.
Few are aware, for instance, that In
size, the Mongolian People's Republic
exceeds the combined areas of France,
Great Britain, Spain and Portugal, and
that its population numbers only one
and a quarter million less than one
person per square kilometre.
Mongolia's wide open spaces remind
one of the old Wild West frontier
country of the United States and the
vast plains of Soviet Kazakhstan.
Among other similarities, the man on
horseback herding cattle ¡s a familiar
sight, and, like Kazakhstan and the
western United States, Mongolia
abounds in mineral resources: coal,
oil, gold, precious and semi-precious
stones and other subsoil riches.
Like the south-western region of the
United States, Mongolia is semi-arid;
but here the parallel ends, since Mon¬
golia is perhaps unique in having a
largely sunny climate with extremely
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
KONRAD FACKNITZ of the U.S.A. is a
specialist in industrial and social psycho¬
logy. Since 1966 he has been work¬
ing with the International Labour Organ¬
ization as an expert in vocational training.
Before then he was training adviser to
steel industries in India and the United
States.
LEV KOSTIKOV is a staff member in
Unesco's Department of Application of
Sciences to Development. Until 1967 he
was Associate Professor of Thermodyna¬
mics, Dean of the Department of Power
Engineering, and Head of the Industrial
Research Laboratory at the Bauman Higher
Technical Institute in Moscow, where he
carried out research on heat transfer
problems and applications of isotopes.
Photo © Eric Schwab

Photo © John Massey Stewart, London
MONGOLIA (Continued)
A people on the move
16
low temperatures. Minus 35 degrees
Centigrade in winter with sun is not
uncommon and summer temperatures
often rise well above 40 degrees.
Almost everyone, to be sure, has
heard of that famous Mongolian of an¬
cient times, Genghis Khan, and his
hardy followers who swept into China,
Turkestan and southern Russia, and
many people still think of today's Mon¬
golians as a nomadic people placidly
tending their herds. But too few have
heard about the enormous strides Mon¬
golia has taken in industrialization, co¬
operative farming and education. To¬
day, the "land of the nomads" is very
much on the move, and at a pace that
is rapidly transforming the whole struc¬
ture of its economy and social life.
It takes a hardy people to survive
the sharp daily as well as seasonal
variations of temperatures in a climate
such as Mongolia's. The Mongolians
are people to match the climate and
the country. They are a tough breed,
cheerful, hospitable and Industrious.
As horsemen they are outstanding.
Horse racing is Mongolia's national
sport, and even boys 5-12 years old
take part In races that try boy and
beast over 40 kilometres of terrain at
breakneck speeds. When they grow
up, they are thus completely at home
in the saddle. This kinship of man and
horse served the Mongolians well
during the centuries that this once lar¬
gely nomadic people moved with their
flocks of, sheep, cattle, goats and
horses over the vast steppe to find
pasture.
This nomadic existence demanded a
mobile home that would protect the
Mongolian against his exceptionally
variable climate. He found it in his now
traditional Yurta, an igloo-shaped tent,
about 20 feet in diameter, with a trun¬
cated conical roof, out of which rises
the all-important stove pipe, and a door
which is always placed facing south.
Its construction is a marvel of
ingenuity and practicality. Heavy felt
is stretched over a wooden frame
resembling a rose trellis. The entire
structure, trellis, felt and door, Is easily
transported and can be assembled or
taken down in a matter of 30 minutes.
It was the Yurta and the amazing
Mongolian horses that gave Genghis
Khan his mobility and striking power
seven centuries ago.
Like many people whose life de¬
pends largely on the weather, the Mon
golians are prone to talk about it. Each
time they meet, it is customary for
them to spend ten or fifteen minutes
discussing the last rain, its effect upon
the pasture and consequently on the
herds. Cut off from the rain-bearing
winds of the Pacific by its high moun¬
tains, Mongolia has little rain or snow;
its annual average fall of rain and snow
is about 300 mm.
Each season has its greeting and
conversational style related to the
rains of summer, the winds of winter,
the hunting season in autumn and the
beauty of spring. Through all these
conversations runs a common theme:
the effects of the weather on the herds.
To a degree without parallel any¬
where else In the world the Mongolian
economy is dependent upon animals.
Mongolia has 23 million head of cattle
over 20 per head of population. The
Arats, as herdsmen are called, depend
almost entirely on animal products for
their livelihood. Before the fairly recent
introduction of agricultural co-opera¬
tives, there were more than 200,000 no¬
madic families, usually living at a bare
subsistence level off their herds.
Under a feudal system which existed
In Mongolia until 1921, land was held

Photo © J. Kosidowskl, Warsaw
NATION OF HORSEMEN.
Centuries of nomadic
life have made the
Mongolians extraordinary
horsemen, who delight
in racing across the
steppes astride fleet Tatar
horses (above). Children
learn to ride as soon as
they are old enough
to sit in the saddle (left).
Opposite, after centuries
of riding horses, it seems
to be the ambition of many
Mongolians to own a
motor-cycle. Row of tents
in background are
Yurtas, the traditional
Mongolian nomad homes,
in this farming co-operative
near Ulan Bator.
by princes as hereditary property and
the nomad was expected to pay a form
of pasture tax. Needless to say, the
best pasture was reserved for the
herds of the princes, leaving only the
poorer pasture for nomadic families. At
the same time, Lamaism, one form of
Buddhism, was firmly established In
Mongolia as the official religion. By
the beginning of the twentieth century
Mongolia had over 700 monasteries and
100,000 Lamas. Taxation by the
princes and the demands of the Lamas
were heavy burdens for the impoverish¬
ed nomad families,.
Very few Mongolians chose to be
come farmers , because to do so
would have made them serfs to
one of the feudal princes. So the
majority preferred to wander over
the vast steppes with their families,
Yurtas and herds, somehow surviving
under the crushing burden of taxation.
Only in fairly recent times have
farms existed or has animal husbandry
in the modern sense been practised
in Mongolia. The revolution of 1921
deposed the princes and Lamas and
opened up the land to the people.
Since then, freed of excessive taxation,
the Arat has been able to settle the
land.
This has brought a striking transfor¬
mation. From a nation with practically
no farmers and complete dependence
on imports of grain in 1921, Mongolia
today is self-sufficient in food grains
and produces a surplus of wheat.
Much of the credit for this new self-
sufficiency must go to the state farms
and to the cattle raising co-operatives.
More than 60 per cent of Mongolia's
entire manpower is engaged in agricul¬
ture, the main branch of the country's
national economy. Agriculture repre¬
sents about 60 per cent of Mongolia's
Gross National Product and over
80 per cent of its exports. Since
CONTINUED ON PAGE 20
17

STEPPE TO THE
20TH CENTURY
Mongolia's agriculture is being rapidly modernized through state farms and
nearly 300 co-operative associations, and agriculture accounts for 60 per
cent of the nation's manpower. Yet 260,000 persons or one fifth of the total
population is today concentrated in Mongolia's capital, Ulan Bator (above).
The city possesses a large university (4,000 students), colleges and
technical schools, theatre and libraries. Industry, non-existent 50 years ago,
today provides 40 per cent of Mongolia's Gross National Product.
Archery is still one of Mongolia's favourite sports


MONGOLIA (Continued from page 17)
Not the backward country of geography books
agriculture will continue to play a
major economic rôle for many years
to come, attention is being focussed
on the improvement of livestock
through better breeding, the pro¬
vision of modern cattle shelters in
winter and the expansion of fodder
production. To help meet the shortage
of farm workers, the Food and Agricul¬
ture Organization has started training
programmes at three centres (see
below).
The nomadic way of life has been
replaced by large co-operative asso¬
ciations of many families. These co¬
operatives are an unusual combination
of private ownership and communal
effort. Each member can hold in
private ownership a specified number
of animals. In the average co-opera¬
tive private holdings amount to about
18 per cent.
In 1967 there were 281 co-operatives
for animal husbandry, with an average
of 500 families in each. The co-opera¬
tives vary in size, but most are nearly
300,000 hectares (750,000 acres) in
area, and have between 50 and 70
thousand head of livestock. The dev¬
elopment of co-operatives has made
possible increased productivity of the
herds, better breeding practices and
less exposure for the Individual Arat to
the dangers of nomadic life.
State farms, the equivalent of the
stock raising co-operatives, have in¬
creased tremendously in Mongolia. In
1940 there were only 10 state farms;
today they number 31, with an
average size of about 100,000 hectares
(250,000 acres). But because of
mechanization they employ fewer
families. Ploughing, seeding and har¬
vesting are completely mechanized and
hence require fewer workers. Haymak¬
ing, for example, which normally invol¬
ves much hand labour, is 97 per cent
mechanized on Mongolia's state farms.
Because of Mongolia's sparse pop¬
ulation mechanization of agriculture is
an absolute necessity. The scarcity of
people combined with rapid industrial¬
ization has created a problem which is
probably unique in Asia; more people
are needed to keep Mongolia's
economic boom going.
Living conditions on the co-operat¬
ives and state farms are a vast improve¬
ment on those of the former nomad
families. The housing, medical care,
cultural facilities and social life avail¬
able on the co-operatives and the state
farms, are advantages practically un¬
known to the nomad family.
Small wonder that less than 6 per
cent of Mongolia's agricultural produc¬
tion comes from farmers who have not
yet begun to participate in co-opera¬
tives or states farms. Co-operative
work is a long-standing Mongolian trad¬
ition, expressed by the old saying,
"A great many hands are better than
one giant."
While agriculture is the mainstay of
its economy it would be wrong to think
of Mongolia as only an agrarian state.
About 40 per cent of Mongolia's Gross
National Product comes from industry.
Mongolia's rich natural resources and
agricultural raw materials have made
possible extensive mining and the de¬
velopment of manufacturing industries.
Coal Is the most important mining In¬
dustry (2.5 million tons in 1967) and
oil, iron ore, non-ferrous and rare
metals, construction materials and salt
are also mined. Light industry and food
processing are expanding and employ
about 40 per cent of all industrial work¬
ers. Electric power production has

The U.N. and its Specialized Agencies in Mongolia
20
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has
undertaken a series of projects, financed by its Special Fund,
to contribute to economic and social development in the Mon¬
golian People's Republic. Unesco and other U.N. Special¬
ized Agencies are participating in these projects, which include:
TRAINING ENGINEERS Set up and now operating
under the supervision of Unesco experts, a Polytechnic
Institute was inaugurated in 1968 to train engineers for Mon¬
golia's fast-growing industries. Nearly 1,000 students are
enrolled in its six faculties. Under a Unesco fellowship scheme,
students studying abroad will return as teachers to replace
Unesco instructors. Under a broad plan for educational
expansion, the Polytechnic Institute will give greater emphasis
to research programmes.
TRAINING TECHNICIANS In June 1969, the International
Labour Organization inaugurated a four-year training programme
covering teaching techniques, on-the-job training in factories,
electrical technology, woodworking, refrigeration techniques,
fitting and machine shop operations, mine equipment main¬
tenance, well-drilling, geological drilling, and gem-cutting and
polishing.
HYDROLOGICAL AND METEOROLOGICAL SERVICES
World Meteorological Organization experts have advised the
Mongolian Government in the setting up of hydrometeorological
stations, and have selected appropriate sites for new hydro-
logical and agrological stations. A network of radio stations
is being built, and a fellowship programme for study abroad
has been organized.
TOP PRIORITY TO LEATHER INDUSTRY Courses and
opportunities for vocational training in animal husbandry have
been developed by the Food and Agriculture Organization.
Training began this year at three centres, each with its own
programme dealing with different climates and types of animal
husbandry.
Specialists sent by the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization have surveyed Mongolia's leather industry. The
government has now given top priority to a proposal to be
examined by the UNDP Governing Council in January 1970
to create a research centre for leather and the leather goods
industry so as to improve production and quality with a view
to increasing exports.
Other projects under consideration include the establishment
of a national computer centre; development of the livestock
and dairy industry, which accounts for half of Mongolia's
Gross National Product, a pilot project to develop vaccine
against Brucellosis, a cattle disease that seriously threatens
Mongolia's livestock, and the creation of a centre for applied
research and experiments for the food processing industry.

BUDDHA OF THE GREEN
PASTURES. Isolated on a
lonely steppe, this statue of
Buddha recalls the fact
that Lamaism, a form of
Buddhism, was for centuries
the official religion of
Mongolia. About the eighth
century, it spread from
Tibet throughout central
Asia' to the Caucasus,
and less than a century ago,
Mongolia still had
700 monasteries and
100,000 Lamas.
«
undergone rapid development and one-
half of the power generated Is used
by industry and transport.
Just as the co-operatives and state
farms have transformed the lives of
people in the countryside, so indus¬
trialization has changed the life of the
city dweller. Ulan Bator, the capital
(260,000 peopleone fifth of Mongo¬
lia's population), began its industrializa¬
tion process in 1934 with Soviet aid.
(Indeed, much of Mongolia's industrial
equipment thus far has come from
technical aid supplied by the U.S.S.R.)
Since then the city's industrial com¬
plex has grown to include a shoe fac¬
tory, processing plants for food and
hides, a prefabricated building mater¬
ials factory and other industries. In
spite of Mongolia's high percentage of
urban growth (42 per cent of its popu¬
lation live in towns and cities), the
shortage of workers has called for a
high degree of mechanization, and the
use of automation is now being studied.
Ulan Bator's hide processing plant, for
example, is over 70 per cent mechan¬
ized and hand work has been kept to
an absolute minimum.
Ulan Bator, with its impressive mod¬
ern buildings, hotels, theatres, mu¬
seums and its industrial complex, now
has a fast-growing rival in the city of
Darkhan, located 250 kilometres to the
north.
Darkhan is a modern city whose
industrial development will eventually
equal that of Ulan Bator, and whose
present population of 25,000 will rise to
near 200,000. Detailed plans showing
how Darkhan will develop are already
displayed in the Mayor's office.
At the current rate of expansion
Darkhan should reach its full growth
within the next two decades. Thanks
to farsighted planning and imaginative
architectural designs, Darkhan will be¬
come one of Asia's most modern cities.
In the middle of the city an imposing
cultural centre will be built, housing a
theatre and sports facilities. Darkhan
will be well provided with commercial
and administrative buildings and shops,
and around this nucleus, blocks of
apartments, with ample green spaces,
will form the residential areas of
greater Darkhan.
Although Darkhan is still In its in¬
fancy (it was pastureland six years
ago), it already boasts an impressive
industrial complex. Located in its
industrial sector, well separated from
the residential areas, are brick making
and cement works, a prefabricated
building materials factory, a grain elev¬
ator and the largest heating and
power plant In Mongolia. Under con¬
struction is a large hide processing
plant. Like Ulan Bator, Darkhan sees
no limit to its development.
To the visitor from abroad, and most
are misinformed about Mongolia, it
comes as a surprise to see the level of
industrial development at Ulan Bator
and Darkhan, and the degree of me¬
chanization on the state farms and co¬
operatives. Nor does the visitor expect
to find "creaseless" shirts in the shops
of Ulan Bator and Darkhan, to be able
to attend a concert, go to a circus or
listen of jazz. He is prepared for none
of this by what he has read in geo¬
graphy books.
Mongolia is* moving into the modern
age at a rapid pace. Schools filled
with students and the Govern¬
ment's readiness to provide a good
education are positive guarantees for
the future. Mongolia has one univer¬
sity and five colleges, a new polytech¬
nic institute (see p. 20), 19 technical
schools and nearly 500 secondary
schools. It has a school and college
enrolment of 207,000; 9,500 students
attend the university and colleges. In
addition to its Academy of Sciences,
Mongolia has research institutes, labor¬
atories and many public libraries.
At the University of Mongolia, which
has over 4,000 students, on seeing
37 geology graduates receive their
diplomas, one Is stirred by the know¬
ledge that they have a vast and un¬
tapped virgin territory in which to prac¬
tise their new skills and knowledge.
CONTINUED ON PAGE 32
21

32
MONGOLIA (Continued from page 21)
Mongolia today is largely a geological
"terra incognita", but if the determina¬
tion of these young men is any Indica¬
tion, it will not be one much longer.
Near Ulan Bator is the Nalaikha
training centre where future technicians
are learning skills that will help make
Mongolia an Industrial country. Here,
young people apply themselves to their
tasks with fervour and enthusiasm,
conscious that they stand on the
threshold of great changes. Just as
Darkhan, symbol of this new frontier
of development, was raised where
nothing stood before, so the students
at Nalaikha are building on virgin soil,
acquiring skills which no one before
them in Mongolia has ever learned.
Each stage of development has Its
own reward. Mongolia's present satis¬
faction comes from making something
new creating a city on the desert¬
ed steppe, as at Darkhan, or discov¬
ering the mineral resources that lie
beneath the soil.
No description of Mongolia would
be complete without some mention of
its striking beauty and its stillness
and tranquillity qualities that are be¬
coming rare In our modern world.
From the vast reaches of the Gobi
desert, to the gentle hills and jagged
mountains of the north, Mongolia is a
land of stillness and beauty. On the
road from Ulan Bator to Darkhan the
fields abound with wild iris as blue as
the Mongolian sky. The odour of new
grass warmed by the spring sun is
like a rare perfume.
Hills and mountains reach as far as
the eye can see, with each succeeding
wave in this great land ocean a differ¬
ent colour. The near hills are freshly
green, the next are tinged with yellow,
and the farthest ones, blue-grey, finally
merge into the delicate purple hue of
the almost invisible mountains. In a
matter of days one becomes detached
from the cares of life and feels a sense
of space and freedom.
All terms of reference about Asia
have to be discarded when consider¬
ing Mongolia. Mongolia is not the
backward country of our childhood
geography books nor is it a teeming
Asian country with the "golden hordes"
so often described by the historian.
It ¡s a vast "frontier land", a modern
nation with enormous potential for
expansion thanks to its abundant natur¬
al resources. And the Mongolian
people, its most valuable resource, are
eager to accept the challenge.
G3 IP
lb M
