THE WEAVING OF AN
ENGINEERING MASTERPIECE
-A SPIDER'S ORB WEB
A step-by-step analysis by a structural engineer
of the extraordinary way a spider builds its web
by Bert E. Dugdale Text copyright © Reproduction prohibited
E,_,ARLY one morning in
August of 1942, at Fayson Lakes, New
Jersey, an opportunity came to me
that I had watched for, but missed,
BERT E. DUGDALE is a retired Ameri¬
can structural engineer. His interest in
spiders began as a child. Later, in his
professional life he was struck by the
similarities between the problems faced
by a spider building a web and those
that confront construction engineers. This
led him to undertake the painstaking
observation of the actual weaving of a
web. His article originally appeared in
"Natural History", the journal of the
American Museum of Natural History,
New York, in March 1969.
for many years. A spider had just
completed placing the structural sup¬
porting lines for a web. Realizing that
this was my opportunity to study the
step-by-step construction of a spider
web, I hurriedly assembled my draw¬
ing board and paper, my pencils, and
a six-foot rule, so that I could record
as carefully as possible the steps to
completion. My chair was placed so
that I was about an arm's length from
the weaver as I watched it.
As the spider added new elements
to the web, I added corresponding
new lines to my sketch, along with
noting the order in which the lines
were being made. The spider kept
me busy indeed, and I had little time
to ponder the engineering significance
of what it was doing. After both of
us were through with our work, we
each went about our own affairs. The
sketch eventually ended up in my
filing cabinet at home.
Twenty-three years later, in the
course of shifting papers, I found it
again, and it fascinated me. I began
plotting the stages of the spider's
work on different sheets of paper,
and only then, as step-by-step I traced
what it had been doing, did I begin
to realize the full significance of the
pattern it had followed a pattern
corresponding to a detailed blueprint
that left little to chance.
Drawing below left shows where
- CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
FOUR STAGES
IN THE WEAVING
OF A WEB
Nature's most expert
spinners and weavers,
spiders spread their
silken nets where they
are most likely to
ensnare flying insects
and other prey. On
these pages, an engineer
describes the methodical
four-stage workplan
followed by a spider as
it wove a web in his
garden, noting each
operation step by step.
Sketch on right shows
the garden site where
spider anchored its web
to a log cabin, a hazel
bush and a rock plant.
Drawings © by
the author

SECOND STAGE
ENGINEERING MASTERPIECE (Continued)
An innate sense of geometrical precision
36
the spider had worked, alongside my
family's log cabin, one of several
inhabited by nature-loving vacationers
in summer. About two metres (6 ft.)
from the corner of the cabin was a
rocky knoll, with a small bush sprout¬
ing out of a crevice in the rock. A
branch of a larger plant, a hazel bush,
reached over the knoll toward the
cabin. Between the cabin and the
knoll grew a small patch of wild irises,
daisies, asters, and other wild wood¬
land flowers in their season.
It is probable that the protection
provided by the overhanging eaves of
the cabin, the presence of the protrud¬
ing corner logs, the pathway between
the cabin and the wild flower bed,
and the stone steps leading up to the
rocky knoll all combined to produce
an ideal location for an orb-weaving
spider to set up housekeeping.
Many times, over a span of several
years, I had seen orb webs suspended
almost vertically in this exact location,
and I had watched numerous spiders
of several species carrying on various
stages of web construction there
indeed, I had often walked into these
webs while fetching firewood.
It is also probable that on that morn¬
ing the favourable air currents around
the cabin, and the prospect that insects
attracted by the flowers would fly
head-on into the hanging web, were
bonus inducements that caused one
Micrathena gracilis, an orb-weaving
spider, to start spinning its silken lines.
Of a species reported to be widely.
distributed in North America, it was
grayish in colour, about 6 mm. (1/4 in.)
in length, and its abdomen was
armed with distinctive spines as well
as the more conventional pairs of
appendages called spinnerets. It is
through these organs that spiders
excrete threads of silky material.
The entire process took about two
and one-half hours and consisted of
four stages, which can be described
as follows:
First Stage: Placing structural sup¬
porting lines to provide a triangular-
shaped framework for the web, which
would itself be roughly 15 cm. (6 in.)
in diameter (drawing I shows the
scene when first observed, and the
establishment of the web centre).
Second Stage: Completing a system
of radial lines to connect the web
centre with the surrounding framework
(drawings 2 to 4).
Third Stage: Building a temporary
scaffolding spiral, extending from the
web centre to the outer frame (draw¬
ing 5).
Fourth Stage: Installing the final
viscid spiral webbing and removal of
the scaffolding (drawing 6).
STAGE ONE: When I first observed
the web, it already had the three main
supporting lines, with crosslines C-D
and E-F in place (drawing 1), thus com¬
pleting the polygonal, outer web fram¬
ing, BCDEFA (except for a crossline
between A and B, which was not
placed until later),.
The spider had also reinforced each
main structural line by traversing it
from time to time, adding a new strand
on each passage. These strands fann¬
ed out at the anchorage points to
provide multiple attachments (a com¬
mon human practice when anchoring
the cables of a large suspension
bridge).
The spider now proceeded to estab¬
lish the web centre (drawing 1). First,
it attached a free-running line at point
1 on AF; then, moving through point
F down to ED, it attached the other
end at point 2. A quick movement
of the spider's spinnerets fastened
the line sufficiently well.
Now it moved up this line and,
approximately midway between 1 and
2, attached one end of another line.
Again spinning out a line as it went,
the spider carried it down to 2 and
then along DC to line CB, where the
other end was attached at point 3.
This time the line was pulled taut
before it was attached. It was this
pull that brought radial lines 1, 2 and
3 to the positions shown on drawing 1.
The conjunction of these first three
radiais determined the web centre,
which was then stabilized by the plac¬
ing of radiais 4, 5 and 6.
The1 web frame, with the initial
radiais 1 through 6, was not in a com¬
pletely vertical plane; it was inclined
about 15 degrees off vertical, with the
upper part leaning away from me.
I was not sure on which side the

THIRD STAGE FOURTH STAGE
Spider has constructed a spiral
scaffolding, laid anticlockwise from
the centre, which will be removed in
stage 4. Lines marked "X" are partial
radiais added to facilitate scaffold
construction. When the spider reached
the outer end of radial 14, it reversed
direction and made a full circuit to
complete the scaffold spiral at radial 1 1 .
Scaffold completed, the weaver now
installs the sticky spiral web that will
serve to catch prey. The web, this time
laid clockwise starting from the
outside, has an average diameter of
17 cm. (six and a half inches). Spider
then cuts a hole at centre of web,
giving itself access to either side. It
then waits for vibrations, the tell-tale
sign that a victim has been trapped.
spider would operate, but inasmuch as
viewing was most convenient with my
back to the sun, all my observations
and sketches of the web were made
with the spider working from the other
side. This was fortunate. As the
weaving proceeded, my position
afforded close-ups of the weaver's
use of abdomen, legs, mandibles, and
spinnerets.
Having now established a web
centre the spider proceeded to the
second stage of construction.
STAGE TWO (drawings 2 to 4): A
complete system of radial lines joining
the centre point to the several enclos¬
ing framework lines was now put
into place.
The method of installing the addi¬
tional radiais was like that for the
initial radiais, except that each new
radial was first attached to the centre
and then carried to a selected location
on the enclosing frame. The spider
was adept at holding a hind leg high
and keeping the freerunning line from
becoming entangled with existing lines.
The fact that the spider was working
on the underside of the off-vertical
web many have helped, as gravity
would tend to draw its body and the
free line away from the web plane.
If the reader will run his eyes over
the radiais in their numerical sequence,
starting with the three initial lines, he
must be impressed by the fact that
never was a new radial placed adja¬
cent to one just laid, but always at
a distance from it, so as to continually
equalize the tensions on the system
and thereby maintain the location of
the web centre. Otherwise, because
of the elasticity of the fibres, the
centre would have constantly shifted
to new points, and the polygonal form
of the framework would have assumed
ever changing shapes and distortions.
Drawings 1 to 3 show the structural
frame as straight lines. This was not
actually the case. As each new radial
was attached to a frame line, the
tension placed upon that line caused,
it to deflect to a more curved line.
For convenience in field sketching,
I kept the straight-line form for the
frame, until all the radiais were placed.
When radiais 20 and 21 were plac¬
ed, there was as yet no cross member
from A to B. The spider, after plac¬
ing 21, went back down it without
hesitancy, up 20 to A, then returned
the same way with a running line that
became crossline AB and was attach¬
ed to radial 6 at their intersection
point. The full polygonal frame,
ABCDEF, was now complete, and
other radiais could be attached to AB.
It is of interest to note that during
this selective method of locating the
radiais, in only one instance was a
new one anchored too near an existing
radial, and that was 22, adjacent to
radial 2. In a few cases there was
too much space between radiais. In
each case the spider later filled the
gaps with partial radiais.
That an apparently deliberate method
was used by the spider to maintain
the approximate web shape estab¬
lished by the first six radiais is sug¬
gested when the next eight radiais
are studied (drawing 2).
Lines 8, 10, and 13 are well dispers¬
ed between points A and F, and radiais
7, 11, and 14 are similarly spaced
between points B and C. Further
evidence of deliberate planning at this
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
37

A SPIDER THAT
SIGNS ITS NAME
The Argiope, a tiny spider (right) found widely
in Europe, is easy to spot because of its
bright yellow abdomen crossed with black
stripes. It has also the unique characteristic
of signing its name to its web with a zig-zag
band of silk fixed between two radial lines.
NEW SKINS FOR OLD
This greatly enlarged photo of a spider's leg in the process
of moulting (below) recalls the delicate brush strokes of a
classical Chinese ink drawing. Old claws being shed with
the skin (top of photo) are being replaced by new ones. Spiders
shed their outer skin several times while growing.
ENGINEERING MASTERPIECE (Continued)
Ready for occupancy
stage is seen in the placing of num¬
bers 15 through 21.
Again, in drawing 3, one sees that
tensions on the centre of the web
remain balanced by the spider through
its choice of radial locations for lines
22 through 33. With so many radiais
now in place, further care in spacing
would not have been necessary, yet
the weaver continued its careful selec¬
tion of locations as radiais 34 through
44 (drawing 4) were added.
STAGE THREE: With all full-length
radiais in place, the weaver proceeded
with the next item of construction, the
scaffolding, which would be removed
after serving its purpose. It consisted
of a spiral starting from the centre and
continuing to the outer perimeter of
the web (drawing 5).
The first seven circuits of the spiral
were spaced very closely, about .8 mm.
to 2.4 mm. (1/32" to 3/32") apart. The
next four or five were spaced 6.3 mm.
to 8 mm. (1/4" to 5/16") apart, and
9.5 mm. (3/8") apart. To maintain an
even spacing the spider kept a foot
on the preceding circuit as it hurried
around the web.
Several interesting examples of
what appeared to be decision making
occurred during this stage. At a few
places where radiais were too far
apart and the spider would have to
stretch to reach the next one, it dis¬
continued the spiral and installed a

COUTURIÈRE
FROM
SINGAPORE
Using one of its claws
as a needle, this
Singapore Spider
(right) stitches together
leaves for its nest.
A "chameleon" of the
spider world, it can
change colour according
to its surroundings.
Inconspicuous on a leaf,
it patiently waits for its
unsuspecting prey.
after removal of scaffolding
partial radial long enough to reach the
outer frame, and held in place by
existing scaffolding. The partial radiais
are marked X on drawing 5.
Again, when the spider had run the
scaffold line to the outer end of radial
14 on what could have been the last
lap, it immediately reversed direction,
and made a full circuit, terminating the
scaffold line where radial 11 joined
the outer frame.
It is at this point that the spider
began the final stage of construction
spinning the viscid, or sticky, webb¬
ing, while simultaneously removing
the scaffolding. The purpose of the
stickiness, of course, is to trap prey
for the spider. The viscid filaments
are so effective that insects, once
enmeshed, seldom escape. The
spider, which itself may be bothered
by the adhesive, exhibits much dex¬
terity in running about the web without
getting into trouble.
When constructing the web, it can
exude either dry or' viscid fibre. The
dry is used for all purposes except
catching victims. In the first three
stages of construction, every filament
was of the dry, non-sticky type. I
know this because I repeatedly tested
the lines for adhesiveness.
However, the filaments may vary in
makeup. The spinnerets of the spider
can be controlled to produce either
round, dry lines, each comprising a
bundle of several strands held together
as a unit, or a flatter, ribbonlike line.
Sometimes the dry line may have a
succession of sticky beads. But this
is a special case. Observers have
found that there is a viscid layer on
such a filament when it is emitted, but
the layer then forms a succession of
beads.
STAGE FOUR: We have seen that
the spider terminated the scaffold spiral
at radial 11, after having reversed
direction at radial 14 the previous time
around. Whether planned or not, this
reversal served a useful purpose, for
without a second's hesitancy the
weaver proceeded to spin the viscid
spiral, this time starting from the
outside, instead of from the centre
(drawing 6).
During this final phase of construc¬
tion, the spider had better footing than
previously; it could step on the dry
scaffolding lines as well as the radiais.
This does not mean that the viscid
spiral conforms exactly to the contour
of the scaffolding. Several circuits
of the viscid line were made for each
circuit of the scaffold.
As the viscid fibres were indistin¬
guishable from the scaffold fibres by
sight, it was difficult, while making
drawing 6, to discern the scaffold
lines in areas where they were cross¬
ed or overlapped by viscid lines. Only
later, in the final moments of the
spinning, did it become clear that the
scaffold lines were gone.
When the spinning was completed
a ball of white material was visible at
the centre of the web. This material
the spider consumed. Theodore Sav¬
ory, in his The Biology of Spiders,
informs us that as the viscid fibre
approaches the next turn of scaffold¬
ing, that turn is rolled up by the spider;
thus accounting for the accumulated
ball at the finish.
Different1 species of spiders have
characteristic patterns for their web
centres. Micrathena gracilis, after
consuming its discarded scaffolding,
actually cut out the centre area of the
web to provide an opening through
which it could come out on either side
of the web. The diameter of this
opening was such that the spider's
eight legs spanned the gap without
difficulty.
After two and a half hours of steady
work, all was completed; the house
was ready for occupancy. The spider
then took up its position over the
centre opening (about one-half inch;
1.27 cm. in diameter) with legs spread
out upon the radiais. It was now ready
to detect any vibrations that would
indicate that a victim was trapped, and
would also give its location.
The term "engineering masterpiece"
in the title of this article is more
applicable than one might suppose.
The use of three main structural sup¬
porting lines is an engineering tech¬
nique based on the geometrical prop¬
osition that it takes three points to
CONTINUED ON PAGE 41
39

SPIDER'S DOMAIN
IN A
DIVING BELL
Photos © Holmè9-Lebel
Numerous spiders are found on the
surfaces of ponds and quiet streams,
but the only one that lives all its
life under water is the European
water spider (Argyoneta aquatica).
This ingenious spider builds a rough
framework for its bell-shaped under¬
water home by attaching a few
threads to the stems of water plants.
Then, rising upwards, it collects air
on its abdomen and rear legs by
projecting them through the surface
of the water (above right). Carrying
this air bubble to Its building site,
it places it where the silken cables
will hold ¡t prisoner. The spider
repeats the operation until it has
collected about one cubic centimetre
of air (above left), and then com¬
pletes the nest by weaving a silken
covering around the bubble. To this
home it brings water bugs and other
prey (photo left) and here too it
lays its eggs and raises a family.
Baby water spiders (photo right)
are completely transparent before
they moult for the first time.

ENGINEERING MASTERPIECE (Continued from page 39)
determine, or stabilize, a plane. Also,
the triangle is the basic form used in
construction to secure stability and
equilibrium.
The division of the web-weaving
process into four separate steps
closely reflects similar procedures in
the construction of a building:
Laying the foundation.
Placing the structural framework.
Building the scaffolding for en¬
closing the structure.
Preparing the place for occu¬
pancy, and removing the scaffolding.
After construction, the spider will
continue to have engineering prob¬
lems, but now under the heading of
"Repairs and Maintenance".
It was hard not to think in human
terms as well as strictly engineering
terms when contemplating the events
at this place. These questions occur¬
red to me:
Why was it that so many webs
had been constructed at this same
location, the various spiders taking
advantage of the same existing cabin
logs, tree branches, protruding rocks,
etc., to build above the little wild
garden? Are spiders able to stand off
far enough and in some way survey
all the attributes of a possible web
site?
Having selected a site, can the
spider then determine which of several
logs, branches, etc., would be most
suitable for anchorages?
Can a spider, having established
a line from the end of a certain log
to a branch, say six feet distant, then
use some decision-making process
that eliminates several alternate pos¬
sibilities in favour of centering the
web directly above the pathway, where
insect traffic will be heaviest?
These and many other questions are
unanswered, as far as I have been
able to discover. I myself have no
answers but it is my belief, based on
many years of observation, that scores
of spiders, of various species, have
built webs at this site in a manner
that suggests that the answer to these
questions could be "yes".
At least, I can say that the same
structural problems had been faced by
innumerable builders, and all of them
had been solved in the same compe¬
tent manner.
SPINNING LESSONS FOR THE SCIENTIST
The web building spider can be a unique laboratory animal that may help
scientists to investigate many aspects of physiological, behavioral and psychological
research, say three scientists who have made extensive studies of spiders at work
on their webs. Their conclusions are published in a short and easy-to-read little
book, "A Spider's Web, Problems of Regulatory Biology" (1).
Their study reveals many interesting and little-known facets of the spider's habits
and working methods. Spiders produce with amazing speed large amounts of silk
which they daily spin into a web of specific design. The authors discuss the anatomy,
physiology and histology of the silk glands, as well as the composition of the silk
itself.
The web is of utmost importance in the life of the spider, and its design has
presumably evolved through some selective process. The authors point out that
the spider nervous system is programmed to achieve construction of a web through
the spreading of silk. The specific nature of the web enables it to be characterized,
and thus computational methods for describing it in mathematical or geometrical
terms can be drawn up.
The authors suggest that the detailed geometric patterns of webs are important
for proper mating by providing a clear and unambiguous signal for an approaching
male. They also note that spiders are able to catch and process flies on strange
webs as efficiently as on their own.
The scientists studied the many differences that occur in web patterns resulting
from natural processes such as aging, growth and weight changes in spiders, as
well as others induced by "manipulating" spiders through the use of drugs and by
other means, and they describe the effects of drugs on web weaving behaviour.
Since spiders build webs frequently, it is possible to have a spider in "normal"
condition construct a web, then make some alteration to the spider and compare
the resulting web with the normal or standard from the same animal.
(1) By P.N. Witt, CF. Reed and D.B. Peakall. Springer-Verlag, Berlin; Heidelberg,
New York, 1968, 107 pp.

