THE
HERITAGE
OF
NON-VIOLENCE
by René Habachi
SUNCE the death of
Gandhi violence has spread across
the world In so many different forms
that we often fail to recognize them
as such. The violence of mind-
conditioning as well as economic
violence; the subtle pressures exer¬
cised by broadcasting, press and the
flood of advertising along with the
spread of open violence with resort
to arms and weapons; the agitation
brought about by the consumer society
of rich countries or the misery of the
poor nations. These are all facets of
our present-day world which led the
Brazilian advocate of non-violence,
Don Helder Cámara, to say, "There are
semblances of order and semblances
of peace which conceal flagrant in¬
justice and threats to peace."
And then, suddenly, a shudder of
doubt sweeps over us: are we not
all living in a state of violence? Are
we not exerting it on others? Are we
not all accomplices in some deep-
rooted violence that stealthily Invades
the fabric of life, lying hidden until the
moment when it suddenly erupts to
spread death and disaster?
To this general onset of violence,
RENE HABACHI of the Lebanon is a member
of Unesco's Division of Philosophy and was
formerly professor of philosophy at the
Lebanese, French and American Universities
in Beirut. He is the author of various works
on philosophy including one on the Middle
East entitled 'Orient, quel est ton Occident?"
(Orient, what is your Occident!) 1969; 'La
Colonne Brisée de Baalbek" (The Broken
Column of Baalbek) 1968; "Une Philosophie
pour Notre Temps" (A Philosophy for our
Time) 1962; and 'Pour une Pensée Méditer¬
ranéenne" (A Revival of Mediterranean '
Thought) 4 volumes, 1956-60.
Gandhi, paradoxically, would have
responded by non-violence. But not
by weak compliance or resigned paci¬
fism. Non-violence is at the extreme
pole of violence; it is a form of vio¬
lence inverted. It implies the same
force as violence but something addi¬
tional to transform it into moral force
so as to counteract violence:
"I seek entirely to blunt the
edge of the tyrant's sword, not
by putting up against it a sharper-
edged weapon, but by disappoint¬
ing his expectation that I would
be offering physical resistance."
(Young India, Oct. 8, 1925).
Non-violence Is thus the spirit and
freedom's last recourse after which
only brute force is possible with final
victory going to the most ruthless.
Gandhi speaks to a world which is
still human, which the spirit has not
yet deserted, because "faith in man¬
kind" is his ultimate message.
For his faith in mankind he paid
with his life. Yet is not this non¬
violence in the face of death, this
triumph of free decision which is inse¬
parable from non-violence, itself proof
that faith in mankind is justified? When
those whose lives are a spiritual
example are cut down by blind vio¬
lence, they kindle a flame that grows
Into a reservoir of light for the sombre
hours when man begins to lose faith
in himself.
Non-violence has so little in com¬
mon with a strategy of withdrawal
that its first act is to test the strength
of the adversary. Of what use,
Gandhi asks, is the non-violence of
the helpless? "Forgiveness," he wrote
in -1920, "is the adornment of the
soldier but not of the coward . . .
where there is only a choice between
cowardice and violence, I would advise
violence." (Hind Swaraj, August //,
1920). And "I would risk violence a
thousand times rather than the emas¬
culation of a whole race." [Hind Swa¬
raj, August 4, 1920). And then again:
"I cultivate the courage to die
without killing, but for the man
who does not have this courage,
I would wish him to cultivate the
art of killing and being killed,
rather than flee shamefully from
danger." (Hind Swaraj, Oct. 2,
1920).
So he who would practise non¬
violence must first be capable of
measuring the strength of violence,
and thus equipped must be ready des¬
pite everything to run the full gauntlet
of non-violence, even if it kills him.
Is not the serene strength of unarmed
force the height of courage?
When non-violence succeeds, what,
then, is the secret of its power? It Is
this: non-violence refuses to lump
together the adversary and the force
he uses or the Injustices he commits.
It respects even the flicker of under¬
standing and freedom that still remains
within the adversary unshackled by
violence. Non-violence thus turns the
adversary's attention to his better self,
to his responsibilities, to the values
that are not Irretrievably lost.
In other words, non-violence is a
road to lost truth which previous acts
of violence had masked or muzzled
under the cloak of faits accomplis or
simulations of peace. 1 Q
Gandhi's life was a search for truth
which was dearer to him than all else.
Truth was his Religion: "Truth is God,"
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

he writes (Young India, Dec. 31, 1931).
For him, only non-violence, personified
as a single-minded militant who has
killed the spirit of violence within him,
is capable of retrieving truth if it is
lost to sight, or of revealing truth if it
is still to be discovered.
This is the high ambition inspiring
"Satyagraha", literally: the grasp of
truth. The French orientalist Louis
Massignon, who knew Gandhi per¬
sonally and became one of his sup¬
porters, translated the definition in
concrete terms as a "civil campaign
for truth". Its only weapon is "Ahimsa",
refusal to injure, respect for others.
Thus the aim of the Satyagrahi is
truth; his method, non-injury, the posi¬
tive aspect of which is love and com¬
passion. The end and the means are
so closely interwoven that Satyagraha
cannot be cunningly turned to other
purposes as a mere strategic device
or tactical manoeuvre.
The Satyagrahi must be sincere, and
must breathe the air of non-violence
and compassion. He must therefore
submit to a strict discipline and a long
apprenticeship. This is "Bramashar-
ya" the discipline of all the senses,
asceticism.
The inclination to violence must be
destroyed by fasting, chastity, silence
(Gandhi imposed total silence on
himself every Monday), wearing the
simplest clothing (hence the adoption
of the loin-cloth, and the. "spinning-
wheel campaign" to spin the cotton for
this garment), and meditation in the
"Ashram"v the places of retreat which
Gandhi founded in South Africa and
India.
Thus, before the militant engages
in an external campaign of non-vio
lence, his efforts are turned inwards
upon himself. How can truth be re¬
quired of others, if it is not first
demanded of oneself? Unclean hands
cannot rekindle the sources of light.
By these exacting, even unforeseeable
demands the Mahatma (or Great Soul)
awakened a whole nation to the ways
of the spirit and at the same time to
political freedom.
Can Gandhi's message hope to find
a response in our present world torn
as it is with violence of every kind?
Some people have sought to deny
Gandhi's message any current validity
on grounds that what historical cir¬
cumstances made possible yesterday
is no longer applicable today. Bri¬
tish liberalism and "fair play" enabled
Gandhi to enter politics because of
his reputation as a mystic. The mora¬
lity of a nation traditionally protestant

could not turn a deaf ear to Gandhi's
appeal to the conscience of his own
people as well as to that of the
servants of the Empire. And so this
sage, armed with his English university
degrees and wearing the simplest gar¬
ments, soon found himself introduced
into Buckingham Palace. But this
situation has gone forever.
It has also been pointed out that
when India was part of the closely knit
British Empire, the impact of non-vio¬
lence through economic and political
non-co-operation could be extremely
effective, whereas in the relatively open
world trading pattern of today such
passive resistance would not get very
far. The loss of one economic market
could be made good elsewhere, while
the principle of the full sovereignty of
the modern State would prevent any
foreign interference in internal affairs.
Resistance could thus be crushed by
violent means, as happens only too
often. Non-violence therefore, these
advocates say, would never have a
chance.
But this reasoning tells only half
the story. It overlooks the fact that
the disappearance of the closely-knit
imperial system may turn out to be an
advantage instead of a handicap for
non-violence. Today, when news is
broadcast about trouble in one country
it often creates a mass movement of
sympathy and solidarity in other lands,
and national public opinion, quickly
transformed into international and even
world opinion, soon makes the force of
its protest felt on perpetrators of in¬
justice (not always, unfortunately, and
the result can take an opposite turn
with a clamp down more severe than
before). Nevertheless, we can all
recall examples which prove that
resistance in one area has a good
chance of arousing mass support
abroad and thereby modify the abuses
of power either directly or indirectly.
Since any national event can now
have world-wide repercussions, non¬
violence, too, has taken on interna¬
tional importance, particularly within the
framework of the United Nations. The
atom bomb of violence can be dis¬
armed only by the ultimate weapon of
peace. It is only on the highest levels
of the human conscience that the
spirit of aggression can be trans¬
formed into a spirit of conciliation.
Pacifism at any price and moralism
at any cost being Utopian or even dan¬
gerous, Gandhi that "practical idea¬
list," as he described himself would
not have disclaimed the principle of
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
IS

equilibrium so magnificently expressed
by Pascal:
"Justice without might is help¬
less; might without justice is
tyrannical. We must then combine
justice and might, and for this
end make what is just strong, or
what is strong just."
What this means is that the interna¬
tional community must have an inter¬
national force worthy of the justice
it wishes to defend. But this is only
the first step towards international
Satyagraha, and only seeks to keep
violence in check rather than to elim¬
inate it. Hence we must go further
still.
General disarmament would be a
practical demonstration of non-viol¬
ence. By rejecting the possibility of
an aggressive gesture, it would short-
circuit any lurking thoughts of armed
intervention, and compel the nations
to discuss their differences. Here, the
acceleration of nuclear disarmament
would no doubt be a first step in the
right direction. But does the elimin¬
ation of the means of violence do
away with the fundamental causes of
violence? So we must go further still.
Adopting Pope Paul Vl's maxim,
"Development is the new name for
peace," could not science and tech¬
nology be pressed into service to re
duce the existing inequalities, instead
of allowing the gulf to widen and
condemning half the world to helpless
resignation? What kind of democracy
is possible in national or international
affairs with power on one side facing
misery on the other? Power is a temp¬
tation to violence, and misery a temp¬
tation to acts of desperation.
The offensive in the "new name of
peace" must now take the initiative,
and face the problem of humanity in
distress squarely and frankly. The
best brainpower of the developed
nations should be put to work drafting
appropriate plans for the future deve¬
lopment decade. We should not wait
for the shadow of world disaster to
loom over us before acting. We would
thus be forced to adopt the method of
non-violence, in order to head off the
explosion which is building up in the
"Third World" as a result of its growing
misery and poverty. And since helping
others always brings its own rewards,
the big consuming societies would
thus be delivered of the weight which
chains them to their wealth. Over-
consumption is as alienating and
dehumanizing as undernourishment
itself.
This effort which has already begun
in the United Nations (but too timidly
and often frustrated by Internal contra
dictions) would be given a new impetus
if undertaken in the name of non¬
violence. Here we are not dealing
only with the Declaration of Human
Rights or the defence of these Rights
which is severely hampered by the
jealous sovereignty of States. It would
be an "international experiment in
truth," in the Gandhian sense; a world
movement of fellowship, that is,
"Ahimsa".
Can we expect the Member States
of the United Nations to be suddenly
imbued with this spirit of non-violence?
Will the voice of Gandhi be heard
without other voices around the world
joining his? That is why it is so vital
that we have disciples of non-violence
who, while fulfilling their civic duties,
resist violence, oppose injustice and
call upon all men to transform their
own inner disarmament into an invin¬
cible shield.
There is Martin Luther King whose
life tragically recalls that of Gandhi.
He asked his followers to subscribe
to a "Commitment Blank," with its ten
commandments echoing the principles
of Ahimsa and Brahmasharya:
"2. Remember always that the
non-violent movement . . .
seeks justice and reconcilia¬
tion not victory.
5. Sacrifice personal wishes in

m
ÜAL L iiJU
¡à ''%
t ' r
order that all men might be
free.
6. Observe with both friend and
foe the ordinary rules of
courtesy.
9. Strive to be in good spiritual
and bodily health.
10. Follow the directions of the
movement and of the captain
on a demonstration."
Then there is Don Helder Cámara,
the Brazilian priest and leader of the
movement "Action, Justice and Peace"
who, like Martin Luther King, invokes
the Gospels to call for justice by the
principle of constructive resistance.
"Action, Justice and Peace was
not created to disarm the revolt
of the oppressed, but to help to
invest the revolt of us all, the
protest of us all, with a courag¬
eous, positive meaning, a lofty
and constructive meaning.
"Action, Justice and Peace was
not created to be an indifferent
movement, adaptable and adaptive
because we know that God abhors
the half-hearted. It aims to be,
and with the grace of God it will
be, the violence of the pacifist."
And here is Gandhi's direct disciple,
Acharia Vinoba Bhave, whose writings
and work are recorded in "The Revo¬
lution of Non-Violence",- now going
from village to village in India to win
over the rich to his "Land-gift" move¬
ment which calls for a redistribution
of land for the benefit of rural families.
In every village he has been creating
"Peace Brigades" to awaken the peo¬
ple to the need for social co-operation.
"All land, like air and water,
belongs to the Almighty. If the
land is properly distributed,
the present state of dissatisfaction
will be transformed into an age
of goodwill, of brotherly love and
co-operation."
Whether inspired by Christ or
Gandhi (who was himself deeply
influenced' by the Sermon on the
Mount and echoed its words on the
banks of the Ganges), the disciples
of non-violence emphasize the inter¬
dépendance of States and peoples,
and consider their national revolution
part of the movement of universal soli¬
darity. In a speech at Calcutta in
1925, Gandhi declared:
"For my own part, I do not want
the freedom of India if it means
extinction of England or the
disappearance of Englishmen. I
want the freedom of my country
so that other countries may learn
something from my free country,
so that the resources of my
country might be utilized for the
benefit of mankind."
This universal approach is no mere
ideal; it is upheld to be a living
experience, the result of man's Intelli¬
gence, feeling and love:
"My religion has no geographi¬
cal limits. If I have a living faith
in it, it will transcend my love for
India herself. Isolated indepen¬
dence is not the goal of the world
states. It is voluntary interde¬
pendence. There is no limit to
extending our services to our
neighbours across State-made
frontiers. God never made those
frontiers."
If we think of the man of tomorrow
homo planetarius we cannot help
recalling that Gandhi's non-violence
not only sought to break the shackles
that paralyze man but to open new
avenues for his progress:
"There is no limit to extending-
our services to our neighbours
across State-made frontiers. God
never made those frontiers."
Science overshadowed by fear is
a destructive force. Science backed
by non-violence could be creative.
17
