by Pierrette Sartin
Real and pseudo problems
of the working woman
T,_ HE history of the work¬
ing woman is pretty much fami¬
liar to the specialist but not too
well known by the vast general public.
While no attempt will be made here
to trace this history, I should like to
touch on one or two major aspects
of the problem as it affects the working
woman in the modern world.
Paradoxically, while many of the
working woman's real problems are
either ignored or shrugged off by
governments and others concerned
with their status, the pseudo-problems
seem to have aroused most debate
thereby retarding the real solutions.
The history of the working woman
has been a long, drawn-out struggle,
often carried on silently and behind
the scenes, against prejudice, privi¬
lege, vested interests, and force of
habit. Despite all his advances,
scientific and otherwise, 20th century
man has not lost all his cave-man
attitudes and socially speaking he still
has a long way to go.
I believe there has never been a
full, objective analysis made of the
working woman's contribution to the
economic structure of society, but
even in this context it really boils
down to a question of ethics indi¬
vidual and social ethics, the struggle
for equality, for the dignity of the
individual person and respect for
human values as defined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and defended for decades by the U.N.
agencies, and first of all by the ILO,
now celebrating its 50th anniversary.
In our present age of science and
super-rationalism, equal rights for all
persons regardless of sex or race are
still opposed by strong economic
forces and age-old notions of male
privilege. This opposition is not
always openly expressed so that it
is not easy to combat. It hides behind
indirect statements with an ideological
flavour, distorted facts and fictitious
PIERRETTE SARTIN is a French sociologist
teaching at Laval University, Quebec (Cana¬
da). She has written widely on the social
status of women and industrial employment.
Her latest book "La Femme Libérée T has
¡ust appeared (Editions Stock, Pans, 1969).
Among her other works: "La Promotion des
Femmes" (Editions Hachette, Paris. 1962)
and "La Fatigue Industrielle" (Editions
Sadep, Paris, 1960).
evidence which help to fan passions
and perpetuate foggy thinking.
Any serious study of the position
of the working woman in modern
society reveals this picture of pre¬
judice, distorted views, irrational and
illogical attitudes.
The fact is that there is not just one
problem of the working woman but a
whole mosaic of problems, some
technical, others moral, social and
economic. All of them interlock and
cannot be dissociated from the deve¬
lopment of modern society as a whole.
They demonstrate the great disparity
that exists between the extraordinary
advances in science and technology
and the narrow-minded, cautious
conservatism of man's thinking.
The working woman and her place
in society have become a sort of
geometric focal point where contra¬
dictions and half-truths, hasty generali¬
zations and unfounded conclusions are
all concentrated in one jumble.
E,.VEN the expression "work¬
ing woman" is misleading. Women
have always worked from time imme¬
morial, and many city women who stay
at home work at least 54 hours a week
if they have no children and as much
as 77 hours a week if they have three
children (1). This has been corro¬
borated recently by two separate
studies carried out by Alain Girard and
Henri Bastide, both of France.
No social legislation in the world
would tolerate such working hours
imposed by an employer.
Yet because the work is done in
the seclusion of the home, and is
unpaid, it is accepted without argument
and even encouraged, even though
the level of productivity is low and
in certain cases of doubtful usefulness.
The phrase "working woman" should
therefore be understood as meaning
paid work performed outside the home
in our analysis of some of the real
and pseudo problems involved.
What then is the present situation
as regards the working women and
how does it differ from that of pre¬
ceding generations?
(1) Corresponding figures for rural women
are 63 and 82 hours a week respectively, and
as high as 80 and 87 hours for farmers' wives.
In virtually all societies the pattern
has been the same, following a course
from work in agriculture to the
so-called secondary sector of industry,
and from industry to the tertiary sector
of commerce, office work and services.
Industrialization has created a
growing number and variety of jobs
suited to an increasing army of women.
It has also led to a reduction in heavy
manual labour in favour of jobs requir¬
ing skill and dexterity.
More and more jobs, however, are
now opening up to women in the ter¬
tiary sector of commerce and other
services.
This increase in the number of
working women is not limited to
Western countries. In Japan the pro¬
portion of women holding jobs has
risen 100 per cent in 10 years as
compared to only a 40 per cent rise
for men; in Morocco, radical changes
are affecting the mass of the population
and one woman out of eight now holds
a paid job; in Tunisia, a bold
programme launched by President
Bourguiba has opened up professional
education and training to women; in
India, where women have long
campaigned for a change in economic
policy that recognizes their right to
work, the Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira
Gandhi, has come out openly in their
support and taken measures to
guarantee them increased educational
opportunities as a first step in their
liberation.
In Latin America, the big birth rate
plus the often high percentage of
illegitimate children, obliges many
women to look for work. It is to be
hoped that the economic and social
development of this region will go
hand in hand with a real programme
of professional training for Latin
American women.
In certain Asian and African
countries, the position of women has
risen sharply and in recent years they
have even reached the top of the
political ladder in contrast with West¬
ern countries where women neverthe¬
less have long been put on a pedestal.
The improvement of the status of
women, despite the great differences
obtaining in different countries, is thus __
a world-wide phenomenon that cannot j*s
be denied. This trend is bound to *
continue. But for the moment it
affects only a tiny minority of women.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

WORKING WOMAN (Continued)
Cutting off one's No's, to spite one's case
26
In the Moslem countries of Africa and
Asia, women who occupy posts
habitually held by men are the
exception; ingrained tradition still
keeps the great majority in a position
of inferiority or subordination.
So, contrary to the generally held
belief, women have not invaded
the labour market. Although precise
figures are not available for a com¬
parative study it can be said that dep¬
ending on the country and the social
system, women now represent 20 to
30 per cent of the world's total labour
force with peaks of about 40 per cent
in the socialist countries.
Even when one person out of three
happens to be a woman this does not
constitute an "invasion" or a threat
to the stability of the labour market.
But it is enough (or at least should
be) to convince any State to take
practical steps as opposed to mere
lip service to solve the economic and
social problems of those women who
want to be wives and mothers and
at the same time help increase their
family income. Or to put it another
way, who at the same time want to
put their knowledge and skills at the
service of their community.
The biggest change that has taken
place in recent years in the world
picture of the working woman is the
extraordinary increase of married
women and mothers in employment in
all countries and the fact that women
who do not have to do so for financial
reasons are flocking into professional
and other work.
Here, the example of what has been
taking place in Canada is worth special
mention. All over Canada, a formi¬
dable number of women with large
family responsibilities are going back
to school or college, attending courses
and taking degrees in order to prepare
themselves for jobs and professions.
The Canadian Government has encou¬
raged this movement by offering spe¬
cial retraining courses and other adult
education programmes at hours of the
day or evening particularly geared to
a woman's family obligations. This is
an experiment that certainly deserves
attention in other countries where it
could well inspire similar efforts.
The tremendous influx of middle-
class women into professional life has
brought with it a marked change in
attitude to work itself: it has ceased
to be regarded as an inescapable
necessity and has become a self-
chosen activity freely and willingly
accepted. As it gradually shed its
coercive character the stigma formerly
attached to it by years of exploitation
slowly vanished.
Despite this, however, there is still
an aura of guilt attached by the
average man in the street to mothers
of children who decide to take a paid
job. But by the same token the mother
who stays at home now also feels ar¡
element of guilt because the work she
does is no longer fully appreciated.
So we see that one of the first
results of the entry of women into
professional life has been to create
a climate of uneasiness in both groups
which society is doing little to over¬
come. By its wishy-washy attitude it
is even making matters worse.
But the married working woman, less
harried as she is by financial pressures
and better armed because of her edu¬
cation and professional background to
defend herself, has come to under¬
stand the real dimensions of the prob¬
lem. She has furthermore given
ample proof (and this is not the least
of her many achievements) that women
are not intellectually inferior to men,
and that if given half the chance men
have from the start which usually
they aren't women can be as career-
minded as men are and lacking in
none of their skills and ability for
executive and managerial posts.
' HAT also characterizes the
working woman in modern society is
not only that she is paid for her work
but that the work she does is becoming
increasingly independent of her
husband's or father's. For centuries,
a wife was little more than her
husband's unpaid helper performing
all his minor jobs and chores for him.
Even today certain vocational guidance
counsellors still seem to assume that
the wife who can help her husband
in his own work and remains, as it
were, in his shadow, achieves the
best compromise between her desire
to work and the interests of the
household. But fewer and fewer
women are now prepared to accept
such an unrealistic solution.
The subject of unequal pay for men
and women is a whole story in itself
and entire books have been written
about it. The picture that emerges
shows how difficult it is to get reality
to coincide with noble principles.
The ILO has been wrestling with this
problem for years, and it came to the
forefront of debate in Europe when
the European Common Market went
into effect several years ago. In five
out of the six Common Market
countries (Belgium, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Fed. Rep. of Germany
and Italy) wage differences between
men and women have been partially
reduced. But in France, the first of
the Six to try to apply the principle
of equal pay, the gap has actually
widened from 6.8 per cent to over
10 per cent in most sectors of the
nation's economy.
One also finds that the higher one
goes in the echelons of responsibility
the greater the inequalities. French
women's salaries in the middle exe
cutive echelons are 35.7 per cent
lower than men's; and in the U.S. up
to a few years ago, the difference
was as high as 50 to 60 per cent.
While the principle of equal pay for
women is now no longer questioned,
it is by no stretch of the imagination
equally applied. To make matters
worse, women's salaries have fallen
so far behind men's in certain indus¬
tries with a high percentage of female
employees that a realignment is now
virtually out of the question except
by gradual stages.
And yet many employers expect a
woman candidate to hold more degrees
and other qualifications than a man
applying for the same position.
Notwithstanding their qualifications
and their increasingly recognized pro¬
fessional capacities, women are still
being sidetracked into subordinate
posts with little or no chances for
advancement. In Western countries,
the executive echelons in private
industry and commerce are- almost
entirely taken over by men. And this
is equally true of banking, even in the
United States where at least 76 per
cent of the country's monetary assets
are in the hands of women.
In the U.S.S.R. the change in the
position of the working women has
been particularly interesting to follow
for women have been able to take
their place in almost every sector of
the national economy. This has been
due to two chief reasons: on the one
hand, the equalitarian social system
developed in that country; on the
other, the extremely high percentage
of women available for work.
Nevertheless, progress did not come
without a fight, for at one period when
the principle of the equality of both
sexes was too narrowly applied certain
injustices to women followed. As a
result, protective laws were rein¬
troduced as of 1956 exempting women
from physically strenuous jobs and
granting them a number of advantages
including retirement at the age of 55,
a six-hour working day on certain
types of jobs, etc.
More interesting than these protec¬
tive laws, which in the U.S.S.R. as in
every other country have their draw¬
backs, are the recent changes in the
working pattern of the active popula¬
tion. This shows a shift towards the
tertiary sectors of commerce and
services, and in industry, a reduction
in the number of women working in
strenuous, badly paid jobs in favour
of the mechanized industries.
Since 1962, moreover, 54 per cent
of the jobs requiring a secondary or
university education with specialization
in a particular field, are filled by
women. Compared to the negligible
number of women engineers in
Western countries, one engineer in
three in the Soviet Union is a woman.

But whereas in 1962 almost half the
working population of the U.S.S.R.
(48 per cent) was made up of women,
they made up only 12 per cent of
industrial management and 28 per cent
of the top administrative posts.
Even in the U.S.S.R., then, the
advances of women remain limited.
Despite all the principles and
recommendations adopted by countries
all over the world, one fact stands out
as a general rule: as soon as an
occupation depreciates in status the
gates are opened up wide to women.
We must face the fact that women
are merely tolerated in the world of
employment. They slip in through
half-opened doors to fill the jobs
scorned by men either because they
are badly paid, monotonous or
unpleasant. . . or because they are too
difficult to perform.
The magistracy in France is a good
case in point: women were excluded
until. such time as the salaries were
considered too low for men. Medical
doctors, librarians and jurists in the
U.S.S.R. are other instances, these
professions being part of the civil
service were less well paid than pro¬
ductive" jobs in industry.
I could quote many other examples
from many other countries.
We also find that once an industry's
personnel becomes predominantly
feminine working conditions begin to
deteriorate and salaries drop.
Legislation is highly useful, but it
can only put an end to the most crying
abuses; it cannot solve all the prob¬
lems. That is why women have found
it necessary to join forces and form
their own groups within trade unions
and professional organizations.
As for the criticism that working
women are prone to absenteeism and
instability and are likely to break off
their careers for marriage or other
reasons, these allegations are lame
pretexts that do not stand up to
serious investigation. It would be
fairly simple to dispose of them if it
were admitted that women, just as much
as men, have the right and indeed the
duty to work, and if, instead of pro¬
tective measures which perpetuate dis¬
crimination, girls were given educa¬
tional opportunities on a same footing
as boys, conceived in terms of future
careers, not just in terms of marriage.
This of course would require a total
rethinking and revamping of our eco¬
nomy so that it is planned for the indi¬
vidual and not as an end in itself or
for society. It would also require a
new approach in which social invest¬
ment was no longer considered an
Nowadays, women
are doing many
jobs long
considered "for
men only". This
smiling Soviet
mariner, Captain
Anna Shchetinina,
is the first woman
in' the. world
to command a
ship sailing the'
seven seas.
unproductive investment which in fact
it is not.
But in the final analysis, behind all
the barriers and impediments raised
against the working women lurks
man's unavowed and unadmitted fear
of losing his job and the no less vivid
fear of competition.
During the Great Depression of the
1930s, the International Labour Organ¬
ization had already come to grips
with this problem, and an article
written by Marguerite Thibert in 1933
neatly disposed of all the arguments
usually advanced on the subject (1).
Despite the many years that have
elapsed, this study still remains per¬
fectly valid today; but it seems to be
unknown to those responsible for the
promotion of labour.
As Marguerite Thibert reported, all
the studies carried out by the ILO in
the United States, Austria and Ger¬
many showed that to eliminate women
from jobs was like sweeping the pro¬
blem under the carpet, solving nothing.
Realistic solutions had to be sought
elsewhere, by creating new jobs and
job opportunities and not by putting
those persons who had jobs out of
work.
A.IS strong as the fear of
unemployment is the fear of competi¬
tion. For women are less of a real
threat to men's employment per se
than a threat to their promotion and
their traditional notion of masculine
superiority (2).
If we are to be totally frank we
cannot fail to recognize that in a great
number of cases men try their hardest
to cut the ground from under women
who want to work. They belittle their
professional ability, glorify their rôle
as wives and mothers, and use various
other means to undermine their
chances of pursuing a career.
But by doing so they defeat their
own purpose, for they virtually compel
women thereby to put their best foot
forward to prove how good they
really are, and this in turn forces men
to vie with them in order try to
catch up so that they can save their
reputations ... or even their jobs. As
a matter of fact, the only persons who
really benefit from this rivalry are their
employers.
Society, rather than the men and
women directly Involved, bears the
basic responsibility for these contra¬
dictions and absurdities. Modern
society has virtually made a fetish of
"efficiency" and "output", yet it deli¬
berately accepts to deprive itself of
the enormous storehouse of intelli¬
gence, devotion, energy and creative
imagination, not to speak of good
(7) Marguerite THIBERT : The Economic
Depression and the Employment of Women.
International Labour Review, Vol XXVII, No. 4,
April and No. 5, May 1933. HT
(2) Pierrette SARTIN : La Femme Libérée 7, ¿. /
p. J5J, Editions Stock 1968 and Les Cadres et
l'Intelligence, p. 192, Editions Hachette 1968.
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

WORKING WOMAN (Continued)
28
common sense that women represent.
And this at a time when we are heading
toward a broader policy of co-opera¬
tion and participation where the work¬
ing woman's understanding, sense of
justice and humanity as well as her
practical realism are needed by society
more than ever before.
By placing so many obstacles in
the path of the working woman the
nations of the world have accepted
with a surprising nonchalance the
prospect of increasing the unproduc¬
tive element in their communities.
This will only magnify the danger that
already exists of our destroying the
balance between the active population
and the total population at a time
when the world is searching for a new
type of society and both the developing
countries and the highly industrialized
ones must face the important issues
of hunger and poverty, war, disease,
illiteracy and exploding populations.
Today, with our world in the throes
of fundamental transformations, with
scientific advances offering a choice
of greater well-being or destruction,
when all our action, ingenuity and
resolve are needed to solve so many
new problems, why do we still have to
put up with silly, child-like attitudes
and social pressures that perpetuate
outmoded ways and run counter to the
needs of the modern couple and
family?
Today, professional training for
women is still far from adequate, and
when it is made available career
opportunities are often sorely lacking.
In many countries a large proportion
of women have little or no chance to
put the costly education they receive
to good use. In Belgium, to cite only
one example, 43 per cent of women
graduates make no professional use of
their degrees. Even post-graduate and
special training courses often lead
nowhere since the hurdles for entering
or returning to professional work are
in many cases more psychological
than technical. This ridiculous wastage
could be avoided at infinitely less cost
if the measures advocated by women
were accepted once and for all so as to
allow women to satisfy both their
desire for a family and a career.
Women have often been called the
custodians of civilization, culture and
the home, and they cannot be that in
the isolated framework of the family
shell, but only by emerging as full-
fledged members of society. Having
a job is just one of the ways of achiev¬
ing such integration but it best answers
the needs of the nations of today.
Human solidarity is no longer just a
family or national matter; it is fast
developing as an international, world¬
wide reality. The new humanism of
tomorrow will be built on this universal
human solidarity and a new awareness
of the dignity of the individual. This
means that there is now a greater need
than ever for men and women to join
forces so that the children of tomorrow
can see a better world and a civiliza¬
tion really worthy of the name.
