INDIA MOVES
Photo © Henri Cartier-Bresson, Paris
Market scene in the city of Ahmedabad in western India, to the north of Bombay.

TOWARDS SELF-SUFFICIENCY IN FOOD
INDIA is in the midst of a dramatic revolu¬
tion: using new, high-yield food grains, chemical
fertilizers, progressive mechanization and modern
irrigation techniques, this nation of 540 million people
long cited as proof of the inevitability that the
world's population must increase faster than its
ability to feed it expects to be self sufficient in food
production by 1970-1971.
This extraordinary leap forward, has been made
possible by the successful development of high-
yielding strains of rice, wheat, jowar, bajra, maize,
groundnut, linseed, rapeseed, mustard, lucerne, etc.
This means that the Indian farmer is now able to
increase production not by 15 to 20 per cent but
by 70 to 80 per cent or more.
Working to bring 32.5 million acres (one-eleventh
of India's cultivated area) under the new seed
varieties by 1971, he has so far had remarkable
success. After the disastrous 1965-67 drought, 20
million acres were planted with a sturdy, prolific wheat,
perfected in Mexico. The result was a bumper crop
in 1968 of 16.6 million tons, exceeding the previous
record by 35 per cent (4.3 million tons). Thirty-eight
million tons of rice were grown in the same period,
as well as a record maize crop of 6.3 million tons.
OiINCE arid and underproductive lands are
now blossoming under the benign influence of the
"green revolution" as growers and government work
together to consolidate their achievements. Several
states have launched ambitious programmes to
increase handling capacity, storage, transportation
and distribution of the bigger crops. Punjab's crash
road construction programme is bringing every village
to within two miles of an all weather road.
Spurred on by nationwide promotional measures
including rebates, transport subsidies and credit, the
fertilizer gap is being closed with increased home
production that will reach almost two million tons by
1971 and over five million tons by 1973-1974.
Where one kilogramme of nitrogen used to produce
10 additional kilogrammes of grain, the same amount
now produces 20-25 kilogrammes of the high-yield
crops; the same quantity of water by means of new
technology produces at least 2-3 times more food.
Through scientific management of soil and water,
agronomists and farmers have come up with results
that a few years ago would have been considered
almost impossible. On land whose production capa¬
city was 3-4 tons of grain per hectare, 10-12 tons
are now considered a minimum goal, with 15-20 tons
an immediate possibility.
Among the most important grains are new dwarf
varieties of rice and wheat. India's first high-yield
rice came from Taiwan, followed by a new strain
developed by the Philippine International Rice Insti¬
tute. The dwarf wheat was developed by the Rocke¬
feller Foundation in Mexico, and made available to
India by the Ford Foundation. Standing only 18 inches
high on a sturdy stock, the new wheat can bear more
grain without falling over (see article page 4).
Another decisive factor in India's agricultural
renaissance is its increasing independence from the
vagaries of the monsoon and ancient irrigation
devices. Modern irrigation systems and efficient
electrical and diesel pumps have taken over in many
areas from bullock-powered water wheels and work
will begin next month to extend the area under modern
irrigation by 35 million acres.
Well into the planning stage are projects to harness
nuclear energy for tapping underground water, manu¬
facturing fertilizers and operating agro-industrial com¬
plexes, and current research points to nuclear energy
for desalting sea water for use in agriculture.
Priority has been given to the manufacture of
modern agricultural machinery, which until now has
been mostly imported. Both the power tiller and
tractor industries are exempt from licensing provi¬
sions, and tractor production reached almost 12
thousand units in 1967-1968, compared to only 880
units in 1961-1962. The target for this year is
18 thousand Indian manufactured tractors.
India's problem is no longer that of getting agri¬
culture moving; it is to keep it going. With the
population growing by 13 million each year, pro¬
duction must be increased to 150 million tons to meet
the needs of between 630 and 650 million people in
the latter half of the 1970s. Indians are confident it
can be done. J.S. Kanwar, deputy director-general
of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, writing
in the Indian journal, Seminar (August 1968), stated
"...A country with 80-90 million acres of irrigated area
should be able to produce without difficulty, even with
the present technology in agriculture, about 300 million
tons of food per annum".
IHE industrious and tenacious Indian farmer,
no longer condemned to subsistence living, is the key -
to continued success. His determination to build upon
the present "green revolution" is being matched by
pragmatic educational programmes to equip him to
deal with management and market problems, and to
use his resources rationally.
The educational and research challenge is being
met by eight new agricultural universities. Quickly
responding to the need, the Punjab University the
state's sole agent for agricultural research has
already established a successful range of programmes
in co-operation with local farmers, while the agri¬
cultural universities of Mysore and Pantnagar have
developed far-sighted research and education policies
tailored to the needs of their respective areas.
Agriculture's new success appears to have checked
the migration of workers to cities and towns, and the
more successful farmers can now earn over $1,300
a year, twice as much as a clerk. Land prices have
risen, medical services in rural areas have improved
and, armed with superior raw materials and benefitting
from advanced technology, the Indian farmer is becom¬
ing a dynamic contributor to national well-being.
India has made impressive progress in a short time; 7
serious problems must still be overcome, but the »
agricultural pattern which has been set is a solid
foundation for future prosperity.
