EARTHLINGS IN
THE SPACE AGE
by Lord Ritchie-Calder
4
* Attention of readers Is drawn to a forthcom¬
ing book entitled "Eastern Cultures An
Anthology of the Unesco Courier" to be
published end 1969 or early 1970 by Long¬
mans Green & Co. Ltd, Great Britain. The
contents and presentation of this work will
be completely different from the present
Issue of the "Unesco Courier".
** Most Issues published prior to 1968 are
entirely out of print and cannot therefore be
made available today.
zl
<l

BI Y his own Ingenuity, Homo
sapiens, the Earthling, has shrunk his
world to the dimensions of a very
small planet. In the arrogance of our
conceit, which puts Man and his brain
at the very centre of the universe, we
have never been quite convinced by
the astronomers when they have tried
to tell us how insignificant the world
is in the immensities of Space. But
now the space engineers, and the
astronauts, beating the bounds of our
global parish, have reminded us how
relatively small it is.
In the spirit of new adventure, one
may regard the world as a departure
platform for fugitives to the moon or a
launching pad for escapades to other
planets or even beyond our solar sys¬
tem, into other universes. But the
Earthlings who cannot so escape must
recognize that on its relatively limited
surface, 3,000 million people today,
4,000 million in twenty years' time, and
6,000 million or 7,000 million forty years
from now, will have to contrive to live
and to work together. Or, by the ne¬
glect of wisdom or the abuse of human
ingenuity, to die together.
An eye, human or electronic, in an
artificial satellite in orbit, sees no poli¬
tical frontiers; no Ideological curtains;
and no differentiation of races. It
might see H-Bombs going off as the
signals of tensions; but in general it
would see a globe of which only three-
tenths was land and seven-tenths
covered by oceans; mountain ranges
reduced to wrinkles; evidence of sur¬
viving forests; tawny expanses of hot
deserts which cover a fifth of its sur¬
face and cold deserts which cover an-
LORD RITCHIE-CALDER is a world famous
science writer. He won the Unesco Kalinga
Prize for the popularization of science in 1961.
other fifth. It might with difficulty dis¬
tinguish the pattern of cultivation of
arable or cropped lands, which
accounts for only one-tenth of the
land surface. That Is the nature of
humanity's family estate of which, at
the moment, we are the improvident
stewards.
The world is not just the relic of a
cosmic incident. It provides the bio¬
sphere, the living space, for the evolu¬
tionary process which, we like to think,
had its consummation in Man.
But with a wisdom which we have
not demonstrated convincingly so far,
we must recognize that that biosphere
and that evolutionary process include
other species with which we can co¬
exist or which we can stupidly destroy.
Stupidly because our relations with
these other species are a condition of
our own survival.
A lump of soil no bigger than a
football contains a micro-organic popu¬
lation greater than the human popula¬
tion of the world. That micro-organic
population includes the germs and
fungi which evocatively suggest dis¬
ease or danger but which, in other
forms, are indispensable to our exis¬
tence. In the same way, we think of
insects as deserving insecticide and
other creatures as deserving pesticide,
but in the process we can kill those
which are essential to our ultimate
needs.
In order to get margarine, we cleared
big areas in Africa of brush and tsetse
flies which it harboured, but In the
process we got rid of the bees which
were needed to pollinate other crops.
Similarly, for our short-term, and
short-sighted, needs we have des¬
troyed the vegetation cover, prevent¬
ing the absorption of water by the
natural sponge through which it seeps
into the underground springs. As a
result the scouring rains sluice the
soil off the hills, cause floods and
eventual erosion.
In the lifetime of the United States,
over two hundred and eighty million
acres of arable crop and range land
have been destroyed more than ten
times the productive acreage of the
United Kingdom.
Only slowly and recently have we
come to recognize that wild animals
are not something with which mankind
is at war but a part of the balance of
life, which is delicately adjusted.
For the first time in history, man has
the power of veto over the evolution
of his species. We share the bio¬
sphere. Into t&at we have injected, in
the past sixteen years, man-made
radioactivity. Elements which did not
exist in nature have been indiscrim¬
inately scattered over the face of the
earth, to combine in all living things.
Today there is not a child in the
world that does not have radiostron-
tium in its bones at least to some
degree. The amounts may be insigni¬
ficant and the possible effects may be
emotionally exaggerated and medically
in dispute. Much is unproven, much
is unknown. But that only emphasizes
that men, on defective evidence or in
positive ignorance, are recklessly tam¬
pering with the biosphere on which
their present and future depends.
I have, in the past fourteen years,
been among the wandering Bedouins
in the desert, the Dyaks of Equatorial
Borneo, the Eskimos in the Arctic, the
peoples of the hinterlands of Latin
America and Africa and Asia. In one
way or another their lives and their
destinies have been consciously
touched by scientific and techno¬
logical achievement.
Many of them have acquired their
freedom in 1962 there are nearly
twice as many nations in the U.N. as
there were when it was founded. But
when the intoxicating effects of politi¬
cal independence wear off, there is
the morning-after-the-night-before.
People are apt to wake up and dis¬
cover that freedom has been robbed
of its meaning; that they are just as
hungry, or more hungry; just as poor,
or more impoverished; just as sick or
more disease-ridden, and just as frus¬
trated in their seeking for a better
way of life.
IHROUGH the limitedfin¬
ancially that is activities of the U.N.
agencies, of the U.N. expanded techni¬
cal assistance fund and now of the
special fund and by the much more
lavish examples of bilateral aid, people
have been shown what is scientifically
and technically possible. But it is not
enough to show them.
To demonstrate what might be done
to people who have not the means to
do it is just tantalizing. It is just
"window-shopping" walking along
with nothing in your pocket and with
plateglass between you and the things
you have been taught to want.
The peoples of the emerging coun¬
tries have not the means to go shopp¬
ing in the supermarket of science as
Prof. P.M.S. Blackett has termed it.
They cannot even afford the bargain
basement.
The object of this kind of assistance
is to help people to help themselves
throwing them a rope with which to
haul themselves out of the morass of
poverty. But this is no Indian rope-
trick the rope has to be tethered to
something, and a winch would help to
haul them out more quickly. As it is,
the rope is slipping.
After ten years of this new social
philosophy by which governments
acknowledged that they were respon¬
sible, not only for their own people,
but for other, less fortunate peoples as
well, the gap between the prosperity
of the highly-advanced countries and n
the poverty of the countries struggling **
for development has not closed it has
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

EARTHLINGS IN THE SPACE AGE (Continued)
widened. The rich countries are richer
and the poor countries are poorer
despite the thousands of millions
which have been spent on aid.
Governments, when the markets
skid, cannot "lift themselves by their
own bootstraps" or, if they do, it is
by duress. In the meantime their
peoples will endure the Misery-Go-
Round of Poverty.
By 1960 the total world stocks of
surplus grain had reached the in¬
credible figure of 125,000,000 tons-
enough to provide the full calorie
needs of 450,000,000 people for a com¬
plete year.
NI O one should be so foolish
as to think that the distribution of those
vast surpluses, even if it were possible,
would solve the problem of hunger.
Relieving immediate stresses, yes. By
distribution through such agencies as
Unicef, yes. By turning food into
currency, yes. Supplies of food can
be made available to governments to
help present needs and the proceeds
can be used by a government to help
its own agriculture to increase its
yields in future years. That is the only
permanent solution to enable coun¬
tries and regions to produce their food
requirements.
It can be done. We do not need to
imagine food artificially produced by
photosynthesis. The scientific know-
how already exists. The knowledge
we have got, applied with wisdom, can
increase the yields from existing
acreages. By plant-breeding we can
extend the food-growing acreages into
what seemed inhospitable regions.
The Unesco Arid Zone Programme
has done remarkable work in showing
how deserts might be developed. I
have no doubt, having been in the
Arctic seeing whether it might become
part of our habitable world, that pro¬
duction, if need be, can be extended
there.
As far as those oceans which cover
seven-tenths of our globe are concern¬
ed, we are at the cave-man stage.
At sea we hunt our food and do not
husband it. Sea-farming and sea-
ranching are perfectly feasible.
The great international survey of the
Indian Ocean, sponsored by Unesco,
in which 25 survey ships of 15 nations
took part, not only told us a great deal
about that birthplace of the monsoons
but also about its biological possibi¬
lities and its food prospects.
In 1961, the United Nations held in
Rome a conference on "New Sources
of Energy". Ironically, atomic energy
was never mentioned. The new
sources were the oldest of all sun,
wind and geothermal energy, the heat
6 in the crust of the earth. It was a
"Do-it-yourself" conference telling
the developing countries how they
might contrive, improvise, and adapt
methods of harnessing the sun and the
winds to their domestic and industrial
needs.
For the first t!me in history, Man,
the Earthling, has the power of veto
over continuing evolution. He can
exercise that veto by the nuclear des¬
truction of the race, or, by default in
handling the problems of starvation,
prove that Malthus was right.
He can ambitiously reach out to the
farther planets, but his species as such
must survive on the surface of the
earth, subsist from the nine inches of
top-soil which feeds, clothes and
shelters him or from the seas from
which he emerged hundreds of millions
of years ago.
All the majesty of his mind can be
dethroned by his stomach. Man can
feast like Belshazzar and ignore the
writing on the wall. He can spend
£40,000 million a year on the defence
of peace and ignore the real content
of the peace he is supposed to be
defending.
He can split the atom and release
the power of matter and use this, his
greatest discovery, to poison the good¬
ness of his earth and destroy his
species. He can outboast the An¬
cients, who in the arrogance of their
material success built pyramids as the
gravestones of their civilizations, for
Modern Man can throw his pyramids
into Space and they may orbit etern¬
ally around a planet which died of his
neglect.
Or he may choose to use his science
and his wisdom to co-operate with all
his kind in the peaceful enrichment of
his Earth and of the people who live
on it.
December J 962

