SAVING OUR VANISHING FORESTS
by Karl Heinz Oedekoven
A, S far back as the un¬
known origin of mankind, the path of
human activity has been marked by
the thoughtless destruction of forest
and vegetation. Civilizations have
flourished and disappeared with a re¬
sultant depletion of trees and plants,
leaving only steppe and desert behind.
Only in recent centuries has man
begun to realize that he was cutting
off the branch that he was sitting on.
Man is becoming more aware today
of nature's vengeance and, at the same
time, of the challenge which confronts
him in preserving his dwindling natural
assets while endeavouring to extend
the fertile earth which is the very basis
of his existence. The demands of an
ever increasing world population make
KARL HEINZ OEDEKOVEN of the Federal
Republic of Germany Is a specialist on world
forestry at the Food and Agriculture Organiza¬
tion, and is former vice-chairman of the
European Forestry Commission.
his task more and more insistent.
The forest, our largest and most
durable soil cover, was once regarded
as only an obstacle to settlement, agri¬
culture and communications. It was
recklessly burned or exploited until it
suddenly became a focus of intense
human interest.
Man has come to learn that the two
most important elements of his exis¬
tence soil and water owe their stabi¬
lity and availability to the presence of
sufficient forest cover.
Three-quarters of the world's popu¬
lation are undernourished. There is
only about one acre of land per head
for food production and no less than
twice this area is needed to ensure
satisfactory nutrition. The true Enemy
No. 1 in the world is not a political or
military opponent, but the deterioration
of the soil, the dryness, the irresistible
progress of semi-deserts and deserts.
In some countries, like the United
States and the Union of Soviet Social¬
ist Republics, soil conservation has
become almost a "State religion". In
South America, all over Africa, Asia
and Australia there is great concern
over dangers threatening the soil.
While political leaders come and go,
this destructive process of soil deter¬
ioration remains a permanent menace.
Each government inherits this problem
from its predecessor. Yet, even to¬
day, the efforts of many countries to
remedy the situation are merely in
their infancy.
We know from the experience of
500 years that the Sahara desert pro¬
gresses towards the south at the rate
of over three feet a year on a wide
front of 2,000 miles. Lake Chad,
which some decades ago was still an
ideal refuge for migrating birds from
Europe, Is steadily diminishing in sur¬
face area and depth and its shores
are turning from fertile green to steppe
brown. All far-reaching plans for the
development of Africa as the "Conti¬
nent of the Future", all plans for water
use and industrialization will fail unless
the necessary attention is paid to the "J
importance of trees and forests. I
Two extensive desert belts have de¬
veloped along both sides of the equa-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

VANISHING FORESTS (Continued)
tor. The one in the south reaches
from Australia to South Africa and
South America. The one in the nor¬
thern hemisphere spreads north from
China, all across Asia, North America
and Mexico.
The northern belt includes those na¬
tions which, as we learned in our
history classes at school, were once
rulers of the world. We were puzzled
to hear in geography class that large
areas of these once powerful nations
are now sterile. The truth is, of
course, that in ancient times they
were not so.
Ctesiphon and Baghdad, once cen¬
tres of concentrated power, were des¬
cribed by Herodotus more than two
thousand years ago: "Of all the coun¬
tries we know this is the most suitable
for growing grain. It is so well fav¬
oured that it yields two hundredfold
and, where conditions are best, even
three hundredfold. The ears of wheat
and barley grow to the width of four
fingers. But to the height of what tree
millet and barley grow I shall not dis¬
close. No one who has not seen
Babylon would believe me."
For Herodotus, Babylon was the
essence of fertility. He also accorded
the same honour to Cinyps, a region in
North Africa: "This country produces
grain equal to the best I have seen,
for it has black soil and springs water
it. The yield is equal to that of Baby¬
lon, three hundredfold under the best
conditions."
Soldiers in the sandy and torrid
conditions of this region (part of mod¬
ern Cyrenaica) during the last war
would have had difficulty in imagining
that a now desolate desert was the
richest of farming land two millennia
ago.
T,
8
HERE are three zones on
the globe which successively were
homes of dominating civilizations but
where the soil became devastated in
proportion to theageoftheirsettlement.
The first zone is the desert of North
Africa. In the Sahara, hundreds of
archaelogical finds and cave paintings
indicate that this was once a flour¬
ishing country of many lakes and
rivers. One cave painting shows men
swimming. Imagine swimmers in the
Sahara desert today!
A second zone is the continuous
range of stone, salt and sand deserts
which spread from west China, across
Turkestan, Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Jor¬
dan, Sinai and up to North Africa. In
ancient times these latitudes were
inhabited by Sumerians, Babylonians,
Persians, Macedonians, and Phoeni¬
cians names which are all connected
with world power and wealth. The
third zone covers Palestine, Syria, Asia
Minor, Greece, Italy and Spain.
This epidemic of devastated soil
seems to be a contagious one.
Attempts at reafforestation in Spain,
Italy and Greece would certainly have
been more successful had the opposite
shores of the Mediterranean still been
covered with a wide belt of fertile land
as once they were. But the terrible
desert has already reached the shore
of the Mediterranean on a wide front
and sends out its drying winds to the
European countries.
The ever-blue sky of Italy has not
always been as blue. Some 2,000
years ago it was just as grey and
cloudy as in northern parts of Europe
and the complaints of the old Romans
about frost and snow-fall which seem
so strange to those who know Italy
today were probably justified.
While once it took millennia, or at
least centuries to deplete fertile land,
modern history offers a striking exam¬
ple of how man can start and complete
this disastrous chain-reaction in only a
few decades. Hardly a century ago
the U.S. farmer moved into the Middle
West, full of initiative and energy.
At first, the existing forests seemed
inexhaustible. They were cut down,
houses and bridges were built, the
wood was burned in locomotives, on
ships and in stoves. Great quantities
were felled and burned on the spot to
make large areas of ash-fertilized farm¬
ing land. Later, monocultures and
tractors cleared away those clumps of
trees and hedges which had survived.
Water ran off the land too rapidly,
soil was eroded, floods occurred and
drought appeared between rainy peri¬
ods. This process was accelerated
during the First World War when large
areas of what remained of tree-covered
prairie were ploughed up for more in¬
tensive wheat production.
After the war, part of this land was
left idle, but there was no longer any
deep-rooting grass or other soil cover
to conserve the moisture and stabilize
the soil. Storms swept the land from
the Gulf of México and Canada un¬
checked, for there were no forests to
break their force. The wind carried
away the fertile topsoil leaving only
sterile layers and rocks.
The same thing happened to former
forest areas. Without the protection
of the trees, without the firm grip of
their roots, without humus, the soil was
carried away. In the south, where the
frost which usually stabilizes the soil
during winter seldom occurs, and
where there is seldom snow cover to
prevent the damage, soil and wind
erosion had the same harmful effect.
Like a network of veins the first
small gullies appeared in the soil,
gradually deepening to real gorges.
The process was repeated a million
times all over the country until only
naked rock was left in some regions.
Even today American rivers carry
away so much fertile soil that an old
Indian once said: "Our country is a
new Atlantis; one day it will disappear
in the Ocean!"
Erosion is only the first phase of a
serious chain reaction which starts
with the regression or disappearance
of forests. Sediment deposited in
reservoirs, water-courses, fields and
cities is an important part of the total
damage. This damage seldom comes to
public attention because it is often invi¬
sible. Sediment increases the total
volume and weight of flow in water¬
courses thus raising the height of flood
peaks and their destructive power. In
drainage basins and reservoirs, sedi¬
ment can reduce water capacity in a
short time.
Investigations made
into the effect of silting on the capacity
of dams in Algeria show several dams
lost 100 per cent of their original capac¬
ity in a period of 74 to 96 years. Simil¬
ar findings in the United States with
respect to annual storage depletion in
numerous dams indicate that from 0.09
to 31.53 per cent of original storage
capacity is lost as a result of silting.
Recently a monograph on the Arno
river basin, on which Florence is lo¬
cated, revealed that 2,670,000 tons of
solid material are carried away an¬
nually by the water flow, thus causing
an average lowering of land surface
of almost one inch a year. -
Silting is almost always associated
with deforestation. Dams fed from
completely wooded watersheds practi¬
cally never silt up. Experiments carried
out by the Tennessee Valley Authority
in 1955 showed that after reafforesta¬
tion and protection works had been
completed, the volume of sediment
carried down by the river was reduced
by 90 per cent.
The forest also plays an important
part in protecting the soil against wind
erosion and sand encroachment. Dune
stabilization by tree planting is a well-
kncOvn practice in many parts of the
world. It is true that almost any vege¬
tation cover will stabilize loose soil and
prevent it from being eroded by wind
and rain, but forests are probably more
effective because of their height, den¬
sity, deep-reaching roots and perma¬
nency. There are indications that the
presence of forests may increase local
rainfall, though effects on a regional or
continental scale have not been de¬
monstrated.
The denser the forest, the greater
will be its power to reduce wind velo¬
city. One authority has proved this
protective effect and noted reductions
in velocity of over 85 per cent. In
Italy, tests have shown that the Cecina
forest reduced wind velocity by 56 per
cent and a hardwood coppice in the
same region was responsible for re¬
ductions of 89 per cent.
The importance of such protection
against wind erosion can hardly be
exaggerated. In dry periods and on
bare land the particles of certain types
of soil become so severed from each
other that a strong wind can easily
carry them away. The finer particles
form clouds and the coarser particles,
whipped by the wind, roll and bounce

over the surface of the soil. Their
movement is halted whenever the wind
slackens and they bank up in pits,
ditches, canals and sunken roads, or
in the neighbourhood of sheltering
objects where they may suffocate
crops.
This is only one of the perils of
strong winds. Drying out of soil, di¬
rect damage to delicate products like
fruit, and the distortion and stunting
of exposed trees can all be traced to
this cause.
It is a striking fact that a number
of countries have never formulated a
forest policy or passed a forest law,
in spite of evident symptoms of soil
deterioration and in spite of repeated
warnings about the results of a further
decline.
One of them comes from Professor
Flatscher, scientist of the Academy for
Soil Cultivation in Vienna. He has
estimated that the world's forests pro¬
duce about 1,600 million cubic metres
of timber a year whereas the volume
cut annually amounts to between 2,200
and 2,600 million cubic metres. This
indicates that the annual fellings are
about 50 per cent above the allowable
cut.
Any private individual who sanc¬
tioned such improvidence would be
held responsible for bad management
and would certainly be heavily penal¬
ized. But mankind as a whole, it
seems, can indulge in prodigal waste
of this kind without being in conflict
with any law.
The total forested area of the world
is estimated to be about 10,000 million
acres and these forests should be cap¬
able of providing reasonably adequate
supplies for a population larger than
now exists. But the provision of such
supplies will entail the treatment of all
productive forests as renewable crops,
the opening up of forests which are
not yet accessible and the cessation of
the widespread devastation of forests
which still continues.
Of the 4,000 million acres of the
earth's original forest area which man
has destroyed, 1,000 million might
well be replanted especially since
much of this land is to be found in
places where the population is in
greatest need of the products of the
forest.
The cost per day of the second
world war was a little over $500 million.
The cost of one day of this war would
reafforest at least 20 million acres,
and the cost of 50 days would be suffi¬
cient to reclothe the entire 1,000 million
devastated acres with proper tree
cover.
Of course, no one is so naive as to
believe we are on the verge of any
such undertaking. But we are in pos¬
session of scientific knowledge, indus¬
trial skill and technical equipment
which could be used to spread the
potential benefits of the forest to the
uttermost ends of the inhabited earth.
November 1961
Lull In activity of one of history's most famous volcanoes,
Vesuvius in the Bay of Naples, enabled air-photographer to
take this strikingly clear shot of its crater. After the eruption
of 79 A.D. which buried Pompeii, Hercuianeum and Stablae,
Vesuvius was less active until the great eruption of 1631. Since
then it has never been really quiet.

