Air pollution
and
lung cancer
by R.E. Waller
T
	 HE possibility that air
pollution might be a factor in the
development of lung cancer was first
considered nearly forty years ago.
The classical work of Prof. Ernest
Kennaway and his associates in
London had shown that compounds
capable of producing tumours when
painted on mouse skin could be
isolated from coal tar, and it was
recognized that these compounds were
likely to be present too in urban air
polluted by coal smoke.
Lung cancer death rates were above
average among men working in
industries where coal was distilled,
and in Britain, -America and in many
countries of Europe the number of
deaths attributed to this disease in
the general population was increasing
from year to year.
At first it was widely thought that
improvements in diagnostic pro¬
cedures, and their greater availability
throughout the countries concerned,
were responsible for much of the
recorded increase in lung cancer, but
by the time the Second World War
interrupted the regular study of
mortality trends, in 1939, it was clear
that there must have been some real
increase in the incidence of the
disease.
In England and Wales, Dr. Percy
Stocks Chief Medical Statistician,
found substantial differences In lung
cancer mortality between different
towns, and a general tendency for
30
R. E. WALLER Is a member of the Medical
Research Council's scientific staff in the
Air Pollution Unit at St. Bartholomew's
Hospital Medical College, London. He
has studied the role of air pollution in
relation to lung cancer and bronchitis for
more than 20 years. He will be one of
the chairmen of the panel on Air Pollution
and Cancer at the 10th Cancer Congress,
in Houston, Texas, this month.
death rates to be highest in London
and the large industrial towns,
declining gradually with size of town,
to the lowest rates in rural areas.
Although there was some evidence
that availability of hospital services
was a relevant factor, these findings,
coupled with the known carcinogenic
action of products from the distillation
or incomplete burning of coal, soon
suggested that air pollution might be
concerned in the development of luhg
cancer.
At the time, there were reports from
Germany of an association between
smoking and lung cancer, and carci¬
nogenic "tars" had been produced
by a number of workers by the
distillation of tobacco. Thus when
plans were made after the war for
further studies on the cause of the
ever rising incidence of lung cancer,
smoking as well as air pollution was
considered as a possible factor.
Epidemiological studies were started
in Britain and in the United States,
among hospital patients with lung
cancer, and these led, by 1950, to a
clear demonstration of the association
between cigarette smoking and lung
cancer.
Simultaneously, work was in
progress on the presence of carcino¬
genic substances in urban air, and
one of the compounds already isolated
from coal tar, benzo(a)pyrene, was
found to be widely distributed in the
air of towns in Great Britain. The
amount present varied roughly with
the size of town, and its chief source
appeared to be domestic coal fires,
though small amounts were also
present in the exhaust products from
motor vehicles. Detailed studies of
local differences In lung cancer death
rates in England and Wales still showed
a general relationship with size of
town, and there appeared to be a
close correlation with various Indices
of pollution by coal smoke.
All these findings were discussed
at an international symposium in
Louvain in 1952. It was clear then that
there had been a real and rapid rise
In lung cancer mortality In all the
developed countries of the world from
which reliable data were available.
Death rates were particularly high in
Austria, Great Britain and many other
countries of Western Europe.
In all cases the increase had, up to
that time, been much greater among
men than among women. There was
also evidence of an "urban excess"
of lung cancer even in countries such
as Denmark, where the towns did not
suffer much from air pollution
problems.
ANY features of the trends
in mortality could be explained in
terms of the established association
with smoking. It was cigarette, rather
than pipe or cigar smoking that led to
an increased risk of lung cancer, and
although in many countries the overall
consumption of tobacco had not
changed much, there had been a
massive swing from pipes to cigarettes
during the first half of the century.
The much higher incidence of lung
cancer among men than among women
was In keeping with their heavier and
longer history of cigarette smoking.
Air pollution did not fit into the
picture as a major factor, for in
countries where the increase in lung
cancer had been most rapid there
had not been any general increase
in pollution. In Great Britain in par¬
ticular, pollution by coal smoke had
been worse at the beginning of the
century than it was in 1950. It remained
possible however that the carcinogens
in coal smoke played some part in
CONTINUED PAGE 32


AIR POLLUTION (Continued)
Extra bonuses for smoke-free city dwellers
conjunction with smoking or. that new
forms of pollution were of special
significance.
One of the reasons for retaining an
interest in the possible effect of air
pollution was the high lung cancer
death rate in Great Britain as compared
with the United States, despite similar
smoking histories.
Although it seems likely that some
of this difference is accounted for- by
the American habit of throwing away a
larger proportion of each cigarette, It
has been shown that British emigrants
to South Africa, Australia, New
Zealand, Canada and the United
States have higher lung cancer death
rates than the native residents of these
countries, though lower rates than
those of the compatriots they leave
behind.
These differences cannot be ex¬
plained in terms of the extent of
cigarette smoking and unless there are
differences in the types of cigarette
smoked or the manner of smoking,
these results suggest an extra risk
introduced by having lived in Britain.
Emigrants from Norway to the
United States have, on the other hand,
rates that are higher than those of
Norwegians who stay In Norway and
lower than those of American-born
residents of the United States. Whilst
it may be that emigrants are selected
sections of the population, making It
difficult to draw firm conclusions from
these results, the implication Is that
the overall exposure to pollution
modifies the lung cancer death rates.
S
32
'INCE 1950 surveys of
benzo (a)-pyrene and other carcin¬
ogens in the air have been carried out
in cities throughout the world. Whilst
the concentrations found are in general
largest where coal Is used for domestic
heating purposes, some benzo(a)py-
rene is produced in other combustion
processes, and this compound can
be detected in most urban areas.
In one survey in North Wales and
the North West of England, the results
were, linked directly with detailed
studies on lung cancer mortality and
smoking. Death rates increased from
the least to the most polluted areas
among non-smokers and among all but
the heaviest smokers, but smoking
itself was still the major factor in
determining the- rates.
More recently, a small scale Inter¬
national study has been done under
the auspices of the World Health
Organization. Lung cancer mortality,
pollution and smoking were compared
first in Belfast and Dublin, chosen as
cities of similar size (500,000 popu¬
lation), with similar social conditions.
The higher death rates found in Belfast
were not wholly accounted for by
differences in smoking habits, but they
were in accord with the higher
concentrations of smoke and benzo(a)-
pyrene found there.
On the other hand, when the study
was repeated in Oslo and Helsinki,
the relatively high death rates in
Helsinki did not indicate any effect
of pollution, since the concentrations
of smoke and benzo(a)pyrene were
lower there than in Oslo, and the
differences in death rates appeared
to be due to differences in smoking
habits.
The findings from this survey
emphasized the limited value of
surveys of pollution at the present
time. With modern oil heating
installed in most buildings, the con¬
centrations of smoke and the
associated benzo(a)pyrene were very
low in Helsinki, but it seemed likely
that they would have been higher
some years ago, when other forms
of heating were in use.
A similar situation exists now in
Great Britain: London and other large
cities that suffered severely from pol¬
lution by coal smoke earlier this cen¬
tury are now relatively clean, due
mainly to the operation of the Clean
Air Act (1956). Surveys of pollution at
the present time therefore provide
little guide to the lifetime exposures
of people now of "lung cancer age".
Continuous monitoring of urban
concentrations of pollution from now
on could provide results to link with
future mortality experience. It is
doubtful however whether large scale
analytical work to determine the con¬
centrations of benzo(a)pyrene and
related carcinogenic compounds in
cities throughout the world is justi¬
fied.
Such evidence as there is from men
exposed occupationally to large con¬
centrations of these compounds sug¬
gest that their effect on lung cancer
mortality is small. A study of men
employed in the production of coal gas
in Great Britain showed that retort
house workers had a slightly increas¬
ed risk of developing lung cancer, as
compared with the general population,
but the concentrations of benzo(a)
pyrene in which some of them worked
were of the order of 100 to 1,000 times
those in normal urban air.
It has been suggested that pollution
from motor vehicles, containing small
quantities of benzo(a)pyrene, may
be of interest in relation to lung can¬
cer, but there is no evidence of any
marked excess of this disease among
men who work in close proximity to
motor exhausts, e.g. as maintenance
men in garages, as policemen on point
duty or as drivers of goods or passen¬
ger vehicles.
A
LLTHOUGH it is now clear
that air pollution cannot be a major
factor in the development of lung
cancer, there is still an "urban factor"
in the mortality statistics in all parts
of the world. Commonly, lung cancer
death rates in large towns are two to
three times those in rural areas, but
against this must be set the finding
that cigarette smokers as a whole have
death rates that are about 20 times
those of non-smokers.
Thus any differences in smoking
habits between town and country are
likely to have a large effect on death
rates, and the present situation may
be a legacy of lower levels of cigarette
smoking in rural areas thirty or more
years ago, even though current smok¬
ing habits are similar In town and
country.
In Britain an interesting situation is
developing now, for the end of the
increase in male lung cancer death
rates is in sight, and among middle-
aged men there are even signs of a
slight decrease. The trend is most
marked in London, whilst in rural areas
death rates are still rising at all ages.
This slight erosion of the "urban
factor" could be due to the levell¬
ing out of smoking habits, or merely
to selective movements of population
between town and country, but it is
of possible interest in relation to chan¬
ges in pollution, since there has been
a marked reduction in the amount of
coal smoke In the air of London, part¬
icularly during the last 10 to 15 years.
It may be many years before the
reasons for these changing trends can
be sorted out, but even if the part
played by air pollution in the develop¬
ment of lung cancer is small, it is
already clear that the dramatic reduc¬
tion in smoke concentrations in the
major cities of Britain has had many
beneficial effects, including reduced
effects on bronchitic patients, increas¬
ed visibility and a general improvement
in the environment.
