Museums
for moderns
by Duncan F. Cameron
W
HEN a child from the city
on his first country holiday collects
stones and mushrooms, a butterfly, a
dead toad, leaves and flowers, we may
dismiss it as childish curiosity. But
notice how he takes his treasures to
a private place; see how he arranges
and re-arranges his collection. See his
real distress, not just when an unthink¬
ing parent throws out his precious
finds, but also when a well-meaning
mother tidies up the childish array,
destroying the spatial relationships he
has painstakingly established. It is
not only through his collection but
also through its structure as a model
of a new reality, that he seeks under¬
standing.
Similarly, consider the compulsive
ordering and arranging of objects in
the private quarters of the aged, as
they strive to maintain faith in a reality
long past. View, In this light, the
apparent chaos and random display
of objects in the private room of a
teenage girl or boy. See their fre¬
quent restructuring of the "collection",
and the uncertainty of those years
expressed in the need for a flexible
model which can be manipulated to
suit the whims of the moment as their
search for an identity a place in the
scheme of things goes on. This is
what collecting is all about.
The museum, I suggest, has a social
function today which has been inher¬
ent since the first collector, at some
point distant In time, gathered objects
around him, arranged and re-arranged
them striving through their contempla¬
tion to come to some deeper under¬
standing of his world. In other terms,
the social function has been constant.
The arbitrary sampling of a reality
perceived, and the organizing or struc¬
turing of a model of that reality, has
22
DUNCAN F. CAMERON is National Director
of the Canadian Conference of the Arts, a
national association of Canada's major
organizations in the arts, and Co-ordinator of
the International Sub-committee on the Pub¬
lic and Modern Art, of the International Coun¬
cil of Museums. A museologist and cultural
resources consultant, Mr. Cameron has writ¬
ten widely in these fields. His article is
based on a study he presented *c a recent
Unesco international symposium on "Mu¬
seums in the Contemporary World."
been one of man's ways of coming
to terms with his environment.
First, let us consider the traditional
museum in these terms. Second, let
us look at the innovations of the last
twenty years and more which were
intended to give the traditional mu¬
seum relevance in the world of today's
audience and to democratize the
museum. Finally let us speculate on
the museum as Everyman's public yet
private environment for a personal
adventure in self-discovery and the
search for identity in a world of cons¬
tant change which is so easily per¬
ceived as chaos.
The traditional museum, and by this
is meant the so-called public museum
of the late nineteenth and early twen¬
tieth century, may have had any of
many origins. Rarely was it a museum
created in the public interest and
planned from its beginnings to serve
a mass audience. More often it was
a private, and possibly a highly artis¬
tic or individualistic collection, opened
to the public.
It may have been a private house,
modest or grand, opened to the public
by virtue of its history, its contents,
its past inhabitants, or failure to find
any other use for it. It may have been
a scholarly collection, the by-product
of research or exploration, opened to
the public by the political pressures
for democratization which, though
naive, were present even a century
ago.
The museum, before becoming
public, was the domain of its private
owner, a university, a church, a
society, or some other persons or
body which had neither created the
museum, nor organized it for effective
use of any kind, by a mass audience.
Even If it had been effective in its
private rôle as a collection or museum,
it was unlikely to be effective in its
new public rôle. I know, in fact, of
no instances where a private museum
became, in reality, a public museum.
I know only of private museums which
became open to the public. The dif¬
ference is important.
Where the private museum is open
to the public the visitor is told, "This
Is someone else's collection some¬
one else's model of their reality
which you may examine." When, on
the other hand, the museum is a public
museum, the visitor is told, "This is
your museum. This Is your collection.
Here is a sampling of a reality and a
view of the world which should have
meaning for you."
How often does the visitor find him¬
self in an alien environment In the
traditional "public" museum? How
often does he retreat to the world
outside our museum where he can find
in that familiar chaos more of rele¬
vance than was made accessible to
him within? And when he does linger,
how often is he finding, not meaning¬
ful relationships with his day-to-day
world, not understanding or revelation,
but rather re-enforcement for his fan¬
tasy world which he can artfully con¬
trive from our offerings?
The museum, as distinct from other
media of communication, depends pri¬
marily on things on real things
rather than on words or ¡mages or
symbols or replicas. The nouns of
the museum language are objects; the
relationships between objects are the
verbs. The adverbs and adjectives of
the language are the supplementary
media of print, graphic, sound, film,
colour and form in the object environ¬
ment, and so forth. This being the
case the prime requirement for the
organization and administration of a
museum is the person or persons who
know most about the things which
constitute the collection, or who know
best how to assemble and build the
needed collection.
These experts, the curators, are of
necessity at the core of all museum
organization. Without them and their
expertise the objects of the collection
cannot be encoded with the objective
and precise messages which are
required if the collection is to become
the meaningful sample of a reality
referred to above. It is the knowledge
of the curator, his researches and his
Insight, which permit the museum to
so present the object that it can speak
for itself.
Only the non-museums of the
twentieth century the exhibit and
CONTINUED PAGE 24

Photo © Mike Peters, Twickenham, U.K.
Unlike the traditional museum,
often rigidly didactic in presenting
its collections, the modern "creative"
museum seeks to put the visitor
into direct contact with what it has
to offer and help him find in these
objects meaningful relationships
with his day-to-day world. Whereas
children have no difficulty in
making contact with objects, thus
lighting a spark of wonder and
curiosity (photo above), adults have
often become accustomed to regard
the label as a more important
source of information than the
object itself (left).
23

MUSEUMS FOR MODERNS (Continued)
The curator 'Jack-of-all-trades'
Photo Bruce Davidson © Magnum, Paris
24
demonstration centres without research
collections or resources for original
research in their fields of interest are
free of this dependency on the curator.
They of course must assume a
parasitic rôle, being indirectly de¬
pendent on those museums which do
collect, research and publish and do
provide curatorial expertise. But
more of the new, non-museums later.
For the moment it is important to
consider the effect which this prime
dependence on the curator has had
on the organization and administration
of museums.
Since the curator was the authority,
and because there was usually no
other staff available, the curator
became not only the collector and
researcher, but also the interpreter.
It was he who designed the exhibition,
who determined the exhibition pro¬
gramme, who produced the interpret¬
ative label and prepared messages for
other supplementary media. It was
the curator who selected and arranged
the objects for public display and It
was often the curator who also gave
the guided tour and the lecture. Who
else? Was he not the authority?
Of course he was, but he was first
a scholar, and was being asked to
become a designer, an educator and
therefore the interpreter. With rare
exceptions he was untrained for these
rôles. In attempting to fill them he
had to fall back on what he knew
best which was the private language
of his scholarly discipline. The
galleries became elaborate, three-
dimensional expressions of nine¬
teenth century systems of the classifi¬
cation of knowledge. The interpreta¬
tion of the collections, rather than
relating to the experience of the
visitor, or to his values, related only
to the compulsive and obsessional
attempts of scholars of that time to
find understanding through ency¬
clopaedic exercises in the structuring
of knowledge.
In fairness it must be said that the
curator did not ask to be given
responsibilities for which he was un¬
prepared. Nor would it be fair to say
that all of them did not want to reach
their mass audiences. They simply
did not know how to go about it. The
situation was compounded by the facts
that exhibition design, education
through the exhibit medium, and other
museum skills recognized today, either
did not exist or were not recognized
during the first century of the period
under discussion.
In discussing the curatorial élite and
its effect on museum organization and
administration, it should be noted that
references to systematics, the obses¬
sional ordering of knowledge, or the
manifestation of curatorshlp as a three-
dimensional textbook, are not directed
towards museums of natural history
or of science and technology alone.
The history museum and the art
museum, including the museum of
contemporary art, fall prey to the same
ills as the others. Private codes are
in use in these museums as In the
others. The criteria for the selection
and organization of works of art or
for determining objects of historical
significance constitute a mystique
which may be even more threatening
and baffling to the visitor than that
which he encountered in the science
exhibit.
This situation has persisted through
the reluctance of the public to protest
it and the willingness of, governing
bodies to support It. Both have been
in awe of the mystique of curatorship,
both have been unprepared to admit
that the content of the museum is
meaningless and lacks personal
relevance. Thus, for many, the
museum is a fantasy playground, an
unreal world offering escapist ad¬
venture.

FINGERTIP
DISCOVERIES
Visiting a museum filled with exhibits
marked "do not touch" or locked
up in showcases is often a frustrating
experience for children. They need
to touch objects, to handle and explore
them from every angle (photo left), fn
museums which cater to this need,
playing or working with exhibits offers
children a "discovery in learning"
and an exciting experience. Right,
introduction to a new dimension in
sculpture an Alexander Calder mobile.
For others It becomes, after minimal
experience, a threatening environ¬
ment in which the frustration of
attempting to understand or to find
meaning in the incomprehensible leads
to anxiety. For a few, the upper-
middle class with higher education and
therefore some key to the secret
codes, it becomes a domain with class
and status connotations. It is this
segment of society which has, in the
past at least, tended to support the
traditional museum as described
above.
The last two decades, however,
have produced new forces and new
attitudes towards the democratization
of cultural resources and have brought
change. But since conferences are
still being held to discuss the rôle of
the museum In society, it would appear
that the changes of the recent past
have been insufficient.
If there Is one sentiment which has
been pervasive in the museum reform
movement of the past twenty years
it is a desire to be both wanted and
useful. Several trends are apparent:
M An open and uncommitted search
for the rôle of the museum in society.
An argument for the museum as an
integral part of the public education
system, yet to be fully appreciated
(financed) or exploited.
The development of popular pro
grammes, sponsored by museums but
not growing out of fundamental or
core programmes of the museum.
The rejection of traditional museum
functions (collecting and identification,
conservation, original research, publi¬
cation), and of the curator, in favour
of public exhibition and interpretation
largely dependent on media other than
the museum collections.
The development of children's
museums as a separate and quali¬
tatively different institution though
contained within the existing museum
organization.
The development of special mu¬
seums for the blind, the handicapped,
the poor, the oppressed, or for what
are often called "the culturally depriv¬
ed minorities."
While all of this has been in
progress (erroneously designated the
"museum revolution"), there have con¬
currently been both reactionary move¬
ments within the museum world and,
from without, an increasing public
demand for and use of museums (the
"museum explosion"). There has
been pressure from both the public
and government for democratization.
The picture is by no means clear.
I would suggest, first of all, that the
reforms have been well intentioned
but have been effected In the absence
of any real understanding of either
the nature of the very evident public
hunger today or of past failures to
satisfy the public appetite. The open
and uncommitted search for the social
rôle or function of the museum is a
long-standing need.
The argument that the museum is
properly a part of the formal education
system is, in my view, indefensible.
The museum, like the playground, the
concert hall, the theatre or the public
park must remain a private environ¬
ment for personal experience no
matter how greatly it may be shared
with others.
The museum's move towards inte¬
gration with the educational system,
I suspect, is primarily a result of the
fact that education in our society is
established; accepted, and was vir¬
tually immune from any general public
attack or criticism in the 1940s or the
1950s. Alliance with the education
establishment meant money, status,
and above all, an unquestioned social
usefulness. That, I believe, was the
attraction.
The objection, of course, is not that
museums are not educational. It is
that the museum achieves its edu¬
cational goals through a process alien
to the traditional school system.
Current innovation and research in
education may bring the two closer
together, but that does not justify the
ill-founded alliances of the past.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

MUSEUMS FOR MODERNS (Continued)
The creative museum adventure in self-discovery
The development of museum spon¬
sored activities which are peripheral
to the essential programme of the
museum is not new. The 1950s and
1960s however produced a proliferation
of supplementary activities and some
museums, while remaining basically
unchanged, surrounded themselves
with: concert series, art and craft
classes, women's organizations, attrac¬
tive programmes of social events,
luncheon clubs for men, lecture series
and study groups, film and theatre
programmes, guided tours of foreign
countries, bazaars, auctions and
fashion shows.
A
26
LLL this might be commend¬
ed were it true that these activities
grew out of the museum's basic func¬
tion and social usefulness. The more
common pattern, I fear, has been for
the museum to become a recreation
centre, a social club, a school, a
college or a market place because it
did not know how to be a museum.
The defence that these added
attractions are necessary for fund
raising or for the involvement of new
audiences, or that they bring depth
and relevance to the traditional
museum programme is weak. It is an
admission that the museum, as a
museum, has been unable to win
public support, to create involvement,
to provide depth and relevance.
One of the most visible trends in
the "museum revolution" in North
America has been the creation of non-
museums, by which I mean exhibit
and activity centres concerned with
public education through the medium
of the exhibit, but without dependence
on collections of original materials.
There are centres of science and
technology, for example, which depend
almost entirely on audio-visual pre¬
sentations and apparatus which de¬
monstrates principles or processes.
Health museums are similar in that
they rely .primarily on the model or
replica. Some natural science mu¬
seums, especially those with industrial
sponsorship, tend to rely more and
more on audio-visual and graphic
media and less on collections of
original materials.
There is no criticism of this develop¬
ment Implied here, but it must be
remembered that an exhibit centre, no
matter how effective, is not a museum,
unless its primary medium is the
object, the collection, the sample of
reality, referred to earlier.
One regrettable aspect of the de¬
velopment of the new exhibit centres
is that they are frequently called
museums, and thus prompt compari¬
sons potentially as misleading as
comparisons between television and
film or between film and theatre.
Even more regrettable has been the
too common practice of publicizing the
exhibit centre, not in terms of its own
special values, but in terms of its
break from the "musty, dusty" museum
tradition. Museums may have brought
such negative comparison upon
themselves but the solution is not to
compete with the exhibit centre on its
terms but seek excellence In the
museum's own terms.
The exhibit centres arc popular, and
do appear to meet a real need in
informal education, especially in the
highly industrialized urban complexes.
But there is danger in the temptation
to imitate success for its own sake.
That danger is real for the many
museums which have to compete for
public funds in a political popularity
contest.
Something must be said of the
effects of the trends already discussed
on museum organization and adminis¬
tration. The most important effect
has been that greater status has been
gained by non-curatorial personnel,
and there has become the possibility
of a power-balance within the museum
organization.
The designers, educators and admi¬
nistrators gained control of a larger
share of budget and of programme
and became more powerful in the
organization. Conservators and other
highly skilled technical staff, registrars,
and librarians, demanded and got new
status and recognition.
I know of one museum where the
business suit or tailored dress was
once the mark of the curator. Female
clerical staff tended to wear smocks
and technicians and skilled tradesmen
wore white laboratory coats. The
white coat, however, seemed to be a
symbol of the scientist or scholar for
the visiting public. Soon curators
donned the white coat and the
technicians and tradesmen were given
buff-coloured coats. Female clerical
staff then abandoned their smocks
and while some blossomed, fashion¬
ably dressed, others adopted the
white coat.
One might have expected the
curators, or at least the director, next
to appear in a white coat with purple
hem, but the silly game never
advanced to that stage. Curators
returned to business suits and tailored
dresses. The point of the ancedote
is simply that the game of status and
the power struggle is both real and
transparent, and bears all the marks
of insecure and defensive behaviour
in the face of change.
The administration and organization
of museums was also affected during
this period by the establishment of
either new departments or the growth
of offices which had previously been
In the background. Some museums
set up public relations departments
and television offices. Education de¬
partments grew enormously. Member¬
ship secretariats and offices for the
planning of special programmes were
enlarged. Design departments, which
in some instances had previously been
no more than carpenter's shops
became design studios with large,
well-qualified staffs. The term "exten¬
sion" was often used to designate
departments responsible for the wide
range of activities supplementing the
museum programme. The lowly book¬
keeper's office became the Depart¬
ment of Administration.
The overall effect has been one of
confusion and at times open dispute.
Good public relations and publicity,
massive education programmes for
schoolchildren and appealing, if irrele¬
vant, adult programmes have all
appeared to be necessary to win
public support and to get public funds
from government. In some cases
these have been at the expense of
the essential museum functions, and
the curators have justifiably rebelled.
The enlarged organizations for admi¬
nistration have sometimes exceeded
need and become stifling bureaucra¬
cies. The desire for popularity has
often led to evaluations of success in
which gross attendance statistics
were given more weight than the
quality of the experience being enjoyed
by the visitor.
I
N summary, the organiza¬
tion and administration of museums
changed In two principle ways. First,
the non-curatorial staff of the museum
began to share with the curatorial
staff the direction of the institution,
although a harmonious balance of po¬
wer was seldom achieved. Second,
the administration concerned itself to
an Increasing degree with its public
and the building of an audience.
In my view this concern too often
related to the institution's emotional
need for acceptance or to the competi¬
tion for public funds, and related too
rarely to the public's need for the
museum as a unique learning environ¬
ment. The exceptions are those
museums created not for a mass,
broad-spectrum audience, but for
children and for certain minority
groups.
Although children's museums existed
in some centres long before the post¬
war period under discussion, and some
had won an enviable reputation, the
CONTINUED PAGE 32

EXPLORING
THE WORLD
BEHIND A MASK
These three imaginatively designed masks
were among 200 works recently displayed at the
Museum of Man In Paris in an exhibition concerned with
African art. But they were not made by African
artists. The exhibition demonstrated the outstanding
success of an educational experiment in which the
Cantini Museum in Marseille collaborated with many
schools in the Provence region of south-eastern France.
In this French museum, collections of modern art
and temporary exhibitions are used as study and
discussion material by children and students aged from
5 to 20. This year, the children showed concretely'
and in highly individualistic ways how their knowledge
has been enriched by a museum exhibition of African
art, combined with their lessons on Africa. Using all
kinds of materials, children produced original works
that reflected their personal interpretation of African
art. These masks, for example, were fashioned by
15 and 16-year-olds, using nails and sieves (left), straw,
buttons and odds and ends of leather (below) and
cores from rolls of paper (below left). The experiment
showed how museums can open a meaningful
dialogue and participate directly in educational and
community activities. It also illustrates how the beauty
of a work of art in a museum can become the link
between children of today and peoples of
another age and culture.
Photos courtesy Daniele
Glraudy, curator Musées
des Beaux-Arts, Marseille
- © Atelier de Reprogra¬
phie, Marseile

MUSEUMS FOR MODERNS (Continued from page 26)
growth of these museums since the
late 1940s has been so great as to
demand our attention.
In effect, museum educators re¬
cognized the inadequacies of the
traditional museum as an experiential,
or "discovery learning", environment
for children. They saw the child's
frustration when confronted with the
static, untouchable display of objects
which by their nature demanded to be
touched, fondled, explored, discovered.
They understood the child's need to
work with the materials in an intimate
relationship, to manipulate the exhibits
and to create new structures. Those
who have worked with children in
museums where these things are
possible know the intensity and depth
of the child's adventure.
I
32
I T Is curious, of course, that
the inadequacies of the traditional mu¬
seum were seen as relative only to the
child's museum experience. I suspect
that was so because the adult
audience was thought of as only those
who frequented the museum rather
than the much larger audience which
did not. The adult museum users
most likely to have contact with
staff might also tend to be members
of the educated middle-class minority
which, I suggested earlier, supported
the traditional museum while valuing
the class limitations of Its form.
There is some evidence that the
adult was excluded in error when the
children's museum was created. Adults
want to visit children's museums and
in some instances special regulation
of visiting hours has been necessary
to keep the children's exhibits clear
for children. Experience with chil¬
dren's exhibits planned for world
expositions includes cases where
adults were of necessity barred from
admission.
The children's museum, wherein the
child Is turned loose to work with the
museum materials to the greatest
possible degree, is one of the clues
to the future.
The museums created for the cultur¬
ally deprived minorities and the handi¬
capped are also of great importance.
To create a museum for the blind
where understanding can be achieved
through tactile exploration of materials
is not only to recognize that the blind
cannot see but also to recognize the
validity of the tactile learning expe¬
rience.
The experimental Inner-city or
ghetto museum where the content ¡s a
product of the users' desires to create
what I call models of reality is another
development of note. From a middle-
class observer's viewpoint these
models may be meaningless, childlike,
crude or vulgar. But the permissive
environments of the best of these
experimental museums do not permit
the Imposition of bourgeois values.
The patronizing programmes of
"culture for the masses" have nothing
to do with these museums. What is
permitted Is the programming of Infi¬
nitely variable models of reality by
the museum users. What may appear
there as fantasy Is seldom irrelevant.
The codes employed in the model may
be private but private to the audience
or users, who are also the exhibitors.
These museums recognize their
potential relevance to day-to-day life.
They do not strive to make their
audience visually literate in the sense
that they will learn to verbalize about
artists and schools and the influence
of someone on someone else like the
well-rehearsed visitors at art gallery
openings. Rather, they strive to make
the users see their own world in the
context of the total human environ¬
ment, with all its beauty and its horror,
perhaps for the first time.
The new museums designed for
minorities differ most in that the
audience becomes the exhibitor. The
curator and the interpreter assume
rôles which are not new but are
modified. The curator now is cast
only in his most essential rôle as
scholar, developing the resources with
which the visitor must create. The
educators, designers and others whom
I have grouped together as "inter¬
preters", now have a rôle which that
title best Implies. They Interpret the
encoded resources of the museum to
the user so that he can work creativ¬
ely with them. In order to do this the
interpreter must be bilingual In the
sense that he must share common
languages with both the curators and
the visitors whom I prefer to call users.
But here we are discussing what I
propose as ¡deals for tomorrow which
can be observed today in but a. few
isolated experimental situations.
The creative museum, fulfilling the
Inherent social function described
earlier, requires organization and
administration different from that of
the traditional museum because the
balance of power has shifted and the
goals are achieved through the active,
creative participation of the user
rather than through the indoctrination
of the passive visitor.
Since the museum must be a
responsive resource, sensitive to the
changing needs of the users, it is, in
effect, programmed by the users.
Thus, if there is a dominant power in
the organization of such a public
museum It Is the public itself. The
curatorial staff continues to fulfil all
of the scholarly functions as before,
but now shares with the interpreters
equal status in the internal hierarchy.
Further, the flow of influence In
decision making no longer moves from
curator to interpreter, to produce a
product to be placed before a passive
audience. Now, the Influence of the
public, as manifested in its needs,
anxieties or simply desires, is trans¬
mitted to the curator through the inter¬
preter. This influences the develop¬
ment of the museum resources for
which the curator is responsible.
The curator in return responds to
his public by making available collec¬
tions supported by such thorough
research and documentation that he
can encode in it what his scholarship
dictates to be the most objective ans¬
wers to the questions implicit In the
public's concern. He also presents
the questions which the collection
poses but which his scholarship
cannot answer.
T
	 HIS is the way in which the
dialogue between curator and user is
effected through the medium of the
collection, with the interpreter decod¬
ing and re-encoding as required In
his intermediary rôle.
This dialogue must be active to be
effective. There is no place here for
the permanent, static exhibit which
purports to be a definitive statement.
The organization of the museum must
keep communication channels open so
that there can be a prompt feedback
of responses between curator and
user.
In considering this proposal It is
important to see that the museum's
traditional responsibility to collect and
preserve that which is most excellent,
or unique or which is an expression
of man's highest achievements Is
neither discarded nor pushed aside.
That responsibility has not been
discussed since It is assumed and not
considered endangered by that which
is proposed. Further, excellence can
only be fully appreciated when the
criteria are both understood and
accepted. This the creative museum
enables rather than Inhibits.
Finally, as must be apparent, this
proposal depends for its realization
upon the application of the methods
and insights of the social sciences.
The sociology and social psychology
of museums is admittedly a subject
which only recently has been consider¬
ed for research. If, however, we are
concerned with exploring the rôle of
the museum in contemporary society, is
it not to the social scientist to whom
we must turn first for guidance?
