>
ë>M
The golden hoard
of the Scythians by
Alexander Kirpichnikov
ALEXANDER KIRPICHNIKOV of the Soviet
Union is a historian who has become well
known in his country for his books and studies
on archaeology and the history of art.
Photos C¡ V. Chuprynin, Archaeology Institute, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, Kiev
In 1969, an archaeological expedition led
by Prof. A. Leskov excavated a Scythian
tomb in the Kakhovka district of southern
Ukraine which had escaped the attentions
of grave-robbers. It contained the
skeleton of a Scythian warrior, 520 gold
objects and countless other objects
of great historical value. The tomb is
considered to be the richest 5th century
B.C. Scythian burial ever discovered.
Above, detail of one end of a massive,
gold torque necklet; the enamel
decorations retain their colour to this
day. Below, three of the many tiny
gold plaques that adorned the warrior's
quiver, depicting a deer, a wild boar
and a hunting-dog.
^«r
t»

THE air traffic director of Moscow's Sheremetiev
airport looked askance at the two young men who stood In front of him, travel-
stained and red-eyed from lack of sleep. But there was an air of urgency
and determination about archaelogist Vasili Bidzilya and police lieutenant Vla¬
dimir Kapstov that lent authority to their demand for an immediate priority
flight to Leningrad for themselves and the battered suitcase which they
refused to put down even for a second.
A glance Inside the suitcase was enough for the airport official. Within
minutes the two men and their precious cargo were in the air and three
hours later they were unpacking their treasures beneath the- astounded gaze
of the Director of the Hermitage Museum, Dr. Boris Piotrovsky, whose eyes
widened as, one after another, gold-rimmed vases, a gold and silver bowl,
two drinking horns embellished with gold and silver, three silver vessels and
a bundle containing hundreds of small gold discs were placed on his desk.
CONTINUED PAGE 21
Thieves who rifled the "Gaimonov"
tomb near Balki in southern Ukraine
failed to find this magnificent gold and
silver loving-cup (below and detail
back cover), and the gold sheep's head
that adoms the tip of a silver rhyton
or drinking horn, above. Unearthed by
a young Ukrainian archaeologist
Vasili Bidzilya in the summer of 1969,
during a routine check of some burial
mounds threatened with obliteration by
a vast irrigation scheme, the loving-cup
is a veritable archaeologist's encyclopaedia
of Scythian life, dress, habits and
customs "written" in gold and silver
by a master craftsman of the
4th century B.C.

Photos © APN
20
The Scythians were great lovers of the
decorative arts, and by a curious quirk
of history they have preserved for us
in their tombs remarkable examples of
Greek craftsmanship. From the
Chertomlyk tombs in the Rostov area
came this gold plate, above, depicting
scenes from the life of the Greek
hero Achilles, which once embellished
a Scythian quiver. Right, a gold facing
for a scabbard showing scenes of
battle between Greeks and Scythians.

THE SCYTHIANS (Continued)
Faces of silver, garments of gold
It was a moment of unhoped for
triumph. Early In 1969, young archaeo¬
logist Vasili Bidzilya had been detail¬
ed to supervise the excavation of some
Scythian burial mounds, near the
Ukrainian village of Balki on the left
bank of the lower Dnieper, some
100 miles north west of the Crimean
peninsular. The mounds were threat¬
ened by the approach of the North
Rogachik irrigation canal system and
the excavation was thought to be me¬
rely a matter of routine. Vasili Bidzilya
could hardly have anticipated that he
would stumble across a treasure-trove
that would make his name famous.
Most of the objects found In the
"Gaimonov tomb", as it is now desig¬
nated, are unique specimens, although
they bear a close affinity with the
treasures found earlier at the famous
Scythian burial mounds of Chertomlyk,
Solokha and Kul Oba.
The Scythians were a nomadic
people who established their kingdom
In the area of the Black Sea, the lower
reaches of the Dnieper and the Don
and in the Crimea. They were skilled
horsemen and maintained their empire
from the 9th century B.C. until the
3rd century B.C. when they were gra¬
dually replaced by the Sarmatians.
Soviet academician Boris Rybakov
has described the discovery of the
Gaimonov tomb as "a great achiev¬
ement that will give fresh Impetus to
the whole study of Scythian culture."
Perhaps the most interesting find
is a gold and silver loving-cup on
which a bas relief depicts scenes of
military and diplomatic events in Scy¬
thian life. On one side of the cup are
seen two long-haired, bearded, seated
figures. They wear caftans of a pat¬
terned material, narrow trousers and
pointed boots secured at the ankles
by leather thongs. One Scythian
wears a sword belt, on which his
hand rests. The other holds a quiver
full of arrows while a bow and bow
case lie beside him. Each man has one
hand upraised and holding a whip.
By fashioning their hands and
faces in silver and their garments in
gold the craftsman has achieved a
luminous, vital effect. He has given
their faces a solemn, pensive expres¬
sion as though they were praying or
taking an oath. For sheer artistry
these are probably the finest portraits
of Scythians in existence and the lov¬
ing-cup is clearly the handiwork of a
master craftsman who was a skilled
sculptor with the eye and attention to
detail of an ethnographer.
Unfortunately, the other side of the
cup is badly defaced, but two seated
figures can be made out. They are
beardless and each has one arm
stretched out towards the other. One
of them has a goblet resting on his
knee. To their right a kneeling man
shields his face with one hand and
with the other proffers something to
his seated lord. To the left a figure is
to be seen drinking from a wine-skin.
With its six figures, who judging by
their accoutrements must have been
personages of considerable eminence,
this bas relief gives a fascinating
glimpse of a long-vanished world and
provides invaluable details of Scythian
weaponry and dress.
Vasili Bidzilya ended his investig¬
ation of the burial mounds by tackling
the largest kurgan, a man-made hillock
over a grave, on which a watch tower
is sometimes placed. The kurgan in
question measures some 30 feet in
height by 250 feet in diameter and is
surrounded by 70 smaller mounds,
some of which had been opened up
earlier. Working under Bidzilya's su¬
pervision, miners from the Zaporozhe
iron ore centre took 2 1/2 months to
remove half the earth mound on top of
the kurgan which was enclosed by a
low circular wall or kerb.
On the western slope of the mound
they found traces of a funeral feast
bones of sheep and horses, fragments
of broken amphorae, bridles and
arrow heads. At the base of the
mound were two entrances leading to
an underground chamber 25 feet below
the base of the mound. The excav¬
ators also found an entrance made
centuries ago by grave-robbers.
A careful inspection of the walls
of the vault revealed a niche contain¬
ing fragments of the alabaster facing of
a sarcophagus. A little farther on the
kitchen area was found with a selec¬
tion of cooking utensils including
bronze tongs for extracting pieces of
meat, a cauldron, a cooking pot, a tray,
a dish, a small bucket, a sieve for
straining wine, several clay amphorae
and a ladle for drawing wine. Lying
across the threshold of the kitchen
was the skeleton of a guard with his
lance and bow and arrows beside him.
When the plunderers of the past
had entered the tomb this area was
apparently blocked by earth, which had
fallen on the grave of a woman in
which were found her leg bones and
the remains of a pair of high leather
boots adorned with 43 gold triangular-
shaped plates.
Then, suddenly, one of the search¬
ers stumbled on a patch of softer
earth. A glint of gold set them digging
furiously and the cache which had
baffled the grave-robbers at last yield¬
ed up its treasure, including the lov¬
ing-cup described above. For eighteen
hours on end the exultant searchers
examined, catalogued and photograph¬
ed the treasure that had lain un¬
disturbed in the earth for 24 centuries.
The excavation of the Gaimonov
tomb has not yet been completed.
Three more burial mounds, Includ¬
ing the central one, have been found
and are being Investigated.
A museum Is to be erected on the
site of these discoveries and copies of
the most valuable objects will be put
on display. The earth mound over the
kurgan is to be replaced and the
ancient white stone kerbing that sur¬
rounds It is to be restored. Rising like
a pyramid out of the flat expanse of
the plain, the mound will continue to
mark the last resting place of Scy¬
thian warriors, a tomb which for their
descendants has provided a window
looking back on to the mysteries of
the past.
FROZEN TOMBS
OF SIBERIA
Near the point where the borders
of Russia, China and Mongolia
converge lie the frozen burial
barrows of Pazyryk. Unlike the
Black Sea Scythian mounds which
were topped with earth, the Pazyryk
barrows were covered with great
boulders. Rain seeped through the
boulders, was turned into ice by the
savage Siberian winter and convert¬
ed the tombs into huge underground
refrigerators. Although the tombs
were rifled by robbers in search of
gold, for 2,500 years a vast range
of articles remained ice-encrusted
beneath the soil in virtually pristine
condition. Uncovered by Soviet
anthropologist and archaeologist
Sergei Rudenko in 1947-1949, they
give us a picture of a horsebreeding
people living much like the Scythians
of the Black Sea area. The fasci¬
nating story of these tombs and the
Iron Age horsemen buried in them
is told in Sergei Rudenko's book
"Frozen Tombs of Siberia", recently
translated into English for the first
time by Dr. M. W. Thompson (see
Bookshelf, page 34).
21
