'Atoms X", painted In
1969 by Anna
Szpakowska-Kujawska,
a young Polish artist
from Wroclaw.

Peace research
-the science of survival
by Bert V. A. Röling
BERT V. A. ROUNG is secretary general
of the International Peace Research Associa¬
tion and professor of international law and
director of the Polemological Institute at the
University of Groningen (Netherlands).
From 1950 to 1957 he was a member of the
Netherlands Delegation to the United Nations
General Assembly. He is the author of
"International Law in an Expanded World"
(1960) and "On War and Peace" (3rd edition,
1967, In Dutch). The present text is based
on a study by Mr. Röling, published in
Unesco's science quarterly, 'Impact of
Science on Society", (Vol. XVIII, N' 2)
April-lune 1968.
w
AR was long regarded as
a scourge of God, as a means
of chastising mankind. The London
City Council in 1665, for instance,
considered the plague epidemic afflict¬
ing their city as an atonement required
by the Lord for the impious writings of
Thomas Hobbes.
Only when war was seen as just
another facet of human inadequacy
could it become the subject of
scholarly contemplation. The first
branches of learning to regard war as
man-made were theology, ethics and
jurisprudence. However, each of
these naturally tended to take a
normative view, to set up standards of
Tightness and wrongness.
The study of war and peace as an
objective branch of learning could only
begin at a rather late period in history,
when scholars no longer sought to set
up judgements, but rather sought to
examine war and its causes with the
objective of understanding the factors
and relationships that play their parts.
The first contributions were made by
historians, political scientists, econo¬
mists and sociologists.
The First World War had already
made it clear that war had ceased to
be "limited", mainly involving armies,
and had become "total", involving the
entire population of a nation.
The Second World War added a
new dimension by the introduction of
nuclear weapons. Total war has now
evolved into its ultimate state: anni¬
hilating war.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
21

PEACE RESEARCH (Continued)
22
This is the problem of our times:
war has now become unendurable, but
the relations between the states, the
international system, have remained
the same. We still have sovereign
states which seek security in their own
military power and want to ensure
peace by "deterrence", by the "balance
of terror", the modern interpretation of
the ancient adage: si vis pacem para
bellum if you wish for peace, prepare
for war.
Though total nuclear war can now
mean the end of our technical civiliza¬
tion, the prevailing system of peace
through power which implies further
arms research, a continuation of the
arms race, an increase in the arms
trade, the gradual spread of nuclear
weapons, must inevitably lead sooner
or later to nuclear war.
Peace research has its origins in the
anxiety aroused by this problem of
war. The desire for peace is no
longer based on moral or emotional
grounds, but now has its foundation in
the human reason. It is our soundly
rational fears which have caused the
question to be put whether a scholarly
approach to the problem of war might
not contribute to its solution.
Thus, after the Second World War
the field of peace research enjoyed a
rapid increase in interest and growth.
Today peace research institutes are
sprouting up everywhere in the world,
while numerous other institutions have
added peace research investigations
to their list of activities.
It seems to me that the whole
spectrum of peace research projects
falls into four well-defined categories:
war; peace; man, society and the inter¬
national system; the means of bringing
about change.
The Study Ot war. Research
projects in this category examine the
causes of wars, the various forms in
which war manifests itself, the functions
of war and the effects of war. Clearly
the study of war is a particulary diffi¬
cult one since causes, manifestations,
functions and effects will vary in each
case according to time and place
although in each case the various
elements are always interdependent.
The fact that each war has its own
history and its own process of develop¬
ment vastly complicates the study.
Ever since Von Clausewitz' Vom
Kriege, war has been primarily thought
of as a "continuation of policy by
military means." Von Clausewitz pro¬
vides what nowadays is often called
the strategic war model. As opposed
to this, there is the cataclysmic war
model, such as is outlined in Tolstoy's
War and Peace: war as an unwanted
and unpremeditated event, the result
of blind social forces, disaster arising
out of hazardous international inter¬
course, or to put it another way out
of dangerous international "traffic".
The difference may be stated thus:
in international traffic, the Clausewitz
war is a deliberate manner of driving,
the Tolstoy war a traffic accident.
If it may be said that strategic total
war has been eliminated from the
repertoire of practical international
behaviour, accidental total war, result¬
ing from the escalation of manoeuvres
in conflict situations, has not. Nor, as
a glance at the world situation tells
us, have either strategic or accidental
limited wars. What this all makes
clear is that the danger for the world
lies in the "accident", in conflict situa¬
tions, whether between big states or
small, chain-reacting out of control.
This spotlights the reason why the
aspect of peace research receiving the
greatest attention by workers in this
field is general conflict theory.
This entire study of war is now widely
known among peace researchers as
polemology, from the Greek, potemos,
"war". Some hold, in fact, that pole¬
mology is a field apart from but
complementary to peace research,
which they feel rather pertains to the
specific question of how to maintain
or re-establish peace. I myself believe
that in practice there is no real distinc¬
tion between polemology and peace
research and that the two terms are,
in fact, synonymous.
A few peace research institutions
are specifically oriented towards the
study of war. Among them may be
mentioned the Institut Français de
Polémologie in Paris. However, other
peace research institutions are also
strongly involved in this same area;
two-thirds of all institutions totally or
partially dedicated to peace research
are interested in general conflict
theory, a branch of polemology.
The attempt to formulate a general
conflict theory follows from the recogni¬
tion of two points: that conflict charac¬
terizes almost all social systems of
all sizes and that conflicts show fairly
similar patterns in the way they evolve.
Thus, conflicts within the family, in
economic life as illustrated by labour
strife in political life, in religion, in
race relations and in international rela¬
tions all have observable similarities.
The objective of studies of these
manifestations is to find the basic
generalizations which apply to all and
to assemble such generalizations into
a theory of conflict, similar in kind to
economic theory.
A general conflict theory, once
formulated, would enable the prediction
of results, as does any scientific
theory. As applied to conflicts, this
means the prediction of the course of
development and probable outcome
of a conflict situation, once the data of
the particular case and the known
structural facts of society have been
established.
Given the predicted probable out¬
come of the trend of a given conflict
situation, it would be theoretically
possible, if the trend indicated is
towards war, to put brakes on the
situation before it got out of hand.
Clearly, the development of a general
conflict theory, or even of a sound
working hypothesis, would be of great
value in reducing the chances of acci¬
dental wars.
Polemology not only includes studies
directly relating to general conflict
theory, such as comparisons between
industrial conflicts and international
conflicts, but other research projects
on such topics as the nature of cultural
conflicts in periods of change, rela¬
tionships between population increases
and war, the relationships between
war-mindedness in a culture and other
aspects of that culture, and general
military strategy.
Some projects in this area deal with
simulations of conflict situations, some¬
times using computers, and with
models of international conflict, wherein
the several national factors involved
in the development of international
conflicts are examined.
The study of peace. This
area of peace research examines the
various forms of peace and the pro¬
blems in a state of peace which tend
to destroy it.
When talking about peace, certain
basics must be realized. It can be
asserted that peace is not a natural
state. It is in the nature of man and
beast to be primarily concerned with
self, to identify self with things dear
to it, and to be stout in their defence.
This should not be misinterpreted.
I do not mean to say that war has its
roots in that which is animal in man,
because, among animals, a life-and-
death struggle between members of
the same species is a rarity. They
fight for a female, or for living space,
or in order to determine which is the
stronger. Moreover, the large-scale
group fight between bodies of conge¬
ners occurs, with the exception of
some species of rats, only among men.
So it is hardly scientific to call war
CONTINUED PAGE 30

(Continued from page 22)
PEACE RESEARCH, THE SCIENCE OF SURVIVAL
a manifestation of animalistic beha¬
viour, and to speak of "beastly" wars,
because animals just do not behave
that way.
That brings us to the second basic
point: that war is inextricably linked
to what in man is peculiarly and
uniquely human. As Raymond Aran
has written, in Guerre et Paix entre les
Nations, "The difficulties of peace
relate more to the humanity than the
animality of man . . . Man is the creature
who is capable of preferring revolt
over humiliation and his truth over
life."
Starting from such foundations,
peace must necessarily be a far from
simple matter. There are a number
of different concepts of peace which
must be taken into account.
There are, for example, the paired
concepts of negative peace, which is
simply a state of non-war, and of
positive peace, which implies the
making of accommodations between
groups so they can live together within
a mutually accepted system of values.
Our immediate concern is necessarily
this negative peace, the mere avoid¬
ance of war, and this is indeed, what
largely occupies the statesmen of the
world at this time.
30
Static and dynamic peace.
If we try to confine ourselves simply
to banning war as by a prohibition
such as that in the United Nations
Charter, what we are really doing is
excluding war as a way of resolving
conflict situations, yet without remov¬
ing the conflict situations and without
providing any alternatives to war.
This is an impossible situation,
because the conflict situations must
become so tense that they necessarily
erupt into violence. But as soon as
we attempt to make some arrangement
for the prevention of open conflict, or
arrangements for the peaceable solu¬
tions of conflict situations, we are
already within the realm of positive
peace.
Another distinction that may be
made is that between static and
dynamic peace: between peace attained
by the maintenance of a status quo
(the kind of peace envisaged in the
Covenant of the League of Nations)
and peace attained by the adoption of
ways and means to ensure peaceable
change and re-adjustment of local,
national and international social
structures.
In a dynamic era, it is much more
evident than in a period of stability
that peace is only possible if changes
can be adjusted to without violence.
We are living in an exceptionally
dynamic era, owing to the release of
atomic energy and the emancipation
of former colonies.
Among the peace research studies
dealing with the various factors of
peace in its several concepts are those
analysing the balance of power, cases
of prolonged peaceful relations bet¬
ween nations, United Nations peace¬
keeping operations, mediation and
arbitration, and non-violence as a
method of defence.
Another large group of studies deals
with the problems which have a strong
tendency to rend the fragile fabric of
peace. Two conspicuous examples
are world armament and world poverty,
but there are certainly others which
are closely related, such as popula¬
tion pressures, intra-national tribal and
ethnic group antagonisms, the shortage
of arable land, the inadequate world
food supply and the economic and
political underdevelopment of new
nations.
The urgency of the arms problem
can be seen by making a comparison
with the animal world. In the animal
world there exists a kind of equilibrium
between the degree of aggressiveness
peculiar to a given species and the
weapons which that species has at
its disposal. Aggressive species have
only weak weapons at their disposal.
Non-aggressive species may be heavily
armed. There probably have been
species which combined great aggres¬
siveness and a great potential for the
infliction of injury but, if so, these
species have died out.
The trouble in the case of man is
that science and technology have
multiplied the effectiveness of his
weapons millions of times, but this
process has not been counterpoised
by an adequate reduction of his
aggressiveness. This is the peace
problem relating to weapons, of which
there are too many at the disposal of
the wealthy countries.
The other major peace problem
follows out of the unequal distribution
of material benefits, with too few being
at the disposal of the poor nations
which represent two-thirds of the
world's population. The distance
between the rich and the poor is
widening every year. The widening
of the gap is bound to lead in the
long run to revolutions and wars.
Peace research projects which relate
to the major problems of peace and
to the formulation of the conditions
for peace include those on arms
control, the influence of industrial-
military complexes, the economic and
social consequences of disarma¬
ment, the social aspects of technical
assistance, and, in fact, all aspects of
economic development.

About one-third of peace research
institutes are working on mathematical
models of arms races. Such models,
like all mathematical models of
complex dynamic structures, are
necessarily somewhat simplified but
can sometimes provide useful insights.
Man, society and the in¬
ternational system. This area of
peace research examines the world
as it is, not as it should be if we
want to prevent war. It investigates
the world as we find it, with the
people in it as they truly are people
with their rational and irrational
elements, with their loves and hatreds,
their suspicions and enmities and in
particular with their tendency to distort
the image of their environment until
it fits the picture of the world they
have made for themselves.
While man as he really is must be
the point of departure in our under¬
standing of this combative world, peace
research must also deal with the
groups in which man lives, the states,
collective bodies with their own
sociological laws, in which the past
plays a dominant part, where tradition
often carries the day and emotionality
plays a predominant role, within which
thought and action are based not on
humanity, but on nationality, in which
conformity is the rule and indepen¬
dent thought is looked on with suspi¬
cion, in which collective distortions of
reality, especially at critical junctures,
have a fatal effect.
Bearing on these matters are peace
research investigations into ethno-
centrism acceptance of the standards
of one's ethnic group as absolutely
right and appraisal of all other groups
by these standards into race rela
tions, into the sources and compo¬
nents of nationalism and into political
ideologies and war propaganda.
Finally this area of peace research
deals with the relationships and beha¬
viour of the world of sovereign states,
that underdeveloped community of in¬
dependent units organized into what is
called the international system, in
which right and justice receive hardly
any consideration when it comes to
vital issues, in which military power is
so frequently the clinching argument.
Experimental studies on small
groups, put into test situations where
we see aggression, threat and conflict
developing out of group behaviour,
particularly out of intergroup rivalries,
are providing insights not only into
similar behaviour between far larger
social groups which are segments of
national populations, but into similar
behaviour on the international scale.
Peace research projects are prob¬
ing into all the many factors involved
in international behaviour and interna¬
tional relations. They examine, for
example, the workings of international
diplomacy, the decision-making pro¬
cess in foreign relations, the role of
élites in foreign policy decisions, the
legal aspects of peaceful coexistence,
World Court practices, the significance
of geographic factors in international
relations, the effects of modern war¬
fare on popular ethical standards, and
the reasons for the successful federa¬
tion of peoples of different cultures
one example of this being Switzerland.
Other studies are devoted to mak¬
ing a semantic analysis of internatio¬
nal disagreements, appraising not only
how the opposing parties' different
ideas of the meanings of the same
words complicate conflict situations,
but also how the intensification of
conflict situations is manifested in a
changing terminology in interchanges,
particularly by an escalation in the use
of violent and threatening language.
The relations between states in the
international system are today, as vir¬
tually always throughout history, totally
"realistic", marked by a total absence
of considerations of morality.
As Machiavelli put in his handbook
for rulers, The Prince, "A ruler cannot
be good in a bad world." A modern
political scientist drew the same con¬
clusion: "The international environ¬
ment makes it difficult almost to the
point of impossibility for states to
behave in ways that are progressively
more moral."
It is this pessimistic attitude which
lies at the root of naked power
politics. Optimists, however, think that
the behaviour of an adversary in a
controversy may indeed be favoura¬
bly affected by a gradual rapproche¬
ment in matters of disarmament by
taking graduated unilateral steps. The
policy of the good example, in which
the risk of a small concession is taken.
In any case, the antagonisms bet¬
ween states arise out of conflicts of
interests. In some cases, the conflict
of interests is such that a gain
for one party must mean a loss for the
other, as, for instance, in territorial
disputes. Yet in the majority of cases
the situation is different and an agree¬
ment between the two or a joint action
would produce results advantageous to
both. Proportionate mutual disarma¬
ment between two states is an exam¬
ple of this, since both states would
maintain the same relative strength,
but at far less cost.
Yet it has always been the case that
the uncertainty which either party feels
as to the possible conduct of the
other, instead forces both of them to Q1
arm all-out, to engage in an unlimit- *»
ed arms race. The fact is that the
conduct of one state is more or less
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

PEACE RESEARCH (Continued)
32
determined by the conduct of the
other, or by its anticipations as regards
the other's conduct. States are
accustomed to act upon the premise
that other states, striving to promote
their interests, will behave badly
which causes them to behave badly
themselves.
The same state of mind applies in
many other aspects of the conflicts
between nations. States blindly pursue
their own individual paths as they
react to each other, including the path
to war, in the belief that they are act¬
ing realistically.
I feel that what is basically neces¬
sary is a different system of internatio¬
nal relations, incorporating new rules
of conduct based on rationality. That
is the task of international law combin¬
ed with a world-wide organization which
can keep a proper check on the obser¬
vance of the rules for international
behaviour it has laid down, and which
has the power to enforce their ob¬
servance.
The means of bringing
about Change. The fourth area of
peace research includes a considera¬
tion of those forces in society which
might help the world to realize the
basic conditions for peace. One might
think here of the churches, the arts
and sciences, education, and mass
communication, including the press,
radio and television. These studies
deal particularly with such questions
as: "How can a large body of people
be reached?"; "What is the role and
significance of protest?"; and "What
may be the influence of the idea of
militant non-violence?"
To find the answers to such ques¬
tions, peace research studies are being
conducted on such general topics as
the effects and effectiveness of non¬
violent protests, the effect of public
opinion on foreign affairs, the role of
mass media in relation to biases affect¬
ing international relations, the In¬
fluence of communication channels
and mass media on foreign policy
issues, the methods of communicating
the findings of social science to deci¬
sion-makers and to the general public,
and how the general public perceives
the intentions of other nations.
Still other studies evaluate the edu¬
cational programmes of international
organizations, the effects of student
interchanges on national attitudes and
the role of religious movements on
international relations.
Change in the present attitudes of
the world towards war will come
slowly. The degree of potential chan¬
ge in public opinion has been invest
igated. It appears that a considerable
percentage (40 per cent) of those inter¬
rogated in one survey had not altered
their views over a period of twenty
years, even in circumstances most fa¬
vourable to changes of opinion.
In other cases, the changes of
opinion were very slight. Each gen¬
eration has a relatively small radius of
attitudes. Major changes usually only
follow out of bitter experience, and
tend to coincide more or less with the
advent of a new generation.
In view of the components of the
vast problem facing peace research,
which are respectively man, the group
(state) and the world of states, it is
obvious that the science of peace must
necessarily be a broadly multi-dis¬
ciplinary one.
Since most of the topics of peace
research fall clearly into the domain of
the social sciences, the scientific
staffs of peace research institutions
are heavily weighted with specialists
in various social science fields.
Among them are those trained in
history, economics, international law,
international relations, political scien¬
ce, and social psychology.
However, specialists in other dis¬
ciplines at the margin of the social
sciences or in some of the physical
and biological sciences are increasing¬
ly finding a place on peace research
staffs. Many staffs now include spe¬
cialists in mathematics and statistics,
military science, geography, physics,
anthropology and psychology. Almost
one-third of all peace research institu¬
tions employ philosophers.
Controversy between two
schools. It is regrettable that the
number of biologists on peace research
staffs is still relatively low, for these
are the scientists who must appraise
man, to determine how his innate
biological characteristics affect his
behaviour. Many peace researchers
are not sure that the study of man as
an aggressive animal falls within the
scope of this field.
Co-operation between the discipli¬
nes is by no means an easy matter,
since the various branches of learn¬
ing have gradually isolated themselves,
developing their own apparatus of re¬
search, and wish to keep their res¬
pective spheres free from the taint of
outside influence. The process of
integration has been set in motion, but
it is still far from being completed.
While it is fundamental that the
science of peace must aim to become
more and more an exact science
approaching the natural sciences, it is
evident that, as a social science, it
can only make limited utilization of
the methodologies of the natural scien¬
ces.
Peace research methodologies may
be classified, generally speaking, as
being of two types, and there is a
controversy currently going on about
their respective merits. The first
approach is what we may call the
"traditional" or "historical-analytical"
approach. The second is the "mod¬
ern" or "mathematical" approach,
which turns to statistical methods, ma¬
thematical analysis and mathematical
model-making in the treatment of the
subject matter. The controversy be¬
tween adherents of the two schools
is an extension of the same contro¬
versy as is found in the fields of socio¬
logy and international relations.
My conclusion tends to be that both
methods are indispensable, because
they are complementary. The exact
method will often succeed in proving
beyond refutation what the traditional
method has suggested. Moreover,
figures form an international language
which can be understood across the
frontiers of states and ideologies.
Usually peace research starts within
a national context. In each country,
it bears a national stamp and employs
a national rhetoric. Each investigator's
outlook cannot fail to be conditioned
by the system of values prevalent in
his own country, by what Julius Stone
(in "Aggression and World Order")
called "the national versions of truth
and justice."
The investigator sincerely strives for
objectivity, but he does not escape
subjectivity. This has an advantage
in that he speaks the language of his
environment and is understood in con¬
sequence. Obviously, this is neces¬
sary for any social science which
wishes to have any impact on society
at all.
The drawback is that where diffe¬
rent approaches are made in different
parts of the world, as in western and
eastern Europe, for instance, there are
serious problems of mutual compre¬
hension. Hence the necessity of con¬
tact and of confrontation, for the ultim¬
ate establishment of common points
of departure and common bases of un¬
derstanding.
In our divided world, we shall be
very long in achieving the common
starting points, the Greek "topoi",
which according to Plato's ideal might
convince even the gods. But in a
situation where, I believe, peace can
only be finally realized as a universal
peace achieved by a universal culture,
it is imperative that this common
basis be established as soon as
possible.
