by Vsevolod Sto/etov
Member of the U.S.S.R. Academy of
Pedagogical Sciences and Minister of
Higher and Secondary Specialized
Education of the Russian Soviet
Federated Socialist Republic.

EDUCATION
key to social
transformation
W
12
E must at all costs set out,
first, to learn, secondly, to learn and
thirdly, to learn ; and then see to it
that learning shall not remain a dead
letter, that it shall become part of our
very being and a fully constituent part
of our social life."
These words, from one of Lenin's
last articles, "Better fewer, but better",
reflect the love of learning of the
man who has been called "the great
headmaster" and his firm belief that
knowledge means power.
Lenin inherited his profound respect
for and interest in learning from his
father who was a talented and well-
known educator of his time. In 1869,
the year before Lenin's birth, llya Niko-
layevich' Ulyanov was appointed ins¬
pector of primary schools in the pro¬
vince of Simbirsk and later he became
director of schools with the rank of
Councillor of State.
In Simbirsk he was known as "The
Liberal" and his sense of responsibility
towards the people led him to actions
that were at times regarded with some
suspicion by his superiors.
As a gimnaziya teacher he refused
to take money for working with the
poorer students to get them through
their examinations. As inspector and
then director of schools he applied
himself with great energy to the task
of building up the school system in
his province. In 17 years he was res¬
ponsible for the building of 450
schools and doubling the school
attendance.
The humanistic upbringing Lenin
received from his parents, the example
of his father's devotion to his work,
his own extensive knowledge of his¬
tory and his ability to analyse events
awakened in him an ardent desire to
fight for social justice.
Lenin was convinced that social in¬
justice and social inequality must be
abolished before full equality could be
achieved. He reasoned that without
equality in education there could be
neither genuine equality nor genuine
democracy. To achieve this genuine
democracy he outlined a number of
aims, not only in the social, political
and economic, but also in the educa¬
tional fields. As early as 1902 Lenin and
his friends declared that they would
fight for universal, free, compulsory
education for everyone below the age
of 16.
Lenin's parents belonged to a
generation of Russian intellectuals who
took a passionate interest in the ideas
of the great French Enlightenment, the
French and English Utopian socialists,
the writings of the Russian revolu¬
tionary democrat Nikolai Chernyshev-
sky. The works of Robert Owen, Saint-
Simon and Charles Fourier were the
manuals of Russian intellectuals in the
1860s.
Lenin's own views on education and
his pedagogical principles also stem¬
med from the teachings of 18th and
19th century philosophers with their
distinctive tone of historical optimism
and moral courage. He saw the aim
of economic, social, scientific, techno¬
logical and cultural progress as being
"the humanizing of the environment"
and ensuring for men a harmonious
and intellectual development.
His programme of social transform¬
ation was, therefore, closely linked with
education. He realized that the new
state could only be built if everyone
was aware of the greatness of the goal.
For this ¡t was necessary to elevate
man, to free him from the grip of
ignorance, poverty and servitude. And
the first step was to wipe out illiteracy.
As Russia entered the 20th century,
CONTINUED PAGE 14

:
i fC-A
f/**
J,/«* U faucet] i
'/?
.i*Jvc<
a
<
Far left, Lenin (carrying
umbrella) in Stockholm on the
way to Russia via Finland
following the February 1917
revolution which overthrew
the Czar. But once back
in Russia, Lenin was forced
into hiding again by the
Kerensky provisional
government. Left, Lenin
disguised as worker
Konstantin Ivanov used
this pass to get to the
Smolny Institute from where
he directed the October
revolution.
Below, Lenin and his wife Nadezhda Krupskaya after
the National Conference of 1919 against illiteracy.
Nadezhda Krupskaya played a major role in forming
Soviet educational policy.
Photo © I ML Archives - Revolution Museum, Moscow

Photo left, Lenin (in centre, under lamp)
presides as chairman of the first
government of Soviet Russia the
Council of People's Commissars
which was formed at the Second
All-Russia Congress of Soviets, the
day after the October revolution.
The first major decrees on Peace,
Land and Nationalization were followed
by further decrees on education and
the preservation of libraries and
monuments and the opening of the
universities to the workers, etc.
In 1919, the famous decree on the
elimination of illiteracy was promulgated.
EDUCATION (Continued)
'Economize on everything except education'
80 per cent of her population bet¬
ween the ages of 9 and 50 was illitera¬
te. In the provinces, especially in cen¬
tral Asia, the far east and north, lite¬
racy was practically nil (Tajiks 0.5 per
cent, Kirghiz 0.6 per cent, for example).
In discussing this situation Lenin him¬
self wrote: "there is no other country
in Europe so barbarous in which the
masses are robbed to such an extent
of education, light and knowledge . . .
No other country in Europe has remain¬
ed in this condition; Russia is the
exception."
Arguing with his political opponents
on the eve of the Great October Revo¬
lution, Lenin wrote "We are not Uto¬
pians." And he went on to say, "We
know that an unskilled labourer or a
cook cannot immediately get on with
the job of State administration." He
firmly rejected the view that "only the
rich, or officials chosen from rich fami¬
lies, are capable of administering the
State, of performing the ordinary,
everyday work of administration."
Both unskilled labourers and cooks,
Lenin said, are capable of learning to
administer the affairs of society pro¬
vided that they get a good education.
L
14
|ENIN focussed his atten¬
tion on universal education literally the
day after the workers had seized poli¬
tical power. Decrees concerned with
land, peace, the nationalization of finan¬
cial institutions, the railways and heavy
industry were immediately followed by
laws on education.
The decree "On the setting up of a
State Commission for Education", pub¬
lished on November 22, 1917, defined
(as did also a number of subsequent
laws enacted in 1917 and 1918) the
main principles underlying the struc¬
ture of the educational system and its
democratic management.
On the eve of the October revolu¬
tion, Lenin's wife and close collabora¬
tor, Nadezhda Krupskaya, wrote, on
his advice, a book entitled "Edu¬
cation and Democracy" which was also
to serve as a basis for the new edu¬
cational system in Russia.
Under the new order, research ins¬
titutes, libraries, publishing houses,
newspapers and periodicals, museums,
picture galleries, theatres, conserva¬
toires, the radio etc., were all enlisted
to help schools of all levels in the
task of spreading knowledge.
The Red Army became a vehicle
for imparting education. A network of
courses, classes, faculties and study
groups was set up throughout the coun¬
try to teach people to read and write.
The watchword of the day was: "If you
know how to read, teach your neigh¬
bour." "Workers faculties" were
organized early in 1919 to help work¬
ers, peasants and soldiers whose
secondary education was incomplete
to join higher educational establish¬
ments. Within a short time they were
established in all universities and insti¬
tutes.
At the third All-Russia Congress of
the Soviets, on January 31, 1918, Lenin
declared that all scientific and techno¬
logical achievements would become
the property of the people and be
placed at their service. This was an
official declaration and in later
speeches and articles he stressed that
the scientific knowledge of the intelli¬
gentsia should be fused with the initia¬
tive, energy and effort of the masses.
The decree "On the setting up of a
State Commission for Education" and
later documents, laid down the basic
principles for the administration of edu¬
cational establishments; it was to be
based on co-operation between
teachers and the general public.
In the early years the Soviet edu¬
cational system demanded enormous
sacrifices on the part of the people and
the state. The young Republic was
beleaguered on all sides by foreign
armies and a large part of its territory
was occupied by the enemy.
Counter-revolution and espionage
had assumed enormous proportions
within the country. Industry, agricul¬
ture and transport were in havoc, mil¬
lions were starving and mass epidemics
ravaged the country.
Nevertheless, the underlying prin¬
ciples of the educational system were
shaped in those grim days. The slo¬
gan of the moment was: "Economize
on everything except education; eco¬
nomize on everything for the sake of
education."
B
ETWEEN 1917 and 1928,
construction of 7,780 new primary and
secondary schools was completed or
begun. Though battling with its many
enemies, with disease, hunger and
devastation, the government organized
universities in Voronezh, Nijni Novgo¬
rod (now Gorky), Irkutsk and Samara
(now Kuibyshev). A few years later
the Byelorussian, Yaroslavl, Turkestan
and other universities were founded.
Russia was well down amongst the
developed countries with regard to the
number of university students. In 1914
there were only 8 students per 10,000
of the population in Russia as compar¬
ed with 34 in the United States and
16 in Germany. In 1914, Russia's
student population was 127,000
whereas in 1968/69, 4,470,000 students
attended the country's higher educa¬
tional establishments.
Considerable changes were made in
the geographical distribution of aca¬
demic institutions. Before 1917, more
than half of these were in Moscow
and Petrograd. There was only one
higher education establishment outside

In 1918, on the first anniversary
of the October Revolution, Lenin
unveiled a memorial plaque In the
Kremlin wall which bears the inscription,
"To those fallen in the fight for peace
and brotherhood of peoples". At that
time Lenin paid much attention to what
he called "monumental propaganda".
This was the first of many plaques,
obelisks and other monuments
erected during Lenin's lifetime.
the present Russian Federation and
Ukrainian Republic. On the eve of
the Second World War there were 146,
including 46 in the Transcaucasian
Republics, 47 in the Central Asian
Republics and 20 in Kazakhstan. Many
higher education establishments were
opened in Siberia.
Today there is not a single Repub¬
lic, territorial or regional centre with¬
out at least one of the country's 794
institutions of higher learning. The
Soviet student population includes
representatives of practically all the
100 different nationalities living in the
U.S.S.R.
There have also been considerable
changes in the social structure of the
student body. In 1914, students from
the privileged classes accounted for
58, per cent of the student enrolment
in ten universities (34,500 students).
Workers were listed under the head¬
ing "others" and the share of these
others amounted to only 2.8 per cent.
In five higher technical institutions
students from the privileged classes
accounted for 41.3 per cent (9,300
students) - and "others" for 4.6 per
cent. A year after the October revolu¬
tion Kazan university still had more
than 1,000 students from the privi¬
leged classes, but there were already
135 students from the urban and rural
working class and 439 of farmer origin.
The government took further steps
to make the student population a
genuinely democratic one and the
process took about ten years. In 1930,
45.9 per cent of the student population
consisted of workers and their chil¬
dren, 19.4 per cent of peasants and
their children, 30.3 per cent of office
workers and intellectuals and 4.4 per
cent of other categories.
The principals of Soviet universities
attempt to make the social structure
of the student body reflect the social
structure of the whole population. It
was with this in view that one-year
preparatory courses were set up at
many higher education establishments
in 1969.
The quality of instruction in the big
cultural centres improves more rapidly
than it does in rural schools and in
schools in the new industrial districts.
As a result pupils from the latter
schools find it difficult to compete with
pupils from the big cultural centres in
the qualifying entrance examinations.
The preparatory courses are intended
to do away with this distinction and
to provide equal conditions for all
young people wishing to acquire a
higher education, irrespective of their
place of domicile.
By 1965, the student population of
the U.S.S.R. had multiplied 28 times
as compared with 1914 and the aca¬
demic staff 33 times. But this was
not only a quantitative growth. Lenin
was anxious that there should be no
break in the continuity of scientific and
cultural development and he ensured
that full use was made of the old
Russia's academic staff amongst whom
were many scholars of world renown.
He maintained that socialist science
and culture would emerge through the
creative assimilation of the scientific
and cultural achievements of preced¬
ing generations.
I
T was this continuity that
Lenin sought to ensure when he laid
down the attitude that the proletariat,
now at the helm of state, should adopt
towards the intellectuals of the old
Russia. He called for active partici¬
pation of all scholars educated in old
Russia in the life of Soviet universities
and institutes and insisted that no arti¬
ficial barriers should be erected bet¬
ween the old and the new scholars.
Comradely co-operation should be
established with the old professoriate
who should be allowed to participate
in research and for whom adequate
living conditions should be provided.
Lenin's attitude towards the older
scholars bore ample fruit and the
majority of them played their part in
helping to develop the educational
system and in training young research
workers.
Nowadays most countries endeavour
to give at least an elementary educ¬
ation to the entire population. Without
it modern industry and agriculture
would be impossible to maintain. Liter¬
acy for the entire population is the
first step in the abolition of the "know¬
ledge monopoly."
The second step is universal com¬
pulsory secondary education and some
developed countries have already
reached this stage. The third stage is
to put higher education within the
reach of all those wishing to acquire
it and capable of benefiting from it,
and the final stage is the elimination
of all distinction between physical and
intellectual labour.
Nobody nowadays any longer doubts
that the aims of these first and second
stages are attainable, but with regard
to the third and fourth stages the old
argument is still being advanced that
people are "biologically unequal" for
hereditary reasons.
Soviet scholars work on the
assumption that, provided their parents
are healthy and lead a normal life, all
people are endowed with equal abili¬
ties. A healthy childhood must be
ensured for all and children must be
provided with the material conditions
for education, rising from one stage to
another.
In other words there must be social
justice, equal access to the achieve¬
ments of the human Intellect and equal
conditions for growth and develop¬
ment. Equal education, therefore,
forms a significant part of that social
justice for which Lenin fought through¬
out his life.
Speaking about this aspect of
Lenin's work, Albert Einstein said:
"I respect in Lenin a man who, with
complete self-forgetfulness, gave all
his strength to the cause of social jus- 1 C
tice. . . one thing is irrefutable people V
like him uphold and renew the cons¬
cience of mankind."
