CAIRO
1,000 years
of history
inscribed
in stone
Photo © Abdel Fattah Eid, Cairo
Since the Pharaoh Menés conquered
the Nile Delta 5, 000 years ago, thus
re-uniting north and south, Egypt has
remained Egypt. And Cairo is the heart
of Egypt. In Arabic, the word for Egypt
is Misr, and for many centuries Misr has
remained the popular name used for the
Egyptian capital. Thus country and
capital rightly share a common name,
for in this great city one can see a
synthesis of all of Egypt's past.
Sarwat Okasha
Minister of Culture
United Arab Republic
by Abdel-Rahman Zaky
10
c
^^TRUNG like pearls on the
thread of Islamic history, the names
of the great cities of Islam evoke a
vision of magical splendour Cordova,
Cairo, Damascus, Aleppo, Baghdad,
Bokhara, Samarkand. The list is end¬
less, yet among these cities none
ABDEL-RAHMAN ZAKY, of the U.A.R., is a
leading authority on Islamic history and
archaeology, and on medieval Cairo. He has
written many studies in these fields and is
the author of "The Citadel of Salah El-Din",
"Cairo: From Gawhar to labarti' and 'Concise
Encyclopaedia of Cairo" (in Arabic). Dr. Zaky
Is lecturer in museography at the Institute
of Islamic Archaeology, Cairo, and adviser
to the "Committee on Civilization' at the
Arabic Language Academy. He is editor of the
"Concise Arabic Encyclopaedia, 1960-1968".
stands so pre-eminent as Cairo.
As the capital of Egypt it is as old
as Islam itself, and down to the pre¬
sent day it has consistently remained,
not merely a bastion of Islam but a
treasure house enclosing innumerable
masterpieces of Islamic art that cover
more than a thousand years.
Its history began when Amr ibn
al-As conquered Egypt for Omar, the
second of the Mohammedan caliphs,
in the year 641 A. D. Amr captured the
Roman fortress of Egyptian Babylon
which stood at the settlement said to
have been founded by emigrants from
the ancient town of the same name.
Just to the north of this fortress, whose

remains still dignify Old Cairo, Amr
set up his camp and here he founded
the town named Al-Fustat (signifying
"the tent").
Later rulers were to add other
administrative centres to Fustat and
always to the north but this was
essentially the beginning of Cairo, the
capital standing on the east bank of
the Nile and replacing ancient Mem¬
phis to the west. In the 9th century,
for example, Ahmed ibn Tulun, whose
great mosque still stands, built Al-
Qatai as his capital, north-east of
Fustat.
The name Cairo, however, and the
beginning of its great splendour date
from the Fafimids, a Shiite dynasty
claiming descent from Fatima, the
daughter of the prophet Muhammad.
The first caliph of the Fatimid dynasty
in North Africa was Ubaydallah the
Mahdi whose reign began in Kairouan,
Tunisia, in 910.
Egypt was conquered half a century
later, in 969, by Jawhar, vizier and
commander in chief of the reigning
Fatimid caliph, al-Muizz. The capital
of the Fatimid empire was at once
established in the new centre that
Jawhar had founded and named Al-
Qahira (The Victorious), a name which
has passed into English as Cairo.
Jawhar had left Kairouan in Feb
ruary 969 with 100,000 men and am¬
ple supplies and equipment. By
July 9, Fustat had surrendered and the
Fatimid army was encamped on the
sandy plain to the north of it. That
same night a new palace-fortress city
was marked out over a square roughly
1,200 yards each way. The south
faced Fustat, the west ran beside the
ancient canal known as Al-Khalij, the
east fronted on the Muqattam Hills,
while to the north lay open country
and the highway to Asia.
The original wall and the seven
gates were of mudbrick. The three 1 1
magnificent stone gateways and the I I
section of the wall that survive today
were part of a grand rebuilding in
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

CAIRO (Continued)
stone on a slightly different alignment
a century later by the great vizier
Badr al-Jamali.
The walled Al-Qahira was a royal
city, entry to which was forbidden
except to those on official business.
It was designed to enclose two pala¬
ces for the caliph and his family,
government offices, quarters for the
garrison, the treasury, arsenal, stables
and other buildings.
Once the walls were begun, Jawhar's
next task was the foundation of a
great assembly mosque. On Sunday,
April 3, 970, was founded Al-Azhar (the
Resplendent), the mosque that is still
the glory of Islam. It was finished on
June 24, 972, and in 988 it began to be
used by scholars and students. It
then became what it has ever since
remained, one of the chief universities
of Islam.
Then, as now, students from every
part of the Muslim world gathered
within its walls to receive instruction
from the lips of great scholars in the
Koran, in theology, the Traditions of
the Prophet, law, grammar, logic and
rhetoric. After the time of Saladin.
Al-Azhar became the most eminent
centre of orthodox teaching in Islam,
a university of unequalled distinction
and world-wide reputation.
Within only a few years of its foun¬
dation, Cairo had grown to such
splendour that in 985, the Arab
traveller Maqdisi, could write: "Bagh¬
dad was in former times an illustrious
city, but it is now crumbling to decay,
and its glory has departed. I found
neither pleasure nor aught worthy of
admiration there. Cairo today is
what Baghdad was in its prime, and I
know of no more illustrious city in
Islam."
For Cairo was no longer a provincial
city, the seat of a mere governor
appointed ry the Abbasid caliphate.
It was the capital of a vigorous empire
SULTAN PUBLICISTS
OF THE 13th CENTURY
Under its Mameluke rulers, Egypt in the
13th century rapidly developed its contacts and
trade with other countries. Benefiting from the
fruitful transit trade between the Mediterranean
ports and the East, Cairo became one of the
world's richest cities.
Chronicles of the time tell us that Sultan
Kalaun (1278-1290) instructed the governors at
his ports to treat foreign travellers and merchants
with the utmost consideration, and by cordiality
and friendship to encourage them to extend their
stay. Such visitors, he decreed, should be taxed
with justice and impartiality and required to pay
only the officially prescribed amount. "They,"
(the travellers and merchants) declared the order,
"are gifts to us from the sea to invigorate the
life of our ports. Whatever they say of us will
be remembered by others. Our good actions
towards them (falling like seed on fertile soil)
will bear fruit which will be borne far and wide
as their ships, with sails spread like the wings
of a bird, carry them to other lands."
Sultan Kalaun did much to promote Egyptian
trade, and for this purpose he issued passports
enabling merchants to travel safely through Egypt
and Syria as far as India.
Other Egyptian sultans actually launched
publicity campaigns, despatching messages to
traders in East and West to encourage them
to visit Egypt. The cordial terms and subtle
phrasing of these messages clearly shows the
importance accorded by Egypt to its contacts
with other countries. One text runs: "Let he who
has chosen to visit our kingdoms look on his
decision as that of a man to whom God wills
nothing but good. Let him come to a country
where no man need possess worldly goods, for
the visitor will find here a veritable Garden of
Eden, filled with distractions for he who is far
from his native land. Let the merchants of the
Yemen, of India, of China, of Sind and other
kingdoms who have taken note of our decree,
make ready to journey to our country. They will
see for themselves that our words have not done
justice to reality and that the good fortune
awaiting them greatly exceeds our promises."

which more than rivalled that of the
Abbasids. It had become a Med¬
iterranean power, the equal of all its
rivals to east and west.
The naval power and wide con¬
nexions of the Fatimids made Egypt a
new factor in the power politics of the
area. These and the wisdom of Fatimid
policies led to Cairo's rise as a centre
of trade that flourished on a scale pre¬
viously unknown.
Writers and travellers have devoted
many pages to describing its splen¬
dours, climaxed by its two great
palaces. Between them lay a square,
Bayn al-Qasrayn (Between the Two
Palaces), a name which still survives
as that of a street flanked by several
fine mosques of later date.
The square was used for parades
and great ceremonies. To the east
lay Al-Muizz's palace, to the west that
built by his son Al-Aziz to overlook
the Garden of Kafur (an earlier ruler)
that now lay between it and the Khalij
canal.
The Egyptian topographer Maqrizi
(d. 1441) devotes nearly two hundred
pages to a description of the palaces
with their four thousand chambers,
including the Golden Hall, a gorgeous
pavilion in which sat the Caliph on his
golden throne surrounded by richly
attired attendants, the Emerald Hall
with its pillars of marble and the Great
Diwan where he sat in state on Mon¬
days and Thursdays at a window
beneath a cupola.
Al-Qahira of the Fatimids was
indeed a new city. The Fatimids could
have echoed the words of the Emperor
Augustus, when he spoke of Rome,
and boasted that they found their city
mudbrick and left it stone. Construc¬
tion in stone was an innovation at that
time, its use having been abandoned
since the classical era.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Left, drawing of a Cairo street
in 1889. Right, street scene
today in a market area
of the city. Though Cairo
today boasts many
skyscrapers and modern
buildings, little has changed
in the appearance of the old
quarters with their narrow
twisting streets, where
crowds throng the stalls and
open-front shops. Cairo
became a great cosmopolitan
and trading centre in the
time of the Mamelukes
(13th-15th centuries A.D.)
when It was the richest and
most populous city of Islam.
Goods and commodities
from many lands were on sale
In Its markets. Even today,
the aromatic odours of the
bazaar quarter recall those
far-off times when Cairo
grew rich on the trade in
strange spices brought from
Arabia Felix and India.

CAIRO (Continued)
Golden age of Muslim architecture
Photo © René Burrl - Megnum
14
As mentioned previously, Badr al-
Jamali rebuilt part of the walls and
gateways (1087-1091). They are monu¬
ments of magnificent stonework. His
own tomb-mosque on the Muqattam is
of stone, as was the mosque of Al-
Akmar (1125). The minaret of Badr's
mosque was also an innovation for
Islamic architecture in Egypt.
The next major change in the plan of
Cairo came with Salah-ad-Din al-
Ayyubi (Saladin), who took over from
the Fatimids in 1169 and ruled till
1193. He planned a new wall to join
Al-Qahira and Fustat into one great
city, thus enclosing an area ten times
as great as the Fatimid capital.
Saladin also built what is still the
dominant architectural feature of Cairo,
the Citadel. It stands on the foothills
of the Muqattam, and it was to the
Citadel that the centre of government
was now transferred. The centre of
gravity had moved from the Fatimid
city. The old palaces fell into ruin
and new buildings arose on their sites.
Only a few fragments of their carved
woodwork have survived.
Saladin and his successors, who
ruled until 1250, brought further
changes to Islamic architecture in
Egypt. The college-mosque (madrasa)
made its appearance, and with it a
cruciform plan in both mosque and
madrasa. The pepper-pot minaret and
the use of stalactite ornament came
into use, as did the lavish use of
squinch arches and the external
ornamentation of the dome.
Under Mameluke rule, which was
uninterrupted up to the Ottoman
conquest in 1517, commercial pros¬
perity led to further expansion of Cairo,
south, west and north. Beyond the
northern gates of Al-Qahira there grew
up a new suburb. Much survives
from Mameluke times tomb-mosques,
college-mosques, schools, inns, public
fountains.
Indeed much of the unique beauty of
Cairo's architecture is due to the
Mamelukes. But of their luxurious
palaces we have nothing except some
huge walls from Bishtak's palace, a
fine gateway from the Yeshbek's
mansion next to Sultan Hasan's impos¬
ing mosque and the better preserved
mansion of the Emir (known as Beyt-
el-Cadi). Their sumptuous beauty is
something that we can but dimly ima¬
gine from the descriptions of travellers
and the rare and delicate objects that
adorn our museums.
We can still see traces of the
exquisite mushrabiyah latticework
that embellished the Mameluke pala¬
ces. Even today, some markets are
shaded by matting or wooden roofs
much as they were in those far off
times. But the luxurious palaces and
mansions, the public baths and gar-

Cairo's oldest mosque, with
Its spiral minaret, brick pillars
and stylized arabesques, has
remained virtually untouched
since It was built by Ahmed
¡bn Tulun In 879 A.D.
(photo left). In the backround
looms the Imposing mass of
The Citadel, the fortress built
by Saladin in the 12th century.
Saladin did not live to see Its
construction finished and the
work was completed by his
brother the Sultan El-Adel.
The Citadel was supplied
with water from
"Joseph's Well," dug out
of solid rock to the level of the
Nile. Dominating The Citadel
are the domes and minarets
of the famous Mohammad Ali
mosque, the largest and most
splendid that remains from the
Ottoman era. Photo far left,
a view of the Inner courtyard
of the Ibn Tulun mosque
as seen from the minaret.
dens, the pleasure .kiosks and bel¬
vederes, the streets and inns that were
the meeting-places of the world, live
on only in the pages of the historian
Maqrizi.
Under the Mamelukes, Cairo was
for two and a half centuries the richest,
the fairest and the most populous city
of Islam. Its mosques and other
buildings testify to the taste and public
spirit of its rulers. The variety and
subtlety of the architecture is
extraordinary.
The 13th, 14th and 15th centuries
all have their characteristic master¬
pieces. From Kalaun, whose period
saw the end of the Crusaders, to
Qait-Bay and Al-Ghuri, who saw the
Ottoman menace about to overwhelm
Egypt at the same time that the
Portuguese were cutting the vital trade-
routes to India and the Far East, one
lovely building succeeded another.
The façades, the minarets and the
interiors grew in delicacy and imagina¬
tive enterprise.
One particular masterpiece is out¬
standing because it is quite unlike any
other the college-mosque of Sultan
Hasan which was built 1356-1359. Its
stones were taken from the Pyramids,
and it is perhaps not too fanciful to
suppose that something of its uniquely
massive and monumental character is
due to that inspiration. Its walls rise
to a great height and are crowned by
a magnificent cornice as splendid in
conception as Michelangelo's on the
Palazzo Farnese in Rome.
Everywhere the impression is made
by size if not by detail. The soaring
portal rises the whole height of
the building. The interior court is
surrounded by four noble arches. The
whole was once adorned with the
finest of craftsmanship in bronze and
enamelled glass, some of which can
be seen in the Museum of Islamic Art,
while its bronze-plated door now
beautifies the Muayyad mosque beside
the Bab Zuwayla gate.
Arab travellers and writers vied with
each other in their accounts of this
gracious city. Ibn Battuta, the Marco
Polo of Islam, described it in the most
glowing terms in 1326. In 1383, Ibn
Khaldun the historian, who ended his
days in Cairo, called it "the metropolis
of the universe, garden of the world,
throne of royalty, a city adorned with
palaces and mansions, convents, mo¬
nasteries and colleges, and illuminated
by the stars of erudition in a paradise
so bounteously watered by the Nile
that the earth seems here to offer its
fruits to men as gifts and salutations."
During this whole period Cairo was
the heart of Islam and of Islamic
civilization. Baghdad was captured
and sacked by the Mongols in 1258 and
never recovered its former splendour.
Cairo welcomed its refugees. Only
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
15

16
CAIRO (Continued)
Mameluke Egypt in the whole Middle
East was able to resist the onslaught
of the Mongols. Three times they
were driven back and defeated.
Egypt's prosperity, indeed, was only
the greater because of them. It was
the greater, too, because much of its
trade passed on to the steadily grow¬
ing markets of Europe.
The craftsmen of Cairo reached new
levels of perfection during this period,
and much of their metal, wood and
glass work has survived in the mos¬
ques themselves and in Cairo's mu¬
seums. Moreover, the skyline of the
city is a symphony of domes and
minarets in which architects and
craftsmen joined in creating one of the
most beautiful cities man has made.
Joseph Gobineau, the 19th century
French traveller, wrote: "In Cairo the
memory of the Mamelukes dominates
everything, so much did they do, so
many solid and beautiful monuments
did they create. Only they could
carve in stone the world of arabesques
which adorns with such splendour the
buildings of all Asia. Though slaves
only yesterday, the Mamelukes, once
they laid their sabres down and
possessed the authority to rule,
seemed no longer capable of anything
trivial. Everything that they built is
without equal among Muslim archi¬
tecture in the rest of the world."
With the Ottoman conquest in 1517
a gradual decay set in. Trade with the
East steadily diminished. Neverthe¬
less, these centuries are not entirely
without importance in the adornment
of Cairo. Neither taste nor skill were
what they had once been. Yet, in the
years up to the beginning of the 19th
century, many buildings were added
to Cairo that are still a delight to
behold.
In 1798, with the appearance of
Napoleon, the power politics and new
techniques of Europe exploded upon
Egypt. Willy-nilly Egypt was dragged
into the modern world. The changes
have been as tremendous as they have
been rapid.
Walking along the Nile or through
the streets of the modern city with its
skyscrapers and broad avenues, the
visitor may not always be aware how
old a city Cairo really is until, looking
to the west, he sees the ancient
pyramids, or to the east the proud
citadel of Saladin.
But in the streets of the older city
the past is never absent. Cairo, like
so many other places in the Nile
Valley, is like a book whose pages are
of stone inscribed with clear records
of man's endless endeavour. Each of
them invites the passerby to wonder
and to seek to learn the nature of his
fellow men in other times and places.
In few cities will such an effort be
more rewarding than it is in Cairo.
Left, back home
from a pilgrimage
to Mecca, a Cairo
citizen, In this
19th century
drawing, recounts
in pictures drawn
on his wall the
journey he made
to the chief holy
city of Islam.
Below and right,
two views of the
Al-Azhar
University.
Photos © Paul Almasy. Paris

AL-AZHAR THE RESPLENDENT
Less than one year after the birth of the city of Cairo in
969 A.D., the new Fatimid rulers of Egypt laid the foundations
of the great mosque of Al-Azhar (The Resplendent) the first
of many architectural masterpieces to be erected by this
dynasty.
At the outset, the mosque was intended to be a centre for
the teaching of the Fatimids' religious ideas. But within a vew
years, In 988, the Caliph Al-Aziz gave orders that tuition should
be provided for 35 students for whom accomodation was also
made available at his expense. The Fatimid caliphs spared
no effort in the spreading of knowledge and the encouragement
of learning. Successive rulers, ministers and wealthy citizens
contributed funds with the result that the mosque became an
Islamic university the oldest in the world whose splendour
and influence grew rapidly. As Egypt became the leading
country of the Muslim world, Cairo became a Mecca for
scholars from far and wide.
Since that time, Al-Azhar has been a centre of Islamic
culture to which theologians, scholars and teachers have come
to lecture In theology, Arabic linguistics, logic, literature, mathe¬
matics, medicine, astronomy, law and other fields of learning.
Al-Azhar's renown as a centre for scientific studies spread
throughout the world during the reign of the Mameluke dynasty
(13th- 16th century A.D.). Even when this period ended and
invasion and occupation dimmed the brillance of cultural life
in Cairo, Al-Azhar remained a refuge of religious doctrines
and teaching and a bastion of the Arabic language.
At the start of the 20th century, Sheikh Muhammad Abdou,
one of the founders of the modern intellectual movement in
Egypt, introduced changes in the programmes and teaching
at Al-Azhar which, while respecting the university's age-old
traditions, also met the new demands of science and modern
education.
More recent transformations have consolidated the vigour
and increased the influence of Al-Azhar. In addition vo its
institutes for traditional Islamic and Arabic studies, it now has
faculties in every discipline of the natural and social sciences,
in agriculture, medicine, commerce, engineering and languages,
as well as a teacher training institute.
Al-Azhar also has a women's college, founded in 1962, and
today attended by 2,000 students from many parts of the world.
The college is the nucleus of a future women's university, in
which the existing college departments of medicine, the basic
sciences, Islamic and Arabic studies, the social sciences,
languages and commerce, including accounting, business
administration and statistics, will become faculties.
In recent years, enrolment at Al-Azhar has grown rapidly . _
and today tops 20,000. To meet this rapid influx, a vast | 7
university complex has been built on the outskirts of Cairo, '
comprising new faculty buildings and a university city to house
students and staff. But the three oldest colleges those for
Islamic studies are to remain near the 1,000 year old mosque
which gave them birth.
