SPIN-OFF
the fruit of space research
Much has been written on man's conquest of space in the past twelve years,
crowned by the two successful landings on the moon by U.S. astronauts
in 1969. Less appreciated, but perhaps far more significant than the spectacular
aspects of space exploration itself, are the spin-off benefits that is,
the vast accumulation of practical results for men on Earth of space research.
Last year, the "Unesco Courier" asked Mr. Gene Gregory, U.S. engineer
and writer specializing in economic and technological questions, to undertake
a special inquiry into the fruits of space research. Mr. Gregory's findings
occupy a major portion of this issue, and reveal a vast array of new products
and processes, innovations in materials, revolutionary progress in electronics
and computer technology, and a host of benefits for developed and developing
countries in communications, weather forecasting, food and agriculture,
education, health and medicine, industry and manufacturing, transportation
and commerce, new sources of energy, geology, hydrology, oceanography
and other applied sciences of direct use to all mankind today and in the years
to come. On page 32, Arthur C. Clarke, the world famous science writer,
discusses the implications and promise of what he calls "The century of
the communications satellite."
"
« r^o^ wiji
A

by Gene Gregory
A
Is the
space
effort
a waste
money
The strange form floating above the
> lunar landscape in this photo-montage
is one of the many new products
' developed through space research. A
revolutionary three-dimensional fabric,
J it was built into the boots used by
_ the first astronauts on the moon,
>. since it is extremely light and an
.b extraordinary insulator. It can be put
o to many terrestial uses.
LS the Apollo 11 and 12
spacecraft raced toward their ren¬
dezvous with the moon last July and
last November, these most ambitious
of man's ventures were the focus of
a sharp and lively debate back on
earth about the real meaning and value
of space exploration.
Twelve years had passed since the
Soviet Union launched the space age
by firing Sputnik I into earth orbit on
October 4, 1957. The United States had
spent some $44 thousand million on
space programmes, $24 thousand mil¬
lion on the Apollo project alone. Hun¬
dreds of thousands of top scientists
and technicians had been striving
together in by far the largest team of
specialists ever mobilized in a single
undertaking.
Yet the basic question was still
being asked: "Is this trip really
necessary?"
Was the moon landing a pointless
"stunt", however adroitly executed, or
a breathtaking demonstration of man's
unlimited capabilities? Would the bil¬
lions allocated for space be better
spent on solving pressing problems
here on earth? What, in short, is
there in all this running around in
space for those of us who remain
earthbound mortals?
Arnold J. Toynbee, the esteemed
British historian, expressed the con¬
cern of many serious-minded scep¬
tics for whom the moon landing sym¬
bolized a yawning gap between tech¬
nology and morals.
"In a sense," Toynbee remonstrated,
"going to the moon is like building the
pyramids or Louis XIV's palace at
Versailles. It's rather scandalous,
when human beings are going short
of necessities, to do this. If we're
clever enough to reach the moon, don't
we feel rather foolish in our misman¬
agement of human affairs?"
But others contend that there is
money enough for the moon and tasks
on earth, too. And some go further
to point out that the conquest of space
has done much, through the develop¬
ment of new ideas, new attitudes, new
techniques and new structures for the
management of large-scale undertak¬
ings, to prepare man for a major offen¬
sive against the unsolved social and
material problems at home.
"If you look at the thousands of
years of civilization," Sir Bernard
Lovell, director of Britain's Jodrell
Bank Observatory reminds us, "you
will find that only those communities
that have been prepared to struggle
with the nearly insoluble problems at
the limits of their technical capaci¬
ties those are the only communi¬
ties, the only times, that civiliza¬
tion has advanced. The Roman Em¬
pire decayed when ¡t ceased to be
progressive in this sense, and there
are other examples. To a certain
extent, you see the beginnings of it
in the United Kingdom today, but for¬
tunately not in the United States and
certainly not in the Soviet Union."
Queen Isabella of Spain was con¬
fronted with something of the same
sort of question nearly five centuries
ago when she sold her jewels to
assemble the resources necessary to
finance the trip to the Indies of
Christopher Columbus and his crew.
Her prime motives may well have
been the glory and riches she expec¬
ted to accrue to Spain. But the great
results of this historical venture were
not the spice and gold it brought to
Spanish coffers, nor the vast territo¬
rial acquisitions which gave Spain
dominion over the first global empire
in history.
Far more important, the Columbian
explorations marked the beginning of
a major new cycle in the development
of the world, enhancing man's mastery
of the seas and bringing together in
one great community, however un¬
happily, the entire human race.
It is not too much to contemplate
that similar experiences may be await¬
ing us as we embark on the contem¬
porary venture into unknown space.
This is not simply because outer space
provides a new dimension to poten¬
tially new resources, nor because the
possibility of finding life on other pla¬
nets has suddenly become much more
real. Of even greater importance is
the vast accumulation of new techno¬
logy and new techniques resulting
from the first decade of space explo¬
ration.
Not unnaturally, the sheer specta¬
cular quality of the moon landing ten¬
ded to focus the world's attention on
the heroic aspects of the achievement.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

6
WASTE OF MONEY? (Continued)
Somehow, the casting of the Apollo
11 and 12 voyages on millions of tele¬
vision sets around the world gave it
the character of a sports event. Focus
was on the astronauts, champions of
a new interplanetary Olympiad, and
on the faultless performance of the
spacecraft In the process, the real
significance of space exploration be¬
came obscure.
If the experience of the past three
or four thousand years has any value,
it tells us that in freeing himself from
the millenial confinement of the earth's
gravitation and its atmosphere, man
has added a vast new dimension to
his environment and to his character.
In broadening his horizons, he has in
a qualitative* sense altered his very
being and completely changed his
relationship to the rest of nature, and
this in turn presages sweeping chan¬
ges in every field of human activity.
Colossal strides in civilization in the
past have followed each major
advance in man's observation of the
skies. Astronomical discoveries, time
after time, have influenced and, in
some cases, shifted the very course of
history.
Now, the impact of space explora¬
tion the most momentous of all
human adventures promises to usher
in a new stage of civilization the broad
outlines of which remain undefinable,
if for no other reason than that the
exploration has only begun. The
potential of the universe for mankind
is as completely unknown today as
was that of the New World after the
return of Columbus to Spain.
As Margaret Mead, the American
anthropologist, has put it: "Once you
raise the question that other land than
this earth is possible to live on, that
other places are possible places to
found colonies, or that there may be
other living creatures somewhere, you
have changed the whole place of man
in the universe. You've altered every¬
thing. This involves a considerable
reduction of human arrogance and a
tremendous magnification of human
possibilities."
Just as the age of earth exploration
completely transformed the political
matrix around the globe, the space age
will radically. alter the present global
political constellation and institutions.
The nation state, already ill-suited to
human needs in the last half of the
twentieth century, can hardly be
expected to effectively serve man's
goals in space.
The on-again off-again trip to Mars,
originally scheduled for the 1970s,
will very likely be too expensive for
either the United States or the Soviet
Union to undertake alone. By com¬
bining in this and other projects in the
conquest of space, it is possible to
co-operate where prejudices and con¬
flicting interests are least involved. In
this age of global problems, the neces¬
sity of co-operation in space as human
beings with predominantly common
interests cannot but have a feedback
on earth. If and when space explora¬
tion becomes more than a marginal
activity, its higher priority is bound to
give new stimulus to international joint
ventures in space.
Already COMSAT (Communications
Satellite Corporation) and INTELSAT
(the international space communica-

THE BULLET
IN THE BRAIN
AND THE SPACE
CENTRIFUGE
In 1968, a man named Joseph
Barrios was shot in the head, the
bullet lodging in the brain. Before
attempting an operation to remove
it, doctors hit on the idea to try
to reposition it to a less critical
area with the help of a centrifuge
capsule used to train astronauts.
Barrios was accelerated to six times
the force of gravity for five
seconds (photo left). The
experiment worked, eliminating
the need for surgery. Right, a
NASA space helmet is fitted on a
child with a heart defect to study
oxygen consumption. A suction
pump circulates fresh air through the
helmet, picking up the exhaled
breath and drawing the combined
fresh air and exhaled breath
into an oxygen analyser. The
conventional rubber mouthpiece used
to collect exhaled air has been
found awkward for children.
tions organization of 70 member
countries) have established a pattern
for international public utilities in
space communications. American and
Soviet rockets are launching Euro¬
pean, Australian and Japanese satel¬
lites into space. And some 40 track¬
ing stations around the globe, involv¬
ing varying degrees of international
co-operation, participated in the Apollo
project.
But if no one knows where this new
adventure in space will eventually take
us, what new worlds will be discovered
what new horizons will open as man
colonizes the moon or other planets,
or what advantages may be found in
manufacturing instruments and equip¬
ment in the vacuum of ogter space,
the first decade of the Space Age has
given us a foretaste of what is in store
for the future.
Since 1967 hardly a person on earth
has not been directly or indirectly
effected in one way or another by the
results of the space exploration.
Liberated from the forces that have
kept us earthbound throughout record
ed history, we now have capabilities
(intellectual and material ) that are
immeasurably greater than ever
before. These new capabilities open
unlimited opportunities for the de¬
velopment of human faculties and
the satisfaction of human needs.
A whole galaxy of earth satellites is
now providing global services which
have already brought vast improve¬
ments to communications, weather
prediction, geology and geodetics,
navigation and oceanography. These
and other vital tools for the enhance¬
ment of man's control over his envi¬
ronment are available not only to the
advanced industrial countries that have
developed them, but have had imme¬
diate benefits for all countries around
the globe providing developing coun¬
tries with tremendous new capabilities
for more rapid economic and social
advance.
New technologies products, mater¬
ials, processes, manufacturing tech¬
niques, operating procedures, and new
standards born of space requirements
are being transferred from their
original space application to industry,
commerce, education and public
health, replacing products or practices
currently in use to provide those which
will better fill the vast variety of human
needs'.
But, most important, effective tech¬
niques and structures have been deve¬
loped for the "forcing" of technology
transfer, and private industry, univer¬
sities and governments now have at
their disposal vast computerized data
banks of knowledge and data on vir¬
tually every field of the physical and
social sciences, technology and the
humanities.
But an even more important aspect
of the Space Revolution is the last
one: techniques for directing massive
projects undertaken by thousands of
minds in a close-knit, synergistic com¬
bination of government, universities
and industry. Taken together these
techniques are potentially the most
powerful management tool in man's
history, changing the way civil serv¬
ants, scientists and managers approach
virtually every task they undertake.
7
