Overcrowding is so serious in some schools for Palestine refugee children
that classes are run on a shift basis. Here, children change shifts at a
prefabricated school in the Baqa'a camp near Amman, Jordan. Over
220,000 school-age refugees in the Middle East attend schools run jointly
by the U.N. Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) and Unesco. More than
83,000 children are in schools operating a double-shift system and over
10,500 go to school in tents or temporary buildings.
Photo UNRWA
I
n the crowded refugee
camps of the Middle East, third gener¬
ation Palestine Arab refugee children,
born to parents who were themselves
born in these same camps, are now
beginning to learn to walk. Each year
more than 55,000 children are born to
refugee parents and these new births,
coupled with a fresh influx of refugees
following the Six-Day War of 1967,
have swelled the original figure
of some 900,000 Palestine Arabs
displaced by the war of 1948 and car¬
ed for by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency (UNRWA) to over
1 ,400,000.
UNRWA was established in 1949 by

THE PLIGHT
OF THE PALESTINE
REFUGEE SCHOOLS
the United Nations to provide the
refugees with food, shelter, clothing
and health, welfare and educational
services.
Today approximately 700,000 of the
refugee population are under the age
of 18 and as a consequence the bur¬
den of the educational effort is
constantly expanding. It now swallows
up nearly 43 percent of UNRWA's
resources annually only slightly less
than is expended on rood, clothing
and shelter.
In the educational field Unesco has
an important role to play. It assumes
technical responsibility for the broad
educational programme and provides
the higher directing staff and a number
of experts who advise on the planning
and execution of the programme as a
whole and on the teaching of specific
subjects.
The joint UNRWA-Unesco education
programme now reaches some 297,000
children of whom over 220,000 are
taught In the 480 UNRWA-Unesco
primary and first-level secondary
schools that have been established In
Jordan, the Lebanon, Syria and the
Gaza Strip.
All the refugee children receive six
years schooling between the ages of
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
15

Right, mountain-top view of Baqa'a, a "city-camp" for
Palestine refugees, near Amman, Jordan. The largest
of UNRWA's six emergency camps, it houses over
40,000 people. Below right, prefabricated huts
provided by UNRWA have done much to improve
living conditions at Baqa'a. Below, a tented
camp at Djeener, also in Jordan.
16
REFUGEE SCHOOLS (Continued)
6 and 12 and those with a satisfac¬
tory scholastic record continue for a
further three years in the first-level
secondary schools. By a system of
payments to government and private
schools some 64,000 refugee pupils
receive additional upper secondary
education.
The refugees are hungry for educa¬
tion. Many of the schools are over¬
crowded and double shifts of pupils
are not uncommon.
But formal education In itself Is not
enough. An important feature of the
UNRWA-Unesco programme is the
technical and semi-professional train¬
ing provided at 12 special centres.
The courses, generally lasting two
years, cover a wide range of occup¬
ational training, turning out plumbers,
draughtsmen, hairdressers, laboratory
assistants, instructors, etc.
An Indication of the educational
effort being made is the fact that last
year over 7,000 candidates in the Gaza
Strip alone sat for their U.A.R. matri¬
culation examination. It was the first
time that examinations of this type had
been held since the Strip was occu¬
pied In 1967.
The holding of these examinations
involved Unesco in delicate negotia¬
tions and arrangements to collect the
examination papers from Cairo and
return the candidates' papers there
for marking. More than 5,000 of the
candidates were successful and in
February and March this year just over
a thousand of them set out on the
200 mile journey to Cairo, in five
convoys co-ordinated and supervised
by the Red Cross, to begin courses
in universities and other higher learn¬
ing institutions.
UNRWA is financed by voluntary
contributions from governments and
donations from voluntary organizations
and private individuals and, therefore,
cannot count on a regular and steadily
increasing income to meet its grow¬
ing needs. The rapid rise in the
refugee school population alone has
added some $5 million to the cost of
the UNRWA-Unesco education pro¬
gramme since the 1966-1967 school
year.
Clearly the need for an expanding
educational effort will continue to exist
so long as the problem of the refugees
remains unsettled, yet owing to short¬
age of funds the UNRWA programme
is in danger. The impact of any
substantial reduction in the Agency's
services will almost certainly fall
heavily on the education and training
programme, despite the tragic implic¬
ations which this will have for the
future of the refugee children.
As UNRWA's Commissioner-Gen¬
eral, Mr. Laurence Michelmore, told
the U.N. General Assembly in 1969,
"If education and training were to be
curtailed, the horizon of the refugees
would be even more limited and a
valuable form of technical assistance
to the Arab world would be lost."
