The five crises
of the university
by James A. Perkins
T
28
HERE is not just a single
crisis of the university, there are
several crises. What we must recog¬
nize is that any one of them by itself
would be enough to cause serious
trouble. The second point is that these
crises are closely related to one ano¬
ther. Thirdly, their solution will prob¬
ably require a major change in the
organization, structure and mission of
the university.
The first crisis is of course the crisis
of numbers. Throughout the world the
largest numerical increase in educa¬
tional growth is at the primary and
secondary level, but by all odds the
highest percentage increase in educa¬
tional growth is at the level of higher
education.
While experiences differ from coun¬
try to country it is safe to say that on
the average the number of students
entering higher education has doubled
in the decade from 1960 to 1970.
Even this swollen number will at
least double in the next decade. If
there were no other problems, this
astonishing growth would, by itself,
result in almost intolerable strains on
most institutions of higher education in
most countries.
The root causes of this increase are
JAMES A. PERKINS of the United States is
Chairman and Director of the Center for Edu¬
cational Enquiry, In New York. He was a
participant at Unesco's International sympo¬
sium on "Education and the Development
of Man", held in Paris in February of this
year, and presented a major study on "The
Crises of the University", on which the
present article is based.
to be found in the requirements of
modern technological society. The
need for trained or even semi-trained
manpower is unending. No country
and no people have a chance of
entering the modern world with only a
small fraction of the population attain¬
ing the equivalent of a secondary
school degree. And no country and
no people can hope to provide the
leadership necessary for a modern
society if only a very small fraction
acquire the equivalent of a college or
university degree.
It is of course unwise to be too
specific about what the threshold
figures for advanced education should
be for any particular country. But for
this writer 30 per cent of the relevant
age group going through secondary
school and 5 per cent of the relevant
age group going through the university
are the threshold figures for a modern
society.
This does not mean that with 30 per
cent acquiring secondary school de¬
grees and 5 per cent acquiring univer¬
sity degrees the country has adequate
manpower for the modern world. It
means simply that until these figures
are reached a society has today little
chance of entering on the current world
stage. Furthermore, larger percentages
than these will be necessary for those
countries who would lead.
It is a sombre note that progress
toward even those limited objectives
has not been uniformly steady. Large
parts of the world are nowhere near
these threshold figures, and in many
countries, expanded higher and sec¬
ondary education must be viewed
against the backdrop of the battle
against illiteracy, which is not being
won. This year there are almost
800 million adult illiterates in the world
a heavy anchor that the developing
countries must drag with them as they
struggle towards modernization.
Nevertheless, most countries have
democratized their secondary educa¬
tion. Heretofore, in many places,
secondary education was the selective
and narrow route through which
entrance to college and university was
determined. Admission to the univer¬
sity was really controlled by careful
selection for secondary school through
examinations taken at the ages of 11
or 12. Under these arrangements, it
was quite possible for countries to
follow a principle of permitting all
secondary school graduates to enter
the university.
With the widening of admissions to
secondary education, however, tradi¬
tional policies of automatic entry into
university have led to enrolments that,
in many cases, are almost grotesque.
Over 100,000 students are enrolled in
the Universities of Paris and Mexico
apiece.
Those countries that have tried to
regulate this tide by turning aside large
fractions of the new graduates from
secondary school have run into much
social opposition, which has been mat¬
ched only by the reaction of students
who have been admitted to find no pla¬
ces prepared for them.
The central fact about numbers is
that we have opened wide the gates to
secondary education but have planned
higher education on the traditional
bases of professional standards and
high selectivity. It is this mismatch of
numbers and of social doctrine that
is at the core of the crisis of numbers.
We are trying to pour the ocean into
our wine glasses and we are getting
wet.
The second crisis of the universities
is that of finance, which stems directly
but not exclusively from the crisis of
numbers. Because we were prepared
neither in doctrine nor in administration
for the doubling of our student en¬
trance during the decade of the Six¬
ties, we are suddenly faced with large
demands for funds, for which neither
fiscal policy nor tax structures were
adequately prepared. The result has
been shortages in every part of the
system, including both manpower and
money.
The budgets of the universities have
gone up not only to accomodate a
doubled enrolment within a decade but
also to deal with the improvidence that
comes from continuing old patterns
which are unnecessarily expensive.
The shocking fact is that the produc¬
tivity of higher education has not
improved during this decade, the per
capita cost of student education has
increased, and the effect of these mul¬
tiplying factors and soaring budgets
has fallen largely on the public trea¬
suries indeed, in most countries,
exclusively on the public treasuries.
As a result of these twin crises of
numbers and costs, there is hardly a
university in the world that is not in
financial difficulty that runs all the way
from serious to catastrophic.
CONTINUED PAGE 30

Photo O Paul Almasy. París

CRISES OF THE UNIVERSITY (Continued)
The paradox of too much success
30
The consequences are not difficult
to discover. The first is an enormous
increase in the use of public funds.
Tuition rates have steadily increased.
Yet, in those countries that have
financed a substantial part of higher
education from student tuition, the per¬
centage of the total cost it is able to
support has steadily declined. Public
money has become an increasingly
important element in every budget.
Another consequence of the univer¬
sity crises has, of course, been an
increase in public surveillance of aca¬
demic expenditures which has in turn
raised deep problems about the future
autonomy of individual institutions and
of the whole educational system. It
takes no crystal-ball gazer to anticipate
that, as educational budgets increase
as a fraction of total government bud¬
gets, the public demand for surveil¬
lance will increase. Thus, a whole
new set of relationships between the
university and the central governments
stands high on the agenda of univer¬
sity managers.
For many countries, if not most,
higher education has been supported
almost exclusively by public funds as
a matter of tradition. For them the
development of new relationships
between university and state will not
be so difficult but they are already
experiencing the effects of the pub¬
lic demand that their governments
exercise tighter control over academic
expenditures.
For those countries where a large
part of higher education has been
privately financed, as in the case of
the United States, Japan and India, an
increased dependence on public funds
creates a brand of academic trauma.
To surrender independence because
of financial need is rarely a graceful
exercise.
The third crisis is that of relevance.
Several points are important here.
The first is that traditional education
offers little nourishment for the most
crucial needs of new countries, or for
the needs of some older countries
now in the process of modernization.
The Latin American universities, for
example, with their heavy emphasis
on law, medicine and letters, have not
seemed completely relevant to the new
thrust of student demands for appro¬
priate preparation for the managing of
societies that are both democratic and
technologically sophisticated.
In the U.S. as well as other countries,
it is the students who have presented
the university with the third crisis of
the relevance of its curriculum. The
problem of relevant curricula comes
under two headings. First is the rele¬
vance of general subject matter: that
is, a better balance of humanities,
social sciences, and sciences that
most universities have provided or are
even now prepared to provide. A
second problem is the applicability of
the education received. An educa¬
tional system may offer a balanced
diet of the three large disciplinary
areas but still all of them at such an
abstract level that students would find
their needs not met.
So in addition to a balanced curri¬
culum among the three great fields
of knowledge, universities are also
under pressure to provide a balance
between basic and applied studies.
Obviously the newer the country the
more pressing are the demands for
applicable knowledge, while for the
mature countries a more balanced diet
between basic and applied work is
desirable.
But the problem of applied versus
basic, or relevant versus traditional
studies in the newer countries is not
an easy one to resolve. Applied
studies do not flourish very long unless
they are attached, in fairly close
proximity, to more abstract matters.
Most scholars realize that to do this
they must have connexions with
scholars in more mature countries.
There is, in this arrangement, a
great danger of a brand of intellectual
colonialism which will keep the newer
universities from ever rising to the
same level of sophistication and in¬
fluence as those in established
countries with which they have
developed connexions.
Finally, universities in developing
countries need such contacts almost
more than established universities,
but if they are to tilt their interest
too heavily toward the applied scien¬
ces they will cut themselves off from
some of the most vigorous intellectual
growth going on in other parts of the
world. The pressure for attention to
applied work remains and will probably
have to dominate the academic scene
in developing countries, but not at the
complete expense of attention to
traditional matters.
One other point needs to be made
about the matter of relevance. As the
numbers of students have Increased,
larger and wider cross sections of our
societies have been admitted to the
universities and many of today's
students are first-generation entrants
without any family tradition to prepare
them for the rigour of their studies.
In addition, many are from minority
groups or heretofore deprived groups
of their societies, and the immediate
utility of their university experience
has to be demonstrated not only to
them but to the families who can
ill spare them. The result has been
an insistence on the part of these new
classes of students at the university
that there be a direct and visible
demonstration that what they were
being taught had a direct connexion
with the agonies of the environments
from which they came.
In the United States this has been
most vividly witnessed by the demands
of many Black students for courses
that would help them improve the city
ghettos from which many had come.
In Latin America, the Indian from Bol¬
ivia, Colombia and Peru was demand¬
ing an education that would help
rescue him and his family from the
grinding poverty of his culture. In
less harsh tones, perhaps, this case
is being stated with greater and
greater emphasis by students coming
from the industrial cities of England
as well as the southern parts of Italy.
Even a casual observer will see the
connexion between numbers, costs
and relevance. To provide education
that is relevant to a variety of demands
is a costly business, while higher costs
require demonstrably higher relevance.
And as the university meets these
demands for relevance and offers
differentiated programmes, one can
expect an increased interest in univer¬
sity attendance, which will feed the
cycle of numbers, costs, and relevance.
This brings up one of the ironic
features of the current scene, namely,
that these crises are in large part the
result of the university's successful
adaptation to the needs of its various
publics. As the university succeeds,
its problems increase rather than
decrease.
B
UT even these three inter¬
related crises of costs, numbers and
relevance do not, by themselves,
determine the atmosphere in which
the university is struggling to per¬
form its mission today. By them¬
selves they would have produced
convulsions of major proportions and
the problems of adjustment would
have been severe. But there are
deeper matters at work that have
enormously complicated the busi¬
ness of university management which
brings us to the fourth crisis: the
crisis of the new priorities.
Somewhere in the beginning of the
Sixties, at least in the more develop¬
ed countries, the leading edge of these
societies shifted its social priorities
away from attention to affluence, full
employment, and peace-keeping by
military power, and toward more pre¬
occupation with justice for the minor¬
ities and the poor, the quality of
the environment, and peace-keeping
through the subordination of national
ambitions to the idea of the inter¬
national community. Not every country
has felt this shift in priorities in either
the same manner or the same degree.
But that some glacial change began
to take place during this past decade
is hard to deny.
One feature of this shift was the
adoption of the new priorities by the

young, while the adult world, with
vivid recollection of the Depression
and the two world wars, was not about
to abandon its deep concern for a
rising GNP and world peace by
military means if necessary.
Much has been made of the genera¬
tion gap, and while there has always
been such a gap, something new has
been added. As societies modernize,
the individual becomes free of both
restraints and duties imposed by tribe
and family. Modern society requires
mobility and encourages it. The young
are sent to school while the adults are
drawn into the whirlpool of profes¬
sional life. Thus the young are left
to create their own culture and their
own societies.
This disjunction of the generations
would have produced a whole variety
of complicated social problems even
if the pressing concerns for justice
and peace had not been adopted by
this new generation. But independence
fuelled by zeal, alienation fed by
distrust, separatism exaggerated by
fundamental difference in philosophy
all have served to present the uni¬
versities with problems that are not
just complex, but explosive. They are
explosive because the generations
coming to the university saw their
dissatisfactions, caused by numbers,
costs and relevance, through the red
glare of anger at the society of which
the university was an Increasingly
important part.
In these circumstances it was in¬
evitable that the university while try¬
ing to deal with its internal priorities
would find the new social concerns
of its students almost impossible to
resolve. They might be resolved if
the students were content to have the
university function as a neutral forum
in which these serious external prob¬
lems could be debated.
But having become so closely
identified with the society that support¬
ed it, the university, clearly, was not
only an instrument for Investigation,
but a target for opposition. This fourth
crisis of the university stems from a
schizophrenia not yet resolved
namely, whether the university is more
valuable as a neutral arena for inquiry
and debate, or more valuable as a
lever for social reform.
In general, when societies are divi¬
ded, universities have had difficulty in
establishing their neutrality, or at least
maintaining it, whereas when a society
has a substantial consensus on its
main priorities, university neutrality
becomes the more possible.
It is not surprising, therefore, that
the countries that have had the most
difficulty with their universities have
been those with the deepest divisions
in their social philosophies and social
programmes. Universities are struggl¬
ing today with this enormously complex
problem, which has become a heavily
political issue.
Most systems are trying to plot a
course between the two extremes of
neutrality and social activism by main¬
taining the maximum of independence
from society while also making
concessions to the new concerns in
admissions policy and curricular ven¬
tures. Numbers, costs, and relevance
are terribly important issues, but the
central question is, to reiterate, the
role and mission of the university: Is
it a neutral and protected arena for
free thought, or an instrument for
social betterment? The division of
opinion on this question has produced
a crisis that has inflamed the others.
Behind even the crisis of university
identity and mission there is another
and deeper crisis that imperils the
very idea of the university itself. This
fifth crisis is the new scepticism that
denies the possibility of objective,
rational thought. It would take a whole
book by itself to thread our way
through the complexities of this cen¬
tury and to trace the widening attack
on the rationality of man and even on
his potential for rationality.
Suffice it to say that the comfort¬
able Western belief that reasoning
man in a reasonable universe would
increasingly comprehend his environ¬
ment to the benefit of a better
evolution of mankind is a notion that
has less currency with each passing
year. In its place has risen a mysti¬
cism and a belief that somewhere
in the dark reaches of the mind, in
the senses and sensations, in feeling
rather than in thought, one is more
likely to find truth than in an objective
examination of the world around us.
All this has undermined one of the
central notions upon which the univers¬
ity is based that learning is cumula¬
tive and that the opportunity for
rational discourse is its raison d'être.
With these concepts under attack, the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
STANDING ROOM ONLY. Student "cram-in" in this lecture hall at the Sorbonne,
in Paris, illustrates one of the big problems of the modern
university the crisis of numbers. Enrolment in higher education has doubled
on the average in the last ten years and is likely to double again
by 1980. Throughout the world the largest percentage increase in
educational growth is at the level of higher education.

CRISES OF THE UNIVERSITIES (Continued)
Idea of the university itself is in
question.
In summary, therefore, the univers¬
ity is facing five crises the crisis of
numbers, the crisis of costs, the crisis
of relevance, the crisis of priorities,
and the crisis of scepticism.
Is it surprising therefore that the
problem of university governance is
both universal and pressing? Any
institution that had such a series of
interrelated crises placed on its agen¬
da within a relatively few years would
have staggered under the load. It is
one of the miracles of the century
that the university has survived at all.
A professor who comes on stage
briefly as a distinguished president,
rector, or vice-chancellor will not even
understand the problems in a short
tour of duty, let alone be able to
handle them.
Recent convulsions on the campuses
of the world have not made university
management an attractive next step
for the distinguished professor. Con¬
siderable tradition still protects the
professor in his classroom and
laboratory, but does not serve to
protect the president or rector in his
office.
Staffing, however, 'may turn out to
be the least of the difficulties in
university governance. The redis¬
tribution of power and responsibility
between students, faculty and the
administration is bound to preoccupy
those driven by concern for relevance
and for the new priorities.
Those who are caught up in the
current social revolution are demand¬
ing the university's participation and
are not likely to find the traditional
roles of faculty, students and adminis¬
tration to be congenial to their ob¬
jectives. It would be a great error to
assume that the current redistribution
of power rises merely out of the
maturing of the entering student body.
The real fuel for this demand for new
style of governance comes from those
who are dissatisfied with the curri¬
culum and who believe that new forms
of governance may be necessary to
redirect the university onto different
paths.
We have been inclined to think of
the crisis of the university as being
the crisis of governance. This may
be so, but we will not understand the
nature of the crisis of governance
unless we realize it is compounded of
five crises of numbers, costs, rele¬
vance, priorities and scepticism. No
new organization chart will be adequate
to embrace the considerations with
which universities must now deal.
Statesmanship of the highest order,
both in and out of the universities, will
be necessary if they are to fulfil their
historic mission in our new world.
