4. From club
to megabomb
I
22
I T was Dr. Ole Holsti, pro¬
fessor of political science at the
University of British Columbia in
Vancouver, who provided a hinge,
between the social and the natural
sciences. He reported on the work
he has done on subjects under stress,
not monkeys or mice but human beings,
including statesmen in historical situa¬
tions. The son of a Finnish official of
the League of Nations, Holsti was born
in Geneva and now works in Canada
almost a one-man international rela¬
tions institute.
He Is interested in finding out what
happens to people under stress when
they have to make decisions that
could lead to the ultimate human
aggressive act: war. He first stated
that there is a biological basis for what
statesmen do in these situations. Hu¬
man beings do not have an infinite
capacity for processing information.
They can only juggle so many things in
their minds at the same time about
seven, give or take two either way.
This means they make mistakes
under pressure.
Dr. Holsti pointed out that a phys¬
ician is considered extraordinary if he
can cure 80 or 90 per cent of his
patients, but such a record is not
nearly good enough for politicians
trying to avoid war in the age of the
nuclear missile. According to current
findings, war is not a pathological
situation created by a Hitler. Irrational
decisions can also be made by normal
individuals in times of stress.
Some stress is a good thing and, at
moderate levels, it can improve per¬
formance. Dr. Holsti cited a hypothe¬
tical emergency: a city is likely to be
hit by a major flood and its citizens
must fill and stack sandbags to protect
it. This is a simple task and, under
stress, people can actually do physical
labour much longer without tiring.
But different skills are needed to
make decisions during a crisis. Experi¬
ments show that the level of these
skills drops in such a situation. Under
stress, subjects tend to see situations
as black and white, never distinguish¬
ing greys. They display "deterioration
of verbal performance, increased rate
of error, diminished tolerance for
ambiguity, loss of abstract ability and
disorientation of visual-motor co-ordin¬
ation." As Dr. Holsti read this list,
some of his listeners wondered
whether people in such a condition
should be allowed to drive a car, let
alone steer a ship of state.
The worst stress of all is time. The

statesman is under pressure to be the
first to mobilize, or not to be beaten
to the draw when the other fellow
has a nuclear missile in his holster.
It makes no difference whether the
danger is real or not. "If he believes
that something Is true, then this is
more important than if it is true."
In the summer of 1914 when local
crises led to the First World War,
statesmen felt they had to be the first
to mobilize. Between French and
German mobilization, there was only
a difference of five minutes. No time
was available to make alternative
choices and, according to Dr. Holsti,
great stress even distorts one's ability
to perceive the passing of time.
It also leads the individual to con¬
centrate on the immediate rather than
the distant future. "It's the problem
of the drowning man you have to get
him to breathe before you worry about
whether he will catch pneumonia,"
Dr.- Holsti said, but then added: "Un¬
fortunately, short-term advantages may
be long-term disadvantages."
I
|N times of crisis, states¬
men tend to filter out information that
does not agree with their own opinions,
to consult only a limited number of
advisers, or none at all. Going back
to World War I, Dr. Holsti remarked
that the Kaiser wanted to believe that
Britain would stay out. In the margin
of a report from his ambassador to
London warning him not to count on
British neutrality, he wrote: "This old
fool's information should not be believ¬
ed." He thought much more of his
ambassador to Russia who was telling
him what he wanted to hear: the Czar
would never go to war over Serbia.
Dr. Holsti then moved to the eve of
the Second World War. Robert Van-
sittart, British Permanent Under-Secret¬
ary for Foreign Affairs, kept insisting
that the Soviet Army was not weaker
than the Polish Army and that Hitler
was not likely to be satisfied by a piece
of Czechoslovakia. Convinced that no
one was reading his memos, he pur¬
posely mixed their page order and
received them back still in the same
order, initialled as having been read.
As usual, Dr. Kun spoke with the
voice of his own past. He related
how he had served In the Hungarian
resistance movement during World
War II. "Stress was high near the
end of the war. The streets of Buda¬
pest were full of corpses, we in the
underground had lost contact with
each other. I was responsible for the
lives of 400 Jewish children who had
to be kept hidden and fed. We found
that our performance was highest
under stress. Today, I just cannot
imagine how I performed my duties
then."
Dr. Hamburg commented that
studies do show that some people are
highly creative, under stress, but that
this is not true for all. Dr. Holsti
agreed with him on the basis of the
lessons gleaned from recent world
history. They raise what he called the
biggest question of all: what can be
done ? The answer, in his opinion, is
to buy time.
Dr. Holsti' compared the summer of
1914, which saw "a great increase of
communications, but not with one's
enemies", to the Cuban missile crisis
of 1962. He pointed out that Presi¬
dent Kennedy took great pains to get
alternative viewpoints before taking
decisions, even absenting himself from
discussions because he knew that his
presence, as the president, might
inhibit them.
When it was decided to pull back
American vessels so as to give Soviet
ships more time, the message was
sent not in code, but in clear so that
it could be intercepted. An inter¬
cepted message, Dr. Holsti said, was
deemed to be more credible than a
public statement. "I certainly hope
that the world will not undergo another
Cuban missile crisis, but it did prove
that how one behaves under stress
can make a difference in such a situa¬
tion."
D
R. Holsti did not go along
with the widely-held belief that indivi¬
duals unable to withstand stress fall
by the wayside in politics, a process
that President Truman summed up in
his famous remark: "If you can't stand
the heat, get out of the kitchen." To¬
day, said Dr. Holsti, "there are new
paths to the attainment of political
power. We cannot rely, if we ever
could, on the normal pattern of poli¬
tical advancement to weed out peo¬
ple unable to cope with pressure."
Nor can we go on relying on war as
a force for human evolution. This
reminder came from Dr. Robert Bige-
low of the zoology department of the
University of Canterbury, at Christ-
church, New Zealand. Dr. Bigelow
is the author of The Dawn Warriors, a
book in which he sets forth his theory
that warfare played a fundamental part
in the development of man.
During prehistoric times, early
human societies competed with each
other for space. Individuals within
groups had to co-operate for defence;
they needed signs and symbols to
communicate. "The most co-operative
groups took over new terrain and
pushed out the least successful groups
by killing them," said Dr. Bigelow.
"Within one or two million years, the
size of the human brain trebled and so
did man's capacity to communicate."
"The extent of human co-operation
rose enormously. I think that we now
have only one or two steps further to
go to achieve global co-operation.
We cannot eliminate competition but
we have good cause to hope we can
render old-fashioned warfare obsolete,
even though it was warfare that forced
us to co-operate. If we don't exter¬
minate the species with nuclear
weapons, global co-operation is Inevit¬
able, although we may have a dark
age of two or three centuries."
A
Ltime scale for the chan¬
ges in brain structure that Dr. Bigelow
cited was supplied once more by
Dr. Washburn. He pointed out that
early man's brain capacity remained
unchanged for two or three million
years. During this period, there was
not much evolution, either, in the stone
tools that he produced.
"Then, 700,000 years ago, a very
different kind of tool appeared. Any
fool can make the early tools but
experiments have shown that graduate
students cannot succeed in reproduc¬
ing the later ones even after ten weeks
of laboratory work. Man's brain had
become twice as large. He had a
new order of skills, he knew fire, he
was hunting large animals. There
was one species of man in the Old
World from China to England.
"It would seem that, 40,000 years
ago, the whole game changed again.
We see different tools and it is at this
time that the roots of our present-day
languages may have appeared. If
you put Java man into our school
system, he would not get anywhere,
but late Neanderthal man would go
right through college." And, one
could not help but think, without
anyone even noticing his caveman
manners or hair style.
We seem to be right back where we
started when the curtain went up on
history. Not quite, however. Humans
are as aggressive as ever, but we now
wield not clubs but megatons. We just
cannot go on living the same way if
we are to go on living at all. To yi
quote Dr. Washburn once more: "Man ""
must adapt the species that did not
adapt are extinct."
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
