New look
in Soviet schools
by losif Nekhamkin
k
24
IS the world enters the
1970s under the banner of scientific
and technical progress, the appli¬
cation of this new knowledge has
become the decisive factor in econo¬
mic development.
Formidable changes have taken
place which influence our thinking and
concepts of what criteria to apply to
general education. What should be
taught? How should it be taught?
What should education imply? What
should our schools be like? Educators
in every country are all asking these
questions.
Sociologists, economists, scientists
and statesmen, too, are pondering
these problems, bearing in mind the
needs of tomorrow's citizens, the men
and women who are today infants or
just entering school, but who will be in
the prime of their lives as the twenty-
first century arrives.
By then they will be living in a world
which we today cannot visualize by
any stretch of imagination. Yet
somehow we must decide what kind of
education will help the child of 1970 to
become a responsible citizen thirty
years from now.
In the U.S.S.R., this problem natur¬
ally preoccupies the educator and
also the State itself, which from its
inception has given the highest
priority to public education and
cultural development. Even when civil
war and foreign intervention threatened
the very existence of the newly-estab¬
lished state, at a time of economic
devastation and widespread famine,
Lenin told the First All-Russia Con¬
gress on Education: "Public education
is an inseparable part of the struggle
we are waging."
Today, as in the past, the Soviet
Union gives high priority to public
education, and it need hardly be said
that Soviet education has never stood
still. Like other countries, the U.S.S.R.
has faced complex problems posed by
the need to keep abreast with constant
change and progress.
Formerly these problems were re-
IOSIF NEKHAMKIN, Soviet writer and
journalist, has specialized in the popula¬
rization of educational, scientific and
technological questions. He is science
editor of 'Soviet Union", the illustrated
monthly published in Moscow.
solved by merely increasing the num¬
ber of subjects and extending the
period of schooling. This simple expe¬
dient, however, no longer works. The
amount of knowledge required for
what is now regarded as a basic edu¬
cation has reached the point where
it can no longer be crammed into even
the tremendously expanded school
programmes of today.
These programmes have required
children to use their minds as vast
storehouses of facts, dates, theorems,
names, experiments, figures and for¬
mulae. And despite this (or more
likely because of it) schools have not
brought home to children the ideas,
interests and needs of the 20th cen¬
tury. Overburdened with the funda¬
mentals of classical education in all
subjects, children have felt much more
like contemporaries of Newton, Lomo-
nosov and Lavoisier than those of
Einstein, Kurchatov and Wiener.
The problem facing Soviet schools,
as well as schools in all industrially
developed countries, was how to im¬
prove the educational system and
bring it in line with the requirements
of scientific, technical and cultural pro¬
gress. It was one whose solution was
beyond the scope of the schools
themselves, since it called for the con¬
certed efforts of educators, psycholo¬
gists, doctors, specialists in every
branch of education, parents, the pub¬
lic in general and scientific and gov¬
ernment organizations.
A Joint Commission of the Academy
of Pedagogical Science and the Acade¬
my of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. was
set up a few years ago to direct this
work. The question was soon being
discussed and hotly debated in spe¬
cialized publications and in the daily
press. Research programmes and
experimental pilot projects in schools
were launched and the views of spe¬
cialists in medicine, psychology, ped¬
agogics, didactics and methodology
were sought.
The research and discussions cen¬
tered on two main questions "teach¬
ing methods" and "the scope and
content of education". In other words,
the search for ways and means that
give full scope to the process of
harmonious all-round development and
offer the best chance of revealing and
stimulating the creative potential of
every child.
This quest, of course, is never end
ing. But today, when programmes
based on the results of pilot-projects
have been tested in hundreds of So¬
viet schools and are now being follow¬
ed by many thousands of children,
it is possible to sum up some of the
salient features of the work achieved
thus far.
In this connexion, I am reminded of
a conversation I had a few years ago
with an American educator, Dr. R. Hall,
after he had visited Soviet schools
and studied the work of Soviet edu¬
cators. He recalled the observation
made over sixty years ago by a distin¬
guished American educator and
psychologist, Dr. Edward L. Thorn-
dyke, who complained that the results

Quite a number of Soviet secondary schools combine general education with training in various
trades and skills to be used by pupils in case they fail their entrance exams to universities. Here,
teen-agers in a Moscow secondary school use a big computer to train for one of the world's
newest jobscomputer programming.
of pedagogical research were all too
often left on shelves to gather dust, so
that teachers made no use of them and
scientific research had little effect on
the development of educational plans
and programmes.
"In the Soviet Union I have seen the
efforts you are making to establish
close contact between researchers in
the field of education and the teachers
themselves, "Dr. Hall told me." They
work together on practical rather than
theoretical questions, and this working
relationship ensures that the results of
research are applied directly in the
classroom."
This is indeed the case. Academi¬
cian Isaac Kikoin, a leading Soviet
physicist, once told me: "I remember
what a journalist remarked, when he
learned that school courses and text¬
books in physics were being devel¬
oped by four academicians and several
doctors of science. He described our
efforts as an outstanding sacrifice,
bearing in mind the time we spent on
this task at the expense of our own
scientific work."
"But there was no need for the
journalist to praise us so highly," said
Academician Kikoin. "You might say
we were motivated by selfish consid¬
erations rather than a passion for self-
sacrifice. Every scientist is interested
in developing competent successors.
The improvement of our schools is
one of the most effective ways of
accomplishing this."
Many scientific groups like the one
just mentioned are at work in the
U.S.S.R. in Novosibirsk and Moscow,
Kharkov and Kazan, Leningrad and
Kiev, for example. Distinguished
scientists not only lecture, but often
conduct entire courses in secondary
schools. And the experience and
knowledge they contribute to the
drawing up of new school program¬
mes have helped considerably to
raise the standard of general edu¬
cation in the U.S.S.R.
What are these new programmes
and how have they improved edu¬
cation? Firstly there has been a rig-
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
25

26
SOVIET SCHOOLS (Continued)
orous revision and thorough clearing
out of the storehouse of school
knowledge, cluttered with subject
matter accumulated over the centuries.
This process was not one of simply
"whittling down" the volume of mater¬
ial, but primarily of improving general
concepts. As the logic of a scientific
cognition of the world (from the par¬
ticular to the general) is not the same
as the logic of learning about it in
school, the learning process has no
need to duplicate blindly the steps
taken by the original discoverers of
scientific truths.
All reference materials and facts
which did not demand "mental exer¬
cises", but simply memorization were
reduced to a minimum. This has given
school programmes greater maturity:
children are no longer required merely
to memorize and reproduce what is
taught, but to draw logical conclusions
and to have a deeper understanding
of the interdependence of facts and
phenomena.
In this process of "growing up",
schools have not needed to add extra
hours to the programme. The Soviet
school programme (elementary phase
and secondary combined) still totals
11,000 hours as before fully enough,
say educators, for a child to acquire a
thorough background of general edu¬
cation.
Methods and programme structures,
of course, have been revised. The
course on 19th century Russian his¬
tory, formerly covering 25 hours in the
7th form and 30 hours in the 9th
form, is now taught as a 50-hour cour¬
se in the 8th form. The result is a
more in-depth course taught in fewer
class hours.
One sweeping change is the re¬
duction of the elementary phase in
education from a four to a three-year
programme. This new curriculum was
many years in the making and de¬
serves special mention.
One can hardly picture a seven-
year old child confidently working out
algebraic equations on the blackboard.
Yet this is something that can be seen
in the Soviet Union today, not as a
special demonstration by exceptionally
gifted children, but as part of everyday
class work in a number of experimen¬
tal schools.
Research into the learning capaci¬
ty of young children has produced
some surprising results. It turns out
that first year elementary pupils can
master the kind of abstract concepts
that were thought to be within the
reach only of much older children.
The mastery of algebraic abstractions
is a particularly revealing example.
Experiments carried out in Moscow
and in a number of schools in the
Kalinin and Tula regions show that
the learning capacity of first form chil¬
dren today is considerably higher than
that of their predecessors.
It took a great deal of time and effort
to establish this fact scientifically, to
convince many people of its validity
and to apply the results of initial exper¬
iments as actual programmes in sel¬
ected schools. From these studies and
tests came the conclusion that the
existing four-year elementary curri¬
culum could be shortened to three, thus
freeing about 500 hours for the teach¬
ing of systematic courses in such
subjects as science, and making it
possible to reduce the number of
lessons in the secondary programme.
It was primarily to lighten this
heavy work-load the bane of schools
throughout the world that the new
programmes were introduced, as the
U.S.S.R. Minister of Education, Mikhail
Prokofiev has pointed out. As a scho¬
lar and educator, he is well aware that
the lighter study load will give children
opportunities for independent work
and also to follow studies that corres¬
pond to their inclinations and abilities.
The Soviet school programme is
working towards this goal. For the
upper classes, selective courses are
planned which provide laboratory and
practical training in such subjects as
draftsmanship and designing, electrical
and radio engineering, chemical and
mechanical technology, agriculture and
animal husbandry.
In 1967-68, between 40 and 60 per
cent of children enrolled in the 9th and
10th forms throughout the country took
advantage of these selective studies,
and in 516 schools nearly 2,000 new
classes offered specialized courses in
mathematics, physics and chemistry.
The changeover to the new pro¬
gramme, now accomplished in most
of the 206,000 schools in the Soviet
Union, is a challenge to the country's
two and half million teachers. Schools
have been re-equipped and teachers
retrained. Teaching methods have
been enriched with new ideas and
reinforced with modern equipment
television, tape recorders, film projec¬
tors and computers. Soviet pedagog¬
ical specialists have produced text
books and teaching aids specially
adapted to the new programmes.
This nation-wide renovation of
school programmes, based on years of
intensive research, calls for a vast
financial effort by the government to
meet the needs of the nearly 50 million
children now enrolled in Soviet
schools. When we add to this all the
other forms of education provided in
the Soviet Union we find that about
80 million people are engaged in stud¬
ies of one kind or another. This means
that some 300 million textbooks,
published in 47 languages, are needed
every year.
I began by attempting to show what
problems our scientific and technolo¬
gical age has created for schools. To
conclude, I would say that this age can
also help schools in overcoming these
problems. m
