r r r
I
|N addition to the direct
programmatic benefits deriving from
the application of space programmes
to earth needs, there is an almost infi¬
nite variety of second order "spin-off"
returns from man's venture into space.
In a recent appraisal of the impact
of the U.S. and Soviet space program¬
mes, European space companies con¬
cluded that the new technologies deve¬
loped through space exploration have
been of the greatest significance, pro¬
foundly affecting the whole of indus¬
try particularly in new materials,
techniques of metal forming, automa¬
tion and ways of obtaining a new
order of miniaturization and reliability
in complex equipment.
As a result, a noted European finan¬
ce minister has somewhat wistfully
estimated that every dollar the U.S.
has invested in its space programme
in the past ten years is returning four
dollars worth of value today.
If this is true, it is largely because
NASA recognized from the outset that
the maximum transfer of space tech¬
nology to non-space use should
be purposefully and systematically
sought. At least in part with a view
to achieving this goal, NASA sought
with outstanding success a working
partnership between universities, in¬
dustry and government.
A measure of the application of this
policy is the fact that 90 per cent of
every dollar spent by NASA in the
first decade of operations went to uni¬
versities and private industry. At the
peak of the space programme in 1966,

3.
The new
space-age
technology
some 200 universities, 20,000 con¬
tracting firms and laboratories and
420,000 workers were involved in the
programme. (NASA's operations were
manned by approximately 32,000 civil
employees).
Contractors have been not just the
major aerospace companies, but also
electronics firms, auto manufacturers,
rubber companies and, in fact, a
cross-section of modern industry.
While Europe has made a very slow
start in space technology, a large num¬
ber of European firms are either NASA
prime- or subcontractors and others
are producing components of INTEL¬
SAT satellites. Still others are involv¬
ed in ELDO (European Launcher De¬
velopment Organization) and ESRO
(European Space Research Organiza-
13
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

INTEGRATED CIRCUITRY
AT ONE'S FINGER TIPS
The stringent demands of space technology for ever
smaller yet even more reliable equipment have
sparked some revolutionary developments in the
science of electronics. Strikingly miniaturized
circuits have been created for all kinds of electronic
equipment, to the point where thousands of circuits
can be compressed into a case smaller than a coin.
Right, an "integrated circuit" placed on a finger
tip and magnified several hundred times. In the
newest molecular electronics, circuits are built
up virtually molecule by molecule. Finely focussed
electron beams are used as high precision tools
for fabricating these microscopic circuits. Such
breakthroughs in electronics technology have
spawned a whole generation of new products from
clocks to calculators the size of a cigar box as
well as faster and large-capacity computers to
meet the information and control needs of science,
education, industry, business and government
SPACE-AGE TECHNOLOGY (Continued)
Equipment designed to be
99.999 per cent reliable
14
tion) projects. As a result, new
co-operative relationships have devel¬
oped between engineers and scien¬
tists, between industry and university
or research institutes, and between
industry and government.
In France, since its creation in 1962
to develop space activities, the Cen¬
tre National d'Etudes Spatiales
(CNES) has relied almost entirely on
the symbiosis between the Centre
National de la Recherche Scien¬
tifique, university laboratories and
private industry. Similar patterns have
emerged in the United Kingdom, Fed.
Rep. of Germany and Italy.
But experience has shown that even
such a working partnership between
government, universities and industry
does not automatically produce "spin¬
offs" of new technology into the
mainstream of society. While to some
extent this process is inevitable, its
workings are slow and uncertain.
Minimum lead time for the transfer of
new knowledge to new applied tech¬
nology is usually 10-16 years. But in
some cases the conversion is likely to
take 30 to 40 years. In addition, the
time it takes to develop new techno¬
logy into marketable products and
processes seems to have lengthened,
too, when things are left to their natu
ral course. So much of new techno¬
logy depends on perception and
entrepreneurship. It is putting things
together that no one had thought of
putting together before, things that,
left alone, may lie around a long time.
In his latest book, "The Age of Dis¬
continuity", Peter Drucker has summed
it up this way. "Perceptions have
greater impact, as a rule, economically,
socially and culturally, than have many
"new" things or even "new" ideas. . .
In an age of rapid change, a techno¬
logical strategy is essential for the
success and indeed for the survival of
a business and perhaps even an indus¬
trial nation. It is necessary to have
thought through in advance where to
put one's own technological effort."
He goes on to point out that Henry
Ford never really invented anything.
Everything he used was known. Even
the automobile was not new; there
were many on the market before he
brought out his famous Model T. And
yet Henry Ford was a true innovator.
What he contributed were mass pro¬
duction, the mass market, and the pro¬
fitability of the very cheap.
But the very fact that hardly more
than a decade after the beginning of
space exploration NASA has cata¬
logued more than 2,500 technological
innovations directly attributable to its
programmes and that there have been
innumerable instances of significant
transfers of new technology to the
economy is testimony to both the vast-
ness of new knowledge gathered by
space programmes and the effective¬
ness of new techniques to hasten the
transfer process.
In the early 1960s, the beginning of
the "knowledge explosion era", it
was apparent that the research and
development effort of the space pro¬
gramme had the potential to contri¬
bute more than any other single fac¬
tor to economic growth during the
coming decades. But it was also
apparent that traditional mechanisms
were no longer adequate to do this
with sufficient dispatch.
James E. Webb, then the Adminis¬
trator of NASA, conceived of a Tech¬
nological Utilization Programme as an
experimental effort designed to achie¬
ve the widest possible use of the tech¬
nology and knowledge arising out of
the NASA programmes.
To provide industry and universities
with a one-stop source of scientific
and technical data, the findings of
research and development work spon¬
sored or undertaken by the U.S.
Department of Defense and the Ato-

i
mic Energy Commission, as well as
data compiled by the Chemical
Abstracts Service, were added to the
NASA Scientific and Technical Infor¬
mation Data Collection.
This Data Collection, in addition to
research and development of NASA's
own installations, includes all inven¬
tions, discoveries, innovations and im¬
proved techniques developed by pri¬
vate or public contractors in their
work for NASA.
Some $5 million a year is now being
spent solely for the identification, eva¬
luation, classification, storage and dis¬
semination of this information to indus¬
try. But the value of this program¬
me is not confined to the accomplish¬
ment of this task alone. In addition
to channeling a volume of highly
advanced technology into the main¬
stream of the economy, NASA has
provided valuable new knowledge
concerning the involved and difficult
process of technology transfer itself.
Regional Dissemination Centres
(RDCs), operated by six universities
strategically located across the United
States, now provide industry with a
computerized knowledge bank contain¬
ing about 700,000 reports and which
continue to grow at the rate of great¬
er than 6,000 per month. Each cen
tre develops and operates a variety
of information and other technical ser¬
vices available to firms in the private
sector which pay fees to partially sup¬
port the centre's operation.
The centres, operating within the
university institutional framework, are
encouraged to contribute toward
teaching, research, and service goals
of the university as well as to de¬
velop industry relationships. Intensive
efforts are made to identify new pro¬
ducts, new processes, new scientific
and technological knowledge, and all
useful Innovations in materials,
processes, manufacturing techniques,
operating procedures, and new stan¬
dards born of space requirements.
As a result, industry has come to
understand much better the dynamics
of technology and to appreciate the im¬
portance of anticipating the direction
and speed of technological change.
Large, medium, and small-sized firms
have begun to adapt their organization
structure to perform the innovative,
entrepreneurial function of developing
and harnessing knowledge "energy"
to assure technological advance in
their field.
V
ERY little advanced re¬
search in aerospace is directly appli¬
cable in the market place. Products
and processes conceived for extremes
in temperatures, pressures and stress,
or exceptional qualities in weight, mi¬
crominiaturization, reliability and per¬
formance frequently are available only
at a cost prohibitive to the normal
commercial or industrial use. Once a
market is found for a product or pro¬
cess, adjustments are necessary to
bridge the gap between the needs of
the market, the state of the art, and the
elements of cost.
Clearly, while the Apollo and other
space programmes have succeeded
in forcing "invention by the clock",
the full impact of these programmed
innovations will not be felt on industry
until the mid-1970s and even the
1980s.
It still takes time and money for
large aerospace' companies to find
new applications even for in-house
technologies. And then thousands of
companies must ask the computers
which store the vast reservoir of
NASA and other data the right
questions.
Still, if the individual technology
transfers which have bridged the gap
between space programmes and earth-
bound applications are not enough to
bring a man out of his chair, col¬
lectively they become monumental.
Least apparent, but considered most
important by industrial engineers, is
the impetus space programmes have
given to the technology of perfection.
Manrating of thousands of systems
and millions of parts has forced new
standards of excellence into the in
dustrial system. Modern industry had
already achieved a high order ef¬
ficiency, cost consciousness and high
sensitivity to the needs of the market.
Now it has developed a capability for
precision and flawlessness.
The Apollo Saturn space vehicle,
with more than 5.6 million parts, push¬
ed the necessity for reliability far
beyond anything previously achieved
even with the high standards of qua¬
lity imposed by jet-age commercial
aviation.
If a level of 99.9 per cent perfection
were assured, it would mean that one
part in a thousand might fail. This
would mean that on each flight some¬
thing like 5,600 parts would be defec¬
tive resulting in almost certain catas¬
trophe.
To assure accident-free manned
space flight, manufacturers were
required to design equipment to be
99.999 per cent reliable or just as
close to zero-defects as is humanly
possible.
It was this kind of perfection that
prompted Astronaut John Glenn to
quip, when asked how he felt before
his first flight: "How would you feel if
you were strapped in a machine which
has thousands of components and each
one was built by the lowest bidder?"
While cost considerations prevent
many techniques used to obtain the
perfection John Glenn knew had been
achieved in his spacecraft from being
directly applied to the manufacture of
consumer products, they do have wide
and immediate applications in medi¬
cine, precision instruments and other
laboratory and industrial equipment
which in turn improve prevention and
care of disease and improvements In
production.
Almost without exception, every
industryin the U.S., the U.S.S.R.,
Europe and Japan that has been
exposed to the almost maddening
demands for the light weight, micro¬
miniaturization, and the unrelenting
reliability of the space programme has
profited from the sweat that was
involved.
As one top American engineering
official recently put it: "Every partici¬
pating company in the space effort has
been forced through a new and very
fine sieve of quality control and relia¬
bility. It is inevitable that product bet¬
terment would be the result . . . Maybe
a new material, some new trick in
fabrication. Maybe some new ap¬
proach in production that consciously
or unconsciously the company applies
to other products."
Space contractors have developed
many entirely new products and man¬
agement techniques that have crept
over from the space side of their
operations to the commercial side.
Spin-offs In biomedicine, new mater- ^ »-
ials, power generation and computer 1 ¿J
technology, have brought major chan-
ges to industry, commerce and most
important to the quality of human life.
