BEYOND
BABEL
Today, whether we like it or not, we are
laying the foundation of the first global society
T
by Arthur C. Clarke
HERE is no longer any
need to argue that the communications
satellite Is ultimately going to have a
profound effect upon society; the
events of the last ten years have
established this beyond question.
Nevertheless, it is possible that even
now we have only the faintest under¬
standing of its ultimate impact upon
our world.
There are those who have argued
that communications satellites (here¬
after referred to as "comsats")
represent only an extension of existing
communications devices, and that
society can therefore absorb them
without too great an upheaval.
I am reminded rather strongly of the
frequent assertions, by elderly generals
immediately after August 1945, that
nothing had really changed in warfare
because the device which destroyed
Hiroshima was "just another bomb".
Some inventions represent a kind
of technological quantum jump which
causes a major restructuring of society.
In our century, the automobile is
perhaps the most notable example of
this. It is characteristic of such
inventions that even when they are
already in existence, it is a considerable
time before anyone appreciates the
changes they will bring. To demon¬
strate this, I would like to quote two
examples one genuine, one slightly
fictitious.
For the first I am indebted to the
Honorable Anthony Wedgewood Benn,
now U.K. Minister of Technology, who
passed it on to me when he was
Postmaster General.
Soon after Mr. Edison had invented
the electric light, there was an alarming
decline In the Stock Exchange quota-
32
ARTHUR C. CLARKE, British science
writer and former chairman of the British
Interplanetary Society, was awarded the
Unesco Kalinga Prize for the Populariz¬
ation of Science in 1962. He has been
a regular contributor in the past to the
"Unesco Courier". This article is taken
from an address he delivered to an
international space communications confe¬
rence at Unesco, Paris, last December.
tions for the gas companies. A
Parliamentary Commission was there¬
fore called in England, which heard
expert witnesses on the subject; I feel
confident that many of these assured
the gas manufacturers that nothing
further would be heard of this impracti¬
cal device.
One of the witnesses called was the
chief engineer of the Post Office,
Sir William Preece an able man who
in later years was to back Marconi
in his early wireless experiments.
Somebody asked Sir William if he had
any comments to make on the latest
American invention the telephone.
To this, the chief engineer of the Post
Office made the remarkable reply:
"No Sir. The Americans have need
of the telephone but we do not. We
have plenty of messenger boys."
The second exemple is due to my
friend, Jean d'Arcy, Director of Radio
and Visual Information Services Divi¬
sion of the United Nations. He
has reported to me the delibera¬
tions of a slightly earlier scientific
committee, set up in the Middle Ages
to discuss whether it was worth
developing Mr. Gutenberg's printing
press. After lengthy deliberations,
this committee decided not to allocate
further funds. The printing press,
it was agreed, was a clever idea, but
it could have no large-scale applica¬
tion. There would never be any big
demand for books for the simple
reason that only a microscopic fraction
of the population could read.
If any one thinks that I am labouring
the obvious, I would like him to ask
himself, in all honesty, whether he
would have dared to predict the
ultimate impact of the printing press
and the telephone when they were
invented. I believe that in the long
run the impact of the communication
satellite will be even more spectacular.
Moreover, the run may not be as long
as we think.
The human mind tends to extrapo¬
late in a linear manner, whereas pro¬
gress is exponential. The exponential
curve rises slowly at first and then
climbs rapidly, until eventually it cuts
across the straight-line slope and goes
soaring beyond it. Unfortunately, it
Is never possible to predict whether
the crossover point will be five, ten
or twenty years ahead.
" However, I believe that everything
I am about to discuss will be tech¬
nically possible well before the end
of this century. The rate of progress
will be limited by economic and
political factors, not technological
ones. When a new invention has a
sufficiently great public appeal, the
world insists on having it. Look at the
speed with which the ' transistor
revolution occurred. Yet what we
now see on the technological horizon
are devices with far greater potential,
and human appeal, even than the
ubiquitous transistor radio.
It must also be remembered that our
ideas concerning the future of space
technology are still limited by the
present primitive state of the art.
All of today's launch vehicles are
expendable, single-shot devices which
can perform only one mission and
are then discarded. It has been
"recognized for many years that space
exploration, and space exploitation,
will be practical only when the same
launch vehicle can be flown over and
over again, like conventional aircraft.
The development of the reusable
launch vehicle the so-called "space
shuttle" will be the most urgent
problem of the space engineers in
the 1970s.
It is confidently believed that such
vehicles will be operating by the end
of the decade, the end of the 1970s.
When they do, their impact upon
astronautics will be comparable to that
of the famous DC-3 upon aeronautics.
The cost of putting payloads and
men into space will decrease from
thousands, to hundreds, and then to
tens of dollars per pound. This will
make possible the development of
multipurpose manned space-stations,
as well as the deployment of
very large and complex unmanned
satellites which it would be quite
impractical to launch (from Earth) in
a single vehicle.
It must also be remembered that
comsats are only one of a very large
CONTINUED PAGE 34

o
DIME-SIZED ATOMIC BATTERY. Two sizes of a miniature atomic battery are compared above to a pair
of tweezers. Batteries may be smaller than an old English farthing or U.S. dime to produce microwatts
of power or the size of several stacked coins to produce milliwatts of power (a microwatt is one-millionth
of a watt). An electric watch can be powered by 10 microwatts, a hearing aid by 1,000 microwatts.
Batteries produce electric current directly from low-level nuclear radiation and have a lifetime of up to
five years. Other batteries of similar size exist which convert heat from radioactive isotopes directly
into electricity, providing 100 times as much energy as chemical batteries of equal weight Developed
for use in space, all these batteries are finding application as power sources for biomedical telemetry,
cardiac pacemakers and undersea uses. Below, a tiny sensor and radio transmitter developed for space
missions but now used to monitor electrocardiograms and the condition of patients with respiratory
ailments. Radio starts buzzing loudly if complications occur. A TV camera, used to film the separation
of Saturn V rocket stages, and no bigger than a packet of cigarettes, is now on sale in a commercial
version for monitoring industrial processes.
33

BEYOND BABEL (Continued)
The wise King Canute and the rising tide
range of applications satellites; they
may not even be the most important.
The Earth Resources satellites will
enormously advance our knowledge of
this planet's capabilities, and the ways
in which we may exploit them. The
time Is going to come when farmers,
fishermen, public utility companies,
departments of agriculture and for¬
estry, etc. will find it impossible to
Imagine how they ever operated in
the days before they had space-borne
sensors continually scanning the
planet.
The economic value of meteorolo¬
gical satellites and their potential for
the saving of life has already been
demonstrated. Another most impor¬
tant use of satellites, which has not
yet begun, but which will have an
economic value of thousands of mil¬
lions of dollars a year, Is their use for
air-traffic control. It appears possible,
that the only real solution to the
problem of air congestion, and the
mounting risk of collisions, may be
through navigational satellites which
can track every aircraft In the sky.
I
34
N dealing with telecommu¬
nications problems it is convenient
and often indeed essential to divide
the subject according to the type of
transmission and equipment used.
Thus we talk about radios, telephones,
television sets, data networks, fac¬
simile systems, etc., as though they
were all quite separate things.
But this of course is a completely
artificial distinction; to the communica¬
tions satellite which simply handles
trains of electric impulses they are
all the same. For the purposes of
this discussion I am therefore looking
at the subject from a different point
of view, which may give a better
overall picture. I am lumping all tele¬
communications devices together and
am considering their total impact upon
four basic units in turn. Those units
are the Home, the City, the State, and
the World.
Note that I start with the home, not
the family, as the basic human unit.
Many people do not live in family
groups, but everybody lives in a home.
Indeed, in certain societies today the
family itself is becoming somewhat
nebulous around the edges, and among
some younger groups Is being replaced
by the tribe of which more anon.
But the home will always be with us.
There was once a time when homes
did not have windows. It is difficult
for those of us who do not live in
caves or tents to Imagine such a state
of affairs. Yet within a single genera¬
tion the home in the more developed
countries has acquired a new window
of incredible magical power the TV
set. What once seemed one of the
most expensive luxuries became, in
what Is historically a twinkling of an
eye, one of the basic necessities of
life.
The television antenna swaying
precariously above the slum-dweller's
shack ¡s a true sign of our times.
What the book was to a tiny minority
in earlier ages, the television set has
now come to be for all the world.
It is true that, all too often, it Is no
more than a drug like its poorer
relative, the transistor radio seen
pressed to the ears of the blank-
faced noise-addicts one sees walking
entranced through the city streets.
But, of course, it is infinitely more than
this, as was so well-expressed by
Professor Buckminster Fuller when he
remarked that ours Is the first genera¬
tion to be reared by three parents.
All future generations will be reared
by three parents. As René Maheu, Di¬
rector-General of Unesco, remarked
recently, this may be one of the real
reasons for the generation gap. We
now have a discontinuity in human
history. For the first time there is a
generation that knows more than its
parents, and television is at least partly
responsible for this state of affairs.
Anything we can imagine In the way
of educational TV and radio can be
done. As I have already remarked,
the limitations are not technical, but
economic and political. As for
economic limitations, the cost of a
truly global satellite educational
system, broadcasting into all countries,
would be quite trivial compared with
the long-term benefits It could bring.
Let me indulge In a little fantasy.
Some of the studies of educational
comsat broadcasts let us call them
EDSATS to developing countries
indicate that the cost of the hardware
may be of the order of $1 per pupil
per year.
I suppose there are about a thousand
million children of school age on this
planet, but the number of people, who
require education must be much higher
than this, perhaps two thousand mil¬
lion. As I am only concerned with
establishing orders of magnitude, the
precise figures don't matter. But the
point is that, for the cost of a few
thousand million dollars a year a
few per cent of the monies spent on
armaments one could provide a
global EDSAT system which could drag
this whole planet out of ignorance.
Such a project would seem ideally
suited for Unesco supervision, because
there are great areas of basic educa¬
tion In which there are po serious
disagreements.
The beauty of television, of course,
is that to a considerable extent it
transcends the language problem. I
would like to see the development, by
the Walt Disney studios or some
similar organization, of visual edu¬
cational programmes which do not
depend on language, but only upon
sight, plus sound effects. I feel
certain that a great deal can be done
in this direction, and it is essential
that such research be initiated as soon
as possible, because it may take much
longer to develop appropriate pro¬
grammes than the equipment to trans¬
mit and receive them.
Even the addition of language, of
course, does not pose too great a
problem, since this requires only a
fraction of the band-width of the vision
signal. And sooner or later we must
achieve a world in which every human
being can communicate directly with
every other, because all men will
speak, or at least understand, a hand¬
ful of basic languages. The children
of the future are going to learn several
languages from that third parent in the
corner of the living-room.
Perhaps looking further ahead, a
time is going to come when any
student or scholar anywhere on earth
will be able to tune in to a
course in any subject that interests
him, at any level of difficulty he
desires. Thousands of educational
programmes will be broadcast simul¬
taneously on different frequencies, so
that any individual will be able to
proceed at his own rate, and at his
own convenience, through the subject
of his choice.
T,
HIS could result in an
enormous increase in the efficiency of
the educational process. Today, every
student is geared to a relatively
inflexible curriculum. He has to attend
classes at fixed times, which very often
may not be convenient. The opening
up of the electromagnetic spectrum
made possible by comsats will
represent as great a boon to scholars
and students as did the advent of the
printing press itself.
The great challenge of the decade
to come is freedom from hunger. Yet
starvation of the mind will one day be
regarded as an evil no less great
than starvation of the body. All men
deserve to be educated to the limit
of their capabilities. If this opportunity
is denied them, basic human rights
are violated.
This is why the forthcoming experi¬
mental use of direct broadcast EDSATS
in India in 1972 is of such interest and
importance. We should wish it every
success, for even if it is only a
primitive prototype, it may herald the
global educational system of the future.
It is obvious that one of the results
of the developments we have been
discussing will be a breakdown of the

barrier between home and school, or
home and university for in a sense
the whole world may become one
academy of learning. But this is only
one aspect of an even wider revolution
because results of the new communica¬
tions devices will also break down
the barrier between home and place
of work.
During the next decade we will
see coming into the home a gener¬
al purpose communications console
comprising TV screen, camera, micro¬
phone, computer keyboard and hard-
copy readout device. Through this,
anyone will be able to be in touch
with any other person similarly
equipped. As a result, for an ever-
increasing number of people in fact,
virtually everyone of the executive
level and above almost all travel for
business will become unnecessary.
Recently, a limited number of the
executives of the Westinghouse
Corporation In the United States who
were provided with primitive forerun¬
ners of this device, promptly found that
their traveling decreased by 20 per
cent.
This,' I am convinced, Is how we are
going to solve the traffic problem
and thus, indirectly, the problem of air
pollution. More and more, the slogan
of the future will be, "Don't Commute
Communicate." Moreover, this de¬
velopment will make possible and
even accelerate another fundamental
trend of the future.
It usually takes a genius to see the
obvious, and once again I am indebted
to Professor Buckminster Fuller for
the following ideas. One of the most
important consequences of today's
space research will be the develop¬
ment of life-support, and above all,
food1 regeneration systems for long-
duration voyages and for the establish¬
ment of bases on the Moon and
planets. It is going to cost thousands
of millions of dollars to develop these
techniques, but when they are per¬
fected they will be available to
everyone.
This means that we will be able to
establish self-contained communities
quite independent of agriculture, any¬
where on this planet that we wish;
perhaps one day even individual homes
may become autonomous closed
ecological systems producing all their
food and other basic requirements
indefinitely.
This development, coupled with the
communications explosion, means a
total change in the structure of society.
But because of the inertia of human
institutions, and the gigantic capital
investments involved, it may take a
century or more for the trend to come
to its inevitable conclusion. That
conclusion is the death of the city.
We all know that our cities are
obsolete, and much effort is now
going into patching them up so that
they work after some fashion, like
thirty-year-old automobiles held toge¬
ther with string and wire. But we
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
WORLD
TV CLASSES
FROM
SPACE
The cost of the equipment for a truly global satellite
educational system broadcasting radio and TV
programmes to all countries has been estimated at
about $1 per pupil per year. Such a system could
eventually be developed to allow thousands of
programmes to be broadcast simultaneously on different
frequencies so that any individual could select the
subject and level of his choice. T.V. educational
broadcasts via communications satellite are to begin
in India in 1972, and the results may show whether
this method offers a real solution to the educational
problems of the developing countries. A global
communications satellite system may also open up
vast possibilities for the new idea of "lifelong
education". Photo shows two Malagasy technicians
at work on the antenna of a satellite tracking station
in Tananarive (Madagascar). Built by a Madagascar
firm for NASA, the station is manned by 120 Malagasy
technicians with U.S. help. In addition to tracking
satellites in orbit, it picks up data recorded by
weather and astronomical observation satellites.
35

World weather watch
around the clock
The development of a morning's weather hour
by hour (left) recorded by a satellite passing over
the Pacific on January 24, 1967. Right, photo
sequence of day-to-day weather changes over
the Pacific. Satellite meteorological observations
have sparked a revolution in the art of weather
forecasting. More accurate predictions have
brought incalculable benefits, from the saving
of lives and property to the protection of
food crops. Even more fantastic prospects
will be opened up once reliable long-range global
forecasts of two weeks or more become a
reality. The potential saving of such forecasts
to India's agriculture, for example, would be
at least $1,600 million a year and to U.S.
agriculture $2,500 million. In 1961, timely warning
of the approach of Hurricane "Carla" in the
U.S. by the weather satellite Tiros 3 enabled
over 350,000 persons to flee from the path
of the storm. Warnings have had similar
beneficial effects in many countries. Space
observations now bring greater navigational safety
to ships and aircraft. Pilots on transoceanic
flights leaving New York now receive weather
photos of their route transmitted automatically
from weather satellites. Today, U.S.S.R. and
U.S.A. weather satellite systems are combined
in a worldwide meteorological network under the
auspices of the World Meteorological Organization.
Photos NASA
1057 AM 11 43 AM
Pacific weather, hour by hour
36
BEYOND BABEL (Continued)
must recognize that in the age that is
coming the city except for certain
limited applications is no longer
necessary.
The nightmare of overcrowding and
traffic jams which we now endure is
going to get worse, perhaps for our
lifetimes. But beyond that ¡s a vision
of a world in which man is once again
what he should be a fairly rare ani¬
mal, though in instant communication
with all other members of his species.
Marshall McLuhan has coined the
evocative phrase "the global village"
to describe the coming society. I hope
"the global village" does not really
mean a global suburb, covering the
planet from pole to pole.
Luckily, there will be far more space
in the world of the future, because the
land liberated at the end of the
agricultural age now coming to a
close after ten thousand years will
become available for living purposes.
I trust that much of it will be allowed
to revert to wilderness, and that
through this new wilderness will
wander the electronic nomads of the
centuries ahead.
It Is perfectly obvious that the
communications revolution will have
the most profound influence upon that
fairly recent invention, the nation-state.
I am fond of reminding American
audiences that their country was
created only a century ago by two
inventions. Before those inventions
existed it was impossible to have a
United States of America. Afterwards,
it was impossible not to have it.
Those inventions, of course, were
the railroad and the electric telegraph.
U.S.S.R., China in fact all modern
states could not possibly exist
without them. Whether we like it or
not and certainly many people won't
like it we are seeing the next step
in this process. History is repeating
itself one turn higher on the spiral.
What the railroad and the telegraph
did to continental areas a hundred
years ago, the jet plane and the
communications satellite will soon be
doing to the whole world.
Despite the rise of nationalism and
the surprising resurgence of minority
political and linguistic groups, this
process may already have gone further
than Is generally imagined. We see,
particularly among the young, cults
and movements which transcend all
geographical borders. The so-called
"jet set" is perhaps the most obvious
example of this transnational culture,
but that involves only a small minority.
In Europe at least, the Volkswagen
and Vespa sets are far more numerous
and perhaps far more significant.
The young Germans, Frenchmen, and
Italians are already linked together by
a common communications network,
and are impatient with the naive and
simple-minded nationalism of their
parents which has brought so much
misery to the world.
What we are now doing whether
we like it or not indeed whether we
wish to or not is laying the foundation
of the first global society. Whether
the final planetary authority will be an
analogue of the federal systems now
existing in the U.S. or the U.S.S.R.
I do not know. I suspect that, without
any deliberate planning, such organiza¬
tions as the world meteorological and
earth resources satellite system, and
the world communications satellite
system (of which INTELSAT is the
precursor) will eventually transcend

13 January 1967 14 January 1967 15 January 1967
Pacific weather, day by day
their individual components. At some
time during the next century they will
discover, to their great surprise, that
they are really running the world.
There are many who will regard
these possibilities with alarm or
distaste, and may even attempt to
prevent their fulfilment. I would
remind them of the story of the wise
English king, Canute, who had his
throne set upon the sea-shore so he
could demonstrate to his foolish
courtiers that even the king could not
command the incoming tide.
The wave of the future Is now rising
before us. Let us not attempt to hold
it back. Wisdom lies in recognizing
the inevitable and co-operating with
it. In the world that Is coming, the
great powers are not great enough.
Let us look at our whole world as
we have already done through the
eyes of our moon-bound cameras.
I have made it obvious that it will be
essentially one world though I am not
foolish or optimistic enough to imagine
that it will be free from violence and
even war. But more and more it will
be recognized that all terrestrial vio
lence is the concern of the police and
of no one else.
And there is another factor which
will accelerate the unification of the
world. Within another lifetime, this
will not be the only world, and that
fact will have profound psychological
impact upon all humanity. We have
seen in the annus mirabilis of 1969
the imprint of man's first footstep on
the Moon. Before the end of this
century, we will experience the only
other event of comparable significance
in the foreseeable future.
Before I tell you what it is, ask
yourselves what you would have
thought of the Moon landing, thirty
years ago. Well, before another
thirty have passed, we will see its
inevitable successor the birth of the
first human child on another world, and
the beginning of the real colonization
of space. When there are men who
do not look on Earth as home, then
the men of Earth will find themselves
drawing closer together.
In countless ways this process has
already begun. The vast outpouring
of pride, transcending all frontiers,
during the flight of Apollo 11 was an
outstanding indication of this process.
Whether or not one takes it literally,
the myth of the Tower of Babel has an
extraordinary relevance for our age.
Before that time, according to the book
of Genesis (and indeed according to
some anthropologists) the human race
spoke with a single tongue.
That time may never come again, but
the time will come, and through the
impact of comsats, when there will be
two or three world languages which all
men will share. Far higher than the
misguided architects of the Tower of
Babel ever could have imagined
36,000 kilometres above the equator
the rocket and communications
engineers are about to undo the curse
that was then inflicted upon our
ancestors.
So let me end by quoting the
relevant passage from the 11th chapter
of Genesis, which I think could be a
motto for our hopes of the future:
And the Lord said: Behold they are
one people and they have all one
language, and this is only the beginn¬
ing of what they will do, and nothing
that they propose to do now will be
impossible for them.
37
