- ^OvWl
All over the world tentacular cities
are devouring the countryside.
In the United States, nearly two
hectares (five acres) of land
are being consumed each minute
by highways, urban expansion,
airports, parking lots and similar
space eaters. Existing towns
merge to form sprawling
"megalopoli" such as the one
stretching from Boston to
Washington or the area between
San Francisco and Los Angeles.
Above, axed trees mark the
invasion route of an expanding
Paris suburb. Above right, the
massive shape of a modern
housing complex rises above
Genoa, Italy. A tiny tree, sole
survivor of nature's green mantle,
stands isolated in this new
landscape of concrete forms.
Photo © Jacques Windenberger, Alx-en-Provence



THE
CONCRETE
CAGE
54
by Roe/of Jan Benthem

Photo © Mondadori Press, Milan
c
^^INCE the early days of
civilization, human settlements have
illustrated the relationship of man to
his natural environment. Sometimes
there was a triumphant challenge in
man's architecture, almost a collision
with nature, as if man had tried to free
himself from his surroundings, as
ROELOF JAN BENTHEM of the Nether¬
lands is Director of the Dutch government's
Country Planning Department. He is Presi¬
dent of the Country Planning Committee
of the International Union for the Conser¬
vation of Nature and Natural Resources
(IUCN) and an advisor to the Council of
Europe. His article is based on a study,
"Urbanization and the Countryside", pre¬
pared for the Council of Europe's European
Conservation Conference held at Stras¬
bourg in February 1970.
demonstrated in the Greek and Roman
cities. Other periods of history, how¬
ever, show a. deep attachment of
former generations of builders to their
natural surroundings. In the Byzan¬
tine cities and monasteries, for
instance, in the same part of Europe,
shape, colour and material combine to
form a complete unity with the land¬
scape.
Concentrated forms of settlement
have been chosen in nearly all parts of
the world where, in the evolution of
mankind, farming became the funda¬
mental structure of society. Our dis¬
tant ancestors usually built their
houses, villages and towns in com¬
pact units, in order to defend their
dwellings against intruders.
Even nowadays this old pattern can
be observed in different parts of
Europe. Classic examples of this
period are still to be found in a number
of medieval walled cities which con¬
trast with the surrounding open rural
environment: Rothenburg in the Fed¬
eral Republic of Germany, Trogir on
the Dalmatian shore, Carcassonne in
southern France and Avila in Spain,
among others.
With the Renaissance the picture
gradually changed. Wealthy citizens
started to build their palaces and villas
outside the towns, and integrated their
dwellings into the surrounding country¬
side by creating parks and gardens.
The villas outside Rome and, later,-
Versailles in France, Schwetzingen in
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
55

-W *íf
56
the Federal Republic of Germany, and
Schönbrunn in Austria, still exemplify
this period, in which the townsman
began to discover the attractions of
lural life.
In the dynamic process of man's
growing control over the natural world,
revolutionary changes have taken
place since the last decades of the
19th century. With the beginning of
the first industrial revolution, the strik¬
ing contrast between the "stone city"
and the "green country" began to give
way, and the strict boundaries between
the town and the countryside were no
longer respected.
With unlimited and uncontrolled
growth of urban development, dwel¬
lings and allied structures began to
spread over the land. The mass move¬
ment of people from the countryside to
the cities, the increasing expansion of
industry and the rapid growth of popu¬
lation are the main causes.
Large tracts of beautiful landscape,
evolved and shaped over centuries,
often disappeared in a few years as a
result of unbridled urban explosion and
a total lack of regional planning policy.
Since World War II, a new aware¬
ness of the values of the environment
has arisen. Unforeseen progress in
technical development has completely
changed the pattern of human society,
and the reconstruction and expansion
of urban zones has become one of the
features of post-war government
policies.
Much research and many experi¬
ments in the development of new
forms and policies of urban planning
have been carried out during the last
decade. Instead of the old pattern of
concentrated towns, new ideas have
been launched and realized.
The chilling prospects of the "Mega¬
lopolis" cleared the way for an en¬
couraging search for urban systems
more in keeping with man's needs and
human dignity. Linear towns, city
regions with open space systems,
satellite-town developments and the
"garden city" concept of the English
town planner, Sir Ebenezer Howard,
have been tested more or less suc¬
cessfully in several countries.
The concentration of people in ever
greater agglomerations is one cause
Photo © United Press Photos, Paris
of the difficult situation that has arisen
in parts of Europe and elsewhere in
the world, and the migration from the
countryside to the big cities continues
in many countries.
In France, for Instance, no fewer
than 150,000 persons employed on the
land move to the cities every year. As
a result, the population of the towns,
large and small, will have doubled by
1985. By then, more than four-fifths
of the population will be concentrated
in towns. Almost 60 per cent of to¬
day's Parisians were born in the
country.
There has been a relative depopula¬
tion of the heart of France's big cities,
but at the same time an increase in
"suburbanisation." Between 1954 and
1962, the community of Paris lost
24 per cent of its population through
migration, but the population of the
Paris urban district increased by
30 per cent and that of the suburban
district by 65 per cent.
In the densely populated western
part of the Netherlands, the "Randstad
Holland," as it is known, where an
intensive "conurbation" (a continuous

The elephants, left, are not wearing ear muffs as a gag. Muffs were fitted after elephants,
newly arrived from the jungles of Thailand, stampeded and escaped when a low flying
jet passed over the zoo, located near London airport. From the moment they leave
home, city workers, below, are exposed to a constant barrage of noise from trains, road
traffic, office machines, factory equipment, to name but a few sources. Researchers
looking into the relationship between noise ond health report that when a sudden noise
strikes the ear, the heart beat increases, blood vessels constrict, eye pupils dilate
and internal organs are seized by spasms. One scientist predicts that if noise continues
to increase for the next 30 years as it has for the past 30, it could become lethal.
network of urban communities) has
evolved, nearly one half of the popu¬
lation of the 'Netherlands is living in a
region which covers no more than two-
ninths of the total area of the country.
In the Ruhr area of the Fed. Rep. of
Germany and in the industrial centres
of Belgium, Italy and the United King¬
dom, similar situations clearly demon¬
strate the effects of a concentrated
urban structure.
In Europe, as in other parts of the
world, the impact of an enormous sub¬
urban sprawl on the surrounding
countryside is clearly apparent. Des¬
cribing these suburbia, a Council of
Europe report notes the existence of
"individual houses, small, mediocre
and monotonous, surrounded by tiny
garden plots which are the only outlet
for the personal taste of each owner,
expressed in the arrangement of his
kitchen garden, his patch of lawn, his
few yards of fence, with the result that
these dreary plots combine the worst
features of uniformity and diversity
alike.
"The final decline of the area result
ing from this nondescript concentra¬
tion of separate houses is difficult to
prevent," says the report, "precisely
because this type of housing satisfies
the desires of the majority of the popu¬
lation. In France, for instance, an en¬
quiry showed that 82 per cent of the
people prefer small houses to flats,
and the attachment to a small garden
may well be attributed to the resur¬
gence of a former peasant background
which, in a population only recently
urbanized, is never far distant."
In the United Kingdom, over 40 per
cent of the population live within six
vast urban concentrations. But this
country, the cradle of the "garden city",
has evolved new urban forms to meet
changing conditions and new ways of
life. In the last 20 years, extensive
public building programmes have
raised 14 new towns, now completed,
and 14 more are being built.
Based on this experience, new in¬
sights and new techniques have devel¬
oped rapidly in the United Kingdom.
Considerable attention has been given
to methods of studying the social,
economic and physical factors in new
town planning and how to use this
new knowledge.
Britain's first new towns were built
soon after the end of the Second
World War on sites containing rela¬
tively small centres of population in
the vicinity of an urban agglomeration.
The population target was usually fixed
at between 50,000 and 80,000. Many
of the towns chosen for expansion in
more recent years are already impor¬
tant centres in their own right and
have thus been able to build on the
basis of a large existing population and
an established industry. The maximum
scale of expansion that of the new
town at Milton Keynes provides for
a population of 250,000 in an area of
nearly 22,000 acres.
Earlier new towns were set up as
satellites in a ring about 20 to 30 miles
from the conurbation centre. More
recent new towns and major town
expansion projects tend to be sited
much farther away.
The recent new towns are visually
more sophisticated. Densities of con¬
struction are higher, but provide a
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
57

THE CONCRETE CAGE (Continued)
Invigorating the classic landscape
greater variety of accommodation. The
neighbourhood is no longer consider¬
ed as a distinct and separate physical
entity.
In each new town the landscape
character of the site has been fixed
at the start of the planning process, as
a guide in the location of all the land
uses. The design of each town res¬
pects throughout the character of the
landscape and its potentialities, a
policy which has proved of special
value in the later towns, incorpor¬
ating more distinctly urban concepts.
Town planners in England now have
in mind towns of 300,000 to 500,000 in¬
habitants, not located within an area
generally covered by local traffic.
These urban clusters would no longer
be satellites arranged around a nu¬
cleus, but new independent focal
points.
In France, the "départements" of the
provinces have relatively small scope
for activity in the field of economic
development. Paris, the focal point,
wields a tremendous influence. But
plans are now being, studied in France
to transform eight existing towns at
some distance from Paris into secon¬
dary metropolitan cities with up to one
million inhabitants.
In the Federal Republic of Germany,
urbanization has from the start devel¬
oped in a decentralized form due to
the spatial structure and the historical
development of the country.
u
58
RBANIZATION in its pre¬
sent form has a much greater influence
on the environment than ever before.
This is partly due to the scale of urban
development and partly as a conse¬
quence of the stronger relationship
between the urban and the rural
worlds. Communication between the
different urban concentrations increas¬
ingly opens up the countryside.
Greater land use and increasing
exploitation of natural resources are
also directly related to the urban
process.
There is a distinct connexion bet¬
ween a particular type of urban devel¬
opment and its effects on the country¬
side. Much depends on the attitude of
man and his ability to create and
handle efficient planning machinery.
In nearly all European countries the
existing landscape pattern Is strongly
influenced by man's activities. Some
parts are even completely man-made.
Nevertheless, a great diversity has
been created and maintained during
centuries of development. It is even
probable that the cultural landscape
of Europe is more varied than the
original natural scene which existed
before man transformed it.
This diversity is threatened by the
urban expansion of the last century
and particularly of the last few deca¬
des. Firstly, the spreading urban area
itself encroaches on the available land.
This increase is not only caused by
population growth but also by rising
standards of living. The basic features
of life demand far more space today
than at the start of the century.
The most spectacular effects of
urbanization on the environment can
be seen In a zone of varying width lying
between the frontier of the urban re¬
gion and the surrounding countryside.
In this transition zone a kind of "no
man's land" the town has not fully
established itself, but the genuine rural
land has already disappeared. Charac¬
teristic features of this zone are
decaying farms, junkyards, roads and
railways, electric power lines, airfields
and petrol stations and the ever-
present publicity hoarding.
Townsfolk and country people are
concerned with what is going to hap¬
pen in these transition zones on the
fringes of urban conurbations, but the
problem has not yet been sufficiently
understood and studied. A joint
approach by scientists, planners and
designers is urgently needed in these
areas to safeguard the interests of
both town and country.
Increased prosperity, better trans¬
port and more leisure have led to a
resurge of interest in outdoor life.
Living conditions in many urban areas
stimulate the desire of the townsman
to find relaxation in the countryside
during leisure time. Hence the in¬
crease of second homes in many Euro¬
pean countries.
The results of this offshoot of urba¬
nization need not be harmful to the
landscape providing such factors as
regional and landscape planning and
protection of the environment are
taken into account. In parts of Wes¬
tern Europe, good use has been made
of old abandoned farm houses which
have begun new lives as second
homes, and whose restoration, in many
cases, has made them attractive
examples of rural architecture and un¬
doubted assets to the landscape.
On the other hand, there are exam¬
ples, particularly in coastal areas or
other attractive scenic regions, where
second homes, week-end retreats or
holiday settlements have become liabi¬
lities to the landscape because no ade¬
quate planning and building control
exists.
T
HE time has perhaps come
to consider the possibilities for a
planned development of urban and
rural areas on a much broader inter¬
national scale. National planning
should at least consider and be based
on a framework for development of
"international regions" that could em¬
brace central, western and southern
European countries.
Such an approach is urgently need¬
ed. The interdependence of European
nations in several spheres of land use
is more and more evident. Growing
awareness of the implications of re¬
gional planning problems in all coun¬
tries and their increasing European
significance has led in recent years
to the setting up of regional co-op¬
eration groups in trans-frontier areas.
The expansion of international tour¬
ism means that an ever greater num¬
ber of people are visiting beauty spots
and recreation areas in different coun¬
tries. The increasing use of roads,
railways and other means of commu¬
nication creates an obvious need for
international consultation on the
management of these areas.
In an age when space exploration
and moon landings have become a
reality, it should be possible to
develop a proper management of man's
home here on earth. Urban develop¬
ment need not necessarily be destruc¬
tive to the countryside, but should be
one of the components of a compre¬
hensive policy for reconstruction and
rehabilitation of the environment.

Photos © Bureau d'Etudes Henri Chomette, Pari
HOT WATER
PYRAMID
At first glance, this building, above,
looks like an Egyptian pyramid. But
for its French designer it is a purely
geometrical form that harmonizes
with other buildings in the new town
of Mons en Barceul, near Lille, France.
A pyramid-shaped building is in fact
an appropriate choice for the area.
To the 30,000 inhabitants of the new
town it has the familiar outline of the
coal tips that dot the landscape in
this coal mining area of northern France.
A dominating feature of the new
urban centre, the pyramid has also a
utilitarian purpose. It houses an
ultra-modern plant, supplying heat
and hot water to the entire town.
Within the pyramid, chimneys from
three oil-fired furnaces lead to a single
outlet in the apex. Special equipment
filters off smuts and oily smoke to
prevent air pollution. Left, close-up of
one of the 12 brick figures («guardians
of the fire") which support the slate
covered structure. The appearance of
these figures stylized forms of the
ancient heraldic Lion of Flanders is
strikingly similar to the monumental
sculptures of Mayan temples of Mexico.
