T
22
HE sounds of the gamelan
orchestra the muted thunder of
drums, sonorous gongs or tinkling chi¬
mes are heard throughout Java, their
music pervading palaces and theatres,
squares and even private homes. To
the music of the gamelan are enacted
the Hindu epics of the Mahabharata
and Ramayana. Children and adults
crowd performances and listen en¬
chanted to stories of the deeds of my¬
thical heroes, demon kings, princes¬
ses and comic servants.
One form of traditional Indonesian
theatre art is the wayang kulit, the
famed shadow play by puppets made
of incised and painted buffalo hide,
whose silhouettes are projected on a
screen at night. The puppeteer or
dalang leads the gamelan, sings the
songs, narrates the story, and speaks
for each character in changing tones
and accents.
Wayang, in its widest sense, means
a dramatic performance, a play, or a
story, whether the actors are puppets
or human beings.
Troupes of dancers belonging to pri¬
vate clubs in Central Java also dra¬
matize the great epics in dance
plays (wayang wong). In addition,
professional groups-^each one the
exponent of a particular style move
from city to city, playing in each to
packed houses for two or three months
at a time.
Young children soon become fami¬
liar with the Mahabharata and the
Ramayana. When the wayang kulit
is performed they sit or squat in groups
before the screen, following with wide
eyes the appearance of a prince or
a demon. When dancers rehearse
they too have an audience of children
who frequently try to imitate the move¬
ments and gestures of an admired
dancer. At home they play on toy
instruments themes heard from the
gamelan. Moreover, manner of speech,
patterns of behaviour, ethical and
moral precepts which shape Javanese
mores are, to a considerable degree,
learned in childhood at performances
of the wayang.
In the countryside, around the city
of Jogjakarta are found the temples
dedicated to the Buddhist and Brahma-
nic faiths. Built of volcanic stone their
dark grey masses loom over rice fields
and dominate nearby villages, repeat¬
ing the rhythm of surrounding volcanic
peaks and ridges, silent reminders of
a past civilization whose beliefs still
affect the lives of the people today.
CONTINUED PAGE 24
HIROSHI DAIFUKU is head of Unesco's
Section for the Development of the Cultural
Heritage. He is the author of many studies
on anthropology, conservation and museo-
graphy.



lilt
monuments
of Java

by
Hiroshi Daifuku
The mighty temple complex of Loro Djonggrang, at Prambanan, ranks as one of Indonesia's most
magnificent monuments. Built in the 10th century A.D. it originally comprised over 220 temples,
sanctuaries and other buildings. Above, one of Its. smaller sanctuaries viewed from the great
temple dedicated to Shiva. Balustrades on the Shiva temple carry vividly sculpted scenes from the
great Hindu epic, the Ramayana (see "Unesco Courier" special issue, December 1967). They
relate how Rama, helped by an army of monkeys, sets out to rescue his wife Sita after her
abduction by Ravanna, king of Lanka. Right, a courageous bird, Jatayu, carries Sita's ring to Rama
and tells him where she is held captive. Left, another scene from the Ramayana carved on the
temple of Brahma, flanking that of Shiva.

THE GROTTO
OF THE HERMIT
At the foot of the Wadjak mountains
near Tulung Agung, Java (site of the
discovery of the remains of Wadjak Man,
a type similar to Neanderthal Man) is a
hermit's cave hewn from the solid rock.
Its walls are decorated with reliefs
illustrating episodes from the story of
the mythical hero Ardjuna, and his
temptation by nymphs sent down to earth
by Indra, god of the sky, to disrupt his
meditations. Right, nymphs descend from
the abode of the gods and alight- hear
a stream. Far right, boatmen, shouldering
their oars approach the grptto where
Ardjuna meditates. (Ardjuna himself is
not shown in this photo).
ART OF JAVA (Continued)
Great scenes from the Ramayana
Thus, though they are no longer
religious centres, their associations
with the cultural life of the people
through music, dance and the theatre
are ever presenfand thus make them
living rattier than dead monuments.
The beginning and growth of Hindu
culture in South East Asia is still not
perfectly known. Archaeological dis¬
coveries of stone and metal inscrip¬
tions, dating from the beginning of the
5th century A.D., show that Indian
influence had already reached the
archipelago. Small states existed,
based on Indian patterns, which traded
with India and China and with each
other, and waged war among them¬
selves.
Gradually a dominant state evolv¬
ed. Mataram, as it was known, gain¬
ed control of Central Java during the
8th century and built the first temples
on the Dieng Plateau, dedicated to
Shiva. Buddhist missionaries prob¬
ably came a short while later.
During the latter part of the 8th cen¬
tury a new dynasty appeared, the Sai-
lendra, which controlled most of Java
and Sumatra. Much of what is known
of Central Java during this period is
derived from the many monuments
constructed by the different kings of
this dynasty.
Borobudur (see the "Unesco
Courier", June 1958 and June 1968) is
the best known of these monuments.
Besides carvings treating the religious
aspects of Buddhism, many panels give
an indication of the life of the people
during this period.
A caparisoned elephant standing
near a prince and princess indicates
its use as a steed. Musicians play on
flutes, drums, cymbals and rattles
while a dancer's gestures carved in
stone centuries ago could easily be
those of a dancer today. A high-prow-
ed, two-masted ship under full sail
laden with passengers and cargo
reveals the level of seamanship achi¬
eved in south east Asia during this
period.
Three kilometres from Borobudur is
the temple of Mendut. Within it
stands the famed statue of the "Preach¬
ing" Buddha, flanked by a statue of the
Bodhisattva of Mercy, Avalokiteshva-
ra, to its right and the Bodhisattva of
Power, Vajrapani, to its left. They
are, says the Netherlands archaeolo¬
gist, A. J. Bernet-Kempers, "one of the
greatest manifestations of Buddhist
spiritual thought and art . . . There
are few, if any, groups of statues
anywhere else in Buddhist countries
which can compete with them."
On the wings of the flight of steps
are carved parables (¡atakas) based
on folk tales such as the story found
in many other East Asian countries of
a talkative turtle who begged a pair
of geese to take him on a flight. On
the panel, the turtle is shown suspend¬
ed by its mouth from a stick held bet¬
ween the two birds. As people make
fun of him the turtle opens his mouth
to reply, falls, and is killed by the on¬
lookers.
The "tree of heaven" carved on the
sides of Mendut and nearby Pawon
recalls the silhouette of the gunungan,
the carved leaf-shaped buffalo hide
which is used to signal the opening
and closing of the wayang kulit puppet
play to indicate changes of scenes,
forests, and in general to symbolize
the entire ritual of the wayang.
Guardian figures found at temples
such as Kalasan, Sewu and Sari, mas¬
sively sculptured, with heavy stone
clubs, protect the entrances from evil.
Their benign features are in contrast
to the more demonic countenances
found in such figures in temples of
the other Asian countries. The tradi¬
tion continued until recent times and
many of the palaces of Central Java
have had such figures added to the
entrances of the grounds.
The varying styles of architecture,
the carved statues of pilgrims, Bodhl-
sattvas, royal personnages, all testify
to the wealth of the civilization as well
as to the, dedication of the Sailendra
rulers to Buddhism.
Accounts of pilgrims and travellers
to the Java of this period give some
indication of the wealth and political
importance of the Sailendra Dynasty.
Apart from the stone temples and the
scenes they portray, little remains of
this former glory for most of the
domestic architecture was built of
perishable materials, such as wood
which is rapidly destroyed in the humid
monsoon climate.
Labour and materials to build all

these structures must have been contri¬
buted by the great mass of the people,
who also served in the armies of the
kings, engaged in commerce, and
otherwise produced the wealth which
made possible the activities of the
State.
It is also probable that many indi¬
genous beliefs antedating the intro¬
duction of Hinduism and Buddhism
persisted, as indeed they do today.
The worship of Shiva also probably
continued throughout the Sailendra
period and some authorities suggest
that the attributes of Shiva and Buddha
may have been combined.
In the latter half of the 9th century,
construction was begun of the temples
dedicated to Shiva, Brahma and Vishnu.
This complex of temples, known as
"Loro Djonggrang", at Prambanan,
rivals Borobudur in conception. Tradi¬
tionally it is identified with the Mata¬
ran, kingdom at the close of the Sai¬
lendra period.
It seems to have been gradually
abandoned when the capital of Mata-
ram was transferred to Eastern Java
and the temples were finally destroyed
by an earthquake in 1549. For centu¬
ries they lay forgotten with only low
brush-covered mound hinting at their
presence. Excavation revealed the
importance of the site and it is being
slowly restored.
The visitor today comes upon frag¬
ments of the outermost wall which is
built in a square, with each side
390 metres (1,300 ft) in length. The
complex of temples and shrines are
found within two inner, concentrically
walled enclosures. The square walls
are oriented north to south with gates
at each of the four cardinal points of
the compass. Within the central court
are found the principal temples sur¬
rounded by a wall 110 metres (360 ft)
square. The intermediate court origi¬
nally had 224 minor temples, most of
which are in ruins, surrounded by a
wall 222 metres (730 ft) square.
The central temple dedicated to Shi¬
va towers 47 metres (155 ft) above a
narrow balustraded terrace. It was
carefully restored between 1937 and
1953. However, it was not possible
to complete the roof, and today the
statue of Shiva stands in the open sil¬
houetted dramatically against the sky.
The builders of the temple combined
several Indian styles with Javanese ele¬
ments into a single harmonious archi¬
tectural composition. Matching it in
beauty are the temples dedicated to
Vishnu and Brahma, to the north and
the south of the temple of Shiva.
Of more immediate interest to the
present-day culture of Java, however,
are the dancing figures sculpted on
the balustrades of the temple, and
above all the scenes from the Rama¬
yana on the interior of the balustrades.
Carved in stone, they record the bat¬
tles of Rama, the feats of Hanuman the
monkey general, and all of the legen¬
dary characters and scenes with
which the Javanese and Balinese are
so familiar through their theatre and
dance. The scenes from the Ramayana
are continued on the neighbouring
temple dedicated to Brahma. These
ancestral carvings are studied and
serve as standards of comparison for
the dancers of today.
Because of this an amphitheatre
has been built nearby and during
the full moon of the dry season (June -
September) annual performances of the
Ramayana are given by different dance
groups, coming not only from other
localities of Indonesia, but at times
from neighbouring countries.
The Islamic religion was introduced
into Indonesia by Indian traders dur¬
ing the 13th and 14th centuries. The
religion had already been modified by
Indian influences and as it was
gradually adopted rather than being
imposed by conquest acquired dist¬
inctive Indonesian characteristics, in¬
cluding a marked tolerance for survi¬
ving elements of Hindu religion.
In Central Java the oldest Muslim
monuments are found on the north
coast. The best known is the minaret
of Kudus near the city of Semarang. It
is not monumental in scope, but is
historically important, and in form it
resembles the Balinese drum tower or
kulkul rather than Indian models.
An outstanding example of aristo¬
cratic Indonesian Muslim architecture
exists ¡n Jogjakarta. It is largely in
ruins today, but traces of its former
glory exist. The pleasure palace of
the Sultan, Taman Sari (or "flower gar¬
den") was once located on an island
in an artificial lake which was reached
either by boat or a tunnel leading to
the island from the shore. Today the
island is a low hill surrounded by
garbage as the former lake now serves
as a dump.
The old tunnel, its moss covered
walls and shafts letting in air and
sunlight, bears mute witness to its for¬
mer role. One of the outer gates, sur- HT
rounded by nondescript housing, still ¿J
stands with crumbling masonry.
Behind it lie tanks or basins, partially
filled with silt, but children can still play
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

ART OF JAVA (Continued)
26
in them. Traces of old canals exist
and the lavish architectural plan
calling for a lake, fountains, and pools,
have also earned it the name of the
"water palace". The design of Taman
Sari differs strikingly from the lighter
wooden construction used for later
aristocratic buildings.
The Summer Palace of the Sultan
and the palaces of the Prince of Solo
and other members of the old Javanese
aristocracy offer another type of archi¬
tectural style which is much more Far
Eastern in concept. Here are courts
shaded with trees, low lying pavilions,
quarters for servants, etc. Within the
walled enclosure the most important
building is the front pavilion where
gamelan concerts are given, and
dances practised.
In the palace of the Sultan, now
open to the public as a museum, is one
of the most important collections of
gamelan instruments. In other prin¬
cely houses of the city of Jogjakarta,
dance groups composed of the young¬
sters from aristocratic families and
children from homes in the city and
surrounding countyside are trained. At
all such dancing lessons, crowds of
youngsters gather to watch and thus
learn the movements of the dance and
the modes of behaviour considered to
represent the ideal.
Thus, in Central Java today and in
other regions of this populous Island,
the formal classroom lessons of con¬
temporary civilization are tempered
with those learnt from the religious
and moral heritage and from the an¬
cient monuments of the past.
It is not possible at present for the
government to consider financing the
restoration and conservation of all of
the monuments of Central Java, Irres¬
pective of their importance to the cul¬
tural heritage. At Sewu, for example,
most of the shrines are tumbled heaps
of dressed stone. Some, by the pains¬
taking process known as anastylosis
(the fitting together of pieces like a
gigantic jigsaw puzzle) have had their
component parts identified and partial¬
ly reassembled, but not restored, due
to lack of funds.
Together with the monumental sites
described above, Central Java can
offer to the visitor a unique experience
and perspective of the growth of civili¬
zation in south east Asia which, for
much of the world, is still largely
unknown.
Central Java is heavily populated and
is largely agricultural. Measures to
meet pressing social and economic
needs have priority. The drive to
finance the restoration of Borobudur,
being launched by Unesco, will not in
itself contribute to the well-being of
the local people.
Unesco, however, is aiding the
Government in planning a programme
for the development of cultural tourism
which will help to justify the costly
programme required for the conserva¬
tion of the sites and monuments, and
at the same time open new economic
possibilities for the people.
yn rSaTWI,
i?3^3£S 'V**
CHARITABLE HARE. Disguised as a
Brahman, a god visits four animal friends an
otter, a monkey, a jackal and a hare and
begs for alms. Each offers the holy man
some food, but the hare (none other than the
Buddha in one of his earlier lives) having
nothing else to offer, is ready to sacrifice
his own body the ultimate example of
charity. This relief (800 A.D.) is one of
600 illustrating Buddha's birth stories, on the
galleries of the great Borobudur temple
on the island of Java.
I HE "Jatakas",
or birth tales of the Bud¬
dha, comprise 547 stories
in prose and poetry. They
are believed to have been
written about the 5th
century A.D., based on an
earlier version in Pali,
itself inspired by even
more ancient writings,
possibly dating from the
3rd century B.C. These
tales of the Buddha's
previous lives show how,
before the final incarna¬
tion in which he attained
Enlightenment, the Bud¬
dha had been reborn in¬
numerable times as an
animalas a monkey, an
elephant, an antelope, a
stag, a horse, and many
others. Ancient Buddhist
art, taking its themes
from the Jakata stories,
has depicted a graceful
cavalcade of beasts of
every kind, as in these
sculptured scenes from
Java 's monuments. .
STORIES IN STONE
ÜÜ -
im
I ^
3&.
%à*
&5zm*
MONKEY HERO. The King of Benares seeks and finds a tree covered with
luscious fruit growing by a river. Seeing a troop of monkeys devouring the fruit, he
orders his archers to shoot the animals down. The chief of the monkeys (the
Buddha) rescues his people by making a bridge across the river with a long rattan
and his own body. When the last monkey has passed, the exhausted chief
monkey lets go and is on the point of falling into the water when the king,
moved by such self-sacrifice, spares his life. (Borobudur temple relief).

TALKATIVE TURTLE. A turtle asks a pair
of geese to take him on a flight. Gripping in
his mouth a stick held by the birds he rises into
the air. As the people below mock him and
try to shoot him down, he opens his mouth
to return their abuse, falls to the ground and is
killed. This ancient story is one of the Fables
of Bidpai, the name under which a famous
collection of fables of Indian origin became
known in Europe in the middle ages. The original
Sanscrit work, composed by a Brahman in the
3rd century A.D., is still highly popular in India
as the "Pancatantra". The fable of the turtle,
which inspired one of the well-known fables
of La Fontaine, is depicted here on a relief in the
Chandi Mendut temple, Java (800 A.D.).
RESOURCEFUL GOAT. A story from
the Pancatantra has become a famous
fable in Java. A monkey offers to
lead a tiger to where a goat is living,
and lashes itself to the tiger's back with
a rope. Seeing them arrive, the goat
shouts to the monkey: "Thank you for
bringing me a tiger to eat, but where
are the other nine you promised me?"
Hearing this, the tiger panics and
dashes off, dragging the monkey behind
him... (Chandi Mendut temple, 800 A.D.).
