"Cancer claims a steady toll of human lives all over the
world and in many countries it is second only to diseases
of the heart and arteries as a cause of death. It is also a
disease which arouses strong emotions. Cancer is a subject
many people prefer to shun; a disease which is commonly,
and wrongly, believed to be untreatable;a disease from
which many people die or suffer needlessly because,
whether from ignorance or unreasoned fear, they do not
seek advice until it is too late." These words by
Dr M.G. Candau, Director-General of the World Health
Organization, explain why WHO has chosen as its theme for
1970, "Early detection of cancer saves lives." This issue
of the "Unesco Courier" was prepared in collaboration
with the Office of Public Information of WHO and the
International Union Against Cancer.



4
CANCER
where
we stand
by John Higginson
T,
HE increasing disillusion¬
ment during recent years among both
the lay public and the scientists in the
absence of an immediate break¬
through in either the treatment or
prevention of cancer has tended to
lead to excessive pessimism.
This attitude probably results from
the expectations engendered by the
exciting progress in molecular biology
JOHN HIGGINSON has been director of
the International Agency for Research on
Cancer, at Lyon, France, since 1966. Born
in Ireland and now a citizen of the United
States, he has been particularly concerned
with the geographical and environmental
aspects of cancer, and directs the Interna¬
tional Agency's research work on viruses
and chemical agents in cancer and their
relation to environment. This article
appeared in the Feb-March 1970, issue of
"World Health", published by WHO.
and chemotherapy in the late fifties
and early sixties which appeared to
offer immediate solutions to the
problem and gave rise to claims that
were often widely and uncritically
disseminated in the lay press.
Though our brightest hopes have not
been fulfilled and the malignant cell
has been shown to be more complex
than used to be thought, the progress
made in cancer research during the
last two decades is considerable and
offers much hope for the future.
For some time, scientists have
warned that the immediate future
may not provide quick solutions to
complex biological problems and
that we should be prepared for a
period of steady, if less spectacular,
progress. Many people, however,
have become so accustomed to the
concept of "breakthroughs" that the
many years of careful work which
CONTINUED PAGE 6

This striking three-dimensional type
photo, taken with a special scanning
electron microscope, shows a cancer
cell surrounded by blood corpuscles.
Photo j Patrick Thurston - Observer

CANCER (Continued)
Some astonishing facts and figures
6
make them possible are frequently
forgotten.
While prophecies in science are
notoriously fallacious and solutions to
certain cancer problems may arise
sooner than expected, past experience
requires that cancer research be
regarded - as essentially long-term;
financial and manpower requirements
need to be planned accordingly.
To speak of a single solution to the
"cancer problem" Is an oversimplifica¬
tion. From several point of view,
cancer of each individual organ in
the body should be regarded sep¬
arately since each may require a
different approach. Nonetheless, there
are certain common features of
malignant disease which justify con¬
sideration of cancer as an entity,
especially when problems at the
cellular level are under investigation.
During recent years, the absolute
number of cancer cases' has risen in
industrialized states. This Is due in
the first place to the increasing
proportion of elderly people in the
population who are prone to cancer.
This rise does not represent a true
increase in frequency but reflects
improved medical care and Increased
expectation of life that have followed
the control of such infectious diseases
as tuberculosis.
Secondly, there has been a large
increase in lung cancer incidence
during the last two decades, especially
among males. The increase in cancer
of other sites has been less marked
or is negligible. In fact, in most
developed countries, the frequency of
stomach cancer is declining for
reasons not understood but which
would appear to be associated with
an improved standard of living. Thus,
one cannot speak of a general cancer
Increase in modern industrial society.
The remainder of this article will
discuss certain highlights of the last
two decades which illustrate best
the immense Increase in knowledge
which has occurred in relation to this
disease and which has formed the
base on which future research pro¬
grammes can be developed in a
rational manner.
Much of this information has now
raised a whole series of new problems,
both at the sociological as well as at
the molecular level, and not all of these
problems are susceptible to solution
by available technology.
There are two major long-term
objectives in relation to cancer re¬
search:
Cancer Prevention. This is the
ideal solution as its aim is to prevent
cancer and thus avoid the heavy costs,
both economic and physical, associat¬
ed even with successful treatment.
Cancer Treatment. Since it is
unlikely that complete prevention of
all cancers will be possible within
the foreseeable future, continued
attempts to seek hew and improved
methods of treatment are continuing
to demand a high priority.

* # ,*
THE
PHANTOM
HAND
In recent years thermography has
become a valuable aid in the
early detection of cancerous
tumours. Tumours are hotter
than healthy areas of the body
and thermography consists of
producing images based on heat
variations. The hotter zones
appear white and the colder
areas dark. Far left, a thermograph
of a human profile. In the
photo, top left, two hands were
placed on a table and a
thermograph made. Shortly
afterwards, a second
thermograph was made(lower left)
after one hand had been
withdrawn. The phantom hand
which remains visible represents
the heat transferred to the table
The use of thermography has
had startling results in detecting
breast cancer.
Photos < Laboratoires d'électronique et de
physique appliquée, Limeil- Brevannes, France
Studies on the epidemiology of
cancer have produced some of the
most significant clues regarding the
causation of cancer in man.
While attempts have been made
since the beginning of the 19th
century to collect statistics, Living¬
stone could still write a hundred years
ago that "cancer is a disease of
civilization". However, significant
progress in the collection of cancer
data has been made since the second
World War and adequate statistics
are now available to enable assess¬
ment of cancer patterns under a wide
variety of environmental conditions.
Cancer affects all races and com¬
munities, but there are marked dif¬
ferences in the frequency with which
various organs are affected: for
example, cancer of the liver and of the
mouth are more frequent in southern
Africa and in India respectively
than in Europe and North America,
whereas the reverse is true for cancer
of the large intestine. Other studies
have shown that migrant populations
develop the cancer patterns of the
country to which they migrate and
not that of the country of origin.
These facts have been most im¬
portant in preventing undue emphasis
on genetic factors in man and in
indicating that most cancers are
primarily influenced by environmental
factors, though they may be modified
to a minor degree by individual
susceptibility. Skin cancer is an im¬
portant exception in that it is signifi¬
cantly affected by pigmentation.
The recognition that most cancers
are not inevitable but are caused by
environmental factors has had im¬
portant practical results in directing
increased research to identify these
factors as a first meaningful step
towards prevention.
The demonstration of a group of
individuals who show an unusual
frequency of a cancer has been of
great assistance in relation to identi¬
fying tumours of occupational and
cultural origin, since individuals in
these cases are exposed to unusually
high concentrations of a carcinogen
similar to that found in the laboratory.
Nearly 200 years ago, Percival Potts
demonstrated that cancer of the
scrotum and skin was very frequent
among London chimney-sweeps. He
ascribed these tumours to the soot
with which their clothes were con¬
tinually impregnated. With different
methods of heating and improved
standards of living, chimney-sweep
cancer has largely disappeared.
High-risk groups have been identi¬
fied in many industries. Today, leg¬
islation to prevent cancer is enforced
in most industrialized countries and
the worker is protected either by better
techniques or by substituting safer
compounds for the dangerous agent.
However, these success stories are
often forgotten by the public, since 7
once a cancer has been controlled it '
no longer represents a problem of
interest. Examples of such disappear--
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

CANCER (Continued)
50,000 new drug compounds tested each year
ing industrial tumours include bladder
cancer in dye workers and osteo¬
sarcomas in watch-makers. Yet the
continual development of new man-
made chemicals as well as changes in
technology require constant vigilance
on the part of the industrial doctor, and
industrial techniques must be con¬
tinually monitored to avoid the intro¬
duction of possible new hazards.
Since the identification of a hazard
by the appearance of a tumour in
man clearly represents a failure in
prevention, large-scale programmes
operate today in many countries to
test the potential cancer-producing
properties of new chemicals.
Unfortunately, facilities are insuffi¬
cient to test all new chemicals in the
environment, even in the most in¬
dustrialized countries. Further, the
extrapolation of results of animal tests
to man is complex and involves many
difficulties.
Thus, while it is generally agreed
that substances carcinogenic to ani¬
mals should not be utilized by man
unless essential, it should not be
forgotten that all but two of the many
stimuli known to be carcinogenic to
man were first identified in man and
not in animals. Furthermore, some
substances identified as carcinogenic
to animals would appear relatively
harmless to man at the levels to which
he is exposed.
0
8
THERS, such as drugs and
pesticides, may offer benefits which
for the moment would appear to out¬
weigh their cancer-producing poten¬
tial. It is possible in some cases that
their elimination may lead to greater
tragedies in terms of health and nutri¬
tion than1 would result from their
utilization.
For example, pesticides in malaria
control and food production have
saved tens of thousands of lives.
Isoniazid has been essential for the
treatment of tuberculosis and there
is no evidence that it has carcinogenic
properties in man although it has
produced lung tumours in mice.
It is recognized that the public health
official today must take calculated
risks based on the available data.
Studies made in the last two decades
indicate how such data may be
collected by the use of appropriate
epidemiological techniques.
In conclusion, the advanced public
health measures of today which
monitor our water, air and food for
cancer-producing agents are far
advanced in comparison with the
situation at the beginning of this
century, and represent steady, if un¬
spectacular, progress.
The relation of a cancer to a cultural
habit provides one of the greatest
success stories of modern cancer
research. Twenty years ago a firm
association was first demonstrated
between cancer of the lung and the
cigarette habit in man, although the
relationship had been suspected for
much longer. Numerous additional
studies have now placed this causal
association beyond any reasonable
doubt and, although other factors such
as air pollution may be significant, in
the absence of cigarette smoking they
are of relatively little importance.
The potential benefits of this disco¬
very can be illustrated by the situation
in the United Kingdom where nearly
40 per cent of all cancer deaths in man
are due to lung cancer. Failure to
achieve this level of prevention results
from the unwillingness of the average
individual to accept that a pleasurable
habit is dangerous. However, there is
evidence that with increasing educa¬
tion smoking will gradually begin- to
diminish.
More than 500 representatives of
35 countries attended the first World
Conference on Smoking and Health in
1967 and it was interesting to note that
in some countries a significant proporr
tion of doctors have ceased smoking
or switched to pipes or cigars.
Intensive research is now being
directed towards identifying exactly
the hazardous stimuli in cigarette
smoking and developing safer ciga¬
rettes.
Cigarette smoking and excessive
drinking have also been implicated as
major factors in cancer of the oes¬
ophagus and mouth in many areas.
In India, mouth cancer which accounts
for approximately one third of all
cancers in males has been shown to
be related to betel chewing. Again,
prevention is theoretically possible.
Unfortunately, little is known about
the cause of many cancers including
cancers of the stomach, colon, rectum
and breast and leukaemia. However,
the many potential chemical car¬
cinogens which may contaminate food
or air are being investigated.
Recently, new groups of compounds
which occur in nature and contaminate
food have been discovered and are
now being studied for their effects on
man. Moreover,- as our knowledge of
events at the molecular level of the
cell increases, it may eventually be
possible to determine in advance those
chemical compounds that are potential
carcinogenic hazards.
I
INFORMATION services
have markedly improved and the data
obtained in one laboratory is now
rapidly transferred to another in the
same or different countries, although
at times in some countries certain
industries have not always been as
collaborative as the situation warrants.
It is therefore possible to state that
during the last three decades research
on chemicals carcinogenic for man
has been placed on a rational basis,
which is essential for the final iden¬
tification of the compounds concerned.
Defining the potential problem has
also indicated the limitations of fi¬
nancial and physical support since it
is estimated that over a quarter of a
million new compounds are synthe¬
sized each year, of which between
5,000 and 10,000 require testing.
Viruses were first identified as
causing experimental cancer in birds
in 1908. During the last two decades
it has been demonstrated that they
cause leukaemia in several species,
including dogs, cats and cattle. There
is now, moreover, increasing circum-
stancial evidence that they may also
be associated with certain types of
human cancer for example, Burk-
itt's lymphoma, a childhood disease
in Africa, in which the virus shows
the same properties as that which
causes infectious mononucleosis, a
relatively mild and common blood
disease. A very similar virus has also
been discovered more recently in
tumours of the post-nasal space.
Major attempts by large-scale sero-
epidemlological surveys of a type
unforeseeable even a few years ago
are now being planned to find out
whether this relationship is causal.
While certain common human viruses
such as the adenoviruses which may
cause the common cold have been
shown to be carcinogenic, their role
remains unproven in man.
The virus concept has been of great
value in elucidating mechanisms of
cellular metabolism, especially in rela¬
tion to nucleic acids. Since the

carcinogenic viruses are composed of
a core of either DNA or RNA, much
has been learned of how such viruses
may modify the cell's own nucleic acid
following infection, with the resultant
neoplasia.
The potential nature of these dis¬
coveries will become clearer during
the next decade, when the role of
viruses in human cancer will almost
certainly be clarified; evaluation of
control methods should follow. The
progress in developing new concepts
of malignant disease introduced by
the virus hypothesis may be difficult
to appreciate by those not engaged in
this field, but this work has modified
many concepts of cell control and the
progress of the past fifteen years will
probably be more easily appreciated
in the light of the successes of the
next decade.
Not only have the standard methods
of surgery and radiotherapy been im¬
proved, but chemotherapy has made
giant progress since 1947 when it had
just been shown that acute leukaemia
in children could respond to drugs.
Since then a vast number of new
compounds has been developed and
studied. In the USA alone, 50,000
compounds are screened each year.
The use of these compounds in
leukaemia in various combinations and
with other forms of treatment has
brought great improvements: whereas
in 1964 complete remission of leuka¬
emia was found in only 40-50 per cent
of cases in children and the median
survival was one to one and a half
years, in 1967 complete remission was
possible in over 90 per cent of children
and the median survival had risen to
three or more years.
Data collected from many countries
would indicate that today it is even
possible to believe that some leuka¬
emia patients have actually been cured
and further successes would appear
probable. A complete cure by chemo¬
therapy is now also possible in a
proportion of patients with Hodgkin's
disease and choriocarcinoma, and
possibly also Burkitt's lymphoma in
Africa.
However, gains are small against
the major cancers, colon, rectum and
breast, where the surgeon and the
radiotherapist are still responsible for
most treatments, and stomach and
lung cancers, which are still highly
refractory to therapy. However, the
five-year survival for cancer of the
colon increased from 31 per cent of
cases in the early forties to 46 per
cent in the late fifties.
It Is clearly fundamental to the
application of the classical therapies
that the patient be seen early enough
in the course of his disease to permit
adequate treatment, and much progress
has been made in techniques that may
prove valuable in identifying cancer
at an early age.
These techniques largely rely on the
identification of malignant cells in
various secretions of the body. Un¬
fortunately, they are not always
utilized by those who most need this
type of examination, even when
available. Thus far, their overall effect
on mortality has been relatively slight;
however, the whole concept of early
diagnosis and, thus, possible curative
treatment has had a radical influence
on modern therapy.
f*
^B^ANCER is a disease of the
cell. A widely accepted hypothesis is
that an initial event leading to a change
in a single cell may result in a series
of events within succeeding genera¬
tions of cells, culminating in a tumour.
Whereas progress as indicated by
actual improved therapy or meaning¬
ful prevention has not yet resulted
from developments in the field of
molecular biology, there is no doubt
that progress in this area offers the
best and most rational long-term
approach to cancer prevention and
therapy.
As our knowledge of the factors
involved in cell control, multiplication,
transformation and drug , resistance
increases, it is not improbable that the
progress of the last decade will be
regarded as the watershed of our
understanding of the neoplastic
disease at the basic level.
Another related field in which much
progress has occurred is that of
immunology, which has developed
during the last fifteen years from a
discipline which was believed to have
no relevance to cancer, to one that
now shows great promise not only
in relation to therapy but also in
diagnosis and control.
In conclusion, it is obvious that very
significant progress has been made in
all aspects of cancer research during
the last decade, which has resulted in
improved therapy and prevention.
The fact that expectations have not
been fully realized only reflects the
complexity of the problem and not
lack of progress; the efforts of the
many dedicated workers in this
arduous and non-spectacular field
should be recognized. Furthermore,
cancer studies have provided con¬
siderable "spin off" for other branches
of medicine, a fact which is often
ignored.
A model of the International Research Centre
on Cancer now being built in Lyon, France.
It will house the International Agency
for Research on Cancer, set up in 1965
with the help of WHO, and headed
by Dr John Higginson, the author of this article.
9
