Photo © BIPS - Rassegna Medica
Photographed with a scanning electron microscope, the surface of the human trachea, or
windpipe, recalls a storm-tossed ocean. Here the delicate mucose membranes of the
trachea have been magnified 2,500 times.

Hidden factors
in the 'geography'
of cancer
E,
lARLY in the morning as
the farmers get up to start their
chores, before it is even light, the
rain starts falling. It keeps falling
throughout the day covering Brittany
with an all too familiar veil. But
without the rain there would be no
herds of cattle for making butter.
When work is over, when a farmer
meets a friend or an errand takes him
to the nearest village, a glass or two
of wine or a stiff drink of calvados
seems to shut out the cold and damp
and make a hard life easier and
friendlier.
NEDD WILLARD is a medical writer on
the staff of the World Health Organization.
In Curaçao the sun shines every
day, except during the rainy season
and even then it may come out and
pay a visit for a few hours or so.
Vegetation is lush and warm waters
gently wash the shores of the tropical
island. In spite of the climate the
favourite dish is funchi, a maize
porridge served piping hot. Night
comes quickly, with little transition
from the brightness of day to the
velvet obscurity of night. To the
sound of music people sit sipping
their drinks. Music seems to sound
better that way.
Brittany and Curaçao, what two
places could be more different? Yet
they have one thing in common,
something unpleasant: a high rate of
by Nedd Willard
cancer of the oesophagus, the tube
between the mouth and the stomach.
This sad distinction they share with
Jamaica and the uplands between
Kenya and Uganda. A number of
investigators spurred on by the Inter¬
national Agency for Research on
Cancer (IARC) are hard at work trying
to find out why.
The IARC was created in 1965 by
the World Health Assembly and forms
part of WHO. Its main attempts are
to find what in man's environment
causes cancer. Some elements iden¬
tified so far are man-made. Pesticides
are being studied, for example, but
others seem to occur naturally.
In Nairobi, Dr CA. Linsell, Chief of.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
27

Is the secret hidden in the soil?
the Centre set up by IARC, co-ordin¬
ates the material which is gathered
along the Kenya-Uganda border by the
Medical Research Council of Great
Britain with his own research.
In France, Dr A. Tuyns, a member
of the Agency staff, is studying
oesophageal cancer in man in Brittany
in collaboration with the Rennes
School of Public Health and Professor
Louis Massé. In Jamaica, Professor G.
Bras heads the Agency centre. In
Curaçao, Dr U. de Jong of the Agency
is at work on the spot profiting by the
co-operation of the Curaçao cancer
registry. And so the net to gather
vital data has been spread over vast
distances, and covers quite different
climates and ways of life.
The dominant idea behind this
research is that if regions like Brittany
and Curaçao differ widely in most
characteristics, it might be possible to
find those they share and so even¬
tually isolate the factor responsible
for causing such a high rate of cancer
of the oesophagus..
One distinction can be made, based
on the different incidence of the
disease between the sexes. In
Brittany and Jamaica, it is primarily
the men who are subject to the
disease. In Curaçao, the rate is high
among both sexes.
But the first nagging question
remains, what common link can there
be between a rugged peninsula jutting
into the cold Atlantic sea, a tropical
island bathed in sunshine, and the
uplands of a continental plateau? One
fact which struck observers imme¬
diately was a certain liking people of
these regions share for their local
alcoholic beverages or, in the case of
Curaçao, for their hot maize porridge.
The Bretons down large draughts of
calvados while the people of Malawi,
far away in Africa, like their home¬
made gin.
Studies have shown that at least
home-made Malawi gin contains nitro-
samines, chemicals which can provoke
oesophageal cancer in animals. If
samples of the drinks or food in these
regions reveal the presence of nitro-
samines in large quantities this may
prove significant.
But Curaçao, Trinidad, Brittany and
Malawi are still thousands of miles
apart. This makes study more difficult
and the job of eliminating all extra¬
neous factors almost overwhelming.
Therefore, the discovery of three re¬
gions in the same country, geographi¬
cally quite close together, with three
different patterns of oesophageal can¬
cer proved to be the starting point
for a unique supporting study. Scien¬
tists had found a natural microcosm
In which to study this form of cancer.
Along the northern coast of Iran,
on the Caspian Sea, lie three regions
with very different climates and life
patterns.
The first region is heavily forest¬
ed, well-watered land where the
main crops are tea and rice. Further
east up the coast lies an intermediate
region where there is some rainfall
and cotton fields predominate, although
there are a variety of activities inclu¬
ding tourism and fishing. Finally,
slightly inland from the coast, lies a
semi-desert region, a region of camels
and thirst, of poverty and nomadic
huts. Three regions, only a short dis¬
tance apart; three ways of life, three
climates and soils, three strikingly
different patterns of cancer of the
oesophagus.
The dry region of Gonbad-Gorgan
has the highest incidence, 50 to 70
cases per-1 00,000 people. The interme¬
diate region is between the two extre¬
mes with about 15 per 100,000: the
well-watered area, or ralnbelt, has only
about 6 per 100,000. The question
seeking an answer is, why?
To find out, a start was made on this
problem by a team in the summer of
1968. Dr Ezat Mahboubl, of the Ins¬
titute of Public Health in Teheran, orga¬
nized a cancer registry in the spring
of 1968 as part of a joint research
agreement with IARC. Dr Janet Kmet,
an IARC staff member works closely
with a team of physicians and techni¬
cians who permanently scan the Cas¬
pian littoral collecting all available
information from local doctors. The
research base Is at Babol, in the field
research station which has been given

Why do certain types of cancer afflict
particular regions? In northern Iran, on the
Caspian sea, three adjacent regions, having
very different climates, types of soil and
patterns of life, provide research workers
with a natural field of study. The incidence
of cancer of the oesophagus varies widely
from one region to another. There seems
to be a relation between the humidity and the
salinity of the soil and this type of cancer.
But many factors have to be distinguished
and compared before a definite conclusion
can be reached. So a research station was
established last year at Babol where
information from local doctors Is collected.
1. Far left, fishermen on the Caspian Sea.
In this wooded, well-watered region the
incidence of cancer of the oesophagus Is low.
(6 per 100,000 of the population.)
2. In the cotton-growing Babol region, left,
the rainfall is less extensive than on the
Caspian coast. Cancer of the oesophagus
affects 15 out of 100,000 of the population.
3. Right, the arid zone of Gonbad-Gorgan is
inhabited by nomadic tribesmen and here the
incidence of oesophageal cancer it about ten
times higher than It ii among the Caspian
fishermen (50 to 70 per 100,000 of the
population).
for the study by the Iranian Institute
of Public Health Research.
Dr Kmet hopes, by studying the
physical, biotic and cultural charac¬
teristics of the Caspian littoral, to
discover new techniques for under¬
standing the environmental factors
in cancer.
The region chosen In Iran has
many unique advantages. Within
a small distance, there are striking
changes In climate and soil; Dr Kmet
strongly suspects that the humidity of
the climate and the salinity of the soil
play a part, but before incriminating
one or two factors, many others must
first be examined and acquitted.
In the desert region of Gonbad, peo¬
ple have a habit of drinking large quan¬
tities of tea, scorching hot. It was
plausible that this fiery flood of liquid
poured down the soft linings of the
gullet would over the years instigate
cancer. It seemed reasonable, but it
wasn't true: people in the neighbour¬
ing regions who don't suffer a high
incidence of oesophageal cancer also
like to drink their tea scalding hot.
Moreover, women in Gonbad do not
drink more tea, yet they have a higher
incidence of oesophageal cancer than
the men.
So many things are involved that
finding the factors responsible for
human cancer requires long efforts in
various disciplines. The way of life
a vague term can be broken down
into a thousand component parts, any
one of which may be important.
How do the people work? What do
people eat and drink? Finally, the place
itself, the climate and the soil on
which the community lives and from
which it draws Its sustenance has to
be studied. According to Dr Kmet,
the evidence collected so far seems
to suggest that low rainfall and high
salinity in the soil are related to the
oesophageal cancer problem.
A geographical concordance bet¬
ween humidity and salinity of the soil
on the one hand, and the distribution
of oesophageal cancer on the other,
has been clearly shown, but it may
be coincidental. Where there are sa¬
line types of soil there is a high In¬
cidence of this disease, at least in
the vast areas of central Asia. These
findings generally fit well with thé high
incidence of oesophageal cancer on
the Iranian plateau.
The findings in Kazakhstan in the
U.S.S.R. support the hypothesis of a
causal relation, since the border bet¬
ween saline soil types in the coastal
areas and non-saline soils in the forest
and chernozem districts north and
west of the northern shores of the
Caspian Sea is a disease dividing-line
similar to those found in Iran. Some¬
thing similar has also been noted in
Kenya.
But clues are not proof and every
factor must be weighed, compared and
sifted. For facts to be accurate and
comparable, they must be gathered in
a uniform way. The team therefore set
out to standardize the observations to
be gathered in the field research sta¬
tion at Babol. Located in the Interme¬
diate region, it already serves as a co¬
ordination centre for the data collected
with the aid of three hundred doctors.
These physicians send in biopsies
which are examined in the laboratory.
The pathologist, Dr Salmasizade, and
the head of the registry, Dr Falati, go
out themselves to visit each local
health centre as well as physicians in
the region in order to check on cancer
reports. A large map is being drawn
up to show the areas where the diffe¬
rent forms of cancer oesophagus,
lungs and other sites are occurring.
The road leads out through the des¬
ert dotted Irregularly with the yourtas
of the nomads. This traditional way
of life still stretches its tents from Iran
to the edge of China.
Region two lies midway between
desert and rainbelt. The way of life
differs from that of the desert although
the diet Is about the same. The Babol
research centre is at the hub of this
region. Here is where the precious
files are accumulated and studied.
Chaluz lies in the heart of the rain-
belt, Region three. The plants spar¬
kling with dew emphasize the life-giving
humidity here. Children are out at
work harvesting weeds from the rice
fields to feed the livestock. On the
coast, the fishermen embark for a day
at sea. Here the number of cases of
oesophageal cancer reported Is very
low.
The road rises through the clouds
and breaks the rain barrier to emerge
on the other side, where the way leads
to Teheran. Behind the mist lie three nn
regions where diets are similar, al- /JJ
though occupations differ. Where does
the difference lie? The answer may
be hidden In the dirt under foot.
