THE STRATEG
IN A NUTSH ELL
The following are the 30 major goals and
recommendations of the Pearson Commission Report
on international development:
IN THE FIELD
OF TRADE Vigorous expansion of world trade is needed for rapid inter¬
national development, with developing countries becoming
more outward-looking and competitive.
Developed countries should abolish import duties and excessive
excise taxes on primary commodities produced exclusively by
the developing nations. Developing countries should be assured
of an increasing share of markets for their agricultural products
which may also be produced in the developed countries.
Financing should be available to help poor countries meet short¬
falls in export earnings.
Quantitative restrictions on manufactured imports from
developing countries should be abolished during the 1970s.
Trade between the developing countries themselves must be
greatly expanded, partly through new mutual tariff concession
agreements.
Regional development banks should be more strongly supported
and they should extend export credits to developing countries.
International organizations should study the need for inter¬
national payments arrangements to facilitate trade among
developing countries, and they should negotiate mutual and
wide-ranging tariff concessions.
Financial support is needed for stores of agricultural products
to meet periods of lean years and to stabilize prices.
FOREIGN
INVESTMENT
Developing countries should remove impediments to foreign
investment and assure stability and improved administrative
procedures affecting foreign firms.
Foreign investors in developing countries should contribute
to manpower training, local industry and national growth.
Developing countries should not grant foreign investors
excessive protection and tax concessions.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

STRATEGY IN A NUTSHELL (Continued)
ECONOMIC
GROWTH
International organizations and creditor governments should
set up an "early warning system" to let developing countries
know they are nearing the danger zone of excessive debt
burden.
Private foreign investment is not an alternative to public aid.
Official aid to finance roads, schools and hospitals is a
prerequisite to private investment.
Increases in aid should be clearly aimed at helping the develop¬
ing countries to reach a path of sustained growth. The target
of the 1970s is to increase average annual GNP at least 6 per
cent per year. Countries that reach this level should be self-
reliant by the end of the century.
Aid increases in the future should be closely linked to the
economic objectives and development performance of the
countries receiving aid. In return, poor countries should expect
commitments of support from rich countries.
VOLUME
OF AID
The U.N. target of foreign aid by wealthier nations equalling
1 per cent of their gross national product should be reached
by 1975 at the latest. Public or government aid in the form of
grants or low or interest-free loans should make up 0.70 per cent
of the gross national product by 1975 and in no case later than
1980.
Food aid programmes will have to be replaced by other forms
of aid as developing countries become more self-reliant in
food production.
DEBT RELIEF Debt relief should be recognized as a legitimate form of aid.
To avoid future debt crises, aid terms should be more lenient
and uniform among donor groups.
AID ADMIN
ISTRATION
Foreign aid donors and receiving countries should meet this
year to cut through administrative red tape and set up three-
year programmes instead of annual budgets.
There should be less strings attached to aid-giving obliging
developing countries to buy goods in donor countries. Donor
nations should grant more leeway allowing their funds to be
used for buying in other developing countries.
TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE
16
Rapid growth during the 1960s of more than 10 per cent a
year has created shortcomings in this form of aid. It has often
failed to meet actual requirements of developing countries,
especially in agriculture and education, and has not been
adequately integrated with capital assistance.

»OPULATION
CONTROL
HD TO
EDUCATION
AND
RESEARCH
MULTI¬
LATERAL AID
National and international corps of technical assistants should
be able to make a career of their work, with help from both
donor countries and private institutions.
Family planning should be available to all. No child shoul
be born unwanted. Birth rate control must be stressed by
both donors and recipients when planning aid programmes.
A Commissioner for Population should be appointed by the
United Nations to help direct population control programmes
in the various U.N. agencies.
The World Bank in consultation with the World Health Orga¬
nization should launch an international programme for the
mobilization of research resources in this field.
Greater resources should be made available for educationa
research and experimentation in new teaching methods in
developing countries to increase their capacity to absorb,
adapt and develop scientific and technical knowledge.
A share of research and development resources in indus¬
trialized countries should be oriented towards problems in
developing countries. Rich countries should help in setting
up international and regional centres for research and develop¬
ment in fields such as tropical agriculture, extension techniques,
education, and urban planning.
International organizations must exert greater leadership and
direction to make development assistance a genuinely inter¬
national effort.
The share of multilateral aid should be increased from the
present 10 per cent of official public aid to 20 per cent by 1975.
The International Development Association (IDA), the World
Bank's easy-loan financing agency, should become a pivotal
organization in multilateral aid efforts.
IDA should almost quadruple its work by 1975 with national
contributions reaching a total of $1,500 million compared with
a level of $400 million at present. Regional development banks
must also receive increased support.
The president of the World Bank should call a conference during
1970 of all U.N. and other international, multilateral and bilateral
agencies to work toward co-ordinating their efforts, now
lacking direction, so as to create a coherent international aid
system. | 1 J
