Anti-smoking campaigns are
increasing in intensity in many
countries. In the U.S.S.R. dramatic
posters, right, remind the public of
the dangers of smoking, and in
Soviet laboratories rabbits trained to
smoke provide research workers
with valuable information.
Restrictions on advertising of
cigarettes are in force in
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, England,
France, Ireland, Italy, Norway,
Sweden and Switzerland. In the
United States, the Senate has approved
a law banning cigarette advertising
on radio and television from
January 1971. Great Britain's biggest
ever anti-smoking campaign via
the press, films and television has
just been launched by the Health
Education Council. Private
organizations such as "Smokers
Anonymous" and "Smokestoppers
Ltd" provide help for those trying
to break the habit. But a wide gap
still exists between the vast sums
spent on tobacco advertising and
funds available to the anti-smoking
movement. Poster in Russian reads:
"How you burn up your health."
by Robert M. Taylor
14
ROBERT M. TAYLOR Is Secretary-General
of the International Union Against Cancer.
He is Executive Director of the National
Cancer Institute of Canada and Executive
Vice-President of the Canadian Cancer
Society, Toronto. His main field of interest
is cancer control.
zl
<

The case
against smoking
T
WO years ago, at the
opening of the World Conference on
Smoking and Health in New York City,
the former Surgeon-General of the
United States Public Health Service,
Dr. Luther Terry, set the scene by
saying "We have come to the end of
one era in the smoking and health
field. The period of uncertainty is
over. While science will continue to
probe the reason why, there is no
longer any doubt that cigarette smok¬
ing is a direct threat to the user's
health."
If this statement was true in 1967,
how much more obviously is it true
today. On all sides, the evidence
accumulates which points to the
smoking of cigarettes as one of the
greatest of health problems: the risks
of developing cancers of the lung,
mouth and larynx and oesophagus are
greater in those who smoke; death
and disability resulting from chronic
bronchitis, pulmonary emphysema and
from coronary artery disease lie in
wait for the nicotine addict.
In Canada, a country with a popula¬
tion of 20,000,000, it has been esti¬
mated that there are almost
18,000 excess deaths each year caused
by lung cancer, heart disease and
chronic chest disease.
The statistics describing the toll due
to smoking have been used in an
arresting fashion by Cuyler Hammond
who has estimated that while 78 per
cent of non-smoking males age 25 will
live to the age of 65 or greater, this
proportion drops to 54 per cent for
those who smoke 40 or more ciga¬
rettes per day.
Another result is that for the first
time ' in this century . . . the life

TAK
CrOPAET SUOPOBbE
expectancy of the male population is
decreasing rather than increasing.
The public has heard about the
hazards associated with smoking.
In a poll of public opinion about cancer
which was carried out in 1967 among
Canadian men, it was found that 82 per
cent of. non-smokers and 73 per cent
of smokers thought smoking was inju¬
rious to health. In the face of this
knowledge, how is it that the consump¬
tion of cigarettes has not fallen.
There are many answers to this
question. The first is that the tobacco
industry has employed and is con¬
tinuing to employ every possible means
to cast doubt on the evidence
which has incriminated its product.
It goes even farther by denying that
any hazard exists, and It is backing
its position with an advertising
campaign which in the Western World
counts for an annual expenditure of
hundreds of millions of dollars.
But this is not all. As handmaidens
to the industry are the fatalism of the
addict, the apathy of the public and
too often the indifference 'or hostility
of responsible members of govern¬
ments who are reluctant to face the
loss of income from the tax on the
sale of tobacco and especially ciga¬
rettes, an income which comprises a
significant portion of the total.
So those who would seek to
counter these forces face great obsta¬
cles and must be prepared to fight a
long battle; and we must be patient
as well as persistent for it will not be
in our interest to enter this controversy
unless we are resolved to use our
intelligence and to keep our emotions
in check no matter how great the
temptation to let them go.
An outstanding educationist in
referring to controversy has said
that controversy is to be carefully
distinguished from the bilious invective
or the crude personalities to which
the term is erroneously applied. Anger
produces little except vituperation
and bombast but controversy can be
sharp . and pointed; it demands
toughness and resilience of mind.
How should this toughness and
resilience of mind be applied? I should
point out that what I am about to
recommend might be described as
the idealized . approach, that I am
perfectly well aware that in some
countries one or more of these pro¬
posals have been implemented, and
I am equally aware that in others
some aspects of the programme may
be impracticable.
Each country must decide for itself
the form of approach which will be
suited to deal with the problem, but
Photo WHO
those of us who are in a position to
create or influence public opinion must
still strive to enlist a total effort a
community-wide approach.
The first and, in my opinion, the most
important requirement is that each of
us accept the role of an exemplar.
Unless each of us is prepared to
abandon the habit of smoking we can
scarcely expect results in our effort
to convince others of the hazard.
I make this point with all the fervour
and conviction of an ex-smoker of
13 years standing.
While the need to set an example
is important for all who embark on
the campaign, it assumes even greater
importance for those persons such as
physical health educators, teachers,
nurses and physicians who are
assumed to be more knowledgeable
about matters of health than the
general public.
I confess to you that it is difficult
for me to understand how the pros¬
pects for cancer control can be
discussed in an effective way through
a cloud of cigarette smoke, and I doubt
that the vision of the future can be
seen under such circumstances. The
smoke gets in your eyesl
The most important activities of
those who would give battle to this
hazard can be grouped under the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
15

CASE AGAINST SMOKING (Continued)
It's never too late to quit!
16
heading of education. There has been
much speculation as to whether it is
more important to educate the adults
or the children. Those who favour
the approach to adults claim that
unless one persuades them to give up
smoking, the programme directed to
the children will fail, and those whose
targets are the children, claim that we
must tackle the habit at the age when
it is first taken up.
The truth is that the programme
must be aimed at the members of
both groups. With films and filmstrips,
health talks and posters the young
must be persuaded that they should
not take up the habit, that it is no
longer the smart thing, that it is not
a sign of maturity.
At the same time, we must deliver
the message to the adults and we
must be prepared to back this up with
offers of help in the form of withdrawal
clinics for those who, having decided
to give up the habit, need help and
encouragement.
Perhaps one of the most telling
arguments that one can use with
parents is to point out that the children
of parents who smoke are more likely
to take up the habit, that the habit of
smoking reduces the life expectancy
by about 8 years and that therefore
the adults who are parents and who
continue to smoke are threatening
their own children with the reduction
of life expectancy.
I would like to make four suggestions
about the features of the education
programme. These may be described
as the four "e's": encouragement,
enlargement, enlistment and evalua¬
tion. Since these are earnest sug¬
gestions, I should perhaps refer to
them as the four entreaties. '
By encouragement, I mean" that in
our approach to adults, we should
underline the benefits that can result
from giving up smoking, and we
should promote the idea that it is
never too late to quit. I fear that in
our enthusiasm to persuade, we have
too often yielded to the temptation of
depicting the evil results of smoking
and of doing so in such a fashion as to
arouse fear.
It has been shown by a number of
authorities, and has been re-empha¬
sized more recently by John Wake¬
field, chairman of the Committee on
Public Education of the International
Union Against Cancer, that fear is not
the most effective means of changing
behaviour. To quote J.A.C. Brown, "the
more frightened people become of the
consequences of an action, the more
they may be impelled to continue it."
By enlargement, I mean that we
should incorporate in our educational
approach the point of view, that
although we are concerned with
smoking primarily because it is a
source of cancer, it is a cause of
death and disability and human misery
in a number of other ways. The prob¬
lem of smoking has many facets and
demands a multi-faceted approach.
It is because of this fact that I use
the term enlistment, and by this I refer
to the importance of enlisting the
co-operation and activities of other
agencies both governmental and non¬
governmental. The best illustration of
this form of activity with which I am
familiar is the National Interagency
Council on Smoking and Health in the
United States.
Although I am less familiar with
others, it appears to me that equivalent
action has been taken in a number
of countries in different ways. To
name only two, I understand that in
Austria, the Federal Ministry for Social
Administration is assisted in pro¬
grammes about smoking by other
ministries and by such voluntary
agencies as the Austrian Cancer
Society; and that in Denmark, the
Minister of the Interior has appointed
a commission, known locally as the
Cigarette Commission, representative
of government and voluntary agencies
including the Danish Cancer Society.
I suggest that in those countries
where such collaboration does not
exist, the cancer agencies take the
initiative in bringing this about.
And the final "e" is evaluation. Too
often the wrong, or at least the less
important, statistics are used in des¬
cribing an educational programme.
These are the numbers of lectures and
radio talks, the numbers of films and
filmstrips distributed, the numbers of
pamphlets produced and so forth.
w
HAT is important and what
should be done if we hope to make
significant progress is to determine
what was accomplished by the effort
and this means that we must have a
clear definition of the objective. Was
it to inform or was it to change
behaviour, or both?
To measure what was accomplished,
it is necessary to carry out periodic
surveys of the target population and
one must ask the right questions. Let
me assure those that have not yet
participated in such analyses that they
will be in for some surprises.
That film which you thought was
superb may turn out to have had the
opposite effect to that which was
intended. That pamphlet which set out
the dangers so clearly may have been
more effective in arousing fear than
in causing changes of behaviour.
And now, finally, what about the
tobacco industry and its activities? It
may be assumed that the industry will
never institute meaningful controls of
the hazards of smoking and will never
initiate action to reduce the number
of those who smoke.
It may be assumed that the industry
is in fact contemptuous of the public
and that its actions now and in the
future will be motivated only by the
search for profit. Under these circum¬
stances, the cancer control agencies
have important roles to play in arousing
public interest in control measures.
The first target must be the
advertising campaign. Mr. Emerson
Foote, formerly a senior member of
the advertising world and a past-
chairman of the National Interagency
Council on Smoking and Health, once
wrote a letter to the late Robert F. Ken¬
nedy in which he said, "Television
advertising encourages people to
smoke cigarettes. Cigarettes kill
people. It is not morally justifiable to
encourage people to kill themselves.
Therefore, cigarette advertising on
television should be banned."
In a similar but less dramatic vein,
the Task Force for Smoking and
Health in the United States has said
"the Task Force is unable to see how
in the long run a product involving the
health hazards of cigarettes can
continue to be advertised."
I subscribe to the points of view
expressed in these statements. The
fact that significant steps have been
taken against the advertising of
tobacco in Czechoslovakia, Denmark,
England, France, Ireland, Italy, Norway,
Sweden and Switzerland should give
heart to the rest of us.
A desirable adjunct to controls on
advertising is the labelling of cigarette
packages with a clear warning about
health hazards.
An ironic situation which exists in
Canada and which may also exist
elsewhere is that the Federal Govern¬
ment which is collecting $350,000,000
in taxes on tobacco and spending less
than $350,000 per year on programmes
directed against smoking has provided
millions of dollars in subsidies to the
tobacco-growing industry. The Cana¬
dian Cancer Society is joining with
other agencies in an effort to bring
this support to a conclusion.
Other steps which are desirable and
which are being taken to reduce the
hazards of smoking include restrictions
on the sale of cigarettes to children
and the banning of smoking in public
places and in places of work.
I would like to conclude on a note
of hope. I feel that the climate of
public opinion is changing, that the
demand for more positive action on
the part of government is growing,
that the social acceptability of ciga¬
rette smoking is diminishing and that
the idea is taking shape in the minds of
more and more persons that it Is
not necessary to smoke to appear
grown up, and that it is necessary
not to smoke to remain healthy.
