4.
Benefits
to
medicine
IB
I
N 1959 a new term, "bio-
astronautics," came into popular usage
to describe all studies related to living
organisms in space. It has to encom¬
pass every discipline and technology
that contributes to the study of living
phenomena.
To sustain a man in space, a small
artificial world had to be created an
environment containing at least a mini¬
mum supply of everything required to
maintain health, mental alertness, and
physical fitnessincluding breathable
atmosphere, a near optimum diet, exer¬
cise in an extremely restricted environ¬
ment, and a synergistic programme of
activities that will also allow a sleep
cycle permitting alertness and health
to be maintained.
This opened an entire virtually unex¬
plored field of medicine. Everything
that influences the adult had to be
studied from both the traditional
aspects and the new view of operating
in space with weightlessness as the
principal unknown.
The focus of bioastronautics on the
healthy adult initially, test pilots who
are assumed to be among the finest
physical specimens to be found in a
large population was a historic depar¬
ture from the past studies of medicine
that have concentrated on pathological
processes found in adults who were
either ill or showing early signs of
illness.
Bioastronautics has also been con¬
cerned primarily with relatively young
men as opposed to medical studies in
the past which tended to concentrate
on older people.
At the outset of the space pro¬
gramme it was found that little was
known about the physical parameters
of the normal healthy adult. During
the past ten years, a vast amount of
data has been obtained, enabling us
to know what the mental and physical
performance of a healthy human should
be under a given set of circumstances
in any one of several different envi¬
ronments.
These base-line data are already
having, and will continue to have, a
great impact on the emerging field of
preventive or predictive medicine.
To determine the physical parame¬
ters of astronauts or cosmonauts, and
to monitor these parameters during
space flights, a variety of physiological
instrumentation has been developed
that has great potential in clinical medi¬
cine, both for the individual physician
and throughout the complex of clinics
and hospitals.
Many of these devices have gone
through clinical trials and are begin¬
ning to find their way into general
medical practice, providing the most
dramatic benefits of space life scien¬
ces for humans in their mundane
struggle for existence and also for
development.
Many biomedical innovations that
are now finding clinical applications
have been serendipitous, and in some
instances developed from space needs
outside the broad area of bioastronau¬
tics. Serendipity items range from
tiny motors now being used in kidney
dialysis machines and heart pumps to
prosthetic organ implants that promise
to outlive the patients receiving their
life-extending surgery.
Perhaps the most significant of these
serendipitous life-science contributions
to clinical medicine is in the difficult-
to-define area of advanced computer
development and related programming
techniques, especially mathematical
models to simulate the life processes.
Biologists and medical scientists can
now handle a vast amount of physiolo-
CONTINUED PAGE 18
The handicapped man, above,
is dialing a phone number,
but he is doing so in an
extraordinary way by the
voluntary movements of his eyes!
Like the woman below, he is
wearing a pair of special
"glasses" which are in effect
an infra-red switch that enables
a person who cannot use
his hands or feet to use his
eyes to switch and control a
variety of functions. The device
can operate and steer a motorized
wheel chair, turn the pages
of a book, switch stations on
a TV or radio set, alter a
thermostat setting, or turn a
lamp on or off. The eye switch
was developed in the U.S.
as an aid to astronauts when
high acceleration forces prevent
them from using their
arms or legs.

J2§
U .. >£ / U
5^1
R. *J- I r Î ^J
Ban & '^t
There is already a long list of practical
benefits to medicine from space research
and particularly the new field of
bioastronautics. Many hospitals are
new using automated systems first used
for astronauts in flight to monitor heart
beats, blood pressure and other body
functions. Many devices have been
adapted as aids for handicapped persons
(some are shown on these pages).
A NASA device has been designed to
familiarize astronauts with the problems
of walking on the moon where weight
is only one-sixth of that on earth A
system of slings enables a man to
waik, run or jump under conditions
simulating gravity on the lunar surface.
Left, the same device is now in use
in the rehabilitation of persons who have
difficulty in learning to walk with
crutches or even to sit up in a wheel
chair. It also aids those learning to
walk with artificial legs. The slings
rori.jro the ^hyf=ical work Inad on a
patient during rehabiliation and can
oe adjusted for any degree of
support required.
Astronautics helps the handicapped
"Laser cane" (right) emits light beams to detect
obstacles, allowing blind user to scan the area
ahead of him. It is one of several such devices
produced by bionics", a new science combining
biology and electronics to develop apparatuses that
can supplement the functions of the human organism.
This eight-legged "walking chair", or "moon walker" (below), gives
new freedom of movement to disabled children, including those
who have lost a leg or are paraplegic. It can easily traverse
a field or sandy beach, step over obstacles and onto a curb. It is
controlled by a lever which can be adjusted for operation by hand,
Hot. or even by the chin. The idea came from the design of the
Lunar Tic", an unmanned, radio-directed instrument carrier for
exploring the moon's surface. Here, a handicapped boy confidently
crosses the road in his walking chair.
' ** I
* si
! I
Photo Aerojet Space Corporation
17

BENEFITS TO MEDICINE (Continued)
Dialing a phone number with the eyes
18
gical data from experiments and have
some understanding of how they inter¬
relate in living systems. Bioastronau¬
tics programming techniques will even¬
tually allow biomedical research to
become far more of an exact science
than it has been in the past.
But much of the transfer of medical
technology from the space programme
has been spinned by the new approach
to systematic technology applications
to non-space uses. An outstanding
example of this process involves the
adaptation of design principles in the
space helmet worn by the Gemini
astronauts.
The University of Wisconsin Medical
Center is in the final stages of adapt¬
ing the helmet to use in delivering
breathable medication for child care.
Current practice is to place the child
with a respiratory ailment in a hospital
tent and fill the tent with medicated
vapours. Use of the helmet respiro-
meter in place of the tent enables the
ailing child to have considerable mobi¬
lity and yet breathe the healing
vapours without exposing his whole
body to them.
Similarly, a switch actuated only by
voluntary movement of the eyes has
found immediate applications for use
by the handicapped. Developed for
NASA by an Alabama company as a
potential aid to astronauts in situa¬
tions where high G-forces might make
them unable to move their arms or
legs, by mounting light sources at each
side of a pair of eye-glasses, this most
ingenious device bounces a light into
the wearer's eyes detecting the differ¬
ence between the reflection from the
whites and from the darker pupils.
When the pupil of an eye moves
across the path of the light beam, the
reduced reflection activates an electric
switch. Properly relayed, the "sight
switch" can be put to a variety of uses
to assist a patient who cannot move
his hands or legs.
Among these uses: remote opera¬
tion of a machine to turn the pages of
a book; to switch on or off a hospital
call board, room lights, a thermostat,
a television set, a radio, etc. The sight
switch has already been experimen¬
tally adapted to a motorized wheel¬
chair enabling a paraplegic to control
it with only his eyes.
Space programmes have been par¬
ticularly prolific producers of new auto¬
mated patient monitoring systems.
One NASA contractor produced for
biomedical experiments at the Ames
Research Center a telemetry unit
designed to monitor the electrocardio¬
grams of astronauts while they per¬
formed various duties.
The unit consisted of a small, bat¬
tery-operated transmitter with electro¬
des to be pasted to the chest and a
portable FM receiver. Heart signals
transmitted to the receiver were ampli
fied to be read visually on a polygraph
or oscilloscope.
Now a slightly modified wireless
telemetering system is being used in
a New York hospital in the intensive-
care cardiac monitoring unit. The sys¬
tem is excellent for monitoring a heart
patient, and permits the patient to
move freely within 100 feet of the
receiver while his EKG is being con¬
stantly read.
ONITORING of the effects
of weightlessness and other unique
environmental aspects of manned
space flights has caused substantial
improvements to be made in electrodes
used to measure heart and brain func¬
tion. Almost every one of these elec¬
trode advances has been swiftly trans¬
ferred to general clinical practice.
Spray-on electrodes using electri¬
cally conducive cement developed
through the co-operative efforts of
NASA and Spacelabs, Inc., in Van
Nuys, California, for applying electro¬
cardiogram electrodes quickly to pilots
just before their training flights can
be sprayed on the skin by a spray gun
or aerosol process in less than half
a minute.
In turn, the NASA Biomedical Appli¬
cations Team at the Midwest Research
Institute in Kansas City has transferred
the technique at the University of
Kansas Medical Center, where spray-
on electrodes have been tested for a
wide variety of applications. The suc¬
cess of this transfer can be credited
largely to the amount of attention that
NASA has given to this innovation.
But, most important, innovations of
this kind have become an international
process, as was demonstrated recently
by the work of Dr. W. Ross Adey,
Director of the Space Biology Labor¬
atory at the Brain Research Institute
of the University of California, in the
refinement of a novel electroencepha¬
logram (EEC) system.
Soviet scientists originally conceived
the idea of placing sponge-type EEC
electrodes in the cosmonauts' helmets
so that the electrode contact could be
made simply by putting the helmet on
without any special scalp attachment
or removal of any hair.
Dr. Aday was aware of the Soviet
concept and developed a similar spon¬
ge-type electrode system mounted in
a covering similar to a bathing cap or
light helmet that requires only the
removal of oil from the skin and hair
surface. Transfer of his sponge elec¬
trode cap, or helmet, was made directly
by Dr. Adey himself at the University
of California Brain Research Institute,
where the system has been used with
schizophrenic children and in obtaining
new data on the state of the brain
during sleepwalking.
The sponge EEG helmet system, is
doubly unique, involving an indirect
technology transfer benefit from the
Soviet space programme and the direct
transfer of the system to non-space
use by the scientist who developed it
in the first place.
Electrodes are relatively inexpensive
and are in a different category from
CONTINUED PAGE 23

COLOUR PAGES	
OPPOSITE: . The moon is potentially a
great laboratory for a host of experiments
and observations essentially impossible
to perform on earth. To realize this
potential it has been proposed that an
international laboratory be established on
its surface, where scientists from
different countries would work together.
These photos show two phases of an
"earthrise" viewed across the lunar
horizon. On left, the glowing half orb
of earth photographed on May 22,
1969 by U.S. astronauts Thomas P.
Stafford, John W. Young and Eugene A.
Cernan, as they orbited the moon in Apollo 10. Right, photo taken by Soviet spacecraft
Zond 7, orbiting the moon at an altitude of 2,000 kms., on August 11, 1969.
Photos NASA-Hasselblad and APN
CENTRE PAGES: On this map, a panoramic presentation of the conquest of space,
vehicles and trajectories of the principal space missions accomplished since 1957
intermingle around the earth. They range from Sputnik 1, the first space satellite
launched on October 4, 1957, to Apollo 11 which returned to earth on July 24, 1969,
after landing the first men on the moon. Trajectories are identified as follows:
Manned spacecraft: U.S., orange, U.S.S.R. green; Unmanned satellites and probes:
U.S., yellow, U.S.S.R., blue; Unmanned satellites and probes launched by U.K.,
Canada, France and Italy, red. The original map, prepared and published by
Editions Hallwag, Berne (Switzerland), measures 112 by 84 cms. It presents overleaf
details of over 200 space missions and numerous explanatory drawings and photos
of space vehicles. It can be ordered through booksellers (Price Sw. Fr. 6.80).
Photo © Hallwag, Berne

* <- "V

.Asa's
wn
ft*j^£ /.

N
tx /î
&£-
fë
t ^y^ Surveyor * ^k^'
Y yh
i
0 ^%c^_ Mars "
s ^ asçygj
/ -- \
N
^ -4 ... ,**
ocot F
1
y
^^^ Mondbahn
^^^ Mo'.n Ofbil
mm~


BENEFITS TO MEDICINE (Continued from page 18)
COLOUR PHOTOS
OPPOSITE
Here we see a few of the vast
possibilities of observation from
space for surveying and managing
our earth's resources. Pictures were
taken by spacecraft (including
Gemini and Apollo missions) and
NASA aeronautical survey missions,
for the NASA Earth Resources Survey
Programme. The flights tested the
potentialities of spaceborne cameras
and remote-sensing devices for
global studies of earth's resources.
NASA hopes to launch a special
earth resources technology
satellite by the end of 1971. It
could survey crops and water
resources, track icebergs and watch
for forest fires.
TOP LEFT: Infra-red photo of citrus
orchard in the Lower Rio
Grande Valley, Texas, shows insect
damaged trees as dark colour and
healthy trees bright red. Damaged
forest trees in Oregon appear blue-
coloured in photo BOTTOM LEFT,
healthy ones as red or pink. Infra¬
red photography picks out dead and
diseased trees more clearly than
standard colour shots. Such
detection permits prompt use of
spraying and measures to limit spread
of infestation. From space photos
it is possible to identify crops and
estimate their state of maturity. An
eventual operational survey satellite
system could report regularly on
crop growth and at harvest time
predict the yields in various parts of
the world, thus simplifying
management of global food supplies.
TOP RIGHT: Like a blot of India ink
on a blue and white mosaic is
how this large lake and valley
appear in a satellite photo taken
125 miles above the earth. Pattern
of red dots, bottom end of lake,
marks field and orchard vegetation.
Specialists see the key to more
efficient exploitation of resources in
small-scale photo image mapping of
earth's features from space. By
conventional aerial means this would
require more than a million photos
just for the U.S.A. By satellite, only
400 pictures would do the job better.
BOTTOM RIGHT: From space, cameras
see more than man can on the
ground and sensors can detect more
facts. Earth objects reveal to
sensitive instruments spectral
"signatures" as distinctive as
fingerprints. Different colours in
this infra-red shot of a glacier area
indicate geological, hydrological and
glaciological patterns. Geological maps
are already being corrected and
made more useful both scientifically
and commercially from colour photos
of the earth taken from spacecraft.
Photos NASA
a system that might cost hundreds of
thousands of dollars. Overall budget
tradeoff considerations are not entailed
in their purchase, as they are with
systems such as, for example, the
automated blood pressure cuff.
Developed by the Air Research
Manufacturing Company to measure
the blood pressure of the astronauts
during all phases of the Mercury and
Gemini orbital missions, the automated
cuff can be said to have passed its
initial clinical tests in 1961. But it
was first installed in an intensive care
centre in Bethesda at the National
Institutes of Health only in 1968.
The reasons for this seven year
delay in an improved process that
would have been a contributing factor
in saving many lives are typical of the
pattern that has prevailed in trans¬
ferring relatively expensive bioastro¬
nautics systems tö the needs of clinical
medicine.
Even hospitals and clinics have their
priorities, and have to put their scarce
resources into systems with the
greatest lifesaving value instead of
those that would simply refine a
measurement that could be obtained
manually. And, if the medical pro¬
fession manifested no great rush to
try the new technique, the research
company was so busy in other life
science activities that there was no
internal need to find new markets
quickly for this system.
In other cases, however, systems
rejected by the space programme after
the Research and Development stage,
have found immediate terrestrial appli¬
cations. Such was the fate of a
walking machine developed by the
Space General Division of Aerojet
General to serve as an unmanned,
radio-directed instrument carrier for
exploring the Moon's surface.
When the decision to go ahead with
the manned Apollo mission was made
the prototype of this machine, called
the Lunar-Tic, was relegated to limbo
until Dr. Richard Brennaman, a NASA
technology utilization officer, was
informed of its existence.
With a grant from the Department of
Health, Education and Welfare, the
University of California contracted with
Space General to build an eight-legged
version of their Lunar-Tic to be used
by crippled children. The new system
performed according to expectation,
was able to navigate terrain that would
stop an ordinary wheelchair, and could
even climb a flight of stairs. A
crippled child can control it by
manipulating an upright stick that can
be modified with a chin cup to serve
quadriplegic children who cannot
move either their arms or legs.
Among the numerous other bio¬
medical developments by the aero¬
space industry as a result of research
and development for the Apollo
programme, here are some of the most
significant:
A "Telamedic" device which
relays electrocardiogram data by
telephone, and designed for immediate
electrocardiogram checks on post-
coronary patients in the home, nursing
home, hospital or physician's office,
has been developed by United Aircraft
Corporation's Hamilton Standard Divi¬
sion. The battery-powered system
includes a transmitter and receiver,
each about the size of a bedside alarm
clock. No special equipment , Is
needed for the telephone.
Using technology developed in
research on small radioisotopic systems
to convert nuclear energy to electric
power, Aerojet is making a conceptual
design study of a system to power
artificial heart devices of the future.
The Aerojet system would be of a size
that would permit implanting in the
abdominal cavity and, connected to the
heart, would supply power without
interruption over years of operation.
Laser technology developed ori¬
ginally for space use is being adapted
for delicate and precise use In medi¬
cine. Martin Marietta Corp. has been
working since 1962 with medical
research teams throughout the U.S. to
find new ways to use lasers in "knife-
less surgery" and as diagnostic tools.
Lasers are already being used in
several countries with outstanding suc¬
cess in eye surgery, and are being
evaluated in dermatology, organ repair,
amputation, and microbiological stud¬
ies. Laser surgery has two great
advantages which argue for its imme¬
diate use: it is painless, and in many
cases it is practically bloodless.
A cross-spectral analysis compu¬
ter programme created by Rocketdyne,
a division of North American Rockwell
Corp., for use in solving a variety of
rocket engine vibration, ignition and
combustion problems has been found
applicable to medical research and
brain studies. In-depth studies of the
heart are presently being performed in
Australia using this cross-spectral ana¬
lysis concept. The technique may also
be used by medical science in the
diagnosis of a wide variety of human
abnormalities and diseases.
A space industry spin-off with
obvious potential is the automated
patient monitor developed by the
Boeing Company. The device is about
the size of a package of cigarettes and
can be strapped to the patient's arm
or leg. It will report on six physiolo¬
gical conditions three for the heart,
two for temperature and one for blood
pressure. The battery-powered moni¬
tor is divided into two subsystems, one
for the patient and one for a central
control station. Radio links the two.
Tiny wires extend to skin-surface sen¬
sors. No needles or implanted probes
are used.
Upon command from the central
control station information on the
patient is printed out on the same strip-
charts that physicians use, or dis¬
played on an oscilloscope. The control
station operator will have selection
switches one for each patient, enabl¬
ing her to dial specific patients on the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
23

BENEFITS TO MEDICINE (Continued)
circuit. Key to development of the
system has been the advancement in
micro-circuitry and data transmission
and handling techniques needed for
the Apollo/Saturn V programme.
At the peak of the Saturn V pro¬
gramme the Boeing Company hired a
blind computer programmer. While he
could generate his own programmes,
there was no way he could monitor
and evaluate the data produced by
them. Braille printers were not avail¬
able on the commercial market.
Boeing realized it had to develop a
technique that would convert the
COBOL computer language characters
into Braille on a computer.
The firm's engineers came up with
a system that converts print image
tapefiles, consisting of 120 characters
a second, into six-dot Braille cells that
can easily be read by the blind pro¬
grammer. The technique was turned
over to the Baylor School of Medicine
for further exploitation.
24
Through these and many other trans¬
fers the public is already benefiting
from a myriad of clinical uses of space
medicine, among which are major
breakthroughs in the alleviation of
human suffering and the extension of
human life. Bioastronautic and other
space innovations offer important solu¬
tions to the mounting clinical problems
of crowded hospitals and other places
where people seek needed and pre¬
ventive medical treatment.
But the great potential of bioastro¬
nautics technology transfer lies in the
years ahead. A dynamic space pro¬
gramme during the 1970s and 1980s
combined with a well funded tech¬
nology transfer programme can be
expected to provide transfer options
of benefit to almost every branch of
medicine and biological research. But
Imagination and understanding combin¬
ed with good planning are likely to be
equally as important as the level of
technology transfer funding.
Photo usis
Techniques developed for building biologically sterile spacecraft
to explore the planets are being applied in the design of hospital
operating and recovery rooms. In industry, too, men and women
who build components for communications systems (photo above)
now work under conditions that often rival hospital operating rooms
in cleanliness. A single speck of dust, visible only through a microscope,
could affect the operation of many of the delicate instruments of modem
electronics technology. A constant war is therefore waged on dust,
and technicians work in sealed-off work areas and wear special
lint-free clothing, thus helping to increase the reliability and life
of sensitive equipment. An air curtain recently developed to keep
spacecraft free from dust during assembly in the factory is now
being used in testing antibiotics. The air curtain insulates the
test bench and substantially reduces the number of test failures
that can be attributed to dust-borne organisms.
^
