This year for the first time Unesco has awarded two literacy prizes.
At a ceremony in Teheran on International Literacy Day, September 8,
the Mohammad Reza Pahlavi prize (created by the Shahinshah of Iran
in 1967) was awarded to the "Radio Schools of Sutatenza" in Colombia
(see photo story below). The Nadezhda K. Krupskaya prize, donated by
the Government of the U.S.S.R., went to the Institute of Language and
Literature of the Mongolian People's Republic for its efforts to elimi¬
nate illiteracy in Mongolia (see "Unesco Courier", November 1969).
Honourable mention was given to organizations in Ethiopia, France,
India, Rwanda, Tunisia, Sudan, Iran, Mexico and Congo (Brazzaville).
The article by Miguel Soler Roca published opposite surveys the
problems of illiteracy in Latin America today within the framework of
the continent's overall development problems.
Photo © Pierre A. Pittet. Geneva
To bring education to Colombia's
Isolated mountain communities,
a young priest. Father José Salcedo,
(right) started a radio school in 1948,
In the Andean village
of Sutatenza, 140 kilometres
from Bogota (see "Unesco Courier",
February 1955 and August-September 1969)
Within a few years Radio Sutatenza
had over 200,000 pupils.
Today the network of radio schools
numbers more than 160,000 receivers,
and Acción Cultural Popular, as Radio
Sutatenza is now known, broadcasts
to groups throughout Colombia. Above,
youngsters tune in to their radio teacher.
Far right, villagers crowd into a
theatre run by Acción Cultural Popular.

by Miguel Soler Roca
The education
revolution
in Latin America
T
HEY had made the long
journey through the jungle from their
distant villages and now, in the
welcome shade of a huge lapacho
tree, they settled down in a circle
ready to listen to us. We were
"somewhere in Latin America".
Our audience was composed of
leaders of groups of settlers who were
carving out a new life for themselves
on their jungle land-grants which they
were gradually clearing with fire, axe
and machete. Almost all of them were
young and they came from parts of
the country where the land was
exhausted and holdings, split into
minifundios, were too small to support
their families. Here in the jungle,
despite the many difficulties to be
overcome, they were getting a second
and, perhaps, a last chance.
We had been visiting similar settle¬
ments for several days. It was clear
that the settlers sensed the profound
change in their lives created by their
new circumstances and that they
wanted to educate themselves. The
group now surrounding us repeated
the same tale that we had heard
elsewhere: most of them, especially
the women, were illiterate; there were
no schools, but they were prepared to
build one and attend it, the children
in the morning, the women in the
afternoon and the men at night.
One of us asked, "Why do you want
an education? What good will reading
and writing be to you in the middle
of the jungle?" I noted down some
of the replies. "We have to sign
important papers with a thumbprint;
we want to be able to read them for
ourselves." "We have debts, but we
don't want to have other people keep¬
ing our accounts." "There are books
on farming which could teach us many
useful things." "We also want edu¬
cation for our wives; they could learn
how to feed the children better and
to nurse them when they are ill." One
man, more mature than the others,
summed up the replies when he said,
"We do not know why we are working
or who we are working for."
The. Education Ministers of the world
had said much the same thing, but in
more technical language, at the 1965
Teheran Conference on the Eradication
of Illiteracy, when they declared, "to
be effective, literacy programmes must
be sufficiently varied in form and
content to take into account differen¬
ces in age, sex, social condition and
environment, as well as the interests
of the adults themselves, their moti¬
vations and the possibilities for imme¬
diate application."
Since 1965, increasing efforts have
been made to promote global literacy.
It has become more generally accept¬
ed that a literacy campaign must aim
not merely to teach people to read
and write; that it must help them to
understand, to quote the settler's
words, "Why they are working and
who they are working for."
Unesco, therefore, is aiding a num¬
ber of countries to experiment with
methods based on the relationship
between literacy and the needs of
men and women in their work and
everyday life. Every year since 1965,
on International Literacy Day, Septem¬
ber 8, educators and political and
religious leaders re-affirm the need
for greater efforts to free the world
from ignorance. And scores of natio¬
nal, regional and international meetings
have studied the technical aspects of
the problem.
Much has thus been learned about
illiteracy and how to tackle It. Yet
estimates show that each year there
are five million more illiterate men and
women in the world. In 1970 the
global figure is 783 million, or 50 million
more than in 1960. This rising tide of
illiteracy, a paradox in an era when
man's expanding knowledge and skills
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
MIGUEL SOLER ROCA is Unesco repre¬
sentative at the Regional Office for Education
In Latin America, at Santiago, Chile. A
Uruguayan specialist in adult education, he
was director of CREFAL, the regional head- _
quarters for functional literacy programmes yfi
in rural areas of Latin America at Patzcuaro, imil
Mexico, from 1964 to 1969. He previously .
worked In Bolivia as a Unesco specialist In
rural education.

EDUCATION IN LATIN AMERICA (Continued)
Literacy and social justice
have made possible astounding techno¬
logical achievements, focuses attention
on all the obstacles that prevent the
creation of just and stable societies.
In absolute terms Latin America
Is in a better position than Africa
or Asia. It has an estimated 50 million
illiterate men and women, but they
represent less than six per cent of
world illiteracy. And if we compare
illiteracy figures for 1960 or there¬
abouts with those of some ten years
earlier, the situation appears to be
stabilized.
But when we compare Latin Amer¬
ica with other regions of the Third
World, we should recall that: Latin
American countries achieved indepen¬
dence over 150 years ago; that the
ratio between Latin America's popu¬
lation and natural resources is by no
means disproportionate; and that by
the start of the present century, every
Latin American country had set up a
system of primary education which
should theoretically have served as
the foundation for economic progress
and political democracy. A compa¬
rison on this basis brings home the
harsh realities of the present situation
In Latin America.
The level of adult illiteracy in Latin
American countries today ranges from
4 to almost 90 per cent. Statistics are
often incomplete and out of date.
Those that do exist show that in six
of Unesco's 24 member states in Latin
America and the Caribbean, over half
the population is illiterate. In six other
countries illiteracy runs from 25 to
50 per cent and in a further seven,
from 10 to 25 per cent. In only five
countries is it lower than 10 per cent.
A direct link obviously exists
between the level of illiteracy and
the effectiveness of a regular educa¬
tional system. That is why Unesco
launched and supported a Major
Project for the expansion and improv¬
ement of primary education in Latin
America, between 1956 and 1966.
The project made spectacular pro¬
gress, and this helps to explain why
the problem of illiteracy, even in the
face of a massive population increase,
has not attained more alarming pro¬
portions. Primary, secondary and
university enrolments have risen at
a far higher rate than Latin America's
population growth a remarkable edu¬
cational achievement.
But even the 10-year Major Project
failed to solve the acute problem of
school drop-outs. Most children, even
at the primary level where schooling
is obligatory, were still failing to
complete their studies. The propor¬
tion finishing the sixth year," compared
to those starting school, fluctuated
between 8 and 50 per cent. In 13
countries, less than 25 per cent of
children remained in school for the
full six years.
Unesco is following up this problem,
taking as a principle that literacy
requires at least four years of primary
schooling to become definitive. Incom¬
plete education is obviously one of
the chief causes of illiteracy, yet how
many children stay at school for even
four years? The answer is, in the
cities the great majority; in the rural
areas very few.
The result Is seen in the statistics
of some Latin American countries.
These show a relatively low rate of
adult illiteracy, but a percentage of
people with less than four years of
schooling that is 20, 30 or even
40 per cent higher.
An alarming disparity thus exists
between statistical illiteracy and actual
illiteracy. It is here that the rural
primary school, ill-equipped, Isolated
and offering only a brief education, is
seen as the main source of adult
illiterates, men and women who relaps¬
ed Into illiteracy after leaving school
or who may never have been fully
literate in the first place.
B
OOK reading is another
yardstick for measuring the effective¬
ness of schooling and literacy pro¬
grammes. Here, statistics show that
public libraries in the U.S.A. and
Canada have more than one book
per head of population whereas libra¬
ries in some Latin American countries
have only one book for every 200
persons.
In the case of the daily press, the
visitor to Latin America may be misled
by the large number of newspapers
published in the capital cities. But
most of these papers have very limited
circulations. In fact statistics show
that whereas the annual per capita
consumption of newsprint in the United
States is 42 kilogrammes, in at least
seven Latin American and Caribbean
countries it is less than 2 kilogrammes.
If to all these facts we add that the
proportion of Gross National Product
allocated to education in Latin Ame¬
rica varies from 1.7 to 5.6 per cent,
it becomes clear that the difference
in levels of illiteracy reflects the limi-
The illiterate Is
blocked at the foot
of the economic and
social ladder. In
Latin America there
are still 50 million
illiterate adults, despite
tremendous strides
made In education
in recent years.
tations and weaknesses of the entire
educational system.
It Is nowadays a commonplace to
say that illiteracy is directly related
to a country's level of development.
Illiteracy and economic underdevel¬
opment are virtually synonymous. Thus
illiteracy co-exists with low incomes,
falling export prices, a dependent
economy, and a large rural population,
of whom the majority are employed
in farming. It is found where techno¬
logy is lagging, where productivity is
low, particularly in agriculture, where
life expectancies are 10, 15 or even
20 years lower than in the developing
countries, and where diets are defi¬
cient in calories and protein even on
a continent blessed with fertile soils
and a variety of climates.
And these are not the only conse¬
quences of illiteracy. Its effects are
seen in the rigidity of social structures,
the exclusion from political life of the
vast majority of the people, the exo¬
dus of able men and women from
countryside to city and sometimes
abroad, industries incapable of absorb¬
ing the surplus of manpower. It is
reflected, too, in unco-ordinated work¬
ing methods, instability in public
administration and politics, the absence
of coherent and responsible public
opinion, a widening . gap .between
generations and an increase in contes¬
tation, demonstrations and violence of
every kind.

1
Photo © Yves Billon
Today a vast programme for the
promotion of literacy is under way in
which the most promising and most
discussed projects are those of
Unesco's Experimental World Pro¬
gramme of Functional Literacy. They
are operating in twelve countries,
financed from national resources and
from the funds of the United Nations
Development Programme. Through a
number of these projects, Unesco is
helping to evaluate the problems of
illiteracy in Latin America and is
supporting the efforts of each country
to overcome them.
Under the Experimental Programme,
Unesco has sent out teams to assess
literacy teaching programmes in a
number of Latin American countries.
Since the central aim of the programme
is to confirm the relationship between
functional literacy and economic de¬
velopment, each team is composed of
an educator and an economist.
Experimental projects based on
these exploratory studies were begun
in Ecuador in 1967, and in Venezuela
in 1969, the latter financed exclusively
from national resources. In Brazil,
Chile and Jamaica, a series of "micro-
experiments" have been studying
problems such as literacy teaching
methods, and the use of teaching aids
and audio-visual media.
Latin America has one of the first
centres for training educators created
under United Nations auspices
CREFAL (originally set up as the
Fundamental Education Centre for
Community Development in Latin
America). CREFAL, established at Patz-
cuaro, in Michoacan State, Mexico, in
1951, is an outstanding example of
effective collaboration between a host
country, Mexico, Unesco, the Organiza¬
tion of American States and a number
of U.N. Specialized Agencies.
F
ROM 1951 to 1960, CREFAL
concentrated on training teachers for
programmes of fundamental education.
From 1961 to 1968, it ran courses on
community development, and since
1969, when it became the regional
headquarters for functional literacy
programmes in rural areas of Latin
America, it has sought to promote new
ideas about literacy in the countries
of the region.
CREFAL organizes international
training courses, publishes studies on
teaching methods and materials, sends
its specialists to advise governments
and carries out educational research,
including practical tests of methods
and materials in villages near Patz-
cuaro.
Thus far CREFAL has organized
17 courses lasting from 6 to 18 months,
and 18 special short courses, attended
by some 1,500 Latin American educ¬
ators. Formerly in fundamental educa¬
tion and community development and
more recently in functional literacy,
CREFAL's influence has been con¬
siderable. Every educational service
in Latin America operating in these
fields has at least one CREFAL
graduate on its staff.
From its earliest days, Unesco has
sought to mobilize efforts and resour¬
ces in support of literacy campaigns
in the developing countries. Recently,
many new ideas and opinions regard¬
ing the world problem of illiteracy have
emerged. I would like to summarize
some of them.
There can be no choice between
literacy programmes for adults and
primary education for children since
they are complementary sectors of
education.
Mass illiteracy must be eradicated,
principally among young men and
women, and for this all the methods
and resources that countries can
mobilize are acceptable providing they
contribute to effective literacy teaching.
An operation of this size calls for
priorities. Functional education is
seen as an obvious priority since its
aim is to link basic education with
the priority needs of communities
undergoing economic and social de¬
velopment.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
27

EDUCATION IN LATIN AMERICA (Continued)
Teaching men and women to think for themselves
Since literacy is only the first stage
of adult education, it is valueless
unless it encourages men and women
to go on learning. This they could do
through crash programmes of educa¬
tion, through courses teaching the
skills and knowledge needed for
development, or through out-of-school
education, now offering an increasingly
wide choice of subjects and serving
as the first step towards tomorrow's
systems of lifelong education.
To accomplish this will call for
something more than techniques to
reduce illiteracy and to provide under¬
privileged men and women with new
means to earn a living. Nor will it be
enough to offer them some ready-made
"official" definition of the society to
which they belong.
The aim is not to direct the mass of
50 million illiterates, and an equal
number of under-educated persons, in
Latin America towards what we, as
educators, believe to be the right goal.
The real problem is to teach them to
think for themselves, so that they will
not only free themselves from Igno¬
rance, but also from all forms of
injustice, and learn to participate as
conscious, responsible members of
society, a society that does not exist
as yet because they are still excluded
from it.
These principles are gradually
becoming accepted. To replace
illiteracy by "functional" literacy as far
as possible is now the goal.
But a problem that has been left
dormant for so long cannot be tackled
without causing some upheavals. One
difficulty is the pointless dispute
between those who wish to eliminate
illiteracy by concentrating all efforts
on educating the young and those who
believe that large sums should be
invested in adult education, whereas
the whole educational system is
creaking and groaning under an in¬
tolerable strain.
This disagreement can only be
settled by an effective system of
educational planning; otherwise action
undertaken will be subject to a "tug-of-
war" between the different educational
services.
Somehow, a way must be found to
reconcile two fundamental truths: that
without universal primary education,
illiteracy cannot be eradicated; and
that unless we succeed in changing
the attitude of adults towards the
social role of education, primary
schooling cannot become universal,
In 13 Latin American
countries, less than a
quarter of the
children complete
6 years of schooling.
These drop-outs soon
forget the little
they learnt during
their brief schooldays
and grow up to
join the ranks of
illiterate adults.
28

since, in an illiterate community,
children with only a minimum of educa¬
tion quickly relapse into illiteracy.
This reconciliation calls for a consi¬
derable effort by the poor nations.
The cost of setting up effective
services of educational planning is an
extra burden on their shoulders, which
some of them see as a luxury they
cannot afford. But failure to recognize
the need for this effort would mean
the indefinite postponement of a
solution to the double problem of mass
illiteracy and ineffective primary educa¬
tion.
Cuba showed, in 1961, how illiteracy
can be tackled and overcome providing
certain conditions exist. In Cuba's
case they may be summed up as strong
political motivation, the ability to
mobilize national efforts for a common
objective, and a problem of relatively
small dimensions both geographically
(Cuba covers 114,500 sq. km.) and
demographically (a 23 per cent rate of
illiteracy when the campaign began).
The example of Cuba has given other
countries food for thought. On the
one hand it has shown how the chronic
weaknesses of certain literacy teach¬
ing services are aggravated by lack
of political and popular support, which
renders them completely ineffective.
On the other, it has demonstrated how
the problem can be overcome if con¬
ditions are right.
Certain Latin American governments,
convinced that circumstances now
favour a repetition of the Cuban
success, are speaking of literacy
programmes in terms of national mo¬
bilization.
Some governments are carefully
examining the problems of the function¬
al literacy approach, seen as an alter¬
native strategy (an attack on literacy
on a narrower front but in greater
depth). What form is it to take and
how is it to be achieved? Who is to
benefit first from the priorities implicit
in a system of functional literacy? In
three years time when current exper¬
imental projects have been evaluated,
it will be easier to answer these
questions.
B
UT we need not wait so
long. Reports and studies on functional
literacy are already reaching educators.
Once it is accepted that functional
literacy means literacy revitalized by
the daily needs and interests of men
and women, new programmes, methods
and materials will not be lacking
thanks not only to educators, but also
to specialists, technicians and workers
in other fields.
Nor do I believe that the choice of
where the functional literacy effort
should be concentrated should be
made exclusively by educators. It is
up to the development planners to say
where expenditure on literacy pro¬
grammes will become a worthwhile
investment.
Indeed, this vital need for co-ordina¬
tion forces us to change our approach
and to prepare literacy programmes in
direct collaboration with other sectors
of the development programme. It is
clearly more effective to locate the
areas in which economic development
is making headway and then to back
up this progress with a strong function¬
al literacy programme.
The idea that literacy is only a first
step in the system of adult education
has spread rapidly in Latin America,
especially since the Caracas Confe¬
rence in 1966. In other words, it is
now accepted that adults have right
of access to all levels of education
through crash programmes covering
literacy itself, primary education and
secondary education.
It is claimed that adults can complete
these courses in roughly half the time
required in the normal educational
system, and this is borne out by the
fact that more and more men and
women are attending evening classes
so as to obtain the baccalauréat that
enables them to enter university.
But here, two points should be made.
The first concerns the drawback to
providing adult education in a form
that merely parallels the normal educa¬
tional system. A good many people
in cities have personal motivations for
wishing to study systematically. But
how far is it possible to take more
advantage of this and open further
urban centres for accelerated second¬
ary education, without providing
vocational training for those employed
in offices, industry and farming? No
doubt the development planners will
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

EDUCATION IN LATIN AMERICA (Continued)
answer this after weighing the need
for employees with a higher level of
education and the pattern of supply
and demand in the labour market.
The second point relates to the role
of out-of-school education for the
newly literate person. The urge to
accumulate diplomas should be replac¬
ed by a desire for knowledge that
meets real needs. And the newly
literate man and woman must be
guaranteed the opportunity and means
to go on learning.
Unfortunately, this is still thought of
in terms of formal education, although
continuity in learning can also be met
adequately by a plentiful supply of
books and magazines, by radio and
television programmes, by club and
library activities and through individual
studies not necessarily linked to
complete programmes of secondary or
higher education.
One might add that the fundamental
aims of adult education are beginning
to be discussed in Latin America. But
the problem is much greater than it
appears at first sight. It calls for
reforms throughout the existing educ¬
ational system, conservative in its
attitude to social change, and trauma¬
tic in the psychological effects it pro¬
duces, particularly in the case of teen¬
agers.
If we reduce adult education, includ¬
ing literacy teaching, to a system for
cramming minds with a mass of know¬
ledge, we shall produce a better-
informed society, but not a more per-


ceptive one. And factual knowledge
without self-awareness and a mind
open to the world may result in failure
to achieve the right objective.
In Latin America, the Brazilian
educator, Paulo Freiré, has rightly
stressed the importance of awareness
that enables men and women to use
their critical judgement and act accord¬
ingly; to understand social realities in
global terms.
Following his research in Brazil,
Paulo Freiré worked with the Govern
ment of Chile to develop and make
use of the "psycho-social" educational
method. Increasingly welcomed in
Latin America, this method has gained
much of its impetus from educators
associated with the Roman Catholic
Church.
If literacy is to become a driving
force for the liberation of men and
women, it will only do so by giving the
"literate" a clearer appreciation of the
world, and only through changes in
the composition of groups which take
decisions. The day illiteracy is era¬
dicated we shall see a change far
more important than the raising of the
average level of education. On that
day, the structure of decision making
will be transformed.
I recently attended the inauguration
of a new adult education programme.
Hanging above the assembled crowd
was a huge poster. Foreshadowing a
wind of change in Latin America, it
bore these words: "Literacy is revolu¬
tion."
