fe
THE TOWER
OF BABEL
by Friedrich Ragette
A
An imaginative 17th century concept
of the Tower of Babel engraved on
copper one of many versions of
the Tower conceived by artists
throughout the centuries. The raising
of the Tower is related in the Old
Testament and differing descriptions
of the building were given by the
Greek historian Herodotus (4th century
B.C.) and the Greek geographer
Strabo (1st century A.D.).
Drawing Q Donald Thompson
[S told in the Old Testament
(Genesis: 11) the story of the Tower
of Babel is one of the most fascinating
stories of all time. It tells, concisely, of
man's efforts to build a great tower
into the heavens, of God's wrath at
such arrogance and of the curious
punishment He imposes. It has colour,
excitement and a moral that is plain
to see:
"And the whole earth was of one
language, and of one speech. And it
came to pass, as they journeyed from
the east, that they found a plain In the
land of Shinar; and they dwelt there.
And they said one to another, Go to,
let us make brick and burn them thor¬
oughly. And they had brick for stone,
and slime had they for mortar. And
they said, Go to, let us build us a city
and a tower, whose top may reach unto
heaven; and let us make us a name,
/est we be scattered abroad upon the
face of the whole earth. And the Lord
came down to see the city and the
tower, which the children of men
builded. And the Lord said, Behold,
the people is one, and they have all
one language; and this they begin to
do: and now nothing will be restrained
from them, which they have imagined
to do. Go to, let us go down, and there
confound their language, that they may
not understand one another's speech.
So the Lord scattered them abroad
from thence upon the face of all the
earth: and they left off to build the
city. Therefore is the name of it call¬
ed Babel; because the Lord did there
confound the language of all the earth:
and from thence did the Lord scatter
them abroad upon the face of the
earth."
The moral of the story, of course, is
that man should keep his place and
not aspire to God-like creativity. But
down through the centuries the theme
FRIEDRICH RAGETTE is Assistant Professor
of architecture at the American University
of Beirut.
of the story man the builder challeng¬
ing God the creator has been inter¬
preted and reinterpreted according to
the age.
In medieval times the moral element
pride goeth before a fall was
uppermost. During the dynamic, self-
confident Renaissance the story was
an occasion to celebrate the ingenuity
and adventurousness of man. In the
Space Age, the era of nuclear fission,
it might well express renewed doubt
about the ultimate results of man's
endeavours.
The story has had a particular appeal
to artists. From faithful artisans carv¬
ing simple versions on cathedral walls
for the enlightment of unlettered
peasants to imaginative giants like
Brueghel, painting his splendid works
for the pleasure of the world, it has
been a fruitful subject for Invention
and enlargement.
Perhaps it was the idea of man's
recurring ambitions to create struc¬
tures as high and as everlasting as
possible. Perhaps it was the intriguing
picture of thousands of workers sud¬
denly breaking out into strange incom¬
prehensible tongues. Whatever, the
reason, it touched the artistic imagi¬
nation and brought forth almost as
many versions of the tower as there
were artists attempting to depict it.
Some saw the tower as an early ver¬
sion of the leaning tower of Pisa.
Some saw it as a massive pile of
receding blocks of stone. Others
likened it to a great wedding cake.
Only a few turned to the surviving
descriptions of what the tower actually
looked like.
One of these descriptions came from
the attempt Alexander the Great made
to rebuild the tower after he found it
in ruins. (Some 10,000 workers clear¬
ed away the rubble but with Alexan¬
der's death in 322 B.C. the project
stopped.) Another, earlier description
came from Herodotus, the Greek his-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

TOWER OF BABEL (Continued)
A scoop for Herodotus
How a 16th-century Flemish painter
visualized the Tower of Babel. The artist
may have been Inspired by the account
of Herodotus which describes a square
based tower with stepped-back storeys
and a spiral staircase to the summit
Texts and inscriptions dug up in
Mesopotamia in modern times have led
archaeologists to suggest that the
legendary Tower of Babel may have been
one of the "ziggurats", tower-like
temples erected by the Sumerians, offering
their gods a stepping stone between
heaven and earth. Above, a suggested
reconstruction of the Tower of Babel
made in 1918 by the German archaeologist
Robert Koldeway, who excavated many
sites in Mesopotamia and wrote several
books on Babylon. Below, another
archaeologist's reconstruction in 1930 also
recalls the form of Sumerian "ziggurats".
torian who visited
460 B.C. and gave
account:
Babylon about
an eye-witness
" In the midst of the temple a solid
tower was constructed, one stadium
(about 200 yards) in length and one
stadium in width. Upon this tower
stood another, and again upon this
another, and so on, making eight
towers in all, one upon another.
All eight towers can be climbed by
means of a spiral staircase, which runs
around the outside. About halfway up
there are seats where those who make
the ascent can sit and rest. In the top¬
most tower there is a great temple, and
in the temple is a great bed richly
appointed, and beside it a golden table.
No idol stands there. No one spends
the night there save a woman of that
country, designated by the god himself.
The priests told me that the god des¬
cended sometimes to the temple and
joined her... but I cannot believe this."
With such a tangible description on
record one would think there would be
no doubts that the tower of Babel
really existed. But since Babylon, for
more than 20 centuries, was really
little more than a name a vague
legend of grandeur and a few undif¬
ferentiated mounds of earth in Meso¬
potamia serious historians still tend¬
ed to dismiss the story as no more
than an interesting legend.
Then, in 1854, the British Foreign
Office notified its consul in Basra,
Mr. J. E. Taylor, that the British Mu¬
seum wanted someone to search out
ancient ruins in southern Mesopota¬
mia. Mr. Taylor obliged and In excav¬
ating those undifferentiated mounds
uncovered the top of a large man-
made brick structure and some clay
cylinders on which was written, in
cuneiform, the history of the building.
They were not startling discoveries
but they did point the way for the expe¬
dition in the 1920s during which Sir
Leonard Woolley, under the auspices
of the British Museum and the Univer¬
sity of Pennsylvania, found the famous
"Ur of the Chaldees," the birthplace
of Abraham, and unearthed evidence
that the stories of ancient Babylon
were not legend, but history.
It had been a splendid history while
it lasted, rivalled only by that of ancient
Egypt in brilliance and depth of civiliza¬
tion. It began sometime in the fourth
millennium before Christ when a non-
Semitic people called the Sumerians
descended from the mountains of Per¬
sia and settled on the fertile plain bet¬
ween the Tigris and Euphrates rivers.
They built cities, invented cuneiform
writing, and perhaps the wheel, chan¬
neled the waters of the nearby Euphra¬
tes into a remarkable irrigation sys¬
tem, perfected the art of the goldsmith
and built great towers of bricks made
of clay. From them, eventually, evolv¬
ed the Babylonian civilization, the cen¬
tre of which in the waning centuries of
Mesopotamian importance, was Baby¬
lon, "the Glory of Kingdoms."
By any standards Babylon was a
magnificent city. Sprawled along the
banks of the palm-lined Euphrates,
Babylon was a great metropolis of
broad avenues and high buildings,
numerous temples and great walls.
Through the magnificent Ishtar Gate, a
structure of yellow brick adorned with
lions and bulls in glazed blue tile,
streamed thousands of merchants, sol¬
diers, priests and farmers. Armour glit¬
tered in the sun and chariots clattered
down the avenues to the river.
Beyond the city walls, lush fields of
wheat, clusters of fruit trees and small
CONTINUED PAGE 39
Co/our pages
Opposite : Pieter Brueghel the Elder
produced two famous paintings of the
Tower of Babel. This detail is of the one
in the Boymans-van Beuningen Museum,
Rotterdam, a work executed on wood
and measuring 60 by 74 cm. (2 by 2»/2 ft.).
Tiny ant-like figures swarm over the
half-completed building and the artist has
included naturalistic details such as the
transport of brick and lime, leaving their
powdery red and white traces on the
tower. The works of Pieter Brueghel, the
foremost of a famous family of Flemish
painters (and called "the Elder" to
distinguish him from his two famous
painter sons) reveal the everyday life and
new ¡deals of the prosperous Flanders of
his day (1 6th century) where a strong
current of humanistic thought had replaced
many outmoded medieval attitudes and
beliefs. The second tower is published in
colour opposite page 39.
Overleaf: Right, the complete Rotterdam
painting showing the mighty tower
piercing the clouds and reaching up to
heaven. Its tremendous bulk dominates a
lush countryside, a seascape and a bustling
port recalling Antwerp which, in Brueghel's
time, was already a famous centre of
international trade. Left, another detail
of the painting. Brueghel imagined the
structure as an intricate system of Roman
arches and vaults. But the ziggurat
temples of Mesopotamia, which may
have inspired the idea of the Tower of
Babel, were a solid mass of masonry.

i
ft
Vaaiaj
§k¡>^
\-



S
3M
i IF'm
1
' m ï' r. r i '
ffisl T
a;'"Íh Il I
Wm
» '.*.
OK »
Il If

The masons of Sumer
longed for the mountains
Opposite: Top, Pieter Brueghel's
second "Tower of Babel," in the
collection of the Vienna Kunsthistorisches
Museum. Larger than its Rotterdam
counterpart (144 by 155 cm; 4ft.
9 ins. by 5ft.), it is painted on wood and
dated 1 563 by the artist himself (the
Rotterdam work is undated). The
imposing building recalls the Coliseum
which Brueghel saw in 1553 when
he visited Rome. In the foreground,
architects and masons greet an emperor
during construction, but dress and
equipment are 16th century. In this
version too the tower rises above a
large port; in the background is a town
with typically Flemish houses. Bottom
photo, detail of the upper part of the
Rotterdam "Tower of Babel". A
comparison of the structures in the
two paintings shows that in both
Brueghel drew inspiration from the
solid symmetry of Roman
amphitheatres.
gardens extended almost as far as the
eye could see. And high above, look¬
ing down on this magnificence and out
across the plains from a height of
nearly 300 feet, stood the great tower
that the ancient Jews, herded into
Babylon for 70 years of captivity, were
to describe to the world as the Tower
of Babel.
In digging out the history of Babylon,
archaelogists found that in every im¬
portant ancient town in the land bet¬
ween the rivers there existed the
remains of towerlike structures called
- ziggurats. They also discovered repre¬
sentations of stepped towers on seals,
amulets, cylinders and bas-reliefs, as
well as cuneiform texts giving the
names and dimensions of the towers.
Eventually, near what is now the
village of Hilleh in Iraq, they uncovered
the ground plan of a particularly large
tower. It was made of burnt bricks
and was some 300 feet square. Texts
found in the ruins called it "Eteme-
nanki, the House of the Foundation of
Heaven and Earth."
The texts also told of its restoration
during the reign of Nabopolassar in
625 B.C., mentioned baked bricks,
streams of bitumen, the counsel of
Babylonian gods, and, some 60 years
later, the conscription of foreign labour
by the famous Nebuchadnezzar to
continue the restoration.
It all fitted. This was the Tower of
Babel, and the Tower of Babel, al¬
though perhaps larger and more impor¬
tant, was no more than another of the
ziggurats that dotted the Mesopota¬
mian plains. Thus they had at once
confirmed the Biblical story and pro¬
duced at least a possible explanation
of its combination of two unrelated
subjects: the building of a tower and
the diversity of languages among men.
For thousands of years, apparently,
ziggurats were an integral part of Me¬
sopotamian cities, each differing from
the other in detail like the cathedrals of
Europe, but essentially the same: mas¬
sive cube-like blocks, with stepped-
back upper terraces, and monumental
stairways leading to upper sections
from which spiral stairs ascended to
the topmost platform on which stood a
temple or shrine.
Inevitably they reminded the explor¬
ers of those other marvels of ancient
engineering, the pyramids of Egypt.
But while the pyramids were tombs,
built by individual rulers to provide safe
resting places for their bodies and to
ensure their comfort in afterlife, the
ziggurats were clearly places of wor¬
ship, built, enlarged, restored, and em¬
bellished by generation after genera¬
tion. Why, archaeologists wondered,
was such tremendous labour expended
to give them this form?
From available evidence, the answer
seems to be this. The Sumerians ori¬
ginated in mountainous country. They
frequently depicted their gods standing
on mountain tops, and many of the
animals in their art are of a mountain
type. When they migrated to the plain,
they did not change their religion but,
where nature had failed to provide
, mountains, they fashioned their own
out of the only material available to
them: clay bricks.
Thus, far from challenging God as
the Hebrews thought, the Sumerians
and their successors worshipped from
the ziggurats, and offered their gods
a stepping stone between heaven and
earth in the hope that they would des¬
cend and follow them to their new
habitat.
As to the second part of the story,
God's decision to "confound their lan¬
guage," one theory Is that the captives
might have mistaken the sacred name
of Babylon, Bab-ili, meaning the gate of
God, for the Hebrew balal, meaning
confusion an ironic twist In a story
about a confusion of tongues.
Another theory is that because many
nations had traversed the plains of
Mesopotamia, Babylon probably hous¬
ed people of many races remnants
of older inhabitants, slaves and con¬
scripted labour, perhaps business or
diplomatic representatives of neigh¬
bouring tribes all speaking different
languages or dialects.
To the simple nomadic Jews, march¬
ed off from their pastoral lands
800 miles away and set down in this
teeming city, the diversity of language
was unsettling and mysterious and
called for an explanation. In the habit
of seeking theological explanations for
all human phenomena, they may have
concluded that the confusion of ton¬
gues was God's curse on the Babylo¬
nians for setting up strange religions
and for constructing these arrogant
towers into the heavens. That, in any ma
case, is how they told it and why, ever Jjjl
since, Babel has been a warning to
man to limit his pride and put a rein
on ambition.
