THE
PEARSON
REPORT
This issue is devoted in major part to what has already come to be known
as the "Pearson Report", the most comprehensive analysis to date of economic
development. Entitled "Partners in Development", the report proposes a new
basis for international co-operation and spells out the responsibilities of both
donor and recipient countries. Its proposals represent a far-reaching pro¬
gramme of action, a new global strategy that can transform the present aid
framework into one that fits the changing needs of the developing world
in the next two decades.
Two years ago, the crisis of confidence in the effectiveness of develop¬
ment aid led George Woods, then President of the World Bank, to suggest
a "grand assize" in which an international group "of stature and experience
would meet together, study the consequences of twenty years of develop¬
ment assistance, assess the results, clarify the errors and propose the policies
that will work better in the future."
In August 1968, the new President of the World Bank, Roberts. McNamara,
asked Lester B. Pearson, former Prime Minister of Canada and Nobel Peace
Prize winner, to form a Commission to undertake such a study. Three months
later, the Commission on International Development held its first meeting
in Mont Gabriel, Canada.
With Lester Pearson as its chairman, it comprised seven prominent inter¬
national figures: Sir Edward Boyle (U.K.), Roberto de Oliveira Campos
(Brazil), C. Douglas Dillon (U.S.), Wilfried Guth (Fed. Rep. of Germany),
Sir Arthur Lewis (Jamaica), Robert E. Marjolin (France), and Saburo Okita
(Japan). After 11 months of intensive investigations, including meetings
in Latin America, Africa, Asia and the Middle East at which some 70 govern¬
ments presented their views, the Commission drew up its findings and
recommendations in a 400-page report which has now been published (For
prices and other details see inside back cover).
The text below is the address Lester Pearson delivered in Washington
several weeks ago before the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund, in which he summarized the major findings of this far-reaching study.
Other articles in this issue present excepts and summaries of the conclusions
and proposals in the Pearson Report.

A NEW STRATEGY
FOR GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT
by Lester B. Pearson Nobel Peace Prize, 1957
4
LESTER B. PEARSON. Prime Minister of
Canada from 1963 to 1968, was awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize in 1957. Statesman and
diplomat, he was an adviser to the 1945 San
Francisco Conference that drew up the U.N.
Charter. He also shared In planning that led
to the creation of the Food and Agriculture
Organization and of UNRRA, which helped to
restore the economies of war-ravaged coun¬
tries and cared for displaced persons. He
led successive delegations to the U.N. Gen¬
eral Assembly, of which he was president In
1952-53, and took a leading part in most of
the historic International events of the time.
In 1960, he became International executive
chairman of the Council on World Tensions.
His books Include 'Democracy in World Poli¬
tics" (1955), "Diplomacy In the Nuclear Age"
(1959), "Peace in the Family of Man" (1968).
Nlot only is the question of
development difficult and complex in
itself ; but we have been examining it
during a tense and difficult period in
human affairs. The tone of the times
is doubtful and discordant. A decade
which began with the all but total
liquidation of the old colonial order
has ended with man walking on the
moon.
Goals reached often serve only to
illuminate the long, dangerous road
ahead. The absence of war has not
brought peace, but an uneasy twilight
zone darkened by the shadow of total
destruction. Concern for the rights
and dignity and freedom of all men
has not only sharpened conflict over
how to protect these essential values
but has revealed that there are multi¬
tudes who still do not enjoy them.
The implausible speed of techno¬
logical change has exposed and ren¬
dered less tolerable the glacial pace of
social transformation. Unprecedented
economic progress in many areas has
CONTINUED PAGE 6

kC Xl
9
5

The eight members of the World
Bank Commission on International
Development, headed by Lester B.
Pearson, who drew up the far-ranging
study, "Partners in Development" .
Lester B.
(Canada)
Pearson
Sir Edward Boyle
(U.K.)
GLOBAL STRATEGY (Continued)
Doubts, cynicism and disillusions
6
thrown into sharp relief the depriva¬
tions and flagging hopes of the less
fortunate.
The circumstances in which the
developing nations have tried to
modernize their societies present new
and unprecedented obstacles to the
effort. The results they have achieved
can only be properly analyzed and
appreciated against the background of
these obstacles.
Development is an ancient concept
but one which, in our modern age,
has acquired new meaning and pur¬
pose. Its pursuit unites two strands
of human thought : the belief in pro¬
gress and the conviction that man
can master his destiny.
The roots of modern progress reach
back to the origin of human civilization,
but its acceleration since the industrial
revolution has had an uneven impact
and has created serious strains. This
is true inside the industrialized
countries themselves where whole
regions are left behind in the surge
of rising prosperity. Above all, it has
produced a wide gap between the
industrialized countries and the rest
of the world.
In an attempt to bridge this gap and
to repair centuries of neglect and
stagnation, nations untouched by the
technological revolution have mobilized
their resources while the international
community has helped in an unprec¬
edented manner by a massive transfer
of resources.
It is the nature of international co¬
operation for development that it
should have a tentative, groping
quality. These are largely uncharted
areas, and the costs of exploration
are as high as the results are uncertain.
Some social and economic enterprises,
often experimental, will yield high
returns; others will not, and will be
pushed aside by more promising
endeavours.
It was not the task of our commis¬
sion to go into all the ramifications
of the development process; but rather
to enquire whether the international
co-operative effort, derived from this
new feeling of commitment, and dedica¬
ted to promoting the growth of low-
income areas, warrants continued
heavy expenditures of energy and
resources on the part of the richer,
developed countries; and, if so, how
the effort can be strengthened and
improved by steps on both sides.
E are convinced that co¬
operation for development is not only
practicable but is of essential im¬
portance. Our study of the experience
of the last two decades has confirmed
that belief. The flow of public and
private resources from developed to
developing countries, with the results
achieved, represents an example of
foresight too rarely in evidence in
world affairs. It would be tragic if we
now turned our backs on this effort.
Nevertheless, doubts and fears now
afflict the development effort. Too
often, particularly in the larger donor
countries, the prevalent attitude is one
of weariness, disillusion, and even
rejection. Recipient countries also
have increasing doubts about some
aspects of foreign assistance, which
makes development co-operation more
difficult. Too many in both developed
and developing countries are becoming
cynical, not only about the effective¬
ness of the aid effort, but about the
the validity of the very concept of aid.
Because some donor countries have
attempted to seek political influence
or direct economic gain from aid. sens¬
itive leaders in governments of some
developing countries see in such
policies even if they are designated
"aid" a form of neo-colonial inter¬
vention ; not an expression of genuine
international co-operation, or an
authentic expression of international
interdépendance or human solidarity.
In some donor countries, there is
growing opposition or indifference to
aid for development as costly, waste¬
ful, ineffective and unnecessary. We
try to deal with these objections in
our report.
There are others, however, who
would wholeheartedly support a
genuine policy of co-operation and aid
for development, who do not find this
in the current aid policies of some
developed countries which they feel
to be too closely linked with narrow
political and commercial interests of
the donor; or as something too closely
tied to a wrong foreign policy.
The fact is that we are reaching
a point of decision, even of crisis,
in the history of this novel and
noble adventure in international co¬
operation.
To cope with it, we must face up
to, and try to answer, the basic
question: why should countries, strong
and affluent it is true, but beset by

Saburo Okita
(Japan)
Robert E. Marjolin
(France)
many agonizingly complex domestic,
economic and social problems, be
concerned to do anything about the
plight of the poor countries? In short:
why aid at all?
The first response to this question
is, of course, the moral one. Every
accepted system of values in the
world proclaims the duty of the rich
and the privileged to help the poor
and the deprived.
Every religion, every article of
humanistic faith, reminds the fortunate
of the responsibility which attends
good fortune. The growth and spread
of civilization, the building of the
communities which we have come to
call nations, the common rule of indiv¬
idual and national behaviour which
makes possible our continued exist¬
ence in a nuclear age, all these re¬
inforce the proposition that it is the
duty of those who have resources and
skills to share them with those who
have not.
This is a deep and durable reason
for support of development and for
development aid. Too often, in our
day-to-day struggle for national or per¬
sonal interest, we forget the simple
power of this instinct; even though
we know how dehumanizing the con¬
sequences would be if we were ever
finally to ignore it. However, humanita¬
rian and moral concern for others does
not by any means exhaust the case
for aid.
Of equal to some people of greater
importance are the requirements,
indeed the compulsions , of an in¬
creasingly close and interdependent
world community. These requirements
do not dismiss national interest as the
basis of policy but they insist that it
must include considerations that are
extra-national.
National self-interest is a rational
basis for policy in aid and anything
else but only if it is enlightened and
farsighted and looks beyond its own
boundaries.
The establishment of a good econo¬
mic and political relationship through
co-operation for development is a
worthy objective and could be a re¬
warding one. Certainly there will be
more development and progress in the
richer industrialized countries if the
poorer countries with two-thirds of the
world's population can develop.
IHE reverse is also true. It
becomes more apparent with every
passing day that the interests of each
nation and each man are inseparable
from those of all others. It is now
almost without reason to ask where
one nation will be twenty-five years
from now without at the same time
asking where the world will be.
The revolution in transportation, in
communications, in production meth¬
ods, and in so many other aspects
of life and society has ended forever
the day when individual countries can
gain lasting advantage through the
defeat or decay of their neighbours.
Recognition of these facts has led
to a new concept of national self-
interest, which is not the less impres¬
sive because it is so often honoured
in the breach. Basically, it asserts that
the paramount, long-term interest of
all nations, rich and poor, is in the
creation of a world in which all the
world's resources, human and physical,
are put to the greatest possible use.
This is the vision which should in¬
spire all who look beyond the anxieties
of today to the opportunities of to¬
morrow.
We have learned in the last twenty
years that this vision can only be
realized if the wealthy countries join
in a sustained effort to help the de¬
veloping countries to help themselves.
We no longer ask why rich people
or rich regions of our homeland are
to be taxed to help reduce and remove
poverty in underdeveloped areas. We
recognize such commitments as the
natural obligations of community. The
time has come for a similar national
commitment of assistance to those
developing countries who are them¬
selves willing and able to expend the
effort necessary to achieve the eco¬
nomic and social progress which the
new technology now makes possible.
Let us be in no doubt about the
intention of these developing countries.
For them, development is no longer
an option; it is an imperative. They
do not intend to slumber for more cen¬
turies. Development is part of their
unfinished revolution: another stage in
their struggle for freedom.
The question is not whether develop¬
ment will happen. It will. Rather, the
choice is between slow, halting growth
in an environment of desperation with
declining levels of assistance and em¬
bittered international relations, or
growth as part of a positive, concerted
campaign to accelerate and smooth the
absorption of the technological revolu¬
tion in the poorer countries, with a
reasonable chance that the spirit of
shared concern and effort will reduce
the frictions and the dangers, and
facilitate and expedite positive results.
If the developing countries have no
choice, developed countries have. But
do they realize how a choice for dis¬
engagement would affect their own "7
societies? /
The notion of the basic rights of
man is of the essence in all the civiliz-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

GLOBAL STRATEGY (Continued)
An uneasy twilight zone
ed societies of the world. It shapes
and informs the values by which these
societies govern themselves.
Can the denial of these rights in
the economic and social sphere which
is what we are now dealing with to
two-thirds of the people of the world
be ignored without damage to the prin¬
ciple and interests of the fortunate
few? I think not.
If the rich and the strong of this
world were to succeed in ignoring the
weak and the poor, they would do
well to examine what they themselves
had become.
The division, the disparity, the gap,
between the two worlds is widening
and becoming more critical. From this,
tragic conclusions are drawn and
frightening results are predicted. Of
course, comparative statistics can often
make the situation worse than it is,
and give a misleading impression.
It does not make sense, for instance,
to suggest that a ratio of 15 to 1 in
the "per capita" income of two
countries means that the citizens of
one country are living fifteen times as
well as those of the other. There is
much more to the quality of life than
a rising income.
I realize that governments and citi¬
zens feel a special responsibility to¬
ward their countrymen. But the world
is now too small to confine that res¬
ponsibility within national boundaries.
If the nation-state cannot meet this
test, if it cannot co-operate with other
states to ensure certain basic social and
economic conditions as the minimum
entitlement of all men, it may dis¬
appear and it will deserve to do so.
Humanity is quite ruthless in dealing
with social and political forms and
institutions which have outlived their
usefulness.
These are not new truths. We have
recognized them for years and have
accepted, in principle, their implica¬
tions. Indeed, there has been nothing
more encouraging since the end of the
last war, than the growing acceptance
of a commitment to help in this historic
task of world development. Are we
to abandon it now?
It could be for the evidence grows
that there is a weakening of the poli¬
tical will to carry on with the commit¬
ment in some, including the richest,
of the developed countries. Some rea¬
sons for this weariness and weakness
of will I have mentioned. Others stem
from expecting too much too soon;
from forgetting there is no such thing
as instant development.
Still others are traceable to wrong
impressions of how much aid has been
provided for development, as distinct
from shorter term political and military
objectives. It is no more sensible to
criticize aid provided in support of
immediate political or military goals on
the grounds that it has not resulted
in development than it is to criticize
shipments of instruments of war for
the same failure.
To these things must be added a
great misunderstanding about what
has, in fact, happened in developing
countries; about what has been achiev¬
ed and what can be achieved in the
future if there is the will to sustain
' .;* \v^-/^.-
I
8
.CONOMIC statistics alone
do not give a true comparison between
the living standards and satisfactions
of a tenant in a high-rise housing
development in a packed and polluted
megalopolis and those of a village
in sunny Ceylon.
Nevertheless, after making all these
allowances, it is a frightening prospect,
and could be a tragic one, if a small
minority of the nations of the world
march into the space age, exploiting its
potential and at least having the oppor¬
tunity of solving its problems, while the
great majority are denied entrance to
this new world or find such entrance
intolerably delayed.
Of course, none of this argues that
we must now have or should have,
world government and that the nation-
state should disappear. On the con¬
trary, it is clear that the nation-state
has particularly vital functions at this
juncture in history.
What it does mean is that there
must be a great concern in all nations
for the fate of all other nations, and
that this must reflect itself in more
effective co-operation, including co¬
operation for development.
>
ï
0)
Z

the development effort. Look at the
record of growth in Gross National
Product. This is not by any means a
complete measure, for development is
much more than G.N. P. As Gunnar
Myrdal says, "development is the
movement of the whole social system
upwards".
But figures for G.N. P. do indicate the
progress which has been made. The
average annual rate of G.N. P. for all
developing countries between 1950 and
1968 has been a remarkable 4.8 per
cent. Taking the 1960s alone it now
appears that the United Nations
development target of five per cent
per year will be met.
Even if we take income per head,
the record is still historically impres¬
sive. Some forty-one developing
countries have, since 1955, managed
average growth in income "per capita"
of two per cent or more for a ten-year
period. This is roughly what the
developed countries of Western Europe
and North America achieved in the
century starting in 1850.
It is even more encouraging that
these forty-one countries, about a third
of all the developing countries, are
not confined to any geographical area,
topography, race, religion, or popula¬
tion size. They are equally divided bet¬
ween Africa, Latin America and Asia,
and they include some of the largest
countries as well as some of the
smallest.
I do not claim, of course, that this
achievement can simply be laid at the
door of foreign aid and technical assis¬
tance. Of course not. At least 85 per
cent of the whole investment effort has
been achieved by the developing
people themselves. Aid in capital and
expertise has often been a catalyst
of local action. As a source of scarce
foreign exchange, it has frequently
been indispensable.
But the hard grinding work and
saving that underlie development, par¬
ticularly in countries with desperately
low standards of living this has been,
as it must be, accomplished by the
people themselves.
It is not easy to cast our minds
back twenty years. It reminds us of
too many of our mistakes. But it is
worth recalling that doubt was wide¬
spread in the mid-40s whether there
could be any development of signifi
cance in countries which began with
the enormous backlog of poverty,
illiteracy, inefficiency and instability
which characterized so many of the
developing countries.
Those who doubted the possibility
of progress were wrong. Under¬
development is not necessarily a vi¬
cious circle; it is an evil that man
has the power to eradicate. To use
Professor Arthur Lewis' pungent phrase,
underdevelopment is "a lickable pro¬
position". But to "lick" it, a greater
and better managed effort for interna¬
tional co-operative assistance is re¬
quired and we won't have a hundred
years to do it.
The record is all the more Impressive
if we recollect that over sixty new
countries gained formal independence
in the twenty years following the
Second World War. They have added
their voices to a clamorous protest
against the inequity of human con¬
ditions.
Which of us, knowing the conflict¬
ing political, tribal and cultural pres¬
sures, as well as the economic weak¬
ness and lack of political experience
which afflicted new developing coun-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
*
*£Sm\

GLOBAL STRATEGY (Continued)
tries, would have dared to predict that
they would pass through the crucial
early stages of political independence
with, on the whole, only limited, though
highly publicized, turmoil and with
strengthened political frameworks? It
took great faith and great foresight in
the new countries to do this. Fortu¬
nately, there were also men of the
same foresight and faith who were
prepared to help them by a massive
transfer of resources, material and
human.
Those qualities are now to be tested
once more, for we stand at a critical
point in the development effort.
The figures indicating progress are
encouraging. They show what can be
done. But against the needs and the
magnitude of the problem and against
the present mood of disengagement
they give little ground for optimism and
none whatever for complacency.
D
10
ESPITE great over-all pro¬
gress, the impact made on the poverty
of individuals comprising nearly two-
thirds of the world's population is still
pitifully small. Living conditions in
most developing areas remain well
below the standard of Europe before
the industrial revolution. Well over
half of the citizens of developing coun¬
tries still must survive on average
annual incomes below $100 a year.
Many of these countries, including
some of the largest and poorest, have
fallen considerably below the average
rate of growth. With the rapid rise in
population the improvement in income
per head is often imperceptible.
People live longer, but often not any
better.
Many more children are in school,
but the education they are receiving
is often irrelevant to their surroundings
and their country's needs. There are
immense problems of uncontrolled
urban migration and unemployment.
Even the encouraging results of the
"green revolution" in agriculture have
created new problems as well as re¬
moved old ones.
These are but a few of the problems
ahead. Yet, we now have the one
indispensable element with which
policy-makers in the 1940s were not
blessed. We know, as they did not
know, that development programmes
can work, that development can, in
fact, be induced where but only where
there is the will and the work. We
must now ask how we can use this
knowledge for a new, accepted, and
more systematic approach to the
development problems of the 1970s
and beyond.
Tragic consequences will surely
follow tomorrow our failure to
act today'
W.E strongly believe that
development must, in the future even
more than it has in the past be an
active and a genuine partnership bet¬
ween rich nations and poor. It is
futile to hope for the day when either
side can stand off at a distance and
provide or receive large quantities of
aid without fully understanding and
participating in the process by which
their allocation and use is decided.
No country has the right to intervene
in another's policy-making, but any
country or agency which transfers
resources to another country does
have a right to be heard and to be
informed about decisions which basic¬
ally affect the development it is helping
to support.
This partnership, which must be
separated as much as possible from
the vagaries of day-to-day politics, is
basic to a sustained relationship
centred upon long-term development
objectives which is the only proper
basis for a systematic approach to the
problem. It must cover not only the
official resource flows, which are the
responsibility of governments and
which, strictly speaking, are alone
entitled to be called "aid"; it must also
include policies with respect to trade
and private capital flows which can be
equally important to the growth of the
developing countries.
These private flows, of course (they
make up now nearly half the total flow
of financial resources to developing
countries) are no burden on the tax¬
payer. They may be a risk as well as
a profit for the investor, but the
burden after allowing for the very
real development value of the loan is
on those who have to do the repaying.
That burden is now heavy in certain
developing countries and is increasing
in some to the point where debt ser¬
vicing is exceeding new lending.
Second, it is clear that official aid
should increasingly be directed to
economic development, as opposed to
the many shorter term objectives to
which it has been so often directed in
the past.
There are, of course, countries where
rapid development must await basic
and long-term improvements in social
conditions, but for the great majority
of countries a concerted effort at
development which produces clear and
measurable progress should now be
possible and should be the basis for
self-sustaining growth as well as for
the social progress which must not be
separated from it.
Additional aid, in short, should be
aimed at a clear and tangible objec¬
tive and allocated according to explicit
criteria wh^ph emphasize, above all,
the economic performance of the reci¬
pient but do not ignore social change.
We feel that the over-all target for
the 1970s should be an average annual
rate of growth of 6 per cent for the
developed world as a whole...
We understand and accept that this
will be an average rate of growth, and
that some countries will do better and
some worse. Nevertheless, we believe
that this global target could be of great
use in establishing a bench-mark by
which progress can be measured and
success defined.
We also strongly believe that a
simple growth rate and a global target
is not enough. To be satisfactory to
both developed and developing coun¬
tries, aid must be planned to help an
economy reach the point where growth
is self-sustaining, and can be main¬
tained without foreign financing on
concessional terms...
s,I OME of the machinery ne¬
cessary for this purpose is already in
existence. We are encouraged by the
work of the consortia, of the consulta¬
tive groups, and of regional organiza¬
tions, which combine donors and
recipients in a regular forum in which
both past performance and future aid
requirements are reviewed.
We believe that this sort of system
should come into being in those count¬
ries and regions where it is not now
the rule. To this end we recommend
that the World Bank and the regional
banks not only take the lead in
strengthening these institutions where
they exist, but also in helping to create
new ones where they are needed.
There must be greater co-ordination
and broader consultation on all aspects
of the development process espe¬
cially in the field if the aid relationship
is to be effective and satisfactory.
Both the concept of partnership em¬
bracing all relevant resource flows, and
the allocation of additional aid princi¬
pally according to agreed standards of
CONTINUED PAGE 12

The production of electric power has multiplied by seven In Asia,
five in Africa, and four in Latin America in the last twenty years.
Although in many parts of the developing world demand still
runs ahead of supply, power production has met the needs
of rapidly growing industries, provided irrigation for agriculture
and a vastly improved service for urban consumers, and has
made possible a start on rural electrification.

Aid from the World Bank and Its associated
organizations for African development has increased
considerably in recent years. By March 1969,
loans, credits and investments totalled over
$2,000 million. They have helped to build roads,
railways and pipelines, to construct hydro-electric
installations, to improve and expand schooling
and technical training, and to develop industrial
production and mining. Photo shows huge mounds
of manganese ore in Gabon, where mining of
rich deposits has been extensively developed.
GLOBAL STRATEGY (Continued)
Is l*yo of G.N.P. too much
to ask the rich countries?
performance, underline the need for
a much larger multilateral element in
the international aid system. The pre¬
sent flow of concessional finance from
multilateral institutions comprises only
about 11 per cent of the total flow
of official development aid. We be¬
lieve that, by 1975, it should make
up at least 20 per cent.
Multilateral agencies enjoy special
advantages for conducting an objective
assessment of both feasibility and per¬
formance, as well as the allocation of
aid, but, to play the bigger role we
12
visualize for them, they must be effi¬
cient in organization and administra¬
tion.
This does not mean, of course, that
there should be any diminution in
bilateral aid. Indeed, our recommenda¬
tions would result in two-thirds of the
increased flow going through bilateral
channels.
We particularly suggest a stronger
role for the International Develop¬
ment Association (I.D.A.). We believe
that among existing organizations,
I.D.A. is in the best position to exert
FINANCING DEVELOPMENT
Financing development is the business of three international organizations that
form the World Bank Group the World Bank, the International Finance Corporation
and the International Development Association and of the United Nations Develop¬
ment Programme.
THE WORLD BANK (International Bank for Reconstruction and Development) has
acquired a formidable experience of development finance since it made its first loan
in 1947. From early support of power and transport projects, it has diversified its
operations to include financing of agriculture, industry and education. The Bank
(110 member countries) also helps member states to draw up development programmes,
advises on economic policy, assists in planning projects and studies development
problems.
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION (IFC), established in 1956, assists
member countries (today 91) to develop the private sector of their economies by loans
and investments not secured by government guarantee. From financing mining and
manufacturing, IFC has entered new fields: food-processing, distribution services and
tourism.
THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA), set up in 1960,
supplies capital on especially favourable terms to the least prosperous countries. Its
funds come mainly from contributions by 18 more prosperous governments of its
102 member countries and from the World Bank's own net earnings.
During the past ten years, the World Bank Group has invested about $1,000 million
a year in development.
THE UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (UNDP) was set up in 1965
by a merger of two existing U.N. development operations the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance and the Special Fund to enable the entire U.N. family to respond
more effectively to the needs of the low-income countries. The world's largest multi¬
national source of pre-investment assistance and technical co-operation, UNDP opens
the way for large-scale capital investment: more than $1,900 million in development
investment has followed 37 major UNDP projects undertaken at a total cost of only
$43 million.
leadership in the effort to establish
criteria for the allocation of aid which
emphasize economic performance,
rather than the political relationships
and historical accidents which bear
little or no relation to development
needs or performance. We also be¬
lieve that I.D.A. can be central to the
establishment of new co-ordinated
machinery designed to pull bilateral
and multilateral instruments together
into a more coherent and regularized
administrative system.
With progress and improvement in
the allocation and organization of aid,
we recommend a substantial increase
in its volume. Specifically, we believe
that the already agreed objective of
public and private transfer from de¬
veloped to developing countries of
1 per cent of Gross National Product
should be confirmed.
We do not believe, however, that
it is realistic to assume that all
countries can reach the 1 per cent
target at once even though they have
accepted it in principle. For some
the distance to be covered is too large
and the sequence of appropriation,
commitment and expenditure too long.
We believe, however, that it is both
possible and necessary to reach or
exceed this goal by 1975. All develop¬
ed countries should accept this dead¬
line; announce the steps they intend
to take to achieve it, and report
periodically on the progress made.
Perhaps even more important, we
believe that the flow of official develop¬
ment aid, the only kind which really
involves a burden on the taxpayer,
should reach 0.7 per cent of the Gross

National Product by 1975. The addi¬
tional average annual amount, about
$1,500 million, required to reach this
target is modest enough in relation
to the annual increase of Gross Natio¬
nal Product in the developed countries,
which will be about $120,000 million,
but we recognize that it may cause
difficulty for some countries. Never¬
theless, we firmly believe that no
smaller transfers can secure the inter¬
national development objective which
all seek.
It is not enough that there be more
aid. It must also be better aid, more
effectively organized and administered.
It must be suited to the needs of sound¬
ly conceived development plans,
whether this will require project or
non-project financing. It must be in¬
creasingly untied so that the admini¬
strative and economic evils of tying
are no longer visited upon the reci¬
pients. It must be accompanied more
and more with integrated technical
assistance which provides the know¬
ledge and skill necessary to make use
of the funds provided. Our report
contains many recommendations on
this matter of quality and I cannot over
emphasize its importance.
This emphasis on official aid in no
way means that we minimize the im¬
portance of private flows. On the
contrary, we feel that private foreign
investment and the transfer of know-
how are important and need to be
stimulated. We make recommenda¬
tions to this end for improving the
climate that will take into account the
legitimate interests of both the foreign
investors and the preoccupations of
the recipient country.
The vital importance of trade for
development is also underlined in our
report. A continued vigorous expan¬
sion of world trade is a basic condition
for rapid international development.
Many developing countries must be¬
come more outward looking and com¬
petitive, but the developed countries
also must review their trade policies
to remove obstacles to the expansion
of the trade of the developing countries.
The ideas I have suggested are
heavily dependent on the success of
another effort; that to control the rapid
growth in population. This growth is
largely due to the fact that the death
rate has gone down not that the birth
rate has gone up. Nevertheless, it is
increasingly clear that nothing we do
in the development field in low-income
countries will be of lasting significance
unless and until there is a substantial
slowing of the rate of population growth
which now threatens in many countries
to overwhelm all other progress.
Population is still not an easy subject
to discuss though there has been much
more candour in talk about it in recent
years. It remains, in our view, a matter
of family and national decision in which
no outside authority ought to inter¬
vene. However, it is so important
to the future of not only the develop
ment effort but the entire world that
no aid-providing agency can ignore
performance in this area any more than
it can ignore performance in any other.
We are aware that economic and
social progress is in the long run the
best way of stabilizing population
growth. But we haven't a long run
any longer. There is a population
explosion and immediate action is
needed.
We would hope that the trend which
has already appeared and seems to
be gathering force in developing
countries toward more concern with
family planning will gain even more
momentum in the years ahead.
These, then, are some of the basic
ideas of our report. In them, we have
tried to balance the goal of self-
sustained development in the low-
income world by the end of this cen¬
tury, with co-operative policy and action
for aid based on a genuine partnership.
To those who have grasped the vision
of balanced development in a world
community, with all that this holds for
the future, but do not appreciate the
practical difficulties now in the way,
the immediate steps suggested in our
report will appear too timid.
Those who do not accept our assess¬
ment of the problem may find them
unrealistic and unnecessary. We, our¬
selves, believe that these recommen¬
dations are practicable and attainable
if and I know how big an "if'can be
there is the will to that end; a will
which will be shown on both sides of 1 Q
the development front. I U
We are not so presumptuous as to
assume that our investigation and our
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

GLOBAL STRATEGY (Continued)
report reveals new truths. Our hope is
more modest. It is that our findings
may provoke the world-wide reconsi¬
deration we believe the subject now
needs; that, in the words of Mr. McNa-
mara, it may "stimulate discussion and
debate and prompt action on the
issues in the widest possible forum;
among governments, among interna¬
tional agencies, among public and pri¬
vate organizations of every size and
description which are concerned with
what I believe history will regard as
the most crucial task that confronted
our century: the orderly development
of mankind itself in an era of revolu¬
tionary technological change."
We are encouraged by Mr. McNa-
mara's pledge given "to undertake a
careful analysis of each of the com¬
mission's recommendations which in
any way bears upon the (Bank's) work
and to submit these analyses to the
Bank's directors with recommendations
for appropriate action."
In the policies and action to meet
what is, in fact, a crisis in International
development, .indifference rather than
opposition is the greatest obstacle to
progress.
T,
14
HE time has come for all
men of good will to recognize that
this indifference, or the kind of mild
support that gives development assis¬
tance a very low priority, is not good
enough to meet the challenge. Aid
for development must be given a high
priority even in the company of guns,
butter and outer space. History leaves
no choice, in the coming decade, to
developed and developing countries
alike, but to face together with honesty
and energy the difficult, frustrating,
but vitally important problems that are
caused by the grossly uneven pattern
of world growth.
Basically, what we have to offer
as a rationale for action to change this
pattern is our vision of a world com¬
munity in which all peoples can parti¬
cipate with dignity and self-respect;
in which the deprived and disadvan¬
taged will join the mainstream of tech¬
nological and social progress.
We can only ask those who do not
share this vision to look ahead for
25 years and try to determine what
the world will look like then, if the
division into the rich and the poor, the
developed and the stagnant societies
continues and widens, as it will cer¬
tainly do if we do not work together
to prevent it. Then think back to the
measures we could have taken, and
thereby have avoided the tragic con¬
sequences that will surely follow to¬
morrow our failure to act today.
