NASA's broad range of aerospace research activities has led to
many practical applications in unexpected fields. NASA's Langley
Research Centre in Virginia recently found that on water-covered
surfaces tyres do not touch the ground but skim along on a cushion
of water. Discovery of this "hydroplaning" effect has had
immediate applications for automobile safety. U.S. government
agencies and the automobile industry are now experimenting with
grooved highways, road textures, new tyre treads and Improved
breaking systems to avoid skidding and loss of control on wet roads.
The fuel cell that provided electrical power for Gemini and Apollo
spacecraft has already been used experimentally to run farm
tractors and electric passenger cars, and may be the forerunner
of power for pollution-free automobiles of tomorrow.

7. Space-age electronics
and pocket computers
T
HE key to man's conquest
or space is the computer. The assi¬
milation of scientific data for every
stage of a space flight, the design and
production of virtually every component
of a spacecraft, the precision control
of the spacecraft in flight, and the
storage, classification and retrieval of
data received from each space mis¬
sion have produced tremendous ad¬
vances in computer technology. The
stringent weight and volume require¬
ments of spacecraft have led to
development of striking miniaturized
computer circuits which in a short time
will find their way into commercially
available equipment.
Computers have been scaled down
to the point where thousands of cir¬
cuits can be compressed into a case
smaller than a thumbnail. Similar low-
cost computers soon will be incor¬
porated into control systems for air¬
planes, motor vehicles, industrial ma¬
chinery, and construction and mining
equipment.
Space age computer software dev¬
eloped for the wide gamut of opera¬
tions involved in the Apollo program¬
me have been adapted for use with
computers in air traffic control, indus¬
trial process control, engineering
design, automation of hospital services
and sophisticated medical diagnosis.
Computer data processing techniques
and programmes developed by space
projects have permitted airlines to
provide instant flight information and
reservations systems, insurance com¬
panies to improve their accounting and
investment services and other firms to
handle transactions involving more
than 20 million items per day.
The applications of computerized
numerical control and digital logic to
the machine tool, a direct result of
aerospace research, received its great
impetus from the metal machining re¬
quirements of the space programme.
Parts are complex. Zero-defects stand¬
ards are absolute. Production lots
are small. Design changes are fre¬
quent. A system which assured the
automatic control of machinery by
means of programmed instructions
stored on punched cards or tape
replacing the operator, jigs and manual
controls was essential to meeting
these rigid standards and rigorous
conditions.
"The marriage of numerical control,
the digital computer and machine tools
is one of the stunning technological
innovations of our time, ranking with
nuclear power and space flight itself
as a third great development of our
generation," the American industrialist
Willard F. Rockwell, Jr., contends. Not
only will 80 per cent of all machined
parts be produced by numerical con¬
trol, with tremendous improvements in
productivity which means lower costs
as well as greater reliability, but the
computer is enabling management to
make sounder decisions on the basis
of faster, more accurate and more
complete information.
While the aerospace Industry is still
by far the largest user of numerically
controlled tools, numerical control
applications are being broadened to
a multitude of other uses beyond the
cutting of metal. These uses include
material handling, assembly, welding,
fabrication, inspection, quality control,
computer graphics and drafting ma¬
chines and plotters. Systems concepts
of numerical control cut right across a
company's activities with an irresis¬
tible logic all of their own.
They jolt and stimulate and chal¬
lenge every member of the corporate
team from the worker to top manage¬
ment. They free the worker from the
drudgery of assembly-line routine,
and the engineer can turn to more
creative pursuits. They blur the dis¬
tinction between design and manufac¬
turing, interlocking both Into a single
computerized process. They become
an integral part of computerized
management information systems.
And all this adds up to a new indus-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
29

SPACE-AGE ELECTRONICS (Continued)
Cartridge programmes for every TV set
trial revolution, with productivity boost¬
ed by a ratio of four or five to one
wherever numerical controls and data
logic are properly used.
To make certain that innovations in
computer software technology devel¬
oped in space projects become avail¬
able to all who can use it, the Com¬
puter Software Management and In¬
formation Center (COSMIC) was set
up by NASA and is run under contract
by the University of Georgia.
COSMIC operates as the central
clearinghouse and dissemination outlet
for computer programmes and related
information developed by NASA itself
as well as by its 20,000 contractors.
The centre receives, evaluates and
checks out the software adding to its
inventory those programmes which are
operational and of potential value in a
wide range of applications.
Over 14,000 requests for software
from industry, commerce and univer¬
sities have been filled by COSMIC
with substantial savings to the user.
Since the development costs are all
born by NASA, it is estimated that the
average purchaser of a programme
from COSMIC saves from 50 to 90 per
cent of the cost of developing a sim¬
ilar programme. More than 400 com¬
plete programmes and documentation
packages are available for sale "off
the shelf" and new items are regu¬
larly being added to the inventory.
I
30
F computer technology is
the key to man's conquest of space,
the computer itself owes its rapid de¬
velopment to space requirements. To
begin at the beginning, if aerospace
technology had remained shackled to
the vacuum tube, there would have
been not the slightest hope of landing
on the moon or probing the planets in
this century. Even efforts to explore
the near reaches of space just outside
the atmosphere would have been ser¬
iously handicapped because of the
size, weight and power consumption
of avionic equipment.
The development of the transistor
and its solid-state offspring the inte¬
grated circuit made it possible to
build digital computers no bigger than
a shoebox and reliable enough to
make possible exacting interplanetary
space flights. But it was first the
transistor, and now microminiature
integrated circuits, that made possible
the development of successive gene¬
rations of computers faster and with
greater capacity to meet the informa¬
tion and control needs of science,
education, industry, business and
government. Thus, in France the Labo¬
ratoire Central de Télécommunications
has developed a tiny computer with
integrated circuits no bigger than a
portable typewriter using space elec¬
tronic technology.
Yet the transistorized computer was
but the beginning of a total revolution
of the electronics industry throughout
the world, providing the underpinnings
for economic miracles such as that
of Japan. Now, following on the heels
of the ubiquitous Japanese-made
transistor radio, a whole new genera¬
tion of electronic products from clocks
to computers using advanced micro¬
electronic devices called "metal oxide
semiconductor/large-scale integrated
arrays" (or more simply MOS/LSI
devices) are pouring off Japanese
production lines.
Developed by North American Rock¬
well's Autonetics Division, MOS/LSI
devices are about the size of this
capital "O", twice the thickness of a
sheet of writing paper, and contain
more than a thousand circuit elements.
None of the vital space systems could
function without the electronic sensing,
calculating and controlling "brain
centres" using these devices.
But neither could the revolutionary
desk-top calculators now being pro¬
duced by Japan's Hazakawa Electric
Company, using Autonetic MOS/LSI
devices. Approximately the size of a
cigar box, the new calculator weighs
just three pounds, operates instan¬
taneously, without noise, and features
a lighted display of eight digits. And
this promises to be just the beginning
of a Lilliputian invasion that will
eventually affect the lives of men
everywhere.
Another technological breakthrough
in space age electronics promises to
revolutionize education and home
entertainment. In addition to books,
libraries of the future will contain
Electronic Video Recordings (EVR)
cartridges that can be played over any
ordinary television receiver. Devel¬
oped originally for high resolution'
photo reconnaissance of the moon EVR
will soon be produced and marketed
worldwide by "The EVR Partnership"
in London a consortium of Columbia
Broadcasting System (US), Imperial
Chemical Industries (UK) and CIBA
(Switzerland) as a low-cost means of
playing sound motion pictures of high
quality as and when the user chooses.
It's like recording tapes with the
very important difference that sight
has been added to sound, the sound
track being carried on magnetic strips
built into the edges of black and white
or colour film. For the public, it means
movies at home. For students, audio¬
visual learning at home.
For doctors, too busy to keep up
with the ever-Increasing flow of med¬
ical literature, it means convenient
audio-visual briefings on new develop¬
ments in the medical field prepared
and distributed by pharmaceutical
companies for easy viewing at home
after office hours. For television, it
means competition. And for socio-
philosophers like Marshall McLuhan, it
is the end of the Gutenberg era and
an affirmation of the "picture civiliza¬
tion". Slowly, under the impulse of
space technology, civilization seems to
be bypassing the written word.
A
iS this happens, a new
industry is developing on a global
scale. In the U.S., Kodak has devel¬
oped a new process for the duplication
of films which produces four times as
many copies in any given time than
previous methods, and at half of the
price. CBS has set up a plant for
high-speed duplication and will develop
the EVR market for films. In licence
agreements with CBS, Motorola will
manufacture EVR players and the
New York Times will develop educat¬
ional EVR cartridges.
Outside the United States, llford
will manufacture fine grain 8.75 mm
film for copy prints and high
speed printing equipment of its own
design to provide copies for fast
delivery at low cost. The Rank Organi¬
zation will manufacture and distribute
teleplayers, and plans to package the
Rank Film Library in .EVR cartridges.
Quantity production Is scheduled to
begin by the summer of 1970, just
three years after Its first use in lunar
reconnaissance.
Add to all these spectacular develop¬
ments affecting whole industries the
crop of new science-based companies
shooting up in North America, Europe
and Japan dedicated specifically, if not
exclusively, to the conversion of aero¬
space technology to "down-to-earth"
civilian applications.
Spar Aerospace Products Ltd. of
Toronto, Canada, is typical of the
breed. In addition to its space eng¬
ineering work in support of the Cana¬
dian Alouette/ISIS programme and
planning for the Canadian domestic
communications satellite system, Spar
manufactures STEM (Storable Tubular
Extendible Member) for Canadian, U.S.
and European space programmes.
But STEM devices are also excellent
examples of the many "unglamorous"
products developed specifically to
meet satellite requirements that are
now finding a wide variety of uses in
earthbound applications. Essentially,
the STEM principle is a means of
coiling-up and storing long, rigid rods
or booms. In the ground environ¬
ment, uses range from vehicular ship
antennas, mobile elevating masts for
television cameras, lights or antenna
arrays to surveyor's tripod legs and
tent poles. The ability to coil-up
lengths of relatively rigid tube into a
small volume, and re-deploy it again
has a range of uses limited only by
one's imagination.
