Photo Ihrt © Stern - Black Star, New York
24
The cyclone that struck East Pakistan on the night of 12-13 November, last year, was one of the worst
natural catastrophes of this century. Photo above, showing large ship left stranded far inland in the
middle of a paddy field, and shattered village (right) give only a paltry picture of the devastation that
killed an estimated half million persons. Lack of adequate communications posed a serious problem for
rescue workers as food, medical aid and other equipment were rushed to the scene from around the
world. "Are we going to continue, as we have done in the past to stagger from one catastrophe to
another, helping to bury the dead, tend the injured, feed,clothe and house the survivors, while
doing virtually nothing to prevent the recurrence of such disasters?", asks Dr. Fournier d'Albe in the
article on facing page. "Or shall we mobilize our scientific, technical and economic resources in order
to deal with the situation in a rational manner?"

by
E. M. Fournier d'Albe

On cyclones and
other natural disasters
of a geophysicist
I
|N 1970, Nature gave Man
two severe lessons in survival.
On November 12-13, a tropical
cyclone moved slowly up the Bay of
Bengal to the Ganges-Brahmaputra
delta. The low atmospheric pressure,
the hurricane-force winds and the huge
volume of water coming down the
E.M. FOURNIER D'ALBE Is a specialist in
Unesco's Department of Environmental Scien¬
ces and is in charge of the programme in
geophysics related to the prevention of na¬
tural disasters. Before joining Unesco Head¬
quarters staff, he carried out long-term mis¬
sions for Unesco In Pakistan, where he help¬
ed to set up a geophysical observatory in the
earthquake-prone region of Quetta, and at the
National University of Mexico.
rivers at the end of the monsoon
season, combined with the high tides
(it was nearly full moon) to produce
a surge of water which swept over
many of the islands in the delta and
flooded the whole coastal area to
depths of as much as six metres.
In an area of 2,800 square miles,
between 250,000 and 500,000 people
were drowned. Some 235,000 houses
were destroyed and the number of
persons stricken was estimated at
three million. Innumerable cattle were
lost, some 600,000 tons of crops were
destroyed, and over one million acres
ravaged.
At 3.24 p.m. on May 31, 1970, seismic
waves generated by an earthquake
55 kilometres below the sea bed off
the coast of Peru began to reach the
"Callejón de Huaylas", a high valley in
the Peruvian Andes noted for the
beauty of its scenery, and a favourite
rendezvous of climbers. Within ninety
seconds, more than half the buildings
in Huaraz, the largest town in the
valley, had collapsed into rubble, filling
the narrow streets with debris and
burying, under their ruins more than
fifteen thousand people.
But earthquakes can also shake
whole mountains. While Huaraz was
crumbling into dust, a great slab of
rock (seven or eight million cubic
metres) broke away from the west face
of the giant peak of Huascarán,
carrying with it about a million tons of
ice from the summit glacier. It fell six
hundred metres on to the glacier below
and, within a minute, a huge mass of
rock, water and ice was moving with
gathering speed down the slopes of
the mountain towards the Huaylas
valley.
By the time it had reached the foot
of the mountain it was travelling with
such speed that it leapt over a
150 metre high ridge and buried the
town of Yungay under five metres' of
mud. Of the 20,000 inhabitants of the
town, only a few hundred escaped.
As soon as the extent of these
disasters became known, there was on
each occasion a spontaneous move¬
ment of solidarity throughout the world.
Rescue teams, medical supplies, food,
clothing and emergency housing poured
into the stricken areas from dozens of
countries, not only as individual gifts
but also through the Red Cross and
other international relief organizations.
Such was the volume and variety
of this help that the governments
of the countries concerned, whose
resources had already been strained to
the limit by the disasters themselves,
had the greatest difficulty in co-
continued NEXT PAGE
25

MAY DAYI MAY DAYI MAY DAYI This air photo (right) records the death of two Peruvian towns Yungay
and Ranrahirca buried under the debris of an avalanche that rolled off the west slope of Huascaran, Peru's
highest mountain, on Sunday, May 31, last year. A mass of glacial ice and rock on the mountain, shaken
loose by an earthquake which rocked Peru, swept down the Huaylas Valley and with the noise and speed of an
express train struck the two towns. Some 80 million cubic metres of water, mud and rocks buried the towns,
killing over 20,000 persons. "Aqui Estuvo Yungay" (This is where Yungay stood) says the inscription (top
of photo) and a cross marks the site of the Central Square (Plaza de Armas). Burial place of Ranrahirca is
similarly marked (bottom of photo). Dotted line at centre shows where a highway formerly linked the two towns.
Below, some survivors of the Peruvian earthquake, to whom emergency supplies and equipment were airlifted.
ï
0)
Z
Z
3
CYCLONES AND OTHER DISASTERS (Continued)
26
ordinating and channelling this aid
into the areas where it was most
urgently needed. As had so often
happened in similar circumstances in
the past, a great deal of effort and
generosity was, in fact, partly wasted
through confusion.
The question before us is very clear:
are we going to continue, as we have
done In the past, to stagger from one
catastrophe to another, helping to bury
the dead, tend the injured, feed, clothe
and house the survivors, while doing
virtually nothing to prevent the re¬
currence of such disasters? Or shall
we mobilize our scientific, technical
and economic resources in order to
deal with the situation in a rational
manner?
If the latter is our choice, our first
task must be to comprehend the
natural phenomena which are responsi¬
ble for these disasters, so that we
may forecast with accuracy when and
where they will strike and what will
be their magnitude.
This is already being done with
some success in the case of wind
storms and floods; it may well be
possible to do so, In the future, for
volcanic eruptions, provided that the
necessary resources are devoted to
establishing proper instrumental sur¬
veillance of active and dormant vol¬
canoes.
It Is perfectly feasible, when suffi¬
cient data are available, to predict
where destructive avalanches, earth¬
quakes or landslides are likely to
occur, and it may be that further in¬
tensive research will provide us with
the means of forecasting when they
will happen.
The most striking progress in all
these branches of scientific research
has been made, as one might expect,
In the advanced countries. But there
are still vast areas of the world where
the means necessary for the sur¬
veillance and study of the natural
phenomena are sadly lacking, and here
there is an urgent need for more
effective international co-operation and
assistance.
Our second task' must be to devise
and develop means of protection
against the violence of nature. We
already know, in theory, how to
build wind and earthquake-resistant
houses, how to control floods in rivers
and how to reduce the risks of avalan¬
ches and landslides; but only in very
few parts of the -world Is such know¬
ledge systematically applied.
This is partly a problem of economic
resources: flood control, for instance,
often entails large and expensive
public works. But it is often a problem
of education: rules and regulations can
be drafted for the design and con¬
struction of wind and earthquake-
resistant buildings, but these rules will
remain ineffective unless the engineers,
architects and builders fully understand
them and recognize the need to apply
them diligently in practice.
Here again, there is a tremendous
need for more effective international
co-operation, especially so that the
resources of the great research centres
can be brought to bear on the problems
faced by the developing countries,
problems which are imposed on them
by their limited economic resources.
Our third task must be to Integrate
these scientific and technical elements
Into the overall plans for dealing
with disaster situations. Considerable
efforts are being made, both by the
United Nations and by the League of
Red Cross Societies, to assist govern-

ments in preparing national plans.
However, there are still great variations
from country to country in the degree
of preparedness for coping with
natural disasters.
Even in countries where detailed
plans have been made, one often finds
that these are concerned solely with
post facto rescue and relief; relatively
little attention is given to the improve¬
ment of forecasting and warning
systems or to the development of more
effective means of protection, based
on a better knowledge of the natural
phenomena concerned.
One particular aspect of such
planning needs to be emphasized.
When a disaster has occurred, medical
and rescue teams are normally on the
spot within a few hours, and they are
swiftly followed by emergency supplies
of food and clothing. However, it
often happens that in the few hours
or days immediately following a
catastrophe, the local authorities have
to make urgent decisions on re-housing
and the re-establishment of public
services.
These decisions may have far-
reaching consequences for the subse
quent reconstruction and rehabilitation
of the affected area, but they never¬
theless have often to be made under
conditions of extreme stress. It has
therefore been suggested that emerg¬
ency aid should include not only
rescue and relief teams but also small
technical units to help in the organiza¬
tion both of immediate relief and long-
term rehabilitation.
The three tasks defined above were
presented in a certain logical order,
but of course work may proceed on
all three simultaneously. There is no
doubt that their fulfilment would be
rendered easier If there were a greater
degree of co-operation and a greater
exchange of ideas and information
between different countries, between
international organizations both within
and outside the United Nations system,
and between the various professions
concerned.
At the beginning of this article, we
remarked on how natural disasters
never fail to stir the spirit of human
solidarity, and on the generous aid
which is always forthcoming on these
occasions. Yet we must surely ask
ourselves, In this latter half of the
twentieth century, whether more
effective means cannot be found to
help those countries and communities
which have to bear the heavy economic
burden of reconstruction after such
events.
Is It not possible to imagine some
global system of insurance against
natural disasters? This question has
often been debated and was studied
in some depth by the International
Relief Union during the years of its
active existence. The principal diffi¬
culty resides, of course, in the magni¬
tude and the uncertainty of the risks
involved.
However, with our steadily increas¬
ing knowledge of the natural pheno¬
mena and the recent rapid progress
in mathematical techniques for handl¬
ing statistical problems of this kind,
we may perhaps soon be able to
define the bases on which viable
insurance schemes may be established.
This is certainly a problem which would
repay intensive study by scientists,
mathematicians and insurance spe¬
cialists, working in close co-operation
with each other.
And so the lesson to be learnt from
the events of 1970 is quite clear.
Science and technology offer us the
means of foreseeing the violent
paroxysms of nature and of protecting
ourselves against them. Disasters of
the kind that happened last year can
be prevented in the future if, by a
concerted effort, we bring the scientific
technical and economic resources of
the world to bear on this problem.
27
