Last year, the International Social
Science Council, sponsored by
Unesco, held a World Symposium
in Tokyo to study social aspects
of environmental disruption.
All the following articles (with
the exception of the interview
with Mr. Boris Vo/tovski)
are based on the lively discussions
and presentations that marked
this Symposium. Speaking of
the real challenge facing
the social sciences with regard
to environmental disruption,
the Secretary-General of the
International Social Science
Council, Dr. S. Friedman,
underlined the importance of the
Symposium. It would, he said,
"draw the attention of
governments and international
agencies to the tasks which have
to be urgently undertaken to
protect man and society from
some of the greatest dangers
brought about by technological
development and environmental
changes."



O
G
A
I
Environmental disruption in Japan jj
the story of 3 cities
K 1/ \
6
by Shigeto Tsuru
A
j^r^^Japanese dictionary com¬
piled in 1955 and intended to cover
all the words currently in use in Japan
carries no mention of the word kogai.
But kogai has become one of the most
widely discussed issues in Japan.
The term kogai, which literally
means "disamenities inflicted on the
public", was first used in Japan's
Rivers Act of 1896, and has nowadays
come to gain wide currency, covering
not only environmental pollutions of all
kinds, but also various undesirable
side effects of economic activities.
When a wide circulation Tokyo daily
asked all the election candidates in
SHIGETO TSURU, a leading Japanese eco¬
nomist, is professor of economics at Hitot-
subashi University, Tokyo. He is head of
Japan's Economic Research Institute and a
member of his country's National Resources
Investigation Council.
December 1969 what Tokyo lacked
most, virtually all of them replied,
"clean air and a clear sky".
A classic example of kogai in
Japan is the story of Ashio, a town on
the Watarasé River, 100 kilometres
north of Tokyo. Copper was discov¬
ered there in 1610, and the Ashio mine
remained a top supplier of copper for
two centuries and a half under the
management of the central feudal
government of Tokugawa.
After the Meiji Restoration the mine
was transferred in 1871 to a private
firm, and from 1877 a process of
ruthless entrepreneurship turned it
into a major copper-refining centre.
But this modernization and the new¬
found prosperity of the copper indus¬
try inevitably brought spillover effects
of an undesirable kind. The first vic¬
tims, in 1880, were the fish in the
Watarasé River, tight years later it
'was the turn of the rice crops which
depended on the river for irrigation
(the Watarasé waters directly affected
200,000 hectares of cultivated and den¬
sely inhabited land). Finally, the health
of persons living along the river began
to suffer.
A protest movement against the
Ashio copper refining began in a
somewhat timid fashion and did not
make a dint in the composure of a
rising capitalistic firm. The copper
producers took a superior attitude by
denying any connexion between their
operation and the woes of the farmers
along the river.
By adopting a position of non¬
interference, the government of the
time actually sided with the copper
interest, for it would have been easy
for the government to launch an inves¬
tigation into the spillover effects of

.
These Japanese characters spell out the word "Kogai," which means "public harm",
or "public nuisance," and signifies pollution. Above, an aerial view of Keihin, the vast
conurbation comprising Tokyo, Yokohama and their suburbs. From this megalopolis
comes one-third of Japan's total industrial output. Above the horizon and the smoke
rises the distant peak of Japan's sacred Fuji Yama, long extolled by poets. Today
industrial smog increasingly hides Japan's highest mountain from its citizens.
copper-refining and to establish firmly
that the connexion alleged by the far¬
mers really existed.
The protest movement gained mo¬
mentum after Shozo Tanaka, an ener¬
getic Diet member from the region,
became its leader. Tanaka dramatized
the issue in the Diet, spent days and
nights with the farmers in consolidating
the protest organization, and finally
made a direct appeal to the Emperor
in 1901.
Tanaka's efforts wrested some
concessions from the copper firm and
induced the government to set up a
committee of investigation. But the
only concessions offered were the
payment of compensation, calculated
more to bribe village elders than to
justly recompense the damage caused,
and the promise that a "filtering
device" would be imported from Ger¬
many and installed. This turned out
to be a device for recovering re-usable
waste and did not bring the improve¬
ment which the farmers had been led
to expect.
The protest movement went on more
violently than before, reminiscent of the
tenant farmers' riots in the past. The
most radical protesters were farmers
from the village of Yanaka, and the
Photo Terud Yamada © Gamma, Paris
Calligraphy by Kimihiro Torii
government struck a fatal blow at the
movement by designating the Yanaka
area as reserve land for emergency
overflow from the Tone River. Farmers
were forced to leave the land and were
given a pittance as compensation. And
with this defeat the Ashio protest
movement was rapidly eclipsed.
It is characteristic of the story of
Ashio that the kogai problem was
fought mainly as a political issue and
never became a legal one. The source
of pollution was clearly identifiable
and should have led to the drafting of
new laws to cover strife of this kind.
But the legal specialists of the day
failed to respond to the challenge.
The spirit of the times was such that
nothing could be allowed to halt the
engine of economic growth and pros¬
perity. It was quite natural, for exam¬
ple, for the people of Yawata the first
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

KOGAI (Continued)
Growing outcry against our poisoned environment
major steel centre in Japan proudly
to sing in their municipal anthem:
Billows of smoke filling the sky
Our steel plant, a grandeur un¬
matched
Oh Yawata, Yawata, our cityl
No city today would advertise
"billows of smoke" in its sky.
The defeat in the last war crushed
the military ambition of Japan, which
for more than half a century had given
a peculiar twist to the country's poli¬
tical and economic development. With
the defeat, however, came a new and
immediate imperative of economic
rehabilitation, and at the nadir of eco¬
nomic activity in 1945, all other con¬
siderations appeared secondary.
In retrospect, some glaring cases of
kogai could be traced back to the
postwar years, but it was not until
around 1955 by which time Japan's
per capita income had regained the
prewar level of 1934-36 that the kogai
problem as a public issue started to
attract wide attention. Three incidents
in particular helped to dramatize the
issue: the kogai of the Yokkaichi petro-
Cleanairl Pure water I Less noise! These are the demands of
these demonstrators in Tokyo. Despite strict regulations enacted
over recent years, environmental pollution is rising in Japan and is
becoming a social problem of concern to young and old alike.
Photo © Orion Press, Tokyo
chemical centre, the methylmercury
poisoning in the Minamata area, and
the cadmium poisoning along the
Jintsu River.
The city of Yokkaichi faces the Bay
of Isé in central Japan. It started out
as a port city in modern times com¬
bined with a scenic bathing beach.
When, in 1955, the Mitsubishi-Shell
interest bought the former site of a
naval fuel depot and began construct¬
ing an oil-refining and petrochemical
complex, the city authorities saw the
possibility of transforming Yokkaichi
into a great industrial centre.
A group of "regional development"
experts was commissioned to draft a
"Yokkaichi Master Plan", and a gigan¬
tic piece of reclamation was begun
along the scenic seashore. The "plan"
spoke of "a birth of a new industrial
city with abundant sunlight and green
spaces"; but foresight was lacking.
There was no suggestion of moving
either the residential section along the
seashore or the congested urban cen¬
tre near the port facilities.
The result was that one of the best
residential sections, constructed by the
Yokkaichi municipality, lost its scenic
view of the bay and found itself sep¬
arated from a huge thermal electric
plant by only a narrow strip of road.
The first group of the petrochemical
complex (in the Shiohama area) was
completed in 1960, and the second
group (in the Umaokoshi area) in Nov¬
ember 1963. Industrial production in
the city grew by leaps and bounds.
Within five years shipments of manu¬
factured products more than doubled
in Yokkaichi compared with an already
impressive national growth rate of
70 per cent.
Meanwhile, spillover effects of in¬
dustrial operations, and particularly air
pollution, gradually became noticeable.
In 1959, one year after the first petro¬
chemical plant began operating, asth¬
matic complaints became unusually
frequent in the Shiohama area and the
death rate among older women sud¬
denly soared. As cases of this
bronchial ailment increased, it soon
became known as "Yokkaichi asthma"
and started attracting wide attention.
But respiratory troubles were only
one of the misfortunes of the citizens.
Indeed, Yokkaichi presented an
"ideal" case of kogai in multiple form.
Kogai in almost all its modern forms
the pollution of the air by sulphur
oxides, smoke and various kinds of
dust particles; noise and vibration;
water pollution; offensive odours
began to plague the people of Yokkai¬
chi about 1960.
The Municipal Health Centre kept a
record of all the complaints received
and these show a marked rising trend:
from 36 in 1960 to 670 in 1966. In
particular, complaints of offensive
odours suddenly soared after 1963.

The sources were identified in most
cases as volatile organic matters (such
as butadiene, naphtha, acrylic esters,
etc.) contained in the factory drainage
wastes. But ordinary citizens were not
the only ones to complain. Before
long, one spillover effect in Yokkaichi
began to harm the fishing industry.
At the mouth of the Suzuka River,
south of the Shiohama industrial area,
is a small fishing village. After 1960,
complaints were made that fish caught
in the traditional fishing grounds of the
Bay of Isé smelled peculiar, and soon
the fishermen were accusing the Miye
Thermal Plant which drained its cooling
waters at the mouth of the river near
the village.
The Electric Generating Company
would not take any action and as the
damage to fish increased, the fisher¬
men took the law into their own Bands,
by throwing sandbags into the drain¬
pipe. An intervention by the Prefectural
Governor brought a settlement by
compensation, but an investigation
clearly showed that the thermal plant
was only an intermediary in the dam¬
age caused.
The electricity company simply
pumped, up the harbour water from one
place for the purpose of cooling its
boilers and then drained it at another,
without adding anything or otherwise
changing the quality of the water. The
harbour water itself was polluted by
effluents from other factories facing
the harbour.
The "stench fish" incident attracted
nationwide publicity and added more
fuel to widespread complaints over
kogai in general by people from other
cities. This led the government to
appoint a special committee to look into
the entire range of kogai effects in
Yokkaichi. The committee submitted a
report and recommendations in March
1964.
National concern was further arous¬
ed by the death in April 1964 of a
63-year-old man, one of the victims
of air pollution in Yokkaichi. By now,
Yokkaichi had become known through¬
out Japan as a "city of kogai", a
reputation which drove it to wrestle
with its problems in deadly earnest,
and at the same time made it an
object lesson from which the central
government and other regions had
much to learn.
Compared with the case of Yokkai¬
chi, the story of Ashio, briefly touched
upon earlier, was technically an ex¬
tremely simple one. It had occurred in
the early stage of Japan's industria¬
lization when the imperative of pro¬
duction took precedence over public
welfare. If the Ashio copper-mining
company had had a modicum of social-
mindedness, it might have taken steps
at a much earlier stage either to reduce
the emission of pollutants or to com¬
pensate for the damage done.
But it comes as something of a
shock to realize that a case quite
similar to the example of Ashio has
occurred in present-day Japan, with the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Photo © Gamma, Paris
YEN FOR FRESH AIR. What is the world
coming to if we have to resort to a
coin-operated machine to get a whiff of fresh
air? Automatic apparatuses like the one
above are not an uncommon sight now on
Tokyo street-corners, glassy stare and all.
Will they be the coming attraction for Paris,
London, Rome and Los Angeles tomorrow?
9

KOGAI (Continued)
10
victims, rather than the offender, again
shouldering the burden of proof. The
case is that of the "Minamata Disease".
Minamata, a small city (pop. 50,000)
on the western coast of Kyushu Island,
is dominated by a single factory owned
by the New Japan Nitrogen Company
which manufactures, among other
chemical products, aceto-aldehyde by
the catalytic hydration of acetylene
with sulphate of mercury.
Early in 1953, reports came from one
part of the city that some cats, dogs
and crows had died in convulsions.
Soon, a number of persons developed
symptoms similar to those of the
stricken animals and on examination
were found to have suffered damage to
the central nervous system.
The death rate was as high as 40 per
cent and the disease was concentrated
among fishermen living in a certain
neighbourhood. No one knew what
had caused this lethal disease, but
medical specialists attacked the prob¬
lem and in November 1956 advanced
the hypothesis that the sickness had
some connexion with a heavy metal,
manganese for example, traces of
which had been found in fish and shell¬
fish in the Bay of Minamata.
But the scientists' investigations
were seriously handicapped by lack of
co-operation from the Nitrogen Com¬
pany, which declared that it had ceased
using manganese in 1953. It refused
either to have the factory drainage
tapped or to supply samples of chem¬
icals used in its production processes.
But research went on and in the
summer of 1959 a new hypothesis was
advanced which connected the disease
with methylmercury. About that time,
though the fact was not known until
much later, a certain Dr. Hosokawa
attached to the Nitrogen Company
hospital confirmed, through experi¬
ments on cats, that the factory drain¬
age wastes contained elements
capable of causing the "Minamata
Disease".
This invaluable research was kept
secret by the Nitrogen Company, but
apparently prompted it to settle the
question of compensation by the pay¬
ment of "condolence money" of
300,000 yen for each person who had
died and an annual award of 100,000
yen for each adult hit by the disease.
Even after the scientists had con¬
firmed the methylmercury hypothesis
they had still to prove that the com¬
pounds of this substance found in fish
and shell-fish had come from the Nitro¬
gen Company's production. This task,
which the Company's lack of co¬
operation had made extremely difficult,
was not made any easier by the atti¬
tude of the government.
The Ministry of International Trade
and Industry called in a specialist from
the Tokyo Institute of Technology, who
maintained that methylmercury was not
the culprit, and the Ministry apparently
made its influence felt in the decision
that was taken to discontinue all
further official investigations into the
Minamata Disease beyond 1959.
But the original group of researchers
continued its studies and, ironically
enough, it was assisted indirectly by
the Nitrogen Company whose decision
to change the drainage site after Sep¬
tember 1958 provided an opportunity
for new and objective experiments.
Observation of the geographical distri¬
bution of new patients and analyses
made near the new and old drainage
sites helped to confirm the earlier sus¬
picions that the methylmecury found in
fish and shell-fish had in fact come
from the factory effluents.
By 1964 practically all the links in
the chain including the process
through which inorganic mercury used
by the Company transformed itself
into organic mercury were scientifi¬
cally established.
Minamata Disease victims numbered
116 by the end of 1969 of whom 45
had died. More than ten of the victims
had apparently been affected during
their fetal development.
The number of new cases has been
drastically reduced since 1960 when
the Nitrogen Company installed a spe¬
cial sewage facility. But the case of
the Minamata Disease lingers on in
the form of litigation currently in the
courts, and also through its outbreak
in another area (the lower stream of
the Agano River in 1964-65) which has
refocused public interest on the dra¬
matic problem of methylmercury poi¬
soning.
One striking aspect of the Minamata
incident is that workers employed by
the Nitrogen Company, though appar¬
ently aware early on of the facts that
the Company was trying to conceal,
did nothing to aid the victims of the
sickness. It was only much later, in
1967, that some of these workers,
writing in their union publication, ad¬
mitted they had been at fault.
Why this happened is a problem that
calls for a close scrutiny of relations
between management and labour in an
enterprise such as the Nitrogen Com¬
pany. All in all, the Minamata incident
poses an extremely interesting social
scientific problem, arising from the im¬
pact of kogai upon the complex net¬
work of social and political relations
in a rural industrial city.
What is now known as cadmium poi¬
soning apparently existed even before
the war in a region along the Jintsu
River and was called "itai-itai disease"
("aching disease") by the local people.
Until the cause of this ailment was
traced to effluents of metal mining, it
was commonly diagnosed as dietic
deficiency and some patients improv¬
ed after taking heavy doses of vita¬
min D.
The symptoms are grinding pains
all over the body, but especially
around the pubic bone, and vulner¬
ability to bone fractures. The disease
was found to have a high incidence
among fecund women. According to
CONTINUED PAGE 12

WW
V
._v
Hífr
_ I
; I 0 L-
Jf
ITAI-ITAI, THE ACHING DISEASE. These twisted hands belong to a
Japanese afflicted by " itai-itai", or "aching disease", an illness with a
50 per cent mortality rate that, in 1946, struck people living on the banks
of the Jintsu River. A zinc factory situated upstream which used cadmium
in its refining processes had poisoned the lower reaches of the river and the
adjoining paddy fields. It was not until 1968 that the government officially
designated "itai-itai " as a pollution disease and thus was in a position to
combat the phenomenon.
Photos C KPS, Tokyo
$
-'ii
ife
,v*
Above, not the cracked earth of drought-stricken farmland, but the crust formed by evaporation of deadly liquid
wastes from a nitrogen factory at Minamata, Japan, discharged into a recently constructed purification
reservoir. In 1953, the town of Minamata was struck by a mysterious malady against which doctors were
powerless. Its victims suffered unendurable agony and 45 died. Children were born paralyzed, blind
and deaf. A long inquiry proved that "Minamata disease" was caused by methylmercury used in the
manufacture of nitrogen, then allowed to drain into the sewers and contaminate the water. Recent measures
have considerably reduced the risks, but a vile smell still pervades Minamata. Right, a demonstration by the
people of Minamata who adopted a novel method of bringing pressure to bear on the management of the
nitrogen factory by buying up shares and protesting at company meetings as shareholders. In the foreground
are displayed photographs of young victims of the disease. The characters repeated on the banners in the
background represent the Japanese word "on" meaning "anger."

Photo Kenji Koids © Orion Press
12
KO GAl (Continued)
a doctor who has treated 260 cases of
itai-itai since 1946, the death rate is
as high as 50 per cent.
As in the case of the methylmercury
poisoning at Minamata, it was the
patient research of a few private citi¬
zens that identified the cause of the
disease as cadmium contained in
effluents from a zinc-refining factory
on the Jintsu River.
The original hypothesis linking cad¬
mium with the itai-itai disease was
advanced in 1960. The following year
the local government launched a
research programme and in 1963 the
central government, too, decided to
allocate funds for an investigation.
But it was not until 1968 that a
Ministry of Welfare announcement
identified the itai-itai disease as cad¬
mium poisoning and designated it as a
kogai disease. Although the company
concerned did nothing to obstruct the
investigation, the early stage of the
work by several devoted scientists
was given a cold reception, and the
major financial aid at the time came
from the United States.
The connexion between cadmium
and itai-itai is now well known. The
unusually large amounts of cadmium
found in the Jintsu River came from a
zinc-refining plant upstream at Ka-
mioka. The river flows northwards
very rapidly for a stretch of about
15 kilometres along which earth carried
and deposited by the current has
raised the river bed to a higher level
than the rice fields on both sides.
This alluvial fan formation causes
the river to flood almost every year,
carrying dirt and sand containing
cadmium onto the adjoining fields.
This explains why the itai-itai victims
were found only along this stretch of
river and why the local rice habitually
contained an excessive concentration
of cadmium.
All three cases the Yokkaichi
kogai, methylmercury poisoning and
cadmium poisoning are now the
subject of claims for damages in the
courts. In the postwar decades up
to 1967, 35 cases of kogai litigation
have been recorded in Japan, of which
20 were related to noise and vibration,
seven to water pollution, seven to
sunshine amenity and one to offensive
odours. But in none of these cases
did the damage claims amount to
much, and the legal framework in
which they were handled was a tradi¬
tional one in the sense that the gen¬
eral law prescribing damages or
compensation for injury or prejudice
caused was applied.
But the new suits arising from the
three cases already described are
being heard at a time when public
opinion has been increasingly alerted
to the problems of kogai, and thus
give to legal problems a new dimen¬
sion which challenges the adaptability
of present laws to modern industrial
conditions.
In many ways the Yokkaichi suit is
a test case because numerous plain¬
tiffs and defendants are involved and
because the specific link between the
damage suffered by the plaintiffs and
actions of the defendants is practi¬
cally impossible to prove even by the
lenient criterion of "preponderance of
evidence." The court faces a difficult
task of handling a case without a legal
framework pertinent to the purpose.
In 1958, an incident occurred near
Tokyo in which 700 fishermen rioted
against a paper mill whose drainage
was held responsible for damaging
their fishing. The incident, in which
64 policemen were injured, was not a
sudden affair, but the culmination of
a series of negotiations involving the
company, the fishermen's association
and the metropolitan government in
Tokyo, during which the fishermen's pa¬
tience had been strained to the limit.
The incident was settled by the
enforcement of an injunction order on
the company's operation; and some¬
what hurriedly, the same year, the

Sorcerer's
apprentice?
Seemingly indispensable in the
kitchen and factory, detergents
are highly undesirable in lakes
and rivers where they quickly
poison animal and plant life.
Even small amounts whip up
into masses of foaming scum,
as on this Japanese river (far
left). Today, "foamless"
detergents exist that can be
easily broken down by bacteria.
In some countries their use is
now obligatory, but in many
cases the damage is done
and all life in lakes and
waterways has ceased to exist.
Even modern sewage plants
cannot cope with mountains of
detergent foam which have to
be destroyed by teams using
special equipment (left). Like
the Sorcerer's Appentice in
Goethe's ballad and Paul Dukas'
music, modern technology
conjures up but cannot always
control its chemical marvels
Photo © Camera Press-Parimage, Paris
government enacted two new bills
related to water pollution control the
Water Quality Conservation Act and
the Drainage Regulation Act which
became harbingers of kogai legisla¬
tion in the following decade.
But really serious efforts to draw
up new laws on kogai problems only
began in 1963 when the then Minister
of Welfare, Mr Kobayashi, proposed
an umbrella legislation on pollution
control in general, followed, in 1965,
by the setting up of a government
commission (the Kogai Commission)
to study the problem.
In August 1966, the Commission
submitted an interim report in which
for the. first time in Japan a systematic
philosophy dealing with the kogai
problem was spelled out. Its main
points can be summarized as follows:
In the light of private law, res¬
ponsibility for kogai, in principle, lies
with the persons at the source;
Such responsibility is not affect¬
ed by questions of intention or negli¬
gence;
Costs of prevention and elimina¬
tion of kogai shall be borne by the
persons at its source;
The setting up of a buffer zone
to neutralize the effects of kogai
should be an integral part of urban
planning, and responsibility for such
arrangements including their cost
should be shared by the central
government and by local authorities;
Pollution control should give
higher priority to the quality of the
environment than to the specific
limitation of effluents;
Compensation for damage should
be based on offensive effects that
exceed the normally accepted tol¬
erance limit.
Several representatives of industry
on the Commission strongly opposed
a number of points. But when the
Commission submitted its final report
to the government in October 1966,
the basic philosophy remained more
or less intact and became the basis
for new legislation the Basic law
for Environmental Pollution Control
(Kogai Taisaku Kihon-ho), which was
adopted by the Diet in July 1967.
The Basic Law is a kind of charter
which sets out a general programme
of action but leaves the actual appli¬
cation to specific legislations and
administrative decisions.
The question of spillover effects or
external diseconomies is directly link¬
ed to the kind of institutions found in
a particular economy. Japan's eco¬
nomy is a capitalistic one in which
private firms are the basic autono
mous units. In the early days of
capitalistic development the principle
of "As ye sow, so shall ye reap"
prevailed within the factory bound¬
aries, and any nuisance caused out¬
side those boundaries was considered
"external" in terms of the firm's
financial operations. If and when the
external effect attained proportions
large enough to cause damage to a
third person or the public as a whole,
legal action of one kind or another
was taken.
With the advent of modern techno¬
logy and the tremendously increased
operations of even a single factory,
coupled with urban development,
"external" effects have acquired a
new dimension and it is quite clear
that the old principle of "As ye sow,
so shall ye reap" can no longer be
encompassed within the narrow cost
accounting of an individual firm.
In other words, the social character
of the production process has become
so important that the freedom of
private enterprise can no longer
remain unqualified. Thus a conflict
arises between the traditional arran¬
gement of the Japanese economy and
the consequences of vastly develop¬
ed productive forces, thereby creating
the tensions and problems that have
arisen in the present stage of Japan's
social and economic development.
13
