THE THOUSAND AND ONE NIGHTS
or The secret
of Scheherazade
by Michel Léturmy
Vivid ¡mages of Islamic customs and life in medieval times emerge
from the pages of "The Thousand and One Nights", In stories
that often evoke settings as enchanting as this courtyard of the
Royal mosque in Isfahan (below). Left, drawing by the 19th cent¬
ury French artist, Paul Gavarni, for the tale of the Magic Horse.
Photo © Henri Stlerlln, Geneva
.-

I
N this strange world,"
said Bernard Shaw, "you never can
telll" When a genie materializes from
a bottle and accuses someone of
killing his son... Well, that's what fairy
tales are made of. But when a young
girl named Scheherazade tells the
Sultan the story of a genie who
materialized from a bottle and accused
someone of killing his son..., that's no
longer a fairy tale, for if Schehera¬
zade falters in her story, or if the
Sultan so much as yawns, she will
lose her life.
No, you never can telll When
someone tells you that Scheherazade
saved her neck and halted a massacre
by telling the Sultan the story of a
genie who materialized from a bottle...
that's make believe! But when, about
the year 1700, Antoine Galland dis¬
covered that behind the seven Arabian
tales he was publishing there lay a
thousand and one nights of tales and
a Scheherazade to tell them, he
realized that this wasn't make believe
at all, and that he had just discovered
a new world. Can one ever really tell
how things will turn out?
Indeed one can'tl Galland, for ins¬
tance, thought he had reached the
Arab world, yet, without knowing it, he
had stumbled across Iran.
Even a great orientalist, then, could
be taken in by a remarkably well-
assimilated Arabic-speaking, Moslem
Scheherazade, decked out in Arab
garb. The names, Scheherazade and
Shahriyar, to be sure, were Iranian, but
perhaps they had been introduced just
to lend a touch of the exotic.
The language may not have been
the purest Arabic, yet it was indeed
Arabic, of that Galland was sure. Nor
was Islam pictured in very orthodox
terms: there were génies, fairies and
talismans what we would call "ma¬
gic", but what our grandmothers had
quite simply called "marvels".
Were A Thousand and One Nights,
in fact, Arab tales? Antoine Galland
himself might have been bewitched!
The sceptical orientalists who came
after him put Scheherazade to the
ordeal of a historical and textual inqui¬
sition. Name? First name? Parents'
date and place of birth? Like so many
police detectives they "grilled" the
ancient chroniclers.
Here, for example, is what Mas'udi,
a tenth century Arab historiographer,
wrote in a passage of his Golden
MICHEL LETURMY has made a speciality of
the great literature of the Orient. He Is the
author of an edition of the Arabian Nights
as Told to Children ("Les Mille et Une Nuits
Racontées aux Enfants", 1958) and of the
Club Français du Livre's Special Edition of
"Les Mille et Une Nuits" (The Thousand and
One Nights) with Notes and Introduction,
(1956). His "Dieux, Héros et Mythes" (Gods,
Heroes and Myths) deals with the mythologies
of different peoples and cultures, including
those of Iran. He is the co-author {with
Prof. M. Hamidullah) of a translation of the
Koran, republished this year, and (with
I. Grosjean) of a new translation of the Greek
New Testament (Bibliothèque de la Pléiade,
Ed. Gallimard, Paris, 1971.)
Prairies in which he cited the works
of fiction translated from Persian:
"The book, entitled in Persian Hezar
Efzaneh (A Thousand Tales) belongs
to this category of works; it Is better
known to the (Arab) public under the
name A Thousand and One Nights.
It is the story of a king and his vizier,
and of the vizier's daughter and a slave
who are called Shirazad and Dinazad."
Notice that Mas'udi wrote "entitled in
Persian."
At about the same time (10th
century), another Arab, Ibn al-Nadim,
was compiling a bibliography in which
he stated: "Mohammed ibn Abdus,
author of the Book of the Viziers, had
begun a collection of a thousand tales
borrowed from the Arabs, the Persians
and the Greeks. He sent for the
authors and took his pick of the best
they had to offer; at the same time, he
was taking extracts from books of
narratives and tales. In this way he
put together 480 nights, each one
containing a complete story of approxi¬
mately fifty pages. He died before he
could complete his thousand tales."
S
'TARTING with these state¬
ments, orientalists were able to trace
the history of A Thousand and One
Nights a little more closely. It is
thought that the Persian Thousand
Tales that Mas'udi mentions were
translated into Arabic during the 8th
century and were first entitled A
Thousand Nights. It is also believed
that some Arab tales were added in
the 9th century and that by the 16th
century the collection was in its defin¬
itive form, perhaps as a result of the
Mameluke conquest of Syria and the
conquest of Egypt by Selim I. This
might also explain why, finally, the
Thousand and One Nights settled
down in Cairo where they multiplied
and lived happily ever after.
There remained the task of making
a critical examination of the book to
find out whether it bore any traces
of its wanderings across boundaries
and through time. Basically four
groups of tales can be distinguished:
a group of Indian origin, a narrative
cycle connected with Baghdad, another
which came to be referred to as the
cycle of sea tales, and a final group
formed in Cairo.
In the Indian group the genie is king.
But the génies in these tales are
Moslem (faithful servants or harmful
spirits), who were mastered and
converted long after the tales about
them were first told. Metamorphoses
Into stones and beasts are common¬
place and animals speak. Yet though
these miraculous changes are wrought,
of course, in the name of Allah and
according to his will, one cannot help
but see in them watered down ver¬
sions of more ancient metempsy¬
choses.
In the tales of the second group the
fabulous gives way to the romantic;
they are tales of Intrigue, love or
manners. We walk the streets of
Baghdad, by day and by night, in the
company of the famous 9th century
Caliph Haroun al-Raschid; and if
magical ploys from India are introduc¬
ed, this is only done to help the plot
along.
The story of Sinbad the Sailor
clearly belongs in the sea cycle. His
Voyages have often been published
separately (Galland had translated
them before he discovered A Thousand
and One Nights.) But their character¬
istics can be found in many other tales.
"The wonder springs from an inex¬
tricable mixture of true and false. It is
the saga of the first navigators to use
the compass, the gnomon and the
astrolabe, the Odyssey of those who,
after reading Pliny and Strabo, finally
discovered the lamas of Tibet and the
white whales," writes Nadjim oud-Dine
Bammate in his study Themes and
Rhythms of A Thousand and One
Nights.
The Cairo group, with its mixture of
ancient and modern tales, is more
difficult to identify. At times the
fabulous seems to exceed all bounds;
at times It gives way completely to
satire and the picaresque. Thus, the
fabulous dominates the account of
Sinbad's seventh voyage, as revised
and corrected by the Egyptian story¬
teller.
Altogether, the investigation of the
text had got off to a bad start. It is
difficult to see how this investigation,
which talks of India, Iraq and Egypt
(having missed out Iran entirely) can
be reconciled with the testimony of
the old chroniclers who maintained
that A Thousand and One Nights came
to us from Iran.
But the wonder of A Thousand and
One Nights lies not so much in the
imaginativeness and the charm of the
tales, but In nature of the book itself
which was able to reunite and make
into a whole tales from so many dif¬
ferent sources. And Iran gave us the
story-teller, the young Scheherazade,
without whom none of this could have
existed.
Thus if we were to attempt may
Scheherazade pardon us to make an
orderly summary, we might say that
India and the Arab empire furnished
the material (fabulous myth and com¬
edy of manners), into which Islam
breathed the spirit.
But nothing would have been
created from these two elements had
not Iran embodied them in the only
literary form in which they could meet
and live. The spotlight falls on
Scheherazade, daughter of Iran, and
on her own story, into which could
be assimilated everything moving, sad,
funny, astonishing that the world had
to offer. The story of A Thousand and
One Nights is the story of Schehera¬
zade herself.
"Once upon a time, long, long
ago...
Shahzenan, king of Samarkand and
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
41

THE SECRET OF SCHEHERAZADE (Continued)
ALADDIN
AND THE
WONDERFUL
LAMP
Aladdin, Ali Baba and Sindbad the
Sailor are among the most popular
heroes of the tales in "The Thousand
and One Nights", tales which appeal
alike to children and grown-ups the
world over. Here, the famous puppets
of Sergei Obraztsov at the Moscow
Puppet Theatre enact two scenes
from Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp.
Above, from right, Aladdin, his fiancee,
his mother, the astrologer and the
sultan. Below, Princess Boudour. After
many adventures, Aladdin wins her
hand.
Upper Tartary, was invited to the
palace of his brother Shahriyar, king
of India and China. He had scarcely
left the city when he realized he had
forgotten one of the gifts he had
prepared for his brother. Returning
unexpectedly to the palace, he came
upon his wife asleep in the arms of
her lover. He killed them both and
returned to the caravan. But by the
time he reached his brother's palace,
he was wasted away by the grief that
tormented him. This continued until
one day he saw Shahriyar's wife giving
herself up to debauchery with her
maids and slaves.
The two brothers learned a lesson
from their misfortune and left the city,
determined to withdraw from the
world. But when they reached the
coast, they met a genie who made a
very beautiful young girl appear from
a glass casket. No sooner had the
genie fallen asleep than the girl grant¬
ed them her favours, adding their two
rings to the ninety-eight she had
received from other lovers. Shahriyar,
deciding that the genie was even
unhappier than he, returned to the
capital to take revenge, not only on
the queen, but also on all women.
He would marry a different one each
night and have her put to death the
next morning.
The decree was carried out and the
whole city mourned. But nothing, not
even so much bloodshed, could as¬
suage the Sultan's thirst for ven¬
geance. At this point Scheherazade,
the vizier's daughter, decided to put
an end to the massacre. So she said
to the vizier: "O my father, I have a
favour to ask of you." When the
vizier replied that he would grant any
reasonable request, Scheherazade
declared: "I have decided to put a
stop to the king's barbarity which
weighs so heavily upon the city. In
the name of Allah, arrange for my
marriage to him."
Aghast, the vizier replied: "Allah
be with you, have you lost your
senses-" "No", replied Scheherazade,
"for if I die, my death will be a ransom
for the others; if I succeed I shall have
performed a great service to my city.
You must grant me this boon".
Scheherazade also obtained the Sul¬
tan's permission to bring with her her
younger sister, Dinarzade, who at the
approach of dawn would say "O my
sister, if you are still awake, tell us
one of those delightful stories you
know, for this is perhaps the last time
that I shall be able to enjoy that
pleasure." This "last time" was to be
renewed night after night a thousand
and one times, thanks to the talent of
the story-teller and her cunning in
breaking off her narrative at the most
exciting moment.
On the thousand and first night, the
Sultan granted Scheherazade permis¬
sion to bring before him the three
male children she had borne him. One
was walking, one crawling, and the
third was still a babe in arms. Placing
them before the king she said, "O king
.of the century, here are your children.
I ask you to spare me because of
these little ones, for if you kill me
they will be motherless and no other
woman will be able to raise them."
Hearing these words the king wept.
Pressing the children to his breast
he said, "O Scheherazade, by Allah I
pardoned you even before the children
came, because I saw that you were
chaste and pure, intelligent and pious."
Thus Scheherazade emerged from
her duel with death not only alive but
triumphant. For though, for a thou¬
sand and one -nights, she is lost to
our sight behind the skilful smoke¬
screen of her narrative, we can never
forget that all the time she is but a
story's-length from death.
S
'INCE Shahriyar's day, mil¬
lions of men, anxious to know the
meaning of life, have been enchanted.
The story of Scheherazade was only
just beginning. Good-hearted, but not
overconcerned about acknowledging
her sources, she refused no invita¬
tions, inspiring the Mongol tales, A
Thousand and One Evenings, the
Peruvian A Thousand and One Hours,
the Tartar stories, A Thousand and
One Quarter Hours, and the Syrian
tales, Five Hundred and a Half Morn¬
ings.
She was patroness of many others,
even in France; A Thousand and One
Favours (1716), A Thousand and One
Platitudes (1742), A Thousand and One
Follies (1785). At about the same
time, in response to more pressing
invitations, she founded a whole col¬
lection, Le Cabinet des Fées, which
included Cazotte and Chavis' Evenings
of Sultan Shahriyar. Meanwhile Cré-
billon the younger wrote his Sopha in
which he claimed to depict the spine-
lessness of the "grandson of that
magnanimous Shahriyar".
To Godefroy Demombynes she
revealed a Berber version of A Thou¬
sand and One Nights and sent for a
certain dervish from Isfahan to relate
to Pétis le Croix the story of A Thou¬
sand and One Days.
Diderot found himself writing Les Bi¬
joux Indiscrets; Voltaire set his Zadig
"at the time when the Arabs and the
Persians were beginning to write A
Thousand and One Nights"; Montes¬
quieu played at being a Persian and
wrote his satirical Lettres Persanes;
Théophile Gautier arranged an "Orient
and Cairo", in Rue Le Peletier, where,
dressed as a Persian, he had the
Thousand and Second Night recited
to him.
But by now Scheherazade was not
to be satisfied with literature alone.
From Rimsky-Korsakov she got a
magnificent symphonic suite (1888)
and a composition for voice and
orchestra from Ravel (1903). With
Diaghilev's help she conquered the
Ballets Russe (1910); in May 1914 she
was seen at the Opéra Comique where
she presented Marouf, the Cobbler of

Photo © Glraudon, Paris

A THOUSAND
AND ONE
'FIRST NIGHTS'
The tales of "The Thousand and One Nights", many of which came from 9th century Iran, are
now part of the world's great heritage of folklore. In the past 20 years alone, translations of
these masterpieces of story-telling have been made in 40 countries. Choreographers and musicians
too have long been inspired by the enchanting tales. Above left, costume designed for the sul¬
tana in the Diaghilev Ballet Company's work, "Scheherazade", presented in Paris in 1910. Cos¬
tumes and scenery for the ballet, set to the music of Rimsky-Korsakov, were designed by the
Russian artist Leon Bakst Right, illustration for a French translation of the "Nights" shows
Aladdin's meeting with the magician. Centre, scene from one of Sindbad the Sailor's voyages, by
the famous French book illustrator Gustave Doré.
Cairo. "Later she broke into the
cinema spawning countless screen
Sinbads, Aladdins and Ali Babas.
There was a "Scheherazade myst¬
ery" and everyone tried to penetrate
the secret.
For the most marvellous thing about
the tale is not that Scheherazade held
her brutish husband in breathless sus¬
pense for a thousand and one nights,
nor that she managed to bend the
will of a powerful potentate. The
wonder is that we believe in it, and
the story-teller, far from seeming out
of place in our twentieth century,
western world, succeeds in jolting us
out of our epoch.
And therein lies part of her secret.
Scheherazade could never have come
down through the ages to us had she
not been borne along by the world she
revealed to us. And this world would
not have borne her along had she not
been the expression of its fullness and
its rhythm. Scheherazade was invin¬
cible because she reflected, above all,
a world in movement.
Here is how Nadjim-oud-Dine Barn-
mate describes this world in his
Themes and Rhythms of a Thousand
and One Nights. "It is a world in
which nothing is impossible, where
each one of our actions has incalcu¬
lable consequences, where objects
have their own indomitable, myste¬
rious life and are not in truth what they
appear to be.
"The fisherman uncorks a bottle, but
in so doing he frees a giant. The
cook thinks that she is frying fish,
but really she is summoning a fairy
who breaks through the kitchen wall,
magic bamboo wand in hand. The
world is without causality, or rather
it is subject to a series of trigger
mechanisms, of actions and reactions,
more profoundly secret than our
causality, and whose meaning escapes
us. The world is forever being turned
upside-down.
"In A Thousand and One Nights, the
capricious fantasy of events is balanc¬
ed by the consistency of human types.
The sultan, the sultana, the young
princes and princesses, viziers, mer¬
chants, judges, saints, harnais, procu¬
resses, fairies, shrewd merchants
knights, barbers, navigators, brigands,
astrologers, calligraphers and lovers
all speak and act as their rôles
demand.
T
HUS through the story¬
telling technique we begin to get an
idea of the landscape in which Sche¬
herazade moves, "a multi-faceted
character", writes Bammate, "faithful
to her legend, who finds herself
thrown into a whirlpool of unpredict¬
able events."
And this landscape is the panorama
of life itself (a life created out of
words). For if Scheherazade has the
power to summon génies and fairies
so that Camaralzaman can find the
princess Boudour, only to lose her
again, it is clear that there is no fixed
boundary between life and story.
Behind her back another story-teller
is pulling the puppet strings and
making up the tale that begins,
"Once upon a time a young maiden
named Scheherazade..."
Scheherazade was not born heroic;
she decided to become a heroine only
when this was the only choice open
to her. That was her style and her
secret. First of all, she knew how to
choose the right moment. Not too
early, not too late. It would have been
reckless to start too early; first Shah¬
riyar had to prove his inflexibility.
So Scheherazade counted the girls
who fell one a day and every day
calculated how many remained. She
still had some leeway before her turn
came after all, she was a vizier's
daughter. But she could not wait too
long until the knife was at her throat.
Instead she would go and confront
the sultan. But how? This was her
second stroke of genius; she realized
she no more had a choice of means
than she had of timing. Force was out
of the question; she had no desire to
die a martyr.
There remained one last way, the
very one for which Scheherazade felt
herself suited strategy. Attract the
enemy away from his familiar battle¬
field; draw the man into a woman's
world; astonish him before he has
time to recover and then immediately
rouse his curiosity in such a way that
he imagines he is still in command
(I won't execute her until she's finish¬
ed her story about the beggar).
Thus we learn from Scheherazade
that everything is a matter of strategy,
of humour and of language.
Is there anyone who has not sought,
despite the thousand pitfalls life
strews in his path, the lost treasure or
the enchanted city that each one of
us sets out to conquer? To find the
treasure, to lift the spell that hangs
over the city or over paradise, to risk
everything on the voyage and, if pos¬
sible, to remember the way back...
And if at times the legend lies quies¬
cent, word of it roams the world, from
Genesis and Gilgamesh to Le Grand
Meaulnes by way of The Holy Grail.
It wanders, more or less unsullied,
awakening in passing in those with
half an eye open, the deepest aspira¬
tions of mankind. Such is the mes¬
sage the Nights bring to us from
Iran.
43
