YOUTH OF
YOUTH OF
by René Maheu
Director-General of Unesco
On November 4. 1971, uJsco'tili twenty-five years o) d.
To those who have served Unesco throughout this quarter of a century, giving
unstintingty of themselves and being rewarded a hundredfold by the exhilaration that
cornes from dedication to man in a !) his universality, this anniversary provides a wealth
of materia ! for reminiscence and reftection concerning thé pasto
But it is to the future that t took. The future is the true dimension of Unesco which
has as its mission to usher in a new spirit and which draws its whole strength from
the hope inhérent in its purpose. My thoughts turn to those who were not yet born
when Unesco was created, the young people who are the future of the world and who
make up more than half its population.
tt was fitting to ask a young person, who had played no direct part in the history of
Unesco, to tett thé story of our first twenty-five years, as he himself saw them with
the clear, fresh eye of youth. Those of us who have lived this history have lived it
chiefly for the young peopte of his generation, ever since that"great and terrible
war"when everything was so nearly lost, up until today when our efforts-with ail
their shortcomings-are under the sweeping scrutiny of tomorrow's générations. And
it is precise ! y on them that Unesco's tomorrow dépends. Even if they may misjudge
certain aspects of our activities or some of our intentions can we fait to ask youth
about their attitudes towards our work and whether or not it cornes up to their
expectation ?
! n thé past twenty-five years Unesco has had to face situations and tasks that its
founders had never foreseen such as the cold'war of the Fifties and aid for develop-
ment in the Sixties. Unesco thereby has demonstrated a capacity for adaptation and
invention which testifies to its vitatity, and at the same time it has shown a remarkabte
insight into present-day realities and their probable aftermath.
These qualities will be especially needed in the immediate years ahead which, 1 feel
sure, wit ! see the opening up of a new era. Here i am not referring to political
4

events, to m. difications in relations between States-although some very important
changes are already ernergin'g on the horizon ; 1 am thinking of those more profound
transformatians that are now taking place in the thinking and actions of men which
are bringing into questicn the very meaning of life and the order o# society.
LMOST everywhere, especially amongst thé younger age groups, it seems
to be increasingly felt that the quality of life of the individual is the only real justification
for the efforts made to promote growth and prosperity in a community. It is clear
that the quality of life sought by many persons-including those who choose with-
drawal from society or the path of revoit-ca ! ! s for a re-examination of currentty
accepted values. Development is coming less and less to be equated with growth
pure and simple. Growth for what ? is the often heard question.
We can therefore be quite sure that education, science, culture and communic-
ations, that. is, learning and training, research and the creativity of the mind which
enable man to exptain his existence and give purpose to life, will be matters of the
utmost concern for governments and citizens alike in the quarter of a century to
come. This is atready the case with education. What has been catted the crisis in
education, or more properly, the need for the total regeneration of education, is
clearly evident in different forms and to varying degrees ait over the world. For some,
this"crisis"is merely a symptom heralding the approach of a vast cultural revolution.
Faced with such great changes, the focus of which is still unclear, it is not unfitting that
Unesco in its youth should be entrusted to the youth of the world. Their destinies
are inséparable.
THE WORLD
UNESCO
5
