Member of a Chinese embassy sent to Cam¬
bodia in 1296 on a mission lasting almost a
year. Chou Ta-kuan wrote the only eye¬
witness account known to exist of the
Khmer kingdom at the height of its splend¬
our. His invaluable "Notes on the Customs
of Cambodia " became famous In China. It
was an excellent piece of reporting, full of
life and acutely-observed detail, as may be
judged from the extracts below. It was not
until 1902 that Chou Ta-kuan's Notes were
translated in full by the eminent French
Oriental scholar Paul Pelliot. These extracts
are taken from J. Gilman d'Arcy Paul's
translation of Pelliot's version in French,
published by the Social Science Association
Press, Bangkok in 1967.

Notes
of a 13th century
Chinese diplomat
in Cambodia
by Chou Ta-kuan
I O the Chinese the country called Cambo¬
dia is known as Ch'en-la or Ch'an-la and to its inhabitants
as Kan-po-chih (Kam boja). The present dynasty, drawing
on Tibetan religious lore, calls the country Kan-p'u-chih, a
name phonetically allied to Kan-po-chih.
The Royal Palace, as well as official buildings and homes
of the nobles, all face to the east. The Royal Palace stands
to the .north of the Golden Tower and the Bridge of Gold.
In the chamber where the Sovereign attends to affairs of
state, there is a golden window, with mirrors disposed on
square columns to the right and left of the window, forty or
so in number. Below the window is a frieze of elephants.
Every man or woman, from the Sovereign down, knots the
hair and leaves the shoulders bare. Round the waist they
wear a small strip of cloth, over which a larger piece is
drawn when they leave their houses. Many rules, based on
rank, govern the choice of materials.
Only the ruler may wear fabrics woven in an all-over
pattern. On his head he carries a diadem much like those
worn by the vajradhara; at times he lays aside the diadem
and weaves into his hair a garland of fragrant blossoms re¬
minding one of jasmine.
Only the womenfolk of the commoners are permitted to
stain the soles of their feet and the palms of their hands.
This is forbidden to men. The wearing of fabrics patterned
with recurring groups of flowers is permitted to high officers
and princes. Ordinary mandarins are allowed to wear only
material with two groups of flowers, and women of the peo¬
ple may do likewise. Should a Chinese, newly arrived, wear
cloth with two groups of flowers, it cannot be charged
against him, for he is "An-ting pa-sha", "a man who does
not know the rules."
When functionaries go out in public, their insignia and the
number of their attendants are regulated according to rank.
The highest dignitaries use palanquins with golden shafts
and four parasols with handles of gold; those next in rank
have a palanquin with golden shafts and two gold-handled
parasols; then come those entitled to one palanquin with
gold shafts and one gold-handled parasol; and finally those
with only a gold-handled parasol. Further down the line
come those permitted only a silver-handled parasol.
For ordinary correspondence, as well as official docu¬
ments, deer-skin or similar parchment is used, which is
dyed black. The parchment is cut by the scribe in sizes to
suit his needs. A sort of powder resembling Chinese chalk
is moulded into small sticks called so, which are used to
inscribe the parchment with lasting characters. When
finished with writing, they place the so behind the ear. The
nature of the characters makes it possible to recognize the
writer. Rubbed with something moist, they disappear. All
documents are read from left to right, and not from above
to below.
In Cambodia the New Year begins with the tenth Chinese
moon, and is called chia-te. In front of the royal palace a
great platform is erected, sufficient to hold more than a
thousand persons, and decorated from end to end with
lanterns and flowers. Opposite this, some hundred and
twenty feet distant, rises a lofty scaffold, put together of
light pieces of wood, shaped like the scaffolds used in
building stupas, and towering to a height of one hundred and
twenty feet. Every night from three to six of these structures
arise. Rockets and fire-crackers are placed on top of these
all this at great expense to the provinces and the noble
families. As night comes on, the King is besought to take
part in the spectacle. The rockets are fired, and the crack¬
ers touched off. The rockets can be seen at a distance of
thirteen kilometres: the fire-crackers, large as swivel-guns,
shake the whole city with their explosions.
Every month a festival is held. The fourth month they
have ball games. With the ninth month comes the ya-lieh
or census, when the entire population of the kingdom is
summoned to the capital and passed in review before the
royal palace. With the fifth month comes the ceremony of
"bringing water to the Buddhas." Then Buddhas are car¬
ried from all over the kingdom, water is procured, and the
ruler lends a hand in cleansing them. The festival of floats
marks the sixth month, with the King enthroned on a
belvedere to enjoy the spectacle.
"The burning of the rice" marks the seventh month. This
is the season for harvesting the new rice, which is brought
to the South Gate and burned as a sacrifice to the Buddha.
Countless women arrive in carts or on elephants to watch
this ceremony, but the ruler is not to be seen. The eighth
is the month of ai-lan, or dancing. Every day actors and
musicians are summoned to the royal palace to perform the
ai-lan. In addition battles are staged between boars and
elephants. Foreign ambassadors are invited as guests of the
King to these festivities, which last ten days.
Every day the King holds two audiences for consideration
of affairs of state. No list of agenda is provided. Function¬
aries and ordinary people who wish to see the Sovereign
seat themselves on the ground to await his arrival. In the
course of time distant music is heard in the palace, while
from outside blasts on conch-shells sound forth as though
to welcome the ruler. I have been told that at this point the
Sovereign, coming from nearby, contents himself with only
one golden palanquin. Two girls of the palace lift up the
curtain with their slender fingers and the King, sword in
hand, appears standing in the golden window. All present
ministers and commoners join their hands and touch
the earth with their foreheads, lifting up their heads only
when the sound of conchs has ceased. The Sovereign
seats himself at once on a lion's skin, which is an heredi¬
tary royal treasure. When the affairs of state have been
dealt with the King turns back to the palace, the two girls
let fall the curtain, and everyone rises.
