Lifelines
for the
developing world
by W. H. Owens
i «i
I1/ /
V
Photo © Attlllo Gaudlo, Pari
Metalled highways snake across the barren emptiness of the Algerian Sahara along
the route of the old camel trails. Above, the junction of the fine new roads connecting
Ouargla, Ghardala and El-Golea, some 500 kilometres south of Algiers.
OST of the world's people
live in villages with only primitive
means of transport. The lack of mod¬
em communications deprives them
of trade and social contacts with neigh¬
bouring communities. Across vast
areas of continents the only roads fit
to carry today's motor traffic link the
main towns and cities; even these are
not always hard surfaced throughout,
and stretches may become Impassable
in the rainy seasons.
W. H. OWENS is a British journalist who
has specialized in questions of economic
development and the exploitation of natural
resources.
But great efforts are now being
made In the developing nations of Asia,
Africa and Latin America to provide
and maintain the roads needed to ad¬
vance their economies and improve the
living standards of millions of people.
Too poor as yet to finance their own
highway programmes, these countries
are assisted on a growing scale by
international agencies like the World
Bank and its affiliated International
Development Association, the Inter-
American Bank and the United
Nations Development Programme.
In past years, financial aid for high¬
ways In the developing countries has
been put mainly to large scale projects.
Now, increasing funds are being allo
cated each year to village access
roads and the farm-to-market roads
which directly benefit the greatest
numbers of people.
Due to the lack of transportation
facilities, areas with an excess of food
often exist in close proximity to famine
stricken areas. In west Africa, as
elsewhere, foodstuffs have had to lie
and rot on farms because there were
no means available of distributing them
to needy communities not so very far
away.
The trend towards rural road Impro¬
vement is reflected in recent lending
by the international banks. For exam¬
ple, the Inter-American Development
Bank Is currently assisting Mexico to
CONTINUED PAGE 20
17

HITTING
THE TARMAC TRAIL
Three great continental highway projects the
Pan-American Highway and the Trans-Africa
Highway have been going ahead for some years
past. They mean closer social contact and new
opportunities for trade for millions in the
developing countries. Apart from one section, the
Pan-American Highway, forming a continuous
link across two continents from Fairbanks,
Alaska, to Tierra de Fuego on the southern tip
of Argentina, is now complete. Opposite, a new
bridge carrying a section of the highway across a
river in Chile. Below, building a feeder road
in Kabul, Afghanistan, through which a section of
the Asian Highway passes. Feeder roads to
connect these great transport arteries to the
millions of villages of the world are an essential
part of the development plan. Right, the Bus
Station in Lagos, Nigeria, a nerve centre of trade .
between town and village.

illiiiiniijii nmitlinwinrt.
* a. W ?aâ. v * i W ja. -' *^- *
5'. --v*B' - jàm.
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris

ROADS (Continued)
The 3,500 ft. Bosporus Bridgetomorrow's
direct road link between Europe and Asia
provide some 1,500 miles of rural
access roads that will connect sev¬
eral hundred small village communities
to the national highway network, and
so to markets throughout the country.
A Mexican Government survey con¬
cluded that every new mile of road laid
in fertile areas could create employ¬
ment for up to 500 farm workers. And,
of course, there are many other econo¬
mic and social benefits.
I
20
|N India, the provision of
village access roads has been recog¬
nized as an important part of overall
highway planning ever since that
country's first national road develop¬
ment programme (the Nagpur Plan)
was prepared more than a quarter of
a century ago.
Very considerable improvements
have been made to the road system
of India, and in fact the Nagpur Plan
road mileage targets were well exceed¬
ed with the completion of the First and
Second Five-Year Plans. Even so, the
task of creating a modern network
over so vast a land area is an immense
one, and there are still several hun¬
dreds of miles of missing links on the
important routes.
Under India's present 20-year road
development programme, 1961-81, it
is planned to increase the total net¬
work by about one third, to 657,000
miles. The objective is to connect the
more important villages with the near¬
est marketing centres, or district head¬
quarters, in order to speed up the
delivery and distribution of agricultu¬
ral produce.
More precisely, the programme aims
to bring every village:
in a developed and agricultural area
to within four miles of a metalled road
and one-and-a-half miles of any road;
in a semi-developed area to within
eight miles of a metalled road and
three miles of any road;
In an undeveloped and uncultivated
area to within twelve miles of a metal¬
led road and five miles of any road.
Apart from the limited resources
available for rural roads under the
state plans, much good work has been
done in this field through the Commu¬
nity Development Programmé in India.
Many thousands of miles of village
roads have been constructed at very
low cost by the village communities
themselves.
In Turkey, where about 20 million
people, or two-thirds of the total popu¬
lation, live in villages with partly iso
lated economic and social conditions,
an estimated 93,000 miles of rural
access roads are required to improve
their living standards.
In order to complete the greatest
road mileage in the shortest time with
limited resources, a method has been
developed for constructing the roads
not for individual, but for group villa¬
ges. When this long-term roads pro¬
gramme Is completed, nearly 35,000
villages in Turkey will be linked to
one another, either directly or indirect¬
ly, and to the district market centres.
Turkey's most spectacular highway
project now under construction is the
Bosporus Bridge, whose 1,074 metre
(3,523 ft) long clear span will be the
fourth longest in the world. When
completed early in 1973, this wonder¬
ful bridge will provide the first direct
link-up between the European road
network and the developing Asian
Highway System.
The Asian Highway is a vast inter¬
national network of through routes for
motor traffic spanning all the coun¬
tries of southern Asia, except Mainland,
China, between Iran in the west and
Viet-Nam and Singapore in the Far
East. Under the direction of the Uni¬
ted Nations Economic Commission for
Asia and the Far East (ECAFE), which
launched the undertaking in 1958,
great progress is being made in up¬
grading the designated routes to the
agreed Highway standards.
In fact, the target set for the first
U.N. Development Decade, 1960-70,
of establishing at least one through
route connecting all the countries, has
been almost achieved, except notably
in Burma. But it is hoped that the
route through Burma, and the other
few remaining gaps in south-east Asia,
will become motorable in the near
future.
The Asian Highway, from the mos¬
ques of Iran to the temples of Burma
and Thailand, from the high plateau of
Afghanistan to the great forests and
mountains of Malaysia, offers thrilling
prospects as one of the world's great
tourist routes. But its primary purpose
is to change the economic climate and
raise the low living standards through¬
out one of the great undeveloped
quarters of the world.
Certainly its economic benefits
could be vast. For the Highway will
help to open up barren and arid lands
for Irrigation and settlement. It will
provide the means for low-cost trans¬
portation of the region's natural com¬
modities like tea, rubber, rice, cotton,
timber and minerals; and will facilitate
the distribution of food, raw materials
and manufactured goods throughout a
region where hitherto the only modern
long-distance transport has been in the
air. Feeder roads from the Asian High
way will assist the movement of agri¬
cultural produce into areas which at
present suffer serious shortages.
An International road system of a
comparable scale in the Western
Hemisphere is the Pan-American High¬
way, serving all the countries and prin¬
cipal cities across the length and
breadth of two continents. The only
break that remains in the continuous
highway system between Fairbanks,
Alaska, and Tierra del Fuego, in the
extreme south of Patagonia, is the dif¬
ficult Darien section in Panama and
Colombia. Until recent years the Da¬
rien isthmus of Panama was virtually
untouched and impassable, inhabited
solely by Indian tribes. Now these last
few hundred miles which once seemed
unconquerable, will be paved and
opened to traffic during the 1970s.
Speaking recently of the major eco¬
nomic and social benefits which will
result from the completion of this final
Highway section, the chief engineer
of the Pan-American Highway Surveys
in the region, Camilo R. Carles, said:
"The Darien region represents a
very complex, wealthy potential, on
which improvement has been impos¬
sible due to the lack of highway com¬
munication. Each kilometre opened by
the road will mean territory available
for immediate use. The Indian com¬
munities could be incorporated into the
national life; agriculture and livestock
could be improved; forest reservations
would, become available; schools,
markets, health and electrification
programmes would be expanded, and
Panama's development would be en¬
hanced. As a consequence of the
Darien Highway, other access and
feeder roads would be opened, thus
contributing to the development of the
farthest away places of the region."
T
HE special need in Africa
is for roads to promote the inter-ter¬
ritorial trade and economic co-opera¬
tion between states which is of vital
importance for the future advancement
and prosperity of its developing
nations.
In the past, the few motor highways
were built to serve the main centres
within the former colonial territories,
or to link raw material areas with rail¬
heads and seaports. So today the
road situation throughout most of the
African continent is of a very large
number of unintegrated national road
systems. Many African countries do
not have road links with their neigh¬
bouring states.
This major aspect of road devel-

opment was among the main subjects
discussed at the first Africa Highway
Conference, held at Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia, in October 1969. More than
500 delegates from 49 nations attend¬
ed the conference, the theme of which
was African unity and progress, and
how good roads could provide the key
to both.
But as delegates at Addis Ababa
emphasized, the establishment of inter-
territorial road links Is only one half of
the main problem of present land com¬
munications in Africa. The other half
as Is the case in the rest of the dev¬
eloping world is to connect market
centres through an integrated system
of trunk and local feeder roads so
that the village communities, which
comprise over 80 per cent of Africa's
total population, may trade their pro¬
duce and goods freely with one
another In all seasons, wet or dry.
Apart from construction of new
roads, there is the importance of main¬
taining them in good order after they
have been built. Parts of the interna¬
tional loan funds to the developing
countries are therefore usually ear¬
marked for the improvement of na¬
tional maintenance organizations with
the assistance of experts from the
advanced nations. Such funds are
put to the local training of mechanics,
drivers and operators of modern road-
making plant, the purchase of maint¬
enance equipment, the setting up of
depots and workshops, and so on.
The United Nations Development
Programme plays a key role in provid¬
ing technical assistance for highway
works in all the developing countries.
In this and in other fields of modern
development, the UNDP has provided
opportunities for advanced training
abroad to thousands of qualified peo¬
ple whose responsibilities call for skills
they could not at present obtain in their
own lands.
Another agency which promotes the
training of young road engineers in all
countries around the world is the Inter¬
national Road Federation, adviser to
the United Nations on all road trans¬
port matters and sponsor of the Afri¬
can Road Conference and other impor¬
tant regional and world meetings of
highway experts over the past twenty
years.
Under the IRF Fellowship Programme
young engineers from more than eighty
nations including many of the dev¬
eloping countries have been able to
undertake intensive one-year study
courses In highway engineering at
leading universities and advanced
technicial institutes in the United
States. Many of these highly trained
men will take charge of the growing
road building programmes in their own
countries in the vital years that lie
ahead.
Photo © Photo Researchers. New York
Besides the normal risks of the road, the motorist in Zambia, above, has to
contend with the world's weightiest jay-walkers. The Great Asian Highway
goes through the famous Khyber Pass from Afghanistan into Pakistan. Below,
in south Pakistan the pedestrian, whether biped or quadruped, can walk in perfect
security along his own track, safely separated from the pounding traffic of the
Asian Highway, a bit of which can be seen on the extreme left of the photo.
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
*
