The International Centre
for Theoretical Physics, operated
jointly by the International Atomic
Energy Agency and Unesco, is housed
on the Adriatic coast outside Trieste
in this $2 million building (above)
donated by the Italian government.
The Trieste centre, a meeting place
for minds, has neither cyclotrons
nor other Impressive-looking machines.
Each year, over 500 scientists,
mostly from the developing countries,
make use of its facilities which include
lectures in the amphitheatre
(opposite) by some of the "greats"
of modern physics.

TRIESTE
WORLD
RENDEZVOUS
FOR
PHYSICISTS
12
by Dan Behrman

i <r%
A 4 a
V **
Photos Dominique Roger - Unesco
E
iJfc^VERY year, some five
hundred of the world's brightest
young minds in science are exposed
to the International Centre for Theo¬
retical Physics, a rather unusual United
Nations institution on the Adriatic
coast of Italy just outside Trieste.
Most of these scientists come from
developing countries and, under ordi¬
nary circumstances, they would be
likely candidates for the brain drain.
This is precisely why the Trieste
centre is in operation with the joint
support of two U.N. agencies, the
International Atomic Energy Agency
and Unesco, and the Italian govern¬
ment. As a way out of the intellectual
isolation that drives young scientists
to emigrate, it offers them training, an
opportunity to do research at regular
intervals and, most of all, a place to
think, talk and work.
From this scientific centre where
chalk, blackboards and desks are the
DAN BEHRMAN is a Unesco science
writer. He is the author of 'The New
World of the Oceans" (Little Brown and
Co., Boston, U.S.A.), also recently publish¬
ed in a paperback edition.
only visible apparatus, come more than
130 papers every year in the basic
fields of elementary particles, high-
energy physics, field theory, nuclear
physics, solid state physics and plas¬
ma physics.
The centre serves to link east and
west as well as the developed and the
developing worlds. Research work¬
shops have brought together the top
people In the United States and the
U.S.S.R. on many topics and particu¬
larly plasma physics where problems
related to the domestication of the
thermonuclear energy of the hydrogen
bomb are being studied. If they can
be solved, the world will be presented
with a new source of power, pollution-
free and well-nigh inexhaustible.
Yet the pursuit of theoretical physics
cannot be justified in terms of its
immediate applications. It is the most
philosophical of sciences for It is
concerned with the study of the very
nature of matter. As such, it attracts
the most talented brains of the devel¬
oping world, the Einsteins, the Fermis,
the Niels Bohrs of tomorrow and the
day after. They will not devise ways
to build better mousetraps but they
learn to think in terms of original solu¬
tions. If they are not given the chance
to work in contact with others at their
own level, they languish... and they
leave.
Such was the experience of the
founder and director of the Trieste
centre, Prof. Abdus Salam. It might
even be said that it sprang from his
own life, from the Isolation that he
himself suffered when, after taking his
doctorate at Cambridge and conduct¬
ing research in Princeton, he returned
home to Pakistan to teach in 1951.
"I was the only theoretical physicist
in the country at that time", he told me
as I sat in his office sharing his lunch
of sesame seeds. "The nearest one
was in Bombay. You have no idea of
what than can be like. A theoretical
physicist has got to be able to talk, to
discuss, to shout if need be.
"I remember, I received a cable one
day from Wolfgang Pauli, the Nobel
laureate from Zurich, who was in
Bombay. He said he was alone and he
wanted me to come to talk to him. So
I took a plane to Bombay and a taxi
to his hotel. I went up to his room,
I knocked on the door.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
13

TRIESTE CENTRE (Continued)
The micro-macro world under one roof
"He told me to come in and then,
without a word of greeting, he said
to me:
"The problem is, if we have
derivative terms in Schwlnger's action
principle..."
Prof. Salam was called into an
adjoining office for a moment and I
had a chance to take in his surround¬
ings. On one wall hung a framed
16th century prayer in Persian which,
he had told me, invoked the name of
Allah to ask for a miracle. A type¬
written notice had been slipped under
the glass top of his desk:
"Reminder: Mornings to be spent
on physics: No visitors No phone
calls No mall (except personal) be¬
fore noon Administrative matters and
visitors during the period after lunch
until 4 p.m. only. Remaining time to
be spent on physics."
Also under glass on a wall to the
right of the desk was a quotation:
"We have all of us to preserve our
competence in our own professions,
to preserve what we know intimately,
to preserve our mastery. This is, in
fact, our only anchor in honesty."
Prof. Salam might have written that
himself, but it was signed by the late
Robert Oppenheimer, one of the
earliest supporters of the Trieste cen¬
tre. "The day that a director of a
research centre like this one stops
being a scientist, he's useless," Prof.
Salam remarked. "Any fool can admin¬
ister. People forget that they were
made heads of centres because they
were doing good science. So they
lose their competence, they become
manipulators of men just to keep them¬
selves In power."
The entire full-time professional
staff of the centre could fit into a
small Flat or a short sentence: Prof.
Salam, the director; Prof. Paolo Budini
from Italy, deputy director; and Dr.
André Harnende, a Belgian, who is
everything else. At Trieste, Parkin¬
son's Law has been repealed. The
administrative staff has actually dwindl¬
ed from five to three since the centre
opened in 1964 but the number of
scientists it reach'' every year has
more than quintupled.
T
HE International Centre for
Theoretical Physics does all this on a
budget of no more than $600,000 a
year. Of this figure, the biggest chunk
is a generous $250,000 grant from the
Italian govenrment which also financed
the construction of its $2 million build¬
ing. Then the International Atomic
Energy Agency and Unesco each give
$150,000. The remainder is made up
mainly of contributions from the
Swedish International Development
Authority and the Ford Foundation.
This sum covers virtually all expen¬
ses from fellowships and publications
to heating and administration: Includ¬
ed is the operation of the centre's
library with 6,000 volumes and an up-
to-date reference section of journals.
The output in physics is so great today
that one American journal alone runs
to eighteen volumes in a single year.
This all began in 1960 when Prof.
Salam was a member of the Pakistani
delegation to the General Conference
of the International Atomic Energy
Agency in Vienna. He has always
had a great gift for doing a number of
things all at once: even today, he is
still science adviser to the President
of Pakistan and professor of theo¬
retical physics at the Imperial College
of Science and Technology in London
along with his tasks in Trieste. Com¬
muting between such jobs would numb
an ordinary man, but Prof. Salam
claims it enhances his productivity.
As a delegate in Vienna, he put forth
the idea of an international centre for
theoretical physics. "I was naive
then, I wouldn't dare do it today. Peo¬
ple took it half-jokingly and many dele¬
gations abstained on the vote when
It was approved for a preliminary
study. I found out that the Idea in¬
terested the poor countries. What I
wanted to do was to give the poor a
place of their own where they would
not have to beg anybody. Why
shouldn't a bright youngster in Pakis¬
tan have the right to receive the same
stimulating atmosphere as an English¬
man or an American, provided be
deserves it?"
His proposal got over the first hurdle
In 1960. It was helped over the
succeeding ones by Prof. Salam's for¬
tuitous meeting with Prof. Budini at a
Pencils, paper and
conversation are the working
tools of the theoretical
physicist Left, three
Asian scientists studying
a problem are (left to right)
M. Tint from Burma,
I.T. Cheon from the Republic
of Korea and M. Rahman
from Pakistan. Right,
Dr. V.K. Samaranyake
of Ceylon (on right)
and Dr. Ottaviani of Italy
compare Journals in the
Trieste Centre library.

Many Nobel Prizewinners
lecture and attend meetings
at the Trieste Centre.
No less than eight came
to the International Symposium
on Contemporary Physics
in 1968. Among them was
Sir Francis Crick, co-discoverer
with James Watson of the
molecular structure of DNA,
the "messenger" that carries
nature's genetic code.
Sir Francis is seen here
(seated) talking to Prof.
Abdus Salam, Director
of the Centre.
symposium in Trieste on elementary
particle Interactions.
Prof. Budini was also seeking a way
out of isolation, in this case the geo¬
graphic predicament of Trieste in a
cul-de-sac at the far corner of Italy.
Nationalism did not make much sense
to this physics professor at the Uni¬
versity of Trieste whose birthplace, an
island that once belonged to Venice,
has changed flags three times in his
own lifetime. He dreamt of a Trieste
lying instead in the centre of Europe,
a pole of attraction to fellow physicists
from the world over. He and Prof.
Salam had no trouble putting their
dreams together.
Photos Dominique Roger - Unesco
Money was put up by a local bank,
the Cassa dl Rlsparmio di Trieste. An
offer of land, later converted to money,
came from Prince Raimondo di Torre
e Tasso whose nearby castle at Duino
has played host to Liszt. Mark Twain,
Rilke and, most recently, to the 1970
Pugwash Conference. The prince said:
"Trieste is my daughter and this Is
my dowry."
In 1962, the General Conference of
the International Atomic Energy Agency
approved the creation of a centre.
"That was the most momentous day
of my life," Prof. Salam told me. "I
seldom smoke, but I must have smoked
fifty cigarettes that day and I went
through a kilo of grapes. At the end
of the debate, sixty hands went up in
favour and we had won."
The following year, the Italian gov¬
ernment's offer of Trieste as a site
was accepted and, in 1964, Prof. Salam
and his staff moved into temporary
quarters in the heart of the city.
Four years later, they were in their
present building at Miramare, a long
double-decker sandwich in concrete
with two rows of wood-framed win¬
dows as the filling.
On the grounds of the building,
there is a small house where Prof.
Salam lives while he Is at the centre.
It Is only twenty yards or so from his
office window but he can spend two
weeks at a stretch seeing nothing
more of the outside world than those
twenty yards. He has one group
working in Trieste, another at Imperial
College in London. In the centre, he
and his collaborator, John Strathdee,
share an office decorated principally
with blackboards and equations.
Prof. Salam told me they were
endeavouring to put under one unified
scheme the micro and the macro
universes inside the nucleus and
outside in galactic space to cover the
frontiers between the behaviour of
elementary particles measuring 10-15
centimetres (that is, the number one
preceded by fifteen zeroes and a
decimal point) and the so-called
quasars that lie 1027 centimetres (the
number one followed by twenty-seven
zeroes) away from the earth. Prof.
Salam Is fascinated by the "black
holes of gravity" in space occupied
by celestial bodies that have collapsed
under the weak but relentless force
of gravity.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

TRIESTE CENTRE (Continued)
The loneliness of the long-distance scientist
Theoretical physicists, such as those
found at Trieste, try to explain the
behaviour of elementary particles.
But though he may use a computer,
the physicist's main tool is his mind,
and he must have contact with other
minds If he is to keep it honed.
This problem, a major one for many
scientists from the developing world,
was explained to me by Dr. Paul Vltta
who got his Ph. D. in the United States
and is now teaching at the physics
department of the university of Dar-es-
Salaam, In Tanzania.
He had come to the centre to attend
a two-month nuclear theory course
that was just ending. "In Tanzania,"
he said, "I am the only nuclear phy¬
sicist. I am In perfect isolation.
With our teaching load, one very soon
gives up all hope of research. So you
pick up a textbook. It gets out of
date, but you're stuck with it. I simply
need to come to a centre like this."
D
IB
R. Khaik Leang Lim, from
the University of Malaysia at Kuala
Lumpur, is the only Malaysian theor¬
etical nuclear physicist. "There might
be some outside, but not in the
country. If you're on your own, you
can only read scientific journals. It's
hard to keep up. Your interest fluc¬
tuates when you get tired reading.
And there is no one to talk to."
Dr. Llm is an associate at the centre
which means that he has the right to
three three-month stays there over a
period of five years. Trieste now has
sixty such associates from more than
twenty countries. It hopes to expand
the list until it covers all the estimat¬
ed 200 theoretical nuclear physicists
in the developing world. The centre's
activities are now being extended into
mathematics as well.
He thinks that basic science is
necessary to a developing country if
only because over-specialized scien¬
tists have trouble adapting to change,
but he certainly does not believe that
Malaysia needs the whole gamut of
theoretical physics. His own specia¬
lity, nuclear physics, requires fast
computers that are not available at
home. "Here, I must think of some¬
thing to do that requires less compu¬
tation. One cannot change from one
field to another, but one can change
within a field. In that respect, the
centre helps the Individual. He can
meet people in the same or related
fields, he can learn what's going on"
Dr. Lim would like to see a similar
centre some day in Southeast Asia,
perhaps in Bangkok. He had to come
all the way to Trieste to meet Dr. IT.
Cheon from Korea with whom he is
now collaborating by correspondence.
It was once fashionable to remark
that no Einstein can come out of the
jungle, but the reply heard at Trieste
to that Is simply: "Why not?" A phy¬
sicist can come from almost anywhere.
Paul Vitta grew up on a farm in a
village 600 miles from Dar-es-Salaam,
the capital of his native Tanzania,
where he went to boarding school.
For the educational revolution is pay¬
ing off.
Omar El Amin, a research worker at
the University of Khartoum's radiation
and isotope centre in the Sudan, is
one of five brothers whose father was
a crewman on a Nile river steamer.
He reminded me that education in the
Sudan is free. It enabled him to reach
the point where he was able to go to
the University of London for his M. Sc.
in radiation physics. Of his brothers,
one is a textile technician, another is
also studying science, one is in the
army and the fourth is working in
electronics engineering at Kiev. Mr.
El Amin, an experimental physicist,
wanted to come to the Trieste centre
to "see what theoreticians do with
their long equations and their mathe¬
matics."
Scientists often say that the best
way to look at a phenomenon is to
study an extreme case. In that res¬
pect, Dr. Toshar Gujadhur certainly
qualifies as the most isolated of the
theoretical physicists in Trieste. His
home is on the Island of Mauritius and
he was returning there after an absence
of ten years that began when he went
to Imperial College to earn his doctor¬
ate in mathematical physics.
He was about to take a post in a
new teacher training institute on Mau¬
ritius. "I want to go back, my roots
are there, but it will mean complete
paralysis of the mind if I cannot get
to Trieste every three years or so.
I'm working in relativity and quantum
mechanics. Learning to me is like
food, I need it. It's a challenge; you do
it in spurts. I'm here at least twelve
hours a day, six days a week. I arrive
around eight or nine in the morning,
sometimes I go home on the last bus
at 10:30 at night. Some people prefer
to work only at night so the place is
open twenty-four hours a day."
To Dr. Gujadhur, the greatest ad
vantage of the Trieste centre is its
mere existence. "It is a meeting-
ground, it offers post-doctoral training
but, most of all, there Is the fact that
one can come back. I must be able
to tell myself that I will always be able
to come here for three months.
Otherwise, one is just cut off."
That is a precarious situation for the
physicist. Prof. Georges Ripka of the
French Atomic Energy Commission at
Saclay, who co-organized the nuclear
theory course with. Prof. Luciano
Fonda of the University of Trieste,
believes that the scientist in a develop¬
ing country runs the risk of doing
"perfectly good but irrelevant work."
If he only reads scientific journals, he
cannot keep up and there is the dan¬
ger that he will do work already per¬
formed elsewhere. "In an hour's
conversation with a physicist." said
Prof. Ripka, "I learn more than in a
day in the library."
The theoretician must also remain in
touch with the experimentalist, as Is
the case at Trieste. "Research is not
walking in a garden and waiting for a
good idea," said Prof. Ripka. "Physics,
unlike mathematics, is an approximate
science. One must construct correct¬
ed theories when new experimental
data come in. It's not that the old
theories and experiments are bad, they
are approximate. In physics, one is
always guessing. Our guessing is
never quite wrong, and never absolu¬
tely right."
A
.number of guest lecturers
participated in the nuclear theory
course as they do in all the training
given at Trieste. The centre has be¬
come a sort of crossroads for physi¬
cists in Europe and it is not unusual for
a man to come down from Germany or
up from Yugoslavia to lecture for a day
or two. The centre pays for his stay
and his own institution pays his salary
as a contribution by the scientific
community to Trieste.
Participants in the course worked
hard with three lectures a day follow¬
ed by a seminar in which each one
talked about what he was doing. Most
of the lectures were in the forefront
of the subject because, as Prof. Ripka
remarked to me, it just as easy to
teach new material as it is to teach
the old, Prof. Ripka was particularly
pleased that many participants had
CONTINUED PAGE 32

TRIESTEWORLD RENDEZVOUS
FOR PHYSICISTS (Continued from page 16)
arranged to collaborate by post. Such
arrangements are valid, he thinks, if
they are preceded by personal con¬
tacts. "In nuclear theory, contacts
are invaluable. That's how I got start¬
ed myself. I was invited to go from
France to a conference in New York
and I talked to a lecturer there. He
got me going and he put me in touch
with a student of his in Belgium. After
speaking to him, I had the drive and
I'm sure my case is typical. That Is
why I feel responsibility to a fellow
here. He must go home with all that
he can."
Such courses are far from the cen¬
tre's main function. In fact, every
time one looks around, another func¬
tion seems to appear. Besides cour¬
ses, associateshlps, research work¬
shops and occasional symposia, the
centre has a system of federated Ins¬
titutions. They number twenty from
sixteen countries and each has the
right to send a scientist of its own
choosing to Trieste for a period of up
to 40 days a year. Such is the thirst
for theoretical physics that some Insti¬
tutions send forty scientists for one
day and they stretch their subsis¬
tence allowance to cover nearly a
week by staying In modest boarding
houses or with friends.
E.
32
| VEN a week is enough to
become imbued with the atmosphere of
the International Centre for Theoretical
Physics. The long corridor that leads
to Prof. Salam's office on the second
floor is punctuated by portraits of the
centre's spiritual fathers: Einstein,
Niels Bohr, Oppenheimer, Werner
Heisenberg, Wolfgang Pauli, Louis de
Broglie, among others... and a humo¬
rous New Year's card from Lev Landau
showing the fox who fished with his
tail. The developing world flocks to
Trieste and to what these names
represent. To Prof. Salam, this is only
the swing of history's pendulum.
He likes to tell how Michael the
Scot left his native land ¡n the 13th
century to travel south to the Arab
universities of Toledo and Cordova.
Or how Mamun the Caliph of Baghdad
In the 9th century, sent the Emperor
of Byzantium a work concerning "a
new path in mathematics called Alge¬
bra." Prof. Salam blames the Mongol
invasions for the end of Islamic scien
ce. "The Mongols systematically
destroyed libraries. Before printing,
the destruction of a library meant the
end of a tradition. When the libraries
at Baghdad, Bukhara and Samarkand
went up in flames, Islamic science was
lost with them."
With men like Prof. Salam we are
witnessing an exciting resurgence of
Islamic science. Already his work has
received recognition by the award of
the "Atoms for Peace" prize a fitting
recompense for a man whose name,
Abdus Salam, means "Servant of
Peace."
With such a name he was almost
pre-destined to work for the United
Nations. He now has another dream,
a world university of which the Trieste
centre would be but one campus.
c
^^UCH a university could
meet a number of needs. There is
already a strong movement for an
institution devoted to the study of
peace and disarmament which are at
the heart of the problems that the
United Nations must solve.
Secondly, Institutes could be set up
at the postgraduate level to conduct
research in the basic sciences. Like
his own at Trieste, Prof. Salam thinks
that they should use the same built-in
plug against the brain drain by requir¬
ing their participants to spend most
of their time in their own countries.
And thirdly, Prof. Salam foresees
international campuses with truly
International faculties for the applied
sciences. "They could be anywhere:
Kenya for health sciences, par¬
ticularly tropical diseases, Iran for
petroleum and petro-chemlcals, Nigeria
or Latin America or Pakistan for
agriculture, and so forth." Gaps left
In the network of U.N. centres would
be filled by federated universities and
research institutes. "I'm after fifty
campuses, not five or six," said
Prof. Salam. "This must be truly a
world university. Don't worry, it will
come, certainly not tomorrow but
certainly within twenty years."
On that note, I left Abdus Salam.
His prediction is just a dream, but this
disconcerting man of faith and science
must be one of the world's most
realistic dreamers...
