25 years
of Unesco
viewed by
a student
of 25
by Ehsan Naraghi
On November 4, 1971, the United Nations Educa-
tional, Scientific and Cultural Qrganization
celebrates its twenty-fifth anniversary. To
mark this occasion we are publishing in this
special issue of the"Unesco Courier"a"youth's eye"
view'of Unesco, its achievements, its failings and its
problems.
The outcome of months of probing and delving in
and around Unesco's Paris headquarters by a young
Canadian student, Wayne McEwing, this lively survey
gives a new perspective to the work of the least spe-
cialized of the United Nations specialized agencies.
With a ! ! doors open to him, McEwing examined
Unesco from top to bottom, assessing it with the
objectivity of an outsider and putting his reactions
down with the critical candour of youth.
The story of how he came to write about Unesco
in itself speaks volumes for the keen interest of young
EHSAN NARAGHI is director of Unesco's Youth Division, and
was formerly professor of sociology and director of social studios
and research at the University of Teheran (Iran). As a sociologist
he has collaborated for many years in the work of international
scientific associations. yn 1965 he prepared for the United Nations
the first world-wide study on the"Brain Drain". He has written
p M/tde/y on sociological problems in the deve/oping countries, and
rince 1970 he has given courses on youth, education and society
in the Third World, at the University of Vincennes., Paris. His
latest book,"Université, Jeunesse et Société" (University, Youth
and Society) will appear shortly in Teheran.
people everywhere in the international scene and for
Unesco's own interest in the questions and points of
view of youth. Moreover, it demonstrates how
Unesco's approach to the world of youth has evolved
over twenty-five years.
Broadly speaking, before 1968 emphasis was plac-
ed on youth activities in the fields of leisure and sport
activities. n 1968 came the realization that the prob-
lems of youth were of deep concern to society as a
Whole. Now a further step forward has been taken
with the recognition that the problems of society as a
whole are of direct. concern to youth.
! n 1969, Unesco held the first of a series of three-
month, summer study courses for students from ail
over the wor ! d, and these have now become an annual
event. The aim of the courses is to involve young
people directly in the work of Unesco and at the same
time to benefit from the impact of fresh vision and a
new approach-in fact, to establish a two-way traffic
of ideas.
Each student works in a field of direct interest to
his outside activities. A student teacher, for example,
finds himself alongside members of the permanent
staff of the Education Sector working out a funcfional
literacy project for South America ; in the Science
Sector a would-be geologist studies new methods of
assessing earthquake hazards.
At the end of three months, the twenty or so stu-
dents attending a course evaluate what they have

learned and make their own observations and criti-
cisms of the way Unesco operates.
Wayne McEwing attended the first of these courses,
dividing his time between the Office of Public Infor-
mation and the Division of Higher Education. He com-
pleted his three months convinced of the value of the
work being done by Unesco. But he was equally con-
vinced of the need to explain what Unesco was doing
in a graphic way that would give young people a
greater sense of involvement. This was particularly
true for young people is developed countries who are
often less aware of Unesco and its achievements than
their counterparts in the developing nations.
After returning home he explained his viewpoint
in a letter to Unesco's Director-General, René
Maheu. McEwing was then invited back to Paris and
given a free hand to tell the Unesco story in his own
words.
He listened to the opinions of representatives of
the Member States, quizzed experts who had return-
ed from missions in the field, and watched the per-
sonnel of the Secretariat at work.
Whatever their philosophy of life, their conception
of the world and of modern society, young people
throughout the world, are eager to share in the
achievement of those ideals for which Unesco stands.
Unesco is equally eager to establish a permanent
dialogue with and provide a rostrum for the youth of
the world.
However, Unesco knows that young people consider
that international co-operation, whatever its apparent
dimensions, does not go far enough to eliminate the
disparities between rich and poor which exist within
each nation and between developed and developing
countries. The danger that this gap will continue to
grow makes youth critical of a society in which pro-
gress is too often measured in quantifiable terms
rather than those of renewal and social change.
Beyond this criticism of the instruments of inter-
national co-operation, many young people question
current political, economic, social and cultural options ;
they feel that one cannot hope to right the ills of the
world if one remains impotent and silent before the
arms race, the repression practised against groups
and individuals, the degradation and waste of natural
resources. For ail of these preoccupations, ail these
inspirations, can only find an outlet in action if the
members of the international community commit them-
selves to a new phase of co-operation among peoples.
The creative energy which youth brings to this will
for co-operation is a promise for the future.
We hope that the publication of this series of
articles on Unesco's twenty-five years will help to
provoke amongst our readers both young and old a
broad discussion of Unesco's contribution to the dev-7
elopment of Education, Science and Culture in the
world and of youth's preoccupation with international
co-operation and peace between nattions.
: :'". < : ;.-Q-
ëë
g
 L
o
'oc. < :;a.
t 0
Q
F
 O
OL
