By the beginning of the 21st century, three quarters of the world's population,
it is estimated, will be living in urban conglomerations. What life will be like for
our children and grandchildren in these cities is anybody's guess, but already
futurologists are trying to work out forecasts for the organization and management
of these conurbations and the millions living in them. Photos symbolize: left,
city built of stacks of punched cards in a world of computers; right, sardine
skyscrapers for every Tom, Dick and Harry.
28

PONDERING
THE IMPONDERABLE
by Pierre Piganiol
D
ECISION-MAKING has
always Implied looking ahead, that is,
looking at the future, or as the late
Gaston Berger termed it "a pros¬
pective approach". However, it Is
only in the past 20 years that this
prospective approach has been pro¬
perly defined. (1)
The speed at which modern society
is now evolving ¡s a completely new
factor the importance of which cannot
be underestimated. Our acts today
will bear fruit in a world very different
from the one in which they were
conceived, and even the great con¬
querors of history who wanted to
dominate and change the world
rarely Imagined that future societies
would be very much different from
those they lived in.
Gaston Berger expresses his
message in a brilliant style which
gives a clear picture of his main lines
of thought. Society to him is like
a ship tossed on a vast ocean which
needs pilots to guide it through the
rocks, but also requires a prophet to
set the course.
Unfortunately, simply to define a
prospective or forward-looking attitude
is not enough to enable us to select
a line of action, and at the time of
Berger's death, in 1960, the available
method for making such a selection
left much to be desired.
Here the futurology approach con¬
sisted mainly in pinpointing certain
data which were recognized, intuitively
or otherwise, as having a determining
influence in shaping the future, and
carefully studying all the possible
implications of any decisions taken.
At about this time there was
developed, first in the U.S. and very
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
(1) Today the French use the term flfl
"prospective" coined by the French phlloso- /M
pher-industrlalist Gaston Berger, as a syno-
nym of futurology, with perhaps a slight
philosophical overtone that the word futu¬
rology does not have in English.
Photo © The Illustrated London News

PONDERING THE IMPONDERABLE (Continued)
Computerized happiness, computerized happiness, computerized
soon thereafter all over the world, a
technique for choosing a course of
action with reference to the very
specific needs of those who had to
make Important decisions in military or
industrial matters.
Research carried out In this field
led in one instance to the "Relevance
Tree" method (see page 14), which
stresses the need to formulate clear
criteria and to give a weighting (index
of relevance) to each element con¬
sidered In relation to these criteria,
some of which may be purely objective,
but which, in most cases include
concepts relating to quality.
This qualitative weighting is difficult
but very necessary since it allows the
method to be extended to cover human
problems more complex than straight¬
forward technological choices.
Improvement of these methods was,
of course, linked with parallel progress
in methods of forecasting the most
likely future scientific discoveries.
In the last few years we have seen an
increase in such research and the crea¬
tion of techniques that range from the
systematic classification of the opi¬
nions of a panel of experts (the Delphi
method, see page 12), to the logical
analysis of the patterns of science
from which those likely to lead to
future discoveries can be deduced.
Despite their obvious limitations, all
these methods have proved extremely
valuable and, since 1968, there has
been a temptation to apply them not
only to technological choices but to
the evolution of society as a whole.
It was quickly realized, however
that the "Relevance Tree" form of
reasoning was inadequate for the study
of the complexities of the social world.
Futurologists have therefore, made use
of the "systems" approach which,
endowed with a highly sophisticated
mathematical technique, had been
widely applied in the management of
modern industry.
So we have now reached the stage
when we can devise the first "social
models" that can be handled by compu¬
ters,, thus making it possible to draw
the outlines of the dynamic evolution
of the world situation in a future which,
30
PIERRE PIGANIOL, a French physicist and
former head of the Délégation Générale à la
Recherche Scientifique et Technique, is
president of the board of the French National
Institute of Agronomic Research, in Paris, and
an executive with a French organization
dealing with operational research. A leading
member of the French National Centre of
Scientific Research, he is currently Unesco
adviser on science policy to the govern¬
ments of Senegal and the Lebanon. He has
written widely on scientific questions inclu¬
ding the future implications of scientific
development and other problems of futuro¬
logy. He Is the author of "Pour une Politique
Scientifique" (co-author Louis Villecourt),
Flammarlon (1964); "Maîtriser le Progrès",
Laffont (1968); and "Du Nid à la Cité", Dunod
(1970).
for some models, extends as far as the
year 2050.
We have come round full circle and
are returning to Gaston Berger's
"prospective attitude" which in the
meantime has been enriched by better
de'fined, computer-assisted methods of
reasoning.
There is clearly a risk that the
method may finally obliterate the ob¬
jectives. But in my view, we cannot
afford to neglect any new methods or
techniques or spurn the research aids
and tools now available to us. Though
the present "models" we set up may
be far from perfect, they" have much to
offer us, even if they do no more than
force us accept their more rigorous
and precise standards and abandon
mere verbalism.
Although I shall be pointing out a
number of difficulties that are still in¬
herent in these newly developed meth¬
ods, I do not wish to give the impres¬
sion that I have nothing but criticism
for them. My aim is to encourage their
development and to suggest guiding
principles for their use rather than to
arouse unjustified suspicion of them.
B
UT having said this, I
would add that prudence is necessary
for many reasons. The first is that
social problems are extremely complex
and we have still much to learn about
the cause and effect relationship bet¬
ween a decision in the field of human
affairs and its actual consequences.
I know of no model which is not
obliged take into account the changes
in population either in a particular
country or in the world as a whole;
yet as demographers are well aware, it
is extremely difficult to isolate the fac¬
tors that determine the rate of popula¬
tion increase. One can try to link this
rate with standards of living, progress
in medicine, availability of raw mate¬
rials, the quality of food or the amount
of energy available.
This exercise is very important. If we
apply it to the past it confirms the
curve followed by the actual growth
rate of population up to 1970. But I do
not see this as absolute proof of its
validity when applied to the future.
For this, after all, is what interests
us, and here the models indicate some
far-reaching transformations such as
the slowing down of the population
growth rate during the next century.
In brief, the first difficulty lies in
our ignorance of the fundamental and
indeed nighly complex laws of demo¬
graphy.
The second difficulty is due to the
number of factors to be taken into
account. Here also demography offers
an example.
Recent studies relating to a Latin
American country revealed in great
detail what would happen if the popu¬
lation level was suddenly to become
constant.
One might imagine that this situation
would solve many economic problems.
But this would be an oversimplification.
A levelling-off in population would re¬
sult in remarkably far-reaching fluctua¬
tions in the school population, and in
the ratio of working to non-working
population. This ratio could fluctuate
by up to 100 per cent in a series of
oscillations over several centuries.
This hypothesis is, of course, Uto¬
pian and it is impossible to imagine
(perhaps this is just as well) how
the fertility rate could be reduced from
6 to 0.6, then made to rise again gra¬
dually over a period of thirty years and
finally made to fall again that is, to
subject the fertility rate to a series of
subdued oscillations which would
result in a constant population level.
The third difficulty arises from the
fact that experimental verifications are
impossible. A model can, of course,
be tested against the past, but this
suggests implicit acceptance of the fact
that transformations have not been
sufficiently strong to have thrown
doubt upon the structure of the model.
I may be wrong, but I do not have
confidence in a model simply because
it has given a correct description of
the events of the last twenty years;
I even tend to think that it might have
been adjusted to achieve this result.
These models also suppose that
various aspects of society can be
represented with the help of certain
indicators, some quantitative (national
income, future yields, etc.), and some
qualitative (feelings of happiness, free¬
dom, etc.). These indicators are ob¬
viously "global", that is, they include
both the many aspects of a particular
social situation as well as the whole
range of individual human behaviour.
The problem is to know what use
these indicators will serve in a period
of crisis. We should not forget that
these models are established so as to
enable us to analyse forthcoming
crises, and it would be a pity if this
were precisely what they lacked the
ability to do.
Perhaps models are subject to the
same phenomenon as may be observ¬
ed in certain mechanical appliances.
A network of pipes, for example, may
be equipped with a fine set of pres¬
sure gauges, but when "hammering"
occurs in the pipes the gauge readings
bear no relation to real pressure. It
may well be wondered whether some
recent analyses, both of society as a
whole and of a number of industrial
companies, do not contain inherent
errors precisely because they are
using faulty indicators.
Thus, to the material difficulty of pro¬
cessing data whose interactions are

happiness, compu...
often difficult to foresee, another prob¬
lem is added: a somewhat arbitrary
simplification of social phenomena.
We may be agreed on the need for sim¬
plification for the sake of understand¬
ing, but it is much more difficult to
accept over-simplified presentations of
reality when the time comes to make a
decision. Premature over-confidence
in the results of what are still experi¬
mental methods for exploring the fu¬
ture, and their adoption as a basis
for decision-making would be ex¬
tremely dangerous.
A further difficulty, perhaps even
more serious, may be added to those
already mentioned. Technological fore"-
casting has developed in a world which
has a certain control over innovation
in products or processes, and we
already have a sketchy, though work¬
able, idea of the innovative process.
Nothing comparable exists in the social
sciences.
We may conclude this list of diffi¬
culties (without, however, completing
it) by an important comment: every
society has its contradictions; its com¬
ponent sub-systems to borrow an over¬
used mechanistic phrase, are by no
means coherent among themselves.
The problem is that they mesh with
one another just sufficiently so that
the tensions created by the underlying
contradictions do not exceed accep¬
table limits.
In the present situation, perhaps we
should ask ourselves: are our models
and the machines exploring them capa¬
ble of inventing new structures and
resolving existing contradictions?
What I have said could give the
impression that I am opposed to the
use of these models. I hope I have made
it clear that this is not the case. By
all means let us use these models but
with caution accompanied by a much
more scrupulous analysis of those fac¬
tors in our society that have an in¬
fluence in determining the future.
Let us identify a few of the most
striking, if not the most important, of
these factors.
Nowadays, throughout the world, we
are witnessing a wave of enthusiasm
for higher education. Several major
countries have already reached the
stage at which about 50 per cent of
people of an age to enter higher edu¬
cation in fact do so.
A society in which 50 per cent of
citizens have reached this level can
in no sense be run in the same way
as those in which the training of spe¬
cialists and administrators is restricted
by the limitations of the education
system.
There is bound to be an increased
desire for responsibility and partici¬
pation in decision-making. And this
desire will emerge in a world in which
production units and groups providing
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Photo © Jean Suquet, Paris
When the last tree has been felled by the last lumberjack to make
way for the latest industrial complex, will nostalgia for the days
of autumn leaves and "the darling buds of May" impel us to reforest
the land with reinforced concrete conifers and plastic poplars?
"From now on", says Pierre Piganiol, "human activities, multiplied by
population growth, will have to be studied from the point of view
of their interaction with the natural environment".
31

PONDERING THE IMPONDERABLE (Continued)
services will become larger and larger
and in which, consequently, the oppor¬
tunities for responsibility will be fewer
than could be desired.
In these conditions, tensions will
appear which will probably lead to
careers of a cyclic type in which
periods of carrying out orders will
alternate with periods of responsibility
and periods of study. This is, of
course, only a rough outline.
Periods of study will also be made
necessary by the rapid Increase In the
amount of new knowledge required
and by the accelerated renewal of the
material means which determine a
society's way of life.
Two aspects of study therefore
emerge: the cultural and the practical.
In order to understand the world in
which he lives, each person throughout
his life, will need to broaden his know¬
ledge of society, in order to contribute
as a citizen to Its improvement. Study
as the key to a fuller life will become
a feature of fully developed societies.
On the practical level, each man
will need either to keep his working
knowledge (his working tool which
becomes ever more rapidly obsolete)
up to date, by re-training, or to acquire
new knowledge (another working ins¬
trument), by re-conversion. This will
demand social structures that enable
each person to undertake additional
study which will be continuous In the
cultural sphere and periodic but Inten¬
sive on the practical side.
This raises the problem of Income.
It Is very likely that for psychological
reasons the range of salaries will
become smaller, with the level of
remuneration linked more closely to
the man than to the job. It Is also
probable that systems of benefits will
be established for those who leave
their work in order to study.
One can see looming on the horizon
a period in which income will no longer
be distributed indirectly, as in the past,
through payment for work (or possibly
through accumulated capital), but by
other means a situation which can
already be partly seen today.
A second essential factor having a
bearing on the future is the growing
32

Influence of man on his natural envi¬
ronment. Formerly, man was marked
off by his capacity for thought from
the rest of nature which his presence
hardly disturbed and then only in loca¬
lised areas. Today the situation has
changed and our energy requirements,
for example, mean that we release Into
the atmosphere considerable quantities
of carbon dioxide which can cause
climatic changes.
From now on, human activities, mul¬
tiplied by population growth, will need
to be studied In terms of their reper¬
cussions on the natural environment.
The forecasting of imbalances or of
new states of equilibrium has become
essential.
Finally, a third factor: decision¬
making in a complex world implies
extensive knowledge; it requires ex¬
perts. But how far can these experts
take account of public opinion or be
controlled by It? Is there not a consi¬
derable risk of establishing a more or
less esoteric technocracy?
This closes my list of examples.
Some ambitious projects attempt to fit
every aspect of society into a parti¬
cular model and, in particular, to deal
with the factors I have used as exam¬
ples by analysing their interactions.
What is one to think of this?
The three problems outlined above
are clearly very different. The second
deals with a concrete problem,
a difficult one certainly since it
concerns meteorology, but one which,
nevertheless, can be expressed in the
form of a model. Indeed, it has
recently proved possible to make a
map of Europe, in connexion with pro¬
posed Industrial activities in England,
showing the sulphur fallout In rain.
The first example deals among other
things with the supply and demand
ratio for skilled manpower. It is pos¬
sible to make a model of this; it would
be only approximate, but would, never¬
theless, be of considerable help to
further studies.
The third and last example presents
a typical problem of organization and
psychology. Nothing is more difficult
than to assign numerical values to the
"feeling of freedom" or the "sense of
responsibility," and It Is obvious, for
example, that air-line pilots can hardly
be selected by universal vote.
From this is clear how complex
futurology is and how difficult It is to
reduce it to a series of simple formulas
or a simple mode of action.
Depending on what approach is
taken, the work of the futurologist
may be worthwhile and effective (even
if certain elements of information are
uncertain) or it may be naive and
even dangerous (even if the work
appears to be based on highly sophis¬
ticated reasoning).
When all is said and done, planning
the future cannot be reduced to a sim¬
ple problem of logic (though logic must
of course guide all our decisions).
Equally Important are common sense
and questions of ethics.
