T
Educational aid
for the Palestine
refugees
Appeal by Mr René Maheu
Director-General of Unesco
38
HERE are one and a half million
Palestine refugees in the world and they
demand justice.
In whatever manner these demands may
be met on a political level, as part of a peace¬
ful settlement between States, we know that
there can be no true and effective justice for
these refugees, or for all men and women
everywhere, that is not based on the recog¬
nition of their human rights. These rights are
inalienable and on no account can be denied.
The right to education is one of these
rights.
For over 20 years, Unesco has been
associated with the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
(UNRWA) in order to provide these refugees
with the education to which they have a right.
This action, which began without resources
or adequate preparation, has developed and
become progressively better organized and
equipped until, despite the continued pre-
cariousness of the refugees' position and of
the status of the Agency itself, and despite
a psychological atmosphere continually upset
by violence, it has become the most ambi¬
tious educational undertaking under inter¬
national administration. Even in the territo¬
ries occupied as a result of the events of
June 1967, this action continues in circum¬
stances as near normal as possible.
At present, the 500 schools which UNRWA
has established and which it administers
with technical assistance from Unesco, in
Lebanon, in the Syrian Arab Republic, in Jor¬
dan on both banks of the River Jordan and
in the Gaza Strip, accommodate 192,000
pupils for primary education alone, to whom
must be added the 35,000 pupils who attend
public and private schools in the host count¬
ries, thanks to UNRWA subventions. For
secondary education the figures are, res¬
pectively, 53,000 and 30,000, with 2,500 for
technical education. Finally, over 800 stu¬
dents have been awarded scholarships to
continue their studies at university level.
In terms of numbers, the percentage of
Palestine refugees receiving education is
among the highest in the Arab countries,
while from the point of view of quality a
constant improvement has been noted, thanks
in particular to the systematic effort which
has been made to train teachers almost all
Palestinians who, at the rate of 2,700 a year,

are admitted to five teacher-training schools
and to the Institute of Education established
at Beirut for primary teachers already in
service.
And now the continuation of this humani¬
tarian work, a signal example of international
co-operation, is endangered by the precari-
ousness and insufficiency of the resources
available to UNRWA as the agency respon¬
sible for financing the project.
These resources, as we know, are derived
entirely from voluntary contributions, which
are decided upon each year and are supplied
by a small number of States. To meet the
requirements of an ever-increasing popula¬
tion, the Agency has recorded, for several
years now, a deficit which is continually
increasing and which in 1970 will have reach¬
ed $5,300 000 for a budget of $47,800 000.
This chronic deficit has up till now been
covered by drawing on the Agency's work¬
ing capital fund, but this is now so seriously
depleted that it would be risky to have
recourse to it again.
I N these circumstances as Sec¬
retary-General U Thant pointed out to the
General Assembly of the United Nations
short of a substantial and regular increase of
resources, major reductions in the activities
of the Agency will become necessary. And as
it is impossible for the reductions to affect the
medical and health services, which are prime
necessities, or the food rations, amounting
as they do to 1,500 calories a day, i.e. the
bare minimum for subsistence, the Commis¬
sioner-General, Mr. Michelmore, has regret¬
fully reached the conclusion that it is in the
education appropriations that the inevitable
cuts must be made.

These cuts, which will become effective,
as from the coming school year, beginning
September 1, 1971, may amount to as much
as 20 per cent of the appropriations envisag¬
ed for that year, and will have to be decided
on in April at the latest if additional contrib¬
utions are not forthcoming before that date.
In the face of this possibility, whose serious
effect on the morale of the refugees needs
no emphasis, the Executive Board of Unesco
has authorized me to appeal to the spirit of
international solidarity with a view to collect¬
ing the funds necessary for maintaining and
expanding the education services for Pales¬
tine refugees, and the General Assembly of
the United Nations has urged all govern¬
ments to respond generously to this appeal.
It is this appeal to international solidarity
which I formally launch in virtue of the
authority and backing thus accorded me.
I turn first to governments who have the
power, as it is their duty, to work for the
establishment of justice and peace. I ask
them to consider, by reference to other
expenditures, the immense value deriving in
human terms from the few million dollars
ten million would be enough for the time
being which are necessary to pursue the
work of education on which we have
embarked.
The money I am seeking can be paid either
into UNRWA's general fund or into a deposit
account specially opened by Unesco for the
education of the Palestine refugees. Accord¬
ing to the wishes of the donors it can either
be allocated to the UNRWA-Unesco pro¬
gramme as a whole or earmarked for a par¬
ticular undertaking or a particular sector of
that programme.
But I also appeal to private bodies and
movements in a word to all men and women
of goodwill for justice and peace are the
common possession of all mankind and the
concern of everyone.
And it is in virtue of the rights of all men
and women that I make this appeal. Human
rights are a universal cause and no one could
possibly remain indifferent and inactive in the
face of the derelictions or violations to which
these rights are, alas, subject in so many
ways and so many places throughout the
world. We must act while there is yet time.
At the start of a New Year which leads us
to reflect on the passage of time and the use
we have made of our lives, at a time which
Pope Paul VI asks us once more to devote
to ardent meditation and courageous resol¬
ves in regard to the problems of peace, as
we again discern the hope of a peaceful
settlement of the conflict which has ravaged
the Near East for twenty-five years past, the
international community cannot disregard an
essential aspect of the problem of the Pales¬
tine refugees on whom the whole of that
conflict centres.
In these circumstances may there be wide¬
spread and generous response to Unesco's
appeal on behalf of the noble cause of the
right to education.
See boxed article page 40.
