opoï m< m *YHN ocn&*<:otn* <y r> n er |o r*
^AYA tr MAf<F tÀAfteMM f* C SO^tSTmT>J~
^eh¡et i o mfMr»«>aanVrncví N7 neKtiF" Coptic
voices
from
the past
T
HE last half century has been rich in
discoveries of priceless, historic manuscripts. The Dead
Sea Scrolls enriched enormously our knowledge of the
Essenes, who might be described as a "pre-Gnostic" Jewish
sect; the seven volumes of Manichaean writings found In
the.. El Fayum region of Egypt, in 1930, threw new light on
the duallstic Gnosticism of the Persian Mani; the Greek
texts found not far from Cairo, in 1941, clarified our
knowledge of the thought of the great Christian Gnostic
Origen. "
Rivalling all these In importance, the Nag Hammadi
codices, first discovered in 1945, are now to be published
in full for the first time by Unesco, in collaboration with
the government of the United Arab Republic. These Codices
enable us to view the doctrines of the Gnostics as seen
through their own eyes and permit us to trace the evolution
of a movement which has had a marked influence on many
religions of the world.
This was explained by Mr. Henri-Charles Puech, an
eminent French authority on the history of religions, and
Professor James Robinson, Secretary of the United Arab
Republic-Unesco International Committee for the Nag
Hammadi Codices, at a press conference given at Unesco
headquarters in Paris, earlier this year.
The scribes who some sixteen centuries ago bent with
loving and painstaking care over the thirteen volumes of
the Nag Hammadi texts, said Mr. Puech, belonged to a
community of Gnostics that flourished in Egypt during the
first centuries after the birth of Christ.
Even the specialists find it difficult to define Gnosticism
with any precision. The movement was responsible for
many of the heresies of early Christianity, although it is
now generally thought to ante-date Christianity. Mr. Puech
described it as "a current of religious thought that attached
itself to Christianity as it did to other Mediterranean and
Middle Eastern religions".
Many early Christian theologians, such as Valentius,
Clement and Origen, were Gnostics and their thinking had
considerable effect on orthodox Christian thought. They
attempted to combine Christian beliefs with others derived
from Oriental and Greek sources, especially those that
were mystical or metaphysical in nature such as the
doctrines of Plato and Pythagoras.
The Greek word "gnosis" from which the name of the sect
derives, was taken as meaning not "knowledge" as we
understand it, but "revelation". To the Gnostics the purpose
of life was ultimate personal salvation and much of their
literature consisted of aporalyptic writings.
The Nag Hammadi texto are written in various dialects
of the Coptic Language but using Greek characters. It will
be several years yet before their full significance is known.
However, the findings already announced are enough to
whet the appetite for more.
Of all the texts so far examined, the "Apocryphon (or
secret book) of John" is, according to Mr. Puech, of the
greatest importance. It takes the form of a visionary
account of the revelation made by Christ after the Passion
to the apostle John. In it all kinds of religious mysteries are
unveiled the creation of the world, the fashioning of the
first man, the future of souls, etc.
The "Book of the Holy Spirit" Is also revelational in cha¬
racter as is the "Gospel of Truth" which is thought to have
been written by Valentius himself in the middle of the
second century. A.D. There is a double interest in this
"Gospel" since it throws light on orthodox early Christian
dogma as well as on the thinking which led to the Valentian
version of Gnosticism.
^Bi^rF equal importance is the "Gospel according to
St. Thomas" which begins with the words, "These are the
sayings of the Living Christ which were written down by
Didymus Jude Thomas".
The text consists of over a hundred sayings of Christ,
many of which were previously unknown. Some of the
sayings recorded are variants of sayings that appear in the
accepted gospels and are of great interest to scholars since
the variations often conform to tradition as expressed in
Syriac manuscripts. Each saying, therefore, raises
fascinating problems of authenticity. The famous Oxyrhyn-
chus papyrus, published at the beginning of this century,
is probably a version in Greek of the same text with some
variations.
Five of the Nag Hammadi texts are in the form of epistles,
including one from "Peter to Philip, his elder brother and
companion".
It would be almost Impossible to over-estimate the
importance of the Nag Hammadi texts. In the words of
Mr. Puech, "The discovery of the Nag Hammadi library
heralds a complete re-appraisal of our knowledge of
Gnosticism. Before these texts became available, our
knowledge, at least of early Christian Gnosticism, was
based on indirect evidence and writings about heresies
which were often both over-simplified and hostile. We now
have at our disposal an abundance of authentically Gnostic
texts which In number, scope and quality far surpass the
few later Gnostic texts In the Coptic language previously
available to us." H. B.
11
