Ukraine's nation-wide movement
to protect its natural resources
Three years ago, the
Council of Ministers of
the Republic of the
Ukraine set up a State
Committee for the
Protection of Nature.
In the following
interview, Mr Boris
Voltovski, chairman of
the committee, describes
some of the special
problems of
environmental
disruption in the
Ukraine and the
measures being taken
to meet them.
QUESTION. Mr. Voltovski, would
you tell us something about the back¬
ground problems which led to the sett¬
ing up of your committee?
ANSWER. The problems of the
protection of nature are no longer
merely national; they have become
international and, in a sense, universal
in scope. They are now an important
factor in relations between states and
in many countries they have even
become a national political issue. The
dimension of the problem was clearly
demonstrated at the Unesco-sponsored
international conference on Man and
the Biosphere, held in Paris in Sep¬
tember 1968, in which the U.S.S.R. and
the Republic of the Ukraine partici¬
pated. (See the "Unesco Courier",
January 1969, Editor.) This confer¬
ence was devoted to problems of the
biosphere and the use of the world's
natural resources. Over the past few
years many similar conferences, sym¬
posia and congresses have been held
all over the world.
The "triumphant march" of civilization
has inflicted considerable damage on
nature, and the dynamic expansion of
industry with the uncontrolled exploi¬
tation of the earth's natural resources
has led to the pollution of water and
the atmosphere. Erosion and the felling
of forests have been contributory
factors in the spoliation of larger and
larger areas of once fertile land.
Dozens of species of animals are
threatened with extinction. With the
present rate of expansion of the world's
fishing fleets, scientists are becoming
pessimistic about the future of the
once seemingly inexhaustible supply
of fish in the oceans.
All these factors, coupled with the

population explosion, fully justify the
special consideration now being given
to the problems of the protection of
nature.
Q. How is the Ukraine itself
affected by these problems?
A. In the Ukraine, and indeed
throughout the U.S.S.R., the prob¬
lem of air and water pollution has not
reached the same critical stage as in
certain European countries. It does,
however, exist and the Soviet govern¬
ment is taking energetic steps to
reduce it.
The State Committee for the protec¬
tion of nature, of which I am chairman,
was set up three years ago under the
Council of Ministers of the Republic
of the Ukraine. Its title clearly indi¬
cates its responsibilities. But it would
be a mistake to think that nothing was
being done in this field before. The
committee has, however, made it pos¬
sible to co-ordinate all the major under¬
takings aimed at the protection of
nature.
Q. Can you give us further details
of the measures being taken in the
Ukraine?
A. In both Ukrainian and Russian,
the word "land" is often synonymous
with "soil". This conceals a deeper
truth since human life and agricultural
production are dependent upon the
earth's outer layer. Over 10 per cent
of the land surface of the globe is
under cultivation. In the Ukraine the
proportion is much higher 67 per
cent, as against 41.5 per cent in
France, 32.5 per cent in the German
Democratic Republic and the Federal
Republic of Germany, and 26.5 per
cent in the United States. We have,
therefore, to be discriminating in our
use of arable land. In the Ukraine we
are concentrating our efforts on con¬
trolling erosion by wind and water.
Q. Has erosion caused much
damage in the Ukraine?
A. Erosion is a catastrophe. The
French scientist Alexis Guérin has esti¬
mated that during the past century
wind and water erosion has destroyed
nearly 5,000 million acres (15 per cent)
of the land surface of the globe, repre¬
senting 27 per cent of the land in active
agricultural use.
In the Ukraine, erosion has put
31 million acres of land out of commis¬
sion a very substantial loss to agri¬
culture. The Republic is making a great
effort in the struggle against erosion.
In the Ukraine, widespread use is
made of forest screens which protect
the soil from the ravages of the wind,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

UKRAINE (Continued)
Seven million volunteers
28
reduce crop losses and prevent chan¬
ges in the structure of the soil. The
value of these wind breaks was strik¬
ingly demonstrated during the dust
storms that hit the Ukraine in 1969.
Fields protected by forest curtains
were scarcely affected, whereas crops
sown in unprotected fields were a total
or almost total loss. Forest screens
are still being planted in the Ukraine,
and this action, coupled with the cons¬
truction of reservoirs and careful
supervision of small rivers, has' pro¬
duced noteworthy results. The five-
year U.S.S.R. economic development
plan for 1971-1975 envisages a vast
reafforestation programme covering
12 million hectares.
Land development centres have been
set up to assume responsibility for
forests and water and land improve¬
ment, and the work of these centres is
helping to check erosion by water. The
flow rate of rivers is controlled, trees
are planted along river banks and
slopes and ravines are planted with
trees or sown with grass.
Q. You have mentioned forestry
development and some land develop¬
ment schemes. Are there any plans for
further schemes of this type?
A. Large scale operations are
under way in the Ukraine to bring
back into cultivation land formerly
worked for mineral ores. The Polesye
region, in the north of the Ukraine,
covers 20 per cent of the territory of
the Republic. It is a marshy and
extremely humid region. Drainage
work is now being undertaken there
and so far 1,750,000 acres have been
reclaimed. In the next few years it is
planned to reclaim a further 1,500,000
acres for cultivation.
There is also a water problem.
3,200 tons of water are needed to cul¬
tivate 2\ acres of maize; 750 lbs of
water for one lb of wheat grain. In¬
dustry too makes its demand upon
water resources; 150 tons of water
are used in the production of one ton
of steel; 5,000 tons for one ton of
nylon fibre.
Whilst industry is consuming huge
amounts of water, industrial waste
pollutes the water supply making it
unfit for use.
Q. This raises the problem of the
fight against water pollution. What is
being done about this in the Ukraine?
A. In some countries the pollution
of rivers and lakes has become a
matter of national concern. The United
States, for example, has turned to the
government of Canada to ask for sup¬
plies of pure fresh water to meet its
industrial and domestic requirements.
Preliminary estimates indicate that the
cost of installing and operating a water
supply pipeline may be as much as
$25,000 million.
The Ukraine has a relatively limited
water supply, 10 times less per inhabi¬
tant than any other region of the
Soviet Union. Since the demand for
water is increasing, water reserves
must be conserved.
River development schemes, in par¬
ticular the construction of large reser¬
voirs on the Dnieper, are helping to
increase the flow rate. The Ukraine is
criss-crossed by more than 19,000
small rivers, representing an important
water reserve. However, action by
man often causes rivers to silt up and
at times to dry up and disappear
completely. Small river development
schemes are being widely introduced,
not only by the State, but also by
collective farms (Kolkhozes) and State
farms (Sovkhozes) for whom such sche¬
mes are economically advantageous.
Development councils for several
kolkhozes are being set up through¬
out the Republic (more than 70 already
exist). With their combined economic
strength they are able to undertake
improvement works on a more ambi¬
tious scale.
The Republic has fairly large ground¬
water reserves, specially valuable for
domestic consumption, and the govern¬
ment pays particular attention to their
conservation. In 1968, the government
of the Republic decided to create a
special protected zone in the Northern
Donetz Valley which contains a reserve
of 1,500 million cubic metres of pure
fresh groundwater.
Q. What is being done to clean
up polluted rivers, lakes, etc?
A. A number of important mea¬
sures are being taken to protect
rivers from the effluent of oil refi¬
neries, metallurgical plants, paper
mills, cellulose factories, etc. The
Ukraine government allocates more
than 100 million roubles annually for
the construction of purification plants,
and experiments being carried out by
a number of industrial firms, who are
attempting to meet their water require¬
ments by means of a water cycle that
eliminates industrial effluents, are
being closely studied. In a decree
relating to "measures for improving
health protection and the advancement
of medical science", the Ukraine gov¬
ernment has made the construction
of purification plants a top priority for
all major industrial firms.
Throughout the world, industry pro¬
duces annually hundreds of millions of
tons of noxious waste which pollutes
the atmosphere and makes it danger¬
ous for both plant and animal life.
The rapid growth of road transport
using petroleum-based fuel has con¬
tributed to air pollution by increasing
the carbon dioxide content of the
atmosphere at the expense of oxygen.
The carbon monoxide, sulphur dioxide,
hydrocarbons and lead are all carcino¬
genic substances.
Q. What steps are being taken
in the Ukraine to counter this pollution
of the air?
A. The campaign against industrial
pollution of the air is a vast and
complex matter involving large scale
investment and the active participation
of scientists. Ukrainian scientists can
be proud of having invented valuable
systems for purifying gaseous dis¬
charges of all kinds, which are being
increasingly used by industry thanks to
State grants for their construction.
Large tracts of forest land are
needed if the air is to be effectively
purified. The Ukraine is not rich in
forests and those that exist cover only
12.8 per cent of the territory of the
Republic and are mainly concentrated
in the north. However, experiments
have shown that large scale afforest¬
ation is possible in the southern
regions of the Ukraine. The extensive
forests that have sprung up in the

Askania-Nova reserve, the Veliko-Ana-
dolsk woods and the plantations in the
sandy soil of the lower Dnieper cover¬
ing 150,000 acres, are tangible evi¬
dence of what can be done. In recent
years re-afforestation of river banks
has been pushed ahead with a con¬
siderable benefit to river water flow.
This work is the responsibility of the
Republic's Ministry of Forests and
the State centres for the development
of forests and land improvement.
Q. Mr. Voltovski, is your commit¬
tee concerned with any other aspects
of the protection of nature?
A. Our committee is also responsi¬
ble for the protection of animal life.
At a time when certain species on our
planet are becoming extinct, others,
thanks to the protective measures
taken, are finding a new lease of life
in the Ukraine. Over the last few
decades, the elk population has multi¬
plied several times until it is now at
the limit of biological viability; the same
is true for deer of which there are now
15,000 head.
The fauna of the Republic has been
enriched by new species such as the
ondatra (a genus of rodent) and the
nocturnal procyonidae (a family of car¬
nivorous animals which includes rac¬
coons).
There is a great deal more that I
could tell you about measures taken
to protect the natural resources of the
Ukraine. However, I would merely like
to emphasize that these are problems
of concern not only to a certain number
of Ministries, but also to public opin¬
ion in general and to each individual
citizen in particular. In the Ukraine,
voluntary societies for the protection of
nature, with their 6è million members,
and various sporting associations with
500,000 members, play a major role.
Their work is extremely important and
their contribution to the protection of
nature is considerable. The combined
efforts of the entire population will
make it possible not only to prevent
air and water pollution, but also to
increase the natural wealth of the
country.
Modern technology enables
man literally to move
mountains and change the
courses of rivers at his will.
But in grasping the bounty
of nature he often leaves
behind him gaping wounds
and terrible scars. Above, a
huge man-made mountain
of rock and sand rises near
a gold-mining project amid
the vastness of the Kara-Kum
desert in the U.S.S.R.
29
