culture
machine
by Max Lerner
Text © copyright. Reproduction prohibited.
NE could draw a gloomy
picture of machine living in America
and depict it as the Moloch swallowing
the youth and resilience of American
manhood. From Butler's Erewhon to
Capek's R.U.R., European thinkers
have seized on the machine as the
cancer of modern living. Some have
MAX LERNER, American author and colum¬
nist, is Professor of American Civilization
at Brandeis University and was formerly a
member of the Social Sciences Faculties of
Sarah Lawrence College, Harvard University
and Williams College in the United States.
Widely known as an editor, lecturer and
radio commentator, he was formerly Manag¬
ing Editor of the "Encyclopaedia o/ the Social
Sciences." His books include: "Ideas and
Weapons" (1939), "Ideas for the ice Age"
(1941). "The Unfinished Country" (1959), "Edu¬
cation and a Radical Humanism" (1962). This
article is taken with the author's permission
from his book "America as a Civilization"
(paperback: Clarion book published by Simon
and Schuster, two volumes. New York, 1967).
even suggested that there is a daimon
in Western man, and especially in the
American, that is driving him to the
monstrous destruction of his instinctual
life and indeed of his whole civilization.
Part of the confusion flows from the
failure to distinguish at least three
phases of the machine culture. One
is machine living as such, the use of
machinery in work and in leisure and
in the constant accompaniments of
the day. The second is cultural
standardization, aside from the mach¬
ine, but a standardization that flows
from machine production. The third is
conformism in thought, attitude, and
action. All three are parts- of the
empire of the machine but at varying
removes and with different degrees
of danger for the human spirit.
The danger in machine living itself is
chiefly the danger of man's arrogance
in exulting over the seemingly easy
triumphs over Nature which he calls
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

IS
MACHINE LIVING (Continued)
The veneer of uniformity
Photo © Nlepce-Rapho, Paris
"progress," so that he cuts himself off
increasingly from the organic pro¬
cesses of life itself.
Thus with the soil: the erosion of
the American earth Is not, as some
seem to believe, the result of the
mechanization of agriculture; a farmer
can use science and farm technology
to the full, and he need not exhaust or
destroy his soil but can replenish It, as
has been shown in the Tennessee
Valley Authority (1), which is itself
a triumph of technology.
But the machines have been
accompanied by a greed for quick
results and an irreverence for the soil
which are responsible for destroying
the balance between man and the
environment. What is true of the soil
Is true of the household: the mech¬
anized household appliances have
not destroyed the home or undermined
family life; rural electrification has
made the farmer's wife less a drudge,
and the mass production of suburban
houses has given the white-collar
family a better chance than it had for
24
(/) A U.S. federal corporation created in
1933 to conserve end develop the resources
of the Tennessee River Valley.
sun and living space. What threatens
family life ¡s not the "kitchen revolu¬
tion" or the "housing revolution" but
the restless malaise of the spirit, of
which the machine is more product
than creator.
HH VEN in a society remark¬
able for its self-criticism, the major
American writers have not succumbed
to the temptation of making the machine
into a Devil. Most of the novelists
have amply expressed the frustrations
of American life, and some (Dreiser,
Dos Passos, Farrell and Algren come
to mind) have mirrored in their style
the pulse beats of an urban mechanized
civilization. But except for a few
isolated works, like Elmer Rice's
Adding Machine and Eugene O'Neill's
Dynamo, the writers have refrained
from the pathetic fallacy of ascribing
the ills of the spirit to the diabolism
of the machine.
The greatest American work on
technology and its consequences
Lewis Mumford's massive four-volume
work The Renewal of Life makes the
crucial distinction between what is due
to the machine Itself and what Is due
to the human Institutions that guide it
and determine its uses.
It Is here, moving from machine
living to cultural standardization, that
the picture becomes bleaker. Henry
Miller's phrase for its American form
is "the air-conditioned nightmare."
Someone with a satiric intent could do
a withering take-off on the rituals of
American standardization.
Most American babies (he might
say) are born in standardized hospitals,
with a standardized tag put around
them to keep them from getting
confused with other standardized
products of the hospital. Many of
them grow up either in uniform rows
of tenements or of small-town or
suburban houses. They are wheeled
about In standard perambulators, shiny
or shabby as may be, fed from stand¬
ardized bottles with standardized
nipples according to standardized
formulas, and tied up with standardized
diapers.
In childhood they are fed standard¬
ized breakfast foods out of stand¬
ardized boxes with pictures of stand¬
ardized heroes on them. They are
sent to monotonously similar school-
houses, where almost uniformly stand-

Uniformly dressed babies (far left)
and a moon-flight rocket motor, suggestive
of a giant robot "nurse", seem like images
out of Aldous Huxley's satirical novel
"Brave New World", written in 1932.
But Huxley's ominous vision of a society
that disregards individual dignity, worships
the machine and "manufactures" standardized
laboratory babies has happily not materialized.
The machine makes uniformity of life
possible, says Max Lerner, but it does not
compel such uniformity. The economics
of mass production has put a premium
on uniformity, but for the person who has
a personality style of his own, standardization
need not mean anything more than a set
of conveniences which leave a larger margin
of leisure and greater scope for creative living.
ardized teachers ladle out to them
standardized information out of stand¬
ardized textbooks. They pick up the
routine wisdom of the streets in
standard slang and learn the routine
terms which constrict the range of
their language within dishearteningly
narrow limits.
They wear out standardized shoes
playing standardized games, or as
passive observers they follow through
standardized newspaper accounts or
standardized radio and TV programmes
the highly ritualized antics of grown-up
professionals playing the same games.
They devour ¡n millions of uniform
pulp comic books the prowess of
standardized supermen.
A
if^^S they grow older they
dance to canned music from canned
juke boxes, millions of them putting
standard coins into standard slots to
get standardized tunes sung by voices
with standardized inflections of emo¬
tion. They date with standardized girls
in standardized cars. They see auto¬
matons thrown on millions of the same
movie and TV screens, watching stereo¬
typed love scenes adapted from made-
to-order stories in standardized maga¬
zines.
They spend the days of their years
with monotonous regularity In factory,
office, and shop, performing routinized
operations at regular intervals. They
take time out for standardized "coffee
breaks" and later a quick standardized
lunch, come home at night to eat
processed or canned food, and read
syndicated columns and comic strips.
Dressed in standardized clothes they
attend standardized club meetings,
church services, and socials. They
have standardized fun at standardized
big city conventions. They are drafted
into standardized armies, and if they
escape the death of mechanized
warfare they die of highly uniform
diseases, and to the accompaniment
of routine platitudes they are buried
in standardized graves and celebrated
by standardized obituary notices.
Caricature? Yes, perhaps a crude
one, but 'with a core of frightening
validity In it. Every society has its
routines and rituals, the primitive
groups being sometimes more tyrann-
ously restricted by convention than
the industrial societies. The difference
is that where the primitive is bound by
the rituals of tradition and group life,
the American is bound by the rituals
of the machine, its products, and their
distribution and consumption.
The role of the machine in this
standardized living must be made
clear. The machine mechanizes life,
and since mass production is part of
Big Technology, the machine also
makes uniformity of life possible. But
it does not compel such uniformity.
The American who shaves with an
electric razor and his wife who buys
a standardized "home permanent" for
her hair do not thereby have to wear
a uniformly vacuous expression
through the day. A newspaper that
uses the press association wire stories
and prints from a highly mechanized
set of presses does not thereby have
to take the same view of the world
that every other paper takes. A
novelist who uses a typewriter instead
of a quill pen does not have to turn
out machine-made historical romances.
The answer Is that some do and
some don't. What the machine and
the mass-produced commodities have
done has been to make conformism
easier. To buy and use what everyone
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
25

26
MACHINE LIVING (Continued)
else does, and live and think as
everyone else does, becomes a short
cut Involving no need for one's own
thinking. Those Americans have been
captured by conformist living who have
been capturable by It.
Cultural stereotypes are an inherent
part of all group living, and they
become sharper with mass living.
There have always been unthinking
people leading formless, atomized
lives. What has happened in America
is that the economics of mass pro¬
duction has put a premium on uni¬
formity, so that America produces
more units of more commodities
(although sometimes of fewer models)
than other cultures. American sales¬
manship has sought out every potential
buyer of a product, so that stand¬
ardization makes its way by the force
of the distributive mechanism into
every life.
Y
| ET for the person who has
a personality pattern and style of his
own, standardization need not mean
anything more than a set of con¬
veniences which leave a larger margin
of leisure and greater scope for
creative living. "That we may be
enamored by the negation brought by
the machine," as Frank Lloyd Wright
has put it, "may be inevitable for a
time. But I like to imagine this novel
negation to be only a platform under¬
foot to enable a greater splendour of
life to be ours than any known to
Greek or Roman, Goth or Moor. We
should know a life beside which the
life they knew would seem not only
limited in scale and narrow in range
but pale In richness of the colour of
imagination and integrity of spirit."
Which is to say that technology is
the shell of American life, but a shell
that need not hamper or stultify the
modes of living and thinking. The real
dangers of the American mode of life
are not ¡n the machine or even in
standardization as much as they are
in conformism.
The dangers do not flow from the
contrivances that men have fashioned
to lighten their burdens, or from the
material abundance which, if anything,
should make a richer cultural life
possible. They flow rather from the
mimesis of the dominant and success¬
ful by the weak and mediocre, from
the intolerance of diversity, and from
the fear of being thought different
from one's fellows. This is the
essence of conformism.
It would be hard to make the
connexion between technology and
Above, headlights of innumerable cars create brilliant patterns resembling
a collection of diamond bracelets, as they cross overpass bridges
on four levels, in Los Angeles, California. Right, twin loudspeakers
look like bicycle racers in a drive-in cinema where motorists can park
to watch a film show from their cars.
conformism, unless one argues that
men fashion their minds in the image
of their surroundings, and that in a
society of automatism, human beings
themselves will become automatons.
But this Is simply not so. What
relation there is between technology
and conformism is far more subtle and
less mystical. It is a double relation.
On the one hand, as Jefferson
foresaw, the simpler society of small-
scale manufacture did not involve
concentration of power in a small
group, was not vulnerable to break¬
down, and did not need drastic govern¬
mental controls; a society of big-scale
industry has shown that it does. In
that sense the big machines carry with
them an imperative toward the directed
society-, which ¡n turn whether ¡n war
or peace encourages conformism.
On the second score, as De Tocque-
vllle saw, a society in which there is
no recognized elite group to serve as
the arbiter of morals, thought, and
style is bound to be a formless one in
which the ordinary person seeks to
heal his insecurity by attuning himself
to the "tyranny of opinion" to what
others do and say and what they think
of him. He Is ruled by imitation and
prestige rather than a sense of his
own worth.
These are dangerous trends, but all
of social living is dangerous. The
notable fact is that in spite of its
machines and standardization America
has proved on balance less conformist
than some other civilizations where the
new technology has played less of a
role.
Americans have, it ¡s true, an
idolatry of production and consumption
as they have an idolatry of success.
But they have not Idolized authority
or submitted unquestioningly to human
or supernatural oracles. They have
had their cranks, eccentrics, and
anarchists, and they still cling to
individualism, even when it is being
battered hard.
It will take them some time before
they can become "man in equipoise",
balancing what science and the mach-

^
- <?
<**
..
*
Photo USIS
ine can do as against the demands
of the life processes. But where they
have failed, the failure has been less
that of the machines they have wrought
than of the very human fears, greeds,
and competitive drives that have
accompanied the building of a powerful
culture.
It has been suggested that the
American, like the Faustian, made a
bargain with the Big Technology: a
bargain to transform his ways of life
and thought in the image of the ma¬
chine, in return for the range of power
and riches the machine would bring
within his reach. It Is a fine allegory.
But truer than the Faustian bargain,
with its connotations of the sale of
one's soul to the Devil, is the ¡mage
of Prometheus stealing fire from the
gods in order to light a path of
progress for men. The path is not
yet clear, nor the meaning of progress,
nor where it is leading: but the bold
Intent, the irreverence, and the secular
daring have all become part of the
American experience.
