ATILIO DELL'ORO MAINI, former Minister of National
Education of Argentina, is President of the Unesco General
Conference. He was elected at the last session of the
Conference in November, 1970. The General Conference, which
consists of representatives of Unesco's 125 Member States, is
the sovereign body of this United Nations Agency and meets
every two years to discuss and vote the organization's programme
and budget The General Conference elects the members
of The Executive Board as well as the Director-General
of the Unesco Secretariat.
PREM N. KIRPAL, former Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of
Education of India, is President of the Unesco Executive Board.
The Board consist of 34 members who supervise the
execution of Unesco's programme and the administration of its
budget between sessions of the General Conference. It
usually meets several times each year.

Unesco
in the Second
Development
Decade
L
¡IKE the last, reluctant
leaves of autumn, the flags of 125 na¬
tions, which for five weeks had flutter¬
ed in the chill air of Paris, were
hauled down on November 14, 1970,
marking the end of Unesco's 16th
General Conference.
But while the autumn winds were
stripping the trees In preparation for
the long winter months, a strong wind
of change was whistling through the
corridors and conference rooms of
Unesco headquarters. For though
Unesco has reached the ripe age of.
25, the pace of its activities is quicken¬
ing as the world enters the Second
Development Decade.
Change was the keynote of the
speech made by the Director-General
of Unesco, Mr. René Maheu, introduc¬
ing Unesco's Long-Term Outline Plan,
itself an Innovation of major signifi¬
cance, covering a span of five years.
Recognition of the need for long-term
planning underlines the growing scope
and value of the tasks now being
assumed by Unesco which can no
longer be dealt with piecemeal on a
two-yearly basis. Great alms require
continuity as well as flexibility, and
this is what the Outline Plan is intend¬
ed to provide.
"I am profoundly convinced," said
Mr. Maheu, "that Unesco's mission is
essentially a cultural one and that Its
centre of gravity is destined, in a rela¬
tively distant future, to shift from educ¬
ation, where it Is located at present,
to science and then from science to
culture, and that the social sciences
will play a most important role in this
process."

by
Howard Brabyn
RENE MAHEU of France has been
Director-General of Unesco since 1962
and is now in the middi'e of his second
term of office. The Director-General is
the chief executive of the Secretariat
and is appointed for a six years term.
He is responsible for the preparation
and administration of the budget, the
execution of the programme, and the
recruitment and running of the
Secretariat.
MALCOLM S. ADISESHIAH
of India retired as Deputy
Director-General of Unesco at
the end of 1970 after completing
22 years service with the
Secretariat. He is now Director
of the Madras Institute
of Development Studies.
JOHN E. FOBES of the United States
assumed the duties of Deputy
Director-General on January I, 1971.
Before joining Unesco in 1964 as
Assistant Director-General in charge of
Administration, Mr. Fobes had for many
years been involved in the formulation
and implementation of United States
aid programmes and American policies
in international organization affairs.
The desire for change was reflect¬
ed in the budget and programme
which are voted every two years by
the 125 Member States at the general
conference. At a total of $89,898,560.
the allocation for 1971-72 was 16.1 per
cent higher than the previous two-
year budget. An additional contribu¬
tion towards Unesco's operational pro¬
jects of $69,422,000 over the two-year
period will come from the United
Nations Development Programme.
The shift in emphasis towards
science was seen In the planned par¬
ticipation of Unesco in the setting up
of UNISISTthe United Nations Infor¬
mation System, Scientific and Techni¬
cal a prodigious undertaking destin¬
ed to have far-reaching repercussions
throughout the world. With a central
fund of scientific and technical infor¬
mation available, the duplication of
time-consuming and often tedious
research will be avoided.
At present, scientific knowledge
often remains locked up within coun¬
tries by differences of language and
method. Initially UNISIST aims to
establish a common language of sym¬
bols that can be handled by compu¬
ters. A start has been made with a
basic set of 45 characters made up
of Roman capitals, 10 digits and nine
other characters. An inter-governmen¬
tal conference is to be convened by
Unesco this year to push this work
ahead and to arrange for the training
of scientists from the developing coun¬
tries to enable them to work the
system.
In the more distant future, UNISIST
hopes, by encouraging standardization
of norms used, to make an effective
link-up between the various national
scientific information systems as sim¬
ple as making an intercontinental tele¬
phone call.
Information, or rather the lack of it,
Is one of the key factors preventing
effective control of pollution of all
kinds with all its concomitant dangers
for the biosphere, the thin layer of air,
water and land in which life on this
planet exists.
Unesco has been one of the leaders
in pointing out the dangers that exist
for us If we go on Increasing atmo¬
spheric pollution, If we release more
and more oil into the oceans, if our
consumption of energy continues to
double every ten years. These dangers
are now increasingly recognized, but
there Is still too wide a gap between
awareness of the problem and positive
action to deal with it.
With this in mind the Unesco gen¬
eral conference launched a long-term,
inter-governmental programme Man
and the Biosphere. An International
co-ordinating council, with representa¬
tives from 25 States, Is to start work
this year and the programme should
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
13

UNESCO (Continued)
be well under way by the time a Uni¬
ted Nations conference on the human
environment Is held at Stockholm
early in 1972.
The programme aims to develop
ways of measuring changes in the
environment, to establish comparable
data, to arrange for exchange of in¬
formation between existing monitoring
systems and to attempt to achieve
more accurate forecasting of future
trends. In all these activities Unesco
will be co-operating closely with other
specialized United Nations Agencies
such as the World Health Organization,
the Food and Agriculture Organization
and, of coursé, the United Nations
itself.
Work carried out by Unesco in col¬
laboration with the Inter-governmental
Oceanic Commission is to be extend¬
ed in a long-term plan for oceanic
research and exploration and assis¬
tance given towards the establishment
of the world monitoring system» of
automatic buoys known as IGOSS
(Integrated Global Ocean Station Sys¬
tem).
Changing attitudes towards culture,
already widely evident in recent years,
received concrete acknowledgement In
Unesco's budget and programme. The
English essayist John Cowper Powys
once wrote that "culture is the bed¬
rock, the final wall against which one
leans one's back in a [_ god-forsaken
chaos." While the Unesco general
conference might not have been pre¬
pared to go all the way with this
assessment, it clearly recognized that
culture and cultural development was
a sine qua non for the whole fabric
of Unesco policy.
The general conference enthusiastic¬
ally endorsed the findings of the Inter¬
governmental Conference on Cultural
Policies attended by representatives
of 85 countries In Venice last summer.
The Venice conference recognized
that if there was a human right to
culture, the State had a corresponding
obligation to provide access to It,
and this obligation Is underlined in
Unesco's programme.
A regional inter-governmental con¬
ference on cultural policies is being
prepared for Europe next year and
conferences are scheduled for Asia
in 1973 and Africa in 1975. What Ven¬
ice did was to put culture back into
the mainstream of development
along with economic and social aims.
Studies to be undertaken will -deal
not only with planning, legislation
and cultural statistics, but with the
democratization of culture and parti¬
cularly with enlisting the mass media"
for cultural development. (See the
"Unesco Courier" special issue of
January 1971.)
The Unesco general conference
took a very important step towards
safeguarding our cultural heritage by
approving the convention to halt Ille¬
gal trafficking in cultural property
through the institution of a "passport",
without which items cannot legally be
exported.
WORLD BOOM IN TELEVISION AND
14
EAD any good books lately? Latest figures
tow plenty available 487,000 titles produced in 1968, a
70 per cent increase in 13 years.
The publishing boom coincided with a television boom.
In 1968, 22 million more TV sets brought the world total to
236 million, nearly eight times as many as in 1953.
Depending on where you live, you might have cut back
on your cinema-going to make time for all that reading
and viewing. The average Briton went to the cinema only
four times in 1968, once less than in 1967. His American
cousin, with 9,800 movie houses and 3,600 drive-in cinemas
to choose from, only managed to get to the cinema seven
times in 1967. In 1968 the Bulgarian went twice as often,
the citizen of the U.S.S.R. (where more than half the world's
cinemas are located) went 20 times.
The champion cinema-goer is still, however, the citizen
of Taiwan, who went 66 times in 1967. Regrettably there
are no Taiwan figures for 1968: it would have been interest¬
ing to see if he continued to go once a week, and more
often when there was something he did not want to miss.
These figures are taken at random from a yearbook the
Unesco Statistical Yearbook 1969 (1), which has just been
published. Taken together they describe an exciting and
unfair world.
Exciting, because this world is culturally expanding, with
more books, more radio sets, more university students and
a record consumption of paper for cultural purposes which
has nearly tripled since the 1950s.
Unfair, because these cultural advances are concentrated
on a minority of the 3,483,000,000 of us.
(1) UNESCO STATISTICAL YEARBOOK 1969, Unesco, 7, Place
Fontenoy, Paris (7*). $26, £7.80 stg., 104 F.
In the case of book production, Europe, which has only
13 per cent of the world's people, publishes more than
44 per cent of the titles. Africa, which has 10 per cent
of the population, publishes only 1.6 per cent, while even
Asia, with 55.9 per cent of the world's people, publishes
only 20.5 per cent. North America produced 14.4 per cent
in 1968, two points down on 1967, while the U.S.S.R.
produced 15.6 per cent, one point up, although still not at
its peak of 20.9 per cent in 1960.
Africans have few chances of cinema-going. People in
Mauritius and dependencies get to the cinema nine times
a year, those in the Spanish Sahara eight times, but most
Africans are lucky if they see a film a year. Algeria had
far and away the greatest number of cinemas at 322 but
this only equals 13 seats per thousand, while Upper Volta
has one seat per thousand, Mali and Burundi even less.
Daily newspaper reading is similarly concentrated. The
Swedes read most, for although the number of papers is
falling, circulation is rising to 518 per thousand. The
Japanese have 492 copies per thousand, the British, who
were world champions at 573 per thousand in 1954,
have 463, Eastern Germany has 445, more than the Fede¬
ral Republic of Germany which has 328. Norway, the
Netherlands, New Zealand and the U.S.S.R. are in the 300s,
a good number of European countries in the 200s.
Circulations become dramatically thinner elsewhere.
Pakistan has 6 newspapers per thousand. Ceylon 44,
Malaysia 75. In Africa, Mauritius and dependencies have
96 per thousand, Dahomey has less than one paper for
every two thousand, Mali is little better at 0.6 per thousand.
One bright spot: at the previous count 44 countries had
no daily paper; now Botswana has started one.
There is a trend for developing countries to produce more

Furthermore, international assistance
is to be mobilized to safeguard the
sites and monuments of Mohenjo
Daro, in Pakistan, Philae, In the United
Arab Republic, and Borobudur, in In¬
donesia. While the conference was
in progress the Federal Republic of
Germany announced a contribution of
more than half a million dollars towards
the rescue of Borobudur, the Nether¬
lands one of $150,000, and Japan
promised to launch a fund-raising
campaign. The Indonesian government
announced the allocation of one million
dollars to the project.
Buildings and monuments are not
the only aspects of culture that Unesco
is helping to preserve. Work is to
go ahead on the preparation for publi¬
cation of a "General History of Africa",
the collection and publication of Afri¬
can oral tradition and the promotion
of African languages as a medium of
culture and lifelong education.
In its discussion of the social scien¬
ces the general conference re-affirm
ed that all Unesco's activities. have
social consequences. Trying to act
without reference to the social scien¬
ces is like trying to dock a liner with¬
out a pilot. The servicing of projects
by social scientists is, in the words
of Assistant Director-General Richard
Hoggart, "more than mere intellectual
plumbing," for it can affect the defi¬
nition and operation of entire pro¬
grammes.
The social science programme will
concentrate on the development and
promotion of human rights and peace.
Population and environment problems
will be studied and the results of an
enquiry Into trends in human science
research will be published.
Despite the increasing emphasis on
science and culture, education con¬
tinues to receive the major portion
of the Unesco budget. This is
understandable In view of the fact
that the world's population is grow¬
ing bigger and growing younger. In
western Samoa, for example, 51 per
cent of the population is of school
age, and Barbados Is spending as
much as 20 per cent of its national
budget on education.
Experience in the developing
countries has shown that the need is
not merely for more and more educa¬
tion. In Dahomey, only 0.7 per cent
of the children who entered first grade
two years ago are likely to complete
their full 13 years of schooling, while
50 per cent of the 37,000 enrolled will
not even finish primary school. In
Zambia there is a problem faced by
many developing countries; 50,000
primary school leavers could not find
secondary school places In 1969, and
very few of them could find jobs either.
The days are over, in Zambia and other
African countries, when a certificate of
education was a passport to good
employment.
Over recent years, and particularly
during International Education Year
1970, Unesco has been conducting a
re-examination of the aims and methods
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
films and the developed countries less. But even where
patterns change, unfairness remains. After Japan, India
produced more full-length films than any other country
in 1968 at 350, close to the American rate in the early
1950s but the average Indian only got to the cinema four
times in the last year recorded.
The Yearbook does not contain the latest U.S.A. film
production figures which were running at 215 in 1967, behind
Italy's 254 in 1968, and not much ahead of Greece's 192, the
U.S.S.R. 's 163, Hong Kong's 156 or Pakistan's 133. Only
two African countries are recorded as producing any long
films: the U.A.R. (54) and Algeria (3).
School enrolment figures aro much more encouraging.
In the year 1967 some 15 million more students were
enrolled at the three levels of education, total enrolment
being nearly 450 million. Of these over 320 million were
at the first level, over 100 million at the second level and
between 21 and 22 million were at the third level.
For the first time the Yearbook presents a series of
enrolment figures adjusted to allow for the different national
systems and the differing ages of the pupils in various
countries, so as to permit real comparisons between
countries. One striking comparison concerns the enrolment
of girls, who, at under 200 million, still make up well under
half the world total, and are still most disadvantaged in the
developing countries. Whereas in North and South America
52 million of the 108 million enrolled are girls, in Asia only
62 million out of the 164 million students are girls. The
percentage of girls enrolled in Africa, although steadily
increasing, is the same as in Asia about 38 per cent.
Progress shows in the distribution of radio sets. Although
half the world's 674 million sets were in North America,
the number per thousand went up fairly steadily. Morocco,
which had 15 per thousand in 1950, had 57 in 1968, Kenya
had 49, Gabon 104, the Seychelles 204. Even the lowest
distribution rate in an independent African country nine
per thousand for Mali and Rwanda was many times better
than most countries' 20 years back. The lowest distribution
rate recorded in South America was French Guyana's 82,
the highest Argentina and Uruguay at 381. Asia's rates
vary from Bahrein's 1,075 per 1,000 (four times Japan's
score) to Bhutan's 4.
The sections on science and technology contain for the
second time data on the use countries make of human
resources the deployment of scientists and engineers on
research and experimental development (R & D), for
example. Current expenditure for R & D compared with
Gross National Product (G.N. P.) figures give a rough
measure of the effort a country is making and certainly
point the way forward. While the U.S.A. spent approxi¬
mately 3.0 per cent of its G.N. P. in 1967 and other
advanced countries between 1 and 2 per cent, most of the
developing countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America
spent less than 0.5 per cent.
There are some hopeful straws in the wind, however;
a number of young countries have doubled and sometimes
tripled their current expenditures for R & D over the past
five years. Yet this effort remains relatively modest in
comparison with the development tasks ahead for these
countries.
An entirely new section deals with public expenditure on .
culture, giving an idea of differing cultural priorities.
Botswana, having started a daily paper, spent most of its
money on its press Radio and TV took the largest sums
in Austria, Denmark, Hungary, Niger, Norway, Poland and
the U.S.S.R. Nowhere do the fine arts rank top, and the
theatre gets priority only in Czechoslovakia and the Federal
Republic of Germany.
15

UNESCO (Continued)
The recognition of Man's rights
and human dignity
of education. This process is to
continue with special emphasis on
education for all and lifelong education.
Problems of women's access to educa¬
tion and the special needs of the
handicapped will receive particular
attention.
Ministers of education are to attend
regional conferences to be organized
by Unesco In Asia in 1971, in Latin
America in 1972, and in Europe in 1973.
A commission of international experts
has been set up to study plans for
developing educational systems region
by region and a report which will help
developing countries in their planning
will be ready this summer. Another
commission starts work this year and
will advise developing countries how
to make the best use of training
schemes available abroad to provide
the skills needed at home.
In a new departure, Unesco is to
send out "flying squads" of experts
to help Member States with the
planning of curricula. One of the big
problems of today is how to adapt
the school curriculum to keep pace
with rapid technological change. In
some cases curricula have become
irrelevant; in others, particularly in
former colonies, the "imported"
curricula never were relevant.
Not so long ago Jane Austen's
studies of upper middle-class life In
19th century England were still required
reading for African boys who wanted
to get ahead, whilst their own countries'
social problems were totally ignored;
in predominantly agricultural countries
agricultural problems were omitted
from school programmes in which long
hours were devoted to the study of the
European Industrial Revolution.
D
16
	 ESPITE determined efforts
over the years, literacy remains one of
the world's major problems. Although
the percentage of illiterates is drop¬
ping, the total number of illiterates
keeps on rising.
Unesco's Experimental World Liter¬
acy Programme is to be continued
in 12 large scale projects in countries
ranging from Ecuador to Tanzania.
The Indian government, for example,
alms to halve Its illiterate population
of 115 million within the next ten years.
Included in the world literacy pro
gramme will be a number of projects
to encourage young people to parti¬
cipate in economic and social develop¬
ment.
The very latest technological
weapons are to be used in this
continuing battle. This year Unesco
specialists are to examine the possible
uses of computers in education; long-
term studies on the use of tele¬
communication satellites in education
will include experiments to see how
far culturally linked areas, such as
French-speaking Africa, can make use
of regional programmes thus reducing
the per capita costs; a major
project based on Santiago is under
way in which twenty experts are
studying the feasibility of a regional
satellite education system for Latin
America; $200.000 is being spent on
assistance to the Latin American Ins¬
titute for Educational Communications
which carries out research into the use
of mass media for education, trains
personnel and sends out mobile teams
of experts to help national activities.
The growing part played by the
mass media in plans for education
is typical of the trend towards inter¬
disciplinary action in Unesco's pro¬
gramme. Unesco's Communications
Sector no longer restricts itself to the
training of journalists and television
men or the promotion of book produc¬
tion and distribution, important as
these things are. American children
now spend more time in front of their
television screens than they do behind
their desks, so television is already
playing a vital part in their education.
Unesco's communications programme
recognizes this interaction and tries to
harness it.
The general conference also recog¬
nized the inherent dangers of these
powerful new media. A draft declara¬
tion of guiding principles on the uses
of telecommunication satellites is being
drawn up to counter the evident risks
involved when a few countries will
soon be in a position to impose their
cultural, educational and political
standards on large sections of the
world.
While attention Is focussed on the
new possibilities of sophisticated
modern media in education, one of the
most exciting items in the programme
has to do with the oldest form of mass
communication the book. By accla¬
mation the general conference desig¬
nated 1972 as International Book Year,
and Unesco is to launch a programme
to make what is still the cheapest,
handiest (you cannot turn back the
pages of a television broadcast) and
the most effective means of mass
communication available to more
people.
Although there are now twice as
many readers as twenty years ago,
the book is still a rarity in too many
parts of the world. International Book
Year will encourage writing and trans¬
lation, production and distribution as
well as the reading habit, which needs
a boost both in those countries where
books are rare and in those in which
television consumes an increasing
share of leisure time.
Unesco has already set up book
development centres in Karachi and
Bogota and is to establish a copyright
information centre to help developing
countries to get greater access to
those protected works which they need
to fill the gaps in their own production.
T
HE dominating theme of
Unesco's 16th General Conference can
be summed up in the one word "Dev¬
elopment". The urgent need to help the
developing countries to throw off the
indignities of the past and develop
their enormous potentialities was "at
the core of almost every discussion
and every decision.
Addressing the delegates at the Ple¬
nary Session, the President of the
general conference, Mr. Atilio dell'Oro
Maini, former Minister of National Edu¬
cation in Argentina, declared:
"The Second Development Decade
will give Unesco the opportunity of
increasing its aid to Member States.
Unesco is largely responsible for the
recognition of the fact that man is at
once the source, the agent and the
beneficiary of a development which
should be of benefit to the whole
community. Development is not merely
economic growth, nor the purely mate¬
rial expansion of a consumer society.
It is also, above all, the raising up of
man and the recognition of his rights
and dignity."
Standing on the threshhold of the
Second Development Decade, Unesco
has set itself a new pattern of con¬
tinuity with change; building on the
achievements of twenty-five years it
is preparing to meet the new challenge
with new ideas. M
