The annual solar radiation received by the earth is equivalent to about
35,000 times our present yearly consumption of energy. Attempts at
harnessing this vast energy source have led to the construction
of solar furnaces, distillation plants, hot water systems for housing, etc.,
powered by the sun. A promising line of progress lies in the further
development of the use of semi-conductors, such as germanium
and silicon, by means of which sunlight can be converted directly
into electricity. Solar batteries consisting of hundreds of silicon cells
have already been used on satellites to power Instruments such
as cameras, transmitters and recording apparatus. Right, a Soviet
solar powered water distillation plant in the Kara-Kum desert
between the Caspian and the Aral Seas.

A SOVIET
SCIENTIST
LOOKS
AT
FUTUROLOGY
by Igor V. Bestuzhev-Lada
IGOR V. BESTUZHEV-LADA, a leading
Soviet futurologist, heads the Section for
Social Forecasting of the Institute of Con¬
certed Social Research (U.S.S.R. Aca¬
demy of Sciences). He is also director of
the Social Forecasting Research Institute
of the Soviet Sociological Association. Dr.
Bestuzhev-Lada has published numerous
books on futurology, including "If the World
Disarms", "Outlines of the Future", and
"Modern Problems of Social Forecasting"
(all in Russian).

V'à
Photo V. Reznikov © "Soviet Union" Magazine, U.S. S R
^g^NTIL quite recently the
term "forecasting" was usually asso¬
ciated with the weather, earthquakes
and other natural processes that could
be neither planned nor controlled.
Nowadays it Is used more and more
frequently in connexion with social
developments in which planning and
control are Important factors: the
social aspects of science and tech¬
nology, economics, social relations,
urban development, education, health
services, state organization and law,
politics, international relations, mili¬
tary affairs, the development of vast
expanses of our planet and the ex¬
ploration of space.
One might ask why we need to fore¬
cast things that can be planned and
controlled. The answer is that every
decision in planning and direction must
have a sound basis and offer, as far
as possible, the best chance of suc¬
cess. The purpose of a forecast is to
provide relevant data, to evaluate both
the probable and the desirable results
of the project being studied, and to
suggest ways of reducing the gap
between them.
Practical experience in many coun¬
tries has shown that forecasting raises
the efficiency of plans, programmes,
projects and decision-making in gen¬
eral, and this explains the extensive
growth in recent years of various
methods of social forecasting.
But this does not mean, as is some¬
times claimed, that scientific fore¬
casting Is of recent origin. Over a
century ago, Karl Marx and Friedrich
Engels demonstrated that it was pos¬
sible to analyse future problems scien¬
tifically. They prognosticated future
developments by analysing existing
trends, and used what have now come
to be known as the systematic ap¬
proach, social modelling, social
norms, etc. In short, their methodo¬
logy of forecasting anticipated the
demands of modern science. Nowa¬
days, the forecasting and planning of
social processes are taken for granted,
but in the mid-1 9th century, the work
of Marx and Engels represented a
bold, new scientific approach.
Research into the future is nowa¬
days developing under the impetus
of the scientific and technological revo¬
lution and its social implications, and
recent qualitative changes in many
spheres of human activity show how
important it is to make exhaustive
appraisals before plans are drawn up
or decisions taken.
The search for solutions to press¬
ing social problems has already pro¬
duced hundreds of practical methods
for forecasting over relatively long
periods and with a comparatively high
degree of accuracy, and has led in
many countries to the appearance of
specialized institutions and groups
whose aim is to produce realistic
social forecasts with these methods AQ
and to develop still more reliable ¿U
techniques.
Such forecasting is particularly
necessary and effective in countries
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

SOVIET SCIENTIST (Continued)
Spectacular results from the 'systems approach7
Photo M. Nachlnkln © "Soviet Union"
Magazine, U.S.S.R.
Named after Vladimir Komarov, one of
the first Soviet cosmonauts, this U.S.S.R.
research ship is a floating océanographie
laboratory and satellite tracking
station. Its unusual superstructure
wedded to its traditional hull seems to
symbolize the blurring of the once rigid
demarcation between present and future.
24
with state-planned economies. A case
in point is that of urban development
in the Soviet Union where, in the past
few years alone, over 100 new towns
have sprung up in accordance with a
state plan for the rational implantation
of new industrial centres. Naturally,
state ownership of the land facilitates
the forecasting and carrying out of
such projects.
One could say that social fore¬
casting is based on combinations of
several methods:
Opinion-gathering through polls of
various sectors of the population
and systematic questioning of spe¬
cialists;
Advanced extrapolation, that is, the
verification and analysis of data
from direct extrapolation, using
modern mathematical methods and
cybernetics and the complex tech¬
niques of game theory, the theory
of probability, the theory of func¬
tional research and the theory of
decision-making;
Forecast modelling based on the
"systems approach" (a method
which has already produced spec¬
tacular results in the field of space
research).
Two main types of forecasting
models are used: the "exploratory"
method, which aims to answer the
question: "what will happen if the pre¬
sent trend in this or that field con¬
tinues unimpeded?"; and the " norma¬
tive" forecasting method, where the
question posed is "what would be the
desirable, optimal development of the
process we are studying?"
Practical experience has shown that
short term (1-2 years) and medium
term (3-7 years) exploratory forecast¬
ing is between 95 and 98 per cent relia¬
ble. As yet this cannot be said of long
term forecasts (10-20 years or more).
However, it is not only a question
of whether a forecast eventually comes
exactly true or not; more important still
is for the forecasts to raise the effi¬
ciency of programmes, projects and
decisions. Social forecasting has al¬
ready shown that It can double or
even treble the profitability of an enter¬
prise, reduce planned expenditures by
as much as 5 to 10 per cent, and
speed up decision-making consider¬
ably.
A simple example will help to de¬
monstrate the practical advantages of
forecasting. In a factory manufactur¬
ing television sets, it Is obviously im¬
portant for the planning department to
know what technological changes are
likely to be introduced in the manu¬
facture of television sets within the
next few years, and which types of
sets will be most in demand.
If the management possesses this
information together with the results
of market research into population
growth, changes in social structures,
income levels, etc., it will be able to
concentrate production on the most
profitable lines.
Forecasting is nowadays often spo¬
ken of as a new scientific discipline
a "science of the future". But
though we are now witnessing the birth
of a new science, it is not a science
of the future in general. This new
discipline is concerned with the laws
and methods of forecasting, and to
distinguish it from forecasting proper it
is frequently referred to as "pro¬
gnostics".
Forecasting as such, just like ana¬
lysis or diagnosis, is an essential func¬
tion of the sciences and in this sense
it is not a new but a vigorously dev¬
eloping trend of modern scientific
research.
A
i measure of its develop¬
ment is the fact that in 1970, 293 orga¬
nizations in western Europe were
engaged in drawing up complex, long-
term social forecasts, including 84 in
Britain, 70 in France, 33 in the Fed.
Rep. of Germany, 22 in Italy, etc.
Several dozen such organizations were
also operating in Japan. And these
figures do not include research units
engaged in short-term forecasting or
futurology research for specific
projects.
In 1967, some 600 similar institu¬
tions were operating in the U.S.A., but
saturation point was reached and their
growth stopped. Hardly a single large
corporation, firm, board or institution
was without its own forecasting ser¬
vice.
Later, demands for complex, long-
term forecasts gradually came to be
handled by the bigger U.S. research
organizations and the top experts in
the forecasting field. Of the 356 orga¬
nizations of this kind operating in 1970,
various government-operated or gov¬
ernment-subsidized, services account¬
ed for about one-half, corporations
for a third, universities for a sixth and
various foundations for about a tenth.
The most influential of the futurolo¬
gy research organizations in western
Europe and America include the "Futu-
ribles" organization, in Paris, "Man-

kind 2000", In London, the "Commis¬
sion for the Year 2000," at the U.S.
Academy of Arts and Sciences, in Bos¬
ton, the "World Future Society", in
Washington, the "Gesellschaft für Zu¬
kunftsforschung", In the Fed. Rep. of
Germany, and the "Futurology Asso-,
ciation of Japan." In recent years they
have convened a number of national
and international conferences and sym¬
posia, among the most important of
which were the international future
research congresses held in Oslo, in
1967, and Kyoto, in 1970.
The 1960s saw the founding of spe¬
cialized magazines such as "Analyse
et Prévision" and "2000" (France), "Fu¬
turist" (U.S.A.), "Futurum" (Fed. Rep.
of Germany), "Technological Forecast¬
ing" (U.S.A.), and "Trend" (Czecho-
slova.kia).
In the U.S.S.R. special departments
have been set up to work on the
theoreticaj problems of social fore¬
casting, and several hundred groups
of scientists are carrying out applied
research and drawing up precise fore¬
casts for factories, industrial groups
and indeed entire industries.
The U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences
and Soviet ministries are now very
active in these fields. For example,
the scientific councils of the Academy
of Sciences concerned with planning,
social research, etc., have set up spe¬
cial sections to co-ordinate the work
of forecasting specialists on various
boards and institutions, while mem¬
bers of the Soviet Sociological Asso¬
ciation have founded a Forecasting
Institute which conducts permanent
seminars where experts meet to com¬
pare notes on their work.
Specific forecasts have already been
made in the U.S.S.R. concerning de¬
velopments up to the year 2000 in fuel
and power, the water economy, hy¬
dro-power construction and trans¬
port. Long range problems of science
(the manufacture of new materials, the
greater use of chemistry in production,
the future possibilities of biology, etc.)
have been studied, and a scientific es¬
timate has been made of the extension
of higher and specialized secondary
education in the 1970s.
Social forecasting services are being
set up in the German Democratic
Republic and Bulgaria. In Poland, a
state committee, "Poland in the Year
2000", has been established under the
chairmanship of the Vice-President of
the Academy of Sciences. Similar
research groups are being set up In
Czechoslovakia, Romania and Hungary.
Symposia, which brought together
CONTINUED PAGE 27
Mimicking the movements of a human arm and hand with ghostly
precision, this Soviet-developed artificial arm and hand unit brings
new hope to amputees. Myoelectric impulses (the tiny electrical
impulses emitted when a muscle contracts) are picked up by
electrodes attached to the stump of an arm, amplified and used
to activate a miniature motor which opens or closes the artificial
hand. Amputees fitted with these ingenious false limbs can undertake
such delicate tasks as shaving, sewing, painting and model-making.
Thanks to the almost incredible advances made in electronics, the
machine has indeed become an extension of the human brain.
25

Unless you are selected for a space flight or a voyage of exploration of the ocean bed, you
will never see the sun eclipsed by the earth, above left, or this submarine "snowflake"
growing on the ocean bed 5,300 metres below the surface of the sea, above right. To future
generations, or even to children now alive, such sights may one day be commonplace. But
if most of us are still chained to the more pedestrian life (below) of this planet, futurology
can open up a tempting vision and in our imagination we too can scale the heights and
plumb the depths of the universe.

SOVIET SCIENTIST (Continued)
representatives from the East European
countries, were held in Prague in 1967
and 1968 to discuss "Man and Society
in the Scientific-Technological Revo¬
lution". Two further symposia took
place in Moscow, in 1970, one concern¬
ed with scientific, technological, soc¬
ial and economic questions, the other
with medico-biological forecasting.
The greatest progress has been
made in the forecasting of scientific,
technological, economic, demographic
and criminological trends which are
comparatively easy to express statis¬
tically, but the forecasting of trends in
ethnic processes, public education,
culture and sociology, which are more
difficult to define in numerical terms,
have tended to lag behind.
In global terms, there is a need for
more systematic forecasting on the
long-term consequences of the tech¬
nological revolution, on the easing of
international tensions, on the slow¬
down and ultimate halting of the arms
race, and on partial or complete disar¬
mament. The Specialized Agencies of
the United Nations, and in particular
Unesco, could play a major role in
these studies.
The increasing pollution of the bio¬
sphere, for example, is closely linked
with the dynamics and balances of
world fuel and power, raw materials
and transport. Even an outline fore¬
cast of critical situations that might
arise in the future, along with sugges¬
tions for meeting them, would be of
immense use.
The long-term problem of the
world food situation is a major pre¬
occupation of the Food and Agriculture
Organization. The "green revolution"
and technical advances in the produc¬
tion of synthetic foods open up vast
horizons. Yet despite these scientific
and technical successes, social condi¬
tions in the world are such that two
thirds of its people are still under¬
nourished, with one-half actually living
under conditions of starvation. Fore¬
casts made with a view to achieving a
sufficient food balance could be of
capital value in the war against hunger.
A crucial factor in the development
of Asian, African and Latin American
countries is the problem of finding
employment for their exploding popu¬
lations. To meet this problem, dozens
of new agricultural and industrial areas
will have to be created on these
continents.
In this connexion, the International
Labour Organization will certainly need
to devote its attention, among other
measures, to projects that have been
drawn up for a general "reconstruc¬
tion" of vast areas of the African,
South American and Asian continents.
Appropriate use of the potential hy¬
dro-electric power of African rivers,
particularly the Congo, would provide
water for the irrigation of millions of
acres of lands which could then be¬
come hinterlands for dozens of big
industrial centres. The Aswan High
Dam, built in the United Arab Repu¬
blic with aid from the Soviet Union, is
a striking example in Africa of a major
engineering enterprise designed to
transform and develop a national eco¬
nomy.
However, in such far-reaching pro¬
jects there is an inherent danger that
we may unwittingly disturb the balance
of nature. But such risks could be
reduced to reasonable proportions by
systematic forecasts and studies. Con¬
sidering the social significance of such
projects, it would be advisable to begin
this research immediately.
No less urgent is the need for
forecasts on long-term problems
posed by a reconversion of the world
economy in the event of a halt being
called to the arms race and, beyond
this, the prospect of partial or com¬
plete disarmament.
It is sometimes suggested that the
arms race should be allowed to go
on merely to forestall the danger of
economic dislocation. It would surely
be more sensible to consider this
whole question on a scientific basis,
by attempting to construct a series of
exploratory and normative forecasting
models relating to the reconversion of
the world economy on a regional and
global scale.
The forecasts could cover not only
economic aspects, but also prospects
for a positive development of interna¬
tional relations, including the progres¬
sive easing of international tensions,
the completion of de-colonization, the
halting of the arms race, the banning
of weapons of mass destruction, and
complete and general disarmament,
with effective control over all these
measures exercised by the United Na¬
tions and its Specialized Agencies.
Finally, the forecasts could tackle
the problems of reorganizing the mili¬
tary-industrial potential of the devel¬
oped countries as resources for boost¬
ing technological and social progress
on a global scale.
A programme of this scope and
vision would need the services of many
research organizations, and a leading
role could fall to the scientific bodies
of the United Nations, particularly
Unesco.
And in this quest for peace and
disarmament, the specialists engaged y J
in social forecasting would have a '
major responsibility to plan for its
success.
