INTERNATIONAL YEAR FOR ACTION TO COMBAT RACISM AND RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
The year 1971 has been designated International Year for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination by the
General Assembly of the United Nations. Throughout its
25 years of existence, Unesco has waged a permanent war
against these twin evils. During 1971, a special effort is
being made to mobilize public opinion and governmental
and inter-governmental bodies to take more positive action
on behalf of racial equality. At Unesco's Paris headquarters
a public Round Table is to be held, from March 22 to 26,
on "Race and Society" at which a number of internationally
famous personalities have been invited to speak. Audience
participation will also be invited. One of Unesco's best
sellers, "The Race Question in Modern Science", first
published in 1956, is being revised and a new version in
English and French, including a number of entirely new
chapters, is to be published in May this year. A revised
edition of the Apartheid Report, first published in 1967, ¡s
also being prepared.
In his message to the world on the occasion of the
"Day of Peace", January I, 1971, major portions of which
we publish below, His Holiness Pope Paul VI speaks of the
growth of racial and religious discrimination and the menace
it represents to world peace.


THE WILL TO PEACE
Message of His Holiness Pope Paul VI
11
BRISTEN to Us. It is worth¬
while. Yes, as usual, Our word is:
peace. But it is the word of which
the world is in need, urgently in need,
and that makes it new.
Let us open, our eyes at the dawn
of this new year, let us observe two
orders of general facts and events,
which affect the world, its peoples,
families and individuals. These facts,
¡t seems to Us, influence our destinies
deeply and directly. Each one of us
can be their horoscope.
Observe the first order. In truth it
is not an order, but a disorder. For
the facts which We assemble in this
category all indicate a return to
thoughts and deeds which it seemed
the tragic experience of war had, or
should have, wiped away. At the end
of the war everyone said: Enough!
Enough of what? Of everything that
gave rise to the human butchery and
the appalling devastation. Immediately
after the war, at the beginning of this
generation, humanity became suddenly
conscious that it was not enough to
bury the dead, heal the wounds, rebuild
what was destroyed and renew and-
Improve the face of the earth; the
causes of the conflagration we had
undergone must be removed.
The causes: this was the wise plan:
to look for the causes and to eliminate
them. The world breathed again.
Indeed It seemed that a new era was
about to open, the era of universal
peace. Everyone seemed ready to
accept radical changes, in order to
avoid new conflicts.
For the political, social and economic
structures a perspective of wonderful
moral and social Innovations was
presented. There was talk of justice,
of human rights, of betterment of the
weak, of orderly co-existence, of
organized collaboration, of world union.
Great gestures were made: the
victors, for example, came to the aid
of the vanquished. Great institutions
were founded. The world began to
organize itself on principles of effective
union and common prosperity.
The way to peace, as a normal and
fundamental condition of life in the
world, seemed to have been finally
planned.
And yet, what do we see after
twenty-five years of this material and
idyllic progress? We see, first of all,
that, here and there, wars still rage,
and seem to be incurable plagues,
which threaten to spread and grow
worse. We see a continuation of,
and in places an increase in, social,
racial and religious discrimination.
We see a return of the old mentality;
man seems to entrench himself in
situations of the past, first psycho- '
logical and then political.
The demons of yesterday rise up
again. The supremacy of economic
interests, with the all too easy exploi¬
tation of the weak, once more returns;
so does class hatred and class war¬
fare, and thus Is born again interna¬
tional and civil strife. The struggle
for national prestige and political
power is back; the inflexible conflict
of opposing ambitions, and of the root¬
ed and uncompromising prejudices of
races and ideologies has returned;
recourse is had to torture and terro¬
rism; recourse is had to crime and
violence, as a burning ideal, heedless
of the conflagration that may ensue.
Peace is again thought of as no more
than a balance of mighty forces and of
terrifying armaments. Once again
people feel a tremor of fear lest some
catastrophic imprudence might lead to
Incredible and uncontrollable holo¬
causts.
What Is happening? Where are we
going? What has gone wrong? Or
what has been lacking? Must we
resign ourselves to doubting that man
is capable of achieving a just and last¬
ing peace, and to renouncing the task
of implanting into the education of the
new generations the hope for, and the
mentality of, peace?
F
ORTUNATELY another set
of ideas and facts appears before our
gaze; and it is that of progressive
peace. For, notwithstanding every¬
thing, peace marches on. There are
breaks in continuity, there are incon¬
sistencies and difficulties. But all the
same peace marches on and is esta¬
blishing itself in the world with a
certain invincibility.
Every man is conscious of it: peace
Is necessary. It has In its favour the
moral progress of humanity, which is
indisputably directed towards unity.
Unity and peace, when freedom uni¬
tes them, are sisters.
Peace benefits from the growing
favour of public opinion, which is con¬
vinced of the absurdity of war pur¬
sued for its own sake and believed
to be the only and unavoidable means
of settling controversies among men.
Peace avails itself of the ever closer
network of human relations in the
fields of culture, economics, com-

merce, sport and tourism. We must
live together, and it is good to know
each other, and to respect and help
one another.
A fundamental cohesion is taking
shape in the world. This favours
peace. International relations are in¬
creasingly developing, and they form
the premise and also the guarantee
of a certain concord. The great inter¬
national and supranational Institutions
are seen to be providential, at the
source as well as at the perfection
of humanity's peaceful coexistence.
Before this double picture, on which
are superimposed phenomena contrary
to the purpose closest to Our heart
that Is, peace it seems to Us that
a single, ambivalent observation can
be drawn. Let us ask a two-fold ques¬
tion, concerning two aspects of the
ambiguous scene the world presents
today:
why, today, does peace recede?
and why, today, does peace pro¬
gress?
What is the element which emerges,
in a negative sense, or indeed in a
positive sense, from this simple ana¬
lysis? The element Is always man.
Man abased in the first case, man
upraised in the second.
Let us venture to use a word, which
may itself appear ambiguous, but
which, given the thought Its deep signi¬
ficance demands, Is ever splendid and
supreme. The world is "love": love
for man, as the highest principle of
the terrestrial order. Love and peace
are correlative entities.
Peace is a product of love: true love,
human love. Peace supposes a certain
"identity of choice": this Is friendship.
If we want peace, we must recog¬
nize the necessity of building it upon
foundations more substantial than the
non-existence of relations (relations
among men are inevitable; they grow
and become necessary), or the exis¬
tence of relations of self-interest (these
are precarious and often deceptive),
or the web of purely cultural or fortui¬
tous relations (these can be double-
edged, for peace or for combat).
True peace must be founded upon
justice, upon a sense of the intangible
dignity of man, upon the recognition of
an abiding and happy equality between
men, upon the basic principle of human
brotherhood, that is, of the respect
and love due to each man, because
he Is man. The victorious word
springs forth: because he is a brother.
My brother, our brother.
This consciousness of a universal
human brotherhood is also happily
developing in our world, at least in
principle.
Whoever works to educate the rising
generations in the conviction that
every man is our brother, is building
from the foundation the edifice of
peace.
Whoever implants in public opinion
the sentiment of human brotherhood
without reserve is preparing better
days for the world.
Whoever conceives of the protec¬
tion of political interests without the
Incitement of hate and of combat
amongst men as a logical and indis¬
pensable necessity of social life, is
opening to human society the ever
effective advancement of the common
good.
Whoever helps In discovering in
every man, beyond his physical,
ethnic and racial characteristics, the
existence of a being equal to his own,
is transforming the earth from an epi¬
centre of division, antagonism, trea¬
chery and revenge Into a field of vital
work for civil collaboration. Where
brotherhood amongst men Is at root
disregarded, peace is at root des¬
troyed..
And yet peace is the mirror of the
real, authentic, modern humanity, vic
torious over every anachronistic self-
injury. Peace is the great concept
extolling love amongst men who dis¬
cover that they are brothers and decide
to live as such.
This then is Our message for the
year 1971. It echoes, as a voice aris¬
ing anew from the conscience of civil
society, the Declaration of Human
Rights: "All human beings are born
free and equal in dignity and rights.
They are endowed with reason and
conscience and should act towards
one another in a spirit of brotherhood."
This is the summit reached by the
teaching of civilization.
Let us not turn back. Let us not lose
the treasures of this axiomatic con¬
quest. Rather let us all give rational
and resolute attention to this formula,
this goal of human progress: "Every
man. is my brother". This is peace,
In being and in the making. And it
avails for all!
23
