Since the 'Cultural Revolution'
China's new discoveries
of ancient treasures
1972 marks an important date in Chinese publishing, for it is during
this year (which happens to be International Book Year) that, for the
first time since the beginning of the "Cultural Revolution", books
on ancient art, archaeology, etc., have begun to re-appear in China.
Among these books have been a number of magnificent albums, lavishly
illustrated both in colour and in black and white, in which are presented
the rich findings of campaigns of archaeological research carried
out in the People's Republic of China since 1968. Our cover photo and
the photos reproduced in the following pages are a selection from
two of these books: "Archaeological Discoveries during the Great
Cultural Revolution" (Cultural Objects Press, Peking, July 1972), and
"Historical Relics Unearthed in New China" (Foreign Languages Press,
Peking, July 1972). These pages focus attention on one of the great
archaeological discoveries of recent years the unearthing of a Han
Dynasty tomb dating back some 2,000 years and containing treasures
of inestimable value, including astounding mailcoats made of jade
and gold, the burial garments of a prince and princess. An exhibition
of these recently-discovered treasures will be held in Paris early in 1 973.
by Hsiao Wen
I
12
IN the course of the past
few years Chinese archaeologists have
been carrying out extensive excava¬
tions in different parts of China as a
result of which a large number of
ancient sites and tombs have been
unearthed containing many precious
antiquities.
An exhibition of some of these new
archaeological discoveries was recent¬
ly held in Peking. It displayed about
2,000 objects, dating mostly from bet¬
ween the 20th century B.C. and the
15th century A.D. This was only a
sampling of the archaeological treas¬
ures discovered. In Shensi province
alone, for instance, 160,000 objects
have been unearthed, many of them
unique or extremely rare.
In the summer of 1968 two royal
tombs, burial places of a prince and
princess of the Western Han dynasty,
were discovered at Man-ch'eng, in
Hopei province. Hewn from the solid
rock of a 600 ft. limestone hill, the
tombs were those of Liu Sheng (who
died in 1 13 B.C.) and his wife Tou Wan.
Liu Sheng, ninth son of the fourth Han
emperor Ching-ti had been named
King Ching of Ch'ung-shan. Tou Wan
is said to have been the great-niece
of the Dowager Empress Tou, mother
of the Emperor Ching-ti.
Liu Sheng's tomb is 52 metres long,
37 m. wide and over 7 m. high (115 by
112 ft. and over 20 ft. high), with a
total volume of 2,700 cubic metres.
His wife's tomb has an even larger
volume: 3,000 cubic metres. Built on
the scale of a vast palace, each could
have held 1,000 people.
The tombs contained over 2,800
objects made of gold, silver, bronze,
stone, jade, iron, lacquer and silk;
in one was a stable with carriages,
horses and full harness.
The most exciting finds and the
first of their kind unearthed up until
now were the two funerary vest¬
ments of the prince and the princess,
each composed of over 2,000 rectan¬
gles of jade, perforated at the four
corners and linked together with fine
gold wire (see centre colour pages
and caption on page 18).
These jade "mailcoats", Chinese
counterparts, as it were, to the sarco¬
phagi of Egyptian mummies, were used
to enshroud the bodies of emperors
and high-ranking nobles under the
Han dynasty. Sewn with gold, silver
or bronze wire according to rank, they
were supposed to keep the remains
perfectly preserved. By the time the
excavations were carried out, the
bodies had of course long since disin¬
tegrated, and some of the jade plates
and their golden threads had been
broken.
The mailcoats have now been
completely restored. Liu Sheng's is
made up of 2,690 pieces of jade and
1,100 grams of gold wire. His wife's
mailcoat has 2,156 pieces of jade and
contains over 700 grams of gold wire.
An artistic achievement of the highest
order, they would take a skilled jade
craftsman of today at least ten
years to fashion.
Many of the objects from the tombs
are strange and lovely. There is the
Po-shan-lu incense burner, wrought in
bronze with gold and silver inlays.
The conical lid represents the moun¬
tainous island of Po-shan. Half-
hidden among the rocks and peaks,
are scenes with huntsmen and animals
picked out with minutely fine gold fili¬
gree work.
The lid is pierced with tiny holes
through which wisps of incense smoke
rose and drifted. In this way, the
craftsman symbolized the Po-shan
mountain perpetually shrouded in
mist.
Another fine and Indeed unique
example is the large (48 cm. or 19 in.)
gilt bronze lamp from the Ch'ang-hsin
Palace (see cover photo) which con¬
sists of a lantern held by a kneeling
court servant, on whose left arm can be
read the inscription "Ch'ang-hsin"
(eternal fidelity).
This palace was the residence of
the Dowager Empress Tou, who prob¬
ably gave the lamp to her great-
niece as part of her dowry. The whole
lamp can be taken to pieces, and the
woman's head is detachable. The
moveable base allows the direction of
the light to be altered at will; and an
CONTINUED PAGE 14

Photos from 'Historical Relics Unearthed In New China*,
Peking. 1972
Photo from 'Archaeological Discoveries during
the Great Cultural Revolution', Peking, 1972

CHINA'S TREASURES
(Continued from page 12)
adjustable shutter permitted the inten¬
sity of the light to be varied.
In October 1970, two enormous terra¬
cotta jars were found in a cave dating
from the T'ang dynasty (618-907 A.D.)
in the southern suburbs of Sian, in
Shensi province. They contained a
thousand objects in perfect condition,
including gold-worked vessels contain¬
ing cinnabar, amber, coral, amethysts,
chalk-stones, etc., as well as alchem¬
ists' materials such as agate mortars,
silver pots in the form of pomegra¬
nates, etc. All these came from
the mansion of an aristocrat and high
official about the middle of the T'ang
dynasty.
The dominant class was then torn
by internal strife. The officers of the
frontier guard had mutinied and seized
control of the capital, Shang-an (today
Sian). Before fleeing, the Emperor
Hsiian-Tsang and his ministers had
their treasures buried. The two jars
held over 200 pieces of gold and silver
plate, an unprecedented discovery.
According to ancient chronicles, the
Emperor Hsüan-Tsang was not only a
great drinker but also a great lover
of horses and equestrian displays. To
celebrate his birthday he would hold
sumptuous feasts, during which horses
danced with cups between their teeth,
to ceremonial music.
Later, these "dancers" became cav¬
alry horses. During the mutiny, when
they heard the same tunes, they
started to prance about in time to the
music. The soldiers thought they were
possessed by devils, and slaughtered
them. One of these dancinq horses
decorates a silver ewer found among
the hidden treasures.
Other outstanding finds are the
"six-petalled" or "lotus" bowls. They
include octagonal cups, dishes, in
the form of peaches, and amphoras,
all works of remarkable beauty. Many
of them are decorated with graceful
embossed, modelled, traced, stippled
or openwork motifs.
The designs are often enhanced by
grained backgrounds in low relief; in
the silverware the main motifs are
nearly always gilded. According to the
style of the period, these generally
CONTINUED PAGE 16
Left, Han dynasty statuette of a peahen,
discovered in the province of Yun-nan,
is remarkable for the graceful harmony
of its lines. Right, Han bas-relief, dating
from 107 A.D. and measuring 108 cm.
(42 in.) In length by 38 cm. (15 In.) in height
Note how the sculptor has allowed the
figures in this farming scene to overlap the
frame. Above It, he has carved a
frieze of growing crops.

Photo from 'Historical Relics Unearthed In New China", Peking, 1972

CHINESE
PEGASUS
Caught by the sculptor
in all the power and
poetry of the gallop, this
bronze charger Is so
delicately balanced that
it seems, like some eastern
Pegasus, to be almost
airborne. Found at
Wou-wei In the province
of Kan-su, it dates from
the Eastern Han Dynasty
(25-220 A.D.).
CHINA'S TREASURES (Continued from page 14)
16
represent flowers, hunting scenes or
animals (lion, fox, horse, bear, phoenix,
parrot, mandarin duck, tortoise, etc.).
Two octagonal cups with handles
have low-relief figures of musicians
and dancers on each of their eight
sides. The even, clear-cut tooling
seems to confirm the use of elemen¬
tary lathes.
These new excavations have
brought to light, among other things,
a Byzantine gold coin of Heraclius
(610-641 A.D.), a Persian silver coin
of Khosrô II (590-627 A.D.) and five
Japanese pieces (Wadokaiho) minted
in 708 A.D. These coins show that
China was trading with other coun¬
tries at that time.
In the region of Turfan (Sinkiang),
silk and hempen fabrics dating from
the T'ang dynasty have been found.
With their close texture, iridescent
colours and flower or bird designs,
these materials show the quality of the
textiles made in China in those early
days. Under the dynasty of the Eas
tern Han (25-220 A.D.), Sinkiang was
already the main channel for trade
between China and the outside world.
It was along this famous "Silk Road"
that most of the T'ang silks were ex¬
ported. And the pieces of silk and
hempen cloth discovered along this
route bear eloquent testimony to the
long history of commercial and cultural
exchanges between China and the
countries of Western Asia and even
Europe.
It was also in this region that a
volume of the "Confucian Analects
annotated by Ch'eng-Hsüan" was dis¬
covered. This copy, made in 710 A.D.
by Pu Tien-shou, then only 12 years
old, takes the form of a scroll 5 metres
(over 16 ft.) long. It is the oldest manu¬
script of this edition that has been
found so far. It dates back two cen¬
turies earlier than the one recovered
from the Tun-huang caves, and is more
complete.
In the Tsou-hsien district of the pro¬
vince of Shantung, excavations have
brought to light jars and stone tools
belonging to primitive Chinese sett¬
lements, and also a 14th century
Ming dynasty tomb containing artist's
brushes, ink tablets, inkpots and paper,
sets of Chinese chessmen and a zither.
Also found in this tomb were paintings
and works of calligraphy including a
fan with a poem by the southern Sung
Emperor Chao Kou (1107-1187) and
twenty-two books printed during the
Yuan dynasty of the 13th and 14th
centuries.
From the Ching-shan district in
Hopei province have come a series
of bronzes dating from the last period
of the Western Chou (11th to 8th cen¬
turies B.C.), and from the Chiangling
district twenty-five "chings" a kind
of stone xylophone from the Kingdom
of Ch'u (475-221 B.C.).
These "chings" are gracefully and
delicately decorated with phoenixes
and other coloured motifs. When
played, they still produce well-pitched
and harmonious musical notes.

CULINARY IDEOGRAM
Bronze vessel for meat or other cooked dishes, discovered In the
province of Hu-nan. It was made In two pieces and the lid which
kept the food warm could be removed and inverted for use as a
serving dish. Known in Chinese as a "Tou" (pronounced "doe"), the
vessel is represented In writing by a character (below) which exactly
reproduces the shape.
a
Numerous "ying-yuan" gold pieces
from the Kingdom of Ch'u were found
in the Lpu-an and Fu-nan districts of
Anhui province. At Ch'ang-sha in
Hunan province, a bronze halberd and
another long-handled weapon, a par¬
tisan, were found intact, mounted on
lacquered wooden shafts, as well as
a pike with a cane handle. These
weapons date from the end of the
Spring and Autumn Period (5th cen¬
tury B.C.).
The objects discovered at Tsinan in
Shantung province include some twen¬
ty earthenware funerary statuettes
dating from the Western Han dynasty
and representing a circus show of that
period. Ranged around the sides are
a master of ceremonies, an orchestra
with seven musicians and seven spec¬
tators. In the centre there are six per¬
formers, each wearing a different cos¬
tume. Two of the performers are
dancers, the four others acrobats.
At Tatung in Shansi province, exca¬
vations have brought to light inkpots
and two carved stone stands, as well
as paintings on lacquered wood dating
from the Northern Wei dynasty (386-
534 A.D.). These may be panels from
a screen, as the bright colours and
clear outlines resemble the typical
pictorial art of the working people at
that time.
In Peking, an outer door of a watch-
tower of the Ho-yi-men gate has
been discovered, and also the ruins
of ancient dwellings. The city of
Peking has a long history. The Llao
or Khitan Tartars (916-1125) set up
their capital there, which they called
Yen-ching. Then it became the capital
of the Kin dynasty (1115-1234), under
name of Tsung-ching. The later Yuan
dynasty built a new town they called
Ta-tu in the north-east suburbs of the
old capital.
Research has enabled the size of
this Yuan capital to be estimated; and
it is understandable that Marco Polo,
who visited it in the second half of the
13th century, should have described
it as the largest city he had ever seen.
Tombs containing the skeletons of
sacrificial victims, dating from the time
of the Chang-yin Dynasty (16th to
11th centuries B.C.), were discovered
in 1966 and 1969, at Yi-tu in Shantung
province and at Ho-ma in Shansi.
In the Shantung tomb, the slave¬
owner lies surrounded by forty-eight
immolated slaves; the Shansi tomb
contains the remains of eighteen vic¬
tims, four of whom have iron collars
round their necks.
In 1969, the Han-chla granaries were
cleared at Loyang in Honan province.
Their construction was begun in 605
A.D. under the Suei dynasty (581-618) ;
and under the Sueis and the T'angs
they constituted a vast State silo.
The whole covers over 420,000
square metres (500,000 sq. yds.).
Inside the surrounding wall there are
400 circular and concentric trenches,
6 to 8 metres wide and 5 to 10 metres
deep (20 to 26 ft and 16 to 33 ft.).
The largest one could hold nearly
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
17

CHINA'S TREASURES (Continued) Colour pages
18
600 tons of grain ; and even today
decomposed millet seeds have been
found there.
When the Chinese People's Repub¬
lic was founded, it was decided that
the protection of historical remains
would form an integral part of the
scientific and cultural activities of the
nation. Archaeological institutes were
set up all over the country under the
direction of the Chinese Academy of
Science, and a great many archaeolo¬
gists were trained.
In 1961, the State Affairs Council
classed 180 places as protected cul¬
tural sites, including the caves of
Long-men (Honan), Tun-huang (Kansu)
and Yunkang (Shansi), and measures
were taken for their protection.
The Archaeological Research Insti¬
tute of the Chinese Academy of Scien¬
ces and teams of archaeologists from
the various provinces, municipalities
and autonomous regions have since
brought to light a large number of
antiquities.
When ancient objects are found
during building or farm work, they
are immediately handed over to the
State, and the appropriate authorities
are informed. In 1969, two peasants
from Tsao-chuang in Shantung pro¬
vince unearthed the official seal of
Han Linerh, a leader of the Red Ker¬
chief rebels formed in 1368 during the
peasants' revolt, before the fall of
the Yuan dynasty. They immediately
offered it to the Historical and Revolu¬
tionary Museum of China.
When levelling a field, a farmer in
the Sin ch'eng district of Honan dis¬
covered two bronze teapots weighing
together over 37 kilograms (80 lbs.)
one of them dating from the Spring
and Autumn Period, the other from that
of the Warring States (722-221 B.C.).
He duly turned his finds over to the
authorities.
Gold coins (97.5% pure) from the
Ch'u Kingdom were found by farm
workers in Anhui province and given
into the keeping of the State. In
February 1970, workers from the Ning-
hsiang district of Hunan were digging
the side of a hill when they unearthed
a jar containing over, 300 pieces of
finely worked jade. After discussing
their exciting discovery, they took the
jade to the Hunan Provincial Museum.
In this way, many precious historical
relics were finally brought to light
after thousands of years.
The tomb of Liu Sheng was discov¬
ered at Man-ch'eng by a unit of the
People's Army of Liberation stationed
in the area, and excavations were un¬
dertaken with the help of soldiers and
the local population. The tomb cham¬
bers had been buried underground to
a great depth and the entrance was
filled with pebbles cemented and
reinforced with iron. But the archae¬
ologists forced their way through
by clearing the terrain stone by
stone.
