HALF A
MILLION
VERSES
BY HEART
Stone figure, right
(detail left) Is one of
hundreds scattered
throughout the valleys of
Kirghizia, one of the Soviet
republics of Central Asia.
The statues, mostly
human sized, are thought
to have been sculptured
about the 6th century A.D.
by ancient tribes that
inhabited the area.
Far right, a present day
Kirghiz, aged 70, who
remarkably resembles the
6th century figure. He Is
Sayakbal Karalayev,
the famous storyteller
who knows by heart more
than half a million lines
from Kirghizia's greatest
epic poem, "Manas"
which has been handed
down orally for
generations. He Is here
shown examining historical
documents at the
History Institute of the
Kirghiz Academy
of Sciences.
KIRGHIZIA
by Chinghis Aitmatov
20
CHINGHIS AITMATOV Is a famous author
from Kirghizia, a Soviet republic In Cen¬
tral Asia. His works are extremely popular
throughout the U.S.S.R. and have been
translated Into some 60 languages. Win¬
ner of two Soviet awards for literature
the Lenin Prize (1963) and State Prize
(1968) he has written extensively about his
own country, which he also represents as
a Deputy In the Supreme Soviet of the
U.S.S.R., the Soviet Parliament in Moscow.
Among his books published in English are
"Tales of the Mountains and Steppes", the
novel for which he was awarded the Lenin
Prize (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1969)
and "Farewell Gulsary" (Hodder and Stough-
ton, London. 1970).
OR the peoples of my
country the fiftieth anniversary of the
formation of the U.S.S.R. is a great
landmark. What we now call a new
historical community the Soviet peo¬
ple is made up of over a hundred
nations, peoples and ethnic groups.
Some of them were at the feudal
stage of development when the Soviet
Union was formed in 1922, others still
lived under very primitive conditions.
In the recent past the numerous peo¬
ples inhabiting this vast country were
worlds apart as regards civilization,
culture and social experience as well
as in their customs and traditions, their
different religions and the different
languages they spoke, so different, in
fact, that they could not understand
each other.
Every people of my country, big or
small, passed in its development
through different stages of history, life
and culture. It took a long time before
they became what they are today.
Every one of our nations has its own
cultural traditions, its spiritual experi¬
ences, which include not only the
general human values in the treasure-
house of mankind, but also specific
features which are the imprint made
by the life that people led during
different periods.
There is probably no single people
whose fate was an easy and happy one,
whose history is not a chronicle of
suffering and woe. This applies fully
to the history of the Turk peoples (the
Kazakhs, Uzbeks, Kirghiz, Uigurs and
Turkmen, among others), one of the
most ancient in the world, who in the
5th-8th centuries had reached a high

the land
behind the clouds'
level in the organization of social life
and cultural development.
The runic writing of the Turk peoples
is one of the most ancient written lan¬
guages on the territory of the Soviet
Union. I have In mind the Orkhon
characters, notably the texts of the
Kul Tegina, composed in 717 by Tegin,
the first Turk historian and writer, and
other monuments of early Turk written
culture.
Yet, a bitter fate was in store for
the descendants of these peoples.
Generation after generation had to
fight to preserve its national indepen¬
dence. This continued right up to the
20th century. The great revolution that
swept one-sixth of the planet resolved
that age-old problem and gave these
ancient peoples a new lease on life.
A hundred years ago, Kirghizia, my
homeland, spreading over the moun¬
tainous part of Central Asia, the Ala
Tau, was unknown to the world. Travel¬
lers who had been there told of it as
of a geographic discovery. Now
things have changed.
This change is reflected also in the
new symbol of Kirghizia a girl with a
red scarf on her head reading a book,
pictured against the background of the
snow-topped Ala Tau.
Kirghizia has become part of the
developing civilized world. In our age
technological achievement has become
commonplace. A people's intellectual
culture, the problems it is resolving and
intends to resolve have become the
true criterion of its development.
The long road from the improvised
akyn to the modern philosophical poem,
from patriarchal sagas to the modern
novel, from ornaments to modern paint¬
ing, from folk plays to the theatre and
the cinema, from the komuz to sympho¬
nic music has been travelled by the
Kirghiz people during the years of the
making and consolidation of the Soviet
Union.
Political equality has enabled not
only the Kirghiz people but also all
the nationalities of the Soviet Union to
raise their economy and production to
the modern level, and has brought
about the rapid social and national
renaissance of formerly backward
peoples.
Multinational states of the past .
from the Roman Empire and the
states set up by Alexander of Macedón
and Genghiz Khan, to the Russian
Empire were unstable formations
because of various social and econo-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
21

KIRGHIZIA (Continued)
22
mic reasons. The domination of one
people over others, the way of think¬
ing imposed by one people over
other peoples, led to suppression of
national aspirations, to the extinction
of national languages, which deprived
these nationalities of the right to inde¬
pendent existence by robbing them of
their national and ethnic charac¬
teristics.
A people's immortality lies in its
language. The language of every
people is a general human value.
Every language is a creation of human
genius. We should not hold any lan¬
guage in disdain, no matter to what
people it belongs, no matter what
development it has attained. Given
favourable conditions every language
can attain perfection by internal dev¬
elopment and also by borrowing,
directly or indirectly.
The mother tongue is like a mother
to whom one owes a debt of grati¬
tude, just as one owes such a debt
to one's people, by whom one has been
given life and the greatest gift of all
language. At the same time it is
impossible to develop a national cul¬
ture without drawing actively on the
achievements of other cultures.
HE formation of the
U.S.S.R. was a decisive factor for
progress. The Russian language be¬
came the language for communication
between all peoples inhabiting a vast
multinational country, but at the same
time conditions were created for the
development of national languages,
within the limits of their geographic
and administrative areas: 90 to 99 per
cent of the nationalities in the various
national Republics and autonomous
regions today consider the vernacular
as their mother tongue and use it
extensively.
A written language using the Russian
alphabet was created for peoples who
had no written language, and their
national epics .appeared in print. Many
peoples thus acquired a national lit¬
erature of their own. The artistic level
and creative possibilities of these lan¬
guages can be seen from the fact that
the works of Cervantes, Shakespeare,
Tolstoy, Balzac, Hemingway and many
other great writers have appeared in
them. The Russian language played
the role of an intermediary, of a bridge
linking the cultures of peoples, who
previously had not even known of
each other's existence.
The rise of Soviet culture is the re¬
sult of the flourishing of many national
cultures. In a letter to the world-
famous historian Arnold Toynbee,
N. Konrad, a leading Soviet historian,
wrote: "Our revolution has set us the
task of creating not only a new social
system, but also a corresponding cul¬
tural system. There must be one so¬
cial system for our entire community,
and it must, at the same time, take
into account that every people in our
Union has had and continues to have
CONTINUED PAGE 24

TELEVISION ATOP
THE CELESTIAL
MOUNTAINS
At the junction of two gigantic mountain
ranges, the Tien-shan (Celestial Mountains)
and the Pamirs, Kirghizia, bordered
by China and the three Soviet Republics
of Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan,
¡s a country of striking contrasts.
Shepherds tend their vast flocks
on horseback (above left) and tamed eagles
are used for hunting in the centuries-old
way (right). Yet high on
a mountain peak (above right)
a TV and radio relay station keeps
the. three million people of Kirghizia
in touch with the latest news and events.
At a remote grazing ground, 4,000 metres
up (left) a medical service helicopter
lands to pick up a sick shepherd.

KIRGHIZIA (Continued)
Mosaic of cultures and nationalities
24
its own cultural tradition, that many of
these peoples have a great and long
cultural history of their own... Every
people must have its own culture, and
at the same time the national culture
of every people must form part of the
common culture of Soviet society."
One of our tasks is to strengthen
and develop the national cultures, and
the national economies, for our society
is a dynamically expanding community.
This task has become even more ur¬
gent today in the age of the scientific
and technological revolution, one of
the possible consequences of which
may be standardization and the loss
of individuality. The wisest course
for a State in these conditions is to
preserve, improve and enrich national
languages and national cultures. "The
world is great", as they say in the
East "because it has not discarded a
single grain of sand."
I think Konrad's words contain the
answer to the dilemma facing some of
the small peoples in our time: whether
to preserve their national traditions at
the expense of social progress or to
sacrifice them for its sake. No nation
can be preserved if it is bottled up. To
do so in our time would be an ana¬
chronism.
A nation is subject to change, as
is everything in the world. Every
nation has lost something during its
historical development and gained
other things instead. Only what is
best and most progressive in every
nation is worth preserving and devel¬
oping.
The spiritual make-up of the Soviet
people is marked by features common
to all the country's nationalities, while
national characteristics exist and de¬
velop in forms expressive of universal
human qualities. The emergence of
Soviet man, to whom the diversity of
national traits has given an originality
and wealth of ideas, seems to me to
be one of the most important historical
achievements of the past half century.
WEE have travelled a vast his¬
torical distance in our cognition of
reality, and have created a single mul¬
tilingual and multinational Soviet
artistic culture, one that has absorbed
all the great achievements of peoples
big and small. It was no easy task,
since many nationalities had to pass
from spoken folklore, from patriarchal
epics and sagas to books dealing with
the psychological problems of life in
entirely new historical conditions.
Our culture does not reject the
achievements of preceding cultures.
On the contrary, it accepts and wel¬
comes these multiple facets of human
existence the beauty of national
creation, the original characteristics,
traditions and ways of life engendered
by particular historical, geographical
and cultural conditions.
The national originality of works of
art presupposes the expression of dis
tinctive qualities, specific aesthetic
forms and a particular view of the
world in images that are traditional to
a given culture. But time marches on
and the frontiers of national life ex¬
pand, absorbing the best cultural val¬
ues and traditions of many peoples.
National forms change. They inter¬
act and mutually enrich themselves,
free themselves of what is outdated
and has outlived its usefulness in new
social conditions. But whenever we
speak of the national we are apt to
think only of the past and not to notice
what exists next to us, in the present,
what has been born of our environ¬
ment. Yet, artistic thought always re¬
flected the spiritual state of contempo¬
rary society.
That is why national originality is
not only the aggregate of the national
features reaching back across the
ages. It would be wrong to understand
the national in the patriarchal sense of
the word. The national includes not
only what has been preserved and
time-tested, not only the experi¬
ence of the past, but also all the in¬
novations made by our reality.
The best of our national works of
literature and art generally express
common human ideals and problems as
seen from the viewpoint of Soviet man,
from the views he holds on the social
struggle, on past and present history,
on the individual and society.
National originality is thus seen to
be closely attuned to the internation-

COMPUTERS AND BOOKMOBILES
IN THE STEPPES OF CENTRAL ASIA
In factories such as the one below, Kirghizia today produces
sophisticated electrical equipment, physics instruments and
electronic computers. Today six persons out of ten complete
secondary or higher schooling compared with a national illiteracy
rate of 98 per cent in 1917. Left, a mobile bookshop in a
remote mountain settlement in this country rightly called the
"Land Behind the Clouds". Far left, a child spells "Mama"
in Kirghizian: A-pa, written A-na in Cyrillic letters.
Photo V. Runov i APN, Moscow
alist outlook and to current social
concepts, and thus succeeds in high¬
lighting common, human internation¬
alist ideas in a vivid national form.
The harmonious combination of the
international and the national marks the
level of maturity at which thought
becomes planetary, the desire to un¬
derstand others and be understood by
them, the desire for solidarity in the
evaluation of social and aesthetic
categories justice, virtue and beauty.
'UCH thinking, when every
person gives to others as much
consideration as he gives to himself,
when he realizes that his neighbour is
no less sensitive and vulnerable than
he is himself, leads to the acquisition
of the most human of human traits
compassion towards which Homo sa¬
piens advanced through pain and tor¬
ture, "endless suffering and sacrifice,
through wars and revolutions. There
is only one kind of humanism for all
people, and its distinctive feature is
that it cannot be abstract. Humanism
is always social.
In our difficult world, fraught with
the danger of atomic war, humanism
is the only ray of hope for the human
race. And we firmly believe that in
our society we are advancing towards
it in the proper and most dynamic
way by combining national with inter¬
national interests.
