by
Alberto
Moravia
THE IMAGE
AND THE WORD
I HE notion that the book
and the printed word are in rapid
decline gained its widest currency
following the spectacular success of
the image and the media of visual
communication the cinema, television,
advertising displays, strip cartoons,
road signs and so on.
But few persons appear to have
given much thought to the fact that
the image owes its success, in turn,
to the entry into history's arena of
large masses of humanity, including
their new literates and total illiterates.
The illiterate person undeniably has
a distinctive visual awareness. For
him the whole world is a vast system
of visual signs and symbols waiting
to be interpreted and translated. The
origin of writing itself, with its slow
progression from the representation
of an object to a form of symbolism,
shows that primitive man used his eyes
for tasks that civilized man later
entrusted to his ears.
So in the first place, what we are
dealing with is not so much a decline
of the book as a triumph of the image,
a triumph due in far smaller measure
to those who have always been
readers than to those who only
yesterday did not know how read.
If this is so, as I myself believe,
we can expect at any time to see a
steady decline in the influence of the
image and a corresponding resurgence
of the book. In other words, as
millions upon millions of illiterate men
and women learn to read and write,
they are likely to abandon the primitive,
direct language of the image in favour
of the more elaborate, more indirect
language of the printed word.
Modern man, moreover, uses the
picture in ways that are basically
different from those of primitive man.
In the primitive world, it marked the
first steps in communication; today
it is only a provisional return to
conditions that are perhaps temporary.
The modern world is not so much a
ALBERTO MORAVIA, Italian novelist and
writer, is one of the great names of contem¬
porary world literature. His first book, "The
Time of Indifference" (1929), was written
when he was twenty years old. Since then
he has published some thirty novels and
volumes of short stories, a number of which
('The Woman of Rome', "The Conformist")
have been made into films. Globe-trotter
as well as writer, he has also published
studies on the U.S.S.R., India and the
People's Republic of China.
primitive world as one temporarily
"primitivized". In other words, even
in the progression from the language
of the picture to the language of the
printed word we can observe once
again the phenomenon of ontogenesis
(the development of the individual)
which duplicates the phenomenon of
phylogenesis (the development of the
whole human species).
That this hypothesis is plausible is
furthermore borne out by the huge
circulation of paperbacks. Between
the traditional book and the paperback
there is not just a difference of quality
and price. In reality, the two types
of books are profoundly different in
nature.
The traditional book was rooted,
indeed still is rooted, in an organic,
stratified cultural context that has
lasted for centuries. The paperback,
on the other hand, scatters the seeds
of the culture of all ages and all
regions wholesale upon completely
virgin soil. In the space of a few
years, the entire population of our
planet, only now barely emerging from
illiteracy, has been inundated, without
any preparation, with the culture of
thirty centuries.
The danger is that this culture
will be not assimilated, but thrown
together, condensed and reduced to
mere formulas and synthetic aggrega¬
tions in a vast grinding operation of
destruction. After which the masses
would apparently be free to revert
to the image, thenceforward the sole
medium of communication.
This, indeed, may be the direction
taken by marxism in China with its
rejection of the culture of the past as
"Bourgeois". Mao Tse Tung has said
that the vast masses of the Chinese
people are like a sheet of blank paper
on which one can write whatever one
wishes. What will be written on this
paper we still do not know.
Besides, the image itself has
recently appeared to be reaching its
limits. The fact that the spectator
takes in the picture passively, without
any effort of interpretation, ultimately
results in the picture itself losing its
full force and becoming a victim of this
passivity. People watching television
or a film at the cinema simply do not
see what is happening before their
eyes on the screen; or if they do see,
they do not really comprehend.
Passivity has atrophied their powers
of concentration, rendering them
inattentive to the point of blindness.
Of course, they "see" the road sign
indicating a school, or the cowboy
astride his horse firing his gun, but
now what they "see" is nothing more
than a response to the same con¬
ditioned reflex devoid of any mental
reflection and hence any communica¬
tion. Marshall McLuhan admits this
when he says that "the medium is the
message."
The decline of the book is by no
manner of means, then, a certainty.
Even if we ignore the fundamental fact
that the book springs from nature, that
is from the faculty natural to all human
beings to utter words and shape them
into organized speech, we should not
overlook the fact that the book is
made up of words which are "also",
under certain conditions of poetic
creativity, images. Thus there is no
substantial difference between the
image suggested by the book and the
image that appears on the screen. In
fact there is only one difference,
though an important one: the image
on the screen allows for no play of
imagination; it is what it is.
Nevertheless, we must distinguish
between one type of reading and
another type of reading, between one
book and another book. Reading
some books is no more than a simple
physical exercise. Such books,
written for mass consumption, con¬
ventional in content and in style, are
not read in the full sense of the word
but rather are skimmed through by
the reader: when the eye passes from
one ready-made phrase to the next,
from one cliché to another, the
"reader" may believe he has been
"reading" but in reality he has done
no more than register the notations of
a verbal mechanism that is as in¬
comprehensible as it is insignificant.
For a book to be properly "read"
it must first be really "written". If it
is true that the book is in decline this
is due not to the fact that the broad
general public does not read but to
the fact that they read books that have
not been "written" but merely printed.
A book, then, must be thought out
and created or it is not a book.
Indeed, the future of the book is bound
up with the poetry, creativeness,
descriptive power and imagery of the QQ
writing. The future of the book will ¿Q
be assured if we succeed in "writing-
books; it will perish if we content
ourselves with merely printing them.
