f\
Our
African
ancestors
24
by Louis S. B. Leakey
HERE have been so many
discoveries concerning the evidence
of man's origin during the past few
years that nearly every textbook
available today on this subject is out
of date. The facts that will be given
briefly in this paper have all been
published in such scientific journals
as Nature, or have been presented
before international meetings and
discussed by our colleagues. Only a
limited part of the evidence is yet
available In book form.
LOUIS S.B. LEAKEY, of Great Britain, Is world
famous for his discoveries of fossil remains
in East Africa. He began his first archaeolo¬
gical research there in 1926, when he was
23, and has devoted his life to this work
ever since. His most exciting finds have
been made In Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania. He
is now honorary director of the National
Museum Centre for Prehistory and Palaeon¬
tology in Nairobi (Kenya) and honorary pro¬
fessor of anatomy at the University College
of Nairobi. He has published many books
and studies on his excavation and research
into man's past In Africa (see bibliography
inside back cover). Dr Leakey took part In
Unesco's 1969 International symposium on the
origins of Homo sapiens, In Paris.

Left, the famous fossil skull of Zinjanthropus found by Dr. and Mrs Leakey at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania, in 1 959,
and described at the time as the earliest ancestor of man ever found, dating back 1.750,000 years. The skull
of this australopithecine is here compared with the skull of a modern man (centre) and a gorilla (right). The
recent discovery at Lake Rudolf, Kenya, of the remains of an australopithecine who lived more than half a
million years before Zinjanthropus, at the same time as a Homo-Mke creature, has completely upset earlier
theories, writes Dr. Leakey. "Most textbooks", he says, "still place the genus Australopithecus (including
Zinjanthropus) in the direct line of ancestry of the genus Homo, and therefore of Homo sapiens. This view
can no longer be scientifically maintained".
East Africa today figures very
prominently indeed in the story of the
evolution of the direct ancestors of
man himself, as well as of his nearest
cousins the great apes and although
this article will mainly be concerned
with the end part of the story, from
about 3 million years ago onwards,
it must begin by discussing briefly
the discoveries of the Miocene
period, which began about 20 to 25
million years ago.
In spite of the fact that Darwin,
more than 100 years ago, ventured to
predict that one day it would be found
that man had originated in Africa, few
people believed him and it was only
In 1924 that the first indications were
obtained that, in fact, Africa had very
early fossil primates.
The story begins with a discovery
made by Doctor, H.L. Gordon, who
was living at Koru, in Kenya, and
engaged partly in farming and In a
limited medical practice. Because of
his early training and interest In
zoology he began to notice that
following the ploughing of the land
of his farm and on subsequent
washing of the ploughed soil by rain,
fragments of fossil bones and teeth
were visible and he began to collect
these and submitted them to Mr. E. J.
Wayland, the Director of the Geo¬
logical Survey in Uganda, and to me
in 1926 in Nairobi. We both realized
that Dr. Gordon had made a very
important discovery and thus, through
the accident of having a doctor as
well as a farmer at a critical place,
began the long series of discoveries.
Since those early days, East Africa
has yielded a vast collection of fossils
of Lower and Upper Miocene age,
among which are more than 500 fossils
representing the higher apes and also
examples of Proto-man. A similarly
important early discovery was made
in the same year, 1924, at Taung in
South Africa when a student brought
a fossil specimen to his professor of
anatomy at the Medical School in
Johannesburg. This proved to be the
first discovery of a "near-man" or
australopithecine. Thus, 1924 was an
important year for the African con¬
tinent. As will be seen in this article,
discoveries followed thick and fast.
During the early Miocene period
East Africa was inhabited by a number
of higher primate forms, among which
were true ape-like creatures such as
Proconsul africanus at one time
regarded as In the direct line of
ancestry of man and also ancestral
forms of the gorilla, chimpanzee and
gibbon as well, possibly, as an
ancestral orang-utang.
Living side by side with these
extinct apes in East Africa, at that
remote period, was Kenyapithecus
africanus who is regarded by me, and
by many of my colleagues, as in the
direct line of ancestry of man and
the "near-men". This view is not
universally accepted, but the evidence
is very strong. In any event, Kenya¬
pithecus africanus Is much more
similar to a possible ancestor of man
than the other primates which were
contemporary and listed above.
By the Upper Miocene period around
12 million years ago, the evidence
from East Africa Is much more definite.
At Fort Teman, an Upper Miocene site
in Kenya, we have found fossils of
a proto-man named Kenyapithecus
CONTINUED PAGE 27
25

Uï
Photo Hugo Van Lawlck © National Geographic Society. Washington D C.
Olduvai gorge: peephole into prehistory
Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania, above,
contains one of the world's
richest hoards of fossils and
has been the scene of momen¬
tous discoveries by Dr. Louis
Leakey and his wife Mary.
Above right, Dr. Leakey holds
the broken molar of a Dinothe-
rium, an extinct, tusked mammal.
On his hat he cradles a tooth
from an extinct elephant. Left,
scientists look on as Leakey
points out the layer in which
"Zinjanthropus" was found. The
first clues to the existence of
"Zinjanthropus" were his huge
teeth and fossilized palate, right.

OUR AFRICAN ANCESTORS (Continued)
wickeri, whose remains are so similar,
morphologically, to Ramapithecus of
India, but a little older in time, that
some authorities consider the two
species to be identical.
That question can only be settled
when more specimens are found. In
the meantime, what is certain is that
in the Kenyapithecus wickeri speci¬
mens we have a primate with a
large number of hominid characters
and one which is universally accepted
as a hominid or man-like creature,
not a pongid or member of the ape
stock.
Not only does Kenyapithecus wickeri
have physical characters such as small
canine teeth, shovel-shaped incisors,
rounded mandibular arcade and a
short face, which are all hominid
characters, but he was also using
stones to break open antelope skulls
and limb bones, in order to obtain
the brains and marrow. The evidence
for this statement lies
skulls with depressed
one stone exhibiting
having been used to
In other words, an Upper Miocene
ancestor in Kenya, around 12 million
years ago, was already extending his
food beyond mere plant products to
include animal proteins.
It was probably this widening of his
food resources that enabled the
descendants of Kenyapithecus wickeri
to survive, when Proconsul and many
of the other primates, at this time,
became extinct. Although it is not
possible to say that Kenyapithecus
wickeri must be the ancestor of Homo
sapiens It would certainly seem likely
that he represents the stock from
which all man, and man-like species
eventually emerged.
in bones and
fractures and
evidence of
batter bones.
IJN 1931, during my Third
East African Archaeological Expedi¬
tion, we recovered a fragmentary
mandible In a highly fossilized condi¬
tion- at Kanam West on the shores of
the Kavirondo Gulf of Lake Victoria,
Kenya. The specimen was highly
mineralized and derived from deposits
of Lower Pleistocene age, as determin¬
ed by the fauna. It had been badly
damaged before being embedded in
the deposits in which it was found,
and the lower margin was missing. I
described it as Homo kanamensis and
further indicated that it had many simi¬
larities to Homo sapiens. With very
few exceptions, my colleagues refused
to accept the evidence that this
specimen was of Lower Pleistocene
age, but I never retracted from my
stand, because I knew the evidence
was sound.
It was also during the Third East
African Archaeological Expedition in
1931 that I and my colleagues
discovered that the famous Olduvai
Gorge was very rich in early Stone
Age cultural remains.
The original discovery of Olduvai
Gorge itself was entirely accidental
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

OUR AFRICAN ANCESTORS (Continued)
'I almost trod on a half exposed fossil skull'
and dates back to 1911, when a German
butterfly collector, Dr. Kattwinkel, was
chasing a butterfly across the eastern
corner of the Serengeti Plains. He
was so intent on making his catch
that he nearly fell to his death over
the edge of the Gorge. Having lost
his butterfly and escaped with his life,
he climbed down the sides of the
cliff and found some magnificent fossil
bones of a three-toed horse, which he
took back to his colleagues in Berlin.
In 1913 a German expedition was
sent out to examine the place where
these few fossil bones had been found
and discovered a wealth of extinct
animal remains. Thus, again, an
accident led to the discovery of what
is now, probably, the most important
site of fossil human remains anywhere
in the world.
Even though I and my colleagues
studied Olduvai Gorge from 1931
onwards and obtained wonderful
collections of artifacts and fossil
animals, we did not find the first
significant fossil human skull until
1959. This was the discovery of Aus¬
tralopithecus (Zinjanthropus) boisei.
URING the past two years"
my son, Richard Leakey, has been
conducting intensive palaeontological
and archaeological research at the
north east end of Lake Rudolf and he
has found clear evidence of the genus
Homo represented by a number of
specimens. These are completely
contemporary with the fossil fauna,
similar, in most respects, to that from
Kanam West and undoubtedly of
Lower Pleistocene age. Although
Richard Leakey's new Homo finds
have not yet been given scientific
names, their similarity to the original
Kanam mandible is most striking, but
Richard's specimens are much more
complete.
An interesting fact, in connexion
with the discoveries at East Rudolf, is
that in the same series of deposits
there also occur magnificently pre¬
served remains of a robust austra-
Photo © National Geographic Society, Washington D.C.
lopithecine, who was contemporary
with Homo, and which are more than
half a million years older than Aus¬
tralopithecus (Zinjanthropus) boisei,
from Olduvai. There is, therefore,
clear evidence from Kenya of a
Lower Pleistocene form of the genus
Homo, which is completely contem¬
porary with the australopitheclnes In
Lower Pleistocene times.
These facts inevitably lead us to
a brief discussion on the australo-
pithecines as a whole. Most of the
existing textbooks still place the
genus Australopithecus (including
Zinjanthropus and Paranthropus and
other comparable forms) in the direct
line of ancestry of the genus Homo,
and therefore of Homo sapiens. This
view can no longer be scientifically
maintained.
Undoubtedly, of course, the australo¬
pitheclnes and Homo must have a
common ancestor, somewhere in the
scale between the Upper Miocene
and the Lower Pleistocene, but such
a common ancestor has not yet been
found. The fact, however, that a very
robust australopithecine with a number
of over-specialized characters existed
in the Lower Pleistocene some 2i to
3 million years ago, and was con¬
temporary with Homo, completely
destroys the view that, Australo¬
pithecus, as such, is our direct
ancestor. When a common stock
from which these two types of hominid
are derived is eventually discovered,
it will probably have some characters
of both, but clearly be distinguishable
from either.
It is interesting to note, here, that
in the deposits at East Rudolf of
Lower Pleistocene age which have
now yielded numerous specimens of
Homo, there are stone artifacts which
are very closely similar to the three
found in situ at Kanam West with
the Kanam mandible. These were
published in my book "The Stone
Age Races of Kenya". The preliminary
notes which have been published
concerning the East Rudolf artifacts
show clearly that the genus Homo was
making several different types of
f£av
Tanzanian stamp Issued
in 1965 In honour of the
first famous find at Ol¬
duvai Gorge.
TANZANIA
stone tools, during the Lower Pleis¬
tocene In that area.
At Olduvai Gorge a little less than
two million years ago, we have found
further very significant evidence
relative to the origin of the genus
Homo and, therefore, of Homo sapiens.
In Bed I at Olduvai in 1959 we
discovered a very well preserved
skull of an australopithecine which
we described as Zinjanthropus boisei.
At the time of the discovery no
other hominid remains were known
from Olduvai Bed I, while we had
much evidence of the Stone Age
culture known as Oldowan in these
deposits.
Although, therefore, it was accepted
that Zinjanthropus was an australo¬
pithecine, in its physical morphology,
it seemed posible that it might qualify
as a "man", in view of the current
definition of "man" at that time
"Man the Tool-Maker". A few months
later the first fragmentary fossils of
what is now called Homo habilis were
found in deposits of the same age as
Zinjanthropus and also in associa¬
tion with the Oldowan culture. Since
then, many further specimens of this
second type of hominid have been
found at Olduvai and published in
Nature and elsewhere, as it is clear
that they represent the genus Homo,
living during the Lower Pleistocene.
A full description is in preparation
at the present time, in monograph,
and there is no doubt whatsoever
that the morphology of Homo habilis
is much more similar (at least in
respect of the cranial vault) to Homo
sapiens than are the fossil remains
of Homo erectus, the extinct hominid
species first found in Java and China
and later in Africa in Middle Pleis¬
tocene deposits.
HERE seems very little
doubt that Homo habilis lies in the
direct line leading to Homo sapiens.
In all probability the branch which
ended up as Homo erectus diverged
from Homo habilis at least as far back
as the Lower Pleistocene, in view of
the fact of his presence, in the Far
East, as a fully distinct and over-spe¬
cialized species in the Middle Pleis¬
tocene.
Another accidental discovery of
the greatest importance took place
in 1961 the find of remains of
the same type of man as in China
and Java, but twice as old in East
Africa as in the Far East. This time
the accident was due to an error on
the part of one of my staff. The
geologist working with me returned to
camp one day with a draft plane table
map of a certain part of the Gorge.
I looked at it and said, "But you have
left out one long narrow side gully."
He replied, "I have not", and I said,

>*
o
ci
With his smooth,, sloping brow and canine teeth smaller than those of most apes,
though larger than man's, "Proconsul Africanus" was once thought of as a possible
common ancestor of apes and hominids.
"I am very sorry, but you have;
come over with me tomorrow morning
and I will show you."
When we got to the long and rather
grass and bush filled gully, and he had
had to admit that he was in error, I
looked back towards our camp site
and suddenly on the far side of the
Gorge I saw a very small area of
exposed fossil beds. These were on
the north side of the tongue of land
which separates the main and side
gorges.
Although I had explored Olduvai
on foot since 1931 I knew, at once,
that I had never set foot In that tiny
exposure. But for the error on the
part of my student which had taken
me back to the point from which I saw
it, I might still never have seen it.
It was only visible from that one
point of view. As soon as we got back
to camp, I went off again to locate
this hidden patch of exposures, and
as I walked on to it I almost trod on
a half exposed fossil human skull.
That was the first Homo erectus skull
from Olduvai.
This brings us, inevitably, to a
discussion of the further textbook
view that Homo erectus is a direct
ancestor of Homo sapiens. This view,
too, can no longer be taken seriously
for the following reasons:
The shape of the cranial vault of
all specimens of Homo erectus is
quite dissimilar to the cranial vault
of Homo sapiens while, as already
stated above, the shape of the vault
of Homo habilis, which is much older
in time, is very similar.
Homo erectus exhibits a large
number of highly specialized charac¬
ters which are present in the African
and Far Eastern variants while Homo
habilis has many more Homo sapiens
generalized features.
The pelvic bone of Homo erectus
found in Olduvai Gorge and published
recently, and the femur shaft associat¬
ed with it, are clearly of a quite
different type from the corresponding
bones of Homo sapiens and it begins
to look doubtful whether the Trinil
femur truly belongs to Homo erectus.
When we go on, therefore, to
discuss the emergence of Homo
sapiens, in the light of the evidence
available in 1972, it becomes entirely
clear that we have to revise our total
picture of how our species came into
being.
HERE can be no doubt
now, at all, that Homo sapiens was
present in the Middle Pleistocene
times in both Europe and Africa; a
fact which was accepted at the Unes¬
co sponsored Conference on the origin
of Homo sapiens, in Paris, in 1969,
when specimens such as the skulls
from Kanjera, Swanscombe and the
new Kibish specimens from southern
Ethiopia were unanimously accepted
as representing Homo sapiens in a
primitive form, but . quite distinctly
sapiens. In fact this species was
present during the Middle Pleistocene
times in areas as far apart as Swans¬
combe in England and Kanjera in
Kenya. It is obvious, therefore, that
an earlier form of Homo sapiens must
occur somewhere In older deposits.
When the fragmentary Kanjera
skulls were found deriving from Middle
Pleistocene deposits and in associa¬
tion with hand axes in 1932, they
were rejected, much as the earlier
Kanam mandible was rejected, and
were placed in what was called a
"Suspense Accouht". When the
Swanscombe skull, in its turn, was
described in 1936 as Homo sapiens,
it was rejected because It seemed too
old for that species. It was only
when the southern Ethiopian skulls
from Kibish were discovered in 1967
that a new concept of the antiquity
of Homo sapiens began to crystallize,
and become accepted.
To conclude this discussion we
may, perhaps, be permitted to try and
distinguish between Homo sapiens
sapiens (what Is known today as
psycho-social man) and Homo sapiens
faber early tool making members of
our species who had not yet achieved
full psycho-social status.
I believe that the beginning of
psycho-social man probably coincides
with the dawn of art, religion, magic
beliefs and speech in terms of abstract
ideas as distinct from mere words
describing material objects. By this
time too man had begun, perhaps,
to be a community dweller as shown
by the vast accumulations of his
artifacts in the caves of the Dordogne
and elsewhere during the' Upper
Pleistocene times.
29
