MINI-DICTIONARY
ON CARDIOVASCULAR
DISEASES
Aneurysm
Widening of a portion of an artery.
Aneurysm of the aorta occurs in upper or
lower part of the aorta, due to athero¬
sclerosis or to syphilis. Dissecting aneu¬
rysm of the aorta: an aneurysm in which
blood penetrates through a tear of the
inner layer into the aortic wall, disrupting
its tissues; fatal unless immediately treated.
Angina pectoris
Pain occurring centrally in the front of
the chest, brought on by effort (e.g. exer¬
cise, emotion, ingestion of food, exposure
to cold). It is felt as a tight, heavy,
constricting or crushing pain, but may also
be numbing or burning, and may radiate
to the left arm or both arms, round the
chest, or into the neck or jaw. A few
minutes of rest or a tablet of nitro¬
glycerine give quick relief. It is a symptom
of ischaemic heart disease (coronary heart
disease).
Arrhythmia
Any irregularity of heart rhythm. Some
arrhythmias are entirely harmless, others
may indicate that heart disease is present.
Arrhythmias occurring in acute ischaemic
heart disease call for emergency treatment.
Arteriosclerosis
Thickening, hardening and loss of elas¬
ticity of arterial walls, usually due to
atherosclerotic changes. The arteries may
become narrower and impair blood flow.
A therosclerosis
Lesions on the inside of the arteries
with fibrous and fat deposits that lead to
thickening, hardening, narrowing or even
obliteration of the arteries and thus impede
the flow through the arteries.
Bradycardia
Unusually slow action of the heart.
Cardiac arrest
Cessation of the heart's contractions.
It may take the form of a complete stand¬
still of the heart muscle, or of rapid, chao¬
tic individual twitching of the heart muscle
cells (fibrillation of the ventricles). The
patient must be resuscitated immediately.
Cardiac neurosis
Disturbed functioning of the heart,
though the heart itself is not organically
diseased.
Cardiomyopathies
Diseases of the heart muscle of various,
often obscure, origin. The dominant
10
feature is the great enlargement of the
heart with diminished function (cardio-
megaly). Chagas' heart disease is a car¬
diomyopathy in which the cause is known.
Cerebrovascular diseases
Any brain disease caused by impaired
blood flow. The main forms are cerebral
haemorrhage, cerebral thrombosis and cere¬
bral embolism.
Cerebral embolism
Occlusion of a brain artery by some
circulating particle, usually a small blood
clot detached by blood flow from the heart;
it results in stroke.
Cerebral haemorrhage
Bleeding in the brain because of a nip-,
tured artery. Hypertension is its common¬
est cause; many cases could be prevented
by adequate treatment of hypertension.
Cerebral thrombosis
Clotting within a brain artery. It deprives
part of the brain of blood and oxygen
causing damage to the brain cells. Cere¬
bral thrombosis is the most common con¬
dition underlying stroke.
Chagas' disease
A disease endemic in parts of rural
Mexico and Central and South America,
caused by a parasite that is insect borne.
The insect bites its victim and defaecates.
When the victim scratches himself, the
parasite enters the blood stream. The
disease may lead to serious heart damage.
No cure has been developed. Prevention
entails improved living conditions and sani¬
tation, as well as insect control.
Coarctation of the aorta
Narrowing of the upper portion of aorta,
a relatively frequent congenital heart
disease that can be cured surgically.
Coronary arteries
Arteries that supply blood to the tissues
of the heart.
Coronary heart disease
(See Ischaemic heart disease.)
Embolism
Occlusion (blockage) of a blood vessel
by a detached clot or by some other
particle, including bubbles of air or other
gas and particles of fat.
CONTINUED PAGE 12
Who wants
to run the risk?

ONE PERSON OUT OF FOUR (Continued from page 8)
MINI-DICTIONARY (Continued)
Endocarditis
Disease of the internal layer of the
heart, especially the heart valves, caused
by rheumatic fever, bacteria or other
agents, leading to leakage and narrowing
of the valves (insufficiency and stenosis).
Both conditions may be combined and
either or both the mitral and aortic valves
may be affected.
Endomyocardial fibrosis
A tropical cardiomyopathy characterized
by massive fibrosis (scarring) of the inner
wall of the ventricles leading to the defor¬
mation of the cavities and impaired pump¬
ing of the heart.
Essential hypertension
Hypertension of unknown origin, the
most common form of consistently elevated
blood pressure. In some patients the
disease is progressive, leading to com¬
plications such as heart, kidney or brain
damage, but which may be prevented by
adequate treatment.
Extrasystoles
Premature contractions of the heart that
occur independently from the basic rhythm
of the heart: a variety of arrhythmia,
usually harmless and insignificant.
Haemorrhage
Bleeding from any blood vessel.
Heart block
General term for conditions in which the
bioelectric current that activates the heart
muscle cells is delayed (or interrupted)
somewhere along its path. More specific
terms (e.g. atrio-ventricular, bundle branch
block) refer to the site of impairment.
Some types of block are innocuous, others
may point to serious disease.
Hypertension
High blood pressure, abnormal elevation
of arterial blood pressure as a result of
narrowing of the small arteries: this
increases resistance to the flow of blood
and thus may overwork the heart.
Ischaemic heart disease
Cardiac disability from insufficient supply
of blood to the heart muscles; in most
cases caused by advanced atherosclerosis
in the coronary arteries.
CONTINUED PAGE 14
Arteriosclerosis
Spasm and reduced
blood flow
lo the heart musde
£
Destruction of
the musde (necrosis)
Myocardial Infarction
(Heart Ahadrl

ONE PERSON OUT OF FOUR (Continued)
MINI-DICTIONARY (Continued)
Myocardial infarct or infarction
A manifestation of acute ischaemic heart
disease: the occlusion of an artery of the
heart cuts off the blood supply to a portion
of the heart muscle. The affected tissue
dies off injuring the heart. Symptoms are
prolonged intensive chest pain, fall of
blood pressure, and often shock. Many
surviving patients can be rehabilitated to
lead a fruitful life.
Neurocirculatory asthenia
Disturbance of the functioning of the
heart and circulatory system, although no
organic damage can be detected in the
heart and vessels themselves. Patients
experience a variety of symptoms and their
physical performance may be decreased;
there is no lasting impairment.
Pericarditis
A disease of the heart surface; rheu¬
matic fever, tuberculosis, a great variety
of infections and many other agents are
its possible causes.
Renal hypertension
Elevated blood pressure due to kidney
disease; some forms (if only one kidney
is affected) are amenable to surgical treat¬
ment
Rheumatic fever
A sequel to infection by Group A strep¬
tococci characterized by heart disease
and/or acute pain and inflammation of the
joints. The disease usually begins in
childhood with an acute attack and may
have a long-lasting course, since the
patient is liable to recurrences brought on
by new streptococcal infections: these
aggravate the heart disease, but may be
prevented by penicillin.
Rheumatic heart disease
Damage to the heart valves and heart
muscle resulting from rheumatic fever.
Because of endocarditis the valves may
become crippled (see Endocarditis). The
disease may occur without a history of
acute rheumatic fever.
Stroke
A colloquial term for any cerebrovascular
disease having an abrupt onset. The lead¬
ing symptom is paralysis of one side of the
body.
Tachycardia
Accelerated action of the heart. Paroxys¬
mal tachycardia is a particular form of
rapid heart action, occurring in seizures
which may last from a few seconds to
several days. There are several varieties
of paroxysmal tachycardia, some of them
harmless, others rather dangerous.
Thrombosis
Occlusion (blockage) of a blood vessel
by clotting within the vessel itself at the
site of occlusion.
