32
I HE developing countries can
expect to enjoy easier access to books
written and published in the industrially
developed countries thanks to a revision
of the Universal Copyright Convention
worked out at Unesco's headquarters in
Paris last year. Application of the revised
Convention should lead to an increase in
the production and distribution of books
In the Third World.
The Unesco conference for revision of
the Convention, held in July 1971, brought
together representatives of 45 of the 60
countries adhering to the Universal Con¬
vention as well as observers from 30 other
countries and from inter-governmental and
non-governmental organizations specially
concerned with copyright questions.
Essentially, the purpose of the con¬
ference was to satisfy the practical needs
of the developing countries by making it
easier for them to acquire educational,
scientific and technical books, without
weakening the structure and scope of the
copyright protection afforded by the Uni¬
versal Copyright Convention (adopted in
Geneva in 1952) and the Berne Convention
(dating from 1886 and already revised four
times between 1908 and 1967).
Simultaneously, a parallel conference
grouped countries belonging to the Berne
Convention to consider amendments that
give developing countries the same advan¬
tages as those provided by the Universal
Copyright Convention. Although the meet¬
ings of the two conference were held
separately, there was a striking degree of
unanimity on the basic problem.
In the production of books, an
enormous imbalance exists between the
developing countries and the industrialized
world. Though 70 per cent of the world's
population lives in Asia, Africa and Latin
America, these regions represent only a
very small proportion of the annual world
production of five thousand million books.
Asia produces about 21 per cent of this
total and Africa less than 0.15 per cent.
The position is slightly better in Latin
America, but the gap between production
and needs is still very large. The Arab
countries too suffer from a shortage of
books (see page 22).
The same is true for the number of
new titles published. The 18 developing
countries of Asia, representing 28 per cent
of world population, publish only 7.3 per
cent of total new titles; Africa with 9.6 per
cent of world population publishes 1.7 per
cent, and Latin America with 6.1 per cent
of world population publishes 3.8 per cent
It is also apparent that the subject
matter of the books published does not
always correspond to the needs of devel¬
opment In Asia, for example, scientific
GEORGES RAVELONANOSY, of Madagas¬
car, was the first editor of the Courrier de
Madagascar, a French-language daily news¬
paper, which began publication in Tanana¬
rive, in 1962. He is the author of a study
on Malagasy poetry. Since 1970 he has
been a staff member of Unesco's Press
Division.

copyright
revision
means
more books
for the
Third World
Georges Ravelonanosy
and technical books amount to only 10.6
per cent of the titles published less than
half the equivalent percentage in the
industrially developed countries.
To make up for this inadequate pro¬
duction, the developing countries are
obliged to import books; in Africa three
books out of four come from abroad.
The agreements reached at the con¬
ferences provide a legal system of inter¬
national copyright that is flexible, practical
and effective. Three new articles were
drawn up. The first defines what is meant
by a developing country. Under the
second, developing countries no longer
have to wait seven years after the original
publication of a work to translate it into
their national languages for use in schools
and universities or for research. The new
regulations provide for a one year delay
before translation into local languages. For
translation into "languages in general use",
such as English, French and Spanish, the
period is reduced to three years.
Under the third new article, licences to
reproduce works for school, university or
research use may be obtained by any
national of a country that ratifies the Paris
agreement when the original publisher has
not sold the rights within five years of
first publication. For works in the fields
of science and technology, the period is
three years, while for fiction, drama, poetry,
music and art books it is seven years.
Two obligations are imposed on those
taking up translation and reproduction
rights; the translated and reproduced works
may not be exported to another country
and the author must receive just compen¬
sation. In addition to the prescribed num¬
ber of years before the various rights to
translate and reproduce become available,
the Paris agreement provides an additional
six or nine-month period for negotiations
between the original copyright holders in
industrialized countries and publishers in
developing countries.
A number of similar arrangements are
allowed for with regard to audio-visual
material such as television films and sound
recordings intended exclusively for educa¬
tional purposes. Such arrangements apply
strictly within the territory of the country
that has obtained a licence to use material
in conjunction with audio-visual media.
The increasing use of educational broad¬
casts, in the broadest sense of the term,
as a method of teaching in many develop¬
ing countries further underlines the im¬
portance of the new regulations.
Finally, the conference eased the regul¬
ation under which any member State leaving
the Berne Convention cannot subsequently
enjoy protection under the Universal Copy¬
right Convention in countries which are
members of both conventions. Developing
countries were exempted from this "safe¬
guard clause" because of their need to
"adjust the degree of copyright protection
they provide to the level of their cultural,
social and economic development."
AtL N Intergovernmental Copy¬
right Committee was set up at the Paris
conference. Its members were chosen on
the basis of "a fair balance between national
interests bearing in mind the geographical
situation of the population, languages used
and degree of development."
This committee, to be responsible for
dealing with problems relating to the
application and functioning of the revised
convention, will be established as soon
as the revised convention comes into force.
It will consist of the 12 member states
of the 1952 Convention Committee: Argen¬
tina, Brazil, France, Fed. Rep. of Germany,
India, Israel, Italy, Kenya, Spain, Tunisia,
United Kingdom, U.S.A., and the following
countries elected by the conference:
Algeria, Australia, Japan, Mexico, Sene¬
gal and Yugoslavia.
The conference thus achieved a care¬
fully balanced compromise. While safe¬
guarding the moral and material rights of
the author, the new legislation should pro¬
mote the development of letters, the arts
and sciences and contribute to better inter¬
national understanding.
The goals have been set and a broad
field of action foreseen. But the revised
Convention will not become a truly effective
legal instrument until it has been widely
ratified and applied.
