Ten
major
obstacles
to success
in school
by Harry Passow
f\ child's chances for suc¬
cess in school success as measured
by how well he does in various
examinations, his staying on in school
beyond the age required by law, his
continuing on to some form of higher
education or training are rather
directly related to his social back¬
ground. In most nations, this relation¬
ship is so direct that schools have been
accused of simply sorting pupils and
maintaining the status quo rather than
developing individual talents and
aptitudes.
In the past quarter of a century
or so, there has been a dramatic
democratization of education. This
trend has been marked by sharp
increases in numbers of pupils en¬
rolled in schools, in the variety of
educational programmes provided, and
In the resources invested in school¬
ing. Yet, equality of educational
opportunity is a goal still to be
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
All the children in this picture are girls. Despite the growth of Women's
Lib movements in many countries, girls and women are the world's
largest under-privileged group in the field of education. But these
happy schoolgirls from the Republic of Zaire are more fortunate than
millions of their sisters throughout the world who are still denied
education merely because they are girls.
HARRY PASSOW is Chairman of the Department of Curri¬
culum and Teaching of Columbia University, New York.
He is one of the world's leading experts on problems
of urban education and the education of both disadvan¬
taged and gifted children. Among his many works on
these subjects are: 'Towards Creating a Model Urban
School System" (1967); "Education of the Disadvantaged"
(1967); "Reaching the Disadvantaged Learner" (1970);
'Deprivation and Disadvantage" (1970).
7

10 OBSTACLES TO SUCCESS (Continued)
reached by most of the nations of
the world.
Despite a public commitment to
universal schooling by most govern¬
ments, in fact, large numbers of
children seem unable to profit fully
from the opportunities provided them.
Many are prevented from entering
various programmes, and many
schools seem unable to design pro¬
grammes or provide services which
meet the needs of the children and
youth they are meant to serve.
Children from lower social and eco¬
nomic classes, those from racial or
ethnic minorities, residents of inner-
city slums or isolated rural areas,
migrants, pupils whose mother tongue
differs from the language the school
uses In teaching, children from reli¬
gious and cultural minorities these
are the groups from which students
come who are less likely to succeed
in school.
Such groups are not homogeneous
that is, members of such groups are
not all alike nor are all children dis¬
advantaged simply because they are
members of such groups.
There are various factors which are
likely to hinder or obstruct learning
from the time the child enters the
classroom.
A child may be disadvantaged if he
comes from a family which is poor.
Poverty may affect the child's
chances for success in school. A
child who is constantly hungry will
have difficulty giving his full attention
to the lessons to be learned in school.
A child whose parents cannot provide
him with the clothing he needs may
be physically uncomfortable as well
as being embarrassed by being with
classmates who are better clothed.
A child who comes from a home
which is overcrowded, in which food
is In short supply or not well balanced,
where poor sanitary conditions in¬
crease the possibilities of his contract¬
ing various diseases is less likely to
be successful in coping with school
tasks. A child who observes that
the grownups around him are either
without jobs or in poorly paid jobs
is likely to develop limited ideas
about his own chances for the future.
8
A child may be disadvantaged if
he has only limited opportunities for
developing his mental abilities and
language.
The opportunities for the poor child
to develop his mental abilities and
language are more limited than of his
middle-class peers. Differences in
styles of thinking between lower-
and middle-class children can often
be traced to the ways their parents,
especially mothers, talk with them and
the kinds of family interactions which
take place.
Among the most important things
which a child brings to the classroom
is effective language. Lower-class
homes provide children with a variety
of stimuli and help develop many
skills and abilities but they often fail
to provide the kinds of experiences
which help the child to cope with the
demands made on him by the teacher.
Children from poor families often
have more problems with discrimin¬
ating or observing differences between
visual symbols or sounds, with hand¬
ling general ideas as contrasted with
concrete tasks, and with other skills
which are necessary for success in
school-related work. Thus, the school
may make demands on the young
child for which the experiences in
infancy and early childhood have not
prepared him so that he often fails
from the beginning.
A child may be disadvantaged if
there are sharp differences between
the values of his home and neigh¬
bourhood and those of the school and
the classroom.
Values, attitudes, concepts of self,
and drive to achieve are related to
social class. The values or ideals
which are important and meaningful
to the child and his family may be
different from those which guide the
actions of teachers and other school
personnel. Behaviour which is accept¬
ed and even rewarded in the home
and in the neighbourhood may be
rejected and punished by school
authorities.
The value attached to formal educa¬
tion and the importance of succeed¬
ing in school differs with various
cultural and ethnic groups. As a result,
the goals of the school may or may
not receive support in the home.
Frequently, the child is confused by
differences in what is "acceptable"
or "appropriate" behaviour In the
home or neighbourhood in contrast
with what is accepted by the school.
As the child grows and matures,
the values and the standards of
behaviour of his peers become more
and more important to him. In fact,
the peer culture may so dominate the
behaviour of youth that the student
may reject or ignore the values which
his family or the school are trying to
teach him when they are at odds
with what his peers believe are
Important. Values, attitudes, and
feelings all contribute to a prevailing
climate of a school and this climate
has a strong impact on what it is that
students learn and what they believe
is significant.
A child may be disadvantaged if he
is a member of a racial or ethnic
minority group or a lower caste.
Especially when they are visible and
identifiable, children who are members
of racial and ethnic minorities or of
lower castes which are discriminated
against by society at large may be at
a disadvantage in school. The child's
feelings about himself and his own
worth, his pride in his race or ethnic
group, his drive to achieve, and his
beliefs about his chances for success
are all affected by the discrim nation
he encounters or thinks he encounters.
The low expectations teachers and
other school personnel have for lower
class or culturally different phildren
often strengthen and reinforce the
low expectations for success the
child has for himself. Not expecting
that such pupils will succeed, teachers
may not provide effective instruction
so that when the students do fail, the
school's prediction for failure Is
fulfilled.
Schools often provide lower quality
education for racially or ethnically
different groups. Children are cis-
criminated against in the opportunities
provided them as a result of prejudices
of school personnel. In some in¬
stances, groups strive to enrich and
preserve their own culture and view
the school's efforts as aimed at its
elimination. Discriminatory practices
contribute to the failure of some
students to achieve in schools.
A child may be disadvantaged if he
is a migrant.
Children whose parents are farm
labourers travelling with crop harvest
seasons, members of nomad tribes,
gypsies, or itinerant workers may move
about steadily. The migrant child has
not known the same kind of stability
as his non-mobile peers. The migrant
child may have had a variety of
experiences and learning opportunities
but these are often either not recog¬
nized by the school or not viewed
as being important.
In many instances, the migrant child
is viewed as a burden by the school
and by other public agencies. Because
CONTINUED PAGE 10

... ~ |_
H H iaaaUaaaaaaàai
t1
B 	^ä	 a-^W^J
Lk * fc 1 tMl «rU *V 1 1
.
"^
ajU
WORLDS APART. Social and cultural differences can seriously affect a child's chances for
success in school or even his (or her) chance of being enrolled. A child living in a city slum
may be as geographically isolated as one living in a remote village, in the sense that he may
have little or no contact or experience outside his immediate neighbourhood. Here, contrast¬
ing worlds are captured in one blink of the camera's eye. Children like those in the foreground
are often isolated by social barriers as rigid as the wall around the sports club and children's
playground (in background) at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
9

Photos © J.F. Schlano, Paris
A NEW KIND
OF EDUCATION
IN RURAL NIGER
Geographical isolation means educational deprivation
for hosts of school-age children. Playtime is fun, but
are these carefree boys (right), at play in a village in
northern Niger, among the privileged few who attend
school (top right), or are they to be counted among
the vast army of outsiders looking wistfully in on a
wonderland whose doors are closed to them (above)?
In 1962, only 7 per cent of Niger children were enrolled
In schools. Today the position has greatly improved.
10 OBSTACLES TO SUCCESS (Continued)
he attends school irregularly, many
teachers simply do not know how to
cope with the migrant child and simply
tolerate such children until they move
. on. The mobile child is at a dis¬
advantage because of the inability or
unwillingness of the school to arrange
programmes which take into account
his constant moving and particular
cultural style.
10
A child may be at a disadvantage
if the language of instruction Is not
his mother tongue or dialect.
The language which the child learns
as an infant and the one he uses at
home his "mother tongue" is often
different from the language which Is
used by the teachers and the one
found in the books and materials he
uses. Thus, in addition to the other
knowledge and skills the school
requires the child to acquire for
success he may have to learn another
language.
If he has a non-standard dialect or
speech pattern, the child may be at
a disadvantage. Where the language
used by teachers differs from the
language of the home, the child must
learn to understand the instruction in
an unfamiliar tongue and to acquire
ability to use it if he is to succeed.
If his own language or dialect is
rejected or ignored by the school,
or if teachers take punitive action
towards children using non-standard
language, the child's feelings about
himself and his family can be adversely
affected.
A child may be at a disadvantage
if he lives in a geographically Isolated
area.
A child who lives in an isolated
rural region or a very small hamlet
may be at a disadvantage in terms
of the schooling provisions which can
be made for him, his ability to take
advantage of educational opportunities
because of the physical barriers, and
the existing attitudes toward the value
of schooling which may exist. His
parents, for example, may view
education as relatively unimportant
in preparing him to work at home.

i^^^T^^
i JaMHrC
but in the rural areas only I out of 10 children is admit¬
ted to the rare schools that have been established inthe
bush. The school pictured above is equipped with two
battery-powered television receivers on which the
pupils, under the guidance of a supervisor, can follow
two quarter-hour educational programmes, broadcast
morning and afternoon, from the capital Niamey.
Produced under a Franco-Niger co-operation scheme
and planned to fit into a four year elementary school
cycle, the broadcasts accelerate the learning of reading
and mathematics and include educational programmes
on a wide variety of subjects. Between 1967 and 1972,
20 bush schools have benefited from these broadcasts.
In the future, more schools will be built and the broad¬
casts will be extended to reach the village schools of
the Ivory Coast. But for a long time to come, thousands
of children, like this young Niger boy (left) will have
little hope of receiving the education they need to
cope with the changing life in the developing world.
Cultural and language differences
between rural and metropolitan regions
can affect the child's chances for
success in school. Even a child living
in an inner-city ghetto may be geo¬
graphically isolated in the sense vthat
he may have little or no contact. or
experience outside his immediate
neighbourhood except through radio
or television. Thus the gap between
the slum dweller's curriculum and the
materials provided for him and his
experiences may be no less than
that of the isolated rural child with
equal chances for failure in school.
A child may be at a disadvantage
if a girl or if a member of a particular
religious group.
The value of an education for a
girl differs with various cultures. The
expectations as to the number of
years of school necessary for girls, the
kinds of educational programmes they
should be provided with, and the desir¬
able levels of attainment are different
for various cultural groups.
In some cultures, girls are only
expected to attain a minimal level of
literacy or to do poorly in, certain areas
of study, such as mathematics or the
sciences.
Some groups resist sending girls
to school at all, especially if such
schools are jco-educational
In some societies, religious groups
differ in the value they place on edu¬
cation and the extent to which schools
are viewed as altering one's life
chances. Some religious groups, for
example, do not view schools as con¬
tributing to the social and economic
mobility of the child and, therefore, do
not put much emphasis on success in
school.
A child may be at a disadvantage
due to a variety of school factors.
The teaching personnel, pro¬
grammes, services, instructional mat¬
erials, organization, testing pro¬
cedures, and relations to the com¬
munity of which the school is ' part
all affect the child's chances for
success. Teachers who are poorly
prepared and unqualified, curricula
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
11

10 OBSTACLES TO SUCCESS (Continued)]
which are irrelevant, materials and
equipment which are inadequate and
inappropriate, personnel with un¬
realistic or low expectations for
student achievement, grouping or
streaming procedures which limit the
chances for some students, selective
schools and programmes which dis¬
criminate against children of the poor
and those of racial or ethnic minorities
all these affect the student's
success.
The educational processes in most
schools and in most societies are
dominated by the majority group so
that the opportunities for those with
different backgrounds are generally
restricted. Social backgrounds and
tho consequent segregation affect the
academic achievement of students. By
the kind of climate for learning created,
the curriculum designed, the resources
available, teachers and ad-
ninistrators can promote cultural
conflicts which put some youngsters
at a disadvantage and reduce their
chances for success In school.
Social background and success in
school.
In nations all over the world,
developed and developing, more or
less urbanized and Industrialized,
significant numbers of children enter
school at a disadvantage. They
experience initial failure or only limited
success in school in the early years
and their academic failure continues
and becomes more intense as the
years go by.
Such students tend to come from
families which are poor, are members
of racial or ethnic minority groups
or lower castes, may speak a language
or a dialect which differs from the
standard of the majority group, may
live in a geographically isolated area,
may be a female or a member of a
religious group which holds education
in low esteem, and may be a migrant
child (*). In part, the disadvantage
stems from the student's background
and environment. In part, the disad¬
vantage may stem from the school
itself. The combination of social back¬
ground and institutional factors is relat¬
ed to the student's success In school.
Equality of educational opportunity
is a concept with educational, social,
political, and economic implications.
Recognition of the relationships which
exist between the student's back¬
ground and his success in school is
a first step toward understanding the
kinds of changes which will have to
be made to improve the chances for
success for those who are now
disadvantaged for various reasons.

