Exploit of Czechoslovak colour printing
for International Book Year
TREASURES
OF MEDIEVAL
BOHEMIA
18
\^NE of Europe's finest illu¬
minated manuscripts of the Roman¬
esque period, the 11th century Codex
of Vysehrad has recently been repro¬
duced in a superb facsimile edition in
Czechoslovakia. The facsimile, a
masterwork of modern printing techno¬
logy, was published with the assist¬
ance of the Czechoslovak National
Commission for Unesco, as a prelude
to its programme for International
Book Year 1972.
The Codex of Vysehrad, also known
as the Coronation Codex, was written
and illuminated on the order of Vra-
tislav I, to mark his coronation in 1085
as the first king of Bohemia. Vratis-
lav was the first prince of Bohemia's
ruling Premyslide dynasty to assume
the title of king, conferred on him by
the Emperor Henry IV.
Vratislav's coronation codex, today
preserved in the Czechoslovak State
Library in Prague, is an illuminated La¬
tin text of readings from the Gospels,
consisting of 108 parchment sheets,
41.4 cm. by 34 cm. Twenty-six pages
carry pictures of the Evangelists, four
others retrace the genealogy of Christ
and a further four are inspired by
scenes from the old Testament. A
Christological cycle recounts the life
of Christ in a series of 29 scenes.
The texts of the codex are inscribed
in Latin in majuscule (capital letter),
writing, and include many highly dec¬
orative initial letters. The manuscript
is held in a binding of wooden boards
covered in leather, and in a fragment
of the original remaining linen, overlaid
on the back cover by fragments of
richly decorated material.
The reproduction of a facsimile edi¬
tion of the manuscript was a challeng¬
ing task, involving many technical
problems. It was accomplished by
Pragopress Publishers, for their "Ci-
melia Bohémica" series of publications.
Before printing began, hundreds of
tests and verifications were carried
out: six zinc plates, each reproducing
a different colour, were needed for
every page.
Numerous corrections and modifica¬
tions were made before a page proof
was pulled, and when a perfect colour
register had been achieved, each proof
was submitted to the publishers' tech¬
nical committee for final approval.
Equally complicated and painstaking
work went into the reproduction of the
original binding. Guided by fragments
of the original material, a specialist
designed a five-colour brocade which
was woven on an ancient loom borrow¬
ed from a museum.
These combined efforts have en¬
abled the facsimile edition to restitute
to the Codex of Vysehrad an appear¬
ance whose original splendour had
been diminished by the centuries.
The facsimile edition comprises
222 pages, of the same size as the ori¬
ginal manuscript, printed in five or six
colours on art paper. Bound in bro¬
cade with a white leather back, it is
presented in a special leather case to¬
gether with a separate volume giving
a brief historical introduction by Fran-
tisek Kavka of Charles University,
Prague, and a commentary by Jiri
Masin, of the National Gallery, Prague.
The introduction and commentary are
published in Czech, English, Russian,
German and French.
In all, 780 numbered copies of the
Codex were published to mark the
50th anniversary of the establishment
of the independent State of Czecho¬
slovakia. One copy was presented to
Unesco's Director-General, Mr. René
Maheu, last year, by Mr. Joseph Groh-
man, representative of Czechoslo¬
vakia on the Unesco Executive Board.
The Codex of Vysehrad takes its
name from the church of Vysehrad, the
original owner of the manuscript, in
whose possession it remained until it
was acquired by the library of the
Seminary of the Archbishopric of
Prague in 1728. Some historians
believe that the manuscript was origin¬
ally prepared for the St Vitus Cathe¬
dral in Prague Castle, where the
coronation of the Czech kings took
place.
CONTINUED PAGE 23
COLOUR PAGES
The Codex of Vysehrad, a masterpiece
of medieval art. was inscribed
and illuminated for the coronation
of the first king of Bohemia in 1085.
A superb fascimile edition has
recently been produced in
Czechoslovakia. On our pages in full
colour we present a few
of its remarkable illustrations,
reproduced by our
Paris printers Imprimerie
Georges Lang.
OPPOSITE .
In the Codex of Vysehrad, both Christ
and God the Father are depicted
without beards and are given a youthful
appearance. This highly
stylized painting of "Christ's Baptism
in the Jordan", portrays God looking
down from Heaven while the Holy
Ghost descends in the form of a dove.
CENTRE PAGES
The text of the Codex is richly
decorated with numerous ornamental
initials interlaced with floral designs
and often featuring symbolic figures.
Top left, the letter "0" incorporating
a dog and a serpent.
Bottom left, Isaiah making his
prophecy concerning the house
of Jesse from which Christ descended.
The opening words of the prophecy,
written on a scroll held by Isaiah,
allude to the "rod of Jesse", depicted
as a tree with seven branches on
which perch seven doves.
Right, "The Adoration of the Magi"
portrayed with expressive simplicity.
The enthroned Madonna and Child,
as represented here, are typical
of the art of the Romanesque period,
and in particular its sculpture.
Photos Pragopress, Prague





TREASURES OF BOHEMIA (Continued from page 18)
Opposite: "The Resurrection
of the Dead", one of the most
extraordinary paintings in the
Codex of Vysehrad. Framed
with inscriptions in hexameters,
the six pairs of superimposed
tombs seem to float on their
golden background like
so many boats.
Below, detail from the painting
depicting "The End of Judas'
Betrayal", in which Judas
returns the thirty pieces of silver,
near to the tree on which he later
hanged himself.
The Codex of Vysehrad is the larg¬
est and most magnificent of four exist¬
ing manuscripts which there is every
reason to believe came from the same
workshop. Of the three other manu¬
scripts, one is kept in the library of the
St Vitus Chapter in Prague castle and
the other two are in Poland where
they are believed to have been sent as
gifts shortly after their completion.
The Czech scholar Jan Kvet has des¬
cribed the decoration of the Codex of
Vysehrad and of the other manu¬
scripts in the same group as one of the
most important chapters in the history
of Bohemian art. Despite its affinities
with Bavarian miniatures, he writes,
it contains so many special features
that one would be justified in referring
to it as the first school of Bohemian
painting (1).
Palaeographical and liturgical analy¬
ses of these manuscripts, writes Jiri
Masin in his commentary to the fac¬
simile edition, suggest the wide in¬
fluence of the Regensburg scriptory.
But no analogies so far established can
explain the originality of style used
by the "Master of the Codex of Vy¬
sehrad" and followed by his assistants
who ¡Illuminated the rest of the manu¬
scripts in the group. There is no
doubt that this Master, a gifted and
inventive artist, has left a stamp of a
crystalline purity on this particular
expression of the 11th century art of
Romanesque book painting.
The theory that the Codex of Vy¬
sehrad was produced in the Brevnov
monastery seems justified. This mon¬
astery was one of the most active cul¬
tural centres in Bohemia and maintain¬
ed good relations with the reigning
Premyslide dynasty. According to Jiri
Masin, it is likely that an accomplished,
though today unknown, artist the
Master of the Codex of Vysehrad
was invited from abroad to Bohemia to
execute there, with the help of his
assistants, this princely order.
