
THE ACTORS' ANALECTS
Edited, I ranklated and «itli an la
CHARLES J. DUNN and BUNZÖ TORIGOE
tot* m y3
%'¿rA
UNIVKRSITY OF TOKYO PRtSS
UNIVERSITY PRESS PUBLISHING has developed with amazing
vigour during the past decade, enabling specialists to publish
works of scholarship and research which commercial publishers
would hesitate to handle because the subject matter is too specia¬
lized. Left, a University of Tokyo Press publication, "The Actors'
Analects", in the Unesco Collection of Representative Works, a
bilingual English-Japanese edition, 1969, translated by Charles J.
Dunn and BunzoTorigoe. Below, "Introduction à l'Economie Sociale
du Tiers Monde" (an introduction to the social economy of the Third
World), by Arthur Doucy and Paule Bouvier, published by Editions de
l'Institut de Sociologie, Uni¬
versité Libre de Bruxelles.
Right, " Introducción a la
Teoría de Probabilidades "
(an introduction tothe theo¬
ry of probability), by Oct¬
avio A. Rascón, Universi¬
dad Nacional Autónoma de
Mexico, 1971. Far right,
"First Mail West", by Mor¬
ris F. Taylor, University of
New Mexico Press, 1971.
Introduction
à l'économie sociale
du Tiers Monde

THE UNIVERSITY PRESS
in the service of scholarship
28
by Maurice English
WhEN Professor Peter Vor¬
zimmer returned to America from
Cambridge, England, in 1966, it was
with a feeling of confidence about the
manuscript he was bringing back with
him. A specialist in the history of
science, Vorzimmer had spent much
of his six years' residency in Cam¬
bridge exploring the origins of The
Origin of Species, by Charles Darwin.
MAURICE ENGLISH, American author, jour¬
nalist, editor and publisher, has had wide
experience in the field of scholarly publish¬
ing. He is director of Temple University
Press, Philadelphia, and from 1961 to 1969
was managing editor of the University of
Chicago Press. He Is the author of "The
Testament of Stone", an anthology of the
writings of Louis Sullivan, one of the great
pioneers of modern architecture (1963),
"Midnight in the Century', a collection of
poems (1964), "The Saints In Illinois", a play
(1969), and a translation from the Italian
of selected poems of Eugenio Móntale (1966).
In doing so, Vorzimmer had examined
in detail problems which evolutionists
knew had to be settled, but which had
been ignored since Darwin's death.
True, Vorzimmer's confidence in his
work was somewhat troubled by his
impression that no British publisher
would issue it as a book. However,
it could stand one more revision, and
then, no doubt, one or another of the
enterprising publishers in America
would be Interested.
Three or four discouraging years
after returning to the United States,
Vorzimmer had learned otherwise.
Not a single commercial publisher, in
or out of New York, was even
prepared to read the manuscript. Its
title alone: Charles Darwin: The Years
of Controversy, followed by its sub¬
title: The Origin of Species and its
Critics 1859-1882 implied a thorough¬
ness of research which discouraged
sales-conscious editors. They raised
no question about the importance of
the work, but assumed that it could
not be published at a profit.
And at this point, the reader of this
article already knows why, along with
the growth of a flourishing book
industry in the United States, we have
seen, concurrently, the growth of a
wholly non-commercial kind of book
publishing. This is known as univer¬
sity press publishing. Though in the
service of scholarship it defies some
of the tenets of capitalism, it has
developed with amazing vigour. Parti¬
cularly in the last decade it has come
to fill an irreplaceable role in the
dissemination of learning.
As a result, despite the effects of
the current recession in America, the
university presses continue to Increase
in numbers, and in the number and
quality of their publications. And in

recent years, other countries too have
begun to see the advantage of
publishing houses which are free to
publish the fruits of scholarship
and scientific research, without any
form of social, political or economic
pressure.
Here let me pause for two essential
clarifications. The term "university
press" ¡s not of American origin, and
it has sometimes been stretched to
include kinds of publishing which are
essentially commercial (though they
often serve an educational market).
A glance backward in time will show
how the term began.
Like other American phenomena,
this one is a transformation of
something of English origin. The first
university presses were those of
Oxford (1478) and Cambridge (1521).
These were set up originally to publish
works of piety and of learning as it
was then understood. But in addition,
they benefited from the patronage of
the state, including a monopoly on
certain kinds of publishing and printing
(Bibles, grammars, editions of the
classics and over the course of time,
various kinds of educational material).
Nowadays, these two presses are
essentially among the most distin¬
guished "trade houses", whose schol¬
arly and educational publications are
only a small part of diversified lists.
However, their example has embol¬
dened other commercial publishers,
without their historic justification, to
use the word "university" in their
titles, even when they have no
connexion with any institution of
learning. It is simply a means of
appealing to the profitable market in
which they wish to sell their textbooks
and other educational publications.
Although there are exceptions, such
publishers are not, in principle,
interested in bringing out works of
pure scholarship, of basic scientific
research, for which the readership,
over a period of years, may be very
small.
But universities, apart from their role
in teaching, exist to foster just that
spirit of disinterested inquiry which,
in the course of time, often changes
the way in which people think, or feel
or act. Universities exist also to foster
a world-wide exchange of specialized
knowledge not only between scholars
in different nations, but between those
in different disciplines.
"Disinterested Inquiry," in short,
leads nowhere unless its results take
some tangible form. In our society,
the form is usually that of a book.
The challenge has been: how to publish
books whose circulation is likely to
be limited, because their subject
matter is too specialized.
In the United States, this challenge
has been met by the universities
themselves, the most enterprising of
which are undertaking to subsidize
their own presses, so that, first, the
most productive members of their own
faculties will be sure of obtaining
publication of the results of their
research; and an important second
consideration whole fields of know
ledge can be covered by programmes
and series of publications, many of
them written by scholars in other
universities than that of a given press.
The fate of Professor Vorzimmer's
study is again relevant. It was brought
out in 1970 by the press of Temple
University, where he teaches but
only after five of the most distinguished
evolutionists in the country had
recommended publication, and stated
their reasons in writing. And a fact
of possible interest to the trade houses
which refused the work the right to
publish the work in the British
Commonwealth was promptly bought
by a London publisher. Since publica¬
tion, Charles Darwin: The Years of
Controversy has received only favour¬
able reviews, some of them, surpris¬
ingly, in daily newspapers.
When Vorzimmer's book was pub¬
lished, the assumption was that the
university would not recover the money
spent on its manufacture and dis¬
tribution. That is no longer so certain,
in this particular case. The basic
decision to publish, however, was a
completely non-commercial one. And
that is necessarily true of most of the
decisions to publish a manuscript,
made every day by the directors of
university presses in America.
They are subsidized by the univer¬
sities whose names they bear. Some¬
times, though by no means always, the
subsidies ultimately come in part from
some public source (perhaps one of
the fifty states which, along with
the Federal government, increasingly
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
29

UNIVERSITY PRESSES (Continued)
10 ^b of all U.S. non-fiction published under university imprint
30
support higher education in the United
States). Many of the university
presses, however, derive much of
their revenue from their own backlists
of books that remain in print, selling
modestly, over the years; others from
a university printing office or book¬
store whose income goes to the
press; yet others from endowments by
private benefactors.
Whatever the source of the subsidy,
the sponsor-university makes one
stipulation: its press must publish
works on merit alone: the merit of
original scholarship, as judged by
qualified (and anonymousl) specialists
and attested by a "Board of Review"
of " the university's own published
scholars. And finally, of course, uni¬
versity press books are reviewed and
criticized, in the learned journals that
cover the same field.
To see how this system developed,
one must skip almost four centuries
and move from Oxford to Ithaca, New
York, where Cornell University began
its own academic press in 1869. It
was followed by Johns Hopkins in
Baltimore in 1878, and much later, but
still before the 19th century ended,
by Chicago.
Since the dates cited above,
American university presses have gone
through three phases. Until about
1930, they were often launched by an
energetic individual, a university
president, a scholar with a bent for
publishing, or some other academic
entrepreneur. Then, in the 1930s and
1940s, responding to the expansion of
what has been called "the knowledge
industry", the university presses began
to be organized on a more professional
basis, with emphasis on careful editing
and design, sales programmes based
chiefly on mailing advertising "fliers"
to members of scholarly or profession¬
al associations, and sounder business
procedures.
In the United States though this
need not necessarily be true elsewhere
university presses are discouraged
(by tax laws) from entering the field
of textbook publishing, where they
could try to make a modest profit, or
at least recoup their losses on genuine
scholarly monographs.
These problems and the continuing
starting up of new presses led to the
formation in 1937 of the Association
of American University Presses. The
scattered enterprises henceforth had
a clearing house through which they
could agree on standards, share
knowledge of publishing procedures,
and set up training programmes for
editors, book designers and the other
specialists who had now entered the
world of academic publishing.
These new arrivals have included a
number of top editors and publishers
from the New York "trade houses",
who found the atmosphere of the
campus congenial; and congenial, too,
the opportunity to deal with books and
the men and women who write them,
on the basis of their inherent value, not
their marketability.
By 1948, there were 35 member-
presses in the AAUP, which in that
year issued 727 new books. At this
writing, there are over 70 members of
the Association, including a few located
outside the United States, with
associate status. In size, they range
from seven new publications yearly to
almost 200. According to book
industry records, university presses
published 2,700 titles in 1970, the last
year for which official figures have
been compiled; this was 7.5 per cent
of the U.S. total of 36,000 non-govern¬
mental titles; these achieved sales of
$37,000,000, or 1.3 per cent of the total
of $2,750,00,000 . spent for books in
that year by the U.S. reading public.
(Since colleges and universities in
the U.S. now total more than 1,500,
it can be seen that university presses
are not a routine campus phenomenon.
Characteristically, they are associated
with the major universities of the
"Ivy League", world-famous centres of
research like Chicago and Berkeley,
and the larger state and urban uni¬
versities, many of which have student
populations of 40,000 or more. For an
American university to have a press of
its own, especially one. of recognized
quality, is very much a mark of
academic prestige.)
I HE maturing of scholarly
publishing can be tested in various
ways. There is the fact that, of the
100-plus presses which have been
established, although many, due to the
recession, have reduced the total
number of books they publish yearly,
others have continued publishing a
fixed number, and even report no
decline in sales. Only a few of the
weaker presses have been forced to
suspend their activity.
There is another way of measuring
the quality of these presses. At the
present time it is said that, of all the
non-fiction titles published in the
United States in a given year, 10 per
cent are published under the imprint
of a university press. But this statistic
only takes on life in the light of
another: of the non-fiction titles that
remain in print (because there is a
demand for them that sustains itself
from year to year), 15 per cent are
published under the imprint of a
university press.
That difference in percentage is an
indication of the degree of success
with which the editors of university
presses seek out manuscripts on sub
jects of importance, which express
original ideas or organize fresh
information, in clear (and if possible,
vigorousl) language, rather than
publishing books which display more
ephemeral qualities.-
Ât this point, it would show a lack
of candour not to admit that some
American university presses have had
a hard time of it financially. This is
easy to understand. Discouraged
from publishing the kind of educational
books (textbooks, especially) which
find large markets, they are committed
to works which by their very nature
are costly to produce and costly to sell.
Then, too, they are supported by
universities which, themselves, always
feel hard-pressed for funds for all
sorts of worthy educational program¬
mes. And whether profitably or not,
the university presses are selling a
product a fact which in itself makes
them the odd man out on the univer¬
sity scene.
Nevertheless, as we have said, they
not only survive, but have increased
in number, even during the difficult
years through which America is still
living. And there is an encouraging
aspect of the picture for university
presses elsewhere: not all countries
have a tax structure which, like the
American one, discourages university
presses from issuing textbooks and
other educational works which can
help to support the monographs of the
scholars. The reason for this, by the
way, is that in the U.S., educational
institutions are always exempt from
taxation.
A corollary of this exemption is that
they are not supposed to compete
with businesses including publishing
houses which do pay taxes. There
is presumably no reason why an
academic publishing house in a
country with a different tax structure
should not have the best of both
worlds: pay its bills, even return some
income to its parent institution, while
remaining faithful to its basic aim, to
publish excellent works of the mind,
regardless of any other consideration.
In any event, it is notable that
adaptations of this form of scholarly
publishing have already begun in
other countries, including Great Britain,
where the university-connected com¬
mercial publishers of Oxford and Cam¬
bridge have been joined by smaller,
American-style presses. These are
currently in existence at the Univer¬
sities of Wales, Edinburgh, Manchester,
Liverpool, Leicester and London
(whose imprint is that of the Athlone
Press, because the name "University
of London Press" was pre-empted by
a trade house which specializes in
educational books, but ¡s not connect¬
ed with the university Itself.)
In Canada four such presses now
exist, those of Montreal (McGill-

Queens), Toronto, Laval and British
Columbia. In Japan, the University
of Tokyo Press is the best-known of
ten; in Australia, the Australian
National Press, in Canberra, despite
its ambitious name, is one of six.
Elsewhere, there are the presses
of the National University of Mexico,
the Universitetsforlaget of Norway and
in Belgium, the Editions de l'Institut de
Sociologie de l'Université Libre de
Bruxelles. Korea has five university
presses, grouped in an association;
and the University of Malaysia Press
is in operation in Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia as are the Hongkong
University Press, and that of Singa¬
pore University in their respective
territories.
Meanwhile, the African nations have
made a vigorous start with the Haile
Selassie University Press in Ethiopia;
the Ghana University Press in Ghana,
two in Nigeria, one at the University
of Ibadan, another at the University of
Ife. And there is also the Press of
the University of Witwatersrand in
South Africa.
Regularly, the officers of the
Association of American University
Presses (1000 Park Avenue, New York,
NY) receive inquiries from all conti¬
nents, seeking information about the
steps to be taken to provide publishing
outlets for the work of scholars ¡n
scores of old and new nations.
And the Association has taken
initiatives of its own to get in touch
with those scholars, and the univer¬
sities which shelter them. Recently a
delegation visited Moscow and Lenin¬
grad, and was able to bring back a
preliminary, but encouraging, report on
the development of scholarly presses
in the Soviet Union. Some of these
are attached to universities, but others
to the scientific and scholarly research
institutes, now 50 in number, located
in Moscow. It seems possible that an
era of interchange, and even co-
publication, may develop between the
scholarly publishers of the two
countries.
/ANOTHER aspect of aca¬
demic publishing exists which might,
elsewhere, have the same value it has
had in the United States. This ¡s
"regional" publishing, bringing out
works which record or celebrate the
cultures of ethnic and other minorities,
or old customs or cultures, so many
of which are vanishing under the
impact of industrialization.
Thus, the University of Oklahoma
Press has long been distinguished for
the series of books ¡t has published
on the American West, its Indians and
frontier history. The University of
California Press found itself with a
best-seller when it brought out Ishi in
Two Worlds: A Biography of the Last
Wild Indian in North America, by
Theodora Kroeber. (See "Unesco
Courier", February 1963.) The Univer¬
sity of New Mexico Press has done a
service to history, as have many other
regional presses, with such titles as:
First Mail West: Stagecoach Lines on
the Santa Fe Trail (by Morris F. Taylor.
Albuquerque, New Mexico, 1971).
In this field, the opportunity for
university publishers lies in the fact
that major publishing enterprises tend
to be concentrated in the capital cities.
The rich life of the nation, lived in its
provinces and remote areas, and often
expressed in tribal forms and tribal
tongues, can readily be overlooked as
a result. Universities which are
located, as is usually the case in the
United States, in areas remote from
the two or three major cities, have a
role to play in saving the cultural
heritage of the human race, before it
is gone forever.
As knowledge grows in any field, it
becomes more specialized. But this
very specialization makes it more
urgent that different disciplines should
remain in touch, and that the learned
in different nations should keep
abreast of what their colleagues are
doing elsewhere.
The American experience suggests
that the publishers of these men of
learning are best off in the sheltering
arms of a parent institution. Yes, of
course, it provides the all-Important
office space, light and heat, and funds
to pay salaries and the bills of the
printers and binders. But it provides
also the humane skills and attitudes
publishing needs, and the company of
the men and women who provide its
product, and share its ideals.
This may be a unique companionship
in contemporary life, and suggests an
¡deal all university presses might keep
in mind for the future. Up to now,
the great seminal works of the mind
have in most cases been published,
perforce, by commercial houses. But
some of these works have appeared
under the imprint of university presses,
from the time of John Dewey on, and
their number ¡s increasing.
Herbert Bailey, director of Princeton
University Press, recently pointed out
that the great masterpiece of Henry
David Thoreau, Waiden, when it was
published in 1854 by the distinguished
house of Ticknor and Fields, in Boston,
was ignored by the public. The
publishers returned 700 unsold copies
to the author.
As businessmen, they had no
choice; but, Mr. Bailey points out, a
university press, if one had existed at
the time, would have kept those
700 copies on its back list, and
continued to promote them, so that the
appreciation and influence Thoreau
lacked, might have been his much
earlier, perhaps during his own life¬
time.
If they maintain high standards, as
the quality of their books becomes
widely known, who can say that it
will not be the university presses of
various countries which will be the
publishers of the Thoreaus and the
Deweys of the future?
