Old fossils and
antediluvian theories
by Louis S. B. Leakey
and Vanne Morris Goodall
Text © Copyright. Reproduction prohibited
REHISTORY is a compara¬
tively new branch of science but the
records of man's preoccupation with
the riddles of his origins go back to
the dawn of history. In his early
search for the truth man drew upon
the riches of his imagination, and
strange stories, which were Invented, to
explain the mystery of creation, can be
found in the myths and legends of
many peoples.
As the centuries passed, however,
man began to look for a rational expla¬
nation of the mystery of life through
the study of nature. This led ultima¬
tely, as we shall see, to a bitter con¬
flict between the Church and the pio¬
neers of the science of prehistory,
which began in the eighteenth century
and was brought to a climax in 1859
by the publication of Darwin's Origin
of Species.
The crude stone cutting tools which
were made by our very early ancestors
are now accepted as the clues from
which we learn about their cultural life.
For many thousands of years, however,
these Implements, fashioned from flint,
chert, obsidian or other types of stone,
lay scattered over the face of the earth
and were regarded as mere "curiosi¬
ties of nature". Some Greek philoso¬
phers believed that these had been
launched by Zeus and called them
"thunderbolts", and local superstition
in many countries invested them with
magical powers.
It was not until the latter part of the
sixteenth century that Michael Mer-
cati, physician to Pope Clement VIII,
realized the true significance of these
so-called "thunderbolts". "Most men",
he wrote, "believe that ceraunia (thun¬
derbolts) are produced by lightning.
Those who study history consider that
they have been broken off from very
hard flints by a violent blow in the
days before iron was employed for
the follies of war."
Towards the close of the seven¬
teenth century, a London apothecary,
John Conyers, who was described
by his friend John Bagford as a man
"who made it his chief business to
collect such Antiquities as were daily
found in and about London", dis¬
covered "the Body of an Elephant".
Not far away he came upon a pear-
shaped stone. The two friends must
have examined and discussed this
stone on many occasions.
In Bagford's opinion, which must
have been met with a good deal of
scepticism at the time, it represented
"a British weapon made of a Flint
Lance like unto the Head of a
Spear", which had been used in the
days before Britons knew the use of
brass or iron. Bagford suggested,
therefore, that the elephant was one
of the many which had been brought
to England during the Roman occu¬
pation of Great Britain, and had
possibly been slain with the stone
weapon discovered by his friend
Conyers.
It was nearly a century before
John Frere made the next correctly
interpreted discovery of man-made
"stone tools". These stones described
by Frere as "spear-heads", were
found in the brick-earths in an ancient
valley at Hoxne in Suffolk, associated
with the bones of extinct animals.
Laying aside the preconceived ideas
of his generation, Frere had the
courage to announce what he believed
to be the true significance of his
discovery. He not only .recognized
the human origin of the tools, but
suggested that they belonged to a
very remote geological period, an
idea which was incompatible with the
persistent and widespread belief in a
universal flood in Noah's time.
This brilliant interpretation, however,
was ignored by contemporary scientific
opinion. It was not until 1859, when
the brick-earths of Hoxne were re¬
visited, by the geologist Sir John
Evans and by Sir Joseph Prestwich,
that Frere's Interpretations were
verified and his place as one of the
pioneers of prehistory was established
for all time.
It was not long before another vitally
Important step was taken towards
the unveiling of man's origins, when
the true status of fossils (which had
puzzled generations * of men) was
finally established. Fossils are now
known to be the remains of plants,
shells and bones which have been
preserved by natural means in the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
'UNVEILING MAN'S
ORIGINS'
Most of the major facts now known
about man's evolution have been
uncovered during the past century
and a half by a comparatively new
branch of science: prehistory. The
growth of this science and its
revelations are described In "Un¬
veiling Man's Origins" by LS.B.
Leakey and Madame Vanne Morris
Goodall, an Informative book publish¬
ed by the Schenkman Publishing
Company, Cambridge, Mass., In 1969,
and In 1970 by Methuen, London.
In this article we present, by kind
permission of the publisher, extracts
from the first part of the book,
entitled "The Background", and
dealing with the prelude to the
science of prehistory up until 1859
when Charles Darwin published his
book on the origin of species.
59

ANTEDILUVIAN THEORIES (Continued)
The date of Creation : 4004 B.C.
earth's crust, and altered In consti¬
tution according to the influences to
which they have been subjected.
They are of vital importance to the
prehistorian for they supply the clues
which he needs for the reconstruc¬
tion of the long procession of diverse
creatures which have lived on our
planet.
The advanced thinkers of the eight¬
eenth century came to believe that
fossils were of organic origin. The
next step towards a better under¬
standing of their true value was to
find out when the fossilized creatures
they represented had lived. It was
only natural, in an age which was
deeply influenced by religious doc¬
trines, that enlightenment should be
sought in the Old Testament account
of the creation.
An answer which was acceptable
to a very large number of scientists
was found in the story of "The Flood";
this suggested that all creatures,
except those saved by Noah at God's
command, had perished under the
waters of a "universal deluge".
Clearly, then, it seemed highly
reasonable to accept the idea that
fossils were the remains of those
creatures which had been drowned in
the Flood and buried under the debris
which covered the earth when the
waters went down. This became
known as the "Diluvial theory" and
was strongly supported by the Church.
But there were a great many free¬
thinkers who believed that this philo¬
sophy was contradicted by the
evidence of geology. Groups of fos¬
silized animals, each differing from
the others, had been observed in
successive geological strata, indic¬
ating clearly that they had lived at
different geological periods of time.
If this was so, then they could not
all have been drowned In one and
the same great flood.
In order to accommodate the new
data, the famous French palaeont¬
ologist Baron George Cuvier suggest¬
ed that there had been a succession
of catastrophes, each followed by an
era of calm during which the earth
had been restocked. He was careful,
however, to fit this new philosophy
into the accepted biblical chronology.
God's first creation, he suggested,
had consisted mainly of marine
creatures, his second of reptiles and
his third chiefly of mammals. These
were destroyed In turn and a fourth
creation, as described in the Old
Testament, was ultimately swept
away by "The Flood", with the
exception of the inmates of the ark.
Launched by a man of such reput¬
ation as Cuvier, the new "Catastrophic
theory" gained immediate support;
but a handful of advanced and
courageous thinkers began to suspect
that the duration of geological time
had been grossly under-estimated.
At this time the Church was still
blindly supporting the conclusion
proposed by Archbishop James Ussher
in 1654, that the world had been
created in 4004 B.C. He had arrived
at this estimate by computing first _
the ages of Adam and his descendants,'
as recorded in the Old Testament, and
then by adding a number of years
deduced from a study of Hebrew
history.
Dinosaur eggs and mammoth bone huts
For centuries before the notion of evolution became generally accepted,
men refused to believe In the existence of fossils dating back hundreds
of thousands, even millions of years, and. all kinds of theories were put
forward to explain the strange objects that were constantly being
disinterred. One popular theory was that they were the remains of
creatures that had perished in The Flood, and in 171.6 the Swiss doctor
Johann Scheuchzer, seen in engraving left with a collection of fossils,
even published a book entitled "Museum Diluvianum". Many years of
patient research were required before the idea was accepted that these
objects could be the fossilized remains of creatures such as the
carnivorous Gorgosaurus (top right) who inhabited the earth some
75 million years ago. The amazing Dinosaur egg, bottom right, was one
of a huge quantity of eggs found a few years ago on a tract of land
at Roques Hautes, in southern France, by the curator of the Museum of
Natural History of Aix-en-Provence. Below, a dwelling built In prehistoric
times entirely from Mammoth bones, discovered In 1966 at Miejiritch in
the Ukraine, U.S.S.R. The bones of 95 Mammoths were used In the
construction of this dwelling which covers an area of 23 square metres.
Photo © APN, Kiev, Ukraine

Cuvier could not possibly fit three
additional creations into this time scale.
He therefore adopted the proposals
of Comte Georges de Buffon, a great
French geologist, and pushed the
creation of the world back by 80,000
years.
The early part of the nineteenth
century was remarkable for the
intense interest which scientists in
Europe, England and America began
to take in cave exploration. Reports
circulating in 1822 claimed that the
caves in southern Germany had
yielded the remains of many extinct
forms of animals, including those of
elephant, rhinoceros, hyena and bear.
The news of these discoveries inspired
an English clergyman, Dean William
Buckland, at that time also Reader in
Geology In the University of Oxford,
to investigate the Paviland cave on
the Welsh coast. It was not long
before Buckland made one of the
notable discoveries of the century.
The Paviland cave is set In à
limestone cliff and soon yielded a
store of prehistoric treasures. Flint
implements, as well as ornaments and
tools of bone and Ivory, lay embedded
with the same species of extinct
animal which had been found in the
stratified caves of Germany. With
them Buckland discovered a human
skeleton, stained with red ochre.
This became popularly known as
"The Red Lady of Paviland", though
it was later found to be that of a young
man.
The problem of interpreting his
discovery placed Buckland in a difficult
position. As a geologist, he suspected
that he had found the remains of a
"pre-diluvial man". As a Christian
minister and a Diluvialist, the tenets
of his faith precluded him from ad¬
mitting it. In the end, he apparently
allowed his conscience to dictate his
pronouncement. He explained his
discovery by suggesting that although
the remains of the animals had
probably been swept Into the Paviland
cave by flood waters, the human body
must have been intrusively buried at
a much later date, when man had
settled, in England long after "The
Flood".
A few years later a Roman Catholic
priest, the' Reverend John MacEnery,
began to investigate the huge
rambling limestone cave on the Devon
coast of England known as Kent's
Cavern. He found man-made stone
tools in association with the same
species of extinct animals that Dean
Buckland had uncovered in the
Paviland cave; but unlike Buckland he
did not allow his scientific judgment
to be obscured by religious beliefs.
In spite of the severe criticisms to
which he was subjected by the
Church, and even by Buckland, Father
MacEnery remained convinced that he
had found sufficient evidence to
maintain that man had lived in England
long before the time of the "Biblical
Flood", as a contemporary of the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
61

AN EARLY
'EVOLUTIONIST'
An early exponent of the doctrine of
evolution was the German zoologist Ernst
Haeckel (1843-1919). These drawings made
by Haeckel himself In 1866 some of many
he produced for books on' biology illustrate
one example of his theory of recapitulation,
i.e. if a land animal had ancestors which
lived In water and used gills, each embryo
of that animal continues to develop gills
even though they may be lost during later
embryonic development. They show (from
left to right) fish, salamander, tortoise, bird,
calf, pig, rabbit and human embryos. At
first stage (top row) all have gill-like organs
to the right of the eye. At second stage
(centre) limbs develop but "gills" are still
present At third stage (bottom) physical
differences are apparent and "gills" have
disappeared In non-aquatic creatures.
ANTEDILUVIAN THEORIES (Continued)
Drawing Ernst Haeckel
The earth begins to yield up its secrets
62
extinct animals whose remains he had
found. The notebooks in which he
recorded his discoveries and inter¬
pretations were found and published
many years after his death.
Meanwhile, the extensive limestone
caves near Liège, in Belgium, had
been attracting the attention of an
intrepid and dedicated palaeontologist.
In the course of his explorations,
Dr Schmerling of Belgium investigated
more than forty caves along the
banks of the River Meuse and col¬
lected quantities of fossilized animal
remains which were associated with
implements of stone and bone. Human
fossil remains were both fragmentary
and scarce, but since he found them
embedded In the same strata,
Schmerling maintained, in spite of
opposition, that all three groups were
contemporary.
In 1833 he made the discovery for
which he is famous. Day after day,
month after month, he had been
visiting a cave named Engis. His
reward came at last with the discovery
of an almost complete "primate" skull.
It was embedded five feet within the
breccia and surrounded by the remains
of extinct forms of elephant, bear,
tiger, hyena, rhinoceros, reindeer and
other animals which had disappeared
before the beginning of what was then
accepted as the time boundary of the
late Stone Age. In Schmerling's
opinion, this was conclusive proof that
man had been living in Europe "long
before the Deluge".
Another discovery that was totally
Ignored during this period was made
in 1848 in Gibraltar. This find, a
well-preserved skull, was eventually
brought to England in 1862, but it was
not until the beginning of the twentieth
century that its unique place ¡n the
history of human evolution was finally
established. It represented, as we
shall discover, the first recorded
remains of Neanderthal man, whose
history plays an important part in the
story of man's evolution.
It was largely due to the brilliant
and indefatigable work of a French¬
man, M. Boucher de Perthes, that the
balance of scientific thought was
finally tipped in favour of those who
believed in the existence of "ante¬
diluvian man"
Boucher de Perthes was a lover
of antiquities as well as a great
scholar. In 1825, when he was about
forty years old, he was appointed to
the post of customs officer at Abbe¬
ville on the river Somme. The gravel
beds in the valley of the Somme were
continually being exploited for com¬
mercial purposes and had already
been investigated and found to contain
the fossil remains of extinct animals.
These gravel beds naturally attract¬
ed the attention of Boucher de Perthes,
who soon began to notice that many
curiously shaped stones were dug
from the gravel by, the workmen. In
spite of the fact that the gravel beds
had been assigned to the so-called
prediluvial geological period, Boucher
de Perthes was convinced that the
stones, which he began to collect from
the workmen, were in fact "stone
tools" which had been made by man.
He was sure that he had found positive
proof of man's existence in Europe
before "The Flood".
He claimed that the soils outside
Abbeville contained stones worked by
"antediluvial man", in association with
the fossil remains of large animals
belonging to extinct species. Boucher
de Perthes began to be regarded by
scientists as a dreamer and a vision¬
ary. The Church dubbed him a heretic.
He does not appear to have had one
single supporter of any authority until
1854, when he was visited by a
Dr Rigollot, a physician from Amiens,
whose scepticism about the age and
authenticity of the "stone tools" from
Abbeville was well known.
Having examined the Abbeville
stone implements, Rigollot returned
to Amiens and discovered that there
were similar stones in comparable
strata at St-Acheul near Amiens.
Completely converted, Rigollot ranged
himself enthusiastically on the side
of the opponents of the diluvialist
theory, and it is fitting that the work
of these two pioneers of prehistory
should be associated with two early
cultures of the Stone Age known as
the Chellean (or Abbevillian as it is
now called), and the Acheulean.*
* Chellean after the site at Chelles, Abbe¬
villian after the site at Abbeville and Acheu¬
lean after St.Acheul.

Charles Darwin (1809-
1882) Is shown at left one
year before his death.
When he returned from his
voyage in H.M.S. Beagle
at the age of 27, he
brought back with him
specimens of the 13 types
of finches (right) he found
In the Galapagos which
were to give him the clue
to the relationship between
variation and adaptation.
The traditional Idea of
creation maintained that
each of these 13 species
had been separately creat¬
ed and never varied.
Darwin assumed that since
these species were fund¬
amentally the same they
were descended from a
common ancestor and that
the variations were due to
adaptation to circumstan¬
ces. Darwin was violently
attacked from all sides
after the publication of
"On the Origin of Species".
The 19th century cartoon,
below left, published In
Germany, carried the cap¬
tion "Darwin in consulta¬
tion with one of his
ancestors."
Photo © Courtesy of the American Museum of Natural History
We have already seen how the
significance of a fossil human skull,
found in a quarry in Gibraltar in 1848,
went unrecognized. Nine years later,
some workmen quarrying the limestone
cliffs of a deep ravine near Düsseldorf
in Germany made a similar remarkable
discovery. The celebrated Nean¬
derthal cave (which has long since
been demolished), then opened half
way up the steep side of the cliff and,
in 1857, the remains of a strange
individual were found buried beneath
its floor.
By good fortune, a medical doctor,
who was interested in fossils, re¬
covered the remains of this skeleton
from the workmen and sent them to
an expert anatomist for examination.
The extraordinary character of the
skull presented many problems. These
were made the more difficult and
unhelpful because no other animal
remains and no artifacts were found
nearby. There was literally no asso¬
ciated clue to guide the scientists in
their estimation of the antiquity of
these human bones. The find aroused
intense interest in scientific circles.
It is to Professor William King of
Queen's College, Galway, in Ireland,
that honour is due for being the first
scientist to recognize that the skull
cap . from the Neanderthal cave
belonged to a representative of a
hitherto unrecognized type of mankind.
Although the vault of the skull was the
only well-preserved part of the fossil,
King created a new species for its
reception and named It Homo neander-
thalensis.
Scientists of the time were not then
ready to believe that the prehistoric
world might have been peopled by
different species of mankind. Many
of them therefore continued to regard
the Neanderthal skull as a pathological
specimen. More than half a century
was to elapse before King's opinion
was endorsed by science and the
famous skull from the Neanderthal
cave accepted as representing
a member of the species he had
named Homo neanderthalensis.
The first half of the century was
now almost over, and the stage was
set for one of the most dramatic
moments in the history of science.
Lyell and other geologists of the period
had pushed the story of our planet
back in time, presenting mankind
with a new and awe-inspiring concept
of a world which was old beyond
imagining.
Their research had revealed that
great areas of land, now submerged
by water, had once joined Asia to
America, Europe to Africa, and Great
Britain to the rest of Europe, so that
in prehistoric times both men and
animals could have wandered across
these land bridges from one con¬
tinent to another. Evidence had also
been discovered to show that large
parts of the world had once been
frozen in the grip of a great glacial
epoch.
In Switzerland, between two glacial
deposits, geologists had found a bed
of fossilized plants which could only
have flourished in a temperate climate.
This, together with an accumulation
of additional data, led them to believe
that there must have been both glacial
and ¡nterglacial stages within the
Great Ice Age.
From about 1850 on, the "Diluvial"
theory rapidly lost ground. Not only
was it untenable in the light of the
new geological data which were
coming to hand, but many scientists
were beginning to wonder whether the
Biblical "Flood" had, in fact, been a
"Universal Deluge", or merely a local
flood confined to the area in and
around the Euphrates Valley, where
Adam and all his descendants, In¬
cluding Noah, had reputedly lived.
Learned men throughout the ages
have speculated upon the number and
combination of species which Noah
must have packed into his Ark. In
the sixteenth century the famous
Elizabethan sailor and explorer, Sir
Walter Raleigh, calculated that there
must have been "eighty-nine distinct
species of beastes", but by the end
of the eighteenth century this figure
had been doubled, and the estimated
proportions of the Ark had grown
correspondingly formidable.
The problem was aggravated by
evidence which had now come from
such far-flung areas as Africa, Asia,
America and Europe, that each con-
CONTINUED PAGE 66
63

PILTDOWN MAN
FOSSIL
FORGERY
In 1912, a British amateur geologist and
antiquarian, Charles Dawson, reported
the discovery first of parts of a skull
and later of a jaw in a gravel pit at
Piltdown in southern England, which
when reconstructed proved to be a
modern human cranium possessing an
ape-like lower jaw. "Piltdown man", as
the remains became known, which
looked like a new kind of "missing link"
between man and the apes, sparked off
one of the longest and most sensational
controversies in the study of prehistory.
~he remains were at first accepted as
genuine by a few authorities, but it
became increasingly difficult to recon¬
cile the Piltdown man with other finds.
t*.»*
Y«*^
such as Java man and the African pre-
men which had more ape-like skulls and
more man-like jaws. Finally, in 1953,
special studies and tests proved un¬
questionably that the Piltdown skull
fragments were a fraud that they
belonged to a modern man and the teeth
and jaw to a modern ape. The material
had been chemically treated and skil¬
fully tampered with to make it appear
ancient and authentic, and it had been
planted in the gravel pit by an uniden¬
tified hoaxer. One theory is that the
perpetrator aimed to embarrass the
prehistorians of his time and undermine
the entire idea of human evolution, still
strongly challenged in many quarters.
With modern scientific dating methods,
no "fossil" like the Piltdown man would
be likely to escape detection today.
Above, Charles Dawson (standing right)
and British scientists watch anatomist
Sir Arthur Keith measure the Piltdown
skull. The three skulls on left show,
in clockwise order, first, the Piltdown
skull, second a skull of modern man and
third, the skull of Java man.

ANTEDILUVIAN THEORIES (Continued trom page 63)
tinent had its own particular fauna.
Forms ancestral to these animals had
been found In geological deposits
formed before the Biblical "Flood"
could have taken place. Only by
means of a miracle, therefore, could
Noah have collected individuals from
all the living species in the world
before the "Flood" and redistributed
them afterwards.
The controversy regarding the
existence of man in Europe before
the "Flood" now began to die away,
and scientists concerned themselves
with the chronology of glacial and
interglacial man and his cultural
remains. Now that the true signi¬
ficance of stone tools was appreciated,
a vast wealth of data was beginning
to accumulate about the social life
and Industries of our remote ancestors.
A succession of classified cultures
known as Stone Age, Bronze Age and
finally Iron Age had by now been estab¬
lished.
Theories and ideas, suppressed for
so long by religious prejudice, now
struggled into the light, and were
apparent in the new and rational
approach which was being adopted
in the search for man's origins. Many
of the old beliefs which had been
exaggerated by poetic fiction were
therefore swept away.
Wherever the curiosity of man led
him to investigate and chronicle the
marvels of the natural world, scientists
now found themselves in the posses¬
sion of a vast storehouse of know¬
ledge. It remained for someone to
postulate a theory which would account
for the diversity of life on earth
and the ultimate miracle of mankind.
The idea of evolving life, which was
so soon to capture the imagination of
man, was not a new one. Until now,
however, it had been stultified by the
bigoted acceptance of the doctrine of
special creation, which maintained that
all species remained exactly as they
were when first created. A handful
of advanced thinkers of the late
eighteenth century, such as Carl Lin¬
naeus, the famous Swedish naturalist,
Erasmus Darwin of England, and
Lamarck of France, had put forward
revolutionary ideas which were in
opposition to the theory of immuta¬
bility of species. It was, however,
Charles Robert Darwin who finally
gave the world a new concept of the
animal kingdom.
Today Darwin's concept of evolution
is so well known and so widely
accepted that It is difficult to imagine
the magnitude of the sensation it
caused when it was published in 1859.
The first edition of the book was sold
out very quickly and the reaction to
its doctrines was immediate.
The Church saw it as a threat to
the very foundations on which the
doctrine of special creation and the
literal belief in Biblical chronology had
been built. It therefore attacked
Darwin with an almost fanatical inten¬
sity. The idea that a wise and powerful
God had designed and created all
living things in a permanent immutable
form, was part of the Christian faith.
Many scientists, while recognizing the
genius of a theory which would with¬
stand the most acid tests of logic,
nevertheless turned from the idea of
the mutability of species on purely
religious grounds.
Darwin himself was emotionally
Involved in the conflict which his
theory of evolution had provoked, and
he always stressed that he had not
been motivated by any anti-theological
bias when he wrote the Origin of
Species. For those who came to
accept Darwin's theory, man began
to be regarded as the ultimate triumph
of a process of evolution which was
even more miraculous and awe-
inspiring than was the concept of a
special creation of each separate form
of life.
Louis S. B. Leakey
and Vanne Morris Goodall

