Photo r Fulvio Roiter, Venice
"La Casa de Anáhuac",a museum conceived by the great Mexican painter Diego Rivera as
a storehouse of 4,000 years of Mexican popular art, bears striking witness to Rivera's
passionate artistic ideal of a "return to the roots." Anáhuac was the original Aztec name
for Mexico, but today it is applied to the vast central Mexican plateau. Built in the village
of San Pablo Tepetlapa on the outskirts of the capital, the museum perpetuates the
memory of the painter, seen here, as if through a window, in the photo-portrait on the wall.

A hard-hitting article on art
and the artist in Latin America
CAGE BARS
OF REALITY
by Jorge Enrique Adoum
NlABOKOV tells how "... the
first palpitation (of Lolita) was provok¬
ed by reading a newspaper article
relating that a scientist, after months
of effort, had succeeded in making a
large ape in the Jardin des Plantes
(in Paris) sketch a drawing; this
sketch, the first ever produced by an
animal, represented the bars of the
poor beast's cage."
The same seems to happen with
men whenever they are treated like
apes who have to be "taught" to
create; consider the inexhaustible
wealth of invention in popular art or
rebel art compared with the produc¬
tions of any institutionalized art.
Arnold von Salis, among others,
remarked on the imaginative poverty
of Greek art which '"saw no further
than the end of its nose", i.e. no further
than the cage bars.
In "pre-Latin" America, where the
artist was really integrated into his
society and performed an irreplace¬
able function in it, evidence of an
amazing creative imagination can be
seen in the huge otone edifices or
sculptures, pottery, textiles, and gold
and silver work of the Maya, Aztec,
Inca or Aymará cultures. With the
JORGE ENRIQUE ADOUM, Ecuadorian poet
and writer. Is the author of some ten books,
including a 4-volume poetic cycle, 'Los Cua¬
dernos de la Tierra" (Notebooks on my
Country, 1952-1962), and a critical work,
"Poesia del Siglo XX" (Poetry of the 20th
Century, 1957). A former National Director
for Culture at Ecuador's Ministry of Edu¬
cation, he has also been Director of the
Publications Division of Ecuador's Institute
of Culture and Secretary of Its Theatre and
Folklore Institute. He Is now assistant editor
of the Spanish edition of the "Unesco
Courier" and Is collaborating in Unesco's
studies on Latin American culture.
Spanish conquest the first cultural
colonialism set local craftsmen to
mass-produce, In their workshops
and schools, the images needed to
furnish the churches which other
Indians were building Under the direc¬
tion of foreign architects to plans
brought from Spain and Portugal.
Quite touching efforts are made by
certain Latin American critics to dis¬
cover some trace of Indian personality
in the religious art of that period;
the baroque and plateresque colonial
churches have even been called "a
rebellion of stone".
With some rare exceptions like
Aleijadinho, whose incredible Prophets
reveal an originality infinitely superior
to the Iberian peninsular and flamenco
models, the most that can be found
is some tropical bird, animal or plant
added surreptitiously by Indian sculp¬
tors In the bas-reliefs of churches.
The legend of Miguel de Santiago,
which fills the Ecuadorians with awe,
is merely an extreme example of the
cage-bars story; he is said to
have stabbed his model in order to
"capture" the agonized features for
a canvas of Christ.
Official art of course expresses the
imposed order and the colonized
artist reluctantly submits to both: the
major figures of Latin American col¬
onial art were little more than skilled
craftsmen producing goods for a
market that was also their master
the Crown, the Court or the Church.
Yet the true artistic creator was the
people: cut off In their island the
inhabitants of Puna went on decorat¬
ing their clay beads with fabulous
geometrical animals, and the Easter
Islanders erected mysterious giant
idols in the sand; the anonymous
popular prints of Brazil depicted
figures from a strange mythology
peopled with "lobisones", standing
lizards and zoomorphic demons. Later,
Posada's engraving drew on the fune¬
rary and funereal images of Mexican
popular art. They were able to see
further than the realities of man and
nature.
Independence from Spain and Por¬
tugal did not basically alter social
structures, nor was there any change
in the mentality of the colonized artist;
he began to paint military heroes
instead of images, but the technique
was still that imposed on him.
Then came landscapes (in which
the wild scenery of America appears
as placid as a Dutch landscape),
scenes of creóle life (sometimes paint¬
ed by a lawyer politician like the Uru¬
guayan Pedro Figari), genre paintings
which helped to create abroad the
image of a "typism" regarded at home
as originality, and which were pure
European impressionism.
T ROM the nineteen thirties
onwards art faces social reality the
collective prison, the common grave,
the real horror of our countries with
the declared intention of helping to
change the rule of injustice and the
rule of official art with it.
In the "proletarian academicism" of
realist painting, the Indians or Negroes
in Latin America began to be depicted
at work or being murdered which,
for them, was often the same thing, y X
But neither in this manner and even
less in the manner of those who at
about the same time began to paint
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

SKULL IN FINERY
WOMAN IN TEARS
The Ecuadorian artist Oswaldo Guayasamin (b. 1919) has depicted
the harsh life of the Indian woman in Latin America in a series
of paintings entitled "Women in Tears". Right, one of these
paintings. A very popular artist, in every sense of the term, is
the Mexican engraver, José Guadalupe Posada, who died in 1913.
In Mexico there is a popular tradition that death is not a gloomy
affair. Posada used this custom of treating death In a casual
light-hearted manner to smite injustice with satire and irony in his
famous engravings of skulls and skeletons "Los Calaveras". The
skull wearing a gaily decorated hat in Posada's "Calavera Catrina"
(left) is a thrust at vanity and a reminder that all ends in dust
CAGE BARS OF REALITY (Continued)
their own personal cell and the bars
of individual conflicts did the artist
manage to regain in society the place
that had belonged to the creator of
the past, who had expressed himself
and his people at the same time.
This is not a question of subject
or technique. I have seen building
labourers from the country laughing
at a realist mural of agricultural work
on the building on which they were
employed. Realist art is no more "pop¬
ular" than non-figurative art, just as
the novel about the Indians of Latin
America is no more widely read than
avant-garde poetry.
But if the absence of a reading
public may be partly due to illiteracy,
in the case of art we have to admit
that although it may seem easier to
look at a picture than to read a book,
an art gallery does not attract any
more people than a library.
Art is today a test of culture: we
cannot even say that everyone
who reads visits an exhibition; that
other illiteracy, which appeases its
appetite for reading with romances or
Westerns, satisfies its need for art
with the calendars or colour prints of
landscapes, dogs, flowers or nudes
that decorate cobblers' workshops or
house corridors and kitchens.
I
24
F the organizers of the
Toronto survey (see the "Unesco
Courier", March 1971) found to their
chagrin that between artistic innovation
and its general public acceptance
there is a gap of at least fifty years,
just think how long it will take in our
countries, many of which have no mu¬
seum of modern art, many of whose
art colleges have never seen a good
reproduction and whose teaching of the
history of painting has to make do
with the black-and-white reproductions
in the cheapest books.
As for the works of Latin American
artists, in the colonial period they
went to the courts of Spain and Por
tugal or the American viceroys; or
else they formed part of religious
architecture the only way they could
come In contact with the public who,
as may easily be supposed, regarded
them as religious objects rather than
works of art.
Today they are kept in a few private
collections or are used in municipal
architecture or urbanism. Only occa¬
sionally, however, does the State
commission works to decorate public
buildings, and these inspire the work¬
ing classes with greater fear and
mistrust than galleries or museums,
perhaps because there is often a
guard at the door. Or they are plac¬
ed in the office of the Minister or
Director-General, to which the public
is not admitted.
The customers of art dealers and
art galleries consist almost exclusively
of foreign collectors. And through the
law of supply and demand or because
of outside influences, or because even
here "the customer is always right",
not a few artists have had to submit
to the fluctuations of market require¬
ments, ranging from a predilection for
fashionable European trends to the
imposition of a "local style", non-
observance of which, as the Director
of the Guggenheim Museum reported,
makes many North American tourists
exclaim: "They paint like everybody
else. What a pity!"
Thus Schücking's remark about
artists who are democrats in politics
and aristocrats in culture is nowhere
truer than in Le'!n America; outcast
they and then* work from their
society, forced into exile within it, not
so much through rejection which is
already a positive intellectual attitude,
as through indifference or ignorance,
they work for an élite to which they
still do not belong nor wish to belong.
They spring from the middle class
and share its divisions and privileges.
But even there their personal situation
is an awkward one. Because their art
is closer to a handicraft, the social
stigma attaching to manual work In the
eyes of colonial society earns them
the scorn of the upper middle class
for whom literature may be in good
taste.
Yet the marketable value of his
work enables the artist to devote
most of his time to it and also to
engage in various sidelines which earn
him the indifference of the lower
middle class from whom he becomes
alienated. The State seldom recogni¬
zes the artist's existence, unless he
seems to be a threat to the established
order; then a government may be
proud of a painter's work, yet imprison
him for supporting as a citizen the
ideas he portrays in his painting; or
the authorities may decide to obliterate
the mural they commissioned. In this
case not only right but might is on the
side of the customer.
Bi the situation of the Lat¬
in American artist is far more painfully
dramatic and has no parallel anywhere
else. The cultural genocide committed
by the conquistadors lay in cutting the
roots. What might have been tradi¬
tions are merely relics of a past
without continuity. They left the Latin
American artist little to inherit; they
forced him to practise a foreign art
and then accused him of stealing.
And he became so "mixed up" that
he began to cultivate locally the
models transplanted from abroad and
tried to invent a tradition, if only for
a hybrid art.
His drama is the conflict between
seeking his identity as a member of
a society "in definition" and his
authenticity as a creator or in other
words, the dilemma between the need
to belong and the instinct to explore.
These two tendencies, which are not
necessarily opposed Rufino Tamayo
and Wilfredo Lam, for instance, have
managed to reconcile necessity and
freedom gave rise to the only two
organized art movements in Latin
America: Mexican muralism, which

adapted European realism to express
the historical and social realities of
our countries, and Rio de la Plata
constructive universalism, which set
out to create "a synthesis of the posi¬
tive features of neoplasticism,' cubism
and surrealism".
After initial successes In seeking
social documents and experimenting
with plastic techniques, each of these
movements went too far, tending on
the one hand towards a paternalist
aboriginalism reminiscent of the be¬
haviour of societies for the protection
of animals, and on the other (especially
after the constructivism of Torres
Garcia) towards an individual original¬
ity which deliberately ignored the
slaughter going on a few yards from
the studio window.
Until quite recently realism was
regarded as a Latin American tradition
and David Alfaro Siqueiros could
affirm that "there is no road but ours".
Realism the photograph of a situation
which had remained more or less
static (apart from Cuba) became the
painter's official curriculum vitae even
if reality was portrayed merely In the
form of misfortune or natural disaster.
It was, however, the first denuncia¬
tion of the shameful social reality
of our "grievous republics", and its
triumph belatedly celebrated at a
Venice Biennale was "the triumph of
a moral world" but certainly not of
an art trend.
It was a question of that form for
that subject. No one would have
regarded it as an individual expression
of America if it had been concerned
with still life or realistic fictional
representations (as though the Goya
of "The Execution of the Rebels of
May 3, 1808" and of the bitlngly
satirical etchings, "Los Caprichos",
were not the same). And perhaps it
would not have reached the same
heights If the institutionalization of the
Mexican Revolution had not fostered
historical and anecdotal muralism.
While in the countries bordering the
Pacific, especially those with an
indigenous population, art was
generally regarded as a compromise,
although it sometimes substituted
social reality for an idealization of
historical truth, in the countries of the
Atlantic seaboard, economically more
advanced and retaining fewer traces
of feudalism, artistic reality was
emphasized as a "thing" in itself.
Artistic sectarianism accused non-
figurative art of pandering to the taste
of the bourgeoisie, but the same bour¬
geoisie bought realist pictures simply
because they were a good investment.
As for what might be called the public,
realism left its conscience untroubled;
it presented as one facet of society
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

CAGE BARS OF REALITY (Continued)
Academicism, sectarianism, officialism.
26
the martyred multitudes of history
and as the other, the symbols of
economic, political and religious
power. The rest remained outside the
picture in the comfortable position of
spectators. Abstract art did not affect
them.
Then a new art form appeared
"the identity photograph of a society
that can equally well engage in a
cruel war or enjoy the pornography
of illusions instead of facing reality",
as the Argentine art critic, Damián Car¬
los Bayon, has put it, "and in whose
images we recognize ourselves and
in alarm peer keenly into the mirror
to see If it is really our ¡mage."
Then in order to reject it, the call goes
up again for an art for the people. In
the end they want realism, not truth,
which is not the same thing.
In many of our countries, whatever
the intensity of nationalist feeling,
there Is an inferiority complex, even
if it is only the reaction of an ado¬
lescent to an adult. Art expresses
this in a swing of the pendulum:
either taking a pride in one's misfor¬
tunes, like a beggar displaying his
sores, or stretching up on tiptoe to
be as tall as Europe, as though this
were the unbeatable model, and the
clearest sign of this is that gesture
seeming to imply. "We can do it too".
One has to admit that Latin America
has produced no original art movement
since the time of the aboriginal
cultures, although there have been
original artists in the various trends.
And so since the loss of tradition,
there is no pure strain to preserve,
even by force, as is happening with
Latin American Indian music. And
there is no possible escape from the
art of the rest of the world, since
there are no islands free from the
contamination of that cold and almost
mechanical impersonalism that is its
salient characteristic today.
I T is absurd to claim to
preserve the purity of art alone in a
culture which has already adopted
other such alien features as language,
religion and customs. In general, the
only result of these efforts has been
to dis-inter a mode of expression that
has been preserved as it was before
the conquests and then to care for it
like a lifeless museum piece.
Incorporated despite all contradic¬
tions into "Western civilization", it is
not surprising that some Latin Amer¬
ican artists found that their artistic
conceptions coincided with those of
some European art movements. In¬
fluences are then more inevitable than
ever. What revolts us is the massive
export of artistic byproducts. It is sad
to see the popular crafts copying
worthless foreign models because that
is what the market wants: the "images
d'Epinal" were converted into some¬
thing like the typical plastic lan¬
guage of our working classes; the
labels on Havana cigar boxes somehow
or other echo Italian neoclassical
allegory; Catholic devotional pictures
show Virgins made up like film stars;
Donald Duck appears on local pottery;
the carpet-makers of Ecuador have
replaced their own designs by floral
motifs from foreign catalogues.
Some examples of non-popular art,
on the other hand, are a gigantic
fraud; in the heart of tropical Latin
America there is a "Gothic" cathedral
of reinforced concrete and in one of
the countries with the strongest Indian
tradition, there is a "Byzantine" cathe¬
dral with "Chinese" towers.
In the past, European art trends took
a long time to cross the Atlantic and
reached Latin America so belatedly
that they were treated as new when
they were already outmoded in their
countries of origin. Herbert Read re¬
fused to include the Mexican muralists
Siqueiros, Rivera and Orozco in his
History of Modern Painting (and the
French painter Utrillo too, for that
matter).
Today, easier and more frequent
travel, prompted by the need to know
what is happening abroad a tendency
which is not to be blamed in view of
the indifference if not hostility of the
environment, the lack of museums and
information, the scarcity of genuine
criticism, neither superficial nor im¬
provised, and the almost childish need
to make comparisons in order to feel
reassured has reduced the time lag
between Latin American art and other
countries.
And so in Latin America, as in Europe
and the United States, there is a
search for movement in place of
immobility (the Argentineans Pettoruti,
Aizenberg, Fernandez Muro),- the re¬
habilitation of surfaces (the Brazilian
Camargo), op art (from the optical
illusions of the Venezuelan Soto to
the mechanical constructions of the
Argentinean Le Parc), and the desire
for the work to be transformed "from
an object into a spectacle", as found
in the compositions with spectator
participation produced by the Argen¬
tinian Antonio Seguí, or in the Uni
versity of Caracas with its transport¬
able, expandable lecture halls.
Such travel, with which writers are
usually reproached more bitterly, is of
vital importance in the development
of the Latin American artist; he feels
less cut off from the rest of the world
and yet he has not lost his citizen¬
ship.
The "unbridled creation of tropical
shapes" of the Cuban Wilfredo Lam
might perhaps be inexplicable without
the teaching and personal influence of
. Picasso and Andre Breton. The paint¬
ing of the Chilean Roberto Matta and
his "critique of daily life comparable
with that of Daumier" owes much to
Marcel Duchamp. Kracjberg, in whose
works "the material as well as the
the illusion is volcanic", is a Brazi¬
lian who was born near Warsaw and
has lived in Minsk, Vitebsk, Leningrad,
Stuttgart, Paris, Säo Paulo and Parana.
Kazuya Sakai, in whose geometrical
rigour "painting has being not mean¬
ing", was born in Buenos Aires, edu¬
cated in Japan and lived in New York
and Mexico.
Carpentier, in his
introduction to "The Kingdom of this
World", says that "because of the vir¬
ginity of the landscape, its formation,
ontology, and the Faustian presence of
the Indian and the Negro, the Revela¬
tion of its recent discovery and the
fertile crossbreeding it fostered, Amer¬
ica is very far from having exhausted
its store of mythologies."
For that very reason it is very far
from having discovered all its reality.
The new art is helping to complete
the picture of this continent which is
not exclusively agricultural, which has
not remained stuck in the Corn Age,
which does not wish to be shut into
an exotic folklore to please the art
tourists and the foreign TV camera¬
men.
Because we have never been asked
our names and we ourselves are be¬
ginning to call ourselves by the names
they gave us Terra Firma, Hispano-
America, Indo-America, Latin America,
Third World, Developing Countries
we may have believed for a long time
that we are what others imagine and
see ourselves as they insist on seeing
us from outside.
If art has always been a means of
self-knowledge, we shall have to go on
trying to find ourselves in an art that
seeks to express not only the work
we do but the essence of what we
are.
