A Tunisian school experiment
NEW WAYS
TO PROMOTE
READING
Reading habits are often
made or marred in the class¬
room. Specialists at the Ins¬
titute of Educational Sci¬
ences in Tunis have recently
developed reading motiva¬
tion techniques for Tunisian
schools, designed not only
to build a lifetime reading
habit, but also to improve
the way childen express
themselves orally and on
paper. Right, a general view
of Tunis; in the foreground,
the Street of the Dyers.
by Chadly Fitouri
16
^kDULTS nowadays seem to
be outspokenly critical of the way young
people express themselves. Modern
youth, in their view, are inarticulate,
hesitant, even tongue-tied, and adults
regard this ¡nartlculacy as a reflection
of the superficial lives they lead. In
their noisy demonstrations, ¡n their
songs and music, in their art and mod
expressions, it is the catch-phrase,
the cliché, the chanted slogan and the
short-lived idea which predominate.
Educators, for their part, seem to
have found only one explanation for
this decline in the level of expression:
a disinclination on the part of young
people to read.
Should we regard this an inevitable
malady of our time? Are we to hold
the mass media solely responsible
for this decline in the level of
expression among young people?
This would be too simple an explan¬
ation. Nor should we try to explain
away the opinion of adults concerning
modern youth as just another aspect
of the generation gap. It would,
perhaps, be more realistic to argue
CHADLY FITOURI is the founder of the
Institute of Educational Sciences In Tunis.
Professor at the Faculty of Letters of Tunis
University, he has written a number of stu¬
dies in Arabic and French on educational
problems in Tunisia, and has served as an
educational consultant to Unesco on several
occasions. Since 1971, he has been head
of the Division of Documentation, Studies
and Research at Unesco's International
Bureau of Education in Geneva.
that the deterioration in the ability of
young people to express themselves
is due to a general lowering in the
standard of education.
The fact is that when adults compare
the schoolchildren of their own
generation to those of today, they
apparently forget that in many coun¬
tries, yesterday's schools, and the
schools of the day before yesterday,
were much more selective than they
are now. Today the majority of pupils
are drawn from the most under¬
privileged social strata in which the
only cultural tradition is an oral "folk"
tradition.
To say that children from an under¬
privileged environment do not like
reading is therefore in no way a value
judgement, but rather a simple state¬
ment of fact.. If they do not read, if
they do not like reading, it is because
their background has never given them
any encouragement to read.
A survey carried out in Tunisia in
1967-68, for example, showed that
school libraries were either excessively
poor (even non-existent in newly
opened lycées) or useless because
the books they contained had not
been selected according to any logical
pedagogical or educational criteria.
Far from counter-balancing the short¬
comings of the pupils' social back¬
ground, schools seem generally to
aggravate them by making reading part
of the syllabus. Pupils and teachers
alike find the bi-weekly "séance de
lecture", or reading period, restrictive,
artificial and boring.
Yet facility of expression can only
be acquired through examination of
models found in written works. Becom¬
ing acquainted with the works of worth¬
while authors offers an opportunity of
experiencing many facets of the human
adventure; but more than this, on
every page the reader can see how
a skilled writer manipulates words and
builds up phrases to express emotions
or ideas in such a way that not only
is the emotion or idea made clear but
is also endowed with greater depth
and intensity.
Once reading becomes a habit, fami¬
liarity with the works of an author
leads to the participation-reading that
Henry Miller had in mind when he said
that everyone hopes when picking up
a book to meet a man after his own
heart, to experience tragedies and joys
we are too timid to elicit ourselves, to
dream dreams which make life more
enthralling and perhaps to discover a
philosophy of life which will make us
more capable of facing the trials and
problems that beset us. Participation
such as this is never passive.
Adolescence is the age of romanti¬
cism and enthusiasm; it is also, above
all, the time for reading. Few cultivat¬
ed adults fail to retain a vivid recol¬
lection of what they read during adol¬
escence; an individual's career, even
his whole personality, is often largely
determined by his reading during this
period of his life.

At a time when the human element
in daily life is being eroded, it is to
be regretted that the school, whose
basic task is to help children to
develop their full human potential for
learning and living, still overlooks the
riches that intelligent reading has to
offer and the meeting point it provides
for ieacher, pupil and author.
Reading is only a means to an end,
and in devising techniques for motivat¬
ing pupils towards reading we were
guided by three key questions:
Why should we read? What should
we read? How should we read?
Our Reading Motivation Project in
Tunisia grew out of considerations
such as these. Might it not be pos
sible, we asked ourselves, to use those
same audio-visual media that are said
to discourage young people from read¬
ing to stimulate a need for reading
among pupils? In other words, on the
basis of something towards which
young people are strongly motivated,
could we not motivate them towards
other activities and in particular
towards the reading of good literature?
This was the first step.
The second stage was to make use
of the same media to stimulate reflec¬
tion, research, discussion and exchan¬
ge of ideas among young people about
what they had read, thus enabling them
to discover for themselves new hori¬
zons in reading.
In 1968, we decided to submit this
working hypothesis to the education
authorities in Tunisia, the school In¬
spectors and pedagogic advisers, and
to define the educational problem
more precisely we based our recom¬
mendations on the three questions
mentioned above.
WHY READ? Recommending a
course of reading does not necessarily
mean that the pupils will follow it,
whether the recommendation is in the
form of an order or just friendly advice.
Even the threat of examinations gives
no guarantee. We therefore decided
that we would have to break with school
tradition so as to make the pupil feel
that he himself had made the choice
CONTINUED PAGE 20
17

NEW WAYS TO PROMOTE READING
(Continued from page 17)
A statuette from Tanzania symbolizing the opening-up of the world of
books to the peoples of Africa. It was given to Unesco's Director-
General, Mr René Maheu, by students of the Girls Secondary School
at Tabora, Tanzania, who received the first Mohammed Reza Pahlavi
Literacy Prize, in 1967, for their work as volunteer literacy teachers.
Photo Dominique Roger-Unesco
and was impelled by a genuine, per¬
sonal need to read a particular work.
Assuming the worst possible start¬
ing-point the weak, lazy pupil who had
never read a book of 150-200 pages
to the end we worked out the follow¬
ing method.
The exercise should be as far remov¬
ed as possible from the traditional
school background. We would have
liked it to be carried out completely
away from the school, but had to
abandon this idea for lack of facilities.
In the end we decided to work in a
classroom, but to change its physical
layout by replacing school desks with
stools and chairs which could be mov¬
ed around as required. The room was
also equipped with display panels, a
projector, a portable screen and a
tape-recorder.
Attendance at the sessions was en¬
tirely voluntary. The only stipulation
was that the pupils should be of the
same educational level and therefore
of more or less the same age. The
reading motivation sessions were held
outside school hours and lasted as
long as the majority of the group
wished. The groups were not allowed
to exceed 25 to 30 pupils.
WHAT TO READ? We began by
setting up a small committee to choose
a level of presentation (in this case for
a third-year secondary class) and a
book title. We had to adopt this
makeshift solution because no Inves¬
tigation had ever been carried out in
Tunisia into the real reading interests
of schoolchildren. Later, as we carried
out more experiments, using books
such as The Diary of Anne Frank, we
began to discover for ourselves what
the pupils were interested in.
The Institute of Educational Studies
¡n Tunis has since made several sur¬
veys on reading among schoolchildren
and has used the findings as a guide
in selecting titles for children to read.
For it is this choice that not only
gives children a real motivation to read
but also determines their whole intel¬
lectual, moral and social make-up.
HOW TO READ? Henry Miller has
rightly pointed out that a book, like
anything else, is often used as a
pretext to conceal what we are really
in search of. Reading may thus be
merely a form of recreation (maga¬
zines and detective stories), or a
source of quickly assimilated inform¬
ation (newspapers and popularized
texts relating to one's work) or an
opportunity for learning, self-education
and logical reasoning.
All the activities devised for the

Classical music to guide the reader along
Reading Motivation Techniques project
relate to the last type of reading.
A complete session comprises two
phases at intervals of one or two
weeks so that pupils have time to read
the book proposed to them.
After choosing the book we begin
to make what we call a selection and
a montage. Selection consists in pick¬
ing out the key passages, the passages
that are outstanding in style and con¬
tent and passages to which children
of the age and educational level we
are dealing with will be most receptive.
We then make a sound montage
from tape recordings of the voices of
several men and women reading pas¬
sages from the book, though not
necessarily ¡n the order in which the
passages occur in the book. The
sound montage is used simply to
create an ambiance which stimulates
interest without revealing the sub¬
stance of the work. To present a
summary of the book would be a con¬
tradiction of the aims we set at the
start of the project. Our purpose is
merely to whet the listener's appetite.
We decided that the sound montage
would be more effective if we linked
the spoken passages with short pieces
of classical music appropriate to the
theme of the book, and that this would
also help children to understand the
text. Since music can convey certain
feelings and emotions, it may reveal
things which a child of low linguistic
ability would not grasp as quickly from
a written text.
Our pupils, of course, are bilingual
(Arabic and French). They begin learn¬
ing French in the third year of primary
school, and their level of expression
is equally low in French and Arabic.
Our Reading Motivation Techniques
project thus comprises reading in both
' languages. The special report on the
project which the Institute of Educ¬
ational Sciences plans to publish, will
Include a complete list of the authors
and works in Arabic and French used
in the experiments and data on the
pedagogical and audio-visual kits that
were compiled.
We also use visual aids such as
display boards and slides to introduce
and enhance the effect of the sound
montage. Boards are used to display
photographs of the author and his life,
illustrations from the book and copies
of the book itself.
As a session opens, a group leader
(usually a member of the Institute of
Educational Sciences or a teacher
trained by the Institute) welcomes the
children and suggests that they inspect
the displays. He then gives a brief
Introduction, lasting about five minutes,
when he presents the" book (title,
number of pages etc.) and a number
of slides picturing the author are
shown. After this, the tape recording
montage is played.
During the 25 or 30 minutes that
the tape is played, other slides are
shown to stimulate additional interest.
In the session dealing with the book
Poll de Carotte (Carrots), [a bitterly
ironical account by the French writer
Jules Renard of his own childhood
Editor] we projected a picture of
a teenager in an attitude of defiance
while the children were listening to an
extract from the last chapter entitled
"Revolt".
After the recording, the group leader
uses the question and answer tech¬
nique to set off a discussion among
the children. He sees to it that the
discussion does not reveal the content
of the book, but helps to increase the
children's eagerness to read it for
themselves. As this first phase ends,
the children are told that they can take
away a copy of the book if they wish,
and a date is fixed for a discussion of
its key themes with the group leader.
I HE second phase takes
place a week or two later. This time,
it is the children who run the discus¬
sion, after electing a chairman, a
secretary and several observers. As
the experiment proceeds, the part
played by the group leader steadily
diminishes in importance, as the
children learn to abide by the rules
of self discipline, democracy and
responsibility.
During the sessions dealing with
Poil de Carotte and The Diary of Anne
Frank, for instance, children spon¬
taneously formed groups to undertake
studies and surveys of problems relat¬
ing to adolescence, war and peace,
co-education, marriage, divorce,
money, keeping a diary, etc. In this
way, reading becomes an "adventure".
The children themselves decide how
long a discussion should last. These
discussions and study groups offer
bilingual children (who are chiefly from
Arabic-speaking homes) an excellent
opportunity to practice spoken and
written French.
But perhaps the most significant
prospect opened up by the project is
through the discussions and studies
that- create new reading needs and
direct children towards the choice of
new books. In this way, one act of
reading begets another, and each book
becomes a starting "point for studies,
lively discussions, new contacts and
creative activities.
I recall one discussion among fifth-
year primary children that I attended.
It dealt with an extract from Victor
Hugo's Les Misérables (the sad story
of "Cosette"). It sparked off a keen
and continuous discussion lasting for
an hour and a half, between children
who had been taught French for less
than two years. . It showed that when
children aged ten or eleven have
sufficient motivation, they can not only
remain attentive for more than an hour,
but also express themselves in a
language which they have only just
learned to speak.
Reading books also inspires some
children to use painting as a means
of expression in order to portray one
or another of the characters or situa¬
tions as these have impressed them
in the course of their reading or dis¬
cussions. Many such paintings have
been added to the visual kits and have
enriched the display panels to the
benefit of other children.
We feel we have gone a long way
from the tedious setting and dreary
ambiance (well remembered from our
own youth and, unhappily, still too
familiar to many present-day children) ,
which mark the "reading to order" and
"book reports" of official syllabuses.
The kind of motivation for reading
we have described enables teaching
programmes to be adapted to lively
and effective teaching methods, in¬
stead of the other way round, as is
still too often the case.
PROSPECTS'
Readers Interested in a fuller report
on this subject are referred to the
latest issue of Unesco's new educ¬
ational quarterly "Prospects" (Sum¬
mer 1972). Prof. Fitouri's article is
there entitled "An Experiment in
Reading Motivation Techniques".
Other contributors to this number
include Margaret Mead, Felipe Her¬
rera and Paolo Freiré. With its
Spring 1972 number "Prospects"
appeared in an attractive revised
format of 120 pages simpler in size
and presentation to the Unesco quar¬
terly "Impact of Science on Society".
The Spring 1972 issue (Vol II. No 1)
included articles by Jean Piaget.
Lester B. Pearson, Mikhail A. Pro¬
kofiev and Josué de Castro. "Pro¬
spects" is published in two language
editions: English and French. Annual
subscription: £1.05. $3.50, 14F; per
copy: 30p. $1. 4F.
21
