deep water, other leads are needed.
In the Mediterranean, useful inform¬
ation can be gleaned from statistics
based on knowledge of the ancient
ports and cities, the location of trade
routes, the nature of the old ships and
their cargoes.
It is believed that there were over
300 active ports in the Mediterranean
by the 4th century B.C., and that during
the first millenium B.C. some 150,000
ships were built. Other calculations
suggest that as many as 15,000 of
these vessels foundered many in
deep water.
If the total length of the trade routes
in the eastern Mediterranean were
6,000 nautical miles (1 nautical mile
equals 1.9 kilometres) and the average
width 10 nautical miles, there is a
reasonable chance of one sunken ship
in every four square nautical miles
along these routes.
By selecting specific areas where
ships were known to get into trouble,
it is possible to improve the chances
considerably. There are numerous
high-probability sites in the straits be¬
tween islands, between islands and
mainland, and at major "jumping off
points", where ships left the security
of nearby land and set out into open
waters.
Such sites exist between the Pélo¬
ponnèse and Crete, east of Crete to
Rhodes and Turkey, between Italy and
Yugoslavia, between Tunis and Sicily,
around Malta, near Gibraltar, and along
the coasts of Lebanon, Israel and
Cyprus.
Somewhat more is known about the
losses of military ships in the same
period, and there are more fixed points
to guide estimates. There are literally
hundreds of historical references to
sea battles in which astonishing
numbers of ships were involved.
For example, at the battle of Cape
Ecnomus, Sicily, in 255 B.C., 250
Roman ships faced 200 Carthaginian
vessels. Only 16 ships were lost in
the battle, but in a storm off Camarina,
on the southern Sicilian coast, shortly
afterward, 250 of the remaining ships
were wrecked. When Anthony and
Cleopatra met Augustus at Actium in
37 B.C., about 100 ships of the 900
engaged were lost.
Ships that sank much later than the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
Right, impression of a specially
designed archaeological research
vessel, the "Alcoa Seaprobe"
designed by Dr. W. Bascom,
making a sonar search of the
sea bed. An instrument pod,
lowered through the ship's cen¬
tral well, contains forward and
side-scanning sonars that can
sweep a pathway 400 to 800
metres wide. Projections, such
as rocks or the wreck of a ship,
reflect sound waves better and
produce a darker spot on the
record. The sea bed pattern,
below, was recorded by side-
scanning sonar apparatus during
a survey voyage by another
research vessel.
Drawing Willard Bascom
- 	 aaal

DEEP SEA ARCHAEOLOGY (Continued)
Exploring ancient wrecks at 1,000 fathoms
36
ancient ones may be even more in¬
teresting. For example, in 1571 the
Battle of Lepanto was fought between
a fleet of 300 ships from Venice, Spain
and the Papal States and a 273-ship
Turkish fleet, not far from Actium, just
over 1,600 years after the fleet of
Anthony and Augustus fought there.
Another 100-odd ships went down, this
time with a very different array of arti¬
facts.
,So the obvious first place to look
is In the Mediterranean along trade
routes that have been travelled for
thousands of years. Although that sea
has a maximum depth of over 4,500
metres, the major part of these ancient
pathways traversed waters less than
half that depth, within easy reach of
the system about to be described.
It is nearly ten years since I reached
this conclusion and devised a method
for systematic searching, inspection
and the recovery of heavy objects.
The system was awarded a U.S. Patent
in 1965 and with few changes has been
developed into a beautiful new ship
completed in late 1971: the Alcoa Sea-
probe. Now the technology is in exist¬
ence.
1 HE Alcoa Seaprobe looks
much like a deep ocean drilling ship
indeed it is capable of drilling
but instead it uses its semi-rigid pipe
to lower a pod containing sensors into
the depths. These sensors include
two sonars, television cameras and
photographic equipment. When these,
are moved along a short distance
above the bottom they transmit infor¬
mation about a wide swath of bottom
up a cable to instrument watchers in
the control room above.
It is not necessary to send men
down; the pod at the tip of the pipe
extends their vision into the depths.
From the surface they can inspect
objects on the bottom, dusting away
sediment with propellers. Items of in¬
terest can be photographed and per¬
haps recovered with scoops and grasp¬
ing devices.
The Alcoa Seaprobe Is 75 metres
long, 17 metres wide, and draws 4
metres. It is propelled by two vertical-
axis manoeuvering propellers which
can exert thrust to move the ship in
any direction, including skewed and
sidewise. The ship is all-electric with
its power plant forward and quarters
for 50 men aft. It is built of an alumi¬
nium alloy to demonstrate the excellent
marine properties of that material.
The ship is steered by a console on
the bridge which manually or automat¬
ically controls the propellers in such a
way as to hold the ship in position
above a point on the bottom in deep
water. This capability, called "dynamic
positioning", was invented by the
author and associates in 1959, and is
the key to doing precise work on the
bottom in water too deep for anchor¬
ing.
In the centre of the ship is a rect¬
angular opening to the sea 4 metres by
12 metres, called a "well". Directly
above it is an aluminium derrick that
can lift up to 400,000 kg (200 metric
tons working load).
The derrick and pipe-handling system
is capable of lowering or recovering
drill pipe at an average rate of about
0.25 metres per second to a depth of
6,000 metres (although only 2,000
metres of pipe will normally be
aboard). The pipe is ordinary oil drill¬
ing pipe 11.5 cm. in diameter, handled
in "doubles". 20 metres long.
Pipe has the advantage that the pod
and the tongs at its tip can be oriented
and that sea water can be pumped
down the inside at high pressure to
operate hydraulic devices at the
bottom. In order to ensure that the
lower tip of the pipe remains close
beneath the ship, the lower end of it
is weighted with 20 tons of very thick-
walled pipe.
The power-information cable bet¬
ween ship and pod is secured to the
outside of the pipe with special clips
and stored on a huge reel on deck.
More pipe can be added or removed
quickly as the depth changes and the
cable length is readily adjusted.
As with any searching system, pre¬
cise navigation is required so that there
is a clear record of where the ship has
been at every moment. Then any
object found can be refound.
The ship's position can be determin¬
ed closely enough by one of the elec¬
tronic navigation systems. But careful
searching out of sight of land requires
local references such as taut-moored
buoys supporting radar transponders
(combined transmitter and receiver) or
bottom-mounted sonar transponders.
A systematic search is then conducted
relative to these fixed points and the
ship's position is plotted at short inter¬
vals of time as it moves back and forth
along parallel pathways.
Once the navigation markers are
installed we are ready to search. The
pod is lowered to a position 20 to 50
metres above the bottom and the ship
moves slowly forward at less than one
metre per second. The sonars send
out high frequency (177.5kh) pings of
sound, one looking at the bottom
directly ahead, the other scanning each
side to a distance of at least 200
metres (twice that in some circum¬
stances).
The side-looking sonar sends and
receives sound pulses in such a
fashion that objects that rise above
the bottom, like a ship or a pile of
ballast stones, reflect the sound and
produce a dark spot on the record.
Since the sea floor immediately beyond
is in the sonic shadow and does not
reflect sound, that part of the record
remains white.
Thus each ping produces a line on
the record and as the pod moves for¬
ward a sound picture of the bottom
develops. The approximate size of
bottom objects can be determined.
Because the side-looking sonar
beam must strike the bottom at a small
angle in order to be effective, it does
not see objects on the bottom directly
beneath the pod. Therefore the for¬
ward-looking sonar, which works in a
similar fashion, is used to get inform¬
ation about the centre of the pathway.
When a ship-like object is detected
with the sonar, it is necessary to verify
it with television and to determine its
approximate age and value. For this
the pod is lowered into television range
(about 10 metres above the bottom) at
the position plotted for the wreck. The
sea dust can be blown away with
water jets and the hulk inspected and
photographed. The amount of work
to be done will be determined by its
value relative to other wreck's which
could be studied.
If there are artifacts to be recovered
an appropriate tool or device will be
attached beneath the television. It
may be a net, a grasping mechanism,
or a large pair of tongs. Major pieces
of a ship, heavy cannon, anchors, stone
columns, etc., can be recovered as well
as small items. Probably it will be
possible to make reasonably good
maps of the wreck from the photos
and observations.
IIT also may be possible to
raise entire small wrecks In one or
more lifts. Large wooden ship struc¬
tures thus recovered would immediately
be placed in fresh water in a prepared
barge so as to prevent their deterior¬
ation while they are being studied and
exhibited.
With the search method described
here it should be possible to examine
30 square kilometres of bottom per
day. The examination of wrecks and
other objects will take the bulk of the
time but it should be very rewarding.
So it seems that a great treasure
house of information about the ancient
world the bottom of the Mediterra¬
nean is almost within our grasp. In
the New World, examination of 300
year-old wrecks will begin this year.
Hopefully we will learn how well wood
survives, how to identify and study old
wrecks, and how to salvage major
items.
If that is successful the next step will
be to organize similar exploration work
in the Mediterranean. M
