Drawing © from the book "Chlchen-ltza and Its Cenote of Sacrifice"
by Alfred M. Tozzer, Peabody Museum, Harvard University, U.S.A.
by
Pablo Bush Romero

The sacred well
of Chichen-ltza
30
1^ OTT ED throughout the
Maya country of the Yucatan Peninsula,
in Mexico, are thousands of wells
called cenotes. The Mayas used some
of the wells only as sources of water,
but others they considered sacred.
The best known of the Mayan sacred
cenotes is the well of Chichen-ltza, a
great city whose name means "the
mouth of the well of the Itza".
The cenote of Chichen-ltza, a "well
of sacrifice" into which human beings
and objects of all kinds were thrown
as offerings to Chac, god of rain and
water, was first explored by Edward H.
Thompson, a U.S. consul, between
1904 and 1907, in the first planned
underwater dig.
The edge of the well is 27 metres
above the water, 16 to 18 metres deep,
under which lie some 10 metres of silt
and mud. With a diameter of roughly
PABLO BUSH ROMERO, Mexican explorer,
traveller and author, founded the Exploration
and Water Sports Club of Mexico (CEDAM)
and its later development, CEDAM Interna¬
tional. He is a member of the Explorers
Club of New York and the Underwater World
Federation. He led several underwater re¬
search expeditions to Mayan sites In Mexico,
Including the famous sacred well of Chichen-
ltza in the Yucatan peninsula. His books on
underwater exploration in Mexico and wildlife
in Mexico and Africa have been published In
Spanish and English, including "Under the
Waters of Mexico". This article Is a conden¬
sation of the chapter "The Sacred Wells of
Chichen-ltza and other Freshwater Sites In
Mexico", from Unesco's new book 'Under¬
water Archaeology".
60 metres and walls slanting inwards,
the well is difficult to descend.
Most of the objects recovered by
Edward Thompson went to the Pea-
body Museum of Archaeology and
Ethnology in Harvard University,
U.S.A. Some of the artifacts, traced
to their place of origin, indicate that
the Mayas traded with Aztec tribes as
far north and west as the Valley of
Mexico, and as far south as present-
day Colombia, Costa Rica and Panama.
Objects brought up include symbolic
figures carved in jade (now preserved

Photo © René Burrl - Magnum, Paris
From the dark, mysterious depths of the sacred
well of Chichen-ltza, Mexico, (left) divers have
recovered a unique hoard of artifacts which has
given a comprehensive view of the aesthetic life
of the Mayas. Right, a broad, paved avenue
leads from the well to the main pyramid temple
of the city. Above, in the foreground, sculptured
wall of the main pyramid temple with view onto
the "Temple of the Warriors".
Drawing by Tatiana Proskounakoff 0 Peabody Museum, Harvard University, U.S.A.
in the Peabody Museum, which has
perhaps the world's greatest collection
of Mayan jade), stone sculptures, gold
and copper discs, remains of skeletons,
darts and dart throwers, heads of
arrows and spears made of flint and
other kinds of stone, bits of ancient
fabric and bells, pendants and other
items cast, engraved or beaten in gold.
Many of the supposedly gold objects
were of low grade alloy, containing
more copper than gold, and most of
the jade or gold objects were brought
up in fragments. They had apparently
been purposely broken, but in such a
way that heads and features were left
intact. ' Believed to have life, they
were "killed" by being broken before
being thrown into the well as offerings.
Thompson's writings indicate that he
had not recovered more than a tenth
of the contents of the well.
About half a century later, in 1954,
the Exploration and Water Sports Club
of Mexico, of which I was a director,
sent a scuba diving team to Chichen-
ltza to continue the work begun by
Edward Thompson. But it was soon
decided that recovery operations were
impossible with scuba equipment alone
because of the poor visibility and
difficulties with artificial lighting.
A second attempt was made by the
club in 1960-61 under the direction of
the National Institute of Anthropology
and History of Mexico and with the co¬
operation of the National Geographic
Society, in the U.S.A. Many artifacts
were recovered, but after four months,
operations were again suspended.
In 1967, the Mexican underwater
explorers with archaeologists from the
National Institute resumed work at the
well, this time with a group of American
associates. The idea was to pump the
well dry or get the water chemically
pure and crystal clear. Pumping low¬
ered the water-level about 5 metres,
but no further. The alternative was
then tried. Pumping was stopped and
the water was allowed to come back
to its original level (it was not possible
with the equipment on hand to pump
and filter at the same time).
An analysis of the water showed that
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
31

SACRED WELL
OF CHICHEN-ITZA (Continued)
it was worse than in a New York
sewer. Nevertheless, when the chem¬
ical treatment was finished and the
water filtered, it was possible to see
clearly for more than five metres and
the water was drinkable.
Work was resumed with modified
air-lifts which could to some extent
control the force of the water going
up to the screening tables. The mud
was lifted in layers, and all objects
larger than a button were brought up
by the divers. The work lasted two
and a half months.
All kinds of artifacts were re¬
covered: two beautifully carved
wooden stools, several wooden buck¬
ets, about one hundred jars and vases
of different sizes, designs and periods,
fabrics, gold Items, rings, bells, objects
made of jade, rock crystal, copal (in¬
cense), rubber, coral, bone, mother-of-
pearl, horn, amber, copper, quartz,
pyrite and onyx, human and animal
bones, grinding stones, five stone
jaguars and two stone serpents.
The expedition showed that it is
possible to clear and purify the water,
and that an air-lift properly handled
and controlled can be used to dig
underwater sites in cenotes. When
the air-lift disturbs the mud, taking
away the visibility, it can be lifted
about 20 to 30 cm. and very soon takes
away all the mud and particles in sus¬
pension, making it possible to see
again in a short time.
A preliminary study of the human
bones found revealed that there were
many more sacrifices of children than
adults a ratio of more than 50 per
cent children as against all others.
Other sacred Mayan wells have also
yielded up their treasures. From 1956
to 1965, E. Willys Andrews, Director of
the National Geographic Society,
Tulane University research programme
at Dzibilchaltun, near Chichen-ltza,
explored the 55 metres deep Zlacah
cenote with the help of divers from the
Exploration and Water Sports Club of
Mexico.
During the first three working sea¬
sons hundreds of artifacts were
brought up, including a surprisingly
large number of pottery vessels. Most
of the small objects some exquisitely
carved were apparently thrown in as
cult offerings.
In Guatemala, too, several lakes
have been explored and Mayan arti¬
facts recovered, and plans are being
made to investigate several wells at
Chincultic, in the Mexican state of
Chiapas.
On top of the Xinantecatl volcano,
near Toluca, about 100 kilometres from
Mexico City, are two lakes, the Lake
of the Moon and the larger Lake of the
Sun. From the second lake, 4,215
metres above sea level, underwater
explorers have recovered dozens of
copal (incense) offerings, some in the
shape of volcanoes with twin and
single peaks. The Lake may contain
an Aztec treasure hoard and is
scheduled for further exploration.
Left, this gold pendant from the well at Chichen-ltza, symbolizes a flute-playing
bird-god. A projecting nose covers the entire width of the face and the rows
of spirals flanking it are believed to represent wings. The style suggests
the work of Quimbaya Indian metalworkers in Colombia where the pendant was
probably made in the 16th century A.D.

CH1CHEN-ITZA
GOLD DISCS
Ten decorated gold discs,
recovered from the sacred well
of Chichen-ltza, Mexico, record
incidents in the struggle between
the Yucatan Mayas and the
invading Tula-Toltec people. The
discs were torn into small
fragments (left) before being
thrown into the well and only one
has been recovered complete.
About ten inches in diameter,
the discs had an inch-wide border
pattern encircling a central
decoration which was usually
divided horizontally into three
segments, with the scene of action
depicted in the middle, a sky
deity 'above, and an earth monster
below. Above right, Mayan
warriors attempt to escape on
rafts or by swimming from their
Tula-Toltec pursuers in the canoe
seen at right This disc is
unusual in that it has no earth
monster at the bottom. The sky
deity is pictured with outstretched
arms against a background
representing a two-headed dragon with wide-open jaws and protruding, curling tongues.
Below, enlarged drawings of two sky deities. These always contain a serpentine element with
usually a human figure entwined in the coils or issuing from the mouth of the snake or dragon.
Photos and drawings © from the book 'Chichen-ltza and Its Cenote of Sacrifice", by Alfred M. Tozzer, Peabody Museum, Harvard University, U.S.A.
