ANATOMY
OF
A WORLD CRISIS
10
MNCE the end of the
Second World War, education has
become the world's major activity In
terms of total spending. In terms of
expenditure from public funds, it
comes second only to military bud¬
gets. The tasks it is being asked to
carry out are increasingly complex
and vast, beyond comparison with
anything required of it in the past.
It is vital to every aspect of human
progress and development, and its
place In national and international
policy-making grows steadily.
For the first time in history,
educational development on a glo¬
bal scale tends to precede econo¬
mic development.
For the first time in history,
education is preparing men and
women for radically new types of
societies.
For the first time in history,
some societies have begun to
reject many of "finished products"
of formal education.
This new social, economic and
psychological situation is caused by
the speed-up in structural change and
development, which tends to accentu¬
ate the gap that normally exists
between structures, infrastructures and
superstructures. It shows how easily
educational systems can develop a
time-lag or become maladjusted.
A system designed for a minority, in
the days when knowledge changed
slowly and a person could hope to
learn all he would need for his intellec¬
tual and professional life in a few
years, quickly becomes out of date
when it is extended to mass education,
and when the volume of knowledge
increases at an ever faster pace
during a period of change and
upheaval.
Unequal growth, disparities in social
and economic development, diam¬
etrically opposing trends: all these
conflicts have a strong impact on
educational systems, which find it
difficult to keep up with the demands
of an expanding society.
Those they train, too, find it difficult
to adapt to change; and some socie¬
ties now categorically reject the qua¬
lifications and skills being offered
when these no longer correspond to
immediate requirements. This is
because unequal growth and "stop-
and-go" development can only create
equilibrium in one sphere by upsetting
it In another. Even so, the process
is not a wholly negative one, In spite
of the different re-adjustments it
demands, and the "growing pains"
which the educational world Is under¬
going today.
One other factor should be stressed.
Educational structures have a number
of common traits and trends. These
are far from evident to the same
degree everywhere, but significantly
the same ones appear in various
guises in all parts of the world. Des
pite the many cultural, historical,
economic and Ideological differences
existing among countries, or even
within a single country, education In
this respect, has a global character.
This is shown in a number of
Important ways. The first is the
choice of educational models. When
it comes to choosing between two
basic options highly selective or
open admission it is the latter that
is most often adopted. Many of the
problems industrially developed coun¬
tries are grappling with at present are
the result of a changeover from their
former highly-selective systems to a
more open structure.
Most developing nations opted for
open admission at first, but lack of
resources and the demands of eco¬
nomic development have often obliged
them to resort In practice to varying
degrees of selection. Seeking to
avoid both vocational control based
on a planned economy and laissez-
faire anarchy, they try to find solu¬
tions that reconcile respect for the
individual with the needs of society.
Then there is the adoption of so-
called technocratic systems designed
to train workers and qualified pro¬
fessionals and to promote science and
technology.
A more recent trend in educational
policies stems from the desire to
provide an outlet for the upsurge of
freedom-seeking aspirations from the
broad mass of society. This ten¬
dency Is increasing where economic
CONTINUED PAGE 13

I
Diagram prepared for the "Unesco Courier" by Keith Paul. U..K,
1965-66 1966-67 1967-68
Education's
rising share
of world
spending
World spending on education is increasing at a faster
rate than expenditure on armaments. As shown in the
diagrams above, the gap between the two rates widened
from 0.6 per cent in 1965-66 to 4.4 per cent in 1967-68.
World military expenditure in 1968 totalled $182,000
million, according to the report of the International
Commission. But total spending on education, including
$132,000 million from public funds, and sums spent on
industrial and other training programmes, education
programmes in mass communication and privately finan¬
ced education, was far greater. In the U.S.A., some
industrial firms are spending as much on the high-level
training of employees and customers as the instructional
budgets of some large U.S. universities.

«it* itmilllllfMit»! .'M
f*'
12
THE EGG AND I...Q
Current biochemical research on the brain suggests that
it has a largely unused potential (as high as 90 per cent
according to some authorities) and that under favourable
conditions its creative capacity could be tremendously
increased. Other studies, on mental mechanisms and the
learning process, have revealed the serious effects of
malnutrition on brain development. Under-nourishment in
the mother can make the new-born baby's nervous system
more fragile; malnutrition between the 5th and 10th month
following birth may reduce the number of cells in the brain,
which has virtually finished growing by the end of the
second year. The role of RNA (a genetic substance
controlling protein synthesis) in memory and consequently
in the learning process has also been closely studied,
revealing a link between protein-calorie malnutrition in
infancy and early childhood and impaired learning and
mental retardation in later life. "If such damage has been
done", says a U.N. report on the subject, "the consumption
of extra protein in adult life will not repair it, and if such
damage is widespread in a country, it will be likely to Impede
that country's future development in almost every respect"
Protein malnutrition is also a major cause of death among
infants and young children. A country's efforts to improve
nutrition during the pre-school period, especially up to the
age of four, would improve the performance of its educatio¬
nal system. I.Q., in fact, gets its real start "in the egg".

ANATOMY OF A CRISIS (Continued from page 10)
The growing emphasis on self-education
and social development calls for the
active participation of the whole
population.
The transfer of responsibility for
education is also being accelerated.
Until the end of the 19th century, It
was provided mainly by the family
and by religious institutions, grant
schools, apprenticeship guilds and
independent higher-educational estab¬
lishments, whereas today, In most
countries, the responsibility Is that of
public authorities or the State.
There are three main reasons for
this. First, a general tendency to
rely on public bodies to satisfy social
needs. Second, the belief in nearly
all countries that although the State
may allow and in some cases even
encourage private Initiative, It alone
is in a position to assume responsi¬
bility for overall educational policy.
Third, the determination of many
governments to keep control of edu¬
cation because of its ever-increasing
political role.
_ AS regards the structure of
educational systems, several trends
are emerging. Kindergarten educ-
ation, which still remains limited, Is
generally an integral part of the school
system. Primary education is widening
in scope and children begin school at
an earlier age. The number of years
spent at school is increasing too, and
reforms often lead to a link-up bet¬
ween primary schooling and the first
years of secondary education. The
number of children at school is grow¬
ing, and not only at the lowest levels:
enrolment in the higher classes shows
a marked increase.
However, as the school population
increases, there are more drop-outs
and more repeaters. In general in¬
take occurs at the lowest level of the
system and outflow either halfway up
(mainly because of failures) or else at
the top, after successful completion of
studies. Admissions and departures
or changeovers in mid-programme are
still rare, but are beginning to be
accepted. The validity of strictly sel¬
ective systems is questioned be¬
cause of their obligation to do more
to overcome the handicaps suffered
by the most underprivileged social
groups.
In spite of stubborn opposition,
school curricula are beginning to be
made less burdensome. Previous
inequalities in elementary school pro
grammes often the result of social
discrimination are rapidly disappear¬
ing. Instruction is increasingly given
in the mother tongue (1).
There is also a general tendency to
raise the age at which specialization
is required; but this does not prevent
technical and professional education
being increasingly diversified to fit
the growing variety of productive roles.
Cross-links are multiplying between
general and technical education, wide-
ranging cultural courses and specialist
training, the humanities and science
and technology. (Technology now
plays an Increasing role in general
education).
In higher education, traditional uni¬
versities are breaking up into smaller
units, and post-secondary education
as a whole is being widely diversified.
On the one hand, paradoxically, var¬
ious disciplines and facilities are being
grouped in single large establishments
or put under a centralized administra¬
tion ("multi-universities"); while on the
other, smaller, more flexible institu¬
tions are being created to cater locally
for the special needs of certain cate¬
gories of students.
Higher education also tends more
and more to be spread over a number
of different levels. Many new sub¬
jects of study are being introduced,
and interdisciplinary instruction is dev¬
eloping, as well as closer and closer
links with scientific research.
The whole scope of higher educa¬
tion is indeed being widened to meet
the new requirements of a larger stu¬
dent body, to satisfy the need for
expanded research facilities and com¬
munity projects, and to respond to the
demands of those who want the uni¬
versity to act as a catalyst for social
reform.
New kinds of structures, new types
of students and new curricula entail In
turn a thorough revision of selection
and evaluation procedures. Student
participation in the management of
educational institutions and the choice
of teaching programmes is growing.
All over the world, teachers now
constitute a major social and profes¬
sional group; In many developing
countries they form the largest group
of salary-earners.
To all this should be added a grow¬
ing tendency to extend the non-school
sector of education. Adult literacy
campaigns are making headway, and
the distinction between formal elemen¬
tary education and literacy program¬
mes is beginning to disappear.
Schools and universities are supplem¬
ented and sometimes replaced by a
multitude of extra-mural or semi-aca¬
demic activies, which call for the use
of methods long neglected by tradi¬
tional education or only recently intro¬
duced. These developments are of
two different kinds.
First, there are those that take place
within the professional context. A
whole range of programmes provide
civic and vocational training; schools
and other educational establishments
offer advanced courses, retraining or
special coaching; and universities
admit adults without any formal en¬
trance examinations.
Secondly, there are the develop¬
ments belonging to the general cultu¬
ral context. These have freer and
more flexible structures. People are
encouraged to teach themselves, with
the help of information material and
data sources; leisure activities and
social and community projects aim at
promoting participation and helping
people to teach one another.
Increasing stress is also being laid
on the link between educational dev¬
elopment and the many other aspects
of social and economic development.
I OST of the innovations
mentioned above may take various
forms. What counts is that even where
these common trends have not yet
emerged, contrary currents are rarely
found; and there is little indication that
such innovations are likely to be
reversed in the future.
This does not mean that highly di¬
vergent and even contradictory trends
do not exist on other levels. For ins¬
tance, the movement in some countries
is towards centralization, State control
and overall standardization (2). In
other countries, the trend moves to¬
wards decentralization, loosening of
State control and greater variety.
The fact remains, though, that many
developments show a general consis-
(1) In the Soviet Union, s/xty-s/x languages
are used.
(2) In the Soviet Union, for example, where
the basic principles of the educational sys¬
tem have been summed up by Prof. A. V. Pe-
trovsky, a Soviet member of the Commission,
as: "State control and centralized man- 1 Q
agement of public education; universal and | (J
compulsory schooling, free and open at all
levels; -unity and sequence In all types of
education.'
CONTINUED PAGE 16

14

Photo Open University, United Kingdom
BRITAIN'S 'OPEN UNIVERSITY'
Founded in 1969, "to provide education of university and professional standards . . . and
to promote the educational well-being of the community", Britain's "Open University"
became fully operational in January 1971. Today, with a student body approaching 40,000
it has become the largest university in Britain. No formal educational attainments are
required for admission, the only restrictions being that students must be over 21 and
resident in the United Kingdom. Students are expected to study for a minimum of
10 hours a week, 36 weeks a year. Degrees are awarded to students gaining six "credits";
one credit is granted for each study course completed. Instruction is given through a
combination of radio and television lectures, correspondence courses and direct counselling
by tutors at the 300 Study Centres scattered throughout Britain. Every week students
complete their assignments and send their work back to the University where it is marked
by computer. Each student following a foundation (1st level) course must spend one week
at a residential summer school. Left, aerial view of the Open University's headquarters
at Walton, in Buckinghamshire, some 50 miles north of London. Far left, the sorting room
at the University where assignments are prepared and despatched to some 40,000 students
each week. Below far left, a laboratory technician prepares rock samples. Below centre,
a student housewife unpacks a specially designed home laboratory kit Below, a taxi-
driver does his homework at the wheel of his cab between fares.

CAUTION! CHILDREN AT WORK
By the year 2000, the number of young people of school and university age
will have grown by more than 1,000 million an average annual increase of
36 million potential pupils and students. From 1960 to 1968, during the first
United Nations Development Decade, the world's total school-age population
(children from 5 to 19 years) increased from 995 million to about 1,150 million,
or by 20 per cent. During the same period, world population increased 17 per
cent, from 3,000 million to almost 3,500 million. In other words, the "population
explosion" contains within it an even more remarkable "pupil explosion". Today'«
rapidly growing demand for learning throughout the world calls for radical economic,
social and educational innovations.
ANATOMY OF A CRISIS (Continued from
tency which is all the more remark¬
able in that the various situations
have evolved under the influence of
very different theories, challenges and
protest movements. These fall into
four major groups.
1. Educational Reforms
The first trend consists In reforming
or reorganizing existing educational
structures and modernizing- teaching
methods. With or without attendant
structural changes on the social or
economic level, reforms of this kind
are in course nearly everywhere.
Steps taken by public authorities, as
well as by scientific bodies and indi¬
vidual educators, have prepared the
way for major Innovations in a num¬
ber of countries (1).
Important changes have also taken
place in developing countries (2),
largely instigated by central govern¬
ments, although lack of means and
bureaucratic inertia sometimes put a
brake on innovation, as those in charge
16
(1) In the United States and Canada many
Important and meaningful reforms have been
Initiated, particularly In modernization of
programmes and the use of teaching machi¬
nes. In the Fed. Rep. of Germany, current
reforms elm at the democratization of
education and the overall development of
secondary education. Reforms are also being
planned or carried out In Sweden, Finland,
Japan, Costa Rica, Mexico, the Philippines,
the Netherlands (higher education) and Cze¬
choslovakia (vocational training). The educ¬
ational policy launched In France In 1968 was
focused mainly on higher education, but It
has had repercussions In other sectors.
(2) As In Bolivia, Brazil, Egypt, Iran, Rwan¬
da, Tunisia and Venezuela.
page 13)
prefer to wait until the results of ex¬
periments undertaken elsewhere can
be studied. In some countries with
very large educational and financial re¬
sources, the extent and gravity of cer¬
tain problems and the failure to cope
with them provide strong arguments
for those who insist that fragmentary
measures are ineffective and who
therefore advocate total reform.
2. Structural transformations
In countries which have gone
through social and political upheavals
in recent years, events have often led
to profound structural changes in the
educational world, affecting student
entries, access to education at various
levels, curricula reform and to a les¬
ser extent the modernization of
teaching methods.
The establishment of closer ties
between schools and the local popula¬
tion is a top priority In countries which
see education as a vast mass move¬
ment, where all those who have re¬
ceived training have a civic duty to
teach those who have not had the
same opportunities (3). Similar con¬
cerns are to be found in countries try--
ing to reduce the domination of the
State and socialize education by mak¬
ing it the direct and active respon¬
sibility of those involved (4).
3. Radical Criticism
The third trend is marked by those
who are in favour of "de-institution¬
alizing" education and "de-schooling"
society. Their theories have not yet
been tried out in practice (5).
Frank criticism or outright condem¬
nation of "Institutionalized" educa¬
tion may lead either to intermediary for¬
mulas or else to radical plans for the
total "de-schooling" of society. These
extremist theories are based on the
Idea that education, being an indepen¬
dent variable in each society, is a
direct cause of social conflict.
The school's position in society and
the power relationships to which it is
subject make it incapable of being the
instrument of a true education in the
service of men. On the contrary, it
serves the purposes of repressive,
alienating and dehumanizing societies.
So according to I Mich, institutions
should be "Inverted" and schools abo¬
lished, so that men may become free
agents again in a society unencum¬
bered by formal schooling, where they
can regain control of the Institutions
and thereby recover the Initiative for
their own education.
Even the most ardent partisans of
these ideas, however, recognize that
while young people can develop their
(3) Two examples are Cuba, with Its literacy
campaign, and the Democratic Republic of
Viet-Nam, with Its people's education pro¬
jects.
(4) As In Yugoslavia, where schools are run
by councils composed of representatives of
teachers, pupils, parents and the local com¬
munity, etc.
(5) The best known proponent of these
Ideas, Ivan Wich, and other of their advo¬
cates meet pt the Inter-Cultural Documenta¬
tion Centre at Cuernavaca. In Mexico. Their
theories, which have often been taken up
elsewhere, draw a clear distinction between
the development of the learning potenVal,
which they recognize, and the Institutionali¬
zation of teaching, which they oppose.

Sri Lanka (ex-Ceylon) Pakistan
characters and acquire knowledge and
understanding by participation in com¬
munity life and from practical exper¬
ience, some form of schooling is still
necessary for certain kinds of learn¬
ing.
In any case, these novel theories,
which closely reflect other movements
among young intellectuals, are chal¬
lenging both for the controversies and
new ideas they stimulate and for the
lively way in which Jhey pose the
basic problem of the true purpose of
education. They help to highlight pos¬
sible openings or solutions from which
other systems, however different, may
well draw inspiration.
4. Dissent
A fourth trend, swelled by the dis¬
satisfactions of the users themselves,
has developed in certain countries ,
where education Is of increasing con¬
cern to politicians, educationists, res¬
earch workers and scholars, as well
as to the students themselves and the
general public.
Analysis of the reactions of work¬
ing-class people confronted with the
rigidity of traditional educational sys¬
tems Is very instructive In this con¬
nexion. Where the school system re¬
mains the exclusive preserve of an in¬
tellectual elite springing from the
middle class which created the sys¬
tem and which continues to impose its
own laws and moral values, students
are often disconcerted by the divorce
between the outmoded education they
receive and the reality of the world
around them. They become frustrat¬
ed, waste their energies, grow bored,
or find some other outlet for their
hopes and aspirations.
Student unrest made its mark on
history when widespread criticism be¬
gan to undermine the hitherto impreg¬
nable fortress of education. Despite
its sometimes confused or naive char¬
acter and its two-edged radicalism,
it opened a breach in the defences.
Admittedly, however, apathy among
the student population constitutes, in
its own way, another form of dis¬
sent. The disaffection or lack of
enthusiasm found among students in
many countries are undoubted signs
that antiquated educational systems
are being rejected.
Yet interest in education has never
been greater. It increasingly becomes
the cause of conflict between parties,
between generations, and between so¬
cial groups of every kind, which often
amounts to political or ideological
strife. In fact it has become one of the
dominant themes of both empirical and
ideological social criticism.
It is easy to see why public figures
are taken aback when their authority Is
challenged not courteously, by a few
informed critics, as in the past, but
massively, by angry criticism of stu¬
dents and even by open revolt. The
reserve and suspicion with which many
of the more revolutionary conclusions
of present day research are greeted
are also understandable.
We believe, however, that all these
forms of dissent, whether tacit or ex¬
plicit, peaceful or violent, reformist or
radical, deserve for varying reasons
to be taken into account when edu¬
cational policies and strategies are
being mapped out for the coming years
or coming decades.
But how can we identify the true
characteristics of the present day
world among this constellation of con¬
verging or divergent trends and
methods, these teeming ideas and gen¬
erous Intentions?
For more than twenty years, atten¬
tion has remained focused on a few
major questions: the quantitative ex¬
tension and democratization of educa¬
tion, the diversification of structures,
and the modernization of curricula and
methods.
A few years ago a new analytical
attitude to the basic problems began
to take shape, which came down in
the end to three essential questions.
Are school systems capable of meet¬
ing the world-wide demand for educa¬
tion? Is it possible to provide them
with the vast resources they need? In
short, is it possible to continue dev¬
eloping education along current lines
and at the current rate ?
To these very pertinent questions
others of a very different order must
be added today, so as to bring out the
full dimensions of the problem as it
affects the future development of
mankind and conditions the full reali¬
zation of the human potential.
Given the present state of affairs,
we can and must inquire into the true
meaning of education in the modern
world, not only reassessing its respon¬
sibilities to the present generations
which must be prepared for tomorrow's
world, but also analyzing its underly¬
ing powers and myths, its prospects
and its fundamental aims or ends.
17
