by Gösta Tibblïn
Bfl Sven Johnsson, a 58 year-
year-old machinist, works in the busy
port city of Göteborg, Sweden's
second largest city. He was raised in
a small town several hundred kilo¬
metres to the north and came to
Göteborg as a young man. Sven's
formal education stopped at the age
of 14. Both his parents died young,
and Sven was forced to go to work
before he had completed his second¬
ary school education.
GDSTA TIBBLIN Is Director of the Preven¬
tive Cardiology Unit at Sahlgren's Hospital
in Göteborg, Sweden, and Assistant Profes¬
sor at the Faculty of Medicine of Göteborg
University. He is the author of several
major studies on the treatment of cardio¬
vascular diseases.

RESULTS
OF AN INQUIRY
IN SWEDEN
Sven is a heavy smoker. His excess¬
ive drinking is the cause of constant
domestic difficulties. It has also been
responsible for trouble at work.
A few months ago, Sven had a heart
attack at the factory and was taken to
the hospital. A thorough physical
examination showed that his heart was
enlarged and that his vital capacity, or
lung function, was lower than it should
be. He was also suffering from
breathlessness and chronic bronchitis.
Certain blood lipids, such as serum
cholesterol and triglycerides, were
higher than normal.
Sven Johnsson is not a real person.
He is a composite drawn from a study
of cardiovascular patients. The investi
gation covered 843 men living in Göte¬
borg, which is a good place to do
such a study as the population is
stable, and accurate records make the
statistician's task easier.
Since we already knew that the risk
of heart attack increases with age, we
chose only middle-aged men born the
same year, 1913. When the study
began in 1963, none of them had any
signs of heart trouble, but by 1971,
some 36 had had heart attacks.
Their backgrounds disclosed several
common denominators, all described in
the portrait of Sven Johnsson. Smok¬
ing and alcohol problems were risk
factors which cropped up most often.
This "Men born in 1913" study, which
Photo T. Farkas - WHO, Geneva

is continuing, is only part of a large-
scale programme for cardiovascular
disease control in Göteborg. The
second part is an attempt to prevent
ischaemic or coronary heart disease.
Some 10,000 men aged between 45 and
55 were chosen at random to receive
preventive treatment. The treatment
is designed to reduce three of the risk
factors high cholesterol, high blood-
pressure and smoking. Another 20,000
men were selected as controls and
given no treatment.
The 10,000 risk factor subjects are
treated at the Section of Preventive
Cardiology at Sahlgren's Hospital,
which serves the whole of Göteborg.
The anti-smoking part of the pro¬
gramme is still in the development
stage, but after three months of
treatment 40 per cent of the par¬
ticipants stopped smoking completely.
Those who have difficulty giving up
the habit come to information sessions
and group meetings. They are some¬
times given individual treatment as
well. Chewing-gum flavoured with
nicotine is sometimes helpful as a
physical aid.
Among the patients receiving treat¬
ment for hypertension, or high blood-
pressure, some drop out after a while.
Here again certain common social and
emotional factors are present. The
patient who drops out has usually dis¬
covered only recently that he has
hypertension. He has less education
than the others, and a lower income.
We have tried to reduce the drop¬
out rate by developing a special pro¬
gramme for these newly detected
cases. It begins with a slide-session
and a tape that describes what hyper¬
tension is and what can be done about
Göteborg, Sweden's second largest city,
has carried out a major study of
cardiovascular disease since 1963. At
the city's Sahlgren Hospital, some 10,000 men
aged between 45 and 55 are given special
treatment aimed to reduce three risk
factors of heart disease high cholesterol,
high blood pressure and smoking (details
in article this page). Left, a physiotherapist
at the hospital studies the reactions of
heart patients to physical exercise.
it. General discussion follows, with
questions encouraged. Later, the
patients are called in at regular inter¬
vals for re-examination and follow-up
visits, to stimulate attendance for
treatment while prevention is . still
possible. A good physician-patient
relationship is important, so we try-
to make sure that these "doubtful"
patients always see the same doctor.
All cases of heart attack and stroke
that occur in Göteborg are reported
and entered in a register, so by compar¬
ing the register with our records we
can tell whether these cases have
received preventive treatment. In
about four or five years, we should
learn how much of an influence our
preventive efforts have had.
Meanwhile, we are trying to improve
after-care for people who already have
myocardial infarction. When the pro¬
gramme began in 1967 we discovered
that care after patients left hospital
was very uneven. Some were receiv¬
ing intensive and specialized physical
training, but others nothing at all. Just
as many patients died in the first year
after an attack as died in hospital at
the time.
Coronary care units using
new techniques have greatly increas¬
ed survival chances for heart attack
patients. By giving regular check-ups
and supervision after their release
from hospital, we hope to improve
these chances still further.
When we first set up the infarction
clinic, we had to limit it to patients
under 55 years of age at the time of
their attack, but now we cover all
those under 67. We leave the actual
treatment in hospital to the doctors
there, and take over when the patient
goes home. Apart from regular phy¬
sical check-ups, psychological and
social factors are of the utmost impor¬
tance in the recovery phase, and we
have to educate the patient's family
as well as the patient.
The staff of the infarction clinic
includes a psychiatrist and two psy¬
chologists. Patients are invited to
bring their wives or husbands to dis¬
cuss their condition. We explain the
treatment of complications and point
out the risks which could lead to
another attack. All these patients
were originally smokers. Half of them
stop smoking completely a year after
they begin treatment.
Nearly 1,000 patients are in follow-
up treatment at the infarction clinic.
Many of them do supervised exercises
which help us to judge the right time
for them to return to work. When a
patient knows his physical capacity
and how he can best make use of it,
he gains in reassurance and con¬
fidence. Then he can gradually return
to an active life, at work and in his
leisure hours. The results so far indi¬
cate that patients who persevere with
physical training lead a healthier life.
Survival rates can be improved if
patients know the warning signs of
infarction. Many people die suddenly
from ischaemic heart disease outside
hospital. Most have signs of previous
infarction or have had chest symptoms
a week before their death. These
symptoms should have been recogniz¬
ed as early warning signals. Patients
who have had one infarction, and their
relatives, must watch out for any
recurrence of symptoms so that action
can be taken in time.
Hypertension is a frequent early
warning sign. Five per cent of the
population over 50 are hypertensive.
Early recognition of high blood-pres¬
sure is the most promising of all
preventive aids at our disposal.
A modern health service is expen¬
sive and must be efficient. The cardio¬
vascular programme in Göteborg
offers a chance to compare costs and
benefits of the various forms of care
we provide, and to find the answers
to many questions. How many inten¬
sive coronary care units and infarction
out-patient clinics do we need? How
many can we afford? What is the
value of primary as compared with
secondary preventive care? Does
health education save lives? When we
know these things we shall be able OQ
to provide an improved service to »CU
heart patients, and give many people
a longer lease of life.
