A problem of contemporary Latin America
LITERATURE
AND UNDER¬
DEVELOPMENT
by Antonio Candido
Right, a forest of giant
pencils at a literacy rally in
Cuba. When Cuba launched
a nationwide literacy cam¬
paign in 1961, 980,000 Cubans
(23 per cent of the popula¬
tion) were illiterate. Within
12 months, 35,000 school¬
teachers, 100,000 students
and 13,000 workers organiz¬
ed in "Literacy Brigades" had
taught over 700,000 persons
to read and write. Literacy
teaching campaigns In Latin
America have reduced the
overall illiteracy rate from
32.5 per cent to 23.6 per
cent in ten years.
Let us broaden our own spiritual horizons, so that all men
shall be able to read and that each one of us shall have at
his disposal the best possible tools with which to work
for the good of all. Let us strive to come nearer to social
justice and true liberty.
Pedro Henriquez Ureña (Dominican Republic)
->»
©I
10
I HE Brazilian writer Mario
Vieira de Mello, one of the few Latin
Americans to have dealt with the
problem of the relationship between
underdevelopment and culture, estab¬
lishes a distinction that is valid for
all Latin America.
According to him, a marked change
of perspective has occurred. More
or less up to the 1930s the notion of
a "new land" prevailed among us,
the notion of a land which had still
not realized its potential but which
believed itself to have great possibi¬
lities for future progress.
Nowadays, although there is no
essential change in the distance which
separated and still separates us from
rich countries, the notion of an "under¬
developed country" prevails. The first
notion stressed effort and, con¬
sequently, unrealized potential. The
second stresses the poverty and
ANTONIO CANDIDO, Brazilian literary critic
and writer, has specialized In Latin American
literature and panicularly Brazilian literature.
He is professor of literature at the University
of Säo Paulo, Brazil. Among his many books
are 'Flcçâo e Confessäo" (Fiction and Confes¬
sion, 1956), "Tese e Antitese' (Thesis and
Antithesis, 1964), 'Formacäo da Literatura
Braslleira' (Evolution of Brazilian Literature,
1959) and "Introduçâo à Literatura do Brazil"
(Introduction to Brazilian Literature).
atrophy of the present what is lacking
rather than what we possess in
abundance. .
I am not in agreement with the
conclusions which Mario Vieira de
Mello draws from that distinction; but
considered on its own merit, the dis¬
tinction is exact and helps in the
understanding of certain fundamental
aspects of literary creation in Latin
America.
It Is certain that the idea of a "new
land" gives rise to certain funda¬
mental attitudes in literature, attitudes
derived from the admiration and
interest aroused by the exotic, from
a certain respect for grandeur and
from hope in its possibilities.
Latin American intellectuals have
inherited this enthusiasm and have
transformed it into an instrument of
national affirmation and ideological
justification. Stimulated by Roman¬
ticism, backed up by hyperbole and
with exoticism transformed into a
state of mind, literature became the
language of celebration and of ten¬
derness. Our sky was bluer, our
flowers prettier, our landscapes more
inspiring than those of other places.
The idea of nationhood was closely
linked to that of nature and to some
extent derived its reason for existence
from this. Both gave rise to a
literature which compensated for
material backwardness and the weak
ness of institutions by overvaluing ti e
"regional" aspects and making exoti¬
cism the justification for social
optimism.
But on the opposite side of the
coin, the discouraging aspects depend¬
ed on the same order of associations,
as if weakness or the lack of instit¬
utional organization constituted an
inconceivable paradox in the face of
the grandeur of nature. (In America,
everything is big, only man is small).
However, given the cause and effect
relationship "beautiful land... great na¬
tion", it is not difficult to see the
effects that the change of perspective
that went with awareness of underde¬
velopment would have in bringing to
the fore the reality of unproductive
soil, technical backwardness, the over¬
whelming poverty of the people, their
paralyzing lack of culture. This view
was pessimistic with regard to the
present and problematic in relation to
the future.
Awareness of underdevelopment
dates from after the Second World
War, particularly from the 1950s on¬
wards. But already in the 1930s, the
change of direction had taken place
especially in regional fiction which
may be considered as a barometer.
This kind of narrative abandoned
charm and curiosity, foreseeing and
monitoring an element of masquerade

In the picturesque enchantment or In
the decorative, gentlemanly way that
rural, man, was portrayed. It is not
inaccurate to. say 'that, from this point
of;: view, the novel came to be a
demystifying, force which anticipated
the, economist's and- the politician's
awareness, of: the problem.
If we consider the material condi¬
tions for, the existence of literature,
the basic factor is probably illiteracy
which, in those countries where there
had' been advanced, pre-Columbian
civilizations, is aggravated by the use
of, more than one language.
Illiteracy is, in fact, linked to other
manifestations of cultural weakness:
the lack of means of communication
and' distribution (publishing houses,
libraries, magazines, newspapers); the
scarcity, or the wide dispersion and
the small size of the public for
literature because of the reduced
number of real readers (a much
smaller number than the comparatively
low percentage of literates); the
impossibility for writers to specialize in
their literary work which was usually
pursued as a marginal activity or
simply out of sheer passion for the
craft; the lack of resistance or discri¬
mination in the face of foreign
influences and pressures. Economic
and political factors enter into this
weakness.
Illiteracy is not, in some cases,
enough to explain weakness in other
sectors, although it is the basic
characteristic of underdevelopment in
the cultural field.
In other sectors, a fact such as the
development of publishing in the 1940s
in Mexico and in Argentina showed
that the lack of books, was not simply
a result of the reduced number of
readers and their low buying power,
since the whole of America, including
the Portuguese-speaking regions,
exhausted some quite big editions,
especially those of high quality.
Perhaps it is possible to conclude
that bad publishing habits and the lack
of communication increased to the limit
the inertia of the public; and that there
had existed an unsatisfied potential
for the marketing of books.
This last example reminds us that in
Latin America the problem of public
presents original characteristics, since
it constitutes the only group of under¬
developed countries which speak Eur¬
opean languages (if we except the in¬
digenous groups), and which have
also sprung culturally from metropoli¬
tan countries that are still underdev¬
eloped today. In these old metropolitan
countries, the consumption of litera¬
ture is still restricted if we compare
them to the developed countries.
It Is possible to imagine that the
Latin American writer might be doomed
to remain forever what he has al
ways been a producer for a minority,
although this does not mean that he
produces for groups of high aesthetic
level but simply for a restricted num¬
ber with a liking for reading.
In effect, it must not be forgotten that
modern audiovisual resources may
produce such a change in the creat¬
ive process and the means of commu¬
nication that when the mass of the
people finally attain elementary in¬
struction, they will seek satisfaction
for the universal need for fiction and
poetry outside the printed book.
To put it in another way, in most of
our countries, there are considerable
masses of people who have still not
reached the higher level of literature
and are still submerged in the folk¬
lore stage of oral communication
when, having become literate, they are
caught up in the process of urbaniza¬
tion and fall under the influence of
radio, television, comic strips and
popular magazines which form the
basis of mass culture.
Hence the number of readers of
literature, as we understand it here,
does not increase proportionately with
the growth of literacy, for literates
and illiterates alike progress directly
from the stage of folklore to that type
of urban folklore which is mass culture. 1 1
Besides, this problem is one of the "
most serious in the underdeveloped
countries because of the broad pene-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

LITERATURE AND DEVELOPMENT (Continued)
12
tration of what might be called cultu¬
ral "know-how" and the prefabricated
materials of mass culture which come
from the developed countries. This
know-how and mass culture not only
spreads the values of the industrially
developed countries but also enables
them to direct, in their own interests,
the sensibility and opinion of the popu¬
lations of the underdeveloped coun¬
tries.
Illiteracy and cultural weakness not
only Influence the external aspects.
Their influence on the very conscience
of the writer and on the nature of his
creation is even more significant.
In one period, the writer shared the
Ideology of enlightenment, accord¬
ing to which education would auto¬
matically bring about conditions fav¬
ourable to the full development of
man and his progress In society.
At the outset, education was reserv¬
ed for a minority of citizens who en¬
joyed economic and political advan¬
tages; later, it was envisaged as a dis¬
tant, vague possibility for the people
who were viewed less as a reality than
as a liberal concept. The Emperor
Pedro II of Brazil declared that he
would rather have been a teacher, an
attitude similar to that of the Argen¬
tinean, Sarmiento, who believed that
the triumph of civilization over barba¬
rism would have as its premise poten¬
tial urbanization based on education.
A curious case is that of the Bra¬
zilian thinker, Manuel Bonfim, who in
1905 published a fascinating book,
Latin America. Bonfim analyzes our
backwardness as a function of the per¬
sistence of a colonial status, as reveal¬
ed In the continued existence of oli¬
garchies and foreign imperialism.
Finally, when he seems to be leading
up to a theory of the transformation of
social structures as a necessary pre-'
condition, a disappointing strangula¬
tion of his argument takes place and
Bonfim ends by prescribing education
as the panacea. We here sense that
we are at the nub of the "enlighten¬
ment Illusion".
In consequence, the intellectuals
created a vision that was just as dis¬
torted when confronted with the pre¬
vailing lack of culture. Whilst lament¬
ing the ignorance of the people and
wishing that this might disappear, so
that their countries might automati¬
cally rise up to the high level destin¬
ed for them, they excluded themselves
from the context and considered them¬
selves an isolated, truly "fluctuating"
group. And, in effect, they floated, with
or without consciousness of guilt,
above the lack of culture and the back¬
wardness, certain that these could not
contaminate or affect the quality of
what they were doing.
In point of fact, the general lack
of culture produced and still produces
an even more far-reaching weakness
which affects intellectual life and the
very quality of literary works.
Cultural poverty necessarily sub¬
jected the writer to metropolitan
models and to European models in
general, establishing an elite grouping
which was to some extent aristocratic
in relation to the uncultured public.
In effect, insofar as a sufficient local
public did not exist, the writer wrote as
if his ideal public existed in Europe
and so, very often, disassociated him¬
self from his own land. Th's gave
rise to works which authors and
readers considered highly refined,
because they assimilated the form
and values of Europe.
Another aspect of this alienating
"aristocratic" attitude worth recalling
Is the use of foreign languages in
creative writing, which then appeared a
laudable refinement. Some extreme
examples underline the paradoxical
and comic side of this literary vogue.
One instance is that of the fifth-rate
Brazilian Romantic, Pires de Almeida
who, at the beginning of the century,
published in French a theatrical
work probably written much earlier:
La Fête des Crânes: drame de muurs
indiennes en trois actes et douze
tableaux. (The Ceremony of Skulls:
a drama of Indian customs in 3 acts
and 12 tableaux.)
All this did not take place without
some ambivalence since, on the one
hand, the elite Imitated the good and
bad of Europe, and at one and the
same time affirmed the most intransi¬
gent spiritual independence, in a pen¬
dulum movement between reality and
their ideological Utopia. Thus we see
that illiteracy and refinement, cosmo¬
politanism and regionalism may have
their roots in the soil of cultural
deprivation as well as In the effort
to overcome this.
An interesting problem from the
point of view of the dependence which
arises from cultural backwardness is
that of various types of influence, good
or bad, inevitable and unnecessary.
Our literatures (like those of North
America) are basically branches of
metropolitan literatures. And if we set
aside susceptibilities of national pride,
we shall see that despite the indepen¬
dence from these which they achieved
little by little, they are still largely
their reflections.
In the case of the numerically
superior Spanish and Portuguese
countries, the independence process
consisted, to a great extent, in the
transfer of dependence so that from
the nineteenth century onwards, other
non-metropolitan literatures, especially
French, became the models, something
which also occurred in the old
metropolitan countries. At the present
time, it is essential to take North
American literature into account as a
new focus of attraction.
This Is what might be called inevit¬
able influence and is sociologically
linked to our dependence from the
moment of the Conquest and the
sometimes brutal transplantation of
cultures.
Many consider Spanish American
"Modernism" as a species of rite of
CONTINUED PAGE 15
THE URBAN EXPLOSION
In the 19th and beginning of the 20th
century, Latin American novels were mark¬
ed by a special emphasis on regionalism
and rural settings. Recent years have
witnessed a new flowering of Latin Amer¬
ican Literature enriched by psychological
studies of the complexities and problems
of city life. (Photo shows a typical street
in downtown Buenos Aires.) This devel¬
opment reflects the mushroom growth of
cities throughout the Latin American conti¬
nent. The novels and short stories now
emerging in Spanish and Portuguese-
speaking America have been hailed as
amongst the most vigorous and original
in the growing world literature of today.
GRANDEUR
OF NATURE
The almost lunar quality
of this landscape in Chi¬
lean Patagonia is in violent
contrast with the impene¬
trable virgin forests, the
vast plains and "sertöes",
the impregnable cordilleras
and the imposing rivers
found elsewhere in Latin
America. The grandeur of
nature is one of the
major themes of Latin
American literature and art.

SFí^SasM»*5,
MAJOR
THEMES
OF ARTISTIC
CREATION
MYTH AND REALITY
"Magical reality", says the Cuban writer Alejo Carpentier, "is the heritage of all America...
America is nowhere near exhausting the founts of its mythology." Its presence is in
evidence in many of the literary and artistic creations the continent has produced. In
this oil painting by the Cuban artist Wilfredo Lam, entitled "The Abalochas dance for
Chango", various elements of Afro-Cuban mythology the spirit of fertility, the spirit
of resurrection, the god of war evoke the vision of a tropical forest
We, who are writers from the vast expanses of America, are constantly
on the alert to fill these open spaces with living persons of real flesh
and blood. Not only are we conscious of this creative need, we also
see our duty to raise a critical voice in this empty world, which despite
its emptiness is no less filled with injustices, deprivations and suffering.
Furthermore, we feel equally bound to rekindle the ancient dreams
that have long slumbered in our statues of stone, in the ruins of our
ancient monuments, in the infinite silence of our planetary pampas,
our thick forests, our rivers echoing the din of thunder. For we must
people with words the confines of a silent continent with the thrill
that comes from the intoxicating task of creating myths and putting
names to things.
Pablo Neruda (Chile)
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
oto © Roberto Montandon - University of Chile, Santiago
3Êfg£
>*í«í>

ARTISTIC CREATION (Continued)
Right, detail of lavish baroque
decoration in the church of San
Martin Tepotzotlan, Mexico.
BAROQUE
Our art has always been baroque
from the magnificent pre-Co¬
lumbian sculpture and pictorial
art of the "Codices" to the best
novels of present-day Latin Am¬
erica, not to mention the cathe¬
drals and monasteries of the
colonial era. Why be afraid of the
baroque style, born of trees, of
reredos and altars, of over-ornate
statues and calligraphic portraits,
a baroque born of the need to
put names to things, even if in so
doing we move away from more
fashionable techniques.
Alejo Carpentier (Cuba)
Photo below shows an Afro-Brazilian
vendor in a street of Bahia, north¬
eastern Brazil. Africa's contribution to
the culture of Latin America has been
particularly strong, not only in Brazil,
but in Cuba and other islands of the
Caribbean, as well as in Venezuela,
Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Mexico and
various parts of Central America.
The life. and problems of the Aimaraes Indians of Lake Titicaca in
Bolivia are vividly portrayed in a recent film, "Ukamau" (above)
directed by Jorge Sanjinés of Bolivia. Latin America's cinema has
been gaining increasing prominence on the international scene with
films dealing with poignant social and human problems of today.
THE PLIGHT OF THE INDIANS
The Indian is no mere figure of history or archaeology;
he is alive and present, part of us. ..it is neither right nor
reasonable or indeed worthy of us to exclude from our
traditions that part which we see every day around us
in our songs and dances, in our books, in the street,
which flows in our veins and in the hearts of all our
fellow men.
Andrés Iduarte (Mexico)

LITERATURE AND DEVELOPMENT (Continued trom page 12)
AFRICAN ROOTS
African culture in Brazil is far
from a mere museum or anthropo¬
logical curiosity. It is not merely
picturesque but a living, creative
reality. Brazilian culture is noted
more for its extra-European traits
than for its passively colonial
sub-European characteristics.
And much of what contributes to
this Brazilian culture comes from
the fact that the Negro has had
an opportunity to express himself
as a Brazilian and not as an intru¬
der either ethnically or culturally.
Gilberto Freyre (Brazil)
passage which, because of its capacity
for originality, marks our literary com¬
ing of age. Nevertheless, if we cor¬
rect the perspective and define the
fields, we shall perhaps see that this
is truer as a psychological fact than
as an aesthetic reality.
It is true that Rubén Darío, and later
the whole movement, turned back for
the first time the current of influences,
carrying that of America to Spain; this
was a break in the literary dominion
which the latter had exercised.
But the fact is that such a movement
did not stem from original resources of
expression but from the adaptation of
French attitudes and processes. What
the Spaniards received was the in¬
fluence of France, already filtered and
translated by Latin Americans who, in
this way, took their place as cultural
mediators.
A fundamental stage in the overcom¬
ing of dependence is the ability to
produce first-rate works, influenced
not by foreign models but by previous
national works.
Thus, it is possible to say that the
Argentinean, Jorge Luis Borges, rep¬
resents the first indisputable original
influence exercised in a general and
recognizable manner upon the originat¬
ing countries because of his new way
of understanding the process of
writing.
The case of the avant-garde of the
1920s is Interesting since they repre¬
sent an extraordinary liberation in ex¬
pressive techniques. The Chilean poet,
Vicente Huidobro, founds "creation-
ism" in Paris, Inspired by the French
and the Italians. He writes his poetry
in French and in French explains his
poetic principles in magazines such as
L'Esprit Nouveau.
Argentinean "Ultraism" and Brazilian
"Modernism" stem directly from the
same sources. And all that does not
prevent these movements from making
innovations, nor their originators from
being the creators, par excellence, of
our new literature; besides Huidobro
and Borges, they include the Bra¬
zilians, Mario de Andrade, Oswald
de Andrade and Manuel Bandeira.
We know, then, that we are part of
a greater culture in which we partici¬
pate as a variant. That is, contrary to
what our grandparents ingenuously
supposed, it is an illusion to speak
of suppression of contacts and influen¬
ces. At a time when the world tenden¬
cy is interrelation and interaction, the
Utopias of originality no longer persist
in a national sense though they are
understandable in the phase of newly-
formed nations.
In the present stage of awareness of
underdevelopment, the question is,
therefore, more complex. Is there a
paradox here? In effect, the more he
realizes the tragic reality of under¬
development, the more free and
thinking man believes in the need to
reject the foreign economic yoke and
to modify the internal structures which
contribute to the underdeveloped
situation.
Nevertheless, he sees the problem
of Influences with more objectivity,
considering them as cultural and social
links. So much so that awareness of
this link coincides with the beginning
of an ability to make innovations on
the level of expression and with strug¬
gle on the level of economic and poli¬
tical development.
On the other hand, the traditional
affirmation of originality, in the sense
of elementary particularism, led and
still leads, on the one hand to the pic¬
turesque and on the other to cultural
slavery two sicknesses of growth
which are perhaps inevitable but, In
any case are alienating.
Because of the aesthetic movements
of the 1920s and the intense aesthetic
and social awareness of more recent
years, we began to feel that depen¬
dence was moving towards cultural
interdependence. This will not only give
Latin American writers the awareness
of their unity in diversity but will also
favour the fruition of more mature, ori¬
ginal works which will gradually be
assimilated by other peoples, including
those of . the metropolitan countries.
The road of reflection upon the prob¬
lem of underdevelopment leads, in
the cultural field, to transnational in¬
tegration, as what was imitation is
slowly transformed into reciprocal
assimilation.
One example among many. In the
work of the Peruvian, Mario Vargas
Llosa, especially La ciudad y los per¬
ros (The Time of the Heroes), the tra¬
dition of the stream of consciousness
appeared in an extraordinarily refined
form, and is a technique that belong¬
ed to Proust and Joyce as well as to
Dorothy Richardson, Virginia Woolf, to
Döblin and Faulkner.
Here the novelist of an underdev¬
eloped country used ingredients which
came as a cultural borrowing from the
countries which produced the original
literary forms. Nevertheless, he ad¬
justed them in depth to his own pur¬
pose in order to represent the prob¬
lems of his country and invented his
own personal formulae. In this case,
there is neither imitation nor mecha¬
nical reproduction. There is a sharing
of resources which have become com¬
mon property through the situation of
dependence, thus contributing to mak¬
ing this a situation of interdependence.
It appears that one of the positive
characteristics of the underdeveloped
period is the overcoming of the atti¬
tude of suspicion which leads to the
indiscriminate acceptance or to the illu¬
sion of any originality limited exclu¬
sively to local themes.
In Cuba, can one really speak of
artifice or evasion in the case of Alejo
Carpentier, whose work is impregnat¬
ed with surrealism, and whose vision
is a complex trans-national . vision
even with regard to the theme of a
novel like El siglo de las luces (Ex-
plosion in the Cathedral)? 1 k
In Brazil, the recent concrete poetry *J
movement takes its inspiration from
Ezra Pound and its aesthetic principles
CONTINUED PAGE 31

LITERATURE AND
UNDERDEVELOPMENT (Continued from page 15)
from Max Bense; nevertheless, it has
led to a redefinition of the national
past and has permitted unknown poets
to be read in a new way and has
aptly shed light on the stylistic
revolution of the great Modernists,
Mario de Andrade and Oswald de
Andrade.
Considered as a consequence of
backwardness and lack of economic
development, dependence presents
other aspects which have repercus¬
sions on literature. Let us once more
note the phenomenon of ambivalence
which is expressed in the impulse both
to copy and to turn away from the
model; apparently contradictory when
seen in isolation, they may appear
complementary from another point of
view.
Backwardness which stimulates the
servile copying of all that the fashion
in advanced countries decrees, also
encourages writers to emigrate, whe¬
ther to the interior or to the exterior.
Backwardness, which concentrates on
the most idiosyncractic aspects of
national identity, and may really be an
unsuspected way of offering the ex¬
oticism that European sensibility wants
as a distraction, turns into an acute
form of dependence within indepen¬
dence. From the present perspective,
it appears that the two tendencies are
the same and arise from the same
situation of backwardness or under¬
development.
In its crudest form, the servile imita¬
tion of styles, themes and attitudes
and literary habits is laughable or limit¬
ed by provincialism, having been the
mere compensatory elitism of a colo¬
nial country.
Equally crude, though perhaps in
another way, are certain elementary
forms of nativism and literary region¬
alism which reduce human problems
to their picturesque element, transform¬
ing the passion and suffering of rural
man and the coloured populations to
the equivalents of tropical pineapple or
pawpaw.
This attitude may not only be anal¬
ogous to the first but also combined
with it, once it results in supplying
the urban or European reader or
the artificially Europeanized with the
almost tourist reality which he would
like to see in America.
Yet in Latin America, as a
consequence of underdevelopment,
regionalism was and still is a stimulus
to literature. In the stage of new
national consciousness which corres¬
ponds to the situation of backward¬
ness, there is, above all, room for that
decorative picturesqueness which
functions as a discovery and recog¬
nition of the reality of a country and
its incorporation into literary themes.
It is the case with the Amazon
region, which attracted Brazilian
novelists and short story writers from
the beginning of Naturalism, in the
1870s and 1880s, at the height of the
picturesque period.
It became the material half a
century later of La Vorágine (The
Vortex) by the Colombian, José Eusta¬
sio Rivera, which is situated between
the picturesque and protest literature
(though it is more patriotic than
social); and it came to be an impor¬
tant element in La Casa Verde (The
Green House) by Mario Vargas Llosa
in the recent period of heightened
technical awareness in which the
picturesque and protest are alike
thrust into the background before
the human impact which is present
immanently In universal works.
I T will not be necessary
to enumerate all the other literary
areas which correspond to the pano¬
rama of backwardness and under¬
development: areas like the Andean
high plateau or the Brazilian sertäo
(backlands); or even the condition
and environment of the Cuban,
Venezuelan and Brazilian Negro, as
in the poems of the Cuban, Nicolás
Guillen, the Brazilian, Jorge de Lima,
in Ecue-Yamba-0 by Alejo Carpentier,
Pobre Negro by the Venezuelan,
Rómulo Gallegos or Jubiabá by the
Brazilian, Jorge Amado; or, if you
wish, of the plainsman from the llano,
pampa or caatinga.
The economic reality of under¬
development preserves the regional
dimension as a living actuality,
although the urban dimension, is
increasing in importance But It is suffi¬
cient to realize that some good writers
and even the best have found material
in regionalism for works which have
universal validity writers such as the
Peruvian, José Maria Arguedas, the
Colombian, Gabriel García Márquez,
the Paraguayan, Augusto Roa Bastos
and the Brazilian, Joäo Guimaräes
Rosa. Only in the countries in which
the culture of the big cities prevails
completely, countries such as the
Argentine, Uruguay and perhaps Chile,
has regional literature become a real
anachronism.
In the period of heightened national
consciousness, characterized by the
idea of backwardness, we had a
picturesque regionalism which in
several countries was believed to be
the true literature. I am speaking of »»^
a genre long outdated or reduced to II
the level of sub-literature. Its most " '
generalized and persistent manifes¬
tations during its Golden Age was,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

LITERATURE AND DEVELOPMENT (Continued)
perhaps, the gauchismo of the River
Plate region.
The 1930s and 1940s saw the emer¬
gence of a different form of region¬
alism as reflected in what was referred
to as the "social novel", "Indigenism",
or the "Northeastern novel" according
to the country of origin and which,
while not exclusively regional, was so
to a high degree.
This regionalism is of greater inter¬
est to us, since it preceded awareness
of underdevelopment, but it is right to
note that, long before this, writers
such as the Bolivian, Alcides Arguedas
and the Mexican, Mariano Azuela, had
already attained a more realistic sense
of the living conditions and the human
problems of the underdogs.
Among writers who set out to de¬
mystify American reality and who do
so with analytic vigour, sometimes
attaining a high level of artistic skill,
are the Guatemalan, Miguel Angel As¬
turias, the Ecuadorian, Jorge Icaza, the
Peruvian, Ciro Alegría, the Brazilians,
Jorge Amado and José Lins do Regó
and others.
All of them, at least in part of their
work, write social novels closely relat¬
ed to regionalism which frequently In¬
clude the residue of negative pictur-
esqueness, together with a certain
sketchy humanitarianism.
Despite the fact that many of those
writers use a spontaneous, unconven
tional language, the weight of social
conscience at times acts on their style
as a positive factor and gives rise to
the search for interesting solutions
adapted to the representation of
inequality and injustice.
Without mentioning the consummate
master, Asturias, a discursive novelist
like Icaza also owes his continuing
validity less to his indignant protest or
to the emphatic way he paints the
exploiters than to certain stylistic
devices used to express poverty.
This is the case with his novel, Hua-
sipungo, in which certain uses of the
diminutive and of lamenting speech
rhythms represent a sort of diminu¬
tion of man, his reduction to elemen¬
tal functions which are associated with
linguistic inarticulacy in order to sym¬
bolize privation.
In Vidas Sêcas (Barren Lives), the
Brazilian, Graciliano Ramos, carries to
the extreme his normal verbal sobriety,
devising a language which is reduced
to ellipsis, to monosyllable and to the
minimum of phrases in order to ex¬
press the human frustration of the man
of the backlands whose life is circum¬
scribed to the level for survival.
From this point of view, what we now
have is a flowering of the novel,
characterized by technical refinement
which has transformed the vision of
the regions and human lives so that
what had been a matter of picturesque
details becomes more abstract and
acquires universality.
Laying aside sentimentalism and
rhetoric, drawing on non-realistic ele¬
ments such as surrealism, the absurd,
magic situations, anti-naturalist techni¬
ques such as the stream of conscious¬
ness, simultaneous viewpoints, distor¬
tion, ellipsis, the contemporary novel
still uses what was, previously, the
very substance of nativism, exoticism
and social documentation.
We are thus led to suggest a third
phase which might be called supra-
regionalism. It corresponds to the
painful awareness of underdevelop¬
ment and represents a transcendence
of the type of naturalism based on an
empirical vision of the world.
From this supra-regionalism, there
develops in Brazil, the revolutionary
work of Joäo Guimaräes Rosa which
is solidly based on what might be term¬
ed the universality of the region. The
fact of having transcended the pictur¬
esque and the documentary makes
the presence of the region more alive
in works like that of the Mexican, Juan
Rulfo, whether in the fragmentary,
obsessive reality of £/ llano en llamas
(The Burning Plain) or in the ghostly
reticence of Pedro Páramo.
Antonio Candido

