An 'ABC
of text plus image
by Gérard Blanchard
36
B"OTH the outward appearance
and the content of the book have changed considerably
through the ages.
The libraries of Antiquity at Nineveh, Nippur, Lagash
or Mari contained only stacks of "writing bricks"; the
Alexandria library, which was destroyed by fire, housed
mainly papyrus and leather, rolls. The Chinese wrote on
bones, wooden panels, bamboo strips and silk scrolls
before inventing paper.
The Ancient World was full of writings on stones
potsherds, or wax tablets before papyrus and parchment
were used, while paper is of relatively recent date. It was
only at the beginning of the Christian era that the scroll
was replaced by the "codex" of folded sheets bound
together to produce what we ordinarily term a "book".
Today the use of new materials and techniques has
vastly widened this over-narrow conception of the book.
Yet whatever the technique employed and the material on
which they are reproduced, text and image remain the
basis of visual communication. What concerns us here is
the relationship between them.
Western writing cannot be confounded with concrete
images since it uses abstract signs arbitrarily selected to
indicate sounds. This dual system was used on the walls
of prehistoric caves (A) even earlier than the development
of writing.
Endless efforts have been made to achieve the impossible
union of opposites, the superposition of text and image
merging into an essentially lyrical whole. Reading such
a complex image is rather reading a "mándala".
The Hindu and Buddhist mándala JJndia, Japan, Tibet and
elsewhere) is read like a plan; and many temples at
Khajuraho, Angkor and Borobudur, for instance are
concrete realizations of such plans. The mándala is a very
highly structured image for meditation (a series of concen¬
tric circles in squares), which leads the contemplator step
by step into the heart of his meditation.
And so it is rather in the style of a mándala that the
illuminator of the Book of Keils (B) hides the key words
under a wealth of decoration, that Rabanus Maurus (C)
reveals figures hidden in the text by the use of contrasting
black and red print, that Arab calligraphers give form to the
spoken word (D), that Apollinaire lays out his poems in the
GERARD BLANCHARD, French specialist in the graphic arts, is
the author of "Métiers Graphiques' ("Graphic Crafts', Editions
Arts et Métiers Graphiques, Paris 1969) and "La Bande Dessinée"
("The Strip Cartoon" from prehistory to the present), a Marabout
Université paperback, Paris 1969. A new book on Typography
and Language is in preparation. He contributed a special study
on book typography in France from 1800 to 1914 to 'Book Typo¬
graphy in Europe and America" (E. Benn, London, 1966). He Is
chairman of the "Rencontres Internationales de Lurs", an annual
meeting in southern France of specialists In the graphic arts and
communication.
Photos. A : © Archives photographiques, Pans. B : Trinity College, Dublin.
C and F : Gérard Blanchard Collection. D : Calligrams from "Arab Calli¬
graphy", by Mohamed Azlza, STD, Tunis. E : From "Art et Ordinateur", by
A. Moles. Editions Casterman, Paris. G : © Paul Almasy, Paris. H : Paolo
Koch © Rapho, Paris.
f\ Above, paintings made 15,000
years ago on the walls of the
Lascaux cave (France) are
amongst man's earliest efforts In
communication. Alongside the
figurative representations of ani¬
mals are abstract signs perhaps
forerunners of writing.
D A masterpiece of Celtic art,
tho Book of Kells (left) an 8th-
9th century gospel book, is pre¬
served at Trinity College, Dublin
(Ireland). In this work, rich in
graphic invention, colour and
fantasy, the artist has illustrated
only the first words of the texts,
which thé cantors knew by heart.
I* Below, fragment of a Latin text by the famed 9th century
teacher and writer, Rabanus Maurus, Archbishop of Mainz. In
this edition, printed at Pforzheim (Germany) In 1503, text and
image merge with striking effect. Letters printed in red (here
seen as light grey) are set within the outlines of the figures, and
in the "corridors" dividing the page, where they form complete
words or sentences.
Aux il i a'iliitWt n tbrlíí
I n (ritcli c t o r c m t o n
|E n i h ron u s hiere g i V !i
Vt« i I lumframea for«
Protcrithochoftcsa
Bnbleuacatqucfuofv
Nam *~
S t^ n t c I '^^j'Jj^ : i \jJS^& o,:
H Tci^î<&U&£5a*H*rV<ra fl t
tum
«o
ï * 4 ui
"** m t r ad un.
S
y ^
% »tu,
Bnilli
P t n n i » »
Ci.uo earn
Te n fa a <
Hi q: i t *
Tum d i f P
0_u acia "^yJ,
De e r u e t\Jo *hzj ,
De cruccnoofal lunti
f u um f e r
* a I I u a
h i a f a I u
q:ve h i e c]
a n t c a u c
i t u b a n t
ncarcereiWf j b e a t u m
t ixumln fi i pi feregem
i i i COWC.i I ia t iOBUBJil
r I I i i n f i g n t J t r o r um
mjconfringitiniq u a
T t a til praemiadona
ando
an d u n c
c e m p u g
. u eh i n c
Ci od a n I
Pfe hU(
¡roba n do
i t u b i q;
'»vi cuna

shape of the objects he is writing about and that the com¬
puter (E) prints out In letters the various tones of a photo¬
graph it is scanning.
Between the two extremes of the illuminator's work "all
done by hand" and the computer's entirely "machine-made"
product, there are the various methods of reproduction
offered by the printing process: conversion of manuscript
into typographical characters (C) or, later, photographic
"facsimiles" of letters stuck on the invisible outline of
a drawing. These "text-images" indicate one extreme of
the relationship between text and image; another extreme
is revealed in the "text and environment-image".
Fully urbanized modem man lives in the heart of a vast
information centre in which text and image play an important
part. We need think only of the street (H) with its posters
of all sizes, rooftop signs, giant figures, window displays
and flashing lights; the hurly-burly of free commercial
competition throws together the most motley collection of
styles, qualities and interests. This kaleidoscopic environ¬
ment is the reflection of the modern world and foreshadows
the world of the future made of dreams, desires and myths,
with advertising programming the slogans.
An equally striking environment can be found centuries
away in time, in the tombs of the ancient Egyptians (F).
The scenes from the lives of the gods and from everyday
life, painted at great cost during their lifetime, are, for the
inner eye of the dead, a necessary accompaniment for their
new life. The hieroglyphics between the friezes are for¬
mulas of intercession. The Book of the Dead (G) merely
gives a summarized view of this environment.
CONTINUED PAGE 39
iß A bird and a pear, completely different
shapes yet fashioned from two Arabic inscrip¬
tions of the same Invocation, "In the name of
Allah the Almighty, the Merciful". Two exam¬
ples of the remarkable skill and Inventiveness
of Arab calligraphers.
t This print-out of a photo¬
graph scanned by a computer
vividly illustrates the difference
which exists between individual
conventional signs (here typo¬
graphical signs) and the mean¬
ingful pattern they acquire
when assembled.
XM Left, fragment from the
"Book of the Dead", dating
from the New Empire (1567-
1085 B.C.). A guide to life
beyond the grave, "books of
the dead" were placed on the
sarcophagus or on the dead
person's chest, under his arm
or between his legs.
H By night, the 20th cen¬
tury city-dweller is engulfed in
the vast word and Image spec¬
tacle of illuminated advertise¬
ments. Right, street scene in
Las Vegas, U.S.A.
SPOqtPJgH El .A FEMME IUI IM ilIKI. il il . Dil I \ Dl: i .
r Text and image surrounded the ancient Egyptian dead
within the tomb. Scenes from daily life or the lives of the
gods were interspersed with hieroglyphic texts. Mummies
were even enveloped in strips with writing on them. Above,
the tomb of Sennedjem, a high official of the 20th Dynasty
(about 1200 B.C.).

J An Ivory Coast barber's sign
(1969). Though its purpose is totally
different, it is based on the same
principle as that of the Assyrian
stele; the records of royal triumph
have given way to the slogans and
images for shops and commerce.
I This Assyrian bas relief dating
from 880 B.C. shows foreign subjects
bringing a tribute of monkeys to king
Assurnazirpal II (883-859). Here the
image, sculpted first, becomes the
backdrop for the text: cuneiform Ins¬
criptions recording the monarch's
triumphs.
L. The "photo captions" on this
Greek vase identify the figures as
Ajax and Achilles at play. From as
early as the 8th century B.C., inscrip¬
tions on such vases were like books
and identified the myths and legends
with which they were decorated.
38
Norman McLaren
is famous for writing
his texts and engraving
his images directly on
the raw film, as here in
the film "Canada".
In this early 10th century A.D. Greco-
Byzantine psalter, allegorical personages
and religious events (such as the cross¬
ing of the Red Sea, bottom right), are
identified by captions. The same page has
typical figures of Byzantine religious art
tmuaunuvMtwukWAWÊMtak
N
'.m i <S> l » ' *e
Bulgarian poster, one of many publish¬
ed to mark International Book Year 1972.
Photos. I : © Roger-Viotlet, Paris. J : © Jean Castel, Paris. K : © Canadian Embassy. Paris. L Anderson
© Giraudon, Paris. M : © Giraudon, Paris. N : Dominique Roger, Unesco. O : Jean Dieuzaide © Yan,
Toulouse. P : Library of Karlsruhe. Fed. Rep. of Germany 0, R, S, T : Gérard Blanchard Collection

ABC OF TEXT PLUS IMAGE (Continued)
The image is often separated from the text and their rela¬
tionship largely depends on the length of the text. The
custom of official inscriptions gives the characters and
lettering a monumental quality so that, even though unread,
they are regarded as a statement of some importance.
The Assyrian inscription (I) is overprinted on part of the
image, rather like the sub-titles dubbing foreign films. These
texts, carved in stone in defiance of time, tell their version
of history. Monuments erected by princes to commemorate
their conquests may be standing stones, writing carved on
rocks, pillars, triumphal arches all expressions of the
need felt in all ages to leave a landmark and a record.
Like these ancient records, the African trade signs contri¬
bute in their own way (J) to the exaltation of text and image.
And nowadays credit titles (K) projected on the cinema
screen before a film become like frontispieces, those lit¬
erary triumphal arches, that preface books of any impor¬
tance.
The text of the caption beneath or alongside the picture is
smaller in size and more familiar in tone, though still far
removed from the detailed "confidences" of the book.
In contemporary advertisements such texts are slanted
to guide the reader (N) and give the key to the pictures.
Even on Greek vases (L) this was so; apart from the signa¬
ture, praises and dedications personalizing a gift, the pur¬
pose of the text is to explain who the personages depicted
are. An ordinary scene from everyday life suddenly be¬
comes an episode from mythology.
Such means of. identification have been used right
through the centuries from Byzantium (M) to the Renais¬
sance and even long after in popular imagery.
On Greek vases the text is inscribed close to the figures,
but the circular structure of the image (as on Greek or
Chinese scrolls) does not limit the artist so strictly to two-
dimensional space as does the square or rectangular page
of the codex. For this reason there is a kind of free en¬
counter between text and ¡mage.
The desire for rationalization or for a division of labour
(between copywriter and illustrator) entails enclosing the
text in a frame (G), but the portrayal of the type of support
material for the writing, scroll (O) or book, may determine
the exact positioning of the text. This is so with the repre¬
sentation of the scrolls of the Prophets in the whole Judaeo-
Christian iconography.
Through a logical series of intermediary stages, these
texts which exemplify the Word, are placed closer and
closer to the mouth of the speaker. On manuscripts (P),
at the time of the birth of the theatre in the .early 13th
century, and in the first printed works (Q) we begin to find
texts in the pictures which are visualizations of speech and
valuable memory aids for improvised public "readings".
The standard book of Western civilization, having become
an intellectual working tool, discarded its illustrations.
Furthermore, methods of reproducing illustrations made
them completely independent of the text.
The popularization of books in the 19th century encour¬
aged printers to invent simpler processes of illustration.
Of these, wood engraving (R) made it possible to include so
many pictures that the book sometimes came to resemble
the picture storybooks (S) of popular literature. The text
set out in captions under the drawings provides an abridged
version of stories to be told to while away an evening.
In the book, skilful typesetting arranged the text round
the illustration, thus creating a kind of visual punctuation
which restored some of the freedom in lay-out that charac¬
terizes the old manuscripts. The strip cartoon (T) uses
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
\ß Detail of prophets
holding scrolls from the
Portico de la Gloria at the
cathedral of Santiago de
Compostella, Spain, with
its scenes from "The Last
Judgment". In medieval
European statuary the
scroll, held partly unrolled
on which the faithful could
read Biblical texts, was
the distinctive sign of the
prophets.
%4 The scroll-like frames enclos¬
ing the dialogue in this 14th
century incunabula, an illustrated
version of the "Song of Songs",
foreshadows the "balloons" of
the modern strip cartoon.
A 14th century miniature showing
the bearded Ramon Llull (1231-1315)
the Catalan writer and alchemist,
presenting his works (condensed Into
3 tomes) to Jeanne de Champagne,
Queen of France and Navarre. Llull
wrote 292 works in Catalan, Arabic and
Latin. Here, the miniature tells the story
In word as well as image.
K It took ten years to prepare the type
and illustrations for this edition of Bernar¬
din de Saint-Pierre's "Paul et Virginie",
published in 1838. Here we see the illus¬
trations encroaching more and more upon
the text
9 "The Adventures of Baron
Munchausen" are famous through¬
out the world for their inven¬
tive fantasy. This German edi¬
tion of the Baron's exploits is
one of the first examples of the
strip cartoon.
A more modern strip cartoon,
"Prince Valiant", by Hal Foster
(U.S., 1963). The text is in the
frame of the illustrations but not
actually integrated with them.

ABC OF TEXT PLUS IMAGE (Continued)
the two systems of text in pictures and pictures in the
text, sometimes both together.
Part of the difficulty of the text-image relationship arises
from the fact that typography accentuates the arbitrary
nature of character design.
The "codex" form also contributes to these difficulties.
Calligraphers (U) tracing letters and drawings with thé
same hand and the same implement maintain a certain
respect for uniformity.
Western calligraphers are at a disadvantage compared
with their Chinese or Japanese counterparts, whose task
is facilitated by a more fluid and expressive writing.
Any writer-poet, any inventor making notes, anyone wri¬
ting a letter is experimenting with the powerful graphic
medium. But some, like Leonardo da Vinci (W) or
Tagore (X) for example, try spontaneously to link drawing
with writing. Then another more complex adventure starts
all over again the one whose paths we have tried to trace
in broad outline from the earliest writings to the annotated
drawings of Matisse (Y), or from Babylonian bas-reliefs to
Ethiopian paintings (V) and contemporary Japanese comic
strips (Z).
.U,~. ~~ A <* |» fc«~ Will
£? j*.fi-í.tt.M~¿..m:
" .au.fi~¿-A-*y¿¿fiit-,VyA a*
Cljfd fflan arvnr /ur¿rjÁi¿.^firA*rc /vas ,riAti>t<-,/ y.
U Text and image by the hand of the
English master of penmanship George
Bickham (1743). The professional penman
gives rein to his craftsmanship not
only in his writing but also in the embel¬
lishments with which he adorns it The
¡mages he draws have a direct relationship
in form and style with the written word.
V The legend of the Queen of Sheba, an Ethio¬
pian painting of the 19th or early 20th century.
The Amharic text accompanies and explains the
illustrations.
si» -- ,
J\. A corrected manuscript of Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941),
the Indian poet, musician, educationist, philosopher and painter.
These highly sophisticated "doodles" recall the great man's paint¬
ings. "My pictures", he said, "are my poetry in graphic form".
Y Matisse was an artist
of many interests. He not
only painted but also had a
special predilection for book
illustration and the associa¬
tion of drawings with the
written word. Here in a
drawing for the magazine
Verve (1945) the design is
in black and white the
actual colours being indi¬
cated by the words "green",
"red", "blue", etc., in the
balloons, leaving the final
¡mage to the reader's Ima¬
gination.
Photos. U, X. Z : Gérard Blanchard Collection. V
W : © Giraudon, Paris. Y : © Spadem, Paris.
© Paul Almasy. Paris.

A page from the notebooks of Leo¬
nardo da Vinci (1452-1519) in which he
jotted down ideas and sketches of his
inventions. The drawings are inextricably
enmeshed with the text which is written
in the famous "mirror-writing" that da
Vinci used.
i- Japanese "Compact Comics" (1970),
recalling the traditional Japanese print
and the "emaki", successors of the Chi¬
nese painted scrolls. Even the world's
first important novel, Japan's 11th cen¬
tury "Tale of Genjl" by Murasaki Shikibu,
appeared in this "Emaki" book form.
"Comics" are now widely used for mass
education in China.

