THE ASHRAM
AT PONDICHERRY
The ¡deals and precepts of Sri
Aurobindo have found expression
in the life and activities of the
spiritual community he created at
Pondicherry, 170 km south of
Madras. From a handful of dis¬
ciples and followers who lived as
members of Sri Aurobindo's house¬
hold, the community, or Ashram,
has grown into a settlement of
1,800 persons seekers after a
life based on spiritual realization.
Community services staffed by its
members now range from weaving
and spinning (photo left) to farm¬
ing, building, handicrafts and metal
work. Handmade paper (bottom
left) feeds the community's print¬
ing press which publishes in
13 languages. Cultural activities
include painting, sculpture, and
music played on traditional Indian
stringed instruments (photo right).
Founded in 1952, the Ashram's
"Sri Aurobindo International Cen¬
tre of Education" today provides
education ranging from kindergar¬
ten to post-graduate studies based
on an experimental "Free Pro¬
gress" method outlined by Sri
Aurobindo.
Photos © Sri Aurobindo Ashram,
Pondicherry

THE IDEAL
HUMAN
UNITY
Poet, critic, scholar and humanist, Sri Aurobindo was a new type of
thinker whom the London "Times Literary Supplement "has described
as "one who combines in his vision the alacrity of the West with the
illumination of the East. " In 1 914, after four years of spiritual contem¬
plation, he launched a monthly philosophical journal, "Arya" in which
he expressed his vision of man and history, his destiny, and the
progress of human society towards unity and harmony. These treat¬
ises, since published as books, were followed by other major works
from the pen of Sri Aurobindo, including the epic "Savitri", a spirit¬
ual poem of 23,000 lines, and "Mind of Light". The following quo¬
tations are from "The Ideal of Human Unity", which first appeared
in "Arya" in serial form between 1915 and 1918. This treatise and
two other works "The Human Cycle" and "War and Self Determi¬
nation" were recently published under the general title, "Social
and Political Thought", as volume 15 in the Sri Aurobindo Birth
Centenary Library by the Sri Aurobindo Ashram, Pondicherry.

by Sri Aurobindo
Today the ideal of human unity is more or less making
its way to the front of our consciousness. The ideal... must
certainly be attempted, and is likely to figure largely
among the determining forces of the future; for the intel¬
lectual and material circumstances of the age have prepar¬
ed and almost impose it...
The State and the individual
We must note one fact in connexion with the claim of
the State to suppress the individual in its own interest:
that it is quite immaterial to the principle what form the
State may assume. The tyranny of the absolute king
over all and the tyranny of the majority over the indivi¬
dual... are forms of one and the same tendency. Each
when it declares itself to be the State with its absolute
"L'Etat, c'est moi," is speaking a profound truth even while
it bases that truth upon a falsehood. The truth is that
each really is the self-expression of the State in its cha¬
racteristic attempt to subordinate to itself the free will,
the free action, the power, dignity and self-assertion of the
individuals constituting it. The falsehood lies in the under¬
lying idea that the State is something greater than the indi¬
viduals constituting it and can with impunity for itself and
to the highest hope of humanity arrogate this oppressive
supremacy.
National conscience and individual liberty
A national culture, a national religion, a national educa¬
tion may still be useful things provided they do not inter
fere with the growth of human solidarity on the one side
and individual freedom of thought and conscience and
development on the other.
Human aggregation and living organisms
The administrative, political, economic organization of
mankind in aggregates of smaller or greater size is a
work which belongs at Its basis to the same order of
phenomena as the creation of vital organisms in physical
Nature. It uses, that is to say, primarily external and phy¬
sical methods governed by the principles of physical life-
energy intent on the creation of living forms.
Liberty and justice
Liberty is insufficient, justice also is necessary and
becomes a pressing demand; the cry for equality arises.
Certainly, absolute equality is non-existent in this world;
but the word was aimed against the unjust and unneces¬
sary inequalities of the old social order. Under a just
social order, there must be an equal opportunity, an equal
training for all to develop their faculties and to use them.
The plague of national egoism
War can only be abolished if national armies are abol¬
ished and even then with difficulty, by the development
of some other machinery which humanity does not yet
know how to form or, even if formed, will not for some
time be able or willing perfectly to utilize. And there is no
chance of national armies being abolished ; for each nation
distrusts all the others too much, has too many ambitions
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
9

THE IDEAL OF HUMAN UNITY (Continued)
and hungers, needs to remain armed, if for nothing else,
to guard its markets and keep down its dominions, colonies,
subject peoples.
Progress and liberty
... All unnecessary restriction of the few common liber¬
ties man has been able to organize for himself becomes a
step backward whatever immediate gain it may bring; and
every organization of oppression or repression beyond
what the imperfect conditions of human nature and society
render inevitable, becomes, no matter where or by whom it
is practised, a blow to the progress of the whole race.
Diversity and unity
. . .Freedom is as necessary to life as law and regime:
diversity is as necessary as unity to our true completeness.
Existence is only one in its essence and totality; in its
play it is necessarily multiform. Absolute uniformity would
mean the cessation of life, while on the other hand, the
vigour of the pulse of life may be measured by the
richness of the diversities which it creates. At the same
time, while diversity is essential for power and fruitfulness
of life, unity is necessary for its order, arrangement and
stability.
The inner liberty
Nature does not manufacture, does not impose a pattern
or a rule from outside; she impels life to grow from within
and to assert its own natural law and development modi¬
fied only by its commerce with its environment. All liberty,
individual, national, religious, social, ethical, takes its
ground upon this fundamental principle of our existence.
to belittle that to which Nature always attaches so insistent
an importance. On the contrary, the inner and the outer
depend upon each other... The peace, well-being and
settled order of the human world is a thing eminently to
be desired as a basis for a great world-culture in which all
humanity must be united; but neither of these unities, the
outward or inward, ought to be devoid of an element even
more important than peace, order and well-being freedom
and vigour of life, which can only be assured by variation
and by the freedom of the group and of the individual.
The ultimate aim: the spirit
A spiritual religion of humanity is the hope of the future.
By this is not meant what, is ordinarily called a universal
religion, a system, a thing of creed and intellectual belief
and dogma and outward rite. Mankind has tried unity by
that means; it has failed and deserved to fail, because there
can be no universal religious system, one in mental creed
and vital form. The inner spirit is indeed one, but more
than any other the spiritual life insists on freedom and
variation in its self-expression and means of development.
A religion of humanity means the growing realization that
there is a secret Spirit, a divine Reality, in which we are
all one, that humanity is its highest present vehicle on
earth, that the human race and the human being are the
means by which it will progressively reveal itself here. It
implies a growing attempt to live out this knowledge and
bring about a kingdom of this divine Spirit upon earth. By
its growth within us oneness with our fellow-men will
become the leading principle of all our life, not merely a
principle of co-operation, but a deeper brotherhood, a real
and an inner sense of unity and equality and a common
life.
10
Democracy
Democracy is by no means a sure preservative of liberty;
on the contrary, we see today the democratic system of
government march steadily towards such an organized
annihilation of individual liberty as could not have been
dreamed of in the old aristocratic and monarchical systems.
It may be that from the more violent and brutal forms of
despotic oppression which were associated with those sys¬
tems, democracy has indeed delivered those nations which
have been fortunate enough to achieve liberal forms of
government, and that is no doubt a great gain. It revives
now only in periods of revolution and of excitement, often
in the forms of mob tyranny or a savage revolutionnary or
reactionary repression. But there is a deprivation of liberty
which is more respectable in appearance, more subtle and
systematized, more mild in its method because it has a
greater force at its back, but for that very reason more
effective and pervading.
Language and tongues
A common language makes for unity and therefore it
might be said that the unity of the human race demands
unity of language; the advantages of diversity must be
foregone for this greater good, however serious the tem¬
porary sacrifice. But . . . language is the sign of the cul¬
tural life of a people, the index of its soul in thought and
mind that stands behind and enriches its soul in action.
Therefore, it is here that the phenomena and utilities of
diversity may be most readily seized more than in mere
outward things . . . Diversity of language is worth keeping
because diversity of cultures and differentiation of soul-
groups are worth keeping and because without that diver¬
sity life cannot have full play; for, in its absence there is a
danger, almost an inevitability of decline and stagnation.
The inner and the outer
In laying stress on culture, on the things of the mind
and the spirit, there need be no intention of undervaluing
the outward material side of life: it is not at all my purpose
The idea of a world-empire imposed by sheer force is In
direct opposition, as we have seen, to the new conditions
which the progressive nature of things has introduced into
the modern world.
Behind the apparent changes of the most radical revolu¬
tions we see this unavoidable principle of continuity sur¬
viving in the heart of the new order.
In the old phrase his (Man's) business is to learn to live
according to Nature.
Man tries to determine the laws of his mind and life and
body, the law and rule of the facts and forces about him.
The present arrangement of the world has been worked
out by economic forces, by political diplomacies, treaties
and purchases and by military violence without regard to
any moral principle or any general rule of the good of
mankind.
The free individual is the conscious progressive: it is
only when he is able to impart his own creative and mobile
consciousness to the mass that a progressive society
becomes possible.
Texts © Sri Aurobindo Ashram Trust 1970, taken from "Social
and Political Thought" by Sri Aurobindo. '
