The "Asherah", a 2-man, electric-powered, research submarine,
named after a Phoenician goddess of the sea, was built for the
University of Pennsylvania Museum in 1964. The first submarine
specially designed for archaeology, it is 16 ft long, weighs four
and a half tons and can dive to over 500 ft to investigate and
photograph sites of suspected wrecks. Twin cameras can be
mounted on the front bar for mapping of sites. A closed-circuit
TV camera can also be mounted to give the crew a view of the
objects found directly below the craft.

The trials
of an underwater
archaeologist
by George F. Bass
8
a decade of direct¬
ing underwater archaeological excava¬
tions in the Mediterranean, I returned
last year to "dry-land" archaeology,
where I had first received field
training as a student. It was the first
time that I had directed an excavation
on land, and I found the difference bet¬
ween the two types of digs enormous.
Within two or three days after arriv¬
ing at Gravina di Puglia, in southern
Italy, we had acquired shovels, wheel¬
barrows, brushes, knives, notebooks,
surveying equipment, artist's supplies,
and wooden trays and plastic basins
for collecting and cleaning pottery
fragments.
We rented housing for our staff of
about a dozen people (mostly archae¬
ology students), established a photo¬
graphic darkroom, set up tables for
sorting and cataloguing our finds, and
obtained a minibus to get us from this
headquarters to the site and back each
day.
Finally, we rented a portion of the
GEORGE F. BASS Js one of the world's most
experienced underwater archaeologists and
a pioneer of techniques for locating and
excavating underwater sites. Associate Pro¬
fessor of Classical Archaeology at the Uni¬
versity of Pennsylvania and Associate Curator
of the University Museum's Mediterranean
Section, he has directed almost annually
since 1960. the Museum's underwater excav¬
ations off the Turkish coast the first
complete excavations of ancient ships In the
Mediterranean. Dr. Bass has written many
studies on aspects of underwater archaeology
and Is the author of "Archaeology Under
Water" (London and New York, 1966) also
published as a Pelican paperback by Penguin
Books, London (1970).
farmer's field we wished to dig, hired
a few workmen, marked off and sur¬
veyed our first trenches, and began
to excavate. All of the preparations
had taken less than a week.
I could not help contrasting this with
the beginnings of each campaign in
Turkey, where we had carried out all
of our underwater excavations. Design,
construction, and shipping of equip¬
ment had begun many months before.
Selection of a staff, including special¬
ists in diving, mechanics, electrical
engineering, photogrammetry, and the
physiological problems of diving, as
well as in archaeology, photography,
drawing, and conservation, had taken
the better part of a year. Because
each staff member would be able to
work for only an hour or less each
day on the underwater site, we needed
many people, usually 30 or more.
Once in Turkey, the job of getting
up to ten tons of equipment through
customs began. Crates arrived from
America, England, France, Germany,
and Italy. Each shipment presented its
own individual problem. The cable for
an underwater television system might
inadvertently be unloaded in Istanbul,
while the TV camera and monitor
would arrive in Izmir. It often took
weeks to recognize and solve such
problems, while the rest of the equip¬
ment sat idle.
The shipping of our research sub¬
marine Asherah required special per¬
mission from the United States Depart¬
ment of State as well as from the
various concerned ministries of the
Turkish government, but once in Turkey
there remained the problem of getting
an 8-ton crate to an isolated spot on
the coast where we planned to use it.
Simply getting the submarine un¬
loaded in an area where there were
no large cranes took weeks. Then, as
once happened, a box containing a
necessary spare part costing only
$5 was delayed in shipment, and
the submarine, costing tens of thous¬
ands of dollars, was useless for
additional weeks.
We tried to have every conceivable
spare part for our sonar, television,
diving equipment, and submarine, but
this proved impossible. On a land
excavation almost any necessary item
may be purchased or rented locally,
but very few of the components for
specialized underwater work are made
in the countries where we have dived;
further, spare parts for equipment made
in different countries are usually avail¬
able only from those countries."
Meanwhile, our mechanics began to
put in operating condition the twenty-
seven pieces of machinery which had
been in storage over the winter:
electric generators, high-pressure com¬
pressors for filling air tanks, medium-
pressure compressors for air hoses,
outboard motors, bilge pumps, pumps
for our water jets, an air-conditioner
for our recompression chamber. Their
engines were fuelled by gasoline,
kerosene, or diesel. Maintenance of
radios, depth-finders, metal detectors,
and underwater telephones were left
to the electrical engineers. And the
captains and crews of the three boats
we hired were responsible for their
own equipment.

Photo © University of Pennsylvania Museum, U.S.A.
Our fifty-foot diving barge was over¬
hauled, launched, towed several miles
up the coast to the shipwreck site, and
anchored directly above. This pro¬
cedure required calm weather; often
we had to wait days or even weeks
for the right conditions.
We dynamited away part of the
rocky coast nearest the wreck so
that we might unload and set up our
four-man, double-lock recompression
chamber weighing three tons along
with its air bank and compressor.
We lowered our submersible de¬
compression chamber into the water
and attached it to five tons of metal
ballast we had built up on the sea bed-,
then we connected the air hose and
telephone line and ran them to a com¬
pressor and speaker on the nearest
land. This job, so simply described,
took days of heavy manual work.
Our underwater telephone booth was
lowered, set in place, and levelled next
to the wreck site; its lines and hoses
ran to a compressor and telephone on
the barge above.
Most of the work described so far
was done by past staff members who
knew enough Turkish to discuss the
most complex mechanical problems in
local machine shops, and who knew
how to dive. Meanwhile, we were
teaching our new staff members simply
how to dive.c Once, out of 25 divers,
only ten had dived before (except for a
short course in a swimming pool I had
required all to take beforehand); by
the end of the summer each was
diving twice a day to work in 140 feet
of water.
I could continue but I think' my point
is made. Even with careful planning,
never once in ten years were we able
to begin actual excavation during the
first month of one of our underwater
campaigns. It usually took an ad¬
ditional week or two to dismantle all
of the equipment at the end of each
season.
Since most of us were teachers or
students, working only in our summer
vacations of slightly more than three
months, it is obvious how extremely
inefficient a major underwater excava¬
tion can be. We have given as
much thought to overcoming this in¬
efficiency as to the archaeology itself.
After ten years of experimentation, we
have at least partially solved some of
the problems which faced us.
I OST wrecks known in the
Mediterranean were located accident¬
ally by sponge divers, sport divers, or
fishermen. Purposeful search patterns
swum by divers, even around danger¬
ous and therefore promising areas, are
too limited by both time and depth
and the deeper the divers go, the less
time they can spend under water.
Thus we turned to various technical
aids. We searched for wrecks down
to a depth of 300 feet by towing a
television camera a few feet above the
sea bed from a fishing boat in which
we sat staring at the television screen.
In spite of the great clarity of the
picture we received by this closed-
circuit system, the method proved in¬
effective because such a small portion
of the sea bed was visible at any one
timej we would have taken months to
search thoroughly an area only a few
square miles in size, even if we could
have navigated precisely enough to
ensure complete coverage of the area.
Staff members, towed at the same
depth in a one-man observation cap¬
sule, called a Towvane (something like
a diving bell with wings), could look
around through a wrap-around, 360°
plexiglas window and see more, but
the range of visibility was still too
restricted. Further, this method placed
a man into the always hazardous world
beneath the waves, which the television
method did not do.
Greater range was gained by turning
to side-scanning sonar. Our sonar
device, towed behind a small fishing
boat, sent sound waves to the sea bed
600 feet on either side of the search
path. On the boat, recorders showed
small dark spots whenever sound
waves bounced back from something
protruding from the flat sea bed; in
each case the spot might indicate
either a rock outcrop or the cargo of
an ancient ship. Now, however, with
the areas restricted and defined, it was
efficient to bring television into play,
lowering it onto each anomaly for
identification.
First, however, it was necessary to
bring our boat directly above whatever
the sonar had detected. For this we «
had, during the search, stationed three M
students about a mile apart on shore,
sighting on our search boat through
transits. Each had a handi-talkie radio.
CONTINUED PAGE 15

10
SDC. This submersible decom¬
pression chamber is a steel
sphere, over 6 ft. in diameter,
which 4 divers can enter through
a bottom hatch. Inside they can
make notes or contact the sur¬
face crew by telephone during
the long periods needed for
decompression.
METAL DETECTOR. Based on
mine-detector principle, this appa¬
ratus indicates presence of metal
by a sound in the operator's
earphones or on a dial near the
handles. Used to find Roman
wreck off Turkish coast and In
archaeological search off Cyprus.
(See also photo above).
TOWVANE. Steel observation
capsule towed behind a trawler.
Pilot has a 360° view through a
plexiglass window and can con¬
trol the capsule by operating side
fins or vanes. Has been used
down to depths of 300 ft Useful
for searching In clear water over
a flat seabed.
TELEPHONE BOOTH. Plexiglass
hemisphere, 4 ft. in diameter, Into
which fresh air is pumped from
the surface. Four divers can
stand Inside, dry from the chest
up, and talk to each other or to
the surface crew. Also provides
an emergency air supply. (See
also photo above).

A
Drawings on these pages show the under¬
water archaeologist's tools. Above, accurate
mapping of a wreck is made much easier by
the use of an iron grid and piping placed
over the site, dividing it into small numbered
squares. The frame can also be used to
support photographic towers, and divers can
lie across the frame when excavating, keeping
knees and fins away from delicate artifacts.
m m
t
\- öS kSH
5*hP^(f ~'* -V
PHOTO TOWER. 15 ft. high, it
rests on a horizontal scaffolding.
Stereoscopic photos can be taken
either by moving the camera bet¬
ween fixed points on its cross
bar at top of tower or by moving
the whole tower between photo¬
graphs. Photos are used to
make stereo maps of the site.
WATER JET. High pressure
water - jets are used to clear
sand etc. from wrecks. Recoil-
less nozzles on these underwater
"fire hoses" prevent the operator
being pushed backwards by the
force of the jet. Can damage
artifacts unless handled with the
greatest care.
AIR-LIFT. A simple pipe to
whose lower end air Is pumped
from the surface. Air bubbles
rising through the pipe suck
water and sand through the pipe
to reveal hidden portions of a
wreck. Rails can be added to
ease the diver's work in mani¬
pulating the heavy pipe.
AMPHORA CARRIER. Silt-filled
amphoras found In most ancient
Mediterranean wrecks are heavy
and difficult to handle. A simple
raft attached to a balloon which
is then inflated by an air hose
can lift as much as half a ton
of cargo to the surface. Basket
seen here carries 20 amphoras.
11

TRIALS OF AN UNDERWATER ARCHAEOLOGIST (Continued from page 9)
2.000 bicycle spokes for a single wreck
Every two and a half minutes, on a
given radio signal, each transit operator
radioed the bearings he was reading
at that moment on the mast of the
boat, and these bearings were used
by a fourth student, on board, who
plotted each position of the boat and,
therefore, the course of the search.
Thus it was possible to return, directed
by radio messages from the transit
operators, to the same spot again and
again.
In this manner, we found three
wrecks nearly 300 feet deep in a few
days. It is impossible, for physiological
reasons, to work so deep breathing
compressed air, and we do not yet
have the equipment or expertise to
dive with the required mixture of
helium and oxygen. When we do,
however, we should approach these
wrecks in the same way as we have
approached those previously ex¬
cavated.
1 O begin the detailed
records and plans which must follow
each stage of an excavation, a site
should be first measured and photo¬
graphed. Normally the cargo, if of
wine jars or stone blocks, will need
to be cleaned of sea growth with
scrubbing brushes to allow more
detailed mapping.
Much of the cargo and all of the
preserved wood of the ship, however,
will still lie invisible beneath sand or
mud, unless the wreck lies on bare
rock (which immediately indicates that
little or none of its wooden hull will
have been protected from shipworms).
Metal detectors and diver-operated
core-samplers can often determine the
extent of the wreck under the sand, as
can simple metal probes; a proton
magnetometer will, additionally, show
deposits of iron.
Once the size and orientation of a
wreck is known, it is a good idea to
build a rigid, level frame or grid over
the . entire site, dividing it into two-
metre squares. This should be as
close above the wreck as possible,
held up on legs; it can accomodate
slopes and mounds by being stepped.
It can be made of angle-iron and pipe,
or, in order to avoid attracting metal
detectors, of plastic irrigation tubing.
This "scaffolding" serves a variety
of purposes. Pairs of excavators can
be assigned to specific squares, identi¬
fied by numbers and letters, to which
they can return again and again, thus
ensuring continuity of effort. Divers
can also lie across the framework
while excavating, keeping their knees
and fins away from fragile remains.
Lastly, and this was its original pur¬
pose, the frame proves an aid in
mapping, either as support for photo
graphic towers or as a reference for
artists.
We now retain our framework mainly
for the first two reasons, since we
have found a faster method of mapping
than with photo towers. We float a
bar horizontally about 15 feet above
part of the site (the ends of the bar
are buoyed by air-filled oil tins, and
kept level by wires running to concrete
blocks below). On the bar are a
series of marks an equal distance
apart. We hang a special camera on
gimbals from the bar so that it points
straight down, and then slide it along
the bar, taking a picture at each of the
marks.
Each two photographs forms a stereo
pair, allowing us to view the wreck in
three dimensions. Further, knowing
the focal length of the camera, we can
use these pairs to make accurate three¬
-dimensional maps of the site by aerial
survey techniques. This requires a
specially ground lens for our camera,
various measured controls on the sea
bed, stereoscopic mapping equipment
on land, and a knowledge of aerial
mapping techniques, but the method
proves remarkably efficient since it
requires a minimum of diving time. A
more sophisticated version of the
method entails taking the photographs
with a pair of cameras mounted on
the bow of our two-man submarine.
Once objects have been mapped in
their original positions, essential for
the eventual reconstruction of the ship,
they may be removed and taken to the
surface. Commercial lifting balloons
of plastic or rubberized canvas, filled
with air on the sea bed from an air
hose or tank, easily raise to the sur¬
face baskets or trays of artifacts
weighing many pounds or even tons.
Once on the surface, objects may be
towed ashore or winched onto a boat.
After the visible cargo has been thus
mapped and removed, it is time to
dig through the sand or mud into the
next layer. For this picks and
shovels being impractical under water
a suction tube, called an air-lift,
may be used.
This is very easily made: tie a
concrete block to around 30 feet of
PVC irrigation pipe four to six inches
in diameter (this plastic tubing is manu¬
factured in every Mediterranean coun¬
try I have visited). Stick the lower
end of an air hose, supplied with air
from a compressor on a boat or barge
on the surface, into one end of the
tube and give the other end an upward
shove. The air inside the tube will
then rush toward this raised end,
floating the entire tube into a nearly
vertical position; the correct length of
rope between the tube and the con¬
crete block, however, will keep the
tube at an angle so that sand and mud
sucked up through it will fall away
from the excavation area. The suction
is caused by the rush of expanding air
going up the pipe.
Heavy air-lifts of metal, reinforced
rubber, or thick plastic used by us, and
most underwater archaeologists in the
past, are completely unnecessary and
impractical. Catch baskets, which
filter out sand but trap small artifacts
inadvertently sucked up by the air-lift,
may be attached to the top of the tube,
but this creates problems of balance.
Wood remains are best excavated
by hand, with the air-lift held just above
to suck away the cloud of obscuring
mud which occurs during excavation.
To keep pieces of wood in their exact
positions until accurately plotted,
sharpened bicycle spokes can be
driven through them into the sea bed,
holding the soft wood in place (we
have used over 2,000 spokes on a
single wreck). Wood fragments, as
well as all artifacts, should be labelled
with numbered plastic tags so that
once raised to the surface they can
be matched with underwater photo¬
graphs and drawings.
of the work described
will require a good number of divers.
The complete excavation of a modest-
size shipwreck about 65 feet long, we
have found in two instances, takes
about 1,200 man-hours on the sea bed;
and each of our divers can dive
normally less than an hour per day,
in two dives. An excavation is
obviously not something which can
be done by two divers on spare
weekends, although this is too
commonly believed by some amateur
divers.
We dive from a 50-foot-long flat
barge, which holds all of our equip¬
ment as well as up to two dozen divers.
These always work in pairs, for safety,
and use either Scuba breathing
apparatus (using compressed-air tanks)
or, especially for longer dives, hookah
or narghile equipment (using hoses
from surface-based compressors).
With the latter method, the diver al¬
ways wears a small tank with its own
regulator for emergency. Additionally,
we leave extra tanks and regulators at
convenient positions on the wreck.
Perhaps our most useful safety
device was actually designed to facilit¬
ate communications between divers,
and between divers and surface col¬
leagues. This Is our "telephone
booth", a plexiglas hemisphere four
feet in diameter, on four iron legs
which keep the top of the transparent
dome about six feet high.
Fresh air is constantly pumped .i r
through a hose from the surface to 1 J)
this plastic bubble, which also contains
a telephone connected to the diving
barge. At a depth of 140 feet, it is
CONTINUED PAGE 38

TRIALS OF AN UNDERWATER ARCHAEOLOGIST (Continued from page 15)
comforting to know that in case of
emergency one can swim just a few
feet away and stand inside the "booth",
dry from the chest up, and breathe
fresh air.
I have emphasized the time limitation
placed on divers. This is due to the
fact that the longer one stays at any
depth, the more compressed air is
being absorbed into the body. This
gas (air) can come out of solution
and form bubbles, causing what is
commonly known as "the bends", if the
diver rises too rapidly to the surface.
To avoid the bends, which can be
crippling or fatal, the diver must
ascend slowly, in stages, following
schedules that control his ascent rate
depending on how deep he has been
and how long he has stayed down.
To work for an hour at the depth we
have most recently been excavating,
140 feet, would require a total time of
over an hour and a half spent in rising
to the surface, or decompressing. This
hour and a half is more time than we
are willing to spend in open water
following each dive especially as we
dive twice a day, six days a week, for
months at a time.
To allow greater decompression
times, making longer working dives
possible, we built a submersible de¬
compression chamber. This is a steel
sphere more than six feet in diameter,
filled with air through a hose. Up to
four divers can enter through a bottom
hatch. Once inside, they can talk,
read, or take notes in relatively dry
comfort while being raised slowly to
the surface.
There are many, many other prob¬
lems. Conservation of material
raised from the sea, for example, is
a complete subject in itself. But most
problems are solved by following two
principles.
The first principle is that safety
comes before all else. After directing
about 8,000 dives to between 100 and
150 feet, I have gained an increasing
respect for the suddeness of possible
accidents, including diving sicknesses
such as the bends and air embolism.
This concern has led us to design such
safety devices as the telephone booth,
submersible chamber, and special
diving rigs. I would not now want to
be responsible for a single dive with¬
out a physician and a first-rate re
compression chamber (for treatment
of bends or embolism) at hand. When
we began in 1960 we had neither. We
were very lucky.
The second principle is that the
work must be done by archaeologists,
assisted by divers and other special¬
ists. The excavation of a seventh-
century Byzantine shipwreck took us
four summers of diving. Its study,
however, has already taken me and
half a dozen colleagues eight years,
and it is still not quite ready for
publication. But already we know how
the ship was built and what she looked
like, and how this contributes to the
history of naval architecture.
Slowly we have pieced together the
history of the ship: when and where
she was built, who sailed on board and
how they lived, her last route, and
when and how she sank. All this
has taught us much about the mech¬
anics of Byzantine trade and about
life at sea thirteen centuries ago. How
much more meaningful this is than a
simple collection of wood and pottery
and metal artifacts in a museum.
George F. Bass

