Left, 14th century merchant ship (known as a cog) on seal of
the Baltic seaport of Stralsund (German Dem. Rep.). A similar
vessel (1400 A.D.) was raised recently from the Weser river
near Bremen harbour.
Photo © Roger Vlollet, Paris

Under
the icy seas
of
northern Europe
by Ole Crumlin-Pedersen
16
I HE North Sea, the Baltic,
and the rivers emptying into them, have
served for thousands of years as
major trade routes in northern Europe.
The traffic was as heavy as in the
Mediterranean, and countless ships
have sunk In these waters. But clim¬
atic and natural conditions make
archaeological investigation here
entirely different from what it is in
the Mediterranean.
The North Sea and the Baltic are
within the continental shelf area, and
depths in excess of 100 metres occur
only at the northerly end of the North
Sea and the Skagerrak, and in parts
of the Baltic. Not only the coastal
waters but large areas of the sea bot¬
tom are accessible for ordinary diving
up to a depth of 50 m.
Wood-destroying organisms are less
prevalent than in warmer, saltier waters
such as the Mediterranean. Ship-
worm (Teredo navalis) does not resist
consistently low temperatures and
OLE CRUMLIN-PEDERSEN, of Denmark. Is
director of the Institute of Maritime Archae¬
ology at the Danish National Museum, Copen¬
hagen. A naval architect, he has been tech¬
nical director since 1957 of the Skuldelev
project for the excavation and recovery of
five ancient Viking ships In Roskilde Fiord,
Denmark. He is director of the Viking Ship
Museum, opened at Roskilde In 1969 to
house the salvaged vessels. This article is a
condensation of the chapter 'Wrecks in the
North Sea and the Baltic', from Unesco's
new book 'Underwater Archaeology"
requires a salinity of 0.9 per cent to
thrive. In waters with a low saline con¬
tent, its attack diminishes as the sali¬
nity of the water diminishes, ceasing
entirely at a concentration of 0.7 per
cent. Hence the whole of the Baltic
is free of damage by shipworm.
Neither can coral-forming organisms
survive under such conditions, so that
wood and other organic material
present are often extraordinarily well
preserved, even when unprotected by
sedimentary deposits. Thus in many
parts of this area conditions favour
the preservation of wrecks.
Shipwrecks occur in considerable
numbers, especially along the major
sea routes, for example off the island
of Anholt in the middle of the Kattegat
at the entrance to the Baltic, and they
make up the largest group of finds.
Between 1858 and 1881 alone, 125
ships were wrecked on the shoals
surrounding this island, and numerous
older wrecks have been found off its
shores.
In the Netherlands, the draining of
the Zuider Zee also uncovered many
wrecks. Within the Noordoostpolder,
the 540 sq. km. section now drained,
156 wrecks, dating from the twelfth
century to the twentieth, have been
recorded.
However, the wreckage of ships is
not all that can be recovered from the
North Sea and the Baltic. On the
Schlei in Schleswig, the remains of a
harbour have been found near the
CONTINUED PAGE 18
Drawing from "Wasa",
by E. Clauson and A. Franzen
© Nordiska Uppslagsbocker, Stockholm

Photo © Staten9 Sjöhistoriska Museum, Stockholm
RAISING THE 'WASA'. In 1961, Swedish salvage engineers raised the warship "Wasa" from the bottom of Stockholm
harbour where it had sunk at the start of its maiden voyage in 1628. Above, the "Wasa" is towed away on a huge
concrete pontoon to a specially prepared museum site. During the unprecedented rescue operation of the "Wasa", lasting
from 1957 to 1961, divers tunnelled passages under the hull for lifting cables, and pontoons raised the 700 ton vessel
from the mud (drawing left). An arduous series of 18 lifting and dragging operations brought the "Wasa" into shallow
water. Divers plugged every hole in the hull, and as pumps emptied the ship at the rate of 7,500 gallons a minute,
it rose slowly to the surface and was towed to a dry dock.
VIKING DRAGON SHIPS. Underwater excavations at
Skuldelev, in Roskilde Fjord, Denmark, in 1957 brought
to light five Viking ships deliberately sunk nearly ten
centuries ago to block the entrance to the fjord. To
uncover the site, a coffer dam was built round the
ships and the area pumped free of water. Above,
reconstruction of one of the vessels, a 16-metre trad¬
ing ship. A Viking warship also found at Skuldelev
Is similar to the 1,100 years old "drakkar" or dragon
ship (photo left) unearthed in 1880 at Gokstad, near
Oslo Fjord, Norway. It had served as the grave
of the Viking king Olaf, who died in 880.
17

18
UNDER THE ICY SEAS (Continued)
Viking settlement of Hedeby and, in
Danish waters, defences in the form
of barriers across channels have been
located in many places, e.g., sunken
stone-filled ships (the Skuldelev ships
in Roskilde Fjord) or long rows of
posts.
Shifts in the level of land and sea
have also submerged valuable archae¬
ological material. In the Early Stone
Age (9000-7000 B.C.) most of the North
Sea, the coastal waters of Denmark
and the western Baltic were all part
of the North European continent, but
by about 5000 B.C. Denmark had
roughly the same waters as now.
Since then, a tipping process has
taken place about an axis running
through Denmark, with a resultant
upheaval in Norway, Sweden and
northern Denmark, whereas subsi¬
dence in southern Denmark and north¬
ern Germany resulted in the submer¬
gence of neolithic burial-grounds and
settlements.
Traces of Stone Age settlements
have been found in many places off
the coast of Denmark. No methodical
examination has yet been made, but
there is every reason to believe that
underwater archaeology will open up
fresh perspectives here, since the
earliest Stone Age coastal settlements
that are today unknown can be
found at depths of from 20 to 30 metres
in Danish waters.
Only in recent years has more sys¬
tematic investigation of archaeological
material in the North Sea and Baltic
areas been undertaken. But the sal¬
vage of objects of historical interest
was begun as early as 1847, when a
diver from a Danish salvage company
found the wreck of a fifteenth-century
ship off Anholt. His finds included
eight wrought iron cannon which were
acquired by Danish museums.
The first true archaeological under¬
water investigation in Denmark took
place in 1943 when the Director of the
National Museum, Dr. Poul Norlund,
together with a professional diver,
examined the wreckage of a medieval
cog in Kolding Fjord.
Because conditions for the preserv¬
ation of wrecks are more favourable in
the North Sea and the Baltic than in
the Mediterranean, important ship finds
have been brought to light which show
how difficult it is to say where the limit
lies between archaeology above and
below water.
The actual salvaging of the Wasa,
the Swedish warship that sank in
Stockholm harbour within minutes
of setting off on its maiden voyage
in 1628, took place in deep water;
the hull was subsequently excav¬
ated, after it had been brought to
the surface. The Zuider Zee excav¬
ations show that wrecks can be suc¬
cessfully excavated on dry land as
they were in the short space of time
after completion of the drainage and
before the ships' timbers began to
rot.
Photo W. Ruoff. Zurich (Switzerland).
Photo © Dimitn Rebikoff