BLUEPRINT FOR A
'LEARNING SOCIETY'
by Antony Brock
UNIVERSAL MAN. Detail of a monumental
sculpture in wrought iron executed by two Turkish
artists, llhan Koman and Cetin Kanra. Inspired
by a famous motif of Leonardo da Vinci, the
complete work is 13 feet high and 30 feet wide.
It figures in a travelling exhibition now touring
Sweden, and is seen here in a Stockholm square.
II F an international commission
which has just reported to Unesco is right, education
throughout the world is likely to change out of recognition
in the next generation.
To begin with, education will start much earlier as the
importance of pre-school education is more widely recog¬
nized; then it will never end, for the signs are that the
concept of lifelong education, already an ideal, is about
to become a practical reality. Examinations, the bane of
every student's existence, may wither away, for they will
be meaningless to people who are learning at their own
pace. Fixed subjects and curricula are likely to go into
the melting pot and schools themselves, if not as physical
locations then at least as places exclusively for children,
are threatened with extinction.
Above all, spirit and aims will change: the emphasis will
be on learning, not teaching, and education's products will
s . i *' >
*n o
i)

not be measured in terms of so much knowledge dispen¬
sed but of completely developed human beings.
The International Commission on the Development of
Education which arrived at these conclusions was called
on to make proposals that would help governments work
out strategies to meet their own educational situations (1).
The Commission drew on educational experience through¬
out the ' world. Furthermore, the composition of the
seven-man commission which included members from
France, Syria, the People's Republic of Congo, the Soviet
Union, Chile, Iran and the United States makes the fact
that they were able to reach wide agreement remarkable
and compelling.
M OR the ordinary reader, two
things are perhaps particularly striking in the Commission's
report: its understanding and even acceptanceof the
reasons for youth's rebellion against present-day education;
its belief that lifelong education Is not just a theory but
already a fact which educational systems should take
account of to help people cope in a changing world where
the quantity of knowledge increases faster than individuals
can keep pace with, and where, in some countries, half the
working population are in jobs that did not exist at the
beginning of this century.
Striking, too, is the commission's analysis of what edu¬
cation has been and is now: in other words, its diagnosis
of what is wrong with it. In the commission's view, man
is a learning animal. Learning is both natural and necessary
to him but the systems he has set up have all had a
tendency to set out to be a system and to end up as a
straitjacket.
Why? Because the tradition they were established to pass
on became a dead weight, because school became an
institution instead of an approach to life, because there
was too much emphasis on the written word, too much
subject-division, too much authoritarianism in a word, too
much school and not enough learning.
The present situation, the commission finds, is paradoxi¬
cal. There has never been so much demand for education
(between 1960 and 1968, the total number of school-age
children in the world increased by 20 per cent); and there
has never been so much dissatisfaction with, and rejection
of, education by the young. Never before has so much
education been provided but never has society so widely
rejected the product of institutionalized education, as the
increased rate of educated unemployed in many countries
goes to show.
What is to be done about the situation? The Commission
does nbt lay down ground rules for the educational sys¬
tems of the world. But it does suggest guidelines, and
from its considerations of the possible strategies to be
adopted a number of watchwords for educational reform
emerge. Among these are democracy, flexibility and con¬
tinuity.
The move towards democracy in schooling has several
causes, Including the general demand for qualified labour
to meet the demands of stepped-up technology. In some
countries ideology is behind the move, in others, the con¬
sequences of decolonization. In some cases the spur is
even the fear of social unrest. But the report points out
that there is a wide gap "between a decision of principle
to provide universal education and the democratization of
the systems, for, as they are currently structured, inequa¬
lity is built into them. "The universal right to education, in
which contemporary civilization takes such premature
pride", says the commission, "is often refused to the most
underprivileged."
Nutrition, family background and factors like housing all
(1) The report of the International Commission on the Development
of Education has been published under the title "Learning to Be' as a
Unesco-Harrap co-edition (see Inside back cover). In addition to the
French language edition ('Apprendre a être', published as a co-edition
Unesco-Fayard, Paris) editions in Arabic, Iranian and Spanish are In
preparation and publication in ten other language editions Is planned.
play a rôle In success at school. Throughout the world,
the disparities between social classes are strikingly reflec¬
ted in university enrolments.
Merely multiplying schools is not the answer. What is
needed is not equal treatment for everybody, but provision
for each individual of a suitable education at a suitable pace
for his particular needs.
Real solutions to the problems of inequality can only
be found in a sweeping re-organization on the lines of
permanent, lifelong education for "once education becomes
continual, ideas as to what constitutes success and failure
will change. An individual who fails at a given age and
level in the course of his educational career will have other
opportunities. He will no longer be relegated for life
to the ghetto of his own failure.
"Human beings, consciously or not, keep on learning
and training themselves throughout their lives, above all
through the influence of their environment."
Recognition of this should bring revolutionary conse¬
quences: not the extension of school by evening classes
but the integration of child and adult education; not the
occasional use of television to supply the lacks of
schooling but whole-hearted employment of media which
already teach as much and more as lessons. Education
"first helps the child to live his own life as he deserves
to do but its essential mission is to prepare the future
adult for various forms of autonomy and self-learning".
Schools, insofar as they continue to exist as we have
known them, cease, under this system, to be reserved
to children and become places of learning for future and
present adults. Pupils cease to regard learning as the
acquisition of a certain quantity of knowledge within a cer¬
tain time; teachers cease to be time-keepers and progress-
chasers and become channels through which pupils can
get at the knowledge they need.
Flexibility, the third characteristic of the education of
the future, is obviously necessary if lifelong education is to
work. As the divisions between subjects are eroded by
advances in knowledge, curricula will have to change to
meet specific needs grown-ups who want to turn to, say,
radio engineering will not necessarily have the time to
plough through the whole syllabus of heat and light before
they come to sound.
In any case, says the report, flexibility is required by
modern conditions. "At the rate technology is advancing,
many people during the course of their working life will
hold several jobs or frequently change their place of work...
Education rarely equips the individual -for adapting to
change, to the unknown. The world has not yét widely
accepted the principle of a general polytechnical educa¬
tion at secondary levelan education which would gua¬
rantee professional mobility and lead to lifelong education."
Yet such an education has given positive results where it
has been tried.
CONSIDERATION of new tech¬
niques occupies a substantial portion of the report. For the
first time since the textbook, the exercise book and the
blackboard were invented, the "hardware" of the teaching
trade has been substantially increased by a wide range of
audio-visual aids, closed-circuit TV and computers.
The focus of all the innovations of the last ten years
is significantly the same: on self-education, on learning, not
teaching.
This being so, the commission believes that the school
"will be less and less in a position to claim the educational
functions in society as. its special prerogative. All sectors
public administration, industry, communications, trans¬
port must take part in promoting education. In the com¬
mission's view, the trend must be towards the "learning
society".
How this learning society might be achieved makes up £
the last portion of this close-packed report, and its twenty- Jj
one recommendations on the directions of tomorrow's
educational strategies provide plenty of material for thought
and argument (see page 20).
