Photo © Dominique Darr, Paris

AUROVILLE
city
open
to the world
This model of Auroville, the cultural township being set up by the Sri Aurobindo
Society a few miles north of Pondicherry ¡n India, shows the city of global unity
spread out like a giant nebula with the golden sphere or "Matrimandir" as its focal
point (see page 12). With its four zonesresidential, industrial, cultural and internat¬
ionalAuroville will eventually cover an area of 15 square miles with a population
not exceeding 50,000. In the cultural zone academies of arts and sciences will
welcome artists and scientists from all parts of the world. In the international zone
pavilions of all nations will serve as embassies of the culture, art and handicrafts
of each country. The city's nebular-shaped layout allows for the integration of the
different zones. The foundation stone of Auroville was laid on February 28, 1968,
and the city is expected to take 20 years to complete. Unesco has invited its member
states and non-governmental organizations to participate in the development of
Auroville as an international cultural township "designed to bring together the.
values of different cultures and civilizations in a harmonious environment", and has
been lending its support to the project as a whole.
11
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

AUROVILLE (Continued)
SPHERE OF UNITY. An overall view of the giant "Matriman-
dir" sphere at Auroville, showing the huge structure as it will look
after completion in a complex of 12 gardens symbolically recalling
the open petals of a lotus flower (see also cover photo caption
page 3). Its golden discs will move gently in the wind and will
cover the concrete walls overlaid with plastic. Pathways from the
gardens pass between walls 30ft. high that will slope down to
form a 12-sectioned crater enshrining the golden ball. Cross-section
of the structure (below), designed by the French architect, Roger
Anger, shows stairways leading to a lower room from which ramps
give access to a 12-sided hall of meditation in this structure of
spiritual unity. At its centre a luminious ball will diffuse light
into both rooms from the top of the structure, which is pierced ver¬
tically down its axis. Opposite, inhabitants of Auroville gather at
the site as it looks at present. The reflections of the sun add an
awe-inspiring note to the scene. The foundations of the Matri-
mandir and the surrounding gardens are being excavated by hand
without the help of mechanical earth-moving equipment.

FREE PROGRESS. One of the first buildings to be completed at
Auroville was a new type of school new in its architectural approach
and in the educational methods used. Below, an international study
group on the role of the arts is seen in -the open air patio of the
new structure. Studies are available for persons of various ages
using a technique evolved by Aurobindo himself called "Free Pro¬
gress". The method seeks to teach students to gain a better know¬
ledge of their own nature and instil a spirit of "belonging to humanity".
Right, one of the first children bom in the new city of Auroville.
Photos © Dominique Darr^ Paris
13
