Students at Peking University make a plaster
reconstruction of the head of Sinanthropus
or "Peking Man", who is believed to have
lived 600,000 years ago. The original
Sinanthropus skulls, found at Choukoutien,
China, were lost whilst being transferred
from Peking during the Second World War,
leaving only a set of plaster casts and
photographs made in the 1930s (see p. 55).
/z

The
puzzle
of Peking
man
by Pierre Leroy
FATHER PIERRE LEROY, S.J.. of the French
National Centre for Scientific Research, In
Paris, was formerly director of the Museum
of Natural History, at Tientsin and of the
Institute of Geobiology, in Peking. He was
a friend and collaborator of Father Teilhard
de Chardin, and Is the author of 'Dans le
Sillage des Sinanthropes" ("In the Track of
Sinanthropus"), Fayard, Paris (1971), which
presents unpublished letter between Teilhard
de Chardin and J. Gunnar Andersson, who
first investigated the Choukoutien site In
China where the remains of Peking Man
were discovered.
I HE discovery near Peking,
in December 1928, of the very early
fossil remains of a man, Sinanthropus,
or Peking Man as he has been named,
was an event of primary importance in
the history of the origins of man.
As early as 1914, the Jesuit priest
and natural historian, Father Emile
Licent, had begun exploring the Basin
of the Yellow River in the north of
China. There he had come across
some important layers of mammal fos¬
sils "dragons' teeth" as the Chinese
called them. Himself no palaeontolo¬
gist, he sent sample fossils to Marcel-
lin Boule, Director of the Institute of
Human Palaeontology in Paris, who
entrusted the task of examining and
cataloguing them to one of his pupils,
Father Teilhard de Chardin. Finally,
in 1923, it was decided that Teilhard
should go to China to examine the
fossil layers on the spot.
A French palaeontologlcal expedi¬
tion was organized during which Li¬
cent and Teilhard explored an area on
the edge of the Ordos desert, to the
north of the Great Wall, where they
discovered important layers of mam¬
mal fossils and some chipped stones
which on examination proved to be
extremely ancient. They concluded
that prehistoric man had once inhab¬
ited these regions, but no human
remains were found which could help
to identify the craftsmen responsible
for fashioning these stone implements.
In 1918, the Swedish geologist
J. Gunnar Andersson, founder of the
Museum of Oriental Antiquities at
Stockholm, was Invited out to China
to explore certain regions in northern
China for mineral deposits.
Johann Gunnar Andersson had
studied at Uppsala University which, in
1710, had become the headquarters of
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
53

54
PEKING MAN (Continued)
the Swedish Royal Academy of Scien¬
ces. Men such as Berzelins and
Linnaeus had made the Academy one
of the most renowned of Its kind in
Europe. Fresh from university, An¬
dersson had taken part in Otto Nor-
denskjold's dramatic expedition to the
South Pole in 1901. After their ship,
"The Antarctic", had been crushed by
the ice, the members of the expedition
were taken aboard the Argentine war¬
ship "Uruguay" and returned to
Sweden in 1903. Andersson became
a professor of Geology and, at the
age of 32, President of the Swedish
Geological Society.
Andersson began prospecting some
forty miles to the west of Peking. It
was a region of bare hills whose lime¬
stone bedrock had opened here and
there and accumulated pockets of sun¬
baked clay, the "red earth" of the
Chinese geologists. Here he discov¬
ered a vast deposit of mammal fos¬
sils in a perfect state of preservation.
So rich was the find that he decided
to postpone its exploration until later,
and in 1920 he returned to the site ac¬
companied by Dr. W.D. Matthew, a
palaeontologist from the New York Mu¬
seum of Natural History, and Dr. Otto
Zdansky, of the University of Uppsala.
In the course of the excavations,
Zdansky found, among the rubble of
bones, two teeth which he was unable
to identify; had they come from a mon¬
key or from a man? Four years were
to pass before this puzzle was re
solved. In October 1926, to the gen¬
eral surprise, Andersson took a definite
stand the teeth found by Zdansky, he
declared, were human, and a hominid
had probably lived at the site of the
find.
Then, two years later, Dr. Birger
Bohlin of Uppsala University, discov¬
ered a perfectly preserved lower
molar In the same quarry. There was
no room left for doubt, it was a human
tooth, and the quarry In which it was
found was to become world famous
the quarry of Choukoutien.
I|T was now certain that
prehistoric man had inhabited the vast
territory of Asia, from south of the
river Yenisei to Peking. But where
were other remains of these creatures
to be found?
The spot to be explored was selec¬
ted on the basis of Andersson's intui¬
tion and the discoveries of his collea¬
gues Zdansky and Bohlin. Since Li-
cent and Teilhard had found no traces
of human skeletons in the Ordos de¬
sert, the search was concentrated on
Choukoutien. With the backing of
the Rockefeller Institute at Peking and
the Geological Survey of China, a
team of Americans, Canadians, Chi¬
nese, Frenchmen and Swedes set to
work.
The enormous mass of earth of the
THE QUARRY
OF CHOUKOUTIEN
Choukoutien hill was systematically
divided up into sections of two metres
square. Each cubic metre of earth
dug up was carefully sieved so that
nothing would be missed.
Dr Pei Wen-chung, formerly a pupil
of the Abbé Breuil in Paris, was in
charge of the excavations. Father
Teilhard, of the Geological Survey of
China, was responsible for the strati-
graphic study of the terrain.
The internationally famous prehis-
torian, Abbé Breuil, was also to play
an important role. He had previously
studied specimens from the Ordos
desert and had found traces of ancient
palaeolithic workmanship quite distinct
from that known in Europe. He was,
therefore, conversant with Chinese
prehistoric tools and his opinions
would be of the greatest value if other
stone tools were found.
In December 1929, the dome of a
skull whether of a man or a monkey
was not known was found lying in
the sand under a limestone overhang.
It was connected, perhaps rather pre¬
maturely, with the human molar found
earlier by Bohlin. Were its discov¬
erers right to dub it Sinanthropus or
Peking Man, or were they led, by
their desire to produce a startling dis¬
covery, to take their dream for rea¬
lity? At all events, monkey or man,
the problem of Sinanthropus had now
been posed. How was it to be re¬
solved? At that time there was no

Photo © Bertll Norberg, Stockholm
Far left, the north side of the
Choukoutien quarry, near
Peking, where the first Sinan¬
thropus skull was found by Dr.
Pei Wen-chung in 1929. Far
right, a Sinanthropus skull seen
from above. During a decade,
14 skulls, 14 lower jaws and
nearly 150 teeth parts of 45
individuals were found at
Choukoutien. Above, Profes¬
sor J. Gunnar Andersson, the
Swedish geologist, who first
explored the Choukoutien site.
Above left, Father Teilhard de
Chardin in 1931, the year he
Identified fragments of quartz
found near the skulls as tools
made by Sinanthropus.
Photo © Teilhard de Chardin Foundation, Paris
means of settling the question, the
skull was so primitive and incomplete
that there was no way of deciding its
real nature.
Two criteria, tools and fire, enable
anthropologists to decide whether
they are dealing with the remains of
animals or men. Tools alone are not
enough, nor is the ability to fashion
them absolute proof of human pre¬
sence. In fact, under certain cir¬
cumstances animals are capable of
making tools. However, they lack the
quality of foresight. Once a tool has
been used for its immediate purpose,
it is abandoned, rather in the way that
a young child may throw its spoon
away after eating its soup, not think
ing that it will be needed again in a
few hours time.
Man is not only a craftsman; his
intelligence enables him to make abs¬
tractions. He makes tools that will
last and this power of abstraction en¬
ables him, unlike the animals, to make
and keep fire. When, therefore, an
anthropologist finds durable tools and
traces of fire beside fossil remains
that could be either of monkeys or of
men, he knows without doubt that they
must be the remains of men.
One day, Easter Monday in 1931, I
had to go with Father Teilhard from
Tientsin to Peking. Teilhard had been
away from China for several months
and he wanted to have a look at the
material from Choukoutien that had
been brought to the Cenozoic Labora¬
tory. This was the laboratory in
which studies were made of the geo¬
logy and palaeontology of the period
from the Tertiary to the present day.
At the laboratory we met Pei Wen-
chung with whom we had a long dis¬
cussion. We were on the point of
leaving, when Teilhard asked him point-
blank, "Hasn't anything really new been
found at Choukoutien?" "No", re¬
plied Pei, "we are still turning up lots
of remains of stag, tiger, hyena and
all kinds of small mammals". Then,
as an afterthought he added, "Oh yes,
I found this." From the drawer of his
desk he took out a few fragments of
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
55

PEKING MAN (Continued)
The bone of friendly contention
between Father Teilhard de Chardin and Abbé Breuil
56
quartz which he handed to Teilhard.
Teilhard did not hesitate for an instant.
At first glance he had seen that these
quartz fragments bore signs of delib¬
erate shaping. "This quartz has been
worked", he said. Pei's delight
knew no bounds. "So these stone
fragments found near skulls must
therefore be Sinanthropus' tools?"
"There Is no doubt about it", replied
Teilhard. "So Sinanthropus was a
man?" "That is my opinion", answer¬
ed Teilhard.
Teilhard was even more sure of his
appraisal since," during his trip to Paris
in the winter of 1930, he had visited
Abbé Breuil at thé Institute of Human
Palaeontology and had placed on his
desk a small stag's antler on which
there was a protuberance. "I shan't
tell you where it came from", he told
the Abbé, "but what do you make of
this object?"
"It was heated shortly after the ani¬
mal was killed", replied the Abbé,
"and it Is an implement fashioned by
man by hammering the remains of the
animal's forehead with a stone ; the
marks of the stone's impact can be
seen on the stem". "But it comes from
Choukoutien", replied Teilhard. "1
don't care where it came from", replied
Breuil, "my conclusion remains the
same".
The quartz fragments found by Pei
seemed, .therefore, to confirm , the
great prehistorian's opinion. It was
immediately decided to send some
quartz samples to Breuil in Paris so
that he could give his opinion on this
vitally important matter.
Without waiting for the Abbé's reply,
Teilhard left for Kalgan where he was
to rejoin the Citroen motorized scien¬
tific expedition which was about to set
out for central Asia.
Meanwhile, at the invitation of the
Rockefeller Foundation, Abbé Breuil
went to Peking, towards the end of
1931. He wanted to examine the Chou¬
koutien site for himself. He did not
support the view held by the anatomist,
Davidson Black, his former pupil Pei
Chen-wung, and his friend Teilhard,
and his preliminary assessment was
that Sinanthropus was not a man. He
thought that he was more likely to
be some kind of game on which early
man had fed, throwing his bones,
along with tools and implements made
from stags' antlers, into the Choukou¬
tien quarry. Examination of the
quartz fragments showed plainly that
they were deliberately fashioned,
clearly recognizable tools. Yet there
was nothing to support the conclusion
that they were the work of Sinanthro¬
pus.
This was how things stood when
Teilhard returned to Peking after a
long and wearisome journey across
Asia. He immediately took up his
work at the Cenozoic Laboratory. In¬
formed by friends of Breuil's doubts,
he re-examined all the samples brought
back from Choukoutien, comparing
them with the Sinanthropus remains
beside which traces of fire had now
been found in the form of a layer of
cinders twelve centimetres thick.
Why did Breuil have such strong
reserves, and how had he come to
think up the Improbable theory of the
hunter and his game? The reason was
that he could see no possible chrono¬
logical link between the remains of
Sinanthropus and the perfection of the
stone and bone tools he was sup¬
posed to have used.
Teilhard was not a man to allow
himself to be influenced only by
"points of view". He wanted to base
his judgement on concrete evidence,
and he communicated his own observ¬
ations to Breuil. After several letters
had been exchanged between the two
men, Teilhard was unable to convince
Breuil and Breuil failed to shake Teil-
hard's convictions.
'PEAKING about Teilhard,
Breuil wrote, "To my great regret he
continues to stick to his original stand¬
point. While Teilhard is a wonder¬
fully good observer of a geological
site and an excellent palaeontologist,
he was not trained in technical prehis¬
toric studies and the industrial aspects
are beyond him."
The point at issue between the two
men was that, for Teilhard, the quartz
tools found were the work of Sinan¬
thropus, while for Breuil, the fact that
tools made of bone were also found
made this hypothesis seem extremely
doubtful.
The more value Teilhard placed on
the stone industry as indicative of the
capabilities of Sinanthropus, the less
sure he was of the specific nature of
the bone industry. In a letter dated
June 17, 1932 to his friend George Bar¬
bour he wrote, "A study on the stone
Industry of Choukoutien will appear
in the next Bulletin (of the China Geo¬
logical Survey). It puts forward a
more cautious view than that of Breuil.
I don't believe that a systematic bone
industry existed at Choukoutien."
A few months earlier (March 20,
1932) he had expressed the same
opinion in a letter to J.G. Andersson:
Concerning Choukoutien, you have
received Pei's paper (and possibly
Breuil's too) on the newly discovered
industry. Since these two papers
were published we have collected or
uncrated a large number of new sam¬
ples including a large series of chipped
boulders. I am sorry not to be in
full accord with my dear friend Breuil.
My present feeling is as follows:
1) The stones are certainly artifacts.
2) But, even in the case of the finest
specimens in quartz-crystal, the indus¬
try looks very primitive. I have been
unable to recognize any true "pointe",
for instance, nothing anywhere near
comparable with the Mousterian points
in quartz-crystal found in France.
3) The bone and antler industry
seems to me to be more than ques¬
tionable. I think that Breuil has been
deceived by appearances which occur
in any bone deposit. Logically he is
led to recognize a similar industry in
the Nihowan Saumerian beds, a sup¬
position which, so far, cannot be ad¬
mitted.
I hate this disagreement with Breuil,
since I like him awfully and since I am
partly responsible for his coming to
Peking. But what can I do?
The most critical point is to prove
that, without any ' doubt, the tool-
maker was Sinanthropus himself. But
the fact that the jaws and a piece of
skull were found together with the
tools seems as convincing as possible.
I am preparing with Pei a new paper
on this question. What a pity you
cannot come here for at least a few
weeks. We need youl
Good luck in your work.
Teilhard de Chardin.
Teilhard and Davidson Black were
on their way back from the 1933 Inter¬
national Geological Congress of
Washington when a cable reached
them from Peking announcing a discov¬
ery which could either decisively clarify
or further complicate the situation at
Choukoutien.
At the very top of the hill of Chou¬
koutien, where the site had been
broken up by previous excavations, a
trench had been dug and a shaft sunk,
at Teilhard's request, to give sideways
access to the Sinanthropus layer at
the bottom left of the excavation ditch.
CONTINUED PAGE 65

THE PUZZLE OF PEKING MAN (Continued from page 56)
In the course of this operation the
workmen discovered under the sedi¬
ment, at the top of the hill, a well pre¬
served cave, which became known as
the Upper Cave. It had been used as
a refuge by animals and by men.
Human remains, including three well-
preserved skulls of a much more
recent period than Sinanthropus, were
mixed with fossilized skeletons of hye¬
nas, bears, wild goats, tigers and
stags, and ostrich and civet bones.
Amid all this confusion lay evidence
of a quite different culture, fairly close
to the neolithic pierced teeth and
shells, more finely fashioned stone,
bone necklaces and polished stag
antlers.
One very important fact emerged.
A close study of this material and a
comparison of it with that found at
lower Choukoutien and the Ordos
desert revealed a number of affinities
and resemblances. Perhaps this was
due to the similar nature of the stone
raw material found on these sites:
quartz, hyaline, silicified limestone and
chalcedony, as well as pebbles used
for hammering.
Nevertheless, the man of the Upper
Cave, more advanced and a better
workman, had found a way of piercing
shells, teeth and even stones with
which to make necklaces, and the or¬
naments were always found in the
immediate vicinity of the skulls. The
industry of the Upper Cave belongs
to the close of the Palaeolithic era;
we are now at the beginnings of the
advanced era of shaped stone, the
Neolithic era.
Thus the discoveries made ¡n the
Ordos desert in 1923 took on new
meaning. The heterogeneous stone
industry uncovered by Licent and Teil¬
hard was probably the work of men
of differing races, brought to this
place by migratory waves. It has
links with Mousterian, Aurignac and
Magdalenian industry. The man or
men of Ordos fill an intermediary posi¬
tion between the two fossil forms
found near Peking.
Prehistoric men, one group as old
as Pithecanthropus, the other more
recent, Homo sapiens, inhabited the
Choukoutien site, using, at an inter¬
val of some tens of thousands of years,
the same raw materials for their indus¬
try a primitive industry of uneven yet
also inestimable value to the anthro¬
pologist, having specific, distinctive
characteristics readily detectable to
specialists.
As far as the bone industry of the
Sinanthropus period is concerned, al
though it was positively identified and
defended by Abbé Breuil, it remains a
subject of controversy to this day.
The friendly, scientific quarrel bet¬
ween Teilhard and Abbé Breuil was
never finally resolved, each of them
maintaining his own position. Was
this necessarily a bad thing? I do not
think so. It shows us how far a scru¬
pulous study of facts can leave men
of science divided when they are con¬
vinced that their reasoning is rigor¬
ously objective.
Although, as far as I know, Abbé
Breuil never went back on his opinion,
he nevertheless sided with the spe¬
cialists. Like them he saw in Sinanthro¬
pus a representative of a race of men
in the full sense of the word, that is to
say, capable of handling fire and
making use of quartz and pebbles in
a way essential for his survival. What
he did not accept was that all the stone
and bone tools found in the Choukou¬
tien layer were made by Sinanthro¬
pus.
Let us hope that today's Chinese
geologists and anthropologists will
reap as rich a harvest as their prede- nr
cessors.and that, one day, they will QQ
give us the long-awaited answer.
Pierre Leroy
