A 21-POINT
PROGRAMME
for a global
strategy
in education
Lifelong education should be the keystone of all educational
policies in the years ahead, in industrially-developed as well
as developing countries.
The concept of lifelong education
could be applied in as many different
ways as there are countries in the
world. For all countries this question
is the crucial issue of our time.
Educational reforms recently pro¬
posed In Peru, for Instance, call for
a complete restructuring of education,
in and out of school, based on the
principle of lifelong education. Going
far beyond a reform of teaching, the
proposals are directly geared to radi¬
cal structural changes in Peruvian
society. They guarantee each per¬
son's right to choose the education he
prefers, and they aim to create an
education "based on an educational
community designed for dialogue and
responsible participation."
A striking Innovation is the proposal
to split all Peru's educational services
and programmes into "cells", with
communal education cells as the direct
concern of the local community, and
with schools, colleges, universities and
other educational Institutions forming
an Independent network.
20
Lifelong education presupposes a complete restructuration of
education. Education must cease being confined within school
walls. Education should become a true mass movement.
Today's tremendous demand for
education and the demands of tomor¬
row will not be met by present types
of educational systems. Rigid internal
structures need to be broken down
and education offering a far more
varied choice should be made widely
accessible.
In Canada, the Educational Planning
Commission in Alberta Province has
recommended that educational reforms
be centered on the idea of lifelong
education. "Education", it says, "should
develop ability to learn under a variety
of circumstances and conditions, on a
part-time basis, at home using a
variety of methods, and in Informal
settings... We believe that the school-
dominated, classroom-centered, full-
time, teacher-oriented, eight-hour,
eight or ten-month system is an
expensive one, and apart from the
demands of further population in¬
creases, very little additional invest
ment should be placed in this form of
education."
"Lifelong education," in the Com¬
mission's view "Is an integration of
learning Into our work and leisure.
Learning we see as a process of man's
growth towards fulfilment as an
Individual as well as a member of many
groups in societies... The time has
come to accept the principle that edu¬
cation is life and life is education."
CONTINUED PAGE 22

21

21 POINTS (Continued)
Education should be provided in many ways. What counts is
not how a person has been educated, but what real knowledge
he or she has gained.
Everyone should have greater free¬
dom in choosing what to study, and
interruption of studies should not bar
anyone from resuming them later.
Full-time education, part-time educ¬
ation and education by correspondence
as well as the many forms of self-
education should be regarded as
equally valid and interchangeable in
order to meet a student's needs and
interests.
Many possibilities for education and
learning are available in virtually all
countries and cover a vast spectrum,
ranging from closed systems that tend
to be selective and competitive to
open systems that are generally non¬
selective and more loosely structured.
A great variety of educational activities
and institutions fall between the two
extremes. They Include on-the-job
training, agricultural extension ser¬
vices, community development centres,
clubs, co-operatives, labour and poli¬
tical organizations, etc.
An effort to broaden access to
higher education and offer greater
freedom of choice has been made In
the United States with the "University
Without Walls" programme (similar
experiments have been made in
several other countries).
In the U.S., participating institutions
at present include Antioch, Bard, Hof-
stra, Loretto, Heights, Montelth,
Nasson New College (Sarasota),
Northern Illinois State, Sarah Law¬
rence, Shimer and Stephens.
Basically, the University Without
Walls features: admission for anyone
between 16 and 60 wishing to continue
his or her studies; programmes design
ed to meet individual students' needs
and interests; Inventories of inform¬
ation sources (tapes, texts, laborator¬
ies, personal contacts, etc.); the
possibility for each student or group
of students to organize his or their
own studies; the obligation for each
student to spend at least half the
university year In a campus experi¬
mental centre; and a continual dialogue
between student and tutor.
The University Without Walls teach¬
ing staff includes professors and
teachers attached to a particular
campus, visiting experts from agricul¬
ture or business, scientists, artists
and politicians. A student wishing to
obtain a university degree merely
registers to sit an examination when
he feels ready to do so.
Artificial or outdated barriers between different branches and
levels of education and between formal and non-formal edu¬
cation should be abolished.
The introduction of a global, open
educational system would call for:
greater freedom of movement from
one level or place of education to
another; the right, at the end of com¬
pulsory schooling, to go on studying
or take a job (without forfeiting the
possibility of resuming studies later
on); the opportunity to enter higher
education without having previously
completed the period of formal school¬
ing traditionally required; broader
opportunities for combining work and
education.
All this, in turn, presupposes that
students would be able to leave and
rejoin the education system to suit
their needs; that education and labour
laws would be made more flexible;
that study grants now given to young
people would be gradually extended to
adults; and that workers who wished
to begin or resume studies would be
given greater facilities to take leave
from their employment.
One developing country, Sri Lanka
(Ceylon) has considered the adoption
of a "recurrent" educational system
of this kind. Among other features, It
includes:
the award of an end-of-study certi
ficate to the majority of young people
completing initial education;
immediate admission of a small
number of certificate holders to pre-
university studies;
orientation of all others towards
jobs or technical or professional
education;
the right of all to apply for ad¬
mission to pre-university studies after
two or three years, with selection
based on aptitude tests reserved for
those who have acquired pro¬
fessional experience or working skills.

Education for pre-school-age children should be a major objective
for educational strategies in the 1970s.
22
Education for pre-school-age children
(from the age of 2 or 3) should be orga¬
nized on a free, flexible pattern, finding
the best ways of getting families and
local communities to work together
and share expenses.
Mass communication media are
especially useful in this work when
pre-school education has to be brought
quickly to a large number of children,
especially those living in environments
with a limited cultural background.
Pre-school education is extensively
developed in the People's Republic of
China. Kindergartens are Imaginatively
organized, daily or weekly, to take
care of children aged from 3 to 7.
Some kindergartens are attached to
primary schools; others are provided
by factories or village or district autho¬
rities, or are organized and staffed by
street committees, including many
voluntary helpers. Assistance comes
from many people, especially grand¬
parents.
In the U.S.S.R., more than 9,500,000
children are currently enrolled in
crèches and kindergartens. The kol-
koz pre-school educational establish¬
ments, functioning either permanently
or seasonally, take care of a further
3 million children. Research in recent
years at the pre-school Education
Institute of the Soviet Pedagogic
Sciences Academy and In other insti¬
tutions has shown that young children
are capable of acquiring knowledge,
intellectual aptitudes and moral qua-

lities previously thought to be access¬
ible only to much older children.
The most important audio-visual
educational experiment aimed at pre¬
school-age children so far is the
Sesame Street programme in the
United States, and now extended to
Latin America.
It aims to prepare pre-school-age
children from underprivileged envi¬
ronments to enter school in circum
stances similar to those of the average
child. The programme is directed
especially at the working population
in poor districts without kindergartens,
but where nine families out of ten have
a television receiver.
Villagers in the Casamanca region
of Senegal have organized, financed
and are now operating some thirty day¬
care centres under the guidance of
social services. They function during
periods when village men and women
are entirely occupied with work on the
land.
The centres take care of all children
aged from 1 to 7, and also school-age
children before and after school hours.
Staff are recruited on the spot, and
are remunerated in kind or by having
their fields cultivated for them. In
one way or another, everyone in the
village helps the centres.
Millions of children and young persons are still deprived of
education. Universal basic education, geared to national needs
and resources should be a priority objective of educational poli¬
cies for the 1970s.
Global efforts to make primary
education available to all are a long-
term project.
But flexible arrangements that
enable greater use to be made of
existing school space can do much
to remedy the harmful effects of
today's "famine" in education. Such
formulas Include part-time primary
education, combined primary education
for children and adults and special
teaching programmes for teenagers
(12 to 16), especially those who have
not previously attended school.
Tanzania, for instance, uses its inte¬
grated primary schools as centres for
the development of human resources,
serving the whole community.
Classrooms with mobile partitions
are used for adult education, as day¬
care centres and kindergartens, and
large multi-purpose rooms serve,
among other uses, as training centres
for village industries.
igid distinctions between different branches of education
should be removed. Education, from primary and secondary
levels, should have a combined theoretical, technological, prac¬
tical and manual character. I
Technological education will need
to be developed if general education
is to become "general" in the full sense
of the term.
The teaching of general subjects
can produce its full educational value
only when a careful balance is main¬
tained between theoretical studies
and practical work.
In the German Democratic Republic,
for Instance, polytechnic education is
an integral part of the ten-year basic
educational cycle. Polytechnic educa¬
tion Is based on the interaction
between teaching theories and me¬
thods and technology. Research teams
have developed entirely new concepts
for polytechnic education, and the
results of experience and practice are
used as a feedback for further studies
and research.
In polytechnic education, practical,
manual work begins in the first grades,
and from the seventh grade includes
four hours weekly of pre-vocational
training in industry or agriculture or
in polytechnic institutions where stu¬
dents do practical work. The aim is
to familiarize students with techniques
and industrial processes rather than
train them for specific jobs.
"Family hostels", found mainly in
France and Italy, in rural areas with
set traditions, have devised experi¬
mental methods of education.
Their objectives are to avoid uproot¬
ing children at too early a stage in
education; to help children with a
deprived cultural background; to dev¬
elop education that promotes in¬
dividual motivation and is oriented
to local conditions.
Education should aim not only to train young people for spe¬
cific jobs, but also equip them to adapt to a variety of
occupations I
Though education has a major role
to play In vocational training, edu¬
cation systems of the traditional type
are unable to provide training that
keeps pace with the changing job
requirements of modern industry.
What the school can and should do
is to provide a solid grounding of
knowledge, and develop understanding
of scientific principles and the ability
to apply them technically.
In the U.S.S.R., one of the most
fruitful means adopted for achieving
universal secondary education while
leaving general school education its
leading role has been the develop
ment of professional and technical
schools which offer a secondary
education running parallel with pro¬
fessional specialization. The 1971-1975
development plan of the Soviet Union
provides for the training of 9 million
specialists who have had special or
secondary education.
CONTINUED PAGE 26
23

BOTANICAL GARDEN
FOR THE BLIND
In this botanical garden at Horw, near Lucerne (Switzerland), the
blind can associate the smell of a flower with its name inscribed
in Braille on a metal plate. Braille, invented in 1829 by the
Frenchman Louis Braille, consists of raised dots arranged in a
different order to represent each sound. All the phonemes of
a language can be transcribed by 63 different characters,
first invented, Braille was applicable only to French and its adapta¬
tion to other languages and its standardization was due to efforts
made in 1949 by Unesco, and by the adoption in 1950 of the
principle "one sound, one sign". International Book Year, 1972,
has seen the launching of a "Books for the Blind" campaign,
organized through the Unesco Gift Coupon Programme, which
aims to provide Braille and "talking" books for blind people
everywhere. As part of this campaign Unesco organized a gala
evening in Paris on September 25 starring the brilliant Amer¬
ican star Sammy Davis Jnr. and the popular French singer Sylvie
Vartan. The public responded warmly to this appeal by Ur.esco
on behalf of the blind, packing the theatre to see two great
artists who generously performed without fee to make this gala
an outstanding success.
	;	 -> *
^- ' 'tí r
H9B
<£ -
21 POINTS (Continued from page 23)
Responsibility for technical training should not fall exclusively
on the school system. It should be shared by schools, business,
industry and out-of-school education.
To meet its growing obligations in
technical training, education needs
the help of many other institutions.
This calls for active co-operation bet¬
ween educators, leaders of business
and industry, workers and govern¬
ments. In many countries, private and
publicly owned firms allocate part of
their profits to educating and training
their personnel. This practice should
be more widely adopted.
Japan has a highly organized system
of technical and vocational training
supported by business and industry.
At the beginning of this century, the
larger companies established their
own apprentice-training facilities. To¬
day, industrial plants participate in
the public vocational-training program¬
me supervised by the Ministry of
Labour. This comprises 407 training
centres with an enrolment of more
than 100,000 trainees.
In addition, most large firms have
within-industry training programmes
to provide initial instruction for new
employees, re-training and upgrading
of skilled workers, supervisory train¬
ing and management development
courses. The Yawata Iron and Steel
Company, employing 50,-OOQ persons,
is a typical example. Its policy is to
encourage all employees to improve
their skills through daily on-the-job
training given by their ¡immediate
supervisor. The programmes cover
the training of workers and foremen,
clerical and engineering staff and top
management personnel.
Higher education should be expanded and made varied enough
to meet individual and community needs. Traditional attitudes
towards the university must change.
26
Public acceptance of new kinds of
higher education institutions would
help to relieve pressure on presently
overloaded universities of the tradi¬
tional type. It would also enable uni¬
versities to reform their entrance
criteria, basing them less on candi¬
dates' school credits and diplomas
than on their motivations and pro¬
fessional aims. Higher education
would thus become accessible to a
wider range of entrants post-graduate
students, workers and professional
men and women requiring more
advanced training or "recycling"
courses.
The French university centre of Vin-
cennes, which now has twenty-six
departments, employing 400 full-time
teachers and many other lecturers
handling some 12,000 students, aims
to admit a maximum number of work¬
ers and students who have not passed
the French secondary school-leaving

-
21 POINTS (Continued)
Development of adult education, in and out of school, should
be a priority objective of educational strategies during the next
ten years.
Adult education can have a direct
bearing on the progress of children
in school, since primary education
and the educational level of parents
cannot be disassociated. Children
cannot be properly educated in an
illiterate environment. Thus, adult .
education can no longer be a fringe
activity in any society. It should be
given its proper place in educational
policies and budgets, and firm links
established between school and out-
of-school education.
Step-by-step progress in adult
education Is not sufficient to meet the
present situation which calls for a
giant leap forward. This can only be
achieved by mobilizing the efforts and
resources of individuals and of public
bodies.
Yugoslavia's "workers universities-
provide both formal and out-of-school
education and are open to all adults
whatever their earlier training, the
only criteria for admission being indi
vidual aptitude. Courses are offered
at all levels, ranging from elementary
education to instruction in specialized
subjects for highly qualified workers.
Programmes . are adapted to local
conditions and are diversified accord¬
ing to community and individual needs.
Equal importance is attached to func¬
tional education (for professional,
civic or social progress) as to a
person's general and cultural develop¬
ment.
IB All literacy teaching should be geared to a country's objectives
in social and economic development.
Literacy teaching should have two
basic aims: functional literacy among
sections of the' working population
where incentive for literacy Is greatest;
mass literacy where social conditions
for development political, economic
and cultural enable the mass of the
people, to participate.
A mass literacy campaign is justified
to the extent that it enables thé people
as whole to share in improving local
conditions. Mass campaigns should be
promoted and supported by a wide
use of mass media, particularly radio
and television programmes.
Functional literacy, which is tailored
to the needs and literacy problems of
individual communities or areas, calls
for in-depth studies of local conditions
before being launched. One example
of a campaign based on this principle
is the functional literacy project in
Isfahan and Dez (Iran). Studies cover¬
ing economic, social, vocational and
demographic aspects of the areas
were the basis for 15 programmes
linked to the needs and learning in¬
centives of illiterate persons.
This ensured that literacy teaching
was integrated into a simultaneous
learning process which gave priority
to vocational training.
28
Aids to self-education, including language laboratories, libraries,
data banks, and audio-visual equipment, should be integrated
into all education systems. I
New paths taken by education and
an expansion of educational facilities
have helped to promote the principle
and practice of self-learning. Everyone
ought to be provided with the means,
tools and incentives for making self-
learning a productive and rewarding
activity.
Self-education, which has been far
too often neglected as an objective,
.should have its place in the educa¬
tional strategies of every country.
Even countries with limited resources,
should allocate part of the educational
budget to the development of self-
learning among priority groups of the
population.
An inquiry into self-education was
made in Canada by Prof. Allen Tough
and associates at the Ontario Institute
for Studies In Education. Carried out
among several hundred teenagers
and adults engaged in self-learning
projects, it revealed the broad scope
and possibilities of self-directed learn¬
ing in many fields. It also showed
that learners sought the help of a
wide range of persons, other than
teachers and librarians an indication
that many non-specialists qualify as
"teachers" in individualized learning.
Rapid, cheap and easily available
means such as radio should be more
widely used for mass education, parti¬
cularly in rural areas. Where resour¬
ces allow, modern communication
media would be effective as teaching
aids in many branches of education
higher technical education, for exam¬
ple.
A striking example of education via
the mass media Is the Tevec project
in 0ueDec (Canada) designed to bring
adults who have not completed nine
years of schooling up to that level.
The programme comprises "scholas¬
tic" subjects (French, English mathe¬
matics, etc.), and a theme chosen from
a variety of topics (health, the law,
community participation, social welfare,
government) aimed at fostering an un¬
derstanding of daily life in a rapidly
developing society and stimulating
citizen participation.
Methods used in the project have
included: 90-minute television pro¬
grammes, five days a week; corres¬
pondence courses (averaging 15,000
reply cards daily); personal contact
between participants and teachers
(regular visits to homes every three
weeks) and weekly tele-club meetings
to discuss the topic presented. Sampl¬
ing surveys show that 35,000 persons
viewed the programmes regularly, and
110,000 saw them more than once a
week.

In the U.S.S.R., from five to eight
hours of special TV programmes for
teachers and children are broadcast
daily. The teachers' programmes bring
to the TV screen educators, psycho¬
logists and other specialists in educat¬
ion. Children's broadcasts aim to
supplement classroom learning on
some of the most advanced and im
portant subjects in the school pro¬
gramme. Many other radio and TV
programmes serve as guides to par¬
ents on problems of family education
and child and teenage psychology.
Other aids to selective, individual
education include video-tape cassettes
and cartridges which may be plugged
into a television receiver, and the
video disc, which is used in conjunc¬
tion with a video player. These com¬
paratively low-priced aids offer rapid
and selective access to programmes
which can be repeated as often as
required, factors which promise a
wealth of possibilities for the future.
Education systems should be conceived and planned in terms
of possibilities offered by new educational techniques.
Thus far, school systems have gen¬
erally been unable to make system¬
atic use of new possibilities offered
by technological and scientific pro¬
gress.
Mass communication technology is
currently developing in two opposite
directions: towards individualization of
education (as in programmed learning)
and towards mass distribution (as in
educational TV programmes by satellite
transmission).
One new technique is the use of
direct-wire television which makes it
possible to relay more than twenty
programmes simultaneously to the
entire subscriber network, or to serve
one subscriber with a single pro¬
gramme selected from a range of
several dozen.
Mass transmission techniques capa¬
ble of making education available to
millions of children and adults Include
two of great importance for developing
countries: radio and communications
satellite relays.
Radio is the only advanced com¬
munication technique which has found
Its proper place in developing coun¬
tries. Yet, insufficient educational use
is made of this virtually universal
means of communication.
Space communications have de¬
veloped at a staggering speed. Five
years after the first sputnik was
launched in 1957, Telstar was orbited,
in 1962; the first operational satellites,
Early Bird (United States) and Molnya
(U.S.S.R.), were placed in orbit three
years later. More than eighty nations
participate in Intelsat, which recently
orbited the first of the Intelsat IV
series, capable of relaying 6,000 tele¬
phone calls simultaneously.
For the moment, however, national
spatial telecommunications systems
are of interest only to regions with
a common language, to very large
countries such as India, Brazil and
Canada or to a few with disconnected
territories such as Indonesia and
Japan. Economically and technically,
it would not be feasible or justified
to carry out nationally organized pro¬
grammes virtually anywhere else.
Satellite-relayed broadcasting will
therefore have to be handled on a
multi-national scale, on the lines of
the Latin American cultural integration
scheme (SERLA) or the Franco-Ger¬
man 'Symphony-Socrates' project for
Africa south of the Sahara, for
example.
The development of data processing
also opens new paths for education.
Computers, particularly, render mul¬
tiple services ranging from aid to
management and research to strictly
didactic uses.
Universities and other educational
establishments in the United States
contain an estimated 3,000 computers,
or about 6 per cent of all computers
operating In that country. In the Soviet
Union systematic use is made of
computers at Sverdlosk University
and in technological Institutes at
Minsk, Kiev and Lvov. Computers
are used for experimental purposes in
the German Democratic Republic and
in Prague, Czechoslovakia. Of about
4,000 computers in Japan, some 200 are
used for teaching in universities. In
the United Kingdom, almost all
teaching computers are in the univer¬
sities, while many universities in the
Federal Republic of Germany have
also acquired computers.
In the school itself, architecture is
bringing changes. The classroom is
no longer necessarily a "compartment"
for thirty or forty persons. Many
schools have novel and original inter¬
ior layouts. Multi-purpose areas with
mobile partitions and separate booths
can be adapted at will to large or
small groups or to individual study.
Large areas may be used for debating.
The school is becoming a club, a
workshop a documentation centre, a
laboratory and a place of assembly
rolled into one. Student-space
arrangements, timetables, staff distrib¬
ution and allocation of equipment all
tend to be more mobile, and the
institution more flexible and better
adapted to social and technical dev¬
elopments. ,
ICTTeacher training programmes should
latest teaching aids and methods.
make full use of the
New resources provided by educa¬
tional technology should be system¬
atically introduced into teacher training
colleges. These institutions should be
progressively transformed into perma¬
nent training centres and opened more
widely to specialists in other fields
who are needed for short-term or part-
time teaching assignments.
Teacher training colleges will have
to give special training to future
educators in the supervision and
co-ordination of the new, mechanized
educational systems. It will also be
necessary to train specialists to devise
and revise curricula, produce new
teaching material and develop fresh
methods of work guidance and eval- yQ
uation. ^*»
The development of education will
necessarily involve an increase in the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

21 POINTS (Continued)
t>
rr,
J
Photo 0 APN, M
SCHOOLS OUTMODED ?
"What applies to the countries in which education is in the grip of a crisis
does not apply to all countries and all of modern mankind", affirms Arthur
V. Petrovsky, Soviet member of the International Commission on the Dev¬
elopment of Education. "To say that education is reactionary", he adds
"is as wrong as it would be to assert that all education is progressive.
Highly disputable, and, in our view wrong, is the notion that schools are
becoming outmoded in modern society . . . Naturally, we are not implying
that teaching should stop the minute a person leaves a formal educational
establishment. On the contrary, education should go on throughout life."
Above, a young science student conducts an experiment in a Soviet physics
laboratory. Periods of re-training and booster courses are now an essen¬
tial part of any scientist's life.
number of teachers. Authorities will
have to see to it that the greater
expenditure on teaching staff produces
an equivalent improvement in results.
Hitherto, the continual rise in expen¬
diture on teachers' salaries has been
achieved at the expense of spending
on new equipment, innovation and
research. Teaching methods must
therefore be found which are as "pro¬
fitable" as possible, or running
expenses will reach. such a high level
that the cost factor will put modern¬
ization of educational systems out of
reach.
National authorities will have to
consider setting aside a fixed propor¬
tion of the annual increase in the
educational budget to developing new
ways of making the educational system
more efficient.
The radical changes that can be
made in education by large scale in¬
troduction of new techniques are being
demonstrated in the Ivory Coast. This
country's programme of education via
television aims to bring basic educat¬
ion to all school-age children and to
use TV on a nation-wide scale In
promoting cultural and political unity.
By 1980, about 16,500 classes will
be equipped with television receivers
making televised education available
to first-level classes and to young
people aged betwen 13 and 17, and
providing cultural, lifelong education
and information services to all adults.
By 1986 all children will be receiving
televised education.
The World Bank estimates that the
Ivory's Coast's project will cost 44 per
cent less than the maintenance of the
traditional educational system.
The new project is based on a broad
research programme covering teach¬
ing methods and curricula, modification
of school buildings and teacher train¬
ing. It has led to a new intensive
teacher training programme compris¬
ing not only an Introduction of new
subject matter, but also training in the
use of audio-visual techniques, com¬
munication, psychology, after-school
activities and new evaluation techni¬
ques.
The organization of classes and the
order in which courses are arranged
have also had to be altered, and these
modifications will eventually be carried
over into secondary education.
The repercussions of the Ivory Coast
programme are also being felt outside
classrooms and teacher training coll¬
eges. Out-of-school education will be
widely influenced by the introduction
of television and the ministries res¬
ponsible for these activities are having
to modify their own procedures to
meet the needs of this exciting new
venture.

All hierarchical differences among teachers in primary schools,
technical colleges, secondary schools and universities should
be abolished.
MMBHHBIBHBMIBHMH
Teaching is everywhere identical in
nature, value and purpose. A teacher
should specialize according to his
preference for teaching children, teen¬
agers or adults and his wish to live
in the country, in a town or in a big
city. The idea of promotion, with its
financial and other advantages, should
not draw him inexorably towards the
biggest city or the largest school or
towards the top level of higher edu¬
cation.
In some countries, differing levels
of training and pay for primary and
secondary teachers have already been
abolished. Czechoslovakia, Denmark,
U.K. and U.S.A., among other coun¬
tries, now train primary and secondary
teachers in universities or equivalent
post-secondary institutions.
Others, including France, Poland,
and the U.S.S.R. are now following
the same path by training teachers to
university level.
Teachers should be trained to be educators rather than specia¬
lists in the transmission of knowledge.
¡fe
Present day divisions between for¬
mal and informal, school and out-of-
school, child and adult education are
becoming blurred. Teachers who are
trained today will still be teaching
aftçr the year 2000. Teacher training
strategies should be drawn up with
these factors in mind. Programmes
for training tomorrow's teachers
should follow two main lines:speclali-
zation (in pre-school education, school
pedagogy, technical education, back¬
ward child training, adult education,
etc.) and the training of most teachers
as organizer-educators, capable of
teaching children and adults In and
out of school.
Tomorrow's education system will
require specialists in teaching mat¬
erials, self-teaching equipment and the
use of educational techniques, audio¬
visual auxiliaries, etc., as well as
community centre leaders, psycholo¬
gists, administrators with new skills,
systems analysts, etc.
Teacher training institutes recently
set up with Unesco's aid in six African
countries (Cameroon, Ethiopia, Ivory
Coast, Liberia, Niger, Togo) aim not
only to train teachers for specific
classes or subjects but to form rural
educators equipped to work under
local conditions and capable of initiat
ing and organizing a wide range of
community development services. The
institutes have two main objectives:
To train teachers for primary educ¬
ation in basically rural countries, who
would also be effective organizers for
community development.
To offer re-training and improve¬
ment courses to existing educational
personnel primary school Inspec¬
tors, education advisers, high school
teachers, headmasters and primary
teachers to bring them up to date
with reforms in education, and to train
them in new methods and techniques.
Skilled auxiliaries from the trades and professions (workers,
technicians and executives) should be brought in to teach
in schools. Students should also participate, educating them¬
selves while teaching others. I
Far more volunteer and auxiliary
teachers should be used in schools
and in the educational system gener¬
ally. They could not only carry out
non-teaching tasks so as to "free
teachers to teach", but also, after a
short training course, participate in
teaching.
The U.S.A. offers many examples of
volunteer services of this kind. A
volunteer parent aide, usually a mother,
may be asked to correct papers, check
for errors on written work, read to
small groups of children, make instruc¬
tional materials, supervise groups of
children on the playground or assist
the teacher in other ways.
Other helpers are volunteer commu
nity aides, persons with special skills:
handicraft workers, opticians, photo¬
graphers, stamp collectors, politicians,
salesmen, insurance experts, police¬
men, chefs, dairy farmers, members of
minority groups the possibilities are
endless.
Volunteer student aides also have
an important part to play. It Is widely
accepted that helping someone to
learn can also be a significant learning
experience for the person teaching.
On this assumption, many schools
provide opportunities for pupils to
teach other pupils.
The usual method adopted is for
an older child to come to the class¬
room of a younger one to read to him
or to listen to him reading, to drill
him on the fundamentals of arithmetic
or assist him in mastering some other
skill.
Since 1961, Cuba, for example, has
built up a day-care system catering
for 50,000 children up to the age of 5.
At the beginning the service was run
almost entirely by women with little
or no formal schooling, much less any
special training for running kindergar¬
tens.
All these volunteers had to offer
was their own experience and willing¬
ness to accept intensive in-service
training. Parents also help by provid¬
ing school maintenance teams for
carpentry, painting sewing and garden¬
ing, etc.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
31

21 POINTS (Continued)
Contrary to traditional practice, teaching should adapt itself to
the learner. The student should have greater freedom to
decide for himself what he wants to learn and how and where
to learn it.
Children should be encouraged from
an early age to share in the organiza¬
tion of school life. In particular, they
should be able to discuss their rights
and duties, as laid down by school
rules rules that should gradually be
made more flexible.
The same reasoning applies to
teaching methods and subjects. The
learner, particularly the adult learner,
should be free to choose which school
or Institution to attend and the kind of
training he wants. He should be able
to enter the educational system at the
level which suits him best and select
optional additional subjects which
interest him.
All or most compulsory disciplines
in schools are, however^laid down in
terms of objectives the establishments
has set for itself. But this in no way
prevents possibilities for individual
choice being extended.
Many examples exist of institutions
that encourage learners to take res¬
ponsibility for their own education.
The Gesamtschulen, In the Federal
Republic of Germany, seek to stim¬
ulate students' capacity for choosing
their own paths and aim to bring their
working methods close both to uni¬
versity studies and modern professio¬
nal training. Students do not decide
on the kind of diploma they want to
acquire immediately on entering
school.
Studies are divided into three cate¬
gories: Studienfacher, or major choice
subjects; Orientierungsfacher, or com¬
plementary subjects; Grundfacher, or
basic subjects. The first and second
categories form the core of knowledge
regarded as necessary for the pupil's
adaptation to society, but are, how¬
ever, subject to choice. Only the third
category is compulsory for all and
comprises civic and social training, the
visual arts or music, physical training
and religion. But a certain freedom
is allowed as to the amount of time
the pupil devotes to each subject.
In England, the Prior Weston primary
school, London, is an outstanding
example of the increased rôle of the
learner and of recent widespread
changes in primary education in the
United Kingdom. Learning takes place
within a classless environment with
the different age groups working to¬
gether on various learning activities.
The "open plan ' surroundings prov¬
ide activity areas for subject study,
reading, art and other manual activities
and play. A mixture of 5, 6 and
7-year-old children work together on
the same mathematics project (for
example noting down and analysing
the physical characteristics of the
group) with the quicker pupils helping
the slower ones in the same group.
The timetable is flexible and pupils
may spend one or more days inves¬
tigating and describing a single theme
or topic, only moving on to another
activity when the project is completed.
The teaching of reading and writing
is based on individual interests with
the emphasis on creative expression
rather than copy-book exercises.
Self-discipline is encouraged through
co-operative activity and pupil partici¬
pation in the organization of much of
their work. The headmaster and
teachers maintain regular contact with
parents who are encouraged to share
in the school's activities and even act
as ancillary aides for play supervision,
manual training assistance, group
reading, etc.
Students and the public as a whole should be given a greater
say in decisions affecting education.
32
Student participation in the planning
and running of education is progress¬
ing. Such participation increases with
the age of the student, and varies in
different branches of education. Stu¬
dents responsibilities are greatest
where their social, cultural and mater¬
ial interests are concerned. In the
case of programmes and teaching
'methods, student responsibilities are
still limited, and, in most cases,
even more restricted in financing or
teacher recruitment. Student partici¬
pation should, in fact, be exercised
separately from, as well as in conjunc¬
tion with, that of teachers, parents and
others.
Some forms of participation (inspec¬
tion, co-management, self-manage¬
ment, etc.) are now common in certain
primary and community schools, in
secondary and technical schools, in
some adult education institutions, and
in organizations outside the school
system, handling such problems as
educational programmes, research,
teacher promotion, salaries, educa¬
tional investment, etc.
The most significant developments
today are going on in universities in
various parts of the world. Students
have for some time been given partial
or complete control over the "social"
sectonstudent hostels, sports, sanitary
and auxiliary services. They have also
been "consulted" on general policies
or have made their views known
through committees set up to propose
reforms.
In recent years, student representa¬
tion has spread to areas of university
management previously regarded as
the preserve of a few persons chosen
for their particular experience or qua¬
lifications. Today, educational methods
and study programmes are being
brought more and more within the
scope of participation arrangements,
and management bodies (faculty coun¬
cils, national and ministerial commit¬
tees) are admitting student representa¬
tives, in some countries students are
successfully demanding representation
on bodies which decide on admissions,
examinations, finance and the general
administration of education.
Student participation is today dev¬
eloping in Asia, and student influence,
direct (as in the Philippines, India
and Indonesia) or indirect (as in Malay¬
sia and Thailand) is being exerted at
both university and national levels.
