Marshall McLuhan achieved world celebrity with the contention, expressed notably
in his book, "The Gutenberg Galaxy," that one of the great transformations of modern
society is the decline of the written word and the rise to pre-eminence of audio-visual
media of communication. On the occasion of International Book Year, the Canadian
educator and thinker explains his views in the following article written specially for
this issue of the "Unesco Courier." We have also asked the noted writers, Alberto Moravia,
of Italy, and Alejo Carpentier, of Cuba, to present their points of view on the future of
the book in the modern world (see articles pages 23 and 24). On page 30, Y.V. Lakshmana
Rao, Director of the Asian Mass Communications Centre, looks at the future of books in
developing countries, particularly with regard to young people.
by Marshall McLuhan
Polonius : "What do you read, my lord?
Hamlet : "Words, words, words."
Text Copyright © McLuhan Associates Limited, 1972
Reproduction prohibited
WiHEN Gutenberg transform¬
ed the European manuscript into a new
uniform and repeatable package, he
ended the regime of oral scholastic
philosophy and provided the means of
retrieving the world of pagan authors.
Any new technology simultaneous¬
ly erases its predecessor and restores
a much older form of experience.
At the same time that the new inten¬
sity of words as visual objects came
into play against the old oral ground,
words became visual counters in a
new "objective" sense. The world
of resonance and multi-levelled depth
of verbal structures which had been
the basis of the exegesis both of
the sacred page and the Book of
Nature, was suddenly muted by high
visual stress.
New kinds of rational authority
were substituted for the old resonance
with its affinity for magic and meta¬
morphosis. Thus, in More's Utopia
in 1512, Hythlodaye comments on the
fading scholastic philosophy as an
oral thing in distinction to the new
forms of discourse which came in with
the recovery of the ancient writers:
"Your scholastic philosophy is
not unpleasant among friends
in familiar communication, but in
the councils of kings, where
great matters must be debated
MARSHALL McLUHAN is Director of the
Centre for Culture and Technology of the
University of Toronto (Canada) and professor
of Humanities at Fordham University, New
York (U.S.A.). Among his books are 'The
Mechanical Bride' (1961); "Explorations In
Communication' (with E.S. Carpenter, 1960);
'The Gutenberg Galaxy" (1962); 'Under¬
standing Media" (1964); 'The Medium is the
Massage" (with Quentin Flore, 1967); 'From
Cliché to Archetype" (with Wilfred Watson
1970).
and reasoned with great autho¬
rity, these things have no
place... for speculative philo¬
sophy thinks all things suitable
for all occasions. There is ano¬
ther philosophy that is more
urbane, which knows as you
would say her own stage, and
therefore orders and behaves
herself in the play that she has
in hand, playing her part accord¬
ingly with comeliness, uttering
nothing out of due order and
fashion."
Clearly, scholastic philosophy was a
form of discourse that would not do
in the new era. It was doomed, not
because of its content or meaning,
but because it was chatty, conver¬
sational discussion that took all
manner of things into account at
any given moment. In communication
among friends it's natural to interrupt
and to interject observations at any
point. In such oral interchange there
are numerous simultaneous vistas of
any topic whatever. The subject is
looked at swiftly from many angles:
classic notions and insights concern¬
ing that subject are, via memory, on
the tip of every tongue in the intimate
group.
Such an oral form assumes ency-
clopedism, not specialism. With the
coming of print, specialism developed
because the individual reader, by
solitary effort, could speed over the
super-highways of assembly-line print¬
ing without the company or comment
of a group of fellow learners and
disputants.
In his university studies on the
18th century Christopher Wordsworth
records how written examinations
were introduced at Cambridge when
it became impossible for examiners
to keep up with the individual reading
and studies of their students. As
books became cheaper, the quicker
and more diligent students discover¬
ed that they could acquire know¬
ledge for themselves where previous
generations had been dependent on
the oral teaching.
Today, deep into the electric age,
the authority of visual connectedness
and quantified measurement has
yielded to the facts of quantum phy¬
sics in which the mode of relation of
events is via the "resonant interval"
of Heisenberg and Linus Pauling.
With the advent of telegraph and tele¬
phone and radio and TV as service
environments, totally new figure-
ground relationships have come into
play. In science and in fiction, in art
and in politics, the fact of audience
involvement in all aspects of the social
process has become an irresistible
datum.
So far as the book is concerned,
the mode and means of involvement
of reader as co-author and of audi¬
ences as actors has been the symbolic
or discontinous form in poetry and
painting, and music, in press and
novel, and in drama. The mosaic or
collage, inevitable with the telegraph
press, for example, offers us the world
under a single date line and offers
up the world audience as a daily sacri¬
fice of ritual participation in the making
of news.
With the advent of electric inform¬
ation environments, the former con¬
nected forms of discourse and social
organization have steadily been sup¬
planted by decentralist and discontinu¬
ous patterns. The market, which had
been the figure for the industrial
ground of hardware production, has
become increasingly diaphanous as
information and credit replace specie
and bullion.
CONTINUED PAGE 20

*
t
m
m
CA
m
o
70
Photo © "Le Surréalisme" Pans



OF THE BOOK
"The new electronic interdependence", says Marshall McLuhan, "recreates the world in the Image
of a global village", an aphorism aptly portayed by the optical trickery of this Salvador Dali
painting, "Visage paranoïaque", (vertically a face, horizontally a group of villagers).
17

THE YESTERMORROW OF THE BOOK (Continued from page 16)
20
Print made handwriting "obsolete",
but there Is more handwriting in the
present day than there ever was
before printing.
Obsolescence Is not extinction but
the necessary matrix of innovation.
Therefore handwriting has blossomed
out in many new forms, Including
that of the typescript.
In the same way as the .Information
offered by the printed book is out¬
stripped by photo and film and TV,
the book has steadily hybridized with
other forms of visual image giving us
many new art forms. Paradoxically,
even the paperback created a revo¬
lution in reading habits that wiped out
many of the familiar distinctions be¬
tween high-brow and low-brow. Such
a revolution seems to have been based
on the mere substitution of glue for
stitching.
Xerography and the micro-dot libra¬
ry bridged the gap between the writ¬
ten and the oral worlds. It has often
been pointed out that the highly liter¬
ate person is one who has been read
aloud to as a child.
At a time when xerography and
electronic techniques for simulating
the printed word are enveloping the
book world, would it not be appro¬
priate for us to exchange some observ¬
ations on the past, present and future
of the book?
There is a sense in which it is pos¬
sible to speak of the book as "hard¬
ware" technology. At present, the
computer technicians speak of their
operation as "software". Hardware
environments naturally have a very
different character from software
environments.
Eric Havelock in his Preface to
Plato goes into the question of the
Greek transition from an oral to a
written tradition. Albert Lord's Singer
of Tales is a kind of complement to
Havelock's book in delineating the
characteristics of the oral tradition in
relation to literature. John Mac-
Kenzie's The Two-Edged Sword
traces a similar dichotomy in the world
of the scriptures. (Only a few days
ago, browsing through a study of
rabbinical literature, I was startled to
read that neither David nor his psalms
were known to rabbinical scholars of
yore. David was a singer, not a
writer.)
"History as she is harped" has a
totally different character from writ¬
ten history or literature. There is
no chronology in Homer, no perspec¬
tive and no retrospect. It's all now.
That's oral, also electric. In our own
time, access to the oral tradition
through anthropology- has created a
great deal of revision in our image
and definition of "culture". In his vol¬
ume Propaganda, Jacques Ellul, after
looking at various possible approaches
to defining propaganda, concludes
that it is the entirety of a culture in
action; what the Greeks called
"perivallo" or the striking from all
sides at once.
Mr. and Mrs. Opie In their The
Lore and Language of School Child¬
ren have studied the amazing persis¬
tence and homogeneity of children's
games and jokes and gags, whether
in Belfast or Melbourne or New York
or Toronto or Liverpool. This oral
culture which they study consists of
matters taught only by children to
children, not those nursery songs and
stories that adults teach to children.
The paradox is, oral culture is stable
and conservative, whereas the written
word is fashionable and fluctuating.
There is a good deal on this subject
in The Gutenberg Galaxy. For
example, "correct" grammar begins
with the written word. Nobody ever
committed a grammatical error in an
oral culture any more than a modern
child has ever been known to commit
an error in a slang phrase.
To the literary man there is little
congeniality in tackling the entire
environment as culture. He is trying
to specialize his attention in very
special visual ways. One could do
worse than consider The Dunciad in
our enterprise of studying the future
of the book. To Pope, concluding
his Dunciad, the plethora of paper and
print in his time seemed to have blot¬
ted out all serious culture and all
tradition:
In vain, in vain the all-composing Hour
Resistless falls: the Muse obeys the Pow'r.
She comes I she comes I the sable Throne
behold
Of Night primeval and of Chaos old I
Before her. Fancy's gilded clouds decay.
And all its varying Rainbows die away.
Wit shoots in vain its momentary fires.
The meteor drops, and in a flash expires.
As one by one, at dread Medea's strain.
The sick'ning stars fade off th' ethereal plain ;
As Argus' eyes by Hermes' wand opprest,
Clos'd one by one to everlasting rest;
Thus at her felt approach, and secret might.
Art after Art goes out, and all is Night.
See skulking Truth to her old cavern fled.
Mountains of Casuistry heap'd o'er her head!
Philosophy, that lean'd on Heav'n before.
Shrinks to her second cause, and is no more.
Physic of Metaphysic begs defence.
And Metaphysic calls for aid on Sense!
See Mystery to Mathematics fly I
In vain I they gaze, turn giddy, rave and die.
Religion blushing veils her sacred fires.
And unawares Morality expires.
Nor Public Flame, nor Private, dares to shine ;
Nor human Spark is left, nor Glimpse Divine I
Loi thy dread Empire, Chaos Us restor'd;
Light dies before thy uncreating word;
Thy hand, great Anarch I lets the curtain fall.
And universal Darkness buries All.
Alexander Pope felt that an inky
smog had settled over all human
consciousness in the age of Newton.
What lay ahead now seems, in retro¬
spect, to have been a considerable
advance over the world that Pope
saw in dissolution. In the age of
video cassettes, when it will be pos¬
sible to dial a book as easily as an
acquaintance, totally new forms of
literary experience are at hand. It
is our literate job to be ready to
cope with these innovations.
© McLuhan Associates Limited, 1971

SIX VOICE-
PRINTS
OF THE
WORD 'YOU'
The libraries of tomorrow will
be transformed into electronic
communications centres where
micro-books and push-button
translating machines will be
available to the reader, say
