In the past quarter of a century, profound changes have been
occurring in Latin America which have led certain critics to
remark that Latin America is witnessing a veritable "Cultural
Explosion". Since 1967, Unesco has been carrying out a wide-
ranging study of Latin American cultures, covering literature,
philosophy, architecture, town-planning, the plastic arts, music,
theatre, the cinema, etc. For this ambitious enterprise, Unesco
has secured the collaboration of a large number of Latin
American scholars and specialists. Many of these studies will
be presented in separate volumes under the general title "Latin
America Within its Culture". The first volume, dealing with
literature, is scheduled to appear later this year or early in 1973.
It will first be published in Spanish, probably in collaboration
with a commercial publisher. It is planned that editions in
other languages will follow in due course. Most of the articles
published in this issue will appear in more extensive and
elaborate form in the Unesco series of cultural books on Latin
America. (Other aspects of civilization, science and education
in Latin America were presented in our special issue, "Latin
America, 150 years of Independence", in June 1961).
Latin American coun¬
tries no longer want
to live on the smoke¬
screen prestige of
past history. World
events affect us
directly and dramati¬
cally, and demand an
answer: either the
oppression of the past
or the transformation
of the original forms
of society for a com¬
mon life of dignity
where the sharing of
material wealth is not
opposed to individual
freedom.
Alfredo Pareja
Diezcanseco
(Ecuador)
Sao Paulo, Brazil's
skyscraper city and Latin
America's leading
industrial centre with a
population of 6 million.



LATIN AMERICA'S
CULTURAL EXPLOSION
by
CesarFernandez-Moreno
4
CESAR FERNANDEZ-MORENO, of Argentina,
is head of the Unesco programme of cultural
studies on Latin America described above.
Essayist, critic and poet, he has founded and
directed various literary magazines, and has
written for radio, television and the cinema
in Latin America. His books on culture
include "Introducción à la Poesía" (1962),
"La Realidad y los Papeles" (Books and Real¬
ity, 1967) and "Argentina" (to appear shortly).
"A
AMERICA is the land of the
future. In years to come one will
point to its historical importance,
perhaps in a direct challenge between
North and South America. . . America
is a land of dreams for all who are
weary of Old Europe, now a museum
of the past. . . Everything that has
taken place in America up until now
has been a mere echo of the Old
World, a reflection of foreign ways.
But as the land of the future, America
is not our concern, since the philo¬
sopher makes no prophecies."
A century and a half have passed
since Hegel made this prediction for
America, while protesting that he was
no prophet. The future of which he
wrote has now become America's
present; the continent of his time has
already passed into history. North
America is now the home of the
world's most powerful nation, and
South America or rather, present-day
Latin America represents one of the
most dynamic cultural concepts in the
modern world.
Latin America commands world
attention for a number of reasons, the
first being its population explosion.
Latin America's growth rate is the
highest of any continent: 2.9 per cent
annually. Its population now numbers
more than 270 million, unevenly dis¬
tributed over 21 million square kilo¬
metres of land.
Occurring in a so-called underdevel¬
oped economy, this population explo¬
sion threatens to spark off a political
explosion, and this chain reaction or
sequence of explosions can be expect¬
ed, in turn, to bring about a cultural
explosion in Latin America.
Yet why is it that countries which
are far from being wholly Latin in
either language or customs have
become known collectively as "Latin
America"? What is Latin America?
And first of all, why "Latin"?
Three of the nations which discover¬
ed, conquered and colonized the new
continent Spain, Portugal and France
spoke Latin languages. So the
broad historical definition "Latin Am¬
erica" has been applied to all the lands
in the new continent which were
CONTINUED PAGE 6

iiep^uwwi

-1*-»«-
LAT. AM. CULTURAL EXPLOSION (Continued)
Photo © from 'Buenos Aires". photo9 by Alicia D'Amlco and Sara Facio
text by Julio Cortázar. Editorial Sudamericana S A.. Buenos Aires
6
peopled by these three European
powers, in contradistinction to the
"Anglo-Saxon" countries of North
America.
But the Mexican writer, José Luis
Martinez, in his recent study on unity
and diversity in Latin America, points
out that Its present make-up "is some¬
what more complicated than the simple
pattern which prevailed up to the mid-
20th century.
"It still comprises the original group
of 21 countries: Argentina, Bolivia,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico,
Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Puerto Rico, El Salvador, Uruguay and
Venezuela. But Puerto Rico is a self-
governing commonwealth associated
with the United States, and Puerto
Ricans have U.S. citizenship. And
four new countries have been created
since 1960: Jamaica, Barbados, Trini¬
dad and Tobago, and Guiana, mainly
English-speaking, which belong to the
British Commonwealth of Nations."
The Conquest of the 16th century
practically annihilated the great Middle
American and Andean cultures, though
at the same time it infused them with
new life by transfprming them Into the
first vehicles for a process of western¬
ization.
This process also affected the other
peoples of America, who were at that
time in less advanced stages of devel¬
opment the peoples to whom the
name "Indians" was given by European
navigators and explorers, misled by
the monumental geographical error
which led them to believe that they
had reached East Asia.
Within what is now called Latin
America, another world with non-
Latin roots was to emerge: the African
community.
During the 16th and 17th centuries,
slave trading the exploitation of peo¬
ple of one colour by those of another
was carried on in the Caribbean
area and elsewhere. One hundred mil¬
lion Negroes were shipped from Africa
though only a third were to arrive at
their destination in the New World.
Yet this infamous commerce had
some surprising results: the slaves
rewarded their masters by handing on
what they had been able to retain of
their African culture, by teaching them
many things, from singing and dancing
to fighting for freedom.
This African America had a powerful
influence, not only in the Caribbean
area itself, but in the frontier zones
of the north of South America and
the south of North America. These
boundary areas are thus both a barrier
and a channel of communication, and
in any event, a source of enrichment.
The complex network of relation¬
ships in Latin America thus offers prac¬
tically limitless scope for interaction
and reaction, and tempts one to draw
parallels with other similar or compar¬
able situations.
Yet, the more one tries to ordern
the true nature of this huge region,
the more indistinct its image becomes.
The sociologist, Gino Germani, points
to two contradictory viewpoints,
"diametrically opposed, but concurring
to accord a real identity to Latin
America."
The first "emphasizes the Latin or
Graeco-Roman, Christian, Spanish or
Iberian character of the American sub¬
continent." In the second, "Latin
America is seen as a unit, not merely
in cultural and social terms, but also

CENTURY
OF THE PEOPLE?
A thumbnail sketch of our
historyacross the centuries
would give this outline:
the 16th century was the
century of the conquis¬
tadors, when the Spanish
people, under their great
captains, brought a whole
continent of hope under
the spread of a single flag;
the 17th century was that
of our forefathers and the
birth of a new people to
rejoice in this land; the
18th century was that of
the forerunners andheralds
of liberty; the 19th century
was the century of the
"Liberators" who separat¬
ed America from Spain and
demonstrated the might of
the masses who served
under their flags. . .Will the
20th century be the cen¬
tury of the people ?
Germán Arciniegas
(Colombia)
Left, workmen at an industrial
site in Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Right, a potter arrives at the
Indian market centre of
Chichicastenango, Guatemala.
and especially in political terms. . .
The unifying factor is an external one,
antagonistic and menacing."
In the first of these approaches the
key to the enigma seems to be cultural,
and In the. second, political. But both,
we should note, are qualified by still
another factor geography: in the first
case, the reference to the "American
sub-continent", and in the second, to
an "external" factor.
Such special reasoning is almost
inevitable in any attempt to clarify the
image of Latin America. A merely
ethnic criterion, contrasting Latin with
Anglo-Saxon stocks, would meet the
case no better; not only because of
the Indians, Africans and various later
immigrants, but also because of the
ethnic intermingling which can be
found on many of the West Indian
islands, where a mixture of Indian,
Spanish and African blood is given
the all-embracing label of "Latin". A
striking example Is Haiti, a French-
speaking country with a mainly Negro
population.
A more recent development to be
taken into account is the now evident
racial and social penetration of the
southern part of the United States by
Latin peoples. Latin America is infil¬
trating North America from below, by
a sort of demographic capillary attrac¬
tion running up through Puerto Rico,
Mexico and Cuba. The invasion might
be said, in one sense, to compensate
the Latin American people for the
territories they lost when their nations
were in course of formation.
Nor would a purely linguistic
approach be acceptable, taking Latin
America to consist of those countries
which speak Spanish or Portuguese.
Of the 254 million people who made
up the population of Latin America
in 1968, over 164 million (64.5 per
cent) spoke Spanish; and over 85 mil¬
lion were Portuguese-speaking Brazi¬
lians (33.4 per cent). The remaining
2.1 per cent spoke French or English
or (in Curaçao and Surinam) Dutch.
Yet this mixture of Western langua¬
ges is not the only obstacle to a simple
definition of Latin America in linguistic
terms. Pre-Columbian tongues survive
and are widely used in some countries
(as in bilingual Paraguay where Span¬
ish and the Guarani Indian language
are spoken). For similar reasons, a
comparison that contrasts the Catholi¬
cism of Latin America with the Protes
tantism of North America is Irrele¬
vant, since about one-quarter of the
population of the United States are
Catholics.
In spite of this confused tangle of
concepts, the modern world is begin¬
ning to see in a new light and to attri¬
bute a real meaning to the complex
ensemble which persists in calling
itself "Latin America".
If we delve deeper to find the roots
of this apparent unity, history provides
the first clue: it lies in the dependence
of the whole sub-continent to a suc¬
cession of foreign powers. Latin Amer¬
ica was first subject to Iberian domi¬
nation; after this crumbled, the British
and then the North Americans built up
new empires in Latin America, not this
time in the political but in the economic
sphere.
If this stigma of dependence is the
first point to be considered in defining
the elusive concept of Latin America,
the second Is its involvement in the
Great Divide of current history the
widening gulf between rich and poor
countries. This contrast is strikingly
illustrated by the two Americas, where
the North is the rich man and the
South the poor relation.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

LAT. AM. CULTURAL EXPLOSION (Continued)
Melting-pot of races and peoples
8
These two criteria are complement¬
ed and confirmed by a third more ele¬
mentary factor: geography. Latin
America comprises all of the continent
which lies south of the Rio Grande,
or Rio Bravo (marking the frontier bet¬
ween the United States and Mexico).
This explains the familiar exoression
"South of the Rio Grande": south of
the river there is a certain cultural,
political, racial, linguistic and religious
uniformity.
Three motives for the colonization
of America have often been attributed
to the Spaniards: the warlike drive
acquired in reconquering part of
Spain's territory from the Arabs;
Catholic missionary zeal; and lastly,
cupidity (for gold, slaves and women).
Each historian and writer is apt to
stress the motive which appeals to him
most strongly; but in practice it was
no doubt a combination of the three
given above that led to the integration
of the Old World with its other half.
Christopher Colombus was to some
extent a mystic, but this did not pre¬
vent him from adopting an elaborate
strategy to dazzle the Reyes Católicos,
Ferdinand and Isabella, with the gold
of the continent he wished to "sell"
them.
"Gold is the greatest good", he
wrote, "gold becomes treasure, and
whoever possesses it can obtain all
he desires in this world; it can even
lead souls to Heaven." From gold to
Heaven; here was Colombus' career
in a nutshell.
What also Influenced the Spaniards
was the astonishment that filled the
hearts and minds of the explorers and
conquistadors. The awe felt by Colum¬
bus, face to face with America, often
bordered on delirium: when he ap¬
proached the mouth of the Orinoco,
he thought he had discovered one of
the rivers flowing from Paradise.
I H E same amazement
gripped every Spaniard who came
after him. Indians who smoke, for
example, are described by the con¬
quistadors as "men and women who
walk about fumigating themselves
with a burning firebrand." An atmo¬
sphere of knightly adventure illuminat¬
ed the conquest of Mexico. The
great Aztec city of Tenochtitlan, wrote
the conquistador and chronicler, Diaz
del Castillo, "recalls the enchantments
related in the book of Amadis de
Gaula."
Cortes himself discovered farther
north the coastline which he named
California from an early 16th century
tale of adventure and daring. None of
the Europeans could believe what he
saw with his own eyes: none felt that
he was the master of his fate.
The Indians, on their side, were
puzzled by the sight of a man on
horseback, which they assumed to be
some sort of centaur; and they were
dumbfounded when a rider dismounted
from his steed: one creature dividing
into twol The Incas supposed that
horses ate metal because of the bit
held In the animal's mouth; when the
Spaniards asked for fodder for their
mounts, they were offered goldl
Out of this mutual astonishment was
to grow the whole Latin American
culture, with all its creative art. Art
is very often nothing more than an
expression of amazement, which gener¬
ates in the artist an impulse to share
his extraordinary vision with others.
In America, this impulse turned the
conquistadors themselves, and humble,
semi-illiterate soldiers, into unsuspect¬
ed authors: in simple but wonderfully
vivid words they recounted the surpris¬
ing things they had seen or imagined
they saw.
The great pre-Columbian civilizations
were rich in architecture, sculpture and
music (music that has been handed
down almost intact to the present day).
The chief European contributions were
language, religion and various forms
of technology unknown to America.
But in the course of history, Latin
America's store of culture tended to
be polarized in a sort of sterile alter¬
native, harking back to the conqueror-
conquered situation: European on the
one hand, American on the other.
The American element preserved the
cultural remains of the great civiliza¬
tions which flourished before the dis¬
covery and conquest of the sub-conti¬
nent, such as those which still survive
in the present republics of Mexico
and Peru.
The European element was the
culture brought by the pioneers and
conquistadors, among other products
of the Western civilization they repre¬
sented; it was thus a specifically Euro¬
pean phenomenon, although implanted
by the colonizers in the new lands
incorporated in their dominions.
This division created an antithesis
which long distorted the relationship
between the Latin American and Euro¬
pean cultures, by assuming the only
authentic, original contribution of Latin
America to be those vestiges of its
civilizations which had survived the
impact of conquest and colonization.
Viewed in this light, European culture
was thus rejected as being colonialist
and purely imitative in nature.
Indeed, being vanquished by military
might, the original inhabitants of Amer¬
ica the real Americans were des¬
poiled of their empires and posses¬
sions, to receive in exchange the bene¬
fits, highly questionable from their
point of view, of expanding Western
culture.
But although they were driven
towards the borders of their empires
and reduced to a marginal proletariat,
the process was halted before all
traces of them were wiped out. They
survived and still exist, a genuine If
not an influential component of the
new Western world now evolving.
Incorporated In this new world are
many of the characteristics of their
distinct civilizations, now reckoned
among the outstanding traits of the
originality of Latin America.
f% mixed culture inevitably
emerged from the opening-up of the
country, not only because of the wide¬
spread racial fusion that resulted from
the absence of women in the Spanish
expeditions, but owing to the intercom¬
munication essential for mutual under¬
standing. The Spaniards had to explain
Europe to the Americans, and the
latter interpreted America to the Euro¬
peans. First the Indians and later the
mestizos, of mixed Indian and Spanish
ancestry, developed a new conscious¬
ness of themselves as Americans.
The solution to the unrealistic
alternative between the American and
the European was to become both, that
is, to become an Americanized Euro¬
pean or a Europeanized American. A
synthesized conception of its own
nature thus prevailed in the higher
Latin American culture.
This recognizes not only the contri¬
butions of the original cultures, but
also those of the European pioneers,
the fundamental African element which
reached America through the slave
trade, and lastly, the rejuvenating cur¬
rents of learning brought by the immi¬
grations of the 19th century.
"The New World", wrote the famous
French anthropologist, the late Paul
Rivet, "has been a focus for the con¬
vergence of races and peoples since
prehistoric times. . . It Is curious
indeed that the history of America's
evolution should merely repeat the
ethnic trends which presided over its
first peopling. Since its discovery,
America has continued to be a focus
of attraction for the most varied peo¬
ples and races, just as it was during
the long pre-Columbian population
process."
Thus, the possible Asian and Ocea¬
nic ancestry of all the American peo¬
ples, and America's possible geogra¬
phical continuity with Africa in the
remote past, are hypotheses which
would provide a world background for
America's claim to universality. Amer¬
ica is, as it were, a preview of the
world of the future, where, overriding
differences of race and culture, man¬
kind will find real unity.

The "Square of Three Cultures" in
Mexico City. Foreground, remains of an
Aztec pyramid; centre, a 17th century
Spanish church in Jesuit style;
background, modern apartment blocks.
PLAZA OF
THREE CULTURES
IN MEXICO CITY
As the people of Ibero-America become conscious of their identity,
they are scrutinizing themselves, their place in history and their rôle
in the world of tomorrow. . .Ibero-America is, thus, now abandoning
its ridiculous passion to be different from what it really is. The
differences that exist between Ibero-America and the West no longer
instil in us feelings of inferiority, but instead the deep sentiment of
our own individuality and our own personality. . Ibero-America's
history reveals a double experience the history ofdominatingpeoples
and of dominated people a double experience often unknown to
other peoples who have lived only the rôle of oppressor or the op¬
pressed. This experience, if it is to bear fruit, must lead the peoples
of Ibero-America to the healthy assimilation of the values of the
different worlds between which it forms a bridge.
Leopold Zea (Mexico)
9
