This massive statue the "fat woman",
as it has become known was
discovered In the central temple at
Tarxien, Malta. It dates from
Maltas's neolithic period
(around 1600 B.C.). As with many
other ancient sculptures unearthed on
the island, the head and upper part
of the body, perhaps fashioned from
some material other than stone, are
missing. When intact, the statue was
about two metres high and is thought to
portray the Mother Goddess seated.
The pleated skirt ¡s a feature that reflects
the refinement in art that marked the
Tarxien period, zenith of Malta's
prehistoric civilization.

Headless 'Venus figures7
of Stone-Age Malta
Text andphotos
by Paul Almasy
1 HE Maltese archipelago,
consisting of the islands of Malta (the
largest island of the group), Gozo,
Comino, Commotio and Fllfola, lies
60 miles off the southern tip of Sicily
in the central Mediterranean.
Strategically placed between Europe
and Africa, Malta has a long history.
In ancient times the archipelago was
occupied successively by the Phoeni¬
cians, the Greeks, the Carthaginians
and the Romans. But Malta's mega-
lithic monuments, not isolated as else¬
where in Europe, but grouped together,
bear witness to a flourishing Maltese
civilization in prehistoric times preced¬
ing, according to some archaeologists,
the Aegean, Cretan and Mycenaean
civilizations.
One thing is certain, the men who
built the great megalithic temples
with enormous blocks of stone must
have used well advanced techniques
for lifting and transporting slabs that
weighed many tons.
Where did trie earliest people of
Malta come from? To which ethnic
group did they belong? When did
they first tread the soil of Malta?
These are questions which to this day
remain unanswered, although it Is
thought that the first peoples must
have settled in the island some
6,000 years ago.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
PAUL ALMASY, of France, has gained an
international reputation as a photographer-
reporter of unusual artistry and vision. His
work is well known to readers of the 'Unesco
Courier' from the many photographic assign¬
ments he has carried out for the magazine
during the past 20 years. Exhibitions of
Mr. Almasy's work have been held in many
countries. Mr. Almasy produced the above
reportage on special assignment for the
'Unesco Courier'.
29

VENUS FIGURES (Continued)
The legend of the Tower of the Giants
The pottery objects found at Ghar
Dalam (or Dalam cave), long thought
to be the most ancient in Malta, are
very similar to those of the same
period discovered at Stentinello, near
Syracuse, which suggests that the
first inhabitants of Malta came from
Sicily, the largest of the neighbouring
islands. But the decorative motifs of
the Ghar Dalam pottery are also found
on pottery from further east, in Dal-
matia, in Cilicia and other countries
bordering on the eastern coast of the
Mediterranean.
Some historians believe that the
Maltese of the neolithic era came from
Libya. The bay in which the Dalam
cave lies, known as Marsaxlokk, is
situated in the south-eastern part of
the island. Marsaxlokk and Valetta,
which is situated on the north coast,
are the island's best natural ports,
and if it is accepted that the first men
to come to Malta landed in the bay of
Marsaxlokk, then it seems more likely
that they crossed the sea from Libya
and not from Sicily.
The Ghar Dalam period, placed by
archaeologists between 2500 and
2100 B.C., was followed by the Mgarr
period, which takes its name from a
small site in the north-west of the
island where the ruins of a temple,
known as the Ta'Hagrat temple, were
discovered.
of
re
FEMININE BEAUTY 20,000 YEARS AGO. Numerous statuettes of corpulent women
have been found at Palaeolithic sites in Europe, in places as far apart as western
France and the Don Valley in the U.S.S.R. These "Venus figurines", as they are
known, were made about 18,000 B.C. Drawings above show eight of the Palaeolithic
Venus figurines, modelled according to a common pattern. The bulk of the
trunk breasts, belly and pelvis fits within the circumference of a circle and the
sharply tapered legs and narrow shoulders lie close to the limits of isosceles
triangles. Drawn in outline by the French prehistorian André Leroi-Gourhan, the
figurines (left to right and top to bottom) are from: Lespugue (France) ; Kostenki
(U.S.S.R.) ; Dolni-Vestonice (Czechoslovakia) ; Laussel (France) ; Willendorf (Aus¬
tria) ; two centre figures, Gagarino (U.S.S.R.) and Balzi Rossi (Italy). Stone-Age
sculptors in Malta, 16,000 years later, gave the same ample forms to their statues
f women, as did the artists of the Iron Age, two thousand years ago, to amulets
presenting the fertility goddess, discovered in Danish peat-bogs (see page 27).
Small in size, this temple was both
a shrine and a burial place. The dry
stone-building technique appears to
be already fairly advanced, but the
construction of the roof must have
posed considerable problems. It is
thought that this was also constructed
of carved stone, in large thin slabs,
but it is not known how these were
assembled.
Zebbug, another site in the western
part of the island, has given its name
to the next period. In 1947, archaeo¬
logists discovered several tombs and
a considerable quantity of pottery
there. Among, the decorative motifs
were representations of a small human
head.
The various artefacts found in the
temples and tombs of the Mgarr and
Zebbug periods provide valuable
evidence of the evolution of ways and
customs over the centuries that
separate these two periods. In
addition to pottery, the principal
finds at Ghar Dalam and Mgarr
were tools fashioned from bone
and flint. The tombs at Zebbug, how¬
ever, contained ornaments, the most
numerous of all being necklaces made
from shells. However, the chrono¬
logical order of the Mgarr and Zebbug
periods has not been definitely
established, and some experts place
Zebbug before Mgarr on the basis of
carbon 14 dating.
From Zebbug, one crosses the
narrows separating Malta from the
island of Gozo to reach Xaghra and
the Ggantija temples (the "Tower of
the Giants" as they have come to be
known) which have given their name
to the next period.
Situated on a hillside with a pano¬
ramic view stretching out to the
northern coast of the tiny island, the
remarkable temples of Ggantija rightly
deserve their fame. The southern
temple, the largest of the two temple
buildings, was built to a plan which
bears certain resemblances to those
of churches of the Christian era.
On each side of the 108ft long
central corridor, which might be
described as the "nave", are two small
rooms. At the end of the central
corridor is the apse which is marked
off by a low partition wall about two
feet in height. Part of the left hand
side of the central corridor was prob¬
ably used as a sacrificial altar.
The Phoenician inscriptions found
here give no indication as to when
these bold sailors from Asia Minor
came to the island of Gozo. It is
thought that they used Malta and
Gozo as staging ports and worshipped
in the temples.
The northern temple is in the form
CONTINUED PAGE 32

This headless limestone statue, 48 cm. high, was discovered in
the ruins of Hagar Qim, a temple complex first excavated in 1839,
in the south-west of Malta. The holes at the top are sockets where
Photo © Paul Almasy. Paris
the head was fitted. Though no sexual characteristics are
indicated, the shape of the body, recalling those of Palaeolithic
Venus figurines (see opposite page) suggests a female divinity.
31

VENUS FIGURES (Continued)
of a square with sides measuring
82 feet. The rooms into which it is
divided feature several niches which
are differently placed from those of
the southern temple. Careful examin¬
ation of the interior walls suggests
that they were covered with bright red
paint. In view of the size of these
rooms, it is unlikely that they had
stone roofs and the builders probably
made them of wood, though the
possibility that they were left without
roofs cannot be entirely ruled out.
It is surprising that the Ggantija
temples, gigantic for their time, were
built on this particular site. In this
part of the island there is no trace of
the limestone rock of which they are
built. It must have been brought from
Ta'Cenc, on the south coast of the
island some considerable distance
from Xaghra.
Transporting this material from
Ta'Cenc to Xaghra represented a
remarkable feat at that time. It must
certainly have made an impression on
popular imagination since a legend
relates that a giantess carried the
stones on her head, at the same time
holding a baby in her arms and feeding
it along the way.
Tarxien, on the island of Malta, is
the most famous archaeological site
in the archipelago. It was during the
Tarxien prehistoric period that the
ancient Maltese civilization reached
its apogee. To their technical mastery
the builders added artistic taste and
feeling. Not only were the stone
blocks carefully hewn and dressed;
they were also decorated with designs
in relief. Most of these decorations
are carved in spiral patterns and other
geometrical figures, though some
motifs represent animals.
The Tarxien group consists of three
interlinked temples. Their existence
32
Temple complexes discovered in
Malta-, and in particular that of
Tarxien, show that a well-established
religion existed in the Island
3,500 years ago. Excavations
at Tarxien between 1915 and 1919,
laid bare major structures raised
by neolithic builders. Photo right,
of part of the Middle temple at
Tarxien, shows the passage leading
to the inner rooms. Access, however,
is blocked by a small slab gracefully
carved with two spirals, a decorative
motif also found on ancient
monuments In Crete. Many stones
in the Tarxien temples are blackened
with smoke suggesting that the dead
were cremated there in ancient times.
The huge stone slabs used
to build these and other
Maltese temples have
inspired a legend that a giantess
transported the stones on her head,
while feeding the baby she
carried In her arms.
was unknown to archaeologists until
1915 and they were eventually discov¬
ered by accident. The fact that they
remained buried for centuries explains
their perfect state of preservation.
One discovery that immediately
attracts attention is the statue of an
enormously fat woman placed in the
middle of the central temple. The
statue is impressive, even though the
upper part of the body is missing, and
is probably a colossal representation
of the goddess of fertility.
The majority of the stones of the
Tarxien temples are blackened with
smoke, which suggests that the
Bronze Age inhabitants of the island
cremated their dead there. The ashes
of innumerable funeral pyres erected
in the temples throughout the Bronze
Age and the broken remains of
burnt urns recovered there, have
been submitted to scientific, carbon
14 testing. The results of these tests
have enabled a precise chronological
table of the various stages of this
period in the prehistory of Malta to be
established.
The Hal Saflieni Hypogeum (or Paw-
la Hypogeum), an ancient catacomb
discovered not far from the Tarxien
temples, also ranks among the most
important archaeological remains of
Malta. Like the Tarxien temples, the
catacomb was discovered by chance
during the construction of two blocks
of houses in 1902. Entirely carved
from the rock, which here forms a
limestone plateau, the Hypogeum is
several centuries older than the
Tarxien temples.
The Hypogeum is an architectural
complex of halls, passages, chambers,
stairways and high-walled galleries,
into which are carved niches of vary¬
ing shapes and sizes, spread out on
three levels.
The largest and most carefully
constructed room, the inner sanctum
or "Holy of Holies," is situated in the
upper part of the catacombs, and it
is here, in all probability, that animal
sacrifices were made. Access to the
third storey is difficult and the stair¬
way leading to it ends with an impass¬
able step some six feet high.
The purpose of the room below this
stairway is still a matter of conjecture.
Some specialists believe that it was a
treasury and that it was to protect its
contents from robbers that access
was made so difficult. Others maintain
that it was merely a water tank.
During the Bronze Age the period
of invasions began and Maltese
civilization gradually lost its original¬
ity. The isolation that Malta, as an
island, had experienced up to the
Stone Age was disturbed by the
arrival of sailors from the eastern
Mediterranean, from Greece, from
neighbouring islands such as Sicily
and Lipari, and even from the Gulf of
Lions. Improvement in boat-building
techniques and in navigation brought
Malta within reach of the bold sea¬
farers who had set out to seek their
fortunes in distant lands.
The newcomers brought with them
new customs and beliefs which they
imposed upon the peoples of the
islands who, small in number, were
unable to defend themselves. The
objects discovered in the tombs of
succeeding periods are so different
that they cannot be explained in terms
of the evolution in customs of a single
people. Such radical transformations
can be due solely to the cultural
contributions of invading peoples.
No doubt this tiny country with such
a turbulent history conceals beneath
its soil other precious traces of the
past.
