A Unesco world inquiry
FAILURE IN SCHOOL
AND THE
SOCIAL BACKGROUND
OF STUDENTS
by Leo Fernig
H OW far do factors in a
young person's background his
home, the economic status of his
parents, the kind of neighbourhood
he lives in affect his chances of
benefiting fully from the education
he receives?
4
LEO FERNIG has been director of Unesco's
International Bureau of Education in Geneva
since 1970. He was previously director of
the Department for the Advancement of
Education at Unesco, where from 1948 to
1970 he played a leading role in the elabo¬
ration and execution of Unesco's education
programme.
This question of the social back¬
ground of students and their chances
of success at school was the main
subject of an International Conference
on Education convened by Unesco at
Geneva in September last year and
attended by delegates from 90 Mem¬
ber States. In preparation for the
Conference, the International Bureau
of Education, now an integral part of
Unesco, had undertaken an inquiry into
how governments see the problem
and what measures they take to deal
with it (see also page 20).
The right to education is no longer a
vague ¡deal; it is incorporated into
the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, adopted in 1948 by the United
Nations, and governments now recog¬
nize that they have a duty to ensure
that their peoples have equal oppor¬
tunity to enjoy this right.
Yet, for a number of complex reas¬
ons, our systems of education still
fail to achieve the results we expect
from them. The record of the past
decades, and particularly of the 1960s,
has shown that a number of problems
arise when countries attempt to put
educational policies into effect without

/
N,
due regard to the social, economic
and political context of the system of
education.
Official reports submitted to the
International Bureau of Education
speak of a number of problem areas
which may be summed up briefly.
Several countries have multi-racial
populations, like Malaysia, where dif¬
ferences of culture and tradition may
have a direct, influence on school per¬
formance by the children. In other
countries, ethnic minorities pose a
similar problem; such minorities are
constantly being created, as the cur
rent history of migrant workers and
the recruitment of foreign labour in
Western Europe has shown.
Again, the difficulties of rural areas,
and of urban slums are frequently
recognized. A more recent form of
the problem is the "inner-city" on
which the United States provides evi¬
dence: "Concentrations of socio-eco-
nomically disadvantaged Americans
and rapidly increasing populations of
minority groups are clustered in the
central city areas... the resulting Im¬
pact upon the schools has been Inten¬
sified by a corresponding movement to
the suburbs by the more affluent citi¬
zens and by business and industry.
The decline of property values occa¬
sioned by these changes has resulted
in a reduction of funds for education
in the cities..."
More broadly, most of the indus¬
trially developed states remark on the
educational problems associated with
groups who are socially and economi¬
cally disadvantaged i.e. below the
national norm.
The list of problems, difficulties and
shortcomings must, however, be read
against the record of measures taken
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

6
FAILURE IN SCHOOL (Continued)
to produce solutions. These cover
an extremely wide range, from concert¬
ed action by the central government
agencies to local experimental pro¬
jects. A few examples may suffice to
demonstrate the variety of these
measures.
An integrated approach is to be
found In France, where the 6th Plan
stresses the need to develop equality
for opportunity; reforms in the organi¬
zation and content of schooling, the
extension of pre-school education in
rural areas, Increased provision for
special education and the education of
adults these are some parts of the
Integrated programme.
With the central planning approach
of the U.S.S.R., it Is relevant to quote
the 1958 law adopted by the Supreme
Soviet, which provided a series of
educational and administrative meas¬
ures to offset unsatisfactory results
that might arise from family conditions,
place of residence and from the school
system itself.
Although expressed differently,
legislation over the past two decades in
the U.S.A. has led to a vastly increas¬
ed involvement of the U.S. Govern¬
ment in educational matters, with Fed¬
eral support for many programmes des¬
igned to strengthen the education of
socially and economically disadvan¬
taged students.
Again, Israel reports a comprehen¬
sive series of measures designed spe¬
cifically for schools and children "in
need of nurture". These were institu¬
tionalized In 1963 with the establish¬
ment of a centre which serves as the
co-ordinating agency. A characteristic
of the programme is the constant feed¬
back from experimental work, which
has led to the general adoption of
measures found to be effective, while
at the same time policies and plans are
reviewed on the basis of objective
evidence.
A study of failure among working
class children in Rotterdam led to the
setting up of a socio-educational pro¬
ject which embraces six infant and ten
primary schools. Essentially the pro¬
ject aims to draw schools, families
and cultural institutions of the district
closer together, while making exten¬
sive reforms in the form and content
of school work so that it may be more
meaningful to the community.
In the U.S.A., under the Impulse of
Federal funding, a host of local pro¬
jects have developed, most of them
in disadvantaged neighbourhoods.
Characteristic features are the involve¬
ment of the local community and a
greater attention to individual differ¬
ences between pupils.
Although experimental work seems
to be common for children at pre-pri-
mary and even secondary levels, much
less appears to be done to study the
problems of, or satisfy the needs of,
adolescents who have left school.
The International Conference on
Education represented a wide range
of countries. The problems connect¬
ed with equality of educational oppor
tunity do not occur everywhere with
the same intensity, and the national
strategies for ensuring equality will
obviously vary. In this regard, it may
be noted that many developing coun¬
tries are more concerned to extend
their school systems, improve access
In other words, and less concerned
about success at school. Indeed, par¬
ticipation In the existing schools is
often more democratic than it is in
developed countries.
The Conference drew attention to
two practical considerations of con¬
siderable importance. The improve¬
ment of educational equality ¡s a means
of increasing efficiency of the school
system. And measures designed to
democratize education, since they con¬
sider individual differences, are likely
to be the most effective means for
achieving quality in education.
As the problems involved are com¬
plex, with a number of inter-actlng
factors, educational policy by itself is
not enough. All aspects of a govern¬
ment's action in the political, social
and economic fields, have a bearing
on equality of opportunity, and should
be planned with this in mind.
In terms of the education sector by
itself, the Conference outlined forms
of desirable actions. The organization
of the system of education should be
reviewed to take account of the needs
of underprivileged groups. In this
context, provisions for pre-school edu¬
cation (or falling that, improvements in
the early primary grades) are partic¬
ularly important.
At the administrative level, the siting
of schools across the national territory
is a means of overcoming regional
differences. Still more essential are
measures to ensure community parti¬
cipation in school affairs. For at the
origin of educational inequality lies the
fact of a separation between the school
and the community it serves.
The reform of curricula and of teach¬
ing methods follows from changes in
the organization of schooling.
The Conference dwelt at length on
the important role of teachers. If equa¬
lity of educational opportunity Is to be
achieved, certain clear principles can
be stated about the recruitment, train¬
ing and appointment of teachers. Thus,
for example, teachers in training
should learn about the various com¬
ponents of the social background and
should have practical experience of
social work in the community. Like¬
wise, means should be found to attract
and keep good teachers In schools in
disadvantaged areas.
Finally, admitting the complexity of
the question and our present lack of
information about the factors at work,
the conference made a strong claim
for more research work or rather,
for a combination of experimentation
and action. Both national and inter¬
national resources should be diverted
to this objective so that the schools
can progress further and really give
every child the educational oppor¬
tunity that is his due.
LITTLE WOMEN
BIG PROBLEM
