The
long journey
of
the primates
by John Napier
40
HE story of man and his
ancestors is like a play In which the
key character does not appear until
the last scene. Yet by the time he
finally makes his. entrance the
audience has already got a very good
Idea, from what has gone before, of
the sort of person he is going to turn
out to be.
To say man is the "key"' actor In
the drama of primate evolution, of
course, is to take a very biased view.
There is no doubt that if this article
were being written by a giraffe, for
example, man might find himself
allotted a very minor and probably
most obnoxious part in the evolution¬
ary saga of the primates. It is natural
that man should be self-centred In
his approach to primate evolution but
that does not mean that he is not
JOHN NAPIER Is Director of the Unit of
Primate Biology at Queen Elizabeth College,
University of London. A leading specialist
In the anatomy of non-human primates, he
was formerly director of the Primate Biology
Program at the Smithsonian Institution, Wash¬
ington, D.C. He has written several books
on the origins of man (see bibliography
Inside back cover). He is well-known to
British TV audiences for his contributions to
popular science programmes, and has ¡ust
completed a book on the Abominable Snow¬
man, to be published shortly under the title
"Blgfoot", by Jonathan Cape, London.
capable of thinking in any other way.
Many of my zoological colleagues,
for instance, are principally interested
in analysing the background of the
non-human primates, the lemurs, mon¬
keys or apes. But I am an anthro¬
pologist which means that man is the
central theme of my research so It Is
not surprising that I am primarily in¬
terested in the appearance of those
structural and functional features by
which we characterize man today. This
being so we must clarify our ideas and
decide just what we should be look¬
ing for in the primate fossil record.
First of all we must examine the
nature of our criteria and select those
characters that are unique to modern
man and can truly be called his
"hallmarks" (*). There are quite a
number of characters that we might
choose but, bearing in mind that our
source material is limited to fossil
bones and teeth, the range is naturally
rather restricted. The possession of
speech and language Is the most
* Hallmarks are stamped on gold and silver
objects. Basically they provide a verifi¬
cation of the purity of the metal but they
also supply other Information such as the
country of origin, the date and place of
assay and often the Identity of the crafts¬
man.
outstanding human hallmark of all but
unfortunately it leaves no trace in
ancient bones.
One can make all sorts of in¬
ferences that speech evolved at such-
and-such a time but there is no scrap
of direct evidence to support such an
assertion. The ability to speak lies,
first of all, in the shape and mus¬
culature of the mouth, tongue, soft
palate, pharynx and larynx; and
secondly, in the centres of the cortex,
or outer shell, of the brain which
govern the muscular control of the
various "soft" parts mentioned above.
Although many ingenious suggestions
have been put forward none as far as
we know can help us to recognize
the capacity for speech from a study
of bones.
There are numerous cultural
phenomena which we would regard
as significant hallmarks but, again, we
cannot use them because they leave
no physical evidence behind. Be¬
haviour itself does not fossilize but the
extra-corporeal accessories of be¬
haviour do.
Evidence of a hunting economy can
be determined from the living sites
(or living "floors" as they are called)
of early man ; in the same way tool-
CONTINUED PAGE 42

I
r
i*
r* ,t
' * i
v ;
yî..
' .if¿il
'¡«vi
TAX».
I«
r "i i
rÍMi/1.:- ... ,
This drawing is taken from the 2nd edition of Charles Darwin's book "The Descent of Man", M4
published in London in 1883 by John Murray. The solemn-faced simian is perhaps bowed down by <f |
the weight of his name Semnopithecus rubicundas. Charles Darwin explained the curious hair
pattern In terms of sexual selection. "It is Inconceivable", he wrote, "that such patterns can be
of use in any ordinary way".

JOURNEY OF THE PRIMATES (Continued)
42
making behaviour can be identified.
Much as a modern picnic site can
reveal to an intelligent inquirer all he
needs to know about the habits and
social status of the picnickers, so liv¬
ing floors of early man with their
hearths, their animal remains, their
wall-paintings, their burials and so
on can be read and interpreted by
archaeologists.
Unfortunately the background to man
that we are committed to investigate
extends many millions of years further
back in time when no living floors and
no artifacts existed. Apart from the
evidence of stone or bone tools as
supplements to our understanding of
human dexterity we shall not be
leaning very heavily on the evidence
of "fossil behaviour". What, then, are
to be our criteria?
When we think about man and
compare him with non-man one of the
first things that strikes us is that he
stands upright and walks on two legs.
But this is not nearly a precise
enough definition to exclude the many
non-human primates who are also cap¬
able of upright bipedalism. Nor does it
exclude, for example, the bears. For a
more exact criterion we must draw
upon our knowledge of the bio¬
mechanics of human walking.
Human walking is a highly complex
affair. This is not the place to stuff
you with technical details like a
Strasbourg goose with rich food, but
to ask you to accept the simplified
but nonetheless valid conclusion
that modern man shows a unique
method of walking which we call
striding. Striding involves the muscles
and the joints of the vertebral column,
the pelvis, the leg and the foot in a
complicated and precisely integrated
series of manoeuvres. An alternative
term for striding is heel-toe walking.
We are now in a position to formulate
our first hallmark: Man stands upright
and when walking habitually uses a
bipedal, striding gait.
The second characteristic that
strikes us is the dexterity of the human
hand which is infinitely capable,
exquisitely delicate but, at the same
time, alarmingly powerful powerful
enough to cleave a brick in half with
a karate chop, or to tear a city
telephone directory into two equal
parts.
The essential component of the
human hand Is its opposable thumb,
which provides the means for grasp¬
ing objects with strength (the power
grip) or with delicacy (the precision
grip). The opposable thumb is there¬
fore an obvious hallmark, but un¬
fortunately it Is not unique to man; all
living Old World monkeys and apes
possess opposable thumbs.
'NCE again we must draw
upon our knowledge of the functional
anatomy of man's hand to set us on
the right track. Man's precision grip
is much more sophisticated than any
monkey's or ape's; when he places
his forefinger and thumb together in
a precision grip he is employing the
two most acutely sensitive areas In
his whole body. The sensory input
from these small areas provides the
neurological basis for the sort of skill
that a watchmaker, a plastic surgeon
or an assembler of micro-circuits
possesses.
Sometime 'ago, In order to provide
a means of quantifying the precision
grip of primates, I introduced a simple
ratio called the opposability index to
express the relative lengths of the
forefinger and thumb. The oppo¬
sability index of men is 65. The score
for a chimpanzee is 43 and for' a
baboon, which approaches nearest to
man in this respect, it is 57. So now
we are in a position to formulate the
second hallmark: man possesses en
opposable thumb whose length is
approximately 65 per cent the length
of his forefinger.
Man's debt
to the tree
To his ancient ancestors who were tree-living
creatures, man owes his mobility of hand,
opposable thumb and the upright posture
of at least the upper part of his body. Left,
Gibbon apes still swing happily from tree
to tree, but, like man, the gorilla (right) is
now basically a ground-living animal, though
his lower limbs have not adapted to true
bipedalism and he still supports himself with
his knuckles when walking. Through evolu¬
tionary changes in the pelvis, man and his
ancestors adopted a bipedal, striding gait,
better adapted to ground-living. Drawing (far
right), the pelvic girdle of Australopithecus
as compared with that of a chimpanzee.
The third feature that strikes us
about man is that his brain is large
and rounded; but of course brains do
not fossilize and so we can only make
deductions about the brain from the
study of its container the brain-box.
Unfortunately, apart from overall shape
and size, there is no means of deter¬
mining the nature of the brain by a
simple examination of fossil skulls.
What is more, size itself is a some¬
what misleading indicator because
it is naturally variable within a
species; for example among mod¬
ern human populations the brain
volume ranges from 950-2000 cubic
centimetres. The average volume is
about 1400 cc. Brain size is related
to body size bigger animals have
bigger brains and, in some way that
we don't fully understand, to in¬
telligence.
Nevertheless, brain size is a
valuable guide to the palaeontologist
who is attempting to follow the track
of man through time. From the
earliest pre-human stages to the final
flowering of the human family
expressed In the species Homo sapiens,
a steady trend towards enlargement
is seen. Here, then, is the basis of
our third hallmark which can be
expressed thus: man, relative to his
body size, has a large, rounded brain
that may exceed 1400 cc in volume.
Finally, we notice that man
possesses small, even teeth arranged
in an elegant parabolic form in his
upper and lower jaw. The human
teeth, like those of all living primates,
are of four types: incisors, canines,
premolars and molars. Together in
both jaws they total 32, a number
characteristic of all Old World
monkeys and apes but not New World
monkeys or prosimians.
Unlike the apes, man's teeth are
all more or less the same vertical
length; the canines which form
massive elongated and projecting
teeth in the apes are small, short and
discrete in man. Human molars bear

low, rounded cusps In contrast to the
sharp, prominent cusps of apes and
monkeys. The human third molar in
both jaws is often small and Is fre¬
quently absent, whereas in apes the
third molar is often the largest of the
series.
There are many other differences
but these few should be adequate for
the purpose of defining the fourth hall¬
mark as follows: man's teeth are small
and are arranged in the jaws in a pa¬
rabolic curve, the third molar being the
smallest of the series and the canines
non-projecting.
wITH these hallmarks in
mind we ought to be able to pick up
the trail of man during our journey
through the past. The trip will be
rather like travelling by train between
two cities a thousand miles apart.
Most railway systems are very com¬
plicated affairs with numerous junc¬
tions, switching points, branch lines
and dead-end terminals, so we have
to constantly be on our guard that we
do not become shunted along long-
forgotten tracks that simply finish up
at the end of nowhere at a pair of
rusty buffers.
There is a very real danger of this
happening because evolution frequent¬
ly involves a form of mimicry as a re¬
sult of which similar characters crop
up in unrelated or distantly related
forms. We have already seen for
example that walking on two legs Is
not uniquely the possession of man.
This form of mimicry is more
properly termed parallelism and the
theory behind it is that, given a
similar set of environmental opportu¬
nities, animals with a common ances¬
try will tend to evolve in a similar way.
The best example of parallelism in
primate evolution is that the monkeys
of the New World and the Old World,
which are related through a common
ancestor living 40 million or so years
ago, share so many physical charac¬
ters that it is hard for the average
person to tell them apart even seeing
them side by side in a zoo.
Man has a double ecological heri¬
tage. His earliest ancestors were tree-
living creatures well adapted to mov¬
ing, feeding, mating and sleeping high
above the ground in tropical forests.
His later forebears were ground-livers
spending their lives among tropical
woodlands and grasslands In com¬
petition with the myriads of ground-
based mammals including the large,
predatory, carnivores.
His two phases are complementary;
without an arboreal background he
could never have succeeded on the
ground. He possesses neither the
fleetness of the impala nor the killer
power of the leopards, cheetahs and
lions; but he has, through his arboreal
background, acquired talents which
were of infinitely greater value.
He could run on the ground and he
could climb trees; he could evade dan¬
gers by subtle manoeuvres undreamed
of by the instinct-dominated predators
and with his emancipated hands he
could use weapons and tools to pro¬
tect himself and to obtain food. Hands
were far more efficient than the hooves
of his ungulate competitors. Para¬
doxical as it may seem, man's success
as a ground-living primate was entire¬
ly due to his arboreal heritage.
The earliest ancestors of the pri¬
mates were among the first mammals
to make their appearance. At this
stage, some 70 million years ago, pri¬
mates-to-be were small, long-nosed,
ground-living animals rooting among
the leaves of the forest floor for their
insect food, and distinguishable only
by obscure characters of the teeth and
skull from the other long-nosed insec¬
tivorous creatures.
With hindsight, some authorities feel
they can recognize these primates-to-
be even though they possessed none
of the arboreal characters by which
we now recognize the order. They
may well be right, but to those of us
interested In living primates (including
man) the order, effectively, came into
being when the primates started to
live in trees.
Plesiadapis ¡s a most unprimate-like
primate and is totally deficient in arbo¬
real adaptations, while Smilodectes
and Notharctus which appeared a few
million years later were already
advanced tree-climbers.
Arboreal characters can be briefly
summarized as follows:
Mobility of the hands and feet and
particularly of the thumb and big toe
which are well separated from the
other digits and, in some primates,
capable of being opposed.
Replacement of sharp claws by flat¬
tened nails, associated with the de¬
velopment of sensitive pads on the tips
of the digits.
A shortening of the .snout associat¬
ed with a reduction in the apparatus
and the functions of smell.
Convergence of the eyes towards
the front of the face associated with
the development of stereoscopic
vision.
H A large brain relative to body size.
An upright posture which may be
confined to the upper part of the body
in some but applies throughout in
others.
The lemur-like Eocene family the
Adapidas (including the genera No¬
tharctus and Smilodectes) possesses
most of these arboreal adaptations:
nails had replaced claws and sens¬
ory pads were developing on the finger
tips, the eyes were converging and
the snout was shortening, the brain
was relatively large, and the loco¬
motion pattern Involved an upright
posture of the upper part of the body
while in the lower part the hips and
knees were acutely flexed.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
43

JOURNEY OF THE PRIMATES (Continued)
When the ape line and human line diverged
44
This last feature, alone, merits our
particular interest because the upright
posture is one of the hallmarks we
are committed to trace. Later forms
such as Necrolemur, an early Euro¬
pean tarsier-Iike primate, and Hemia-
codon, a North American form, show a
similar postural pattern.
The next recognizable stage in the
fossil record is seen during the geolo¬
gical epoch known as the Oligocène;
at present the ancestor-descendant
linkages between the Oligocène and
Eocene primates have not been prov¬
ed. Most of our Information about the
Oligocène primates comes from a
region of Egypt called the Fayum, now
desert but once covered with dense
tropical forest.
Between 25-35 million years ago the
Fayum was the home of an extra¬
ordinary variety of ape and monkey¬
like creatures. Some, like Parapithe-
cus, were probably destined to become
true monkeys; some, like Aeolopithe-
cus, to become "half-apes" like the
gibbons, and some, like Aegyptopithe-
cus, to become true apes like the chim¬
panzee and the gorilla.
It has even been suggested very
tentatively that one of these creatures
called Propliopithecus represents the
earliest known member of the human
lineage. Both Propliopithecus and
Aegyptopithecus, of which only teeth
or jaws are known, show some of the
characters which anticipate the human
condition. Aegyptopithecus, while
possessing some human-like dental
characters, also has features which
are strongly reminiscent of later apes.
This raises an important point: the
relationship of man and apes. Nearly
everyone would agree that their rela¬
tionship in terms of anatomical struc¬
ture and physiological and biochemical
functions is extremely close. The
principal Issue is how close? When
did the ape line and the human line
diverge?
There are at least four schools of
thought which we can call the "late-
late", the "late", the "early" and the
"early-early". Personally, I favour the
late school but there is something to
be said for the early school which
would hold that the human lineage
dates back to Propliopithecus, some
30 million years ago.
The late school favours the early
Miocene species from Kenya, East
Africa, called Proconsul africanus (or
something very like it) as a likely can¬
didate. We know a little bit about the
gait, the skull and the teeth of P. afri¬
canus. The gait was quadrupedal and
therefore provides no particular hint
of future bipedalism; the hands are ra¬
ther human-like In proportion but the
evidence of an advanced type of pre¬
cision grip is absent; the opposability
index has been estimated at 56. The
brain is still rather primitive but was
quite large in terms of body-size, and
the teeth like those of Aegyptopithe¬
cus are ape-like rather than man¬
like, but not so completely specialized
that one could not envisage an evo¬
lutionary reversal to a human-like form.
During Miocene times volcanic act¬
ivity, rift-valley .formation and moun¬
tain-building were in full swing. One
of two consequences of this orogeny
and the coincidental cooling of the
earth's surface, which had been stead¬
ily proceeding throughout the Tertiary
era, was the spread of grasslands at
the expense of forests. Grasslands
(or savannas) offered new evolution¬
ary opportunities to a variety of mam¬
mals, including the expanding popula¬
tion of primates in the rapidly shrink¬
ing forest zones.
A few primate stocks, including the
ancestors of man and the ancestors of
the modern baboons, evidently react¬
ed to the challenge of the changing
environment. In this way new hori¬
zons were opened up for our remote
human ancestors, and for the evolution
of the critical hallmarks of mankind.
The earliest human ancestor as we
see it at present was a creature called
Ramapithecus known from north-west
India and East Africa. Our material
evidence for the potential humanity
of Ramapithecus is slight and consists
only of Jaws and teeth but is, neverthe¬
less, very revealing.
Ramapithecus has a distinctly man¬
like tooth form lacking all the ape-like
characters seen In Aegyptopithecus
zeuxis and Proconsul africanus. The
dental arcade Is rounded, the canines
are small and the molar teeth do not
Increase In size from front to back as
in the apes. Ramapithecus lived bet-
BABOONS
TREE SHREWS
OPOSSUM
TARSIUS
Drawing © W. Howells
NATURE'S HANDIWORK
The evolutionary process has provided man with hands of astonishing dexterity, combining
considerable strength with delicate precision. This drawing Is a combination of two
diagrams published In Dr. W. Howells' book "Mankind In the Making", Doubleday and Co.
Inc., New York, 1959.

CRANIAL
VOLUME
(cmJ)
500i-
IOOO
500-
THE EXPANDING
BRAIN OF MAN
3 million years
of growth
HOMO SAPIENS
HOMO ERECTUS
HOMO HABILIS «,-**
AUSTRALOPITHECUS ^.«^.
million years
1.75 0.7 0.2 O
Graph shows how the growth of brain capacity has turned modern man into an "egghead".
To make comparison easier the fossil remains of a Homo habilis skull are shown
superimposed on the outline of a present day skull.
ween 12-14 million years ago but of
course his ancestors may have evolved
several million years before this date.
The next recognizable stage in the
human lineage started, apparently, at
least 4-5 million years ago. There is
fragmentary evidence that pre-human
creatures belonging to the genus Aus¬
tralopithecus existed in two areas of
East Africa, called Kanapoi and Lotha-
gam. We pick up the trail of these
near-men two million years later In the
area of Lake Rudolf, again in South
Africa, and in Tanzania at Olduvai
Gorge; in all these regions they are
most prolific. The early (Lothagam
and Kanapoi) australopithecines do
not tell us very much, but the later
forms in East and South Africa show
many of the characteristics of the gait,
brain-size and tooth form that we are
searching for.
Australopithecines are generally re¬
garded as near-men. Technically, un¬
der the curious rules of current an¬
thropology, they do not qualify for the
accolade of human beings, but at Ol¬
duvai Gorge 1.75 million years ago
some of us accept the fact that the
zoological genus Homo (man) first
made his appearance.- His way of life
appears to have been that of a scaven¬
ger, a hunter of small game, and a tool-
maker.
Homo habilis, as this early man is
called, was a bipedal walker and prob¬
ably a "strider"; his brain was still
small by modern standards but bigger
than his predecessors', and his teeth
showed a slight advance on the teeth
of the australopithecines. His hands
were of a human type but lacked the
refinements of precision grip possess¬
ed by modern man.
Homo habilis was succeeded in the
fossil record by Homo erectus, known
from South-East Asia (Java), Asia
(China), Europe (West Germany) and
both North and East Africa. Early
Homo erectus (from Java) had a big¬
ger brain than Homo habilis (H. habilis,
656 cc; H. erectus 935 cc) and the later
manifestations of this species, from
Peking for example, showed a maxi¬
mum brain-size of 1,225 cc.
IIN spite of this large brain
volume, Homo erectus possesses a
skull of primitive and easily recogni¬
zable shape. His gait is assumed to
have been both bipedal and striding.
The form of his hands is unknown, so
the only guide to the extent of his
dexterity are the tools that he made.
These fall broadly into the class of
"power tools", stone artifacts of simple
construction designed for relatively
crude purposes such as killing and
skinning animals, cutting wood and
pounding vegetable products. It has
been shown by experiment that these
could have been constructed and used
in the absence of an advanced form
of precision grip.
Perhaps it was an increase in brain-
size that stimulated the evolutionary
improvement of the hand, but perhaps
It was the other way about. Anyhow
it seems highly probable that the com¬
plexity of the brain, the precision
capabilities of the hand and the
evolution of "precision tools" were
closely interlinked.
Exactly where and when Homo erec¬
tus passed the baton in the human re¬
lay-race to Homo sapiens is not
known. It may have happened in dif¬
ferent parts of the world, at different
times, and in different ways. There
is no saying which geographic popula¬
tion of early men did it first.
With the evolution of Homo sapiens,
which is dated somewhere between
250,000-400,000 years ago, our railway
journey Is almost at an end and we
are entering the suburbs of the metro¬
polis. Most of us can begin to put on
our overcoats and lift our cases down
from the rack. The engine-driver has
read the signals correctly, the signal¬
man has done his Job and our work
is virtually over over for some, but
not for all. The complexities of the sub¬
urban system are still to be nego¬
tiated, and for certain experts this part
of the trip ¡s a matter of deep concern.
They are the specialists In the
growth of agriculture, of citizenship, of
social and political systems, of the
spread of populations and the Inter¬
mingling of genes, processes which
are leading us slowly but inexorably
towards the eventual unification of
mankind in a single biological and
cultural entity. Only when the train
comes to a final stop at the terminus
at some future date will these peo¬
ple reach for their overcoats and suit¬
cases and dismount.
45
