Sea god
from the Isle of Capri
Above, archaeologists gently raise a marble statue
through the waters of the famous Blue Grotto on
the isle of Capri in the Bay of Naples. It is seen
emerging from the waters in the photo right. The
statue, badly eroded by sea water and covered
with marine incrustations (photo above right) was
discovered in 1964 and later found to be a Roman
sculpture of a sea divinity or triton, dating back
2,000 years. It is believed to have been part of a
huge sculptural group decorating the walls of the
Grotto. Underwater exploration in the Bay of
Naples has produced a rich harvest of ancient
stonework and works of art, and has brought to
light the remains of a vast architectural complex.
With its coastline stretching for over 4,000 kilo¬
metres and its history going back for millenia, Italy
is a treasure house for the underwater archaeologist.

DIVING INTO THE PAST (Continued)
The legend of the lost city of Kitezh
the ancient Greek city-colonies of
Fanagoria and Olvia.
After several summers spent work¬
ing under water they have succeeded
in establishing the boundaries, con¬
tours and area of the city of Fanagoria
which was submerged many hundreds
of years ago. Using the simplest
equipment aqualungs and a suction
dredge they have brought up material
evidence of the city's existence, in¬
cluding pieces of pottery and other
household utensils.
The great lakes of the U.S.S.R. also
hold secrets that underwater archae¬
ologists are attempting to wrest from
their depths. A few years ago, an
amateur expedition, made up of spe¬
cialists from various fields with a
common interest in underwater
archaeology, and headed by General
G.N. Karaev, set out from Leningrad
for lake Peipus.
Intrigued by the mysteries of the
past, they decided to explore the site
of the famous Battle on the Ice in
which, the Russian prince Alexander
Nevsky defeated the Teutonic knights
in 1242.
The battle was fought on the frozen
waters of Lake Peipus and ancient
chronicles record that many of the
combatants fell through the ice to a
watery grave. Underwater exploration
by general Karaev's expedition re¬
vealed traces of the battle ancient
weapons and armour.
Students and teachers of the Mos¬
cow Aviation Institute have become
spare time underwater archaeologists
whose aim is to find the lost treasure
of Napoleon. Legend has it that Napo¬
leon took with him on his hasty re¬
treat from Moscow, in 1812, a vast
caravan laden with priceless treasures.
The caravan never reached France.
The legend mentions a lake along
the route taken by the remnants of
La Grande Armée, and the young ex¬
plorers from Moscow have examined
lake after lake, so far without success.
Whether they will ever find the treas¬
ure, or indeed, whether it ever exist¬
ed, is a matter of conjecture. What is
certain, however, is that under the
most difficult conditions they have
developed new methods of underwater
research, including a means of pene¬
trating up to eleven metres of silt.
This alone is ample reward for their
efforts.
6
EaVEN more intriguing is the
story of the search for the "lost city"
of Great Kitezh. Shortly before the
Tartar-Mongolian invasion of Russia,
nearly eight centuries ago, the grand
duke of Pskov, Georgi Vsevolodovich,
travelled down the Volga with his
soldiers establishing fortified towns or
castles along the way to protect the
Russian people from the raids of
the nomads.
After founding the city of Little
Kitezh, known today as Gorodetz, he
turned away from the banks of the
Volga to travel through the forest
beside the quiet river Kerzhenetz. One
hundred kilometres from the Volga, he
ordered trees to be felled and the city
of Great Kitezh arose on the shores of
Lake Svetloyar, in the central Volga
basin.
Shortly afterwards Russia was in¬
vaded by Batu Khan. His army travel¬
led along the Volga capturing Little
Kitezh and burning it to the ground.
Batu Khan forced a prisoner to divulge
the secret of the trail that led to Great
Kitezh, and a few miles from the city
encountered duke Georgi and his
small detachment.
Not a single Russian soldier sur¬
vived the unequal battle that ensued;
but Batu Khan never succeeded in cap¬
turing Great Kitezh, for the town with
all its inhabitants had vanished.
Local legend gives three "explana¬
tions" of the disappearance of Great
Kitezh. In the first, God made the city
invisible; in the second, Kitezh cover¬
ed itself with earth and became the
hills now seen near Svetloyar;
according to the third, the city sank to
the bottom of the lake.
The legend has stirred the imagina¬
tion of generations of Russians and
inspired artists, poets and composers,
including Rimsky-Korsakov who wrote
the now famous opera, "The Legend
of the Invisible City of Kitezh."
A few years ago, I undertook to org¬
anize a combined research operation
on the Kitezh legend, under the aus¬
pices of the "Literaturnaya Gazeta". I
gathered together an expedition com¬
posed of scientists from various fields
in the hopes of discovering some
kernel of truth behind the legend, and
perhaps even of finding the mysterious
city itself.
In the autumn of 1968, we set out for
Lake Svetloyar. The archaeologists in
our group explored the lake shore for
traces of the city; scuba divers examin¬
ed the lake basin and studied the bot¬
tom; geologists, hydrologists and other
specialists determined the age and
source of the lake; and folklore ex¬
perts probed the recesses of local
folk memory, collating everything that
people knew about Kitezh, the lake
and the events of the past.
This first expedition revealed that
Lake Svetloyar is relatively young and
was formed as a result of three land
cave-ins, one of which dated back pre¬
cisely to the time of Batu Khan's inva¬
sion. Our scuba divers discovered
tree trunks on the bottom that had
once been part of the forest, thus
definitely confirming that the lake had
been formed as a result of a natural
catastrophe, but thick silt prevented
them from searching for traces of a
sunken city. Radioactive carbon analy¬
sis substantiated the dating of the
cave-in.
The following year we returned with
a sonic-geolocator, an instrument
specially designed by a Leningrad
scientist, which not only measures the
depth of water down to the bed of a
sea or lake, but' also identifies the
nature of underlying geological layers.
In an ordinary fishing boat we care¬
fully quartered the lake to plot a sonic
cross-section of the bottom. In the
northern part of the lake we discover¬
ed an oval-shaped formation which
seemed to suggest the presence of
some kind of enclosed structure.
Another year passed and, in 1970,
five test borings in the indicated area
pierced ten metres of silt to bring up
pieces of wood which bore tracesof
human activity.
Did we find Kitezh? This question
can only be answered after a further
expedition by underwater archaeolo¬
gists using powerful modern equip¬
ment.
ROFESSOR B.A. Kolchin,
another well-known Soviet archae¬
ologist and a specialist of the Slavonic
Middle Ages, believes that Lake limen,
which lies just south of the city of
Novgorod, could well conceal a large
number of wrecked ships of Norman,
Slavonic, Viking and Greek origin.
The lake once formed a junction of
waterways connecting Scandinavia
and the Slavonic world with Greece
and Rome. Though the lake is only
eight to ten metres deep, it is noted
for its fierce squalls and sudden
storms in which many vessels must
have come to grief. Here is a chal¬
lenging task for a future expedition.
Underwater archaeology is a young
science whose practitioners need the
combined abilities of athletes and scho¬
lars. Prof. Blavatsky believes the time
is ripe for setting up a special Institute
of Underwater Archaeology staffed by
scientist-diving specialists. The Insti¬
tute would need a fleet of specially de¬
signed ships and the latest underwater
exploration equipment. "As a new
branch of an old science, underwater
archaeology is directly dependent on
technological progress," he says.
Many astonishing secrets are wait¬
ing to be revealed by the pioneers of
this new science. As Philip Diolé, of
the French Museum of Natural History,
in Paris, has told archaeologists:
"Learn how to divel The future of your
science lies under water."

Photo © "Chant du Monde", Paria
In search
of sunken
cities
of ancient
Russia
Soviet archaeologists have ex¬
plored sunken cities in the Black
Sea, ancient settlements on the
Baltic and historical sites in
lakes and rivers during the past
15 years. From the bed of Lake
Peipus, southwest of Leningrad,
they have recovered ancient
weapons and armour from the
epic battle fought on the ice in
1242 by a Russian army led by
Prince Alexander Nevsky which
defeated an invading, force of
Teutonic Knights. Above, pre¬
lude to battle, a scene from
"Alexander Nevsky", the 1938
film of the famous Soviet direc¬
tor Sergei Eisenstein. One ex¬
pedition investigated the ancient
legend according to which the
city of Kitezh sank beneath Lake
Svetloyar, in the central Volga
basin, 800 years ago. The story
inspired many artists, poets and
composers, including Nikolai
Rimsky-Korsakov, whose opera
"The Legend of the Invisible City
of Kitezh" was first produced In
St. Petersburg in 1907. Left, the
sunken city of Kitezh depicted
on the cover of a French record
of the opera.
7
