Your heart
i
by George Teeling-Smith
Director of the Office
of Health Economics. London
VIM 9B>
\\Mgmmf'.
**9**'^
VISUAL
'STETHOSCOPE'
By linking an X-Ray machine with a computer, American medical
research workers have devised a new, experimental diagnostic tool
that will enable doctors to "see" a patient's heart-beat.
The X-Rays pick up the traces of a special contrast fluid
previously injected into the heart and the computer re-constitutes
a visual image (above) of the heart in each stage of contraction.

We present below a forecast on heart disease
and vascular diseases in the 1990s their preven¬
tion, diagnosis and treatment. The forecast is
adapted from a broad analysis produced by the
Office of Health Economics in London. The full
study, carried out under the supervision of its
Director, George Teeling-Smith, ranges over many
branches of medicine from allergic disorders and
cancer to mental illness and virus infections. On
page 30, the Soviet cardiologist. Prof. Igor Shkhvat-
sabaya. Director of the Myasnikov Cardiological
Institute, in Moscow, comments on these forecasts.
Coronary
heart disease
preventing coronary heart disease by
most of the currently mooted methods
will at least have been thoroughly
explored.
BLOOD LIPIDS (fats). The effec¬
tiveness of one important cholesterol-
lowering medicine will be known by
1975. A definitive answer concerning
the benefits to be obtained from
dietary changes affecting blood lipids
will not be available before 1980, if
then. There is a very strong and
fairly general expectation that lower
blood lipid levels are more likely to
be achieved by medicines than by
dietary changes. By 1975, we should
have medicines to decrease the body's
absorption or synthesis of lipo¬
proteins. Whatever means of affecting
blood lipids is adopted, a screening
process, probably including young
adults and children, will identify those
with abnormal blood levels.
HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE. The
results of various trials will soon result
in routine screening being offered. By
1980, people will probably be given
a blood pressure screening every year,
possibly even by self-measurement.
Safe and effective medicines for the
control of a high blood pressure will
be available, perhaps given in fixed-
dose regimens.
Some five to ten per cent of the
middle-aged men screened will be
found to need lipid control; some two
per cent of middle-aged and old
people screened will need control of
blood pressure. It is estimated, how¬
ever, that only 50 per cent of those
needing such controls will adopt and
persevere with treatment. In addition,
some 25 per cent of persons who have
had an attack of coronary heart
disease will receive treatment aimed
at reducing blood lipid levels.
DIABETES. The association of
diabetes with coronary heart disease
(and with strokes and disease of the
limb arteries) is already established,
and by 1975, trials will have proved
the value of anti-diabetic treatment in
preventing the occurrence of these
diseases in borderline diabetics. Once
such proof is available, then, as with
high blood lipid levels and a raised
blood pressure, widespread preventive
measures will be undertaken.
OBESITY. The treatment of obesity
is already regarded as a medical task,
and medicines which effectively "burn
off" excess calories without other un
desirable side effects should soon be
available. This approach is more likely
to be effective than educational
measures to improve dietary habits.
CIGARETTE SMOKING. Present
evidence incriminating cigarette smok¬
ing will be stronger by 1975 and, by
1990, cigarette consumption, at least
in high-risk subjects, may be only
50 per cent of present levels.
OTHER RISK FACTORS. Other
known or suggested risk factors
include lack of exercise, an inherited
tendency to the disease, and stress;
these may be less amenable to control.
To combat stress there may be ways
of controlling the heart action, when
necessary, so that emotional over¬
loading does not occur.
EARLY TREATMENT. In order to
combat the very high mortality in the
first hour after coronary thrombosis,
a form of treatment may be developed
that could be used immediately the
patient is seen by his family doctor,
or possibly even by the patient himself
as soon as he had a symptom suggest¬
ing an attack. This would give pro¬
tection for some hours against the
dangerous disturbances of the heart's
rhythm that commonly occur in this
condition. If the patient is to be able
to apply the treatment himself, it would
have to be extremely safe, since it
would often be mistakenly used for
minor conditions.
CONTROL OF SHOCK. Better
blood plasma substitutes and better
pharmaceutical control of shock will
also help in the treatment of the
disease once it has gained a footing,
as will electrical pacing of the heart.
These advances will come mostly from
the experience gained in intensive
coronary care units which will continue
for some years but which may, if
safe efficient therapy can be derived,
be a passing phase.
ANGINA PECTORIS (a condition
allied in various ways to coronary
thrombosis). More effective, long-
acting preparations, which might
improve the blood supply to the heart
muscle, and medicines designed to
prevent anginal attacks while not
depressing the heart muscle will both
be developed by 1975.
NEW MEDICINES FORECAST. By
1975, new medicines should be
available to increase the blood's
ability to dissolve the fibrin of blood
clots. On the other hand, there Is
probably a less promising future for
anti-coagulant medicines. Other new
medicines forecast include some that
will increase the strength of con
traction of the heart muscle while not
affecting the heart's rhythm adversely,
and new diuretics (medicines that
stimulate urination) suitable for cases
resistant to present diuretics or less
liable to cause a loss of potassium
from the body. Myocardial infarction
will probably be treated by direct
injection through the skin into the
heart of tissue culture extracts
containing capillary vessel buds and
growth-stimulating substances making
revascularization surgery unnecessary.
SURGERY. In a small proportion
of the very large number of cases
surgery will still be needed. Artificial
hearts should be perfected by 1990
and may replace human and animal
transplants because of availability.
Some experts believe that pig hearts
will be increasingly used for heart
transplantation, the specially bred pigs
being "immunized" beforehand against
a rejection of their hearts by the
human recipients.
PREDICTION AND PREVENTION.
By 1990, it should be possible to
predict which people are going to have
an attack of coronary thrombosis
within a matter of days and to minimize
their chances of dying from a sudden
disturbance of heart action. Great
advances should be made in cardio¬
logical diagnosis. This should make
it possible to carry out automated
predictive studies, for example at
three-monthly intervals. These could
indicate whether the heart was per¬
forming easily or haltingly. Even if
this particular approach does not
prove successful, it should bring
benefits by re-orienting the medical
profession to a predictive approach
to heart disease. There is dis¬
agreement as to the effect of the
various preventive measures on the
incidence and mortality of coronary
heart disease; the forecasts range
from "an important fall" to no very
marked change in the national
coronary mortality rate despite all
the methods of prevention adopted.
Vascular diseases
The problems of vascular disease
are in many ways similar to those of
heart disease.
HYPERTENSION. Substantial pro¬
gress cannot be expected until there
is a better understanding of the under¬
lying mechanisms of vascular changes
and the causes of hypertension (high
blood pressure). This is likely to m in
come within ten years. It should then JjX
be possible to use naturally occurring *
hypotensive agents to control hyper¬
tension. Immediate advances in vas-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

I IM THE YEAR 1990 (Continued)
cular diseases will depend on better
peripheral vascular diagnostic proced¬
ures, probably based on ultra-sonic
techniques.
TRACE ELEMENTS. Another possible
form of progress will be the identi¬
fication of trace metals and other
"micro-nutrients" whose absence may
be responsible for vascular damage.
Once these are identified, and tests
have been developed to indicate their
presence, replacement therapy should
be possible for individuals in whom
they are lacking. This may be avail¬
able by 1975 or 1980. A better under¬
standing of the general aging process
and its effect on the blood vessels
should be achieved by 1990.
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS. It is
also likely that other environmental
causative agents will be identified and
(as with smoking at present) the
challenge will be to change national
habits to reduce exposure to such
causes.
SURGERY. In the immediate future,
surgical techniques will improve, and
lasers, for instance, will be used to
burn away diseased tissue. The next
step forward will be in the field of
vascular replacement, first with grafts
from humans and then with grafts from
animal banks and finally with grafts
from tissue culture extracts such as
chick-embryo growth extract mixed
with vascular buds which will be devel¬
oped from a small piece of specially
treated patient's tissue.
THROMBOSIS. Early in the 1970s,
"thrombo-prophylaxis" should be pos
sible by separating anti-thrombotic and
anti-coagulant properties. Specific
fibrin-dissolving enzymes should be
available to prevent thrombus (blood
clot) formation.
HIGH-RISK SUBJECTS. There will
remain the problem of identifying
high-risk individuals and pre-sympto-
matic cases and getting social
acceptance for large-scale preventive
medication in these individuals. This
need for early identification of vas¬
cular or blood changes is particularly
important, first because many acute
bouts of vascular disease are rapidly
fatal and second because the changes
which have occurred by the time symp¬
toms appear are often irreversible.
Specifically, the brain damage caused
by a vascular catastrophe will still be
untreatable by 1990.
Conclusion
The pessimistic view is that the
conquest of many diseases of middle-
age (and particularly coronary heart
disease) will leave growing numbers to
suffer in old age from progressively
destructive vascular disorders and de¬
terioration of their nervous system.
The more optimistic view is that des¬
pite the great difficulties the causes of
vascular disorders also will be under¬
stood, and that the medical profes¬
sion and the public will accept the con¬
sequent implications of early diagnosis
and long-term therapy for those at
risk. In this way vascular diseases
could be effectively controlled by the
1990s.

