Do-it-yourself
schools
in the Philippines
by Pedro T. Orata
I HERE is a saying that if
Mohammed cannot go to the moun¬
tain, the mountain must go to Moham¬
med. This principle has been applied
in the Philippines during recent years
to help make education at all levels
available as quickly as possible es¬
pecially to children living in the most
remote villages, and at little or no extra
cost to the government. The aim has
been to provide children with the
kind and quality of education which
they can afford and which is most
relevant to their needs.
These self-help Innovations com¬
prise barrio (village) high schools, pre-
schools, community colleges, and mul-
tigrade schools, on the one hand, and
on the other, science teaching and
social studies for better living, teach¬
ing learners to think, to weigh values,
to work and to earn money to pay their
tuition fees and other school expen¬
ses, and training educational leaders
to do action research.
The projects were started in 1945,
immediately after World War II, with
the establishment of the first high
school outside a provincial capital, at
Urdanata, Pangasinan, in a roofless
church and without books, pencils or
paper, or money to pay teachers'
salaries.
The aim was to give every boy and
girl a chance to go to school by bring¬
ing the school to within walking or
commuting d'stance of their homes,
and to help them and their parents
24
PEDRO T. ORATA is the founder of the barrio
(village) education movement in the Philip¬
pines which he describes In this article. He
received the Magsaysay Award this year for
his 26 years of public service as an educa¬
tional Innovator. (These awards, made by
the Ramon Magsaysay Foundation in the Phi¬
lippines, and often called the "Nobel Prizes
of Asia", are given to Asian leaders In rec¬
ognition of public service.) Dr. Orata was a
member of Unesco's Department of Educa¬
tion from 1950 to 'I960, and Is now an honor¬
ary special assistant to the Secretary of
Education of the Philippines. He has written
extensively on the problems of education in
the developing countries.
(as part of their education for daily
life) to earn more by improving the
productivity of their farms or plots of
land and through the acquisition of
new skills to enable them to help
support their own schools.
We started from where the people
were, with what they had, with exist¬
ing school facilities, equipment and
personnel, and proceeded one step
forward or even half a step at a
time, the people themselves (children
and adults) helping to make the deci¬
sions, formulate the plans, carry them
out and assess their performance, on
the basis of which they helped revise
the programme.
If we had waited until all was well
provided buildings, textbooks, scien¬
ce equipment, well qualified teachers,
etc. the 250,000 children and young
people who are now enrolled in some
1,500 barrio high schools, 45 commu¬
nity colleges and 500 pre-schools
would still be waiting for a chance to
go to school.
We began with a survey of the
situation in order to find out what was
good about it; what, in fact, should
and could be continued and extended?
We did not start by asking for addi¬
tional funds, equipment and personnel,
but did what we could to make better
use of what was available. In some
cases, we had nothing with which to
begin but the will to do what we believ¬
ed needed to be done, and so we
went ahead the best we could.
The purpose of this positive ap¬
proach was to avoid the all too com¬
mon practice in the Philippines, and
perhaps elsewhere as well, of starting
with a recital of a long list of prob¬
lems and difficulties, after which every¬
body is discouraged and no one dares
make a start.
The way we did it, the people were
generally encouraged to go ahead
further after learning that they had
done many things that were worthwhile
and good. This approach may have its
limitations, but it has also its advan¬
tages. People are encouraged to go
on and they feel better able to do so
than if they start with a feeling of frus¬
tration and despair.
We looked at each situation to find
out what knowhow (local and foreign),
facilities, and resources were available
with a view to using them to the full
as a means partial or total of put¬
ting up additional classes, or under¬
taking experiments, or improvising
needed equipment, conducting semi¬
nars and workshops, and so on.
Where rooms were used only for
five or six hours a day, it was possible,
by rearranging the schedule of
classes, to add one or two high
school, pre-school, or community col¬
lege classes, which were scheduled
to meet when the rooms were free.
The home economics cottage, the
shop and garden tools and equipment,
the school garden itself, could be
used when not needed by the regular
classes, which occupied them for only'
part of the school day.
I N the Philippines there are
many qualified teachers who are un¬
employed. We used them to teach
the additional classes. There are also
many teachers who are qualified, or
who "an qualify with little additional
training, to teach these classes, for
which they receive a modest fee to
supplement their small regular salary.
So we gave them the extra job, which
required one or two additional hours a
day, and which they invariably wel¬
comed.
Existing elementary or high school
libraries were used for the time being,
with a supplement of books.
In schools, in hospitals, in chemists'
shops, and in the homes of students
there are innumerable objects that are
discarded and thrown away: burned-
out electric bulbs, empty cans and
bottles, worn-out tyres and inner-
tubes, broken glasses, corn husks,
bamboo and wood. These were u§ed
to improvise science equipment for
CONTINUED PAGE 26

>.f*''
^ -T.'-!.
£»Tl*
<
*
*"
a.
The Philippines has been making an enormous effort to expand education in recent years. In seeking to give more
children access to schools, Philippine educators have come up against two major problems: low family income
(annual average $150 per person) in a country that is rich in natural resources but insufficiently Industrialized; and
the large number of isolated communities In this mountainous archipelago which comprises 11 big islands and 7,000
small ones. Eight million children and teenagers are still unable to attend school regularly, according to an official
of the Philippines Department of Education. This situation applies as much to rural schools (above a village hidden
away in the tropical forest of northern Luzon) as to those in small towns such as Dagupan, north of Manila where
horse-drawn cabs (below) are a familiar part of the street scene.

DO-IT-YOURSELF SCHOOLS (Continued)
This little piggie went to market, this little piggie went to school...
26
high school and college classes and
play equipment for pre-school children.
The principal of the school or the
district supervisor served, with token
payment, as assistant principal or offl-
cer-in-charge of the high school, pre¬
school or college, to administer the
additional classes. This resulted in a
process of inter-relation (at no extra
expense) between the elementary and
even high school and college, which
is one of the most pressing aims of
school administrators everywhere, in
the Philippines and in other countries.
Equally important was to make use
of other countries' experience in deal¬
ing with similar problems. What have
educators done in Switzerland, in
Israel, and in Singapore to deal with
the language problem? What has been
done and Is being done, and with
what success, in Burma, in Thailand,
in Fiji, in India, in Australia to relate
the content of instruction at the
various levels to the problems and
needs of the people, especially in the
villages?
Foreign experience was not copied,
but adapted to problems as they
arose. Unless this is done, what is
likely to happen and Is happening in
some places now is for a country to
repeat the mistakes made elsewhere
instead of learning from such mis¬
takes.
What about teachers' salaries, text¬
books, library books, and other essen¬
tials? Again, we looked around to see
how private schools and colleges,
starting from scratch, have been able
to establish, operate, and maintain
their institutions with substantial profit
to themselves. If they were able to
do so, why with all the facilities
already available could not the new
classes be operated on a non-profit
basis?
Before a high school class is opened
in a barrio (village) elementary school
this applies also to pre-school
and community college classes the
parents and would-be students sign
an agreement that they will, by work¬
ing more to earn extra income, sup¬
port the barrio high school, community
college or pre-school classes, pay the
teachers' salaries, buy the textbooks
or pay the rentals on them, purchase
additional library books or equipment
(that cannot be improvised), etc.
The students and their parents are
assisted in their effort to earn more
by raising the productivity of their
plots of land and farms or to start a
new business or project to earn extra
cash. This is not extra-curricular, but
is made part of the school curriculum
to prepare the students for life and
self-employment, and to give their
parents, who may be awarded a certi¬
ficate of proficiency In recognition of
their newly acquired competence, use¬
ful continuing education. The students
are given high school or college credit
for doing these things to help them¬
selves and each other.
The extension workers of the Bureau
of Plant Industry, the Bureau of Ani¬
mal Industry, PACD (Presidential
Assistance for Community Develop¬
ment), NACIDA (National Cottage
Industries Development Administra¬
tion), and other government entities
are consulted and asked for help
so' that students and their parents will
acquire the new skills' and aptitudes
that they need. Invariably the help is
given gladly and free of charge.
If, for example, a student is given
a piglet to take care of and later on
to sell at a profit, out of which he pays
his tuition fees and other expenses, he
is guided in the work, as part of his
education. He is shown how to take
care of the piglet, how to raise its
food, what to do if it becomes ill, how
to have it injected to prevent it
becoming ill, and after he sells the pig,
to return the initial amount used to
buy the piglet, with the legal interest
of 6 per cent lo the revolving fund or
to the person who bought it for him.
We have been fortunate, from the
beginning and as we went along, to
get a little help from outside, including
foreign agencies the Barrio Book
Foundation, the Asia Foundation,- UNI¬
CEF, Unesco (through its Gift Coupon
scheme), PACD, and others in the
form of limited funds with which to
purchase textbooks to be resold at
low cost to the barrio high schools
and community colleges, to improvise
science and play equipment; to prov¬
ide teaching guides, etc.
IN this way, it has been
possible within the last seven years to
enrol, at little or no additional govern¬
ment expense, more than a quarter of
a million children and youths in barrio
high schools, community colleges, and
pre-schools. These projects were
started In 1964, 1966 and 1969, res¬
pectively.
This year we expect to open "multi-
grade schools" (schools with first to
sixth grade classes under one teacher)
for the most remote villages of the
Philippines. If fully implemented, this
project will benefit over a million young
people who either do not go to school
at all or remain in school for a very
short time.

'BARRIO' SCHOOLS
Since 1945, schools at every level In the
Philippines have mushroomed thanks to a
nationwide campaign based on ingenuity
and imagination. Undaunted by lack of
ideally suitable buildings and specialized
teaching material, educators and teachers
have helped communities in all parts of the
country to set up classrooms that are used
in rotation throughout the day for primary,
secondary and higher education. The
network today comprises 1,500 barrio
(village) schools attended by 160,000 pupils,
one-third of whom are teenagers. Far
left, nursery school children stage an
impromptu show. Left, primary schoolgirl
plays with a piglet, contributed by the
local community fund. In school she learns
how to rear the piglet, the sale of which
will pay for the school materials she needs
for one year. Right, a village home
economics classroom for intermediate grade
girls. "Multigrade" schools, with first to
sixth grade classes under one teacher, are
now being opened to bring education to
a million more youngsters.
This should not be taken to mean
that money as much of it as may be
available is not necessary. Of
course it is, and the more the better.
But money is not all that is required.
Imaginative, selfless, and dedicated
leadership is necessary to do better
what is being done with existing
resources, facilities, equipment and
personnel.
Furthermore, the extra money that
is needed may be raised and contrib¬
uted by the people themselves as part
of their continuing education for life.
And if by any chance the Govern¬
ment has money to spare, it may be
used to provide revolving funds to
establish work projects for the stu¬
dents and their parents.
Many so-called innovations are very
expensive, and what is more, after the
equipment is installed, it is often not
used because nobody has been train¬
ed to operate and repair it if it should
get out of order. In education, every
effort should be made to encourage
innovations that are not expensive,
which the country can afford. It is
better if some of the machines or
equipment that may be needed can be
Improvised. We did this, first In scien¬
ce and then in the social studies, In
pre-school, in practical arts, In home
economics, etc.
In improvising such equipment, the
children not infrequently did some of
the work at home where, invariably,
the parents and other children took
part to their own benefit. Indeed,
some of the equipment, such as lamps,
weighing devices, etc., are useful in
the home. Very often, housewives
are cheated in the market where
weighing machines and measuring
sticks are tampered with.
We started by doing things that
were possible with existing facilities
and personnel, after which there was
ample time to do the other things that
required more money, time and effort.
We found that the best preparation for
the more elaborate operations is suc¬
cess in undertaking simpler projects
requiring little or no extra funds or
training abroad. Once simple pro¬
jects have been undertaken suc¬
cessfully, the more difficult ones are
more easily handled than would at first
have seemed possible.
WiHAT about improving the
relevance and quality of education?
We have not gone far on this either,
but we have taken a few steps forward.
We extended the teaching of scien¬
ce beyond the learning or memorizing
of scientific facts and discovering
principles by the so-called "process"
or "discovery approach". We asked
the question: "After the discovery of
a scientific principle, what follows?"
We went two steps further; first, we
made an effort to lead the pupils to
apply the principle in very simple and
practical ways to select seeds for
planting or to lay out a bamboo irri¬
gation scheme from an artesian well;
and second, we guided them to share
what they knew and the benefit of what
they did to apply scientific principles,
with their classmates and neighbours.
We guided science students to
improvise scientific equipment, to save
money, which was not available, and
more importantly, to make science
learning more meaningful and interest¬
ing, as well as useful, to them. This
is not without precedent. In Switzer¬
land, to give one example, watch-mak¬
ing students devote the first year of
a four-year course to making the
tools with which to construct a watch
as part of their "on the job" training.
The social studies courses were
designed to prevent students from ever
becoming criminals or victims of crime.
They not only learned what was good,
but they practised doing it as well.
Furthermore, they shared their know¬
ledge with their classmates and
neighbours.
We tried to teach them from the
first grade or even pre-school to
think, to weigh values, and to act
accordingly. We made use of real
life situations In the classroom and in
the community, on the bus or the side¬
walk, etc., and we used-the situations
abundantly described in all the text¬
books to stimulate them to think and
to act accordingly.
We still have far to go. But we feel
that selfless, dedicated, and imagin¬
ative leadership is needed as much
or, in many cases, more than money.
If money was available, well and good,
but we did not wait until we got it.
If we had, we would still be waiting.
As it happened, when the govern¬
ment saw the good that resulted from
our efforts, it offered to provide
funds. And, paradoxically enough,
there is now an effort to make high
school education free. This would be
a mistake, first because the govern¬
ment cannot afford it; and second,
because it would result in the students
and their parents being deprived of
the means of working harder to help
themselves, as part of their education
and preparation for life and self-
employment.
To sum up, we undertook the many
projects which we thought were
needed, without funds, by the simple
expedient of helping the children and
their parents to help themselves In
opening and supporting their own
schools and colleges, by improving the
productivity of their plots and farms
by the use of better methods and
more effective skills. This is a very t\"l
important part of their "education for £f
life," and why not as part of their
preparation for higher studies, as
well?
