by
K.R. Srinivasa Iyengar
W,
4
K.R. SRINIVASA IYENGAR, Indian educator,
author and critic, has made a special study
of the life and philosophical works of Sri
Aurobindo, to whom he devoted his latest
book, 'Sri Aurobindo: a Biography and a
History", published recently In two volumes
at Pondlcherry, India. He was formerly head
of the English Department at Andhra Univer¬
sity (S.E. India) and Its V'Ice-Chancellor be¬
fore his election In 1969 as Vice-President
of the National Academy of Letters in New
Delhi. He has published biographies of Ra-
blndranath Tagore, François Mauriac, Shakes¬
peare and other writers.
AS it just a quirk of fate
that Sri Aurobindo, the Indian philo¬
sopher, poet and patriot whose cen¬
tenary we celebrate this year, was
born 75 years to the day before India
achieved independence?
Aurobindo himself regarded the fact
that his 75th birthday coincided with
the proclamation of an independent
India on August 15, 1947, (our "tryst
with destiny" as prime minister Jawa¬
harlal Nehru called it) "not as a fortui¬
tous accident but as a sanction and
seal of the Divine Power that guides
my steps".
Third son of a surgeon, Aurobindo
received an English education at Lor-
etto Convent School, Darjeeling, India,
and St. Paul's School, London, before
reading classics at Cambridge. Return¬
ing to India in 1893, he accepted ser¬
vice in the Baroda State in western
India, rising to become Vice-Principal
and professor at Baroda College and
later Principal of the new National Col¬
lege in Calcutta.
But with the Indian sub-continent,
which he saw not just as a geogra¬
phical area but as Bharati the Mother,
under foreign domination, Aurobindo
set little store on the easy security
afforded by his teaching career and
embarked on a two-pronged program¬
me of revolutionary action.
At first he was content to exercise
from behind the scenes a long-dis¬
tance control over a secret, nation¬
wide, revolutionary organization that
would be ready when the time came
for armed uprising. Then, in 1906, he
openly entered the arena of nationalist
politics, and as de facto editor of the
Calcutta daily newspaper "Bande
Mataram" he preached the nationalist
cause with missionary fervour.
Already Sri Aurobindo's "Bhavani
Mandir", which in the eyes of the alien
bureaucracy was an incendiary pamph¬
let, was in secret circulation among
young revolutionaries. Now his open
espousal of extremist nationalism
made him the most dangerous man

Unesco's General Conference begins its session on October 17
this year. At its last session in 1970 it invited all Unesco member
states and non-governmental organizations to participate in
this year's centenary of the birth of Sri Aurobindo, the great
Indian spiritual leader and philosopher. An exhibition on Sri
Aurobindo's life and work will be held at Unesco headquarters
in Paris from October 16 to 26. Special ceremonies have taken
place and will take place at Pondicherry, south of Madras on
the east coast of India and on the nearby site of Auroville,
the international city named after Aurobindo. In this issue
published in the international spirit of Unesco's General Confer¬
ence we present articles on the life and teaching of Sri Auro¬
bindo; the traditional music of Africa; a Kirghiz writer speaking
about his country, Kirghizia; the glorious heritage of Taxila
in Pakistan; and finally International Book Year and Unesco
as a publishing house.
o
U

IN THE PATH OF A GREAT SAGE
SRI AUROBINDO
Sri Aurobindo in his 78th year,
a few months before his death in 1950.
in India. Following the killing of the
Pringle-Kennedy ladies at Muzzafer-
pore by two revolutionary hotheads,
Sri Aurobindo was arrested and placed
in solitary confinement in the Alipur
jail On charges of conspiracy.
After a prolonged trial he was
acquitted and released in May 1909.
But during his time in prison Sri Auro¬
bindo underwent a mystic experience .
which decided him to turn his back
on politics and retire ^to the French
settlement at Pondicherry in southern
India for the undisturbed pursuit of
Yoga and spirituality.
In his "Cave of Tapasya" at Pondi¬
cherry, he set about working out the
meaning of the spiritual insights he
had received while in jail. In collabora¬
tion with a French woman, Madame
Mira Richard, who was to become
known as "The Mother", he launched
the monthly philosophical journal
"Arya" and founded the famous Ash¬
ram, or settlement.
Although Madame Richard had to
return to France with the outbreak of
the First World War, Aurobindo kept
the journal going until 1921, publishing
in it in serial form a number of philo¬
sophical treatises such as "The Life
Divine", "The Human Cycle", "The
Ideal of Human Unity", "The Synthesis
of Yoga", "The Secret of the Veda",
"Essays on the Gita", "Foundations
of Indian Culture" and "The Future
Poetry".
Sri Aurobindo's achievement as a
lyricist, dramatist and epic poet must
rank him among the great creative
writers of our time. Yet it is not
merely as a writer and poet, but as a
thinker and prophet that Sri Auro¬
bindo has made his unique impact
upon our age.
In his Independence Day message
of August 15, 1947, Sri Aurobindo
referred to five world movements
with which he had involved himself
and whose fulfilment he hoped for a
free and united India, a resurgent Asia,
an emerging world union, the overflow
of India's spirituality into Europe and
America, and, finally, "a step in evo¬
lution which would raise man to a
higher and larger consciousness". The
last was the most important and was
the theme of "The Life Divine", "The
Human Cycle" and "The Ideal of
Human Unity".
Sri Aurobindo's diagnosis of the
present human predicament is that,
while man's mastery over the outside
world has been growing at an acceler¬
ated pace, his inner development
seems to have halted long ago. Our
environment is changing fast, but the
inner climate has remained the same.
So far only the first three stages of
evolution have emerged, the develop¬
ment from "matter" to "life" and from
"life" to "mind"; but the time has
come for the step forward to the
"supermind" and the "divinisation" of
man and the universe.
Sri Aurobindo died on December 5,
1950, but his work has been continu¬
ed by "The Mother". It was in further-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

A GREAT SAGE (Continued)
anee of his vision of the future that
"Auroville", the international "City of
Dawn" was inaugurated in February
1968.
Though nearly twenty-two years
have passed since the death of Sri
Aurobindo, his influence is still keenly
felt, particularly so in this his cen¬
tenary year. He was cast in the hallow¬
ed mould of India's great sages and
Rishis, and it was his destiny to par¬
ticipate in great world movements and
help hasten their fulfilment. He saw
India bound and willed her free; he
saw that man was a creature of infinity
in his aspirations, but a maimed thing
in reality because of the limitations of
egoistic desire, inbuilt incapacity and
the certainty of death.
The Ashram at Pondicherry and
Auroville represent the dynamic phase
of Sri Aurobindo's spiritual philosophy.
They are but mini-worlds, spiritual pilot
projects in which several hundred men,
women and children drawn from most
of the nationalities of the world are
laying the foundations of the "Deva
Sangha" (the Community of Gods) that
Sri Aurobindo envisaged.
The Ashram and Auroville are still
but the beginning of beginnings; no
more than hints and guesses, sketches
and opening bars of music. They are,
if you will, like promissory notes; but
the seal and the signature are Sri
Aurobindo's.
Landmarks
in a life
of dedication
D Aurobindo as a schoolboy in
Manchester, in 1883. Son of an Indian
surgeon, he was born in Calcutta and was
1 educated in England from the age of seven.
H Sri Aurobindo in 1919, preparing an article
for "Arya" the monthly philosophical journal he
founded with Madame Mira Richard,
the Frenchwoman disciple who later became
known as "The Mother" of the Ashram.
Q Aurobindo (seated centre, second from left) with other Indian nationalist
leaders at Poona, near Bombay (1906-1907). After completing his studies
at Cambridge, Aurobindo returned to India in 1893 to become a Professor
at Baroda College in western India. In 1906 he became openly Involved with
the nationalist movement in which his activities led to a term of imprisonment.
After his release in 1909, he turned his back on politics and retired to
Pondicherry where he founded his "Ashram", or spiritual community.
Photo © Dominique Darr, Paris

Sri Aurobindo at Pondicherry in 1919,
the period at which he produced many of his
great philosophical writings.
Q A photograph of "The Mother" taken in Pondicherry
last year. Mira Richard was born in Paris in 1878
and first met Sri Aurobindo in 1914. In 1926, Sri
Aurobindo entrusted the administration of the communal
life of the Ashram and the spiritual guidance
of his disciples to her.
Part of the crowd
attending a "darshan" or
balcony ceremony at the
Sri Aurobindo Ashram.
Four times a year, in
February, April, August
and November,
"The Mother" appears on
the balcony of her
apartment to greet the
disciples and visitors
gathered below In silent
respect.
Disciples meditate at
the tomb of Sri Aurobindo.
