Within the framework of International
Book Year, Unesco is publishing a
study on the book situation in the
world today, entitled " The Book
Hunger ". The study was written in
part by Prof. Robert Escarpit, the
French author and critic, and in part
by Ronald Barker, Secretary of the
Publishers Association of Great
Britain. The following article is a
condensation from two
of Prof. Escarpit's chapters.
"Girl Reading, with Red
Background",
by Pablo Picasso,
an oil painting
on wood, 1953.

READING
HABITS
AND BOOK
HUNGER
by Robert Escarpit
6
W,ILBUR SCHRAMM, in
Mass Media and National Develop¬
ment (published by Unesco in 1964),
describes two families in developing
countries. One family is African.
Communications are intense within the
family group, but it seems to be totally
unaware of what is happening just a
few miles away. One of the children
has been to school, but from lack of
practice he has forgotten how to read
and write, for there are no newspapers
ROBERT ESCARPIT is Professor of Comparat¬
ive Literature at the University of Bordeaux,
France, where he is also Director of the
Institut de Littérature et de Techniques
Artistiques de Masse. Literary historian and
specialist in publishing. Prof. Escarpit
regularly contributes a humorous column to
the Paris daily 'Le Monde". His Study
'The Revolution in Books" was published by
Unesco in 1965. (See "Unesco Courier",
September 1965.)
or books in the society in which he
lives.
The other family is Asian. Its links
with the outside world are more
numerous and long-standing, but the
whole social structure and the tradi¬
tional psychology of the elders pre¬
vent any real exchanges of ideas and
knowledge taking place with this out¬
side world, of which the family is both
well aware and apprehensive. Experi¬
ence is built up locally in conformity
with an ancient wisdom which has
used written expression for centuries,
not to disseminate thought, but to
conserve it.
What meaning can reading have in
these two families? In the former, liter¬
acy teaching and schooling lead up
blind alleys. It is possible, at the
cost of great effort, to teach members
of this family to decipher a text, but
actual reading will not result until the
need for communication is felt, that is,
until there is a desire for change.
Insofar as reading represents an
approach to others, a re-creation
from something offered by others, it
represents a quest for what is new.
If it is to have meaning, there must be
a will to innovate. In the case in
point this may occur as a result of
practical education in agricultural
techniques, and the first steps along
this path may come from listening to
a crackling old wireless set rather
than sitting over a book or newspaper.
In the Asian family, too, it is the
will to innovate which must provide
the urge to read. But here it is more
likely to lead to a clash between
generations with politics entering into

*^Va
Lady Bagrit Collection, London © Kunstanatalt Max Jaffa, Vienna Spadem
the picture. Whether or not written
communication is actually used will
then depend largely on opinion trends,
the steps taken by the authorities and
the enterprise shown by producers
and distributors at the national and
regional levels.
In both cases reading will come
into its own eventually, for only read¬
ing makes it possible to obtain infor¬
mation at will and thus establish atti¬
tudes and consolidate new ways of
thinking and behaving. However, the
means by which these new ways of
thinking and behaving are established
differ greatly from one situation to
another and so, too, do the ways in
which reading becomes a part of
social life.
It is therefore understandable that
the "reading habit", which does not
mean the same thing even in the two
cases considered above, has a differ¬
ent meaning again for a city-dweller
in a highly developed country reared
from infancy in and by means of the
written word, and so accustomed to
consulting it to bring his stock of
information up to date that he is some¬
times even unaware of doing so.
Since it is no longer part of a vital
process or motivated by a social or
psychological need, reading in a con¬
sumer society becomes a marginal
activity, a means rather than an end
in itself.
In other words, "not reading" is not
at all the same thing for a man living
in a world where reading has no
place, no purpose, no permanent sup¬
port, as it is for a man involved, be
it unwittingly, in the reading of a huge
variety of material newspapers, pub¬
licity, printed forms, instructions
amongst which books are but one
item.
A survey conducted in Italy, in 1962,
revealed that out of 400 persons of
all social strata 31 had never read a
book and 129 no longer read books.
In other words, 40 per cent were non-
readers. Another survey carried out
on 2,277 persons in Hungary, in 1964,
showed that 39.4 per cent were non-
readers. Finally, the results of a sur¬
vey conducted in France, in 1967, by
the French Public Opinion Institute
(IFOP) showed that in an adult popu¬
late of 6,865, 53 per cent were non-
readers.
However, if differences in criteria
and methods are taken into account,
this percentage, which shocked French
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

j ^^
r «HP
1
¿i ^ nW^"^ s
Ell M
Û
£ L ¡ lik 1*9
= "V '
£
ri
1 w
kL^ «
ia.
8
BOOK HUNGER (Continued)
opinion at the time, is not in contra¬
diction with results obtained elsewhere.
Even in the most highly developed
countries a fairly large proportion of
those who are able to read never, or
hardly ever, read books.
Paradoxically, this proportion is
probably larger in the developed coun¬
tries, where schooling for all has made
learning to read an obligation, than it
is in countries where progress in
development is in fact measured in
terms of the literacy rate and where
those who can read are very highly
motivated to do so.
In the Netherlands, where reading
is very widespread, a survey in 1960,
in which the question of not reading
was not specifically raised, showed
that 40 per cent of the persons inter¬
viewed said that they did not like
reading. Yet, in East Pakistan, a
sample survey made in 1963-1964
among 145 families of government
employees of all levels revealed only
53 non-readers out of a total of 488
persons over the age of 12, that is,
less than 11 per cent.
The percentage of non-readers
would probably be higher still if the
investigation were confined to those
over school age. Lack of interest in
reading is not so common in youth.
Two surveys on the reading of young
recruits, one conducted in Switzer¬
land in 1960, the other in France in
1962-1963, gave very similar and
remarkably low percentages of non-
readers: 7. per cent in Switzerland,
8,9 per cent in France.
This fact is confirmed by the Italian
survey mentioned earlier. Out of
400 persons interviewed 160 were non-
readers, but whereas 31 said that
they had never been interested in
reading, 129 said that they had lost
the habit. The latter had therefore
been readers when they were young.
And the 31 persons who had never
read even when they were young,
represent precisely 7.75 per cent of
those interviewed.
The problem is therefore one which
arises in adult life and particularly
among young adults, who are the most
likely to lose their reading skills
through lack of practice.
The age at which reading skills tend
to be lost varies; the less schooling
received, the earlier it happens. In
the survey of young French recruits
the proportion of non-readers was
.
VM
Photo Serge de Sazo © Rapho, Paris
12.9 per cent among those who had
left school more than seven years
before enlistment, whereas there were
no non-readers among those who had
left school less than two years before
or who were continuing their studies.
Students are by far the most assi¬
duous readers everywhere, but this
does not mean that once their studies
are completed they will not eventually
be in danger of becoming non-readers
in their turn. There are even indica¬
tions that persons in senior positions
who are also university graduates read
less than middle-grade personnel.
This is probably because senior per¬
sonnel are constantly subjected to
the pressures of modern life, whereas
middle level staff are usually pro¬
tected by social legislation which pro¬
vides them with statutory leisure time.
However, the tenuous character of
reading habits has more remote
causes, going right back to the child's
pre-school years. It is probably then
that fundamental attitudes towards
books are formed. It has often been
shown that the child who meets books
for the first time when he goes to
school tends to associate reading
with the school situation, especially if

The appearance of the
mass circulation book
has been called "prob¬
ably the most important
cultural development In
the second half of the
20th century." The paper¬
back is now as much
a vehicle for classics of
literature as for technical
texts, as much for edu¬
cational material as for
popular fiction. It has
spread from the book¬
shop to new sales outlets
in supermarkets and pet¬
rol stations, drug stores
and village shops. Left,
multi-storey bookshop In
Bogota, capital of Colom¬
bia, where Unesco re¬
cently helped to set up
a Latin American Re¬
gional Centre for Book
Development. Far left,
self - service paperback
display in a new French
supermarket.
no reading is done in the home.
If school work is difficult or unre¬
warding the child may acquire a dis¬
taste for reading and drop it altoge¬
ther once he leaves school. It is
therefore most important that books
should become part of a child's life,
of his play and everyday activities,
before he starts school. Familiarity
with books before learning to read
is a sound basis for the skills to be
acquired later.
Once schooling is over, obstacles
to reading increase. These obstacles
are of many different kinds, but they
can be summed up under three heads:
first, the physical, psychological or
social obstacles which have their
origin in the reader himself, second,
those due to the machinery of book
production and distribution, third,
those inherent in the actual reading
materials and the purpose for which
they are designed.
Among obstacles of the first type
lack of time is generally the chief
excuse given for not reading. More
often than not it simply conceals a
deeper, more pervasive aversion. It
may even be asked whether reading
is ever regarded as a pastime by most
readers, at least in the same way as
sport or watching television.
It is important, nevertheless, to take
the work-leisure ratio into account in¬
sofar as fatigue is one of the most fre¬
quent reasons given for not reading.
However, here too caution is required.
Although the physical tiredness of the
manual worker and the mental exhaus¬
tion of the executive are indeed obsta¬
cles to the effort which the simplest
reading demands, it has been found
that many people (mainly those en¬
gaged in intellectual work) say that
they do not read much because they
are tired and also that they read for
relaxation.
It appears then that a certain mar¬
gin of "availability" is necessary for
reading and that it depends not only
on working hours and working condi¬
tions but on the reader's situation
generally: housing conditions, home
environment, economic level, tenure of
employment, and so on. It also seems
that this availability is not in itself
enough.
The disadvantages stemming from
the tendency to associate books with
school work are just one example of
the many social stereotypes which
prevent people from reading. The mis¬
trust, and hence disdain, once felt
for an occupation which did not make
any call on what were traditionally
regarded as virile qualities may have
been attenuated, toned down, and
have assumed different forms, but
nonetheless remain latent in many
circles.
Other cultural stereotypes, which
have emerged more recently, tend to
set value on reading, but they do not
always succeed in profoundly changing
the old attitudes. Persons interviewed
in surveys generally recognize that
reading is "a good thing", reading
"has its uses", reading is "necessary",
but they are inclined to regard them¬
selves as exceptions even if they
sometimes also blame themselves
on the ground that they have no time,
have other things to do, or simply
give preference to other activities.
Hardly anyone says now that reading
is "all right for women", but there is
still a widespread feeling that read¬
ing is "good for other people", par¬
ticularly, it is implied, those who have fl
nothing better to do. V
Now, as all reading is to some
extent active, no one reads unless he
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

BOOK HUNGER (Continued)
A startling finding : TV and radio promote reading
wants to read. One of the main rea¬
sons why people do not read in the
developed countries is that, despite
the progress made in education and
its generalization, books are still alien
to the vast majority. In other words,
the technical progress of barely five
centuries, which has made possible
the proliferation of books since the
invention and development of printing,
has not been followed by comparable
progress in the evolution of mental
attitudes.
In our "literate" societies "pre-
literate" attitudes prevail. Part
though only part of the hold of the
audio-visual media is due to the fact,
not that they are "modern", but rather
that they appeal to earlier, not
entirely forgotten ways. And this can
lead to an enrichment of life, if the
habit of reading can take its place and
play its part along with this return to
earlier habits.
If this is true of countries with an
old written culture, it is even truer of
emerging countries which have gone
straight to the audio-visual media.
Contrary to what Marshall McLuhan
seems to be saying, it is not certain
that all the suns of the Gutenberg
galaxy have yet come to life.
Around 1970, world book production
was running at approximately 500,000
titles and from 7 to 8 thousand million
copies per year, the annual growth
rate being about 4 per cent for titles
and 6 per cent for printing runs. Be¬
tween 1950 and 1970, world production
of titles doubled and the production of
copies trebled. In the same period,
taking into account adults who became
literate and children who attended
school, the world's reading popula¬
tion more than doubled.
This shows that individual consump¬
tion of reading matter increased
slightly and we can say with some
confidence, therefore, that books are
still holding their own even in an era
of mass communication.
It is undeniable that audio-visual
communications media have promptly
satisfied a demand which has been
latent for several generations and that
they are currently in the throes of a
vigorous expansion. It would be mis¬
leading to equate this "take off" ex¬
pansion with that of printed communi¬
cations, which, in a large part of the
world, have long held pride of place.
Moreover, in the most highly devel¬
oped countries, the rate of expansion,
first of radio broadcasting and then of
television, is showing a tendency to
level off to that of books.
The book, which has been in exis¬
tence for more than 4,000 years, is a
wonderful means of communication in
which messages are coded and can
be reproduced, multiplied, moved, re¬
trieved and decoded by any individual
who has the key to the code or, in
other words, who can read.
Over the centuries, efforts to perfect
books have dealt with the form of the
thing itself: scroll, folio or pamphlet;
with its material: papyrus, parchment
or paper; or with the process of repro¬
duction: hand-copying, hand-printing,
mechanical printing, offset, etc. In
the nineteenth century, the point was
reached, with books published in large
editions and with newspapers, when
a communications network had been
established which satisfied the needs
of industrial society.
This, of course, had its counterpart.
For the machine to work, the decoding
technique had to be popularized. All
Out of a world production of some 500,000 book titles in 1969, about 225,000 (45 per
cent) came from Europe (the U.S.S.R. excluded), representing scarcely 13 per cent of the
world's population. Around 1970, Africa, Latin America and Asia (without Japan but including
the People's Republic of China) were producing only 19 per cent of the world's books,
although they contained about 50 per cent of the world's literate adults and 63 per cent
of the children at school. Below, village campus of "Literacy House", at Lucknow,
India, a centre that has trained 12,000 teachers and other specialists for literacy campaigns
since 1953. Unesco has given technical assistance to help African countries step up
Schoolbook production. Below right, children in a bush school at Beré (Chad) learn to
read with primers produced In Africa.
Photo Marilyn Sllveretone © Magnum, New York

over the Western world, the movement
towards mass literacy went hand in
hand with the development of books
and newspapers. This was a vital
necessity so that the social mechanism
could have the information circuits
which were indispensable to its smooth
running. The progress of education,
compulsory schooling and literacy,
for example, created new needs. At
the beginning of the twentieth cen¬
tury, practically all the developed
world's communications were chan¬
nelled through books and through
newspapers.
At this stage, saturation was reach¬
ed. This was due to the ponderous-
ness of the machinery for distribu¬
tion among a public continually on the
increase, and also to the relative
slowness of the coding and decoding
process in a world where it was be¬
coming essential to save time. The
printed communications system, pro¬
gressively saturated in the first half of
the twentieth century, began to fail,
bringing about a general crisis in the
newspaper world and publishing.
It was at this juncture that audio¬
visual means of communication made
their appearance. Quickly they took
over a large share of the responsibi¬
lities which the written word had been
carrying and which it was no longer
able to shoulder. This relief was effec¬
tive in the first place because it made
it possible to grasp an event immedia¬
tely, whether the happening was fact
or fiction.
Newspapers were more directly
affected by this than books simply
because events are the domain of
newspapers. Finding themselves
freed from the concern of covering
topical events as closely as possible,
Photo © Léon Herschtrltt - Parimage, Paris
newspapers sought a new balance
with radio and television broadcasting
either by providing considered com¬
ments or by comparative news pre¬
sentation.
Where books were concerned, the
consequences were slower to show
themselves. They were also more
complex. So far as the contents go,
it is. likely, for example, that coming
years may see a certain regression or
at least, a change in fictional literature.
This is no doubt because informative
literature such as essays, reporting,
histories and works of popularization,
better satisfies the needs of a public
whose horizons have suddenly
expanded.
There are no limits to the questions
which radio and television can ask but
it is more difficult for them to provide
the constituents of an answer. In any
case, the pressing problem facing
books, whether they are fiction or not,
is how to follow up information which
is proliferating, obsessional, with a
temporary and, by definition, fleeting
import.
Books have also been transformed
in the material sense. A real book
revolution was beginning in the years
preceding the Second World War, but
it has developed especially since 1950,
affecting manufacturing techniques
and distributing methods and showing
itself, more particularly, in the appear¬
ance of the paperback. The paper¬
back, which is produced in very large
numbers, is sold at a price suited to
the purchasing power of the masses
and distributed through a network of
sales outlets which have little in
common with the traditional bookshop.
The mass-audience book has placed
within the grasp of countless readers
immense treasures of science and
culture hitherto denied to them. In
addition, the boundaries between the
various types of intellectual output
have become less marked. The paper¬
back is as much a vehicle for popular
fiction as for educational material and
as much for the classics as for
technical handbooks and research
publications.
Nowadays, books can no longer be
treated separately from other commun¬
ications media. In a large variety of
ways such as the use of colour
illustrations, the support of visual or
sound material and publication in
periodical form, books are acquiring
something of the flexibility of audio¬
visual media with which they have
increasingly closer links. As a
general rule, the development of radio
broadcasting and especially of tele¬
vision, increases readership and
creates a demand for books in direct
proportion to the size of the audio¬
visual network.
In fact, what characterizes the
audio-visual media of the present time,
is that the coding and decoding of
information is almost entirely auto¬
matic and requires only a minimum
of initiative when received. The
response of the recipient is of only
secondary importance to the way the
system works, and feedback to the
broadcaster exists only in a precar¬
ious and marginal fashion, if it exists
at all. In addition, the rate of
reception and the order of chronolog¬
ical sequences have been fixed once
and for all, which makes it difficult to
reconstruct the message on arrival
and to fit it into an independent
system of thought.
This is why it is impossible, when
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
, I
'

12
BOOK HUNGER (Continued)
audio-visual media are used for teach¬
ing or for artistic transmission, to
dispense with the written element
such as the report, the commentary,
the duplicated lesson or the book.
Written communication seems to be
an irreplaceable compromise between
the demands of dissemination and
those of feedback. Even on a large
scale, reading is an act corresponding
to the act of writing. It cannot be
reduced to a simple receiving mecha¬
nism. The recipient has to show
some initiative and in this respect,
reading is an element of progress.
Books, having lost their former
monopoly and having thus been freed
from their bonds, have in some
respects become the hub of modern
communications. We need to find a
new kind of book, however.
In countries which have been
developed for a long time, people
still have an attitude towards books
which goes back to the time when
they were instruments for the internal
communication of a culture of initia¬
tion reserved for the reading élite.
Through force of circumstances, books
have gone down into the market place,
but they will long remain the prisoners
of their myths and legends.
In contrast, countries which began
their development during the last few
decades do not need to take the long
way round which the written word
represents in order to meet the first
urgent demands of mass communic¬
ation.
Untrammelled by pre-existing situ¬
ations, vested interests or established
organizations, they can choose, within
the limits of their material resources,
more advanced solutions than were
open to countries which have preced¬
ed them along the road to develop¬
ment. However, the more they take
the audio-visual "short cut", the more
urgent and immediate will be their
need of books, which alone make it
possible to consolidate gains and
move forward.
Here is where the real problems
arise. The developing countries,
through their efforts in the matters
of schooling and literacy, are prepar¬
ing people for the reading of books,
but what they lack are the means of
producing those books.
Experience shows that the develop¬
ment of the audio-visual network in
a country depends directly on the
growth of that country's gross national
product, whereas the impact of eco¬
nomic progress on reading becomes
apparent only after a long interval of
time and does not make itself fully
felt until the reading public has grown
large enough to provide its own
producers.
It follows from this that the position
of books in the world shows marked
inequalities if considered by regions
rather than globally. With an ever-
widening need for reading material,
we find areas of abundance, areas of
scarcity and areas of famine.
