Um »it States Virgin Islands
British Vugm Islands
St Kitis Nevis Anguilla
Antiyua
Cape Verrle Islands
aA Tokelau Islands
WESTERN SAMOA
9 American S_amoj ; t /,
ja Niue Island "'."
TONGA *
The boundaries shown on this map are not, in some
instances, finally determined and their reproduction does
not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United
Nations and Unesco



28
Colonialism
neo-colonialism
and
decolonization
GAMBIA
Guinea
GUIN
SIERRA LEONE
EOUATORIA
Sao Tome and Pnrt
St Helena £
Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
by
Mohammad
Hakim Aryubi
MOHAMMAD HAKIM ARYUBI was rap¬
porteur of the U N. Spe< iai Committee on
Decolonization in 1972 when he was First
Secretary of the Afghanistan Delegation to
the United Nations The Committee of 24,
as the Special Committee is also known,
was set up in 1961 by the UN. General
Assembly to study progress made in applying
the General Assembly's Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples. The text published
here is based on the report of the Special
Committee for 1972.

OF DECOLONIZATION
Territories presently uh<3er examination by the United Nations Special
Committee on the ending of colonialism.
Countries which have become sovereign independent states since the
establishment of the United Nations in 1945.
V <?
Based on a United Nations map
N December 14, 1960, the
United Nations General Assembly
adopted by an overwhelming majority
and without a single negative vote
the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples. The Assembly declared
that:
"The subjection of peoples to alien
subjugation, domination and exploi¬
tation constitutes a denial of fundamen¬
tal human rights, is contrary to the
Charter of the United Nations and is
an impediment to the promotion of
world peace and co-operation."
During the decade following the
adoption of the Declaration, some
30 dependent territories with a total
population of approximately 60 million
have attained the goals set forth in
the Declaration; many of these
formerly dependent territories have
become Member States of the United
Nations.
It was recognized, however, that
some peoples were still deprived of
their inalienable right to self-deter¬
mination and independence. Many of
these peoples inhabited small and
often isolated territories, where, due
primarily to the paucity of human
and natural resources, decolonization
required a particular solution in each
case.
Some 18 million, however, lived
under regimes which offered them
very little hope, if any, of early or
peaceful emancipation. In many of
these territories, repressive measures,
including armed aggression, continued
to be taken against the inhabitants
and their national liberation movements.
On October 12, 1970, shortly before
the tenth anniversary of the Dec¬
laration, the U.N. General Assembly
adopted by an overwhelming majority
the Programme of Action for the full
implementation of the Declaration.
The concept of inalienable rights of
colonial peoples to self-determination
and independence was thus expanded
to include recognition of their inherent
right to struggle "by all necessary
means at their disposal" against
colonial powers which suppressed by
force their aspirations for freedom and
independence.
The General Assembly recommended
that Member States as well as the
specialized agencies and other United
Nations organizations should render
all necessary moral and material
assistance to the peoples engaged in
the struggle to attain freedom and
independence.
Despite the adoption of the Pro¬
gramme the process of decolonization
in certain territories continues to make
agonizingly slow progress.
The cause of the present impasse
lies in the open defiance by the
colonialist and racist powers con-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
29

m
30
DECOLONIZATION (Continued)
cerned of the relevant United Nations
resolutions and in the refusal of
certain States, particularly the major
military allies and trading partners of
these powers, to co-operate with the
United Nations in implementing the
recommendations and solutions pre¬
scribed in those resolutions.
The Government of Portugal con¬
tinues to deny the principle of self-
determination as defined by the United
Nations. Portugal instead has under¬
taken to intensify its military operations
against the peoples in the territories
struggling to liberate themselves from
its rule, resorting to the bombing of
civilians and the destruction of
villages and property and to the use
of napalm and chemical substances
against these peoples.
In doing so, Portuguese armed
forces have on several occasions
violated the territorial integrity of
African States sharing common borders
with the three territories, once again
underlining the dangers inherent in
the escalation of military operations
with the aim of suppressing liberation
movements.
Indeed, a report of the Special
Mission which visited the liberated
areas of Guinea (Bissau) bore ample
testimony to the gravity of the situation
and a consequential threat to peace in
the region as a whole, as a result of
the further intensification of Portugal's
military operations and other col¬
onialist measures (see page 20).
In the case of Namibia, a territory
for which the United Nations is directly
responsible, the challenge to the
authority and prestige of the United
Nations is specially flagrant, for the
Government of South Africa persists
in its refusal to comply with the
resolutions of the United Nations and
continues its illegal occupation and
administration of the territory, ex¬
tending to Namibia its inhuman
policies of apartheid and racial dis¬
crimination.
In the meantime, encouraged by
South Africa, exploitation of Namibia's
natural resources by foreign economic
and other interests continues at an
increasing pace. All sectors of
Namibia's economy are almost exclus¬
ively controlled by these interests.
The International Court of Justice, on
June 21, 1971, not only confirmed the
Photos Mike McGeorge © Parimage, Paris
illegality of South Africa's continued
presence in Namibia, but affirmed that
Member States are under an obligation
to recognize the illegality of that
presence and administration. Thus,
all States should, as a matter of
urgency, take effective economic and
other measures to ensure the im¬
mediate withdrawal of the , South
African presence from Namibia.
As regards the problems of de¬
colonization in the remaining dependent
territories, the majority of which are
small territories with particular prob¬
lems arising from their small size and
population, geographic isolation and
limited economic resources, progress
has been too little and too slow.
In the majority of these territories,
economic, social and educational
advancement has fallen far short of
the expectations arising from the
obligation which the administering
powers assumed under the relevant
provisions of the U.N. Charter. Indeed,
from many territories there are reports
of injustice and maltreatment of the
inhabitants through alienation of their
land, exploitation of natural resources
against their interests or discriminatory

jjfe'. ËWafcv </#*Wâ
338^* i-
ijKhHjjBBvt^'' i^BV^^Gfl
»fc*
A project for the building of a giant
dam by the Portuguese authorities
at Cabora Basso in Mozambique has
been under way for several years.
In 1970, the U.N. General Assembly
condemned the Cabora Bassa
project as "contrary to the vital in¬
terests of the people of Mozam¬
bique." A year later the General
Assembly called on States "whose
companies are participants in the
construction of the Cabora Bassa
project to withdraw their support
from the scheme and put an end to
the participation of their compa¬
nies." According to the United
Nations Special Committee, the
vast complex of the Cabora Bassa
dam, due to be flooded in 1974,
could permit more than a million
white settlers to move into the area
and constitute a serious obstacle to
the future liberation of Mozambique.
Despite this, work continues at Ca¬
bora Bassa (photo left) under the
protection of the Portuguese army
(right, a bulldozer accompanied by
a mine-detecting squad). °
:|f
labour practices and working con¬
ditions.
U.N. Member States strongly con¬
demn once again the activities of the
military and political alliance of South
Africa, Portugal and the illegal régime
in Southern Rhodesia aimed at
suppressing militarily the right of the
peoples in the territories under their
domination to self-determination and
independence, and demand the Im¬
mediate cessation of all such activities.
The United Nations is fully aware
of the urgent need of the peoples in
the colonial territories, particularly in
the liberated areas of some of those
territories, and of their national
liberation movements for international
assistance, especially for aid in edu¬
cation, training, health and nutrition.
Recognition by the United Nations
of the legitimacy of the struggle of
colonial peoples for freedom and
independence calls for the extension
by U.N. specialized agencies and
international institutions associated
with the U.N. of all necessary moral
and material assistance to the national
liberation movements in those ter¬
ritories, especially in liberated areas. M
for African refugees
and freedom-fighters

The United Nations and Unesco are not the only organizations of the U.N.
family giving aid to African peoples fighting for their independence, in
particular to refugees from territories under Portuguese rule. By the end
of 1972, the High Commission for Refugees, in collaboration with the Inter¬
national Bank for Reconstruction and Development, had spent over eight
million dollars on aid to refugees from Portuguese-held territories. This
sum helped to meet medical and educational needs and to provide roads,
bridges and equipment for the refugee settlement areas. Aid worth 1 .5 mil¬
lion dollars was allocated in 1973.
UNICEF in 1972 provided over 780,000 dollars for refugee mothers and
children in six African host countries (Botswana, Tanzania, Zambia. Senegal,
Zaire, Guinea). FAO and the World Food Programme have given food and
technical aid for clearing land and planting crops to a value of five million
dollars. In collaboration with the Organization of African Unity, ILO provides
grants to enable refugees to learn trades of all kinds. 31
