1. An international inquiry
by the United Nations
4
M OR about two decades,
steadily increasing concern has been
expressed as to the feasibility of pro¬
tecting the privacy of the individual
in the light of rapid advances in
recording and other techniques that
make it relatively easy for a person
to be heard and seen, to have his
voice recorded and his picture filmed,
without his being aware of it, both in
public places and in places which he
has reason to believe are secluded.
These advances are due largely to
developments in the field of elec¬
tronics (in particular, the invention of
the transistor), optics
and the miniaturization
developed, with new
processes continually
available.
and acoustics
of the devices
technological
becoming
Similar concern has been express¬
ed about the technologically unrelated
but contemporaneous development of
the invasion of privacy by psycho¬
logical and physical testing methods
that are being utilized for non-medical
purposes.
The benefits which scientific know¬
ledge and its application through
technology have brought to mankind
are immense, in terms of the liberation
of the mind and an enhanced under¬
standing by man of himself and of the
universe surrounding him and in terms
of the improvement of man's physical
well-being. The United Nations and
its specialized agencies, and notably
Unesco, are concentrating much of
their effort on programmes which
encourage and support the application
of scientific knowledge and technology
to the betterment of human life.
During the nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries scientific advance

Photo USIS
was widely assumed to be inevitably
favourable to human progress, and no
essential conflict was generally en¬
visaged between the two. Subsequent
events, however in particular the
devastation caused by two world wars,
which was made possible to a great
extent by scientific and technological
developments have raised doubts as
to the existence of such an Inevitable
alliance between scientific advance
and human progress.
More specifically there has been a
growing realization that, whereas scien¬
tific knowledge by itself may well be
neutral, much of it can be applied
in ways that are harmful to humanity.
The question of the impact of recent
scientific and technological develop¬
ments on human rights was brought
before the United Nations as the
result of an initiative taken in 1968 by
the International Conference on Human
Rights, convened at Teheran, Iran.
The Conference adopted a Procla¬
mation on Human Rights which point¬
ed out, among other things, that while
recent scientific discoveries and tech¬
nological advances have opened vast
prospects for economic, social and
cultural progress, such developments
might nevertheless endanger the rights
and freedoms of individuals and would
require continuing attention.
The Conference, more specifically,
recommended that the organizations
of the United Nations family should
undertake a study of the problems
with respect to human rights arising
from developments in science and
technology, particularly with regard to
certain specified topics.
Later in 1968, on December 19, the
United Nations General Assembly
adopted a resolution on human rights
and scientific and technological dev¬
elopments in which, sharing the concern
expressed by the Teheran Conference,
it endorsed the idea that these prob¬
lems required thorough and con¬
tinuous national and international inter¬
disciplinary studies which might serve
as a basis for drawing up appropriate
standards to protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
The resolution invited the Secretary-
General of the United Nations to under¬
take, notably with the assistance of
the U.N. Advisory Committee on the
Application of Science and Technology
to Development, and in co-operation
with the competent specialized agen¬
cies, a study of the problems in
connexion with human rights arising
from developments in science and
technology, in particular from the
following standpoints:
' Respect for the privacy of indivi¬
duals and the integrity and sovereignty
of nations in the light of advances in
recording and other techniques;
' Protection of the human persona¬
lity and its physical and. intellectual
integrity, in the light of advances in
biology, medicine and biochemistry;
Uses of electronics which may
affect the rights of the person and the
limits which should be placed on such
uses in a democratic society;
More generally, the balance which
should be established between scien¬
tific and technological progress and
the intellectual, spiritual, cultural and
moral advancement of humanity.
In March 1971, after considering the
preliminary report of the U.N. Sec-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

HUMAN RIGHTS AND THE THREAT TO PRIVACY (Continued)
6
retary-General, the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights
recognized the need during the Second
United Nations Development Decade
to concentrate its attention on the most
important and basic problems of
protecting human rights and funda¬
mental freedoms in the context of
scientific and technological progress,
and in particular on:
Protection of human rights in the
economic, social and cultural fields in
accordance with the structure and
resources of States and the scientific
and technological level they have
reached, as well as protection of the
right to work in conditions of the auto¬
mation and mechanization of pro¬
duction;
The use of scientific and techno¬
logical developments to foster respect
for human rights and the legitimate
interests of other peoples and respect
for generally recognized moral stand¬
ards and standards of international
law; and
Prevention of the use of scientific
and technological achievements to
restrict fundamental democratic rights
and freedoms.
Requesting the Secretary-General to
continue his study, the Commission
called on governments to submit to
him material on problems concerning
the protection of human rights within
the context of scientific and techno¬
logical progress, including information
on the development of legislation,
court decisions and national practice,
and on any national projects dealing
with these questions.
It also called on a number of U.N.
specialized agencies to report on
problems relating to human rights
which fall within their competence, and
requested comments and observations
from intergovernmental and non¬
governmental organizations.
The U.N. Secretary-General request¬
ed further information for the study
from member states of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies,
particularly on laws, draft laws, im¬
plementing regulations, court decisions
and model codes relating to the
various devices and techniques affect-
inq the privacy of the individual, and
information regarding the protection
of the integrity and sovereignty of
nations in the light of advances in
recording and other techniques.
In all, 54 governments supplied
information for the U.N. study on
human rights and scientific and tech¬
nological developments. Some 15
governments stated that they had no
information, studies or comments to
forward. Reports were also received
from six specialized agencies: Inter¬
national Atomic Energy Agency, Inter¬
national Labour Organization, Interna¬
tional Telecommunication Union, Unes¬
co, Universal Postal Union and World
Health Organization.
Information was also supplied by
the Council of Europe, the League of
Arab States, the Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Develop
ment and the International Criminal
Police Organization. Nearly 40 non¬
governmental organizations, represent¬
ing a wide range of interests, co¬
operated in the study, as did many
other organizations, institutes and
individual researchers.
It should be made clear that most
of the new techniques employed in
invading the privacy of the individual
were not originally developed for that
purpose but were by-products of
research in other fields. This fact, and
the fact that many of them have
benign or beneficial uses, tend to add
to the difficulty of identifying and
controlling a host of new devices and
techniques that continue to be dev¬
eloped and that may be used to
invade the privacy of the individual.

