' "«V
THE ANGEL
OF THE MARACAS
By Alejo Carpentier
Latin American rhythms and
instruments have influenced
the work of every modern
composer
16
ALEJO CARPENTIER of Cuba is not only a
famed novelist whose books have been
translated into 22 languages, but also a
musicologist of repute, author of a book
entitled "La Música en Cuba", and a former
lecturer in music at the Universities of
Havana (Cuba) and Caracas (Venezuela).
His books translated Into English include:
"The Kingdom of this World" (1957), "The
Lost Steps" (1957), "The War of Time" (1958),
all published by Knopf, New York, and
"Explosion in a Cathedral", Little Brown,
Boston, 1963. Formerly Professor of the
History of Music at the Cuban National
Conservatory, Havana, he is at present Coun¬
sellor for Cultural Affairs at the Cuban
Embassy in Paris.

Wearing sumptuous costumes,
Indians in Copacabana (Bolivia)
dance the "Morenada" to cele¬
brate the annual religious fes¬
tival of Candlemas ("Candela¬
ria") on February 2. Though
performed during the carnivals
and religious feasts introduced
by the Spanish, this traditional
dance goes back to pre-Colum¬
bian times. The dancers have
ornate plumed headdresses and
wear crinoline-type costumes
weighing nearly 20 kilogrammes,
. "built" over metal hoops and
embellished with pearls and
glass trinkets. The dancers, car¬
rying hand-bells, execute gra¬
ceful movements despite the
weight and dimensions of their
costumes.
'NE day in the year 1608,
shocking news reached the Cuban
town of Bayamo. The much-loved
bishop, Fray Juan de las Cabezas
Altamirano, had been captured by
Gilbert Giron, French pirate and
marauder of the Caribbean islands,
who was holding him for ransom.
Undaunted by the demand for
money or jewels, the indignant towns¬
men of Bayamo banded together into
an armed militia and set off to deliver
the captive. As a large force was
needed for the rescue operation, they
called upon the help of a negro slave
by the name of Salvador Golomón,
who was renowned for his valour.
During the fighting, Golomón chal¬
lenged the pirate to single combat and
lopped off his head with a well-aimed
stroke of his machete. The plunder¬
ers were put to flight and the victors
returned triumphant amid rejoicing and
celebrations.
A hymn composed specially for the
occasion by a choir master versed in
the art of counterpoint was sung in
honour of the rescued bishop in the
church of Bayamo.
The townsfolk brought out their gui¬
tars and rebecks, their flutes and
fiddles, and held a great ball at which
the sound of European instruments
mingled with the beat of African drums,
maracas and claves, and even some
Indian instruments, among them one
called a tipinagua, which must have
resembled the bell-like instruments
played by Indians throughout the
American continent.
Watching the scene of rejoicing, one
of the citizens, Silvestre de Balboa
(1564-1643?), was fired by poetic ins¬
piration and wrote the magnificent epic
stanzas of his "Mirror of Patience" (a
poem whose hero, for the first time in
history, was a negro, on whom, as the
poet put it, all the gods of Greek
mythology looked down in admiration).
This poem was to be not only one
of the first great texts of Latin Ameri¬
can literature, but was also the first
account of a religious and secular
concert combining all the instrumental
and vocal components that were later
to characterize Latin American music.
It was these qualities which brought
the music of the continent to the fore¬
front of the rich panorama of world
music at the beginning of the present
century.
When Hernán Cortés caught sight
of the coast of Mexico, relates his
companion in arms and future historian
Bernai Díaz del Castillo, the Conquis¬
tador, hoping for fortune in battle,
quoted a romance of the "Carlovingian
cycle", which told of Roland and his
valiant companions.
In 1946, I had the surprising expe¬
rience of hearing the verses mentioned
by Bernai Díaz del Castillo recited by
a Venezuelan folk poet who could
neither read nor write, who had never
left his native region of Barlovento,
and to whom they had been handed
down by oral tradition.
During my childhood, young Cuban
girls still used to dance rounds to
the strange "romance" of Delgadina,
an unfortunate maiden mistreated by
"a Moorish dog and a renegade
mother". This reveals the medieval
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
17

ANGEL OF THE MARACAS (Continued)
origin of verses, dating back to before
the reconquest of the Kingdom of Gra¬
nada, whose extraordinary propagation
throughout the whole of Latin America
has been the subject of intensive
study by Ramón Menéndez Pidal.
We know the names of some of the
musicians guitarists and singers
who accompanied Hernán Cortés on
his fabulous adventure, and we also
known something about a certain Juan
de San Pedro, a trumpeter and musi¬
cian at the court of Charles V, who
settled in Venezuela during the early
years of the 16th century.
Some time between 1530 and 1540,
the music of small portable wooden
organs could be heard in the nave of
the original cathedral of Santiago de
Cuba, which at the time was no more
than a great barn, a vast straw hut
with a roof of palm leaves, and where
the Cuban musician, Miguel Velazquez,
first came into prominence.
We also know that the early evan¬
gelists in the New World brought about
one of the first close associations of
two totally alien cultures by the inge¬
nious device of adapting the words of
Christian liturgical texts to the tradi¬
tional melodies sung by the newly-
colonized Indians.
From there it was but a step to the
full-scale, semi-religious, semi-secular
concert described by the poet Silves¬
tre de Balboa.
At this point, however and this
is already apparent in the "Mirror of
Patience" the religious and the
secular parted company and went their
own separate ways, just as scholarly
and popular music existed side by side
but quite independently of each other
in Europe at that time.
w
18
ITH the construction of
what were becoming real cathedrals,
religious music took the path to Mexico
City, Morelia and Lima, where musi¬
cians were beginning to develop a
polyphonic art with a high degree of
technical virtuosity and were already
producing, in the 17th century, liturgi¬
cal works of great importance.
The churches gradually became real
schools of music : the great polyphonic
works of the Mexican composers
Guerrero and Morales were sung
everywhere, as well as those of the
Cubans Porpera and Marcello, and
especially Pergolesi, whose Stabat
Mater had a "best-seller" success
throughout the continent and exerted
a powerful influence on many Latin
American composers.
This brings us to the 18th century
when, obviously familiar with contem¬
porary developments in European reli¬
gious music, composers evolved from
austere polyphony to a harmonic style
in keeping with the fashionable aesthe¬
tic dictates of the period.
There emerged a new style with
greater freedom of composition, and
which demanded a certain degree of
virtuosity on the part of the performer.
Musicians were carried along by the
current of their own invention and
showed increasing interest in the
melodic aspects of vocal works.
Stringent discipline gave way to a
breath of fresh air from Italy, where
musicians had cast off the shackles of
a certain musical scholasticism. This
new Italy was represented in Argen¬
tina by the Florentine Domenico Zipoli
(1688-1726), who held the office of
organist in Cordoba's Jesuit church
and whose scores, with which choir¬
masters quickly became familiar,
brought to church music new models
and techniques which fell upon recep¬
tive ears.
From this background sprang the
remarkable work of the Cuban Esteban
Salas (1725-1803), choirmaster of the
Cathedral of Santiago de Cuba. In
addition to masses, hymns, canticles,
etc., based on Latin texts, Salas pro¬
duced a hundred or so Villancicos, or
carols, for voices, two violins and
thoroughbass.
These pieces have the unusual cha¬
racteristic for that time of being com¬
posed on somewhat naive but fresh
and lively verses written in Spanish.
(The earliest of Salas' Villancicos we
know of dates from 1783).
In the meantime, popular music was
also evolving. From a mixture of
Spanish ballads, African drums and
Indian instruments came forth the
"devilish sarabands of the Indies"
mentioned by Cervantes and other
great classic Spanish authors such as
Lope de Vega and Góngora.
They were danced in the ports of
Havana, in Cartagena, in Portobello
and Veracruz, in Panama "it comes
from Panama", says Lope de Vega,
describing a son (sonata), which
appears in one of his countless plays.
Here was a mingling of negro
rhythms with "romance" melodies, as
well as an echo of the past in the
Indian sonajeras, as the chronicles
called them, coupled with claves, mara¬
cas, bongos and drums of various
kinds, and simple percussion instru¬
ments, whose most complete and finest
form of expression lies in the extra¬
ordinary Brazilian batucadas.
The inspiration, improvisation and
spontaneous imaginative techniques of
their dynamic rhythm patterns could
be studied to advantage by modern
groups interested in this means of
expression, such as the well-known
"Strasbourg Percussionnists".
When Bizet wrote a habanera into
"Carmen", the word habanera the
music of Havana entered the world's
musical vocabulary. Debussy wrote
part of his Nuit à Grenade to the
rhythm of a habanera, and Ravel used
the same rhythm in the third move¬
ment of his "Spanish Rhapsody".
Erik Satie also amused himself by
putting a habanera into his S/tes Auri¬
culaires.
CONTINUED PAGE 34

THE ANGEL
Nor did it stop there ; upon his
return from a diplomatic mission to
Rio de Janeiro where he accompanied
the French poet and playwright, Paul
Claudel, Darius Milhaud wrote his
Saudades do Brasil for piano. As he
recounts in his Mémoires, this work
draws its inspiration from Brazilian
folklore, learned by listening to popu¬
lar pianists who at that time used to
play at the entrances to cinemas on
the Avenida de Rio Branco.
On his return to France, Milhaud
wrote L'Homme et son Désir, a ballet
with a libretto written by Claudel,
whose source of inspiration lay in
the power and mystery of the Ameri¬
can forest. It mobilizes a tremendous
battery of percussion instruments
whose expressive potential was reveal¬
ed to him by what he heard in the
New World. He was also to use
Cuban rhythms in a symphonic "Over¬
ture".
Some years later, Edgar Várese, the
power of whose prophetic genius is
today fully recognized, was to study
the graphics, the notation of certain
Latin American instruments in the
works of his friend the Brazilian Heitor
Villa-Lobos, and those of the Cubans
Caturla and Roldan, in preparation for
his own works, such as Ionisation,
which have become classics in the
realm of innovative music.

l,v;
OF THE MARACAS (Continued from page 18)
To go back a little, Latin American
composition based on techniques of
European origin but also directly or
indirectly influenced by popular music
and by the inventive imagination of
individual singers and instrumentalists
who in towns and rural areas were
developing new forms of expression
experienced a fundamental, deep-
rooted need to find a particular style
of its own.
At the same time in the streets, in
town dances, new forms were emerg¬
ing the tango, rumba, conga, etc.
whose popularity, like that of Ameri¬
can jazz, was to spread throughout the
whole world in the 20th century.
This began to have a certain in¬
fluence upon the work of conservatory-
trained musicians. Since romantic
opera, often in the style of Meyerbeer,
and especially Verdi, was fashionable
in Europe, operas, preferably of a
national character and specifically
Latin American in content if not in
musical form, had to be written.
And written they were, in Mexico,
Venezuela, Cuba, on noble themes
with a slight historical touch, evoking
national myths and legends.
Yet none was to reach the standard
of those of Carlos Gomez (1836-1896),
whose Guarani remains an authentic
classic of Latin American romantic
music. No subsequent work of simi¬
lar inspiration produced in our conti¬
nent has ever managed to equal its
dramatic impact or the orchestral and
vocal treatment of the theme.
At the beginning of the 20th cen¬
tury, Latin American composers faced
a problem very similar to that encoun¬
tered by Russian musicians in fairly
recent times. Arriving late on the
world music scene, with no traditions
other than liturgical or religious vocal
music, they turned inwards towards
their birthright of a powerful popular
tradition.
Within this popular tradition they
found their own individual style, as
did Glinka and Mussorgsky in Russia,
and Smetana in Czechoslovakia. Thus
in the 1920s Latin American musicians
who had emerged after 1900, and had
therefore reached a certain degree of
maturity, turned for inspiration to their
folklore, which seemed to them like
a new discovery.
As though all guided by the same
compass, musicians of the period del¬
ved into the rich resources of popular
tradition, rhythms and melodies in
Cuba, Amadeo Roldan (1900-1939),
Alejandro Garcia Caturla (1906-1940);
in Mexico, Silvestre Revueltas (1899-
1940), Carlos Chavez (b. 1899) ; in
Argentina, Juan Jose Castro (1895-1968)
and in Venezuela, Juan Bautista Plaza
(1898-1965), and these are but a few
names from a long list of musicians.
But it is interesting to observe the
coincidence of the dates, for they dis¬
close a significant trend.
It is also important to note that the
careers of these musicians show how,
starting from a nationalist-folklore con¬
cept, all of them, like Manuel de Falla
in Spain and Bartok in Hungary, tended
to move away from themes noted down
on the spot during carnivals and popu¬
lar celebrations, to find their own per¬
sonal forms of expression. Some¬
times the "national" accent was
retained, but the final inspiration came
from an inner source.
It is appropriate here to mention the
greatest, most remarkable and univer¬
sal of all Latin American composers
of this century, the Brazilian Heitor
Villa-Lobos (1887-1959), whose works
are constantly played at concerts and
in radio and television broadcasts
throughout Europe and America.
Perhaps sensing that the guitar was
to become an instrument of tremen¬
dous versatility in our day, Villa-Lobos
wrote a number of preludes and stu¬
dies which are to guitarists today
what the preludes and fugues of Bach's
"Well-tempered Clavicord" have been
to pianists of every generation a
basic key text which, besides the prob¬
lems of its technical execution, is a
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
35

36
THE ANGEL
OF THE MARACAS (Continued)
highly articulate form of musical com¬
munication.
The recordings of works by Villa-
Lobos increase every day. Besides
some minor ones, they include a num¬
ber which are already classic master¬
pieces such as his "Bacchianas", No. 1
(for cellos), No. 5 (for voice and
orchestra) ; the wonderful Choros 7
(for small chamber ensemble), the
Cuartetos, 5 and 6, and works for
every instrument and all conceivable
orchestral combinations.
Instead of becoming buried in musty
archives and dictionaries of musico¬
logy, they live on vigorously after the
death of their author, imposing a
dynamic Latin American presence in
the world of music.
In 1928 or thereabouts I had occa¬
sion to meet Heitor Villa-Lobos, and
asked him what the thought of musical
folklore. "Folklore? I am folklore",
he answered, putting in a nutshell an
image of the immediate future of Latin
American music.
Since then, our instruments and
rhythms have been incorporated into
modern orchestration. They have to
be added to the arsenal of percussion
instruments foreseen by Berlioz and
Rimsky-Korsakov in their treatises on
instrumentation.
Messaien, Boulez and others among
the most qualified exponents of con¬
temporary music are familiar with
them, just as were earlier composers
such as Milhaud and Edgar Várese.
The contribution made by Latin Amer¬
ican instruments and rhythms are part
and parcel of the grammar, syntax,
phonetics and even the semiology of
every modern composer.
Heitor Villa-Lobos' phrase "I am
folklore" reminds me of the carved
spandrel over the door of a convent
in Misiones, Argentina : among the
traditional figures of the "heavenly
concert", with the traditional lutes,
harps and theorbos, appears that of
an angel playing the maracas.
A maraca-playing angel I To me this
sculpture the immortal angel and
the maracas of our earthly continent
sums up the whole spirit and
character of the entire history of Latin
American music, from the Conquest to
the research now being carried out by
the young composers of this New
World in fields still strewn with pitfalls
but open to new possibilities.
In the final analysis, this New World
of ours, through its traditions, its heri¬
tage and all it has received from else¬
where, assimilated and transformed, is
in fact as old and mature as the other
worlds of our planet.
Alejo Carpentler
m
