THE ENIGMA
OF THE THRACIANS
Tomb discoveries on the plains of Bulgaria
shed new light on a civilization of hunters
and goldsmiths dating back 3,000 years
Right, a hunting scene
decorating part of a link
from a Thracian silver-gilt
belt of the 4th century B.C.
The chase figures promi¬
nently in the decorative art
of the Thracians, who were
great horsemen and hunters.
Unearthed near Letnitsa
(central Bulgaria) the com¬
plete belt link is inset with
pearls forming three panels.
In this one the archer's coni¬
cal cap and fringed tunic and
the attitude of the horseman
urging his mount to jump
recall similar figures dis¬
covered in Persia. The Thra¬
cian craftsman who made
the belt during the 4th cen¬
tury B. C. may have drawn
inspiration from Achaemenid
art of the same period.
Left, a silver knee-piece
embellished with a human
face (350-300 B.C.) found
in a Bulgarian burial mound
at Vratza. When pursuing
dangerous game such as
wolves and bears, Thracian
hunters wore protective ar¬
mour including knee-pieces
of this type.

by Magdalina Stancheva
HE Thracians and their
culture pose one of the most fascinat¬
ing enigmas in the early history of
Europe. Today their ancient territories
lie within the frontiers of Bulgaria,
Greece and Turkey-in-Europe; and
though the Thracians bequeathed their
cultural heritage to Europe, they were
bound to Asia by strong and abiding
links.
Mention of the Thracians may bring
to mind the name of Spartacus, who
led a great slave uprising against
ancient Rome, or passages from
Homer's Iliad. It may also conjure up
an image of gold treasures or of a
region in south-eastern Europe.
As early as the 13th century B.C.
the Thracians crossed the narrow strip
of water separating them from Asia
Minor and indisputable traces of their
presence have been found in the
earliest archaeological layers at the
MAGDALINA STANCHEVA Is one of the
leading archaeologists and philologists of
Bulgaria. Head of the Archaeological Depart¬
ment of the Historical Museum in Sofia
for the past twenty years, she has carried
out Investigations at all the major archaeo¬
logical sites in her country. For her pioneer
work on Serdica (the ancient name for Sofia)
she was recently awarded the Sofia Prize.
site of Troy. In this way they occupied
areas of contact between the two
continents and remained open to in¬
fluences from both East and West.
Answers to some of the mysteries
surrounding the Thracians are today
being found in the burial and settlement
mounds that dot the Bulgarian land¬
scape. Archaeologists excavating the
many cultural layers of the settlement
mounds have uncovered strata dating
back to the Neolithic and Bronze Ages
and found apparent evidence of links
with Thracian and pre-Thracian tribes.
Much painstaking work remains to be
done, however, before it is possible
to determine the date from which the
inhabitants of these settlements can
be considered with certainty as Thra¬
cians.
Altogether, over 15,000 mounds have
been charted and listed by Bulgarian
archaeologists and are now protected
by law as important cultural relics.
What do they hide? Some may be
princely tombs rich with priceless ves¬
sels and jewellery; others may be
soldiers' graves, containing merely an
urn full of ashes and a bent iron spear.
There is work enough for generations
of archaeologists.
But it is not always the biggest
mound that conceals the most valu¬
able treasure. Two years ago, during
the construction of a canal near Sofia,
the scoop of a mechanical shovel bit
deep into a slight rise in the ground
and brought up in its load of earth a
clay urn, a copper cauldron and a huge
gold bowl. With its exquisite shape
and ornamental flutes and spirals, the
gold bowl, dating back to just over
one thousand years B.C., was clearly
the work of a skilled goldsmith.
Prior to this discovery the only
known gold vessels from this period
of Thracian history were those found
near the village of Vulchitrun, in north¬
ern Bulgaria, and known as "The Vul¬
chitrun Treasure". More than 14 kilo¬
grammes of gold had gone into the
making of these vessels of various
shapes and sizes, which it seems were
intended for ritual use, possibly in
connexion with sun-worship.
From about 500 B.C. the Thracian
principalities flourished, and many of
the Thracian tribes united to form the
powerful kingdom of Odrysae. They
traded with Greece and with the Greek
colonies established along the shores
of the Aegean and the Black Sea.
Greek influence made itself felt among
the ruling classes. But it was a two-
way traffic and Thracian culture in turn
left its imprint on the arts and crafts
and even the cultural life of the Greeks.
One example of this was the spread
of the cult of the god Dionysius which
was rooted in Thracian religion. Ano¬
ther is the tragic story of the legendary
Thracian poet and musician, Orpheus, ^
which became a familiar theme in 1 /
Greek and Roman poetry. ' '
In those prosperous times, Seutho-
polis, the capital of the kingdom of
CONTINUED PAGE 20

ENIGMA OF THE THRACIANS (Continued)
THREE-HEADED
SERPENT
This three-headed serpent, left, is one
of the fabulous beasts that decorate
silver-gilt plaques, dating back to the
4th century B.C., found at the vil¬
lage of Letnitsa, northern Bulgaria.
Other plaques bear scenes of every¬
day life. Measuring between 4 and
8 cm., each plaque has a ring on the
back by which it was attached to
the straps of a horse's harness.
OLDEST BULGARIAN
GOLD TREASURE
Dating back to before 2000 B.C., the oldest
gold treasure yet found in Bulgaria consists
of a cache of 44 rings found at Khotnitsa,
Tirnovo district. Archaeologists are puzzled
by these curious objects, made of solid gold
and polished on one side only. Some
consider them to be idols, the two smaller
holes representing the eyes and the larger,
central hole the mouth; others think that they
were ornamental medallions suspended by
thongs threaded through the smaller holes.
LIBATION BOWL
One of the finest items in the treasure trove discovered at Panagyu-
rishté, 70 km. south-east of Sofia, is this 4th-3rd century B.C. gold
libation bowl. Detail left shows the outside of the bowl richly
decorated with three concentric circles of negro heads and a circle
of acorns. These motifs are repeated on the inside of the bowl. Photo
below shows complete bowl (measuring 3.5 cm. high by 25 cm. across)
which was fashioned by craftsmen of Lampsakos, one of the Greek
colonies that flourished on the coast of the Sea of Marmara.


ENIGMA OF THE THRACIANS (Continued)
20
Odrysae, named after its ruler Seu-
thes, was built on the model of the
Greek towns In the valley of the river
Tundja. Here, where the king's palace
was built, archaeologists found .an
inscription in Greek giving the name
of the town, among the ruins that had
lain undisturbed for centuries beneath
the soil of the Valley of the Roses.
Two other magnificent examples of
Thracian art were also discovered in
the Valley of the Roses: the Panagyu-
rishté treasure and the Kazanluk tomb,
burial place of a Thracian chieftain.
The Kazanluk tomb is a small build¬
ing with a narrow passage and a round
chamber covered with a cone-shaped
dome (see "Unesco Courier", June
1968). The walls are covered with
some of the most perfect paintings in
Europe, the finest to come down to us
from the fourth century B.C.
In the centre is depicted the classical
scene of a funeral feast with the chief¬
tain and his wife seated at a well-laden
table. The wife has placed her hand
in that of the Thracian prince, her head
is bent, her exquisite face expresses
grief at the parting. Around them are
servants bringing gifts, and leading
the dead chieftain's favourite horses.
The atmosphere of solemnity is soften¬
ed by these touches of intimacy.
Up above, in the dome, four-in-hand
chariots are being raced.
The paintings reveal the hand of a
highly trained and skilful artist, pos¬
sibly a Greek, but the spirit and the
content of the scenes depict Thracian
customs and the life of a princely
Thracian home.
The set of gold wine vessels, or
rhyta, found near Panagyurishté is
another example of the penetration of
Greek art. The rhyta are made in a
variety of forms: the heads of women
or animals, amphoras with mythologi¬
cal scenes, the forequarters of a goat.
The flat cup (Phiale) Is ornamented
with concentric circles of small negro
heads in relief (see photo page 19).
This exquisite work was made in
the city of Lampsakos on the coast
of Asia Minor.
Many other masterpieces have been
unearthed in recent years and named
from the places where they were
found: the Loukovit, Letnitsa, Vratsa
and Stara Zagora treasures. Gold or
silver, they were almost all made by
Thracian goldsmiths.
Many of the objects found in tombs
were made to ornament the trappings
of horses, for Thracian funeral cus¬
toms included the burial of the dead
man's horse in the same mound. A
Thracian warrior's proudest posses¬
sions were his horse and the arms he
bore, and their decorations were true
works of art.
Figures of animals usually formed
part of the decoration. Skilful styli-
zation transformed their strained and
contorted bodies into intricate entwined
ornaments extraordinary combina¬
tions of four-footed animals, birds and
reptiles.
This art, which was possibly alien
and incomprehensible to the Greeks,
was the product of centuries of dev¬
elopment, during which its forms attain¬
ed a remarkable degree of stylization,
without, however, losing their initial
traits. Some researchers have re¬
cently looked for the sources of this
art in pre-Achaemenid Iran, where new
finds from Luristan show interesting
similarities with those of Bulgaria.
Man, the warrior and mounted hun¬
ter, is the main subject of the decor¬
ative plaques found near the village
of Letnitsa. In contrast to the animal
forms, the human figures appear
rather stiff and clumsy. The engraver
shows little concern for proportion, but
carefully records details of the chain-
mail and weapons, and notably the
face, which is large and expressive.
Human and horses' heads, unconnec¬
ted with the rest of the composition,
are boldly placed in the spaces around
the figures.
HE variety and abundance
of finds in the tombs is linked with the
Thracian attitude towards death. The
Greek historian, Herodotus, (5th cen¬
tury B.C.) described the Thracian cus¬
tom of lamenting over a new-born
baby, but of bidding farewell to the
dead with feasting and merrymaking.
This attitude to life and death must
have expressed the hardships of
everyday life, which led the Thracians
to the ritual rejection of life and to
the concept of death as a deliverance.
Having become a deeply-rooted tra¬
dition, this attitude accounts for the
extraordinary magnificence of the
funerals of the rich. No less than five
richly adorned chariots together with
the horses required by the ritual were
found buried near the tomb of their
master in a mound not far from the
town of Stara Zagora.
In the early years of our era the
A lovely example of Thra¬
cian art, this 16 cm. high,
stylized stag of the 7th
century B.C. was found at
Sevlievo (Bulgaria). The
points of the antlers are
carved in the form of
birds' heads.
hand of Roman rule was laid heavily on
this martial and freedom-loving people.
The prolonged resistance to Roman
conquest was marked by acts of des¬
perate courage, which we learn about
from Roman authors. Far from his
native land (today in south-western Bul¬
garia) Spartacus the Thracian became
the leader of the greatest rebellion of
slaves in history.
But in time many Thracians joined
the Roman army and administration,
while the nobles preserved their pri¬
vileges and their estates, as inscrip¬
tions on the Thracian villa-castle near
Stara Zagora and burial finds of the
Roman period affirm.
Yet the spirit of Thracian culture
survived, and although luxurious tem¬
ples to the gods of the Graeco-Roman
Pantheon were built, shrines of Heros,
the Horseman, the beloved and most
honoured Thracian deity, are still found
scattered over the Thracian lands.
Like his worshippers, Heros was a
hunter and warrior. He is associated
with the powers of life as well as the
underworld and he was the god of both
fertility and death. Bendis, the forest
huntress, who is identified with Arte¬
mis-Diana, the huntress, is Heros'
feminine incarnation.
In the following centuries the Thra¬
cians had to endure the invasions of
the Goths, the Visigoths and the Huns.
They withdrew many times to the hills
and again returned to the ravaged
plains, into which, in the sixth century,
the Slavs gradually penetrated and
settled. They were the last wave of
the Great Migration of the Peoples.
The surviving Thracians merged into
the new ethnic community formed here
by the Slavs and the Proto-Bulgarians.
Today, after 1,300 years, a distant
echo of the Thracian past is still heard
in Bulgarian folklore, in those special
features which distinguish it from the
folklore of the other Slav peoples, and
which are rooted in the ancient history
of present-day Bulgaria.
