Photo © Yves Gaucher, Institute
of Contemporary Arts, London
A WORLD OF DIFFERENCE in the very concept of art spans these two pictures. Below left,
"The Banker and his Wife" by the 16th century Flemish artist Quentin Massys (or Matsys).
With its precise details and true-to-life portraiture, this graceful composition is a marriage of
colour and poetry. Above, a framed blank canvas hung in a recent exhibition. Visitors were
invited to draw whatever they wanted on the canvas, the idea being that the blank space is
an inducement to dream, phantasy and invention. If art is not dead, it has changed its face.

ART IN THE WEST
A continuous, search for new frontiers
by Mikel Dufrenne
MIKEL DUFRENNE, professor of philosophy
at the University of Paris (Nanterre), is known
for his writing and research in aesthetics and
linguistics. Among his works published in
English translation are "Language and Philo¬
sophy" (Indiana University Press, 1963) and
"The Notion of the a Priori" (Northwestern
University Press, 1966). His 2-volume "Phé¬
noménologie de l'Expérience Esthétique"
(Presses Universitaires de France, 1967) will
shortly be published in English by North¬
western University Press.
NE hundred and fifty years
ago Hegel announced that art was
dying. And perhaps art is in fact
dead. Perhaps that which we call art
today is another art, designed for other
purposes and endowed with another
meaning.
Traditional art was neither self-
conscious nor institutionalized. It was
entangled with scholarship, religion
and social life. It offered the imme¬
diate expression immediately ac¬
cepted and understood of a culture
which was experienced as a whole by
the totality of the people. Given over
to divine worship, it celebrated the
sacred element which pervaded the
whole life of the community, uniting
it and making it meaningful.
This embodiment of art an art
which did not regard itself as such,
which is only recognized by us now
finds expression chiefly in archaic
societies. It gradually lost its charac¬
teristic features when culture divided
itself into various institutions and
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

WESTERN ART (Continued)
Technology invades the arts
6
society broke up into classes, violently
opposed in various degrees.
It won its autonomy when the total¬
ity of which it was unwittingly the
soul disintegrated. Then were the
words "art" and "artist" invented, and
art became reflected through the
artist and affirmed itself as art, refus¬
ing to serve any cause except its
own. It is easy to see what art lost
when it won its autonomy.
In the first place art ceased to be
sacred: "it lost its mythical and ritual
force", as the Italian writer Gillo
Dorfles expresses it in his study on
this subject. There are no more
summits or ecstatic moments to which
it might give access. Our heroes
champions or stars no longer in
the main belong to the world of art.
Our myths are caricatures of real
myths, placed at the service of adver¬
tising or propaganda. When the viewer
or the listener becomes a consumer,
when broadcast music becomes the
background for prosaic activities, when
the open space before a church
becomes a parking area, listening and
viewing are deprived of any ritual
character.
Next, art became depersonalized:
it too seems to be prey to the curse of
alienation brought upon man by
technological civilization. When a
work passed through the hands of a
single artisan, that artisan felt that he
was an instrument of the culture that
inspired him. Art was truly "popular".
By participating in the festivity or the
particular event, both the individual
and the creative artist had an oppor¬
tunity of self-expression.
Today the very meaning of the
term "popular art" has been debased:
it no longer designates art of the
people for the people, but one or the
other either art of the people, that is,
"a certain type of spontaneous handi¬
craft", as opposed to genuine art, that
of artists, or else art for the people,
more frequently called art for the
masses and to some extent tied up
with the mass media.
For the very concept of the people
has given way to that .of the mass.
Three forms of culture are readily
distinguishable " high-brow, middle¬
brow and low-brow" and mass
culture is referred to as "mid-cult".
With this middle culture, just as
people are reduced to mass, art is
reduced to pastime. The "art con¬
sumer" is alienated thereby, but the
creative artist, who was still able to
assert his individuality in collective" art
movements, may very well be obliterat¬
ed by impersonal forms of art such as
those produced by the mass media.
In the eyes of a public accustomed
to mass-produced films and television
serials, the identity of the author has
lost practically all significance. While
we know a book by its author, we
know a film or a stage performance
by the most outstanding name, the
easiest to identify. It may be that of
an actor; more often than not it is
merely that of the leading rôle; some¬
times it is that of the organizer or
compère of the programme. In this
way the individuality of the created
work is called in question, as is its
uniqueness.
HlOWEVER, this picture of
the death of art is too gloomy. Let us
not succumb too readily to nostalgia
for the past, unless it gives rise to a
new art, which would not be just a
revival of the old.
"I think "l can say", writes Gillo
Dorfles, "that the loss of the mythical,
ritual and poetic character of art was
a necessary stage, enabling art to
acquire a new technological dimension
specific to our own civilization. But
I also think that in the next stage man
will be in a position to draw on mythi¬
cal and poetic elements for new artis¬
tic purposes... and that creative art
will no longer be deprived of the irra¬
tional fantastic."
Even now a "genuine popular art"
might be able to tap new sources of
meaning and poetry. Not the "degen¬
erate art of the mid-cult", but graphic
art and industrial design: arts which
are perhaps both by the people and
for the people, if it is true that there
is in them "a common ground where
actual participation of the masses is
united with a kind of spontaneous
germination of the products of these
arts". Pop art seems to have realized
this inasmuch as it recognizes the
provoking and yet de-mystifying effects
of the products of the consumer
society which it has taken over.
By breaking its connexions with reli¬
gious, ethical or social values, art has
gained the power to express a deeper,
more fundamental relation, which one
might venture to call pre-cultural or
pre-historical, of man with the world.
In this sensé art today has a function
and force which make it irreplaceable.
Let us look a little more closely,
however, at the position accorded to
art by a technological civilization.
Paradoxically, the most striking phe¬
nomenon, which we shall therefore
mention first, is related not to creative
activity but to the distribution of works
of art although it is true that the
means of reproduction, through a form
of feed-back, end by affecting pro¬
duction itself.
We are familiar with the new means
of presentation, reproduction and dis¬
tribution made available to art by
modern technology: the extension of
transport facilities both for the public
and for the works of art sometimes
entire travelling exhibitions the devel¬
opment of art books, photography,
diapositives and the film, in turn re¬
produced ad infinitum by popular
newspapers and television.
These means, obviously bound up
with the commercialization of art, make
the works available to a vast public.
By these means art is spread all over
the world and this fact cannot be over¬
emphasized. What we are concerned
with here, however,. is the consequen¬
ces of this world-wide diffusion of art.
Firstly, some of these means of dis¬
tribution those which are properly

Bathrooms
and
sculpture-
objects
Modern artists In search of
new forms of expression
often reject traditional ma¬
terials and techniques. The
Dancers, below left, are by
George Segal, an American
artist who gave up paint¬
ing for the sculpture of
plaster figures cast in sec¬
tions on living models and
then assembled and re¬
worked. During the past
15 years he has been
seeking to capture ges¬
tures and attitudes seen in
commonplace surroundings
(buses, elevators, laundro¬
mats, restaurants or bath¬
rooms). In Segal's "real-
life" situations the assem¬
bled "environments" are
authentic and each of his
ghostly-white human fig¬
ures, enigmatic and anony¬
mous, are nevertheless in¬
dividually distinctive works.
Right, "Eggs of Neo-fos-
sils" by Rodolfo Krasno,
of Argentina, who designs
his "sculpture-objects" for
display with music and
dancing.
called the mass media themselves
give rise to new arts. Even if we have
difficulty in believing with McLuhan
that the medium is the message, it is
an incontrovertible fact that new me¬
dia give rise to new messages, those
put out by the "information arts". The
television film, for instance, becomes
a particular genre within the art of film.
Similarly, "... one believes that re¬
cording methods serve above all to
conserve, to imprint, to perpetuate
high fidelity", writes Pierre Schaeffer.
"The real importance of electro-acous¬
tics is that it permits one to make
sounds or again to fix natural sounds,
to repeat them, to perpetuate and to
transform them".
Secondly, as a result of technolo¬
gical resources, the public has adopted
a new approach to the arts, or, one
may say, the works have acquired a
new presence, considerably magnified.
It Is a twofold phenomenon: either we
move ourselves, thanks to ever-
increasing travel facilities, or the works
are brought to us, either directly as
live music over the air, or as art works
in exhibitions travelling across conti¬
nents, or by means of reproductions.
It has often been said of repro¬
ductions that they are untrue to the
originals. Malraux showed however,
that they also reveal unnoticed aspects
for example, details or new angles
to the extent that they constitute new
aesthetic objects.
"Reproduction", writes the Swiss
museologist René Berger, "is no
longer simply.... a phenomenon of
repetition, as the belief would have it,
which draws its tenets from etymology
or habit; it corresponds to a group of
numerous and complex operations
which make it a production...
"Thus, to take a single example, is
born the 'multiple' of which the impor¬
tance is, not only that it does not refer
to an original but also that it abolishes
the very idea that such an original can
exist, each example including, in its
singularity, a reference to the other
examples, uniqueness and multiplicity
ceasing to oppose each other."
HE new approach imposed
by the multiplication of information,
means that the public itself is multiply¬
ing fast, and can no longer exercise its
sovereign judgement based on immu¬
table criteria such as those tradi¬
tionally taught. Even judgement be¬
comes experimental and it can only be
based on studies which are also mul¬
tiple.
Another implication of the massive
dissemination of art may be expressed
by the question: when art is distri¬
buted all over the world does it
become international? Must one con¬
clude that art can only be handled and
exported when it has ceased to be
rooted in a local culture and a tradi¬
tion? Art is international in the same
way as science, but while it is concei¬
vable that there are no such things
as Kansas mathematics or Soviet
biology, can we so readily accept that
Polynesian fetishes or Spanish baro¬
que no longer exist? Do we not know
that poetry is in fact untranslatable?
In this sense certain nationalistic
reactions are legitimate and seem to
serve the cause of art, provided of
course that the particular they exalt is
capable of being raised to the univer¬
sal. As Marx has already said, the
miracle of Greek statues is that they
speak a language we still understand.
International art is an art which has
internationalized itself, but one would
have to distinguish between two modes
of internationalization. One is the
expansion of technical processes and
economic constraints: for example,
multi-storey buildings have spread like
a disease all over the world, but so
also has a certain art of information.
The other may arise through the pres¬
tige of a certain style, which is then
truly a style. Now this style origi¬
nated somewhere and it has not
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

CONTACT, MOVEMENT & LIGHT
How to incorporate the movement of life into works
of art is a challenge that 20th century kinetic art has
tried to meet in different ways: by mechanical, optical
and scientific techniques, direct use of moving light
and even electronic devices (see also pages 18-19).
Below, Soto's "Penetrable", so named because the
spectator can physically penetrate the work. It is
now located on the terrace at the Museum of Modern
Art in Paris. According to Soto (born in Venezuela
in 1923) "art is the material representation of the
immaterial" (la connaissance sensible de l'immatériel).
"We artists", he says, "are astounding the world of
science by our discoveries". With his "Penetrable"
he rejects the old idea that viewer and work of art
must stand apart. Constructed of wood, metal and
WESTERN ART (Continued)
8
disowned its origins. Nevertheless it
has also been capable of receiving and
assimilating the messages of other
cultures, as for example in Picasso's
Negro masks and Olivier Messiaen's
Hindu rhythmic patterns.
This world-wide spread of art also
implies the universalization of taste.
Works of art do not lose their meaning
or their power to inspire other works
when they go abroad, any more than
the ancient works did when they left
their own times. The gradual evolu¬
tion or metamorphosis of meaning
does not entail loss of meaning: a
Negro mask has a new magic when it
becomes an aesthetic object in an
ethnological museum, in the same way
as a Greek or Khmer temple deprived
of its original setting and ceremonial,
reduced to an illustration in an art
book.
Art when exported or reproduced is
not completely uprooted; through it
the public, and artists in the first place,
establish roots in remote worlds. This
does not mean that we become
Negroes at the sight of Negro art, any
more than the proletariat becomes
bourgeois by contact with an art which
was previously the prerogative and
expression of the dominant class.
Discovering a new world does not
mean inhabiting it but widening one's
horizon and perhaps, for the artist, a
prospect of new adventures.
Let us see what this vaster if not
unanimous world has to offer today
in terms of artistic production. First,
new means. We are well aware that
the gradual evolution of the arts is
governed as much by changes in tech¬
niques as by the mysterious mutations
in Weltanschauung or "world view".
This change is multiplied and hastened
by industrial civilization. Its impact
on art is such that a certain form of
music can be called electronic, while
architecture, painting and the film
bring to mind innumerable examples.
Two consequences of this develop¬
ment of techniques should, however,
be noted. The first is that the relation
of art to technique is not unilateral:
technology does not offer art now,
more economic or more effective
means. It creates new ends or, if one
prefers, new styles.
For example, the standardization and
pre-fabrication of architectural ele¬
ments may suggest a new conception
of homes, or groups of buildings.
Similarly the technique of animated
cartoons may suggest a new concep¬
tion of the art of photography.
Then again the technical object may
have recourse to aesthetics. This
brings in the whole problem of design,
of the henceforth deliberate and no
longer spontaneous cultivation of the
aesthetic element in everyday objects;
at the same time we witness the mean¬
ing taken on by poetry when it be¬
comes part of the world's prose.
In the second place, this is also a

rope, the "Penetrable" displays Its amazingly rich
variations as soon as one enters it, as the child here
on his bicycle.
Left, "Two Figures VIII", kinetic painting by Frank
J. Malina, the noted American artist-scientist. His
works suggest the revolution of heavenly bodies or
artificial satellites in outer space. Malina uses electric
light and in certain cases moving discs to animate
his compositions.
Right, a different approach to movement in art,
"Square Tops" by Weng-Ying Tsai (born in China in
1928). Trained in traditional Chinese art and later as
an engineer, he took up kinetic art in 1963. The metal
stems composing this work undulate to the sound of
the human voice and seem to be "listening" to the
spectator. Electronic devices make them sensitive
to light and noise, inciting them to move.
problem for the artist: What concep¬
tion is he going to have of his activity,
or of his vocation, when he associates
with an engineer or himself becomes
a technician? What kind of initiative
can he take, or what control can he
claim over his work, or his part of the
work, when he has recourse to a
computer?
Does he want to be ousted like a
musical performer condemned to
unemployment because of concrete
music? Certainly not; but it is not
easy to analyse the ruses invented by
the conscious mind (or indeed by the
unconscious) when creation is left to
mechanical devices or when it relies
on chance, where once it invoked ins¬
piration. Perhaps in this familiarity
with the technical device, a new men¬
tality is developing which makes the
artist akin to the engineer as much as
to the odd-job man.
It may also happen, however, that
the artist reacts with some violence
to the invasion of our lives by techno¬
logy, that he turns technology against
itself by parodying it, or that he pro¬
motes an aesthetic of the waste pro¬
duct with the dustbins of our civili¬
zation. Everything depends on the
way in which he regards this civiliza¬
tion at least in Western societies.
At all events we must admit that our
civilization offers art not only new
media but also new fields opened
up by these same media, moreover,
and assured of a new audience.
An allusion has already been made
to the demand of industry, which is
considerable today, and in which Dor¬
fles sees the promise of a new pop¬
ular art. One might also refer to the
advertising arts brought into being by
a competitive economy, or the propa¬
ganda arts exercised under authori¬
tarian regimes.
Is it enough to say that advertising
or propaganda have made use of pre¬
existing arts without converting them?
By no means: this is no more the case
than it was for architecture to go on
decorating skysprapers with Corinthian
pillars or Gothic gargoyles. On the
contrary, new art forms or new styles
were invented which in turn influenced
the traditional forms.
There is also scope for art in the
environment itself, and the public took
up this idea before town-planning was
even thought of. In fact the dream
of metamorphosing our surroundings,
at least our urban surroundings, into
a kind of Gesamtkunstwerk or perma¬
nent-opera is not new, but it is perhaps
today that the means appear to be
within our reach, even if this is not
clearly realized.
What constraints are imposed on
the artist by reason of these new
powers? He claimed his indepen¬
dence at the same time as the speci¬
ficity of art. What economic and so¬
cial status does he possess in a capi¬
talist society?
CONTINUED PAGE 11
9

Pop goes the artist
or Warhol in the soup
^' . A- /hi: -S^^rr:^
u^'^Uv^-^
.-j ".
Pop art makes use of (and often
parodies) aspects of the techno¬
logical consumer society, drawing
inspiration from everyday sources
such as advertisements, bill¬
boards, comic books, films and
TV. Above right, one of its Am¬
erican exponents, Andy Warhol,
depicts himself almost engulfed
in a tin of soup. Above left,
painted wooden structure of a
woman's head is a stereotype of
fashion magazine illustrations.
Produced by Luciano Lanata of
Italy, it was exhibited at Expo-70
in Osaka (Japan). The goggles
are a TV screen. Left, "La Bal¬
ance", a playground for chil¬
dren in a new housing complex
in the Paris area. Its architect-
designer describes it as "in mo¬
vement like a heavy sea; wave
upon wave of paving stones".

WESTERN ART (Continued)
Conformity and artistic freedom
Let us first consider the economic
status of art. Despite official commis¬
sions or subsidies, art is essentially
a private business, subject to the laws
of competition. Its commercialization
involves the works themselves, their
sale, their execution, their perfor¬
mance, or their distribution.
Masterpieces consecrated by time
are sound investments which give lus¬
tre to museums, the new sites of
pilgrimage. Even with the more re¬
cent works, however, the market re¬
mains steady once an artist has
acquired a certain reputation among
the connoisseurs. When a new name
or a new school comes up, it does
not banish the others, except perhaps
after many years. Speculation is
confined in practice to unknown artists
or outsiders, of whom the vast maj¬
ority never manage to make a name
for themselves, or a living except by
expedients.
As for the film industry, while it pro¬
vides a living for large numbers of
workers, it only enriches a few stars
and of necessity there are not very
many well-known film directors. Nor
should it be forgotten that there are
probably just as many amateur cam¬
eramen as there are amateur painters
or unpublished novelists.
II T is not, however, this
anonymous multitude which assures
art's economic vitality; it is rather the
prestige of those who are talked about
and who have their followers clients
who are not only collectors, for even in
wealthy countries where a degree of
luxury is within everybody's reach,
this clientele is restricted. Neverthe¬
less, just as there exists a mass of
unknown producers, there is in all de¬
veloped societies an anonymous mass
of consumers all those who attend
museums, read art books, go to the
theatre or the cinema and listen to
recordings.
Even if art does not penetrate the
world's prose to the point of metamor¬
phosing it as the prophets of anti-art or
non-art would have it, art infiltrates
the leisure activities of the masses.
Even if it is not a people's art, it has
been brought to the people, just as
it has spread all over the world.
The ever-increasing place which
art occupies in our daily lives has
attracted the attention of the State,
which is tempted to press it into the
service of ideologies or politics and
to keep a constant check on it.
Hence the question: to what extent
is the artist free or does he feel free
vis-à-vis the State? The standards
and checks officially imposed on him
are a measure of this freedom.. Cen
sorship exists everywhere, but it does
not have the same force and the same
functions everywhere. One may think
that the artist is less free in coun¬
tries where there is a State religion
or a State aesthetic, that he is freer in
countries where the State merely has
interests and does not have doctrines
or recommend a style.
Things are not so simple, however,
for we must be careful to distinguish
between being free, feeling free and
wanting to be free. An artist who
conforms to standards and accepts
supervision may feel free (without
therefore resembling Spinoza's wea¬
ther vane). The artist who identified
himself with his city and with his cul¬
ture did not even ask himself whether
he was free. Similarly, in some coun¬
tries, artists who are particularly sen¬
sitive to social problems see themsel¬
ves as defenders of the policy pursued
by the State, and even prophets of
the future which the State has in view,
to the point of censoring themselves.
On the other hand, in a country
where censorship is mild, an artist may
be affected by all manner of insidious
constraints imposed by the world
around him and feel alienated to the
point of despair or revolt.
If there is any criterion of an artist's
freedom at a time like our own, when
freedom is a subjective requirement, it
must be sought in the vitality and
quality of his art, and perhaps too
in its liberating power.
The inhumanity of our civilization is
due in the first place to the fact that
civilization, when it becomes universal,
crushes all the distinctive and mean¬
ingful landmarks which were familiar
ground. Instead of being lived natu¬
rally as a tradition, it ceases to be a
comfortable suit of clothes made to
measure and becomes a uniform,
mass-produced by the workings of im¬
personal laws, imposed on everyone.
Furthermore, this world turned up¬
side down by the technological revolu¬
tion and by social revolutions is full
of doubts and contradictions: it is a
torn world of which no one feels a citi¬
zen, for nationalism has not disarmed.
The system of production and con¬
sumption, which might tend to unify it,
actually accentuates the scandalous
inequality of development and the con¬
trast between wealth and poverty, bet¬
ween waste and famine.
Within each society also, the gap is
widening between those institutions
which are on the move and those which
are stagnating. Then again our world
is oppressive or hostile. It turns
against the individual. It is not sur¬
prising that certain philosophies assert
that man is dying: he is being enslav¬
ed by material or intellectual systems.
It is no longer merely the Church or the
State which thinks for him and forces
him to accept its reasons; it is reason
itself, in the hands of all those who
have the monopoly of discourse.
Can the artist be said at least to
feel sustained by a public with which
he has bonds and to which he is res¬
ponsible? In his approach to the world
does the artist experience loneliness
or does he feel given away to others,
to a public, or even to a people? Then
again, in his production, is he affected
by public demand or does he follow
only his own impulses or a certain
logic in the gradual unfolding of
a style?
The answer to these questions
should of course take into account not
only the artist's personality and the
rôle he assigns himself, but also his¬
torical situations, social regimes and
systems of art production.
\J all events, whether or
not they are supported by a public,
most artists, at least in the Western
countries, do not usually react to the
world around them without unease or
rebelliousness. Their works bear
testimony- to this. When creative art
is not an escape for them, as specu¬
lative thought or erudition are for
others, it is an opportunity for decrying
everything that mystifies, oppresses or
alienates the individual including
sometimes the very idea of creative art.
For artists have also lost their nai¬
vete: in the past they were able to
identify themselves with the city or the
prince who embodied it; at the dawn of
history they could be the artisans of an
immemorial culture and celebrate a
world in which everything had mean¬
ing. Today this is no longer possible:
what was formerly spontaneous con¬
sent would be complicity. They cannot
help but be accomplices, and know it,
when in order to live, and also to gain
a hearing, they must take their place
in the commercial circuit.
If they do this, can they at least
claim their freedom? Yes, but they may
be drawn back into the net. Every
society has its safety valves to pre¬
vent explosions. Bourgeois society has
its enfants terribles, monstres sacrés
or maudits, which do no one any harm.
Protest is emasculated once it be¬
comes a fashion, pending its inclusion
in histories of art.
Conversely, in countries which dis¬
trust it, it is taken more seriously when
it does occur. The aesthetic charac¬
ter of innovations, in particular, is more
attentively studied and appreciated.
In countries which find protest div¬
erting, the game may become danger- u *
rous for the ruling class at the stage 1 1
when art finds a wider audience, even
among those who are ruled. It may
then produce unforeseen effects and
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

WESTERN ART (Continued)
Shock treatment to 'free7 the public
instead of being a safety-valve become
a detonator.
Wherever he is free, the artist
reacts by impassioned research and
absorbed interest. The first explana¬
tion which comes to mind is of course
the great variety of means made av¬
ailable to him by industrial civilization
and also the demands it makes on
him. Research is then truly technical,
as it always has been. No trade can
be plied, even in eventless societies,
without thought being given to the
skills involved and without invention
being called into play.
B
12
'UT this frenzied research
is partly accounted for by commer¬
cialization and competition. In a madly
competitive market, setting sound in¬
vestments apart, only the latest fashion
sells wells the product which is most
blatantly advertized or shocks the
public. This is a sufficient explana¬
tion for those who are put off by nov¬
elty and who are apt to decry it as im¬
posture. It is not sufficient for those
who want to understand.
Actually this research is stimulated
by ceaseless thought that may go so
far as to negate art and, first of all,
the artist. Pondering on his status,
the artist today seems to be retracing
the path followed from Cennini to
Vasari, from the state of craftsman to
that of artist.
The artist contests his own status
even more radically when he contests
the very idea of art. Not that he ne¬
cessarily abandons the quest, as Rim¬
baud or Marcel Duchamp did; but he
assigns another object to it than the
beautiful, and he pursues it elsewhere.
No doubt any creation is a transgres¬
sion, any invention is a challenge to
tradition.
Today, however, the transgression
takes on violent forms: it exalts
anti-art, art in the making or
spontaneous art, and it is not easy to
discern the artist's motives and inten¬
tions. It certainly displays a degree of
aggressiveness, but against what?
First, against traditional values: putting
a moustache on the Mona Lisa, pervert¬
ing music by adding noise to it, paint¬
ing by affixing objects normally cast
away and choreography by introducing
everyday gestures, are all ways of re¬
jecting the seemly by declaring it con¬
ventional.
They are ways of profaning beauty
because it is oppressive once defini¬
tions or models of it are imposed, be¬
cause it goes hand in hand with other
values now suspect as a result of their
manner of establishment or their ante¬
cedents (even the defining of beauty
was once the privilege of a social
class), perhaps also because this offi¬
cially-accepted beauty has masked or
excluded other forms of beauty.
Aggressiveness is then turned
against the object, not just against the
aesthetic product, as when some pain¬
ters slash their canvases, but against
the prosaic objects depicted in dis¬
torted form and devoid of practical
significance in surrealist works. It may
also be turned against the beholder,
who may be given a bottle-rack to con¬
template or a problematical assem¬
blage of morphemes to read. Is this
not mocking his lack of sophistica¬
tion?
Refusal of values and of the works
in which they are invested, refusal of
the world we know, controlled and po¬
liced, refusal of a public which can be
domesticated at pleasure: we have the
impression that the artist wants to play
and appeals to us to play with him.
This has often been said and there
are countless studies on art and play.
Today, "happenings", Cesar's com¬
pressions of automobile parts, Tin-
guely's machines, Cage's music, and
kinetic works, invite us to take part in
a game. We know that the game can
be serious because of the motivations
it stirs up, the commitment it presup¬
poses and the effects it produces.
Such is art: when it claims to be play
it most urgently needs to be taken
seriously.
We believe that contemporary art,
is a liberation movement, sparked off
in the first place by the repressive and
inhuman character of our civilization
and later by the weight of all that
artifice has added to nature.
HERE are three aspects to
this liberation movement.
First, the world must be liberated by
being peopled with new, startling ob¬
jects which are not a comforting re¬
hash of the already-known. Lifting an
everyday object from its normal sett¬
ing ¡s making of it not so much an aes¬
thetic object as an unwonted object.
It is also a way of taking us out of our
usual setting, of surprising us into lett¬
ing go of the object, inviting us to do
justice to it at last perhaps because
previously undiscovered beauty has
been brought to light. Why not?
Could not even our civilization be
rehabilitated in this way? By con¬
structing a caricature of a machine,
Tinguely gives the machine over to
nature, and perhaps to poetry. In the
works where Rauschenberg accumula¬
tes the obsessive symbols of the Am¬
erican way of life is there not tender¬
ness as well as irony? At all events it
is in this manner that poetry sets words
free, by lifting them out of prosaic
syntagmas, and that Cage's music sets
sound free.
But are we not then invited to take
part in a game of fools? Are we not
abandoning solid ground for the de¬
lights of the imagination? While we
think we are changing the world, have
we not merely changed our outlook
on it?
Before answering this question we
must admit that contemporary art, in¬
stead of merely taking its audience to
witness, provokes it and makes it take
sides more imperiously than ever. It
wants to free its audience as well as
the art object, even if this demands
shock treatment. How? In the first
place, by enabling it to discover new
horizons, freeing it from the bonds of
tradition and prejudice, inveighing
against the values which enslave it.
If the traditionalists accuse art of
mystifying the public, it is precisely
because it is endeavouring to demys¬
tify it to the point of "deculturing"
it, if we can use the word. Today's
works do not claim supremacy or
deference. They treat the beholder
as a friend. What they ask of him is
that he should associate himself with
the creation as an actor, as does a
performer, as does the rambler who
experiences the architecture of a town,
as does an audience when it joins in
the singing of a chorus.
If such works sometimes appear
precarious or roughly-assembled, it is
in order that the partner can finish
them. Execute, finish these words
have a double meaning: this
is the risk run by contemporary
art, the risk of dying in order to
become something else and also in or¬
der that the public may live.
According to Dubuffet, the sin of
culture is that it holds that a work of
art is something to contemplate in¬
stead of something to experience or
to make. Art only frees us if it is our
own, and the mission that certain ar¬
tists have assigned to themselves is to
appeal to our creativeness, not so
much by giving us a model to imitate,
as a master does to a disciple, as by
giving us an example of freedom to be
lived.
The ruse of culture is that the most
provocative work is soon commer¬
cialized, the gesture of revolt institu¬
tionalized, the appeal ignored. At least
the artist was able to free himself. For
this is what he is seeking in the third
place, sometimes alone, without re¬
cruiting companions to share his ad¬
venture, without claiming that his free¬
dom calls for that of others.
Freeing himself always means ex¬
pressing himself, but it does not mean
making a confession or an exhibition.
More deeply it means coming out of
himself and getting rid of the self.
He must gamble to lose himself, and
his authenticity is proportionate to his
abnegation. Hence these strange, in-

New Realism:
more real than the real thing
New Realism is an art movement that began in the U.S. in the
1960s and now has a number of adepts in Western Europe.
Sometimes termed "photographic art", it aims to recreate real
things with more realism and detail than the original.
Thus, "Artist Seated" (left) by Duane Hanson of the U.S.A. Is not
a real live person but a super-realist sculpture made out of
painted plastic, polyester and fibreglass. Only the clothes,
glasses and chair are authentic.
The painting of the giant tyre (above) is by a young Swiss
artist, Peter Stämpfli. Though he has reproduced each element of
the tyre tread, Stämpfli does not wish to be taken for a Realist
artist: since 1969 he has painted nothing but oversize motor tyres,
measuring as much as 6 metres (as in photo). Blown up to this
size, the tread pattern takes on an abstract graphic form.
scrutable, anonymous works produced
by automatic writing, gestural painting
and aleatory music. (In other words,
works freed from pre-established
signs, habits and constraints.)
This world which the artist inhabits
and which he opens up to us, is it not
a hallucinatory world, a refuge from
harsh realities? When we think that
we are freeing ourselves and freeing
the world, are we not exchanging the
real for the unreal, thought for reverie,
freedom for caprice? Is not art a
mirage and a luxury?
Here certain artists throw light on
the subject by invoking something that
goes beyond the real and all contem¬
porary art is surrealistic in some way.
Their works do not set the imaginary
against the real: they disclose a being
in the state of nature, not torn by this
opposition because the subject has
not yet broken away from the object
in order to domesticate it by means of
concepts or tools.
Then the world is what we dream,
but our dreams reflect the world: the
world dreams with us and it is the
world's dreams which art records until
science rejects them.
While in the socialist countries cer¬
tain forms of contemporary art are de¬
cried as symptoms of decadence, in
the Western countries themselves
these productions are not always sym¬
pathetically received. Evidence of
this is provided not only by the public
which continues to frequent museums
of classical art, but also by many cri¬
tics or specialists in aesthetics. We
said at the outset that the old always
continues to exist alongside the new.
We must not forget this as we empha¬
size the new in an attempt to deter¬
mine its true place and to under¬
stand it. '
13
