MUSIC
OF THE
CENTURIES
New and lost horizons
of musical traditions

by Maurice Freedman
MAURICE FREEDMAN fs an internationally
famous name in the world of anthropology.
He is Professor of Social Anthropology at
Oxford University (U.K.) and the author of
a 230-page chapter on Social and Cultural
Anthropology to appear in the forthcoming
Part II of Unesco's study entitled "Main
Trends of Research in the Fields of Social
and Human Sciences." Part I was published
in English by Unesco-Mouton, The Hague,
in 1970 (See "Unesco Courier", March 1973.
page 4). The text presented here is a
passage from a special section on music.
HE study of the music of
non-literate societies, and more widely
of non-European societies, was nurtur¬
ed during the first half of the twentieth
century by some university depart¬
ments of anthropology in the U.S.A.
and Europe and largely ignored by
the more conventional musicologists.
For the latter, music was an art belong¬
ing almost exclusively to the European
tradition.
The exotic element in musicology
was represented for the most part by
the popular traditions collected and
analyzed within the folklore studies of
continental Europe. Since about 1950
that general trend has been reversed.
While in much of continental Europe
the folklore tradition of musicology
has pursued its course, ethnomusico-
logy has during the last few years
exhibited a number of newer trends.
In the first place, there has been
a tendency partly to disengage the
study of non-European music from the
framework established within Western
musicology, the non-Western musical
cultures being examined in their own
terms. One stimulus for this devel¬
opment has been the emergence of
a body of scholars within the "new"
nations who, in studying their own
music by the basic methods devised
within the Western tradition, yet bring
to their work a view from the inside.
A related movement, although one
which embraces the foreign investi¬
gators, might be called the field
worker's "internalization" of non-Eu¬
ropean music by his study of practical
performance and composition, an effort
CONTINUED PAGE 37
5

MUSIC OF THE CENTURIES Continued from page 5
apparent chiefly in those cultures
where the systematic teaching of music
is an indigenous tradition, for exam¬
ple in the civilizations of Asia.
During the first half of the century
ethnomusicology was in search of the
"authentic", that is to say, musical
systems uninfluenced by the West, in
much the same manner as many ethno¬
graphers sought in more conventional
branches of anthropological investiga¬
tion, and in the same period, to
abstract or ignore the Western forces
impinging upon institutions and ideas.
But in recent work musical change and
acculturation are elevated to the rank
of a chief problem; and the adoption
of an historical approach for its treat¬
ment forms a link with the historians
of Western music.
HE newer view of non-
European music has carried over to the
study of the musical culture of minority
groups, above all in the United States.
We have witnessed a revived interest
in the study of Afro-American music
in the Americas as a whole, in that
of the American Indians as a minority
culture (rather than as an isolated
group of remnant cultures), and in
the music of bilingual communities.
An extension of this interest has
led to the study of the musical culture
of certain definable groups (for exam¬
ple, adolescents) within general popu¬
lations, and to an emphasis being
put upon the music of urban life.
Ethnomusicology now becomes rele¬
vant to a very wide range of social
interests, and its practitioners, by a
sort of applied anthropology, play a
role in establishing the cultural iden¬
tity of societies and groups within
societies.
WANT
AN ISSUE
POP MUSIC?
Ethnomusicology in the traditional
fields has, increasingly since about
1960, become specialized and (in the
social scientist's jargon) problem-
oriented. The older style of research
was aimed at characterizing the total
musical culture of a unit (society or
tribe) ; the newer style seeks typically
to investigate a particular technique
or problem. A recent issue of the
journal Ethnomusicology, for example,
includes a survey of oboes in India,
an investigation from various points
of view of a single Hausa song in
Africa, and a study of music and the
structure of town life in northern
Afghanistan.
New techniques of analysis have
appeared. Computers, even though
not greatly used (although experiments
have been going on for the last twenty
years or so), have made an impact
on ethnomusicology. A particularly
important development in the use of
machines has been the attempt objecti¬
vely to reduce musical sound to visual
form; the machines, usually called
"melographs", have been developed
in, among other places, the University
of California at Los Angeles, the
Hebrew University, Jerusalem, and the
University of Oslo.
Efforts have been made to devise
descriptive and analytical procedures
and techniques for coping with aspects
of music not traditionally studied, such
as the manner of the use of the human
voice, tone colour in singing and in¬
strumental music, and the relationships
between singers and performers in
ensembles.
Further along this line of develop¬
ment, exercises have been mounted
to correlate types of performance with
types and configurations of culture.
From a study by Lomax and his col¬
leagues entitled "Folk Song Style and
Culture" (1968) there have emerged
The Editors of the " Unesco
Courier " are considering the
publication of a future issue
on " Pop " and other forms
of modern music. If you
would like us to deal with
this subject in a special issue,
please let us know.
hypotheses on, among other matters,
the relation between work groups and
complex choruses, and that between
the élite supervision of work and solo
singing. In this study it was found
that "a culture's favourite song style
reinforces the kind of behaviour essen¬
tial to its main subsistence effort and
to its central and controlling social
institutions."
In earlier ethnomusicological re¬
search the musicians of non-Western
cultures tended to be treated anony¬
mously, and it was implied that all
members of a culture were more or
less equal in their musical competence
and participation. There is now much
more readiness to treat musicians as
individuals and to accord them some¬
thing of the treatment given to their
counterparts in the West.
The studies of individual musicians,
of their biographies and their contribu¬
tions to musical culture, parallel the
trend in other fields of anthropology
by which individual creativity ceases
to be concealed behind the over-
generalized formulas of cultural style
and social homogeneity.
I|T will be seen, therefore,
that ethnomusicology shows some
marked trends of development, but it
is clearly hampered in moving towards
a true anthropology of music by the
preponderance within it of narrower
musicological concerns.
Most ethnomusicological research is
still centered upon the description and
comparison of music. It cannot reach
into music as culture until, as in the
case of visual art, literature, and tech¬
nology, music ceases to be treated
only as a special subject and becomes
a part of more rounded attempts to
treat thought, feeling, and behaviour.
And much the same can be said about
an even more neglected branch of
study, that of dance.
Of course, there are difficult techni¬
cal problems in the way of achieving
a satisfactory anthropology of music
and dance; but that there are such
problems follows from the specialized
skills of the cultures from which most
anthropologists come; they limit the
ethnographer's vision and lead him to
be insensitive to or uncomprehending
of major aspects of the cultural life
of the peoples he undertakes to ob¬
serve. The "total" suffers from the
musicologist's specialization and from rt"l
the anthropologist's lack of technical Jf
competence.
Maurice Freedman
