The world
drug situation
An up-to-date review
by the United Nations Division
of Narcotic Drugs
l|T is often assumed that
international organizations are the best
informed bodies in the world on the
drug problem and that the U.N.
Division of Narcotic Drugs in Geneva
has at its disposal the best statistics
on the extent of drug abuse.
It is true that the Division receives
information on the abuse of narcotics
from more than 130 governments each
year; consequently the Division and
the U.N. Commission on Narcotic
Drugs can follow trends and patterns
of drug abuse in the various regions
of the world, but the statistics furnished
by governments are relatively hard to
assess.
The assumption that the Division
could easily compile the collected
by Istvan Bayer
16
ISTVAN BAYER is Head of the National
Institute of Pharmaceutics in Budapest, having
resumed his duties there after working from
1967 to March 1973 as a member of the
United Nations Narcotics Division. He Is
the author of many studies and articles on
medicines and drugs.

In support of the international effort against drugs,
the United Nations has just issued (13 April 1973)
a new series of three stamps showing a death's head
superimposed on an opium poppy head (above).
When the poppy head (left) is sliced with a knife, a
milky substance or latex oozes out from which are
made such killer drugs as opium, heroin, and morphine.
data and present well-balanced "world
statistics" in the form of a document,
is, unfortunately, not correct, due to
the simple fact that the annual reports
furnished by governments on drug
abuse do not contain very much
statistical data.
It would not be realistic to imagine
that the majority of governments do
not want to present statistics for the
use of international organs; on the
contrary, experience shows that
governments do furnish good statistics
about illicit traffic in narcotics and
most other aspects of the drug prob¬
lem. Drug abuse, however, is an
exception.
The explanation of this exceptional
situation is relatively simple: one
needs only take into account the
sources of information which are at
the disposal of national authorities.
There are, generally speaking, two
main sources of such information:
reports made and data collected by
(1) law enforcement services and (2)
health authorities.
What kind of statistical data can be
expected from law enforcement ser¬
vices? Data on quantities of drugs
seized at the frontiers or within the
country, and data on the number of
people involved in "narcotic offences"
such as possession of illegal drugs.
All these data are very useful indic¬
ations of the availability and possible
abuse of certain drugs, reflecting the
existence and the dimensions of the
drug problem in a country, but they
are of little value for the quantification
of the drug dependent population. It
is almost impossible to base statistical
data on drug abuse solely on law
enforcement statistics.
Statistics presented by health
authorities usually focus on drug
dependence; consequently, they might
seem to be more appropriate for the
development of a governmental statist¬
ical report on addiction, but, in this
case too, there are a number of draw¬
backs.
The quality of a report by national
health authorities largely depends
upon the general development and
level of the health service in the
respective country; in many develop¬
ing countries, where the number of
physicians is extremely low compared
with the size of the population, the
health service does not have the
necessary staff for case finding and
data collection.
Possibilities for the collection of
"hard data" on drug abuse by health
authorities are limited to countries
where health services are highly devel¬
oped, but even these countries face
many difficulties in data collection.
Let us consider the following
questions: is the reporting of drug
dependence cases compulsory or not?
Who is obliged to make such a report
and to whom? Are cases of occas¬
ional drug-taking or acute intoxication
included in the reporting system or
not? These are basic questions
influencing even the amount of statist¬
ical data collected by national health
authorities.
All of these difficulties are reflected
CONTINUED PAGE 20
17

WORLD DRUG SITUATION (Continued)
Examples that show only the 'tip of the iceberg'
20
in the annual reports, and it is no
wonder that high quality statistics are
usually presented by health authorities
(1) on sick people who were treated
with narcotic analgesics (thereafter
showing symptoms of dependence)
and (2) on addicts treated in hospitals.
The first group of people has nothing
to do with drug abuse as a social
problem; the second group shows only
the "tip of the iceberg". Conse¬
quently, statistics compiled by health
authorities do not give a clear and
complete view of the drug problem.
The Division of Narcotic Drugs
prepares documents on drug abuse
for the sessions of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs. Statistics furnished
by governments are included in these
documents, but are not suitable for
comparison. The Commission and the
Division have undertaken the revision
of the reporting system and efforts
are made to assist governments in
improving the quality of their statistical
data, but it would be unrealistic to
think that uniformity of data collection
could be developed within the near
future. In developing countries with
a drug abuse problem, much more can
be learned from sample surveys than
from the finding of individual drug
abuse cases.
In view of this situation, any question
concerning the "total number of drug
abusers" must remain unanswered.
There are a number of other difficulties
in answering this question, and, while
pointing out the absence of a standard
interpretation of the term "abusers",
we would like to draw attention to the
inherent pitfalls of statistics or "total
numbers" which would include all
abusers of all drugs.
"Narcotic drug" (such as opiates,
cocaine, cannabis, coca leaf) and
"psychotropic substance" (such as
sleeping pills, stimulants, hallucino¬
gens) are legal terms and not pharma¬
cological definitions. Consequently,
in the field of drug abuse, on the one
hand, the distinction between the two
terms is not justified, and on the other,
a distinction should be made between
abusers of specific types of drugs.
(Both coca leaf and heroin are "nar¬
cotic drugs", but there are very few
similarities between a coca leaf chewer
and a heroin "mainliner"; persons
dependent on morphine a "narcotic
drug" or on secobarbital a "psycho¬
tropic substance" might show, on the
contrary, several common features.)
Consequently, this article gives a
general view of the world's drug abuse
situation based on the type of drug
used.
OPIUM AND OPIATES. There are a
number of countries where the use of
opium was traditional. Opium, as a
medicament or as a "pleasure giving
drug", was used by millions of people
without social stigma: it was a "social"
substance.
The world has changed, more and
more countries have become aware of
the dangers of opium abuse and
dependence, and the international
community has played a major role
in the prevention of the propagation of
opium abuse in countries where this
practice never existed and in the
reduction of the extent of opium use
in countries where opium was a tradi¬
tional drug.
India and the People's Republic of
China are the countries in Asia where
the changes have been the most
spectacular. Annual opium consump¬
tion has been reduced from 500 tons
Iran made a great effort to eradicate
opium abuse, but was not so success¬
ful; opium production has been resum¬
ed because the opium prohibition (in
1955) was followed by large scale
opium smuggling into the country.
Opium abuse continued, with catas¬
trophic economic and social con¬
sequences. Iran has introduced a
system of addict registration, and
80,000 opium addicts (who are over
60 years of age or who cannot be
given detoxication treatment because
of their condition) receive a ration of
legal opium established by medical
committees.
There are reports of opium abuse
in Asia from Burma, Hong Kong, Thai¬
land, the Republic of Viet-Nam, Laos,
Singapore and Pakistan. There are
relatively few cases of opium addiction
in Africa, in the Americas and in
Europe. The former "therapeutic



ATEST U.S. DRUGS STUDY CALLS FOR
A NEW APPROACH TO THE PROBLEM
In a report issued on March 22, 1973, in Washington D.C., the U.S.
National Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse has called for a
far-reaching change of attitude on the whole problem of drugs. It termed
the present attitude "inconsistent and founded on many misconceptions".
Among more than 100 recommendations in its 481 -page report, the
Commission proposed:
A moratorium on all drug education programmes in schools until
existing programmes can be evaluated. The Commission found these
programmes "scientifically inaccurate and ineffective".
Severe punishment for drug traffickers.
No relaxation of existing legal controls over narcotics, with "the
highest possible restrictions" placed on heroin.
Legalization of possession of marijuana.
An end to advertizing of sedatives, tranquillizers, stimulants, and
other "mood-altering drugs" that promise to halt "malaise caused by
stress or anxiety".
The establishment of a Federal agency to take over all U.S. drug
programmes law enforcement, education, research and treatment.
The Commission called dependence on alcohol "without question the
most serious drug problem in the country today", adding "The most
serious concern in contemporary America should attach to the use of
alcohol and heroin." The Commission described the present widespread
use of barbiturates as "America's hidden drug problem".
I
at the beginning of this century to
about 5 tons at the present annual
consumption in India. The present
number of opium addicts is less than
100,000, and there are no more than
1,000 registered opium smokers in
the country.
In China, at the beginning of this
century, there were an estimated
10 million opium addicts; and in 1973,
in the Commission on Narcotic Drugs,
it was stated by the observer for the
People's Republic of China that opium
addiction had been eradicated in that
country.
addiction" to opium has disappeared
due to the fact that no more than
small quantities of opium are used for
medical purposes in these regions
(contrasting with some Asian countries
where opium is even now an important
medicament).
This situation does not mean that
these regions are absolutely free from
"symptoms" of opium addiction or that
there are no more "therapeutic
addicts", but the drug abuse scene
has followed the lines of industrial
development. Opium has been replac¬
ed in therapy by morphine, other

opium alcaloids and by derivatives or
synthetic alternates of these alcaloids.
"Therapeutic addicts" are, conse¬
quently, no longer dependent on
opium, but on morphine or pethidine
or methadone. A process similar to
this "legal" development has taken
pla'ce in the illicit market and among
drug abusers: in a number of countries,
opium abuse has been "replaced" by
the abuse of heroin.
There is, in fact, no legal heroin
production in the world. All of the
heroin consumed is made in clandes¬
tine laboratories from huge quantities
of illicit opium produced in areas
where governmental control is poor or
non-existent.
The number of heroin addicts has
increased, notably in North America
where in addition to the "traditional
milieu" (the slum areas) new layers
of the population are affected by this
form of addiction. The North Ameri¬
can scene is characterized by "main¬
lining", that is, intravenous injection of
heroin. The quantities injected are
very high because heroin is adulter¬
ated with quinine, procaine, lactose
and other substances; the "heroin" on
the New York black market does not
contain more than 3 to 5 per cent of
diacetylmorphine (heroin).
The number of heroin addicts in
Europe is relatively low (in the United
Kingdom, for example, the authorities
have reported about fifteen hundred
addicts who are regular users of
heroin), but in some Western European
countries the number of drug abusers
experimenting with heroin is on the
increase (in France, for example, the
number of heroin abusers has been
estimated to be about 15,000).
Heroin remains the main drug of
abuse in Hong Kong; contrary to North
American "mainlining", heroin is inhal¬
ed in the Far East. The same techni¬
ques of heroin abuse prevail in Thai¬
land (where heroin abuse has been
spreading since the introduction of the
UNITED NATIONS BODIES
IN THE FIGHT AGAINST DRUGS
Various bodies of the United Nations are engaged in the concerted
international anti-drug effort: (1) U.N. Commission on Narcotic Drugs (2)
U.N. Division of Narcotic Drugs (Geneva.) (3) U.N. Social Affairs Division
(4) U.N. Social Defense Research Institute (Rome) (5) U.N. Research Ins¬
titute for Social Development (Geneva) (6) U.N. Conference on Trade and
Development (7) U.N. Industrial Development Organization (8) U.N. Food
and Agriculture Organization (9) World Health Organization (10) Interna¬
tional Labour Organization and (11) Unesco. In April 1971 the U.N. Fund
for Drug Abuse Control was set up to co-ordinate and finance action by
U.N. and other organizations.
Many inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations are work¬
ing on the problem of drugs. Amongst these are: International Narcotics
Bureau, Interpol (International Criminal Police Organization), League of
Red Cross Societies, International Council on Alcoholism and Addiction,
and the Council of Europe.
opium prohibition), in some other
countries in Indochina and in Iran.
It is relatively easy to produce heroin
in a clandestine laboratory but the
production of morphine base is even
easier. The abuse of so-called "mor¬
phine base" is, consequently, spread¬
ing in some countries in Asia and in
Europe (notably in Northern Europe).
There is an increase in the abuse of
the so-called synthetic narcotics (syn¬
thetic alternates of morphine and other
opium alcaloids). There are a number
of "therapeutic addicts" who have
became dependent on these sub¬
stances, notably in Europe following
treatment with pethidine, methadone
or dextromoramide. The most sub¬
stantial increase in methadone depen¬
dence cases has been experienced in
countries where this drug is in use as
a substitute for heroin. The increase
in the number of methadone depen¬
dence cases is a "side effect" of
"methadone maintenance" in the United
States, Canada and a few other
countries.
CANNABIS. The assessment of the
"world cannabis situation" is even
\A«..*i_

more difficult than that of opium and
opiates. The view is hindered by:
a lack of statistics on the number
of consumers;
the fact that in some Asian
countries the use of cannabis is
still authorized or tolerated; and
the absence of a standard definition
of the "cannabis" consumed by
local users.
The general use of the term "canna¬
bis" without further defining the drug
(e.g. cannabis resin, cannabis as
defined in the Single Convention (1),
marijuana, etc.) contributes sub¬
stantially to the confusion, but some
trends and patterns in cannabis abuse
can be more or less detected.
The only figure available from areas
where the traditional use of cannabis
remains authorized is an estimate of
200,000 consumers in India. The
consumption of cannabis resin has
been prohibited in that country, but
cannabis itself (in the forms of ganja
and bangh) is still in use for medical,
quasi-medical and ceremonial pur¬
poses, as well as being a "social sub¬
stance".
Cannabis abuse remains a problem
in the Near and Middle East, where
huge quantities of cannabis resin
(hashish) are produced. A part of the
hashish produced is consumed locally
(increasingly by tourists, and first of
all the young ones) part is smuggled
into non-producing countries of the
region (for example into Egypt or
Turkey) and an ever increasing part
finds its way through the organized
illicit traffic to Western Europe.
	 CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
(1) The Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, adopted in 1961, came Into force in
December 1964. It replaces nine existing
treaties, extends control to the cultivation of
plants from which the "natural" narcotics are
made, namely opium, cannabis and coca
leaves, and simplifies the International control
machinery.
21

WORLD DRUG SITUATION (Continued)
22
Abuse of cannabis (in the form of
ganja cigarettes) is spreading in the
Far East, but the increase in the
number of cannabis abusers seems to
be greatest in North America and in
Western Europe, where the "cannabis
question" has become an emotional
topic.
There is a substantial increase in
the use of cannabis resin in some
West European countries. The con¬
sumption of hashish is increasing in
the United States and Canada too, but
the principal form of cannabis abuse
is the smoking of "marijuana".
It is very difficult to find out what
"marijuana" means. In Latin Ameri¬
can countries, this term has been
applied to cannabis leaves. In the
light of the analysis of marijuana
samples seized in North America, it is
applied sometimes to something which
contains very potent cannabis prepa¬
rations, sometimes to "cannabis" (in
the sense of the Single Convention),
sometimes solely to leaves of canna¬
bis, and sometimes to something which
does not contain cannabis at all.
Without a basis for comparison, it is
impossible to determine or even
estimate how many hashish users and
cannabis users are among the several
million regular or occasional marijuana
users in North America and in some
West-European countries.
There are a substantial number of
"dagga" consumers in South Africa,
Cannabis abuse is spreading in other
countries too, notably in West and
East Africa.
There are reports of the abuse of
"cannabis oil" or "hashish oil". This
preparation contains a large amount of
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), one of the
active principles of cannabis; conse¬
quently, its use is even more danger¬
ous than that of hashish.
COCA LEAF. Coca leaf chewing
remains a social problem in the
Andean countries of South America
where huge quantities of coca leaves
are consumed by the indigenous
population. According to the Argen¬
tine government's report, the number
of coca-leaf chewers in that country
is estimated at 50,000. This figure
does not reflect the size of the problem
in the whole region, where the number
of addicts is of the order of several
million.
COCAINE. In the light of seizure
reports, the production and consump¬
tion of cocaine 'is on the increase.
Little data is available on cocaine
abusers because the majority of
cocaine abusers are multiple drug
abusers. There are many cocaine
abusers among heroin addicts.
PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES.
There are very few official reports on
psychotropic substances at the dis¬
posal of the Division of Narcotic
Drugs. The Convention on Psycho¬
tropic Substances of 1971 is quite
recent and has not yet entered into
force. Until now, very few govern¬
ments have collected data on the
abuse of these substances.
There are contradictory reports on
the use of hallucinogens. A decrease
in the abuse of LSD was recently
noted by North American experts, but
in some West European countries the
number of LSD abusers was on the
increase. LSD remains the most
widely abused hallucinogen, and cases
of its abuse have been reported from
other regions of the world (Africa, Asia
and the Far East).
Abuse of stimulants of the central
nervous system is still spreading.
Amphetamine, dexamphetamine, meth-
amphetamine and phenmetrazine are
the most frequently abused stimulants.
"Mainlining" (intravenous injection) of
excessive doses of stimulants remains
a problem in some West European and
North American countries.
There are indications that substantial
quantities of various amphetamine
tablets have been smuggled into Afri¬
can countries; the control of impor¬
tation and distribution of these drugs
is relatively lax in many African
countries, and several governments in
the region are worried about the
growth of amphetamine abuse.
There is only limited data on the
abuse of hypnotics, sedatives and
tranquillizers, but many indications of
an increase in their abuse. No region
is free from the abuse of these sub¬
stances, but people abusing hypnotics,
sedatives or tranquillizers are usually
multiple drug abusers. Data collect¬
ion concerning their abuse is there¬
fore very difficult.
MULTIPLE DRUG ABUSE. It was
noted by the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs at its last session in January-
February 1973, that the trend towards
multiple drug abuse among drug
abusers seemed to be a common
feature of the drug scene in various
parts of the world. This trend was
due* partly to the availability on the
black market of different types of
drugs, and partly to changes in the
"taste" of drug-takers experimenting
with a great variety of legal and illegal
drugs.
There are some well-known drug-
combinations such as heroin-cocaine,
barbiturates-amphetamines, heroin-bar¬
biturates, but the number of people
consuming five or ten different drugs
at the same time or alternatively is
increasing every day.
-Í
