UNESCO & THE WORLD OF MUSIC
I
M was no mere chance that led
Unesco to play an active part in the world of music. On the
contrary, judging that music offered the world a "language without
words" and a vehicle of artistic expression capable of transmitting
a universal message, Unesco's Member States included music
in the organization's world programme from the very start.
Thus, one of the first non-governmental organizations established
under Unesco sponsorship was the International Music Council
(IMC), which celebrates its 25th anniversary during the 1973-74
musical season.
The IMC was allotted the task of studying the development of
music throughout the world and maintaining permanent contact
between Unesco and national and international bodies, including
state radio and television services, concerned with the creative
and educational aspects of music and with its diffusion.
The Council also has a responsibility for promoting contem¬
porary music and encouraging the spread of knowledge of tradi¬
tional music of all cultures. Thus the preservation of non-western
musical forms is an important feature in its projects and programme
in which it aims to cover all aspects of music.
Jazz and the more recent phenomenon of "pop" music are signs
of the beginnings of a profound upheaval affecting the whole field
of musical creativity. Realizing the importance of this musical
revolution, Unesco has undertaken a number of studies of the
increasingly popular new musical forms and the instruments musi¬
cians are and will be using, as well as of the sociological back¬
ground against which the musical forms of today are born and
flourish.
It is in this context that the meetings of music experts organized
by Unesco are held. The first of these meetings, which took
place at Yaounde (Cameroon) in February 1970, was devoted
to the study of musical traditions in Africa South of the Sahara
and gave a new insight into many aspects of traditional African
music, particularly with regard to its evolution and dissemination
(see article by Akin Euba page 24). The findings of this meeting
have been published in English under the title "African Music"
by "La Revue Musicale", Paris, 1972.
A second meeting organized by Unesco at Stockholm, in
June 1970, examined a question which preoccupies most musicians
today the relationship between the arts and technology. The
papers and reports presented at this meeting have also been
published in English under the title "Music and Technology" by
"La Revue Musicale", Paris, 1971. Latin American music was the
subject of a third meeting held in Caracas (Venezuela), in Novem¬
ber 1971, at which experts drew up a systematic study plan
covering traditional music, avant-garde music and musique concrète.
Another Unesco initiative in this same context is the series of
records issued under the general title of the "Unesco Collection".
These records are produced in collaboration with the International
Institute for Comparative Music Studies, a cultural organization
established In Venice in 1970 with among its aims the production
of recordings of the highest technical quality of the top musicians
and groups of the various musical cultures of Africa and the East.
The Unesco Collection (see pages 36 and 39) now includes
two anthologies and two series of records prepared for the IMC
and Unesco by the International Institute for Comparative Music
Studies. Another series, produced since 1972, forms an exten¬
sion and sequel to the musical "Rostrums" organized by the
International Music Council.
The two anthologies, both issued under the Bärenreiter-Musica-
phon label, consist of record albums accompanied by commenta¬
ries and illustrations which open the way to the study of the tradi¬
tional music of several countries of Africa and the Orient. "A
Musical Anthology of the Orient" includes music from Afghanistan,
China, India, Iran, Japan, the Khmer Republic, Laos, Malaysia,
Tunisia, Turkey, the U.S.S.R. and Viet-Nam ; An Anthology of
African Music" includes music from the Central African Republic,
Chad. Ethiopia, Ivory Coast, Nigeria and Rwanda.
The "Musical Sources" series, issued under the Philips label,
covers music of the world's most ancient civilizations and includes
recordings of Arab music and music from Bali, Egypt, northern
India, Iran, Israel, Java, the Khmer Republic, Korea and Tibet.
The second series, "Musical Atlas", consists of recordings of
living folk music still played in certain communities throughout
the world. Issued by Odeon-EMI Italiana, if includes music from
Bengal, Ivory Coast, the Khmer Republic and Portugal.
Contemporary music is catered for by the International Rostrum
of Composers, initiated in 1954 by the IMC in collaboration with
Unesco, which holds annual meetings attended by representatives
of radio stations to encourage the exchange of contemporary music.
Delegates from the radio organizations of 34 countries took part
in the 1971 Rostrum and each radio station undertook to select
and broadcast during the 1971-72 music season at least six of
the 89 contemporary works presented at the Rostrum.
Since 1972, the Rostrum has given rise to a new series of
recordings in the Unesco Collection entitled "Contemporary
Music" (see page 36).
The International Rostrum of Young Interpreters, organized by
the IMC in collaboration with Unesco, and from 1973 to be held
annually, is designed to help young performers in their careers
by presenting them in person before leaders in the world of
music, opera, radio, television, etc. The 1972 Rostrum was held
in Bratislava (Czechoslovakia) as part of the Bratislava Music
Festival. A new Unesco series of recordings Is to be based on
these Rostrums.
Two other Rostrums, organized by the IMC, Unesco and the
International Institute for Comparative Music Studies, are held in
alternate years.
The Asian Music Rostrum, created in 1969, brings together
representatives of Asian radio stations to listen to and exchange
authentic traditional music of their countries and to make it known
in other regions of the world. Eight countries were represented
at the 1971 Rostrum held at Unesco's Paris headquarters Hong
Kong, India, Indonesia, Irak, Japan, Jordan, Korea and the U.S.S.R.
The African Music Rostrum, inaugurated in 1970, also aims to
enlist the help of radio stations to make the authentic traditional
music of the various musical cultures of Africa known throughout
the world. The last session was held in Venice in 1972.
THER international musical events
and meetings, such as the International Music Congress organized
by the IMC, are held throughout the year. The theme of the 1971
International Music Congress, held in Moscow in collaboration
with the Soviet National Music Committee, was "The musical
cultures of peoples: traditional and contemporary." One of the
participants at this Congress was the world-famous Soviet compo¬
ser Dmitri Shostakovich who spoke on national musical traditions
and the laws of their development (see article page 13).
To mark the 25th anniversary of its foundation by Unesco,
the IMC is to hold a series of musical events in Switzerland,
beginnning In September 1973 and continuing into 1974, which are
being organized in co-operation with Unesco and the Swiss
National Music Committee.
A predominant place will . be reserved for works and artists
selected at the four IMC Rostrums. The theme of the first part
of the Symposium at Geneva will be "In search of a new musical
public, approached from the double angle of musical 'animation'
for youth and the presentation of music by the audio-visual media".
Unesco's programme also includes plans for a musical workshop,
to be held in 1974, bringing together musicians from Europe and
Asia. At the same time studies on musical education and the
relation between "pop" music and youth will be undertaken in
collaboration with the Fédération Internationale des Jeunesses
Musicales and the International Institute for Music, Dance and
Theatre in Vienna. Finally, Unesco's programme provides for the
award of study and travel scholarships to musicians and musical
specialists.
Music, then, is accorded the important place it merits in AA
Unesco's cultural programme. For some countries the problem IÄ
of music is one of preserving and encouraging an art; for others
the preservation and promotion of music is bound up with the
whole problem of national development.
