Photo Unesco
By Akin Euba
24
AKIN EUBA, former Head of Music and
Research of the Nigerian Broadcasting Corp¬
oration and Lecturer in Music at the Univ¬
ersity of Lagos, is now a Senior Research
Fellow in Musicology at the University of
Ife. His essays on music have been publish¬
ed in the "International Folk Music Council
Journal", "Nigeria Magazine", "Africa Report'
and "Odu". Akin Euba has written three large-
scale compositions based on elements of
African traditional music: "Four Pieces for
African Orchestra", "Chaka", a setting of
Leopold Senghor's- dramatic poem, and
'Dirges", a setting of poems by African
authors, for speakers, singers, Instrumen¬
talists and pre-recorded African music. The
article presented here Is based on a paper
prepared for a meeting organized by Unesco
on "Musical Traditions of Africa South of
the Sahara", held in Yaounde, Cameroon, in
February 1970.
O the casual observer it
might appear that, in face of powerful
influences from the Western world,
traditional African music has lost its
meaning in contemporary Africa.
Yet most Africans continue to live
according to traditional patterns of
culture and maintain their traditional
music which forms their primary
experience of musical art. It is only
in urbanized Africa that cosmopolitan
culture is so predominant and Western
music so much in evidence.
Among those Africans who have
received a Western education and
whose pattern of existence exposes
them to various aspects of Western
culture, musical taste is of two kinds.
A small minority have cultivated a taste
for the more contemplative forms of
Western music classical and sacred
(and jazz); the vast majority have little
interest in any kind of music except
"pop".
I do not believe that Africans who
have forsaken African for Western
music did so because of artistic
values; it is only that most of them
were born outside the tradition of
African musical culture and are only
vaguely aware of the elements that
make it so important to its practitioners.
Assuming an equal education in both
types of music, those who are most
sensitive to the highest music in their
own culture would probably also be
those who respond to what is best in
a foreign culture. Hence, there is little
danger of Africans, if adequately
educated musically, abandoning their
traditional musical culture when heavily
exposed to Western music.
The reasons for a possible domina¬
tion of African music by Western must
therefore be sought elsewhere.
Africans qualified in Western music
are materially better off than prac-

Two facets of music in Africa. Below, an Ivory Coast harp, the indispensable
accompaniment to song. Throughout Africa the harp is played by men and
the lute by women, except in Mauritania where the custom is the reverse.
The Ethiopian Government has been developing a nation-wide music educ¬
ation programme and has set up a national symphony orchestra. It recently
called upon Unesco for help In this project Photo left, shows the new
orchestra formed with the help of a Unesco expert, Mr. George Byrd, seen
here (left) with the baton.
Photo Edouard Boubat Top-Réalités, Paris
titioners of African traditional music.
A first class concert pianist can earn
more by a single recital than an equally
gifted traditional musician could hope
to make in a year. African "pop"
musicians not only receive much
higher fees, but get their music
recorded and broadcast as standard
fare on local radio stations.
A taste for Western music implies
acquiring a taste for other aspects of
Western culture also. For the average
contemporary African, a good Western
education opens the way to important
jobs and social influence, and this
explains why an African master-
drummer will encourage his son to
spend his time acquiring one rather
than spend it becoming a master-
drummer.
One of the success symbols in
Africa today is a big radiogram
expensive furniture for display in the
living room perhaps but there is also
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

AFRICAN MUSIC (Continued)
Symbol of success:
the record-player in the living room
26
an intent to listen. Whatever the
owner's feelings towards traditional
music, most of his records will
inevitably contain music that is non-
African or at best neo-traditional
popular African; if he wants African
music records he must probably seek
them abroad.
A radiogram owner is a music
patron, contributing to the popularity
of the musicians who get recorded.
In the past, African chiefs were,
financially, the most influential indi¬
vidual patrons of traditional musical
art. But today, financial influence has
passed from them to the radiogram
owners whose musical tastes how¬
ever traditional before have now been
affected by the only records that are
on sale.
Technological advance is now a
basic aim of African societies. Does
technological development automati¬
cally spell doom for a non-technologi¬
cal art culture? So far, the parameters
have largely been determined in
Europe and America: is modern
technology feasible in Africa without
a total conversion to Euro-American
standards? African traditional music
is bound up with African traditional
social life; if the latter becomes
westernized, can the music retain its
characteristic identity, survive in a new
social context?
m OR some scholars, mean¬
ing in African music is bound up into
the functions music serves in society;
the frequency with which it is
integrated with non-musical activities
has led to generalizations about its
utilitarian functions with the implica¬
tion that it is meaningless outside its
specific social context.
There is, however, a second
category of listener, little concerned
with scientific analysis, much more
interested in the "soul" of the music.
That he does derive some satisfaction,
however incomplete, from African
music, suggests that this music,
removed from its social contexts, is
not entirely meaningless.
However, for the listener not in
touch with the context ¡n which its
music is customarily performed, and
who hears it purely as music, a
knowledge of the speech language of
the ethnic group to which the piece
belongs would be crucial to an under¬
standing of the musical language.
For those who watch musicians
perform, the visual impression adds
an artistic side, a dramatic element
that complements the musical element
with a dimension that Is lacking for a
listener who is not actually present.
He who sees as well as hears is
closer to a correct interpretation of
the music's meaning, but only that
much closer, for the total meaning of
the music in relation to the context
cannot be realized by the observer but
only by the participants.
Musical meaning in African tra¬
ditional culture can thus be of different
shades, ranging from the purely tonal
through the linguistic to the socio-
dramatic. Lacking its socio-dramatic
associations, part of its meaning is
missing, but, purely as music, it could
not fail to have meaning for musical
ears partial but intense, and including
aspects which are unimportant or
imperceptible to the average African
listener.
People unfamiliar with African
traditional music, and hearing it out
of context, sometimes find it too
repetitive. But the more clearly the
listener can understand the music's
function, the less is likely to be his
irritation, until he eventually realizes
that repetition is one of the primary
aids the music utilizes in order to
fulfil its purpose.
Contact with Western culture has
introduced a few African musicians to
the idea of composing music meant
just to be listened to, an approach
that may spread in an increasingly
technological Africa as former social
values break down and music sep¬
arates from the context that hitherto
has provided much of its impetus.
Some fear that, in such a situation,
African traditional music may cease to
exist.
Music, of course, cannot live with¬
out new creative forces to sustain it
through changing social circumstances.
But will the African creative genius,,
which has in the past survived so¬
cial change, now become unproductive
in the atmosphere of contemporary
society?
Should traditional music lose its
present social context it should not
be too difficult for it to transform and
become a purely contemplative art-
form. The way is already open, even
if Africans do not customarily listen
contemplatively.
The music may lean very heavily
on poetry whose "real" meaning
is invariably one or more steps
removed from the literal meanings of
individual words and sentences, a sym¬
bol for something else. But even if
we fail to grasp this "real" meaning,
the music may still convey artistic
feeling.
'NE of the challenges to
the contemporary composer in Africa
today is how to carry the essentials
of this poetical sense in African music
over into musical settings of modern
African poetry in non-African langua¬
ges.
Experiments by Senghor and others
in the use of African traditional in¬
struments to accompany recitals of
African poetry in European languages
foreshadow new creative openings.
Again, in Wole Soyinka's plays, texts
spoken in English are juxtaposed with
texts in Yoruba, sung and accom¬
panied in the traditional style of
Yoruba music.
The challenge has been thrown
down by the writers. It remains for
the composers to work towards a
total fusion of non-African speech with
African musical language. The prob¬
lems are immense. African traditional
song composition is conditioned by
the nature of African tone-languages,
and would seem incompatible with
European song.
But although speech meaning in
European languages is only partially
conditional upon tonal considerations,
there are possibilities as for exam¬
ple in the sprechgesang (intoned
speech) compositions of Arnold
Schoenberg of making an artistic use
of the speech tonality of European
languages. African music also utilizes
speech-song, and this might provide a
basis for a co-ordination of cultural
styles setting African literature in
European languages to an African
musical idiom.
The way in which African traditional
music may gradually accomodate itself
for contemplative listening can be seen
in African-language plays written for
the modern theatre. The music fol¬
lows traditional music styles and even
borrows from the existing repertoire.
These plays are really transposi¬
tions of traditional music and drama
from their social context into the con¬
text of the modern theatre and are

thereby a direct evolution from the mu-
sico-dramatic art of traditional culture.
Their success and increasing popula¬
rity are sufficient to justify the view
that traditional music can survive on
its own terms, away from the cus¬
tomary social context.
The ultimate result may be a music
which exists in its own right, devoid
of visual connotations. But if the new
African composers are to maintain
contact with local audiences, they
must approach abstract creativity in
stages and take advantage of the
opportunities offered by the combina¬
tion of music with drama in the con¬
temporary African theatre.
They can learn much by collaborat¬
ing with dramatists and choreogra¬
phers to produce stage versions of
typical scenes from traditional culture,
such as ceremonies pertaining to
chieftaincy, marriage and birth rites.
The dramatic intensity of these events
in their real-life contexts transposes
very well to the stage, where the
events assume an artistic meaning
that is little apparent in real life.
HE components of the new
musical art will be essentially those
which constitute traditional music as
we know it, but re-combined in a new
way and accordingly an extension of
traditional culture. For example, re¬
petition, although retained, will prob¬
ably be subdued or camouflaged.
An instrument that hitherto repeat¬
ed the same pattern continuously may
now share the pattern with other in¬
struments repetition certainly but with
shifting timbres. And, instead of allow¬
ing the leading instrument of an
ensemble, and it alone, to play varia¬
tions, several instruments might be
allowed to share this rôle, simultane¬
ously or alternatively.
Instruments found within one ethnic
group can be classified in broad
general families but otherwise are not
shared with other ethnic groups and,
.even within the same ethnic group,
are commonly designated for specific
functions (a condition which deter¬
mines the patterns of orchestral
groupings).
By doing away with such reserva¬
tions and developing an orchestral
technique that freely combines in¬
struments from his own and other
ethnic groups, the modern African
composer can create a varying texture
of instrumental timbres to sustain the
new music.
Geographically, Western music is
widespread in the world today not
because of any inherent superiority,
but because the West has developed
superior communications. Phonograph,
tape-recorder, radio and television
were all perfected in Western coun¬
tries which still largely retain a mono¬
poly of their use.
Africans now have access to these
media, but even within Africa, gramo¬
phone records circulated through wes¬
tern channels are likely to reach a
wider African public than if circulated
through African companies.
In Nigeria, for example, most re¬
cording companies are controlled from
overseas, and the records of Nigerian
music they produce are those that will
fetch the quickest returns locally. The
record-buying public is concentrated in
the cities who prefer neo-traditional
or westernized popular music.
If these companies ever publish
records of classical traditional music
this will most likely be due to pressure
from non-African musicologists who
have done research in Nigeria. Such
records seldom find their way back to
Nigeria along the normal channels
(i.e. those through which western
music is distributed).
Admittedly, records can effectively
convey only the sound of the music,
whereas much African music can best
be presented through audio-visual
media. Those wanting to hear African
music once had to be present at the
place of performance, but with the
increasing need for communication
across the whole continent, new
modes must supplement and extend
those that hitherto served.
Records and radio provide excel¬
lent media in cases where the visual
aspects are not so important; where
the visual elements are integrally re¬
lated to the rest (a majority of cases,
apparently), television and cinema are
the most effective media. At present,
neither is sufficiently utilized for tradi¬
tional music.
Ministries and agencies concerned
with Africans arts must establish well-
defined projects and considerably step
up the production of films of African
music, calling in the aid of music¬
ology, choreology, anthropology and
other disciplines to help the film tech¬
nicians to' produce films that capture
the essential spirit of the music.
Given the effort and outlay, such films
should be given the widest possible
distribution throughout Africa, with
adequate facilities to enable sponsor¬
ing organizations to exchange films.
UBLICATION of scores is
also important. The transcription of a
musical art that has no tradition of
notation presents many difficulties,
notably that of creating national sym¬
bols to convey the peculiar nuances
of African musical sounds.
But if contemporary Africans are to
become knowledgeable about African
music they must be able to study it
without having to hear it directly from
its exponents; hence the vital impor¬
tance of the printed score, in combina¬
tion with recorded sound.
Improved techniques for making
African traditional music better known
should not overlook contemporary
music. African audiences should be
familiar from the start with new dev¬
elopments in the music of their cul¬
ture, for they have a rôle to play in
shaping the new tradition.
Contemporary African composers
trained in western musical institutes
are now producing music which, using
African elements in a western idiom,
can be classified as Africanized Wes¬
tern. This is a welcome new addi¬
tion, but does not represent a true
evolution from the African main¬
stream and should not be taken as the
main trend in African contemporary
music.
Most African musicians are working
with traditional means and several
new composers have been experiment¬
ing with new ways of employing them.
As African societies become more and
more technological, African traditio¬
nal music may become less utilitarian
and increasingly contemplative. It is
also likely, however, that the new
music will not necessarily replace the
music we now regard as traditional,
and that both forms will coexist.
African music has survived previous
eras of social change because it had
and has enough creative vitality to fl
adapt itself to changing circumstan- ^ '
ces; there is no reason to suppose
that it will not continue to do so.
