6. New techniques
for probing the mind
LIE DETECTOR
"The name He detector is
popularly applied to a num¬
ber of instruments, capable
of measuring changes In
bodily reactions : pulse rate,
blood pressure, breath¬
ing and perspiration rate,
reports a recent U.N. study
on respect for privacy.
"Bodily changes accom¬
panying verbal replies are
recorded in the same way
as an electrocardiogram.
While many devices require
the person questioned to
be connected by wires to
the instrument, it is now
possible to give a lie test
without the person con¬
cerned being aware of it
by seating him in a seem¬
ingly ordinary chair with
built in sensors and record¬
ing apparatus. A new type
of lie detector has been
developed which is desi¬
gned to detect psycholo¬
gical stress from measure¬
ments of a speaker's voice
taken without the speaker
being aware of it. Lie
detector tests are used
primarily in police investi¬
gations and by business
firms as part of their per¬
sonnel selection policy. "
Photo shows an interroga¬
tion using a lie detector in
a scene from a French film.
Photo Gaumont International, Paris

Drawing by Asdrubal Salsamendi - Unesco
iECENT decades have seen
the invention or development of var¬
ious techniques of eliciting informa¬
tion from individuals by psychological
and physical means such as person¬
ality assessment techniques ("person¬
ality tests"), polygraphs ("lie detec¬
tors"), narco-analysis and certain
bodily tests, the use of which may
involve invasions of the privacy of the
individual.
It should be kept in mind in this
connexion that many of these tech¬
niques and devices have medical uses
and when applied in the health and
medical fields have as their exclusive
objective the good of the person
concerned, any invasion of his pri¬
vacy being an incidental by-product.
The new techniques available range
from those concerned with psycho¬
logical reactions alone, through tech¬
niques taking into account the physical
effects of a person's psychological
reactions or the psychological effects
of his physical reactions, to techniques
measuring physical condition only.
One type of assessment is that
employing psycho-physiological
indices, such as cardiac (heartbeat)
deceleration, pupil contraction, and
electrical conductivity of the skin
produced by sweating. These
approaches are used to identify
transitory states of the personality,
such as guilt, anxiety, interest, stress
and emotional ambivalence. The most
important application of this type from
a human rights standpoint is in the
"lie detector" test.
The "lie detector" procedure
consists in the person under exami¬
nation being asked a series of ques¬
tions by the polygraph operator. The
bodily changes accompanying the
verbal replies are registered by the
instrument and translated by pens
into patterns on graph paper, resem¬
bling those of an electrocardiogram.
Certain variations in bodily reactions
to different questions some relevant
and some irrelevant to the subject-
matter under investigation are inter¬
preted, broadly speaking, as reflecting
stress engendered by the need for
telling an untruth.
An example of psycho-physiological
personality assessment is a technique
that purports to reveal "private atti¬
tudes about public things and
persons". This approach examines
changes in the contraction or dilation
of the pupil of the eye when the person
concerned is presented with pictures.
In one study, for instance, pictures
of leading political figures were used.
This study reports that one out of
three of those professing preference
for one of two major candidates in a
political campaign actually preferred
the other candidate, preference being
indicated by pupil dilation for pre¬
ferred candidates and pupil contrac¬
tion for disapproved candidates. Work
has been done on reactions to verbal
materials as well.
This technique also has been used
to indicate the advertizing effective¬
ness of pictorial material. Current
technology usually employs cameras
with the assessee's head held in a
fixed position.
Personality assessment techniques
are used in particular in connexion
with psychological research, guidance,
educational and vocational counselling,
and personnel selection and adminis¬
tration.
When used for guidance purposes,
they are intended to enable the in¬
dividual concerned to gain insight into
his own personality. In connexion
with educational and career counsel¬
ling, they are used with a view to
facilitating the selection of the type
of education or occupation which
would enable the person in question
to make the most of his aptitudes.
In personnel administration such
assessment techniques are used with
a view to facilitating the selection of
the most qualified and suitable can¬
didates for the posts in question,
both for initial recruitment and sub¬
sequent promotion. It is considered,
however, that the predictive value of
such tests varies considerably, de¬
pending on their nature and on the
specific use to which they are being
put.
The original motivation in attempting
to apply scientific methods to the
various procedures mentioned above
has been the search for objective
criteria, untainted by personal pre¬
judice or human error, be it in the
choice of a career, the selection of
a person for a given job or the search
for an offender.
Irrespective of the question of moti-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

HUMAN RIGHTS AND THE THREAT TO PRIVACY (Continued)
vation, however, methods of psycho¬
logical and physical inquiry such as
those mentioned above may easily
interfere with the privacy of the indi¬
vidual concerned. The nature of the
questions asked in psychological and
psycho-physiological inquiries may be
such as to constitute a direct and
open interference, as may the bodily
invasions involved in the purely
physical tests.
Questions as to the subject's
political and/or religious preferences,
sex life and relationships within the
family may be considered in this
category, as may be the revelation
of one's innermost thoughts in ques¬
tioning under narco-analysis or the
discovery through physical tests of
filial relationships or alcoholic con¬
sumption. The recording of a person's
unsuspecting, unconscious or involun¬
tary reactions may amount to clandes¬
tine Interference.
It has been maintained that no in¬
vasion of privacy takes place where
the test is taken voluntarily. What
is "voluntary" represents, however, a
complex issue. For example, it
depends entirely on the law of the
particular state or locality whether a
person involved in a police inquiry or
in judicial proceedings, be it as a
suspect or accused or as a witness,
may decline a request that he submit
to a "lie-detector" test or to narco¬
analysis and what, if any, conclusions
may. be drawn from his refusal.
Where taking a "personality" test
or a "lie-detector" test is made a
pre-condition for hiring, continued
employment or promotion, or even
where this is merely "recommended"
as being "desirable", taking such a
test may not be a genuinely voluntary
act for a person seeking, or seeking
to retain, employment; the more so
as his refusal to take the test, if
recorded, may harm his chances of
obtaining employment elsewhere.
The absence of a meaningful form
of voluntary consent poses a threat to
privacy particularly in cases where the
personality assessment deals with
intimate features of one's personal,
sexual, religious or political life.
Q
14
iUITE apart from these
issues, there remains the question of
the scientific reliability or predictive
value, in ea^ch particular case, of pro¬
cedures such as those discussed
above. A validity record of 80 per
cent may be considered significant in
a research project seeking to establish
trends. The implied 20 per cent margin
for error, on the other hand, may be
significant where conclusions are to
be drawn about an individual human
being.
A further threat to the privacy of
the individual may arise when informa¬
tion obtained with his consent on
the understanding that it be treated
as confidential is disclosed without
consent, whether through computeri¬
zation or otherwise.
A survey of the willingness of some
130 corporations to release em¬
ployment test scores to other indivi¬
duals in the firm (especially immediate
work supervisors), to government
agencies, and even to other firms
indicated that 61 firms were willing
to release this information to imme¬
diate supervisors while only 25 would
release it to the employee himself.
Sixteen of these firms would release
this information to government agen¬
cies although the survey report does
not say for what purpose.
The use of norms compiled in one
country to interpret the meaning of
an individual's personality test scores
in another country may lead to
misinterpretation. This is particularly
likely when ready-made personality
test interpretations are available
through the mail. Claims have also
been made that personality assess¬
ment procedures may discriminate
against minority groups within a
country.
HE question of psycholo¬
gical and physical invasions of privacy
has been the subject of considerable
study in recent years.
The problems discussed are ethical,
technical and legal. Is it compatible
with respect for human rights, more
particularly respect for the privacy of
the individual, to use methods such
as those already discussed in order
to extract information from a person
without his consent or even his
knowledge? Is it possible to increase
the reliability of these methods of
inquiry as well as adapt them so as
to reduce to a minimum the invasion
of privacy they entail? Can the law
effectively regulate the use of these
methods and provide remedies for
persons whose rights have been
violated?
As for "personality" tests and "lie
detector" tests, much of the discussion
revolves around the use of these
methods in employment situations.
Thus the Director-General of the
International Labour Office, in his
report entitled Technology for Freedom
(Geneva, 1972) summarized the ques¬
tions relating to personality tests as
follows:
"No less serious for the future of
personal freedom [than intrusion upon
worker's privacy by surveillance
devices] are some of the possible
consequences of the erosion of
privacy by the growing use of
"personality tests" and "aptitude
tests" which have developed from
advances in psychology and psychia¬
try. Clearly, tests which make it
possible to place a worker in a job
corresponding to his qualifications
and aptitudes, or which can help to
determine more accurately a worker's
suitability for transfer to another job
or for promotion, are to be welcomed,
since they can make for improved
productivity and greater job satisfac¬
tion.
"To the extent that such tests can
be shown to measure variables, such
as manual and other skills, physical
dexterity or ability to handle machi¬
nery, which predict the extent to
which the worker will succeed in the
job or training course for which he
is applying, they can be most useful
tools of personnel policy. Testing
may indeed ensure greater equity in
selection than the more widely used
interview, but it presents two types
of problems.
"There is evidence that testing may
discriminate against culturally dis¬
advantaged groups. Such discrimina¬
tion may sometimes be intentional,
though generally it is likely to be due
to the simple fact that individuals who
are culturally disadvantaged or belong
to minority cultural groups are often
handicapped when competing with
others in certain types of tests. There
is here a potential, if unintended,
abuse of testing, which can be
eliminated only if testing procedures
are devised which can accommodate
a diversity of cultural backgrounds.
"Secondly, tests and interview tech¬
niques which seek to penetrate
personality and measure such impon¬
derables as emotions, attitudes,
mental equilibrium, adaptability, or
capacity to withstand psychological
stress may be designed to have the
subject reveal his political views or
his attitudes on intimate religious,
political, sexual or family matters; a
candidate, or even his family, may be
subjected to gruelling interviews and
other tests placing him under great
mental stress and he may be under
observation without even being aware
of it.
"The conclusions derived from tests
designed to penetrate an individual's
subconscious and to make him reveal
things about himself which bear no
direct relation to his future employment
may be of dubious validity, particu¬
larly if the tests are conducted and
analysed by persons who are not
highly qualified psychiatrists and
psychologists. An individual's whole
career may be compromised, and his
morale unnecessarily shaken, by
undependable or meaningless scores
in such tests.
"The employer or person who
decides not to employ the worker may
come into possession of a mass of
actual or inferred information of a
highly personal nature about him which
is not related to his work. Is not
the whole question of the relationship
to personal freedom of the encroach¬
ment of promotion and selection
techniques upon privacy another
issue of substantial importance for
the discharge of our commitment to
personal freedom?
"These issues have been made
much more acute by current develop¬
ments in information storage. Pre¬
judicial information, whether unfair or
misleading or not unfair but irrelevant
or best forgotten, has become much
more serious because less likely to
be forgotten or overlooked."

The frightening power to control people's behaviour through manipulation of their
subconscious minds, hinted at by George Orwell in "1984" and Aldous Huxley in
"Brave New World", may be nearer than we think. Experiments are being made to
sway our emotions by the technique of subliminal perception by the use of stimuli
that are perceived below the threshold of consciousness. In films, images can be
flashed on the screen for Just a fraction of a second. They are not registered by
the viewer's conscious mind, but register on his nervous system. If repeated often
enough they invade his mind without his being aware of what Is happening. In these
three frames from the film ' "My World Dies Screaming", a skull and the word
"blood" are Incorporated as subliminal projections.
HIDDEN
INVADERS
"There are now in active use
subliminal and brainwashing
techniques by which the sub¬
conscious of the individual is
invaded and his thoughts and
personality are influenced with¬
out his consent. These instru¬
ments can be smuggled in past
the customs of the senses. Some
methods of which I am aware
include ultra-sonic waves, inau¬
dible to the conscious senses,
just as the "silent" dog-whistle
is inaudible to man. At sonic
frequencies just beyond the
threshold of normal hearing you
can get through a silent message
without anybody being aware
ofit. The same thing is happening
in our presentation of films and
television. The subliminal film is
a very dangerous instrument and
has been authoritatively banned
in most countries. But control
is only possible at the point of
preparation since the whole
essence of the subliminal is that
it is not detectable at the receiv¬
ing end and therefore we have
to have strict scrutiny of what is
happening."
LORD RITCHIE-CALDER
U.K. Delegate to the
Unesco General Conference
in 1968
15
