A tree grows in Chuqulcamata (Chile) but only because it is protect¬
ed and cared for like a fragile plant in the Atacama desert where this
city with world's most productive copper mine is situated. Coaxing
trees to grow in an industrial atmosphere and arid climate is no easy task.
t- -i
iäfe
- m*K44-U:r
JiSB~"l
-^j****
J** . <*&&&?''" '"" *: * r**i
- "" -.:£wHHi^i^Hrs^ "~-r.
>x ** ^o

THE MYTH
OF ECOLOGICAL
EQUILIBRIUM
by Miguel A. Ozorio de Almeida
ERHAPS the best way to
put the environment issue in proper
perspective is to ask straight away the
basic question: according to whose
criteria is the environment to be con¬
sidered healthy, adequate, pleasant,
desirable?
If the subject were an anaconda,
and if the anaconda had a mind capa¬
ble of value judgments, it would prob¬
ably suggest that the world should be
a swampy forest; a dromedary would
wish it to be a desert. . But what
should it be for the human race? Cert¬
ainly not all desert or all swamp.
A certain misunderstanding has
permeated the whole debate on envi¬
ronmental protection and restoration,
even in relatively sophisticated cir¬
cles namely that we have to keep
or protect environment or ecological
"equilibrium".
The problem to be solved in fact
is not achieving an "ecological
balance" but, on the contrary obtain¬
ing the most efficient forms of "long-
term ecological imbalance". The prob¬
lem is not to exterminate mankind
now, in the name of ecological equi¬
librium, but to prolong our ability to
use natural resources for as long as
possible.
A basic misunderstanding of this
reality and the consequent striving
for ecological balance has led to
many ill-founded conclusions, both
explicit and implicit. Some suggest
MIGUEL A. OZORIO DE ALMEIDA, spec/a/
adviser to the Foreign Minister of Brazil,
headed the Brazilian delegation to the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environ¬
ment at Stockholm in 1972. Ambassador
Almeida has been closely associated with
the U.N. since 1948, in particular with the
Economic and Social Council, and was Braz¬
ilian delegate to the 1952 Unesco General
Conference.
that mankind reduce its numbers, or
be content with consuming less, or
both. The most interesting aspect of
these conclusions is that the "conclu-
ders" generally tend to shift the bur¬
den of reducing numbers or of consum¬
ing less to some community other than
their own.
But with only marginal exceptions
the great polluters are the highly
industrialized countries. Starting from
radionuclides (practically 100 per cent
of whose production and dissemin¬
ation is imputable to a few highly
developed countries) and going right
on down the list of all the other major
pollutants, the overwhelming discharge
of effluents is the consequence of the
developed countries recent technolo¬
gies and of their high levels of indus¬
trial as well as primary production
(particularly in over-fertilized, over-
herbicided, and synthetically control¬
led agriculture). The contribution to
this type of pollution by underdevel¬
oped countries is, in absolute terms,
extremely small and in relative terms
practically nil.
It could be said that if all pollution
generated by the developed countries
could be withdrawn from the earth,
there would be no pollution of world¬
wide significance; conversely if all
pollution directly Imputable to activities
in underdeveloped countries could be
withdrawn from the world today, all
dangers linked to pollution would con¬
tinue to exist in practically the same
densities.
The possible exception is the pol¬
lution that originates in the existence
of humans at low levels of income:
to be many and to be poor is offen¬
sive to the sight and feelings of some
people. So far most proposals in
this area do not concern co-operat¬
ion to reduce population. It is even
neatly construed that by reducing
numbers per capita income will
increase.
It is forgotten that there is a func¬
tional relationship between popula¬
tion and the ability to grow economic¬
ally and that, if in certain areas, most¬
ly in Asia, human numbers have
become excessive (probably on
account of colonial policies of the
last century), in most of Africa and
Latin America human densities are
still below ideal levels for efficient
economic development.
The threat of pollution is an area
in which there has been a lot of
pseudo-scientific extrapolation of the
doomsday variety.
We are threatened with the melt¬
ing of the polar ice-caps, the conse¬
quent rise in sea levels, and the whole¬
sale drowning of some of the largest
cities and capitals in the world.
We are threatened with the exhaus¬
tion of the oxygen reserve on earth
because of North American and Euro¬
pean over-consumption of this useful
gas, while certain effluents dumped
into the sea are jeopardizing its algae
oxygen-producing ability. We are also
told that the Brazilian occupation and
utilization of the Amazon forest will
eliminate its ability to compensate for
American oxygen voracity.
We are threatened with cancer;
everything that may be an irritant to
human tissues from love-making to
all sorts of organic and inorganic
compounds may produce cancer.
We are threatened with hunger.
We are threatened with emphysema.
We are threatened with poisons. We
are threatened with numbers that may 9n
be expected to eliminate all elbow- **
room on our little, already half-
scuttled "spaceship" earth.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

ECOLOGICAL EQUILIBRIUM (Continued)
26
The sensible question to ask about
these dire predictions of course is:
how probable are these threats and
how long before they become real¬
ities?
One of the answers to this ques¬
tion has been provided by the secre¬
tariat of the 1972 Stockholm Confer¬
ence. In a balance sheet listing of
what are believed to be the twenty-
one most important pollutants, the
state of knowledge about effects other
than acute toxicity to experimental
mammals has been indicated as un¬
certain in all cases but one.
Another answer to the same ques¬
tion may be induced from the very
nature of most of the dramatic predict¬
ions made. Let us take, for instance,
the consequences of the accumulation
of carbon dioxide and the melting of
the polar ice-cap. The first observa¬
tion this evokes is that no index of
probability is attached to this predict¬
ion, which reduces its scientific value.
Our planet had already passed
through great variations in temperature
long before modern industry and tech¬
nology started tampering with its ecol¬
ogy. Each "warming up" period has
generated an opposite "cooling off"
tendency. Moreover, it should be not¬
ed that carbon dioxide accumulates
simultaneously with other effluents,
mostly particles, which reduce solar
radiation reaching the earth and thus
tend to cool its surface. *
As for the time span that these
predictions assume, if they apply to
the next ten years, we had better act
right away. If, however, it is a question
of a hundred years, we may have the
time to improve our knowledge and
thus risk fewer mistakes in dealing
with the problem. If it is one thousand
years, the threat must be discounted,
since it is not realistic to predict the
burning of fossil fuels for such a long
time. If it is one hundred thousand
or one million years, let us forget
about it.
The truth is that we do not yet know
enough to pass judgment and take
action in quite a few of the more
important fields. Ecology, through its
necessarily very broad, general equili¬
brium approach to the ecosystem, is
still very far from a complete science,
either as a methodology or as a body
of accepted facts.
The old scientific approach is inade¬
quate and the new ecological approach
is not yet sufficiently ripe. This leaves
us with a probabilistic outlook; quite
a few of the threats now being made
are illegitimate and another few prob¬
ably true, but it is hard to tell one
group from the other. What should be
done In these circumstances?
The DDT battle
continues
An international group of experts
on pesticides, who met in Rome
in November 1972, supports the
continued use of DDT in agricul¬
ture. "The benefits to man aris¬
ing from the proper controlled
use of DDT will outweigh the
possible risk from exposure",
declared the experts, advisers
to the Food and Agriculture
Organization and the World
Health Organization. The bene¬
fits of DDT, said their report, lay
in the prevention of food losses
to pests which would be disas¬
trous in the developing countries
(see also the "Unesco Courier",
June 1971, July 1971, February
1972, May 1972). The experts
also defended the use of mer¬
cury-based fungicides, whose
risks they considered negligible.
But they recommended further
research to discover completely
harmless yet equally effective
replacement fungicides.
The first step should be to identify
those cases of pollution that have
international significance and then,
within the limits of available know¬
ledge, to determine the degree of
probable urgency for the necessary
action. It is quite clear that the
existing situation of incomplete know¬
ledge precludes drastic action in most
fields.
Action might worsen the situation
rather than improve it as was true
in the case of smog clearance in
Los Angeles, where efforts to reduce
carbon monoxide in the exhaust
of motor vehicles led to measures
provoking the equally harmful pro¬
duction by high-powered engines of
nitrogen oxides and the highly poison¬
ous nitrogen dioxide. In the same
way the abolition of the use of DDT
and other persistent organochlorine
insecticides could drastically increase
malaria and reduce agricultural pro¬
duction in tropical areas.
The second step should thus aim
at sensible improvement of the situa¬
tion, as much as possible by reduction
of emission of the major sources of
pollution and in areas where the carry¬
ing capacity of the environment has
been clearly overtaxed.
This brings up a happy coincidence,
namely, that the largest sources of
pollution are to be found in highly
developed areas, where the largest
economic and technological resources
that are a necessary condition for the
ability to act on environmental prob¬
lems are also concentrated.
The third step should be the ini¬
tiation of adequate research for all
areas where danger seems to lurk, thus
creating the appropriate basis for
future action.
The legitimacy of yet another range
of problems relating to the pollution
of poverty or underdevelopment must
be carefully scrutinized. In rural
areas, pollution mostly consists of
poor sanitation and of food and water
contamination, and the major pollutants
are micro-organisms disseminated
because of the lack of appropriate
sewage. In urban areas the same
problems exist together with quite
a few others linked to excessive urban
densities at very low income levels.
The squalor of poverty itself is one
of the ugliest faces environment may
acquire.
A third characteristic is that, contrary
to the prevailing conditions in devel¬
oped countries, such pollution tends
to diminish with economic develop¬
ment itself. In fact it is impossible
to correct this particular pollution
process, mainly because the resources
necessary to cope with it are not
available at low levels of income.
It is thus highly inappropriate to
discuss these problems, both rural
and urban, outside the framework of
economic development.
Nor is pollution the only problem
of environmental degradation linked
to poverty. Problems of agricultural
soil conservation and of different
types of urban deterioration are also
essentially the result of the economic
inability to act. The prevailing condi¬
tions In the rural areas of developing
countries are based upon a fundamen¬
tal lack of capital resources, whether
in terms of equipment or in terms of
inputs for the improvement (or even
maintenance) of soil conditions.
In urban areas, most problems of
environmental degradation are linked
to the inadequacy of productive
employment in industry. This is the
consequence of the inappropriateness
of imported technologies to the factor
endowment of underdeveloped coun¬
tries, where labour tends to be
plentiful and cheap but is not being
fully utilized within the framework of
the internationally available techno¬
logies.
All proposals so far made for the
solution of urban degradation in under¬
developed countries do not touch upon
the core of the problem, which is
technical and economic. By concen¬
trating upon consequences and ignor¬
ing causes, this approach represents
CONTINUED PAGE 28

Ten major pollutants
CARBON
DIOXIDE
Normally the result of energy consumed in power stations, in industry and homes.
It is thought that accumulation of this gas could significantly increase the earth's
surface temperature, with the possibility of geochemical and ecological disasters.
2
4
CARBON
MONOXIDE
SULPHUR
DIOXIDE
NITROGEN
OXIDES
Results from incomplete fuel combustion, mostly in the steel industry, in solid
waste disposal, in oil refineries and in motor vehicles. Some scientists believe this
highly poisonous gas may adversely affect the stratosphere.
Smoke from power generating plants, industrial factories, automobiles and fuel used
in the home often produces sulphuric acid. The polluted air aggravates respiratory
diseases, corrodes trees and limestone buildings, as well as certain synthetic
textiles and vegetation.
Produced by combustion engines, aircraft, furnaces, incinerators, excessive use of
fertilizers, forest fires, industrial plants. Causes smog, may lead to respiratory
infections and bronchitis in new-born children. Causes excessive growth of
aquatic plants, depletion of oxygen, loss of fish and degradation of water quality.
PHOSPHATES
Found in sewage, especially in detergents, in over-fertilized land and the consequent
runoff into water, and as wastes from intensive animal farming. A major factor
in the degradation of lake and river water.
6 MERCURY
Resulting from combustion of fossil fuels, the chlor-alkali industry, electrical and
paint manufacture, mining and refining processes, the pulp and paper industry.
Mercury is a serious food contaminant, especially of seafood, and is a cumulative
poison that affects the nervous system.
Principle source the anti-knock additive in petrol, but lead smelting, the chemical
industry and pesticides also contribute. It is a cumulative poison that affects enzymes
and impairs cell metabolism. Accumulates in marine deposits and in drinking water.
Contamination due to the operation of oil, tankers, shipping accidents, refinery op¬
eration, offshore oil production and transport wastes. Has disastrous ecological
effects including damage to plankton, marine life and sea birds as well as pollution
of beaches and estuaries.
DDT AND
OTHER
PESTICIDES
Very toxic to crustaceans at extremely low concentrations. Used mostly in agriculture.
The runoff of these products into the water kills off fish and their food and conta¬
minates man's food. May have a cancer-producing effect, and may reduce population
of beneficial insects, thus helping in the creation of new pests.
10 RADIATION
Mostly produced in nuclear fuel processing, and also in weapon production and testing
and nuclear-powered ships. Has important medical and research uses, but above a
certain dose can cause malignant growths and genetic changes.
The symbols used above are taken from "Symbol Sourcebook ; an Authoritative Guide to International Graphic Symbols" by Henry Dreyfuss,
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1972, $28.50. The Table of Contents is published in 18 languages and the book is divided into
practical, easy to use sections dealing with : Basic Symbols, Disciplines, Colour. Graphic Forms. A comprehensive index makes reference simple.

ECOLOGICAL EQUILIBRIUM (Continued)
Three roads to world sanity
28
a serious diversion of resources from
development and constitutes an inef¬
ficient attack upon the problem.
An implicit assumption has been
that, given the present demographic
magnitudes and distribution in the
world and given the present patterns
of consumption of natural resources
and of emission of pollutants by the
developed countries, the world cannot
afford the economic development of
the underdeveloped countries along
the lines followed by the presently
developed ones.
If the three-fourths of mankind
represented by underdeveloped coun¬
tries were to squander natural
resources at the same rate (in per
capita terms) as, for example, the
United States or the Western European
countries, there would not be enough
oxygen to go around and there would
not be enough metals for industry,
while, on the other hand, there would
be so much carbon, sulphur, and
nitrogen dioxide that mankind would be
pushed toward extinction.
As a result of this line of reasoning,
three basic measures are being pro¬
posed:
explicitly, the control of popula¬
tion growth in underdeveloped coun¬
tries;
implicitly, a ceiling on the devel¬
opment of underdeveloped countries;
and
explicitly, a reduction of the
emission of major pollutants by
developed countries.
What this scheme obviously lacks
in logical symmetry if not accepta¬
bility is a fourth measure: that
overpopulated countries reduce their
own demographic numbers and, if
necessary, their industrial "prédation"
upon nature so as to reduce their
claim upon the natural resources of
underdeveloped countries.
It is of course impossible for under¬
developed countries to accept inter¬
nationally agreed ceilings for their
population and for their economic
development. These ceilings are
made all the more unacceptable by the
underlying assumption that the popu¬
lations and development levels of
developed countries are taken for
granted and not liable to discussion,
change, and correction. Lack of
knowledge about the earth's capacity
to sustain human life would make such
ceilings anything but a scientific
necessity.
Plans for the Stockholm Conference
were marked by the attitude that the
developed countries have demonstrat¬
ed, by their development, a special
right to salvation and perpetuation,
thus passing on to the more numerous
underdeveloped peoples the respon¬
sibility for creating the necessary
space on earth. This attitude is all
the more dangerous for being implicit
and not normally discussed in public.
Emphasis upon population growth,
as such, unlinked to the relationship
of the population to the national
resource base including geographical
space is inadequate and unac¬
ceptable.
Countries with more than 100, 200,
or even 300 persons per square
kilometre are thus left outside this
approach, while countries with fewer
than 20 inhabitants per square kilo¬
metre are being condemned for demo¬
graphic policies that would bring about
increased economic efficiency and
constitute a necessary condition for
their national integration and fulfill¬
ment as a human community.
IfcSSENTIAL to the Stock¬
holm approach to environment is the
assumption of the universal right of all
peoples to share in the earth's natural
resources. These resources are not
the so-called common goods, like the
high seas or the bottom of the oceans,
but the mineral, animal, soil, and other
resources within national boundaries.
This is, of course, a very beautiful
assumption, but it would fit better in
the institutional framework of a world
government and we should not forget
that we are still very far from this idea.
United Nations action takes place
within the framework of a world divid¬
ed into national states having a high
degree of sovereignty over the resour¬
ces within their borders. This is a fact
of life that, until changed, must be
kept in mind.
If this were not so, the still untapped
natural resources of underdeveloped
countries very often their only assets
and basis for development would
quite likely be placed by the Stockholm
Conference within a World Trust and
thus at the disposal of the voracious
industry and consumption of highly
developed countries.
Simultaneously the developed world,
closely sheltered by its national
boundaries, would keep basically
unchanged its economic power, its
industrial productivity, and its finan¬
cial control of the international com¬
munity.
It should be understood that what
is necessary is either one universal
framework for all sectors, or a nation¬
al framework for all sectors. If
resources are shared in trust by all
peoples, then economic power,
industrial productivity, and financial
control should also be shared. Since
the latter is considered unthinkable by
developed countries, the former
should also be unthinkable by under¬
developed countries.
A sensible approach at this stage
should be to:
Establish conditions for more
research in critical areas of the envi¬
ronment field;
Muster countries to initiate nation¬
al and international efforts to prevent
the unneccessary loss of unrecover¬
able resources;
Provide for a better dissemination
of knowledge in the broad area of
environment.
In more specific areas, there should
be a commitment by the great polluters
of world-wide significance to take
measures to reduce pollution at the
source, or to compensate or neutral¬
ize its effects wherever they are felt.
And measures should be formulated
to accelerate development of under¬
developed countries so as to reduce
the environmental degradation conse¬
quent to poverty and help in the
creation of additional resources for
environmental restoration alongside the
development process.
Furthermore, an effort should be
made to prevent the transfer of part
of the costs of environmental im¬
provement in developed countries to
the underdeveloped peoples, through
trade or financial or technological
manipulations.
This is the moment of history in
which modern science and technology,
making full application of both accu¬
mulated knowledge and potentialities,
is, perhaps for the first time, on the
verge of carrying out its promises to
provide abundance for all mankind.
And the most important point I can
make is that now, more than ever, we
must not allow ourselves to be cheat¬
ed of our opportunities, to be swept
into a period of unnecessary panic,
impelled by a lamentably short-sighted
interpretation of trends.
We must not meet unjustifiable
fears with dreary solutions: scarcity
for all, reduction of population, and
masochistic castigation of present and
future generations through economiz¬
ing on resources that are far from
exhausted.
