Text c Copyright
HE recently published Re¬
port for the Club of Rome, The Limits
to Growth, will probably have the use¬
ful effect of popularizing the ecolo-
gists' broad warnings of the necessity
of giving up our expectations of conti¬
nuing on the road of unrestrained
growth. But to the serious student
the report has grave defects in its
very approach to the problems of both
present trends and the possibilities
and means of altering these trends.
To begin with, the report uncritically
accepts the concept Gross National
Product without any queries. Also for
the rest, it builds upon, and aggregates
in the most careless way, data that
are extremely uncertain both in regard
to economic growth itself and its
various components.
The data concerning threatening pol¬
lution and depletion are equally un¬
reliable. Even a popular presentation
should contain a reminder of this, par¬
ticularly as it is of importance for the
use of these data in a system analysis.

Photo © from
Cuadernos del
Consejo National de la
Universidad Peruana,
Dec. 1971, Lima, Peru
GUNNAR MYRDAL/s a world renowned
figure in sociology and economics. A
member of the Royal Academy of
Sciences in Sweden and former execu¬
tive secretary of the U.N. Economic
Commission for Europe, he is at present
professor of international economy at
Stockholm University. He is the author
of many authoritative studies and books
on social and economic questions, with
special reference to the developing
countries (see bibliography page 33).
The article published here is an excerpt
from a major address delivered as part
of the Distinguished Lecture Series in
Stockholm last year. The full text will
shortly be published by W. W. Norton
(New York) in a collection of these
addresses. 0
J <i '
Reproduction prohibited
The authors are, in other words, over¬
selling their product in regard to the
validity of the basic data.
Much more fundamental is the ques¬
tion of the realism of the report's
global "world system analysis". This
analysis implies, to begin with, a non-
consideration of the enormous and
increasing differences and inequalities
within countries and still more between
countries.
To explain this, the report states
that "inequalities of distribution are
defined as social problems" and then
placed outside "the world simulation
model", which only "calculates the
maximum possible behaviour of our
world system" provided that there is
"intelligent action on world problems,
from a world-wide perspective".
An economist working on these very
problems will be hard put to give any
intelligible meaning to this assump¬
tion of perfect harmony in the world.
Still less will he be able to outline
how it could be brought about. Par
ticularly in a pretended system analy¬
sis it is simply not possible to get
away from "the social problems" mere¬
ly by stating that they are not taken
into account. The ecosystem has to
be studied as part of the social system
I have mentioned.
More specifically the report places
outside the "interactions" within the
"world model" attitudes and institu¬
tions, indeed even the process of price
formation, while politics is only repre¬
sented by stating a number of the
results of abstract policy alternatives.
Their system is, therefore, far from
inclusive enough to have meaning.
The birth rate, for exemple, is quite
rightly a factor, and a very important
one, within their model. But it is cer¬
tainly not a function only of the other
factors within that model and the inter¬
relations between them all. As we
who have studied the demographic
development in the several regions of
the world know, the movements of
these other factors are not even
among the most important determinants
of the birth rate. And the importance
of them is not through the simple
interrelations of the model. Indeed,
those interrelations are fictitious.
Under these circumstances the use
of mathematical equations and a huge
computer, which registers the alterna¬
tives of abstractly conceived policies
by a "world simulation model", may
impress the innocent general public
but has little, if any, scientific validity.
That this "sort of model is actually a
new tool for mankind" is unfortunately
not true. It represents quasi-learned-
ness of a type that we have, for a long
time, had too much of, not least in eco¬
nomics, when we try to deal with
problems simply in "economic terms".
In the end, those conclusions from
the report's analysis which are sen¬
sible at all, are not different and defi¬
nitely not more certain than could
have been reached without that elab¬
orate apparatus by what Alfred Mar¬
shall called "hard simple thinking
aware of the limitations of what we
know."
13
