The role of culture
in the battle
for independence
by AmHear Cabrai
Amilcar Cabrai, has taken his place as the hero of the struggle for the independence
of Guinea (Bissau) where he was born, and indeed all the Portuguese territories of
Africa. He was assassinated ten months ago. A man of rare stature, both as a
thinker and a fighter, he was concerned with every aspect of his country's future.
He described culture, to which he accorded top importance, as "the very foun¬
dation of the liberation movement" and insisted that priority be given to education in
the struggle for independence. "We must preserve for our children the best of what
we have learned", he said; "they are the flower of our struggle." Photo, right, shows
Amilcar Cabrai in 1972, at an end-of-the-year prize-giving ceremony at a pilot school
created by the Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde independence movement at Conakry
(Republic of Guinea). The text published below is taken from a study presented by
Amilcar Cabrai at a meeting on the Concept of Race, Identity and Dignity, at
Unesco headquarters in Paris, in July 1972.
12
HE struggle of peoples for
national liberation and independence
has become a tremendous force for
human progress and is beyond doubt
an essential feature of the history of
our time.
Objective analysis of imperialism as
a fact or historical phenomenon that is
"natural", even "necessary", to the
economic and political evolution of a
great part of mankind, reveals that
imperialist rule with its train of misery,
pillage, crimes and its destruction of
human and cultural values, was not
a purely negative reality.
The huge accumulation of capital
in a half dozen countries of the
northern hemisphere as the result of
piracy, sack of other people's property
and unbridled exploitation of their
labour, did more than engender
colonial monopoly, the sharing-out of
the world and imperialist dominion.
In the rich countries, imperialist
capital, ever looking for higher profits,
heightened man's creative capacity.
Aided by the accelerated progress of
science and technology, it profoundly
transformed the means of production,
stepped-up the social organization of
work and raised the standard of living
of vast sections of the population.
In the colonized countries, colon¬
ization usually arrested the historical
development of the people when it
did not lead to their total or gradual
elimination. Here imperialist capital
imposed new types of relationships
within the indigenous society whose
structure became more complex.
It aroused, fomented, inflamed or
resolved social contradictions and
conflicts.
With the circulation of money and
the development of the domestic and
foreign markets, it introduced new
elements into the economy. It led to
the birth of new nations out of ethnic
groups or peoples at varying stages
of historical development.
It is no defence of imperialist
domination to recognize that it opened
up new worlds to a world whose
dimensions it reduced, that it revealed
new phases in the development of
human societies and, in spite of or
because of the prejudices, discrimi¬
nations and crimes it occasioned,
helped to impart a deeper knowledge
of mankind, moving as one, as a unified
whole amid the complex diversity of
its various forms of development.
Imperialist rule fostered a multi¬
lateral, gradual (sometimes abrupt)
confrontation on the different conti¬
nents not only between different men
but between different societies.
The practice of imperialist rule its
affirmation or its negation demanded
and still demands a more or less
accurate knowledge of the people
dominated and its historical back¬
ground (economic, social and cultural).
This knowledge is necessarily ex¬
pressed in terms of comparison with
the dominating power's own historical
background.
Such knowledge is an imperative

il
I
V
»
necessity for imperialist rule which
results from the usually violent
confrontation of two different identities,
distinct in their historical backgrounds
and antagonistic in their functions.
Despite its unilateral, subjective and
often unjust character, the search for
such knowledge contributed to the
general enrichment of the human and
social sciences.
Indeed man has never shown such
interest in learning about other men
and other societies as during this
century of imperialist domination.
An unprecedented amount of infor¬
mation, hypotheses and theories was
thus accumulated concerning sub¬
jugated peoples or ethnic groups,
especially in the fields of history,
ethnology, ethnography, sociology and
culture.
Concepts of race, caste, clanship,
tribe, nation, culture, identity, dignity
and many more besides, have received
increasing attention from those who
study man and the so-called "primi¬
tive" or "evolving" societies.
More recently, with the upsurge of
liberation movements, it has been
found necessary to analyse the
characteristics of these societies in
terms of the struggle that is being
fought, so as to determine which
factors spark off or restrain this
struggle. Researchers generally agree
that in this context culture takes on
special importance. Any attempt to
throw light on the true role of culture
in the development of a liberation
(pre-independence) movement can be
seen as making a helpful contribution
to the general struggle of peoples
against imperialist rule.
Because independence movements
are as a rule marked even in their
beginnings by increased cultural
activity, it is taken for granted that
such movements are preceded by a
cultural "renaissance" of the domi¬
nated people. Going a step further,
culture is regarded as a method of
mobilizing the group, even as a
weapon in the fight for independence.
From experience of the struggle of
my own people and it might be said
of all Africa, I feel that this is a too
limited, if not erroneous, conception
of the vital role of culture in the
development of liberation movements.
I think it comes of generalizing
incorrectly from a real but restricted
phenomenon that appears at the level
of colonial elites or diasporas. Such
a generalization is unaware of or
disregards an essential factor the
indestructibility of cultural resistance
by the mass of the people to foreign
rule.
With a few exceptions, the era of
colonization was too short, in Africa
at least, to destroy or significantly
depreciate the essential elements in
the culture and traditions of the
colonized peoples. Experience in
Africa shows that (leaving aside
genocide, racial segregation and
apartheid) the one so-called "positive"
way the colonial power has found for
opposing cultural resistance is "assimi¬
lation". But the total failure of the
policy of "gradual assimilation" of
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
13

AMILCAR CAB RAL:
THE MAN WHO
LIVED HIS IDEALS
"I am just an ordinary African who
wants to repay his debt to his people
and to be a man of his time", declared
Amilcar Cabrai. Born at Bafata, Guinea
(Bissau), in 1925, Cabrai qualified as
a specialist in agronomy and could
have led a privileged life if he had
wanted to. Instead in 1954, when he
was only thirty, he founded the
Anticolonialist Movement in Lisbon.
In 1956, he launched PAIGC (see
page 11) which he headed until his
death. From early in 1963 he began
to organize the independence struggle
In Guinea (Bissau) and within ten years
had liberated three-quarters of the
country. Right, Cabrai with freedom-
fighters crossing a swamp in Guinea
(Bissau). His talent as a theorist and
as an organizer and his personal
physical courage earned him world¬
wide respect In April 1972, at
Conakry, he received the members of
the special United Nations Mission
(see page 20) sent to visit the
liberated areas of Guinea (Bissau). It
was largely due to his untiring efforts
that United Nations' attention was
drawn to the problems of the African
territories under Portuguese adminis¬
tration. He was assassinated at
Conakry on January 20, 1973, before
he could see the final outcome of
the long struggle to which he had
devoted all his energies.
CULTURE AND INDEPENDENCE (Continued)
colonized populations is obvious proof
of the fallacy of the theory and of the
peoples' capacity for resistance (1).
On the other hand, even in
settlement colonies, where the over¬
whelming majority of the population is
still indigenous, the area of colonial
and particularly cultural occupation is
usually reduced to coastal strips and
a few small zones in the interior.
The influence of the colonial power's
culture is almost nil outside the capital
and other urban centres. It is only
significantly felt within the social
pyramid created by colonialism itself
and affects more particularly what may
be called the indigenous petty bour¬
geoisie and a very limited number of
workers in urban centres.
We find then that the great rural
masses and a large fraction of the
urban population, totalling over 99 per
cent of the indigenous population, are
virtually isolated from any cultural
influence by the colonial power.
This implies that, not only for the
mass of the people in the dominated
country but also for the dominant
14 (1) In Guinea and Cape Verde, for example,
the maximum percentage of assimilated
persons Is 0.3 per cent of the total population
after 500 years of civilizing presence and
half a century of "colonial peace".
classes among the indigenous peoples
(traditional chiefs, noble families,
religious leaders), there is usually no
destruction or significant depreciation
of culture and traditions.
Repressed, persecuted, humiliated,
betrayed by certain social groups
which have come to terms with the
foreigner, culture takes refuge in
villages, in forests and in the minds
of the victims of domination, weather¬
ing all storms to recover all its power
of expansion and enrichment through
the struggle for liberation.
That is why the problem of a "return
to the source" or a "cultural re¬
naissance" does not arise for the
mass of the people; it could not, for
the masses are the torch-bearers of
culture; they are the source of culture
and, at the same time, the one
entity truly capable of creating and
preserving it, of making history.
For an accurate appreciation of the
true role of culture in the development
of the liberation movement, a distinc¬
tion must therefore be made, at least
in Africa, between the situation of the
masses who preserve their culture and
of the social groups that are more
or less assimilated, uprooted and
culturally alienated.
Even though marked by certain
cultural features of their own in
digenous community, native elites
created by the colonizing process live
materially and spiritually the culture
of the colonialist foreigner with whom
they seek gradually to identify them¬
selves in social behaviour and even
in their views of indigenous cultural
values.
Over two or three generations at
least under colonization, a social class
has been formed of government
officials, employees in various bran¬
ches of the economy (especially trade),
members of the liberal professions and
a few urban and agricultural land¬
owners.
This indigenous lower middle class,
created by foreign rule and indispen¬
sable to the colonial system of
exploitation, finds itself placed bet¬
ween the mass of workers in the
country and in the towns and the
minority of local representatives of
the foreign ruling class.
Although its members may have
more or less developed relations with
the mass of the people or the
traditional chiefs, they usually aspire
to a way of life similar to, if not
identical with that of the foreign
minority. Limiting their relations with
the masses they try to become
integrated with that minority, often to
the detriment of family or ethnic bonds
and always at personal cost.

Photos © Bruna Amico, Rome
But despite apparent exceptions,
they never succeed in crossing the
barriers imposed by the system. They
are prisoners of the contradictions of
the social and cultural reality in which
they live, for they cannot escape their
condition as a "marginal" class. This
marginality is the real social and
cultural drama of the colonial elites or
indigenous petty bourgeoisie. While
living conditions and level of accul¬
turation determine its intensity, this
drama is always lived at the individual,
not the community, level.
Within the framework of this daily
drama, against the background of the
usually violent confrontation between
the mass of the people and the ruling
colonial class, a feeling of bitterness,
a frustration complex, develops and
grows among the indigenous lower
middle class. At the same time they
gradually become aware of an urgent
need to contest their marginal status
and to find an identity. So they turn
towards the other pole of the social
and cultural conflict in which they are
living the mass of the people.
Hence the "return to the source"
which seems all the more imperative
as the sense of isolation and
frustration of this lower middle class
grows. The same holds true for
Africans dispersed in colonialist and
racist capitals.
It is not by chance then that
theories or movements such as Pan
Africanism and Négritude (two perti¬
nent expressions based mainly on the
notion that all Black Africans are
culturally identical) were conceived
outside Black Africa.
More recently, the Black Americans'
claim to an African identity is another,
perhaps desperate, expression of this
need to "return to the source", though
it is clearly influenced by a new factor
the winning of independence by the
great majority of African peoples.
But the "return to the source"
neither is nor can be in itself an act
of struggle against foreign (colonialist
and racist) rule. Nor does it necess¬
arily mean a return to traditions. It
is the denial by the indigenous petty
bourgeoisie of the superiority claimed
for the culture of the ruling power
over the culture of the dominated
people with which this petty bour¬
geoisie feels the need to identify.
This "return to the source" then is
not a voluntary step; it is the only
possible response to the irreconcilable
contradiction between the colonized
society and the colonial power, bet¬
ween the exploited masses and the
foreign exploiters.
When the "return to the source"
goes beyond the individual to find
expression in groups or move¬
ments", this opposition turns into
conflict (under cover or open), the
prelude to the pre-independence move¬
ment or struggle for liberation from
foreign yoke.
This "return to the source" is thus
historically important only if it involves
both a genuine commitment to the
fight for independence and also a
total, irrevocable identification with
the aspirations of the masses, who
reject not only the foreigner's culture
but foreign rule altogether. Otherwise
it is nothing but a means of obtaining
temporary advantages, a conscious
or unconscious form of political
opportunism.
It should be noted that this "return
to the source", whether real or
apparent, is not something that
happens simultaneously and uniformly
within the lower middle class. It is
a slow, discontinuous, uneven process
and its development depends on each
person's degree of acculturation,
material conditions of life, ideological
thinking, and individual history as a
social being.
This unevenness explains the
splitting of the indigenous petty bour¬
geoisie into three groups in relation
to the liberation movement: a minority
which, even though it may want the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
15

CULTURE AND INDEPENDENCE (Continued)
Domination cloaked in new forms
16
end of foreign rule, hangs on to the
ruling colonial class and openly
opposes the liberation movement in
order to defend and secure its own
social position; a hesitant or un¬
decided majority; another minority
which helps to create and to direct
the liberation movement.
But this last group which plays a
decisive role in developing the pre-
independence movement, does not
really succeed in identifying itself with
the mass of the people (with their
culture and their aspirations) except
through the struggle, the degree of
identification depending on the form or
forms of the struggle, the ideological
content of the movement and the extent
of each person's moral and political
awareness.
Culture has proved to be the very
foundation of the liberation movement.
Only societies which preserve their
cultures are able to mobilize and
organize themselves and fight against
foreign domination. Whatever ideo¬
logical or idealistic forms it takes,
culture is essential to the historical
process. It has the power to prepare
and make fertile those factors that
ensure historical continuity and deter¬
mine a society's chances of pro¬
gressing (or regressing).
'iNCE imperialist rule is
the negation of the historical process
of the dominated society, it will readily
be understood that it is also the
negation of the cultural process. And
since a society that really succeeds
in throwing off the foreign yoke reverts
to the upward paths of its own culture,
the struggle for liberation is above all
an act of culture.
The fight for liberation is an essen¬
tially political fact. Consequently, as
it develops, it can only use political
methods.
Culture then is not, and cannot be, a
weapon or a means of mobilizing the
group against foreign domination. It
is much more than that. ' Indeed, it
is on firm knowledge of' the local
reality, particularly the cultural reality,
that the choice, organization and
development of the best methods of
fighting are based.
This is why the liberation movement
must recognize the vital importance
not only of the cultural characteristics
of the dominated society as whole but
also of those of each social class.
For though it has a mass aspect,
culture is not uniform and does not
develop evenly in all sectors, horizon¬
tal or vertical, of society.
The attitude and behaviour of each
class or each individual towards the
struggle and its development are, it
is true, dictated by economic interests,
but they are also profoundly influenced
by culture. It may even be said that
differences in cultural level explain
differences in behaviour towards the
liberation movement of individuals of
the same social class.
It is at this level, then, that culture
attains its full significance for each
individual comprehension of and in¬
tegration within his social milieu, iden¬
tification with the fundamental prob¬
lems and aspirations of his society
and acceptance or rejection of the
possibility of change for the better.
Whatever its form, the struggle
requires the mobilization and organi¬
zation of a large majority of the popu¬
lation, the political and moral unity
of the different social classes, the
gradual elimination of vestiges of tribal
or feudal mentality, the rejection of
social and religious taboos that are
incompatible with the rational and
national character of, the liberating
movement. And the struggle brings
about many other profound modifica¬
tions in the life of the people.
This is all the more true because
the dynamic of the struggle also re¬
quires the exercise of democracy,
criticism and self-criticism, growing
participation of the people in running
their lives, the achievement of literacy,
the creation of schools and health
services, leadership training for rural
and city workers, and many other
achievements that are involved in the
society's "forced march" along the
road of cultural progress. This shows
that the liberation struggle is more than
a cultural fact, it is also a cultural
factor.
Among the - representatives of the
colonial power as well as in their home
countries, the first reaction to the
liberation struggle is a general feeling
of_surprise and incredulity. Once this
feeling, the fruit of prejudice or of the
planned distortions typical of colonia¬
list news, is surmounted reactions vary
with the interests, the political opinions
and the degree to which colonialist
and racist attitudes have crystallized
among the different social classes and
individuals.
The progress of the struggle and the
sacrifices imposed by the need to take
colonialist repressive measures (police
or military) cause a split in metropo¬
litan opinion. Differing, if not diver¬
gent positions are adopted and new
political and social contradictions
emerge.
From the moment the struggle is
recognized as an irreversible fact,
however great the resources employed
to quash it, a qualitative change takes
place in metropolitan opinion. The
possibility if not the inevitability of the
colony's independence is on the whole
gradually accepted.
Such a change is a conscious or
unconscious admission that the colo¬
nized people now engaged in the
struggle have an identity and a culture
of their own. And this holds true even
though throughout the conflict an
active minority, clinging to its interests
and prejudices, persists in refusing
the colonized their right to indepen¬
dence and in denying the equivalence
of cultures that right implies.
At a decisive stage in the conflict
this equivalence is implicitly recognized
or accepted even by the colonial
power. To divert the fighters from
their objectives it applies a demagogic
policy of "economic and social im¬
provement", of "cultural development",
cloaking its domination with new forms.
NIEO-COLONIALISM is
above all the continuation of imperialist
economic rule in disguise, but never¬
theless it is also the tacit recognition
by the colonial power that the people
it rules and exploits have an identity
of their own demanding its own
political control, for the satisfaction of
a cultural necessity.
Moreover, by accepting that the
colonized people have an identity and
a culture, and therefore an inalienable
right to self-determination and indepen¬
dence, metropolitan opinion (or at
least an important part of it) itself
makes significant cultural progress and
sheds a negative element in its own
culture the prejudice that the colo¬
nizing nation is superior to the colo¬
nized one. This advance can have all-
important consequences for the poli¬
tical evolution of the imperialist or
colonialist power, as certain facts of
current or recent history prove.
The existence of genetic, somatic
CONTINUED PAGE 20

and cultural affinities between certain
human groups on one or more conti¬
nents and a more or less similar
situation in regard to colonial or racist
domination have led to the formulation
of theories and the creation of
"movements" based on the hypothe¬
tical existence of racial or continental
cultures.
The widely recognized or sensed
importance of culture in the liberation
movement has helped to give this
hypothesis a certain following. One
would not wish to minimise the
importance of such theories or move¬
ments as attempts successful or
otherwise to find an identity and
also as a means of contesting foreign
rule. But an objective analysis of
cultural reality leads one to reject the
notion of racial or continental cultures.
In the first place, culture, like
history, is an expanding phenomenon
and closely linked with the economic
and social reality of an environment,
with the level and methods of produc¬
tion of the society that creates it.
Secondly, culture develops unevenly
at the level of a continent, of a "race",
and even of a community. In fact,
the co-ordinates of culture, like those
of every other developing phenomen¬
on, vary in space and time, whether
they are material (physical) or human
(biological and sociological).
That is why culture the creation of
a community, the synthesis of balances
and solutions it produces to resolve
the conflicts that characterize it at
every phase of its history is a social
reality independent of man's will, of
the colour of his skin or the shape of
his eyes, and of geographical boun¬
daries.
If culture is to play its proper rôle,
the liberation movement must lay down
the precise objectives to be achieved
on the road to the reconquest of the
rights of the people it represents the
right to make its own history and the
right to dispose freely of its own
productive resources. This will pave
the way to the final objective of
developing a richer, popular, national,
scientific and universal culture.
It is not the task of the liberation
movement to determine whether a
culture is specific to the people or not.
The important thing is for the move¬
ment to undertake a critical analysis
of that culture in the light of the
requirements of the struggle and of
progress; to give it its place within
the universal civilization without con¬
sideration as to its superiority or in¬
feriority, with a view to its harmonious
integration into the world of today as
part of the common heritage of man¬
kind. '
United Nations action has made an important contribution to the struggle
for the independence of Guinea (Bissau). Below. Horacio Sevilla Borja during
his visit last year to the liberated territories as head of the United Nations
Special Mission. Right, the United Nations flag in a liberated village.


