Weather research
sounding-balloons, here
being filled with he¬
lium, a lighter-than-
air, non - Inflammable
gas, are able to drift
for hours at heights
between 25 and 40
kilometres, where there
is no risk of them
encountering either
high altitude jets or
earth-circling satellites.
These explorers of the
stratosphere carry mea¬
suring instruments to
record air pressure
and temperature, wind
speed and direction
and other weather in¬
formation. Their mis¬
sion accomplished, the
instruments parachute
back to earth.



IS THE EARTHS
CHANCING ?
For the past 30 years
the temperature of our planet
has been steadily dropping
by Hubert H. Lamb
CLIMATE
HUBERT H. LAMB of Great Britain is an international authority on the
long term processes of climatic change. He is director of the Climatic
Research Unit at the University of East Anglia (U.K.) and for many
years has been actively engaged in international research on climate,
in particular polar meteorology and the study of climatic fluctuations.
Among his many writings are "The Changing Climate" (1966) and,
most recently, "Climate: Present, Past and Future", a major study
of which Volume I, "Fundamentals and the Climate Now" appeared
last year (Methuen, London; Barnes and Noble, New York).
LT the beginning of this
century, and right up to the Second
World War, the accepted view in cli¬
matology was that, though there had
been significant changes of climate in
the geological past ice ages and
interglacial periods somewhat warmer
than now (not to mention the many
millions of years of the Earth's history
in warm geological eras with little or
no ice even at the poles) climate
was now essentially constant and had
been so for at least the last two thou¬
sand years.
Descriptions of the climates of Brit¬
ain, Germany and southern Russia by
Roman and Greek writers fn classical
times were so similar to the impress¬
ions of visitors from the Mediterranean
countries in modern times that they
seemed to prove the point : evidently
nobody stopped to think that the coun-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
17

Rain and snow to order?
IS OUR CLIMATE CHANGING ? (Continued)
18
tries at both ends of the journey might
have been either colder or warmer
than now.
Granted the variations of weather
from one year to another produced
alternate times of ease and difficulty
and occasional disasters, but these
were taken to be just random variations
about the mean or, at most, the prod¬
uct of cycles of no more than a few
years or decades duration (and some¬
what capricious amplitude).
Hence, any table of climatic statistics
comprising the weather observations
of 30 years or more was thought to be
an adequate basis for future planning
(and even for the calculation, by refined
statistical methods, of such rare
hazards as the extreme flood or gust
of wind, or the severest frost, to be
expected once in 100, 200 or 500
years).
This view and these methods got
into the standard textbooks, and were
taught in schools and universities to
the generation now holding the posi¬
tions of responsibility in government
and industry in most countries. The
methods were, of course, sound
enough, provided the series of obser¬
vation data were really adequate to
the purpose in mind; but this has come
to be seriously questioned. In many
areas the methods are still in use,
pending a better understanding of cli¬
matic trends and changes.
The need for a reassessment has
become clear for a number of reasons.
Computations in the United States
from surface air temperature observa¬
tions all over the world show that from
the 1880s to some time after 1940 the
Earth's climate was becoming generally
warmer. The global warming over
those years amounted to about half a
degree Centigrade, but in the Arctic
it was much stronger and amounted to
several degrees between 1920 and
1940.
The ice on the Arctic seas decreased
in extent by about 10 per cent and
decreased in general thickness by
about one third. Glaciers in all parts
of the world were receding, opening
up new pastures and land for cultiva¬
tion, while the melt-water swelled the
flow of the mountain rivers in spring
and summer.
The greater warmth increased the
length of the growing season by two
to three weeks in England. The wild
flora and forests, the cultivation of
various crops, and the ranges of sea¬
sonal migration of birds and fish, all
spread to new regions under the in¬
creasingly genial conditions.
Mankind takes naturally to easier
conditions. Old habits of wearing
heavy clothing and laying in food
stocks for the winter in northern lands
were more and more given up, and
often unkindly attributed to the outmod¬
ed mental attitudes of the nineteenth
century, while the climatic improve¬
ment affecting most of the developed
countries in temperate (and higher nor¬
thern) latitudes passed unnoticed for
some time.
Once the climatic trend was noticed,
Man's major impact on the earth's
climate (through atmospheric pollu¬
tion, agriculture, deforestation, etc.)
is largely accidental, but deliberate
attempts at local weather modifi¬
cation date back to the early rain-
making experiments of the 1890s.
Today serious scientific attempts at
artificially inducing rain and snow
by cloud seeding are achieving a
certain limited success. Silver
Iodide crystals, salt particles, ammo¬
nium sulfate or other substances are
released into a cloud. Under favour¬
able conditions the tiny water drop¬
lets in the cloud collect round each
"seed" and fall to earth as rain or
snow. Right, artist's impression of
an aircraft seeding a cloud and then,
at a lower altitude, gathering sam¬
ples of the resulting precipitation.
Left, in the Rocky Mountain region
of Colorado a 6m. X 3.7m. kite Is
52 released, loaded with instruments,
p to monitor the effects of cloud seed-
Q ing to provoke the snowfalls whose
~ melt feeds the Colorado river, life
S stream of the arid regions of the
£ south-western United States.
speculation began about the causes
and possible future consequences.
Some of the first scientific work on
the subject, published in the 1950s,
attributed the warming to Man's output
of carbon dioxide from the burning of
fossil fuels (coal, oil, etc.), which in¬
creased the quantity of this gas in
the atmosphere by almost 10 per cent
in the first half of this century.
Carbon dioxide is a minor constituent
of the atmosphere, only about three
parts in ten thousand by volume; but
its effects on the heating of the Earth
are important. It is much less trans¬
parent to the outgoing long-wave radi¬
ation from the Earth (which it there¬
fore traps and re-radiates, partly back
towards the Earth) than it is to the
incoming radiation from the sun (which
it allows to pass almost without loss).
The effect is therefore something
like that of a blanket or a glass-house,
holding in heat which the Earth has
received. It was calculated that a
doubling of the amount of carbon di¬
oxide in the atmosphere should in¬
crease the overall temperature of the
Earth by 3 to 4°C.
It soon became clear, however, that
carbon dioxide was not the whole story.
Despite increasing production of this
gas, with more and more industrializa-^
tion and the ever-increasing burning
of oil and other fuels, the temperature
trend reversed.
For the past 25 to 30 years the Earth
has been getting progressively cooler
again. Around 1960 the cooling was
particularly sharp. And there is by

now widespread evidence of a corres¬
ponding reverse in the ranges of birds
and fish and the success of crops and
forest trees near the poleward and
altitudinal limits.
Moreover, the longest temperature
records available in various northern
countries from the early eighteenth cen¬
tury (in England from the late seven¬
teenth century) showed that the prev¬
ious warming had a very long history,
traceable from the beginning of the
record through various shorter-term
ups and downs.
This meant that the warming began
before the industrial revolution and
could not be altogether attributable to
the effects of human activity.
Thus, quite recent climatic trends
have forced us to recognize that cli¬
matic changes and fluctuations are
forever going on, even in our own
times, and that we have to reckon
with changes brought about both by
natural causes and the actions of Man.
The decline of prevailing temperatures
since about 1945 appears to be the
longest-continued downward trend
since temperature records began.
In face of this and the many new
types of pollution put into the atmos¬
phere by industrial processes, bomb
tests, high-flying aircraft, rockets and
so on, the question of what we should
expect the climate to do next is often
asked but is not easily answered, and
the improvement of knowledge and
understanding has become an urgent
task.
Investigation readily shows that the
general wind circulation over the
globe undergoes continual variations
of vigour and to a certain extent of
its basic pattern. The variations range
from great predominance of the
"zonal" westerly and easterly cur¬
rents to considerable prominence of
"meridional" (southerly and northerly)
flows which are accompanied by sta¬
tionary "blocking anticyclones" at
certain longitudes straddling the mid¬
dle latitudes zone that is normally the
zone of prevailing westerlies.
HESE changes are the "me¬
chanism" by which climatic changes
are brought about, whatever the ulti¬
mate causes may be. And the effects
are by no means confined to tempera¬
ture and the extent of snow and ice.
Among the successive 10-year aver¬
ages of yearly precipitation in many
parts of the world, let us examine
some figures from about 1840 for
Barnaul (53° N 84° E) in the heart
of Asia.
The decades of global warming in
the early part of this century were
a time of abnormally maintained vigour
of the 'zonal wind circulation, and they
seem to have been marked by excep¬
tional transport of moisture-bearing
winds from the Atlantic all across
Europe and onwards as far as this
area of central Asia.
In previous deaades in the nine¬
teenth century and again after 1950,
the precipitation at Barnaul was less
by a substantial percentage. As the
average annual downput of rain and
snow beween 1900 and 1940, equi¬
valent to a rainfall of 482 mm. per
year, was just sufficient for agriculture
with careful management and some
artificial irrigation, the provision of
enough water in that region, as in other
parts of the world, in the long term
raises anxious problems.
With the rising population of Soviet
Central Asia, and increasing industrial
need for water as well, the authorities
have been obliged to consider divert¬
ing water from the great rivers of
Siberia which flow north to the Arctic
Ocean.
This proposal is one, however,
which demands a more exact under¬
standing of the large-scale processes
of climate than is so far within our
reach. If it is undertaken, it will have
to be attempted in very limited stages
and with a careful watch on possible
side-effects on the grandest scale.
This is because it is the water of
the Siberian rivers which largely pro¬
vides the ice-bearing layer of low
salinity on the surface of the Arctic
Ocean : if that ocean were converted
into a normal salt-water ocean with
an open surface free of ice, most of
the Arctic would be on average 10 to
20°C warmer than it now is (and over
30°C warmer in the winter time).
This change could alter the whole pat¬
tern of the wind circulation, and hence
the distribution of rainfall, over the
northern hemisphere.
A recent experiment (by R.L. New-
son, in 1973) with a mathematical
"model" of the atmospheric circulation
suggests that the winters would be¬
come colder over the northern hemi¬
sphere landmasses in middle latitudes.
And other studies (by a Soviet scien¬
tist, O.A. Drozdov, in 1966) have sug¬
gested, apparently in agreement with
this, that the rain and snow-bearing
cyclonic disturbances would be largely
diverted into the Arctic, leaving many
continental regions drier than before.
This problem of the water needed
in the arid lands in central Asia is one
point (and there may be others) at
which our understanding of climate
becomes involved with the human
population explosion and presents
mankind with a dilemma which may be
very hard to solve.
The great internationally organized
observation network set up by the
World Meteorological Organization in
the World Weather Watch (WWW,
see article page 4) involving the use _
of satellites and many fixed observa- 1 Q
tion points in all the world's oceans
as well as in Antarctica, greatly im¬
proves our ability to monitor the symp-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

IS OUR CLIMATE CHANGING? (Continued)
toms of climatic change as they occur
and wherever they are most clearly
seen.
And the Global Atmospheric Re¬
search Project (GARP, see article page
21) scheduled by WMO for the mid-
1970's should improve our understand¬
ing of the large-scale atmospheric
circulation and its interactions over
the whole globe.
But there is a great need also to
establish the facts of the past record
of climate in as much detail as pos¬
sible, to give climatology the longest
possible observation base for inves¬
tigating the natural climatic fluctuat¬
ions and their causes. Moreover, the
causes are known to go beyond
meteorology as ordinarily understood.
To identify them, and indeed to re¬
construct the facts of the climatic rec¬
ord in past centuries and millennia,
will ' entail an exciting collaboration
between many branches of science
and learning.
The measurements of the strength
of the incoming solar radiation avail¬
able from 1883 to recent years show
very clearly the effects of great
volcanic eruptions which put up per¬
sistent veils of dust into the high
atmosphere in 1883, 1888, 1902, 1912
and 1963.
From comparison of the tempera¬
tures and wind circulation patterns
prevailing in the years immediately
following these and other great vol¬
canic explosions in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries, the effects upon
climate, though temporary, are seen
to be real and in some cases drastic.
B
20
'UT there has been a gradual
decline in strength of the solar beam
since 1945 which may have to be
attributed to the sun itself. There is
probably no need for undue alarm
about this, because similar changes
affecting climate and of the global
wind pattern appear to have occurred
many times before and what we are
witnessing may be a recurring fluc¬
tuation of the solar output, apparently
tending to repeat itself at about 200
or 400-year intervals. The effects
are, however, likely to be world-wide
and to pose awkward problems wher¬
ever we are exploiting climatic resour¬
ces (such as water or summer warmth)
to the limit.
Records exist of the number of
days each year from 1861 to 1970
when the general zonal current of the
westerly winds of middle latitudes has
swept across the British Isles. Par¬
ticularly noticeable are the high fre¬
quencies sustained between about
1902 and 1938, at the height of the
global warming, and the marked de¬
cline in recent years to previously
unrecorded low levels in 1968 and
1969 (and again in 1971).
Other records present the 600
year-long history of the frequency of
the south-westerly surface wind in
eastern England (based upon various
data, including an early weather diary
about 1340, and strictly daily obser¬
vations in London from 1669).
They broadly parallel the record of
westerly winds in the last hundred
years and seem to indicate a marked
decline of the westerlies, as in recent
years, recurring at about 200-year
intervals.
Apart from their possible ultimate
origin in a long-term fluctuation of the
solar energy available, linkages have
been demonstrated between the
changed patterns of the atmospheric
circulation and corresponding persist¬
ent anomalies in the circulation of the
oceans.
Because large volumes of warmer
or colder than normal sea water
cannot be reduced to normal at all
quickly, these have persistent effects
on the wind circulation which are
useful in forecasting.
Among the effects of the changes
of climate and the wind circulation in
recent years which have given cause
for concern are :
a renewed increase (especially
since 1961) of the Arctic sea ice,
which has created difficulties on the
northern sea routes in Soviet and
Canadian Arctic waters and has pro¬
duced some bad seasons on the coasts
of Iceland and Greenland.
a substantial rise, also- since 1961,
in the levels of the great lakes in
eastern equatorial Africa and, more
recently, of the Great Lakes of North
America;
some 200-year extremes of tem¬
perature in individual cold winters in
various parts of the northern hemi¬
sphere (and probably also in the
warmth of summer in 1972 in northern
European U.S.S.R. and Finland).
The most serious effects, however,
have probably been the long-continu¬
ed droughts and deficient rainfalls in
various parts of the world associated
with shifts of the world's anticyclone
belts.
Observations have shown changes
of prevailing atmospheric pressure
over the northern hemisphere in the
1950s and 1960's compared with the
averages of the first forty years of
the century. Pressure became higher,
and the situations therefore frequently
anticyclonic and drier, over most of
the Arctic, particularly the Arctic fringe
the change amounting to + 3 millibars
over part of Greenland.
A belt of lower pressure than before
in middle latitudes, particularly near
40°N (where the change was minus
2 millibars in some areas), marks a shift
of the main cyclonic disturbances and
rainfall towards lower latitudes than
before. (There was also some increase
of cyclonic disturbances in the inner
Arctic, near the pole.)
HE subtropical anticyclones
associated with the desert belt were
correspondingly displaced somewhat
towards the equator, and the equa¬
torial rainbelt seems to have been re¬
stricted in the range of its seasonal
migrations. In consequence, rainfall
increased in Africa close to the equa¬
tor, causing the lakes to rise, while
drought began to afflict places nearer
the fringe of the desert belt, no longer
reliably visited in summer by "equator¬
ial" rains.
Rainfall at eight places in northern
India, the Sudan and at 16 to 20°N in
west Africa averaged 45 per cent less
in the years 1968-72 than in the 1950's.
In all these areas people have been
driven from their homes by the con¬
tinued failure of the rains, and in the
Cape Verde Islands at the same lati¬
tude in the Atlantic an emergency was
declared in 1972 because of the last
five years of drought.
There are indications that corres¬
ponding shifts have taken place in
the anticyclone and cyclone belts of
the southern hemisphere and that the
droughts affecting Zambia, Rhodesia
and parts of the Transvaal in recent
years are essentially part of the same
phenomenon.
Since 1970 the area of increased
cyclonic disturbance in the inner
Arctic has grown in size, and the belt
of increased pressure and more anti-
cyclonic influence has expanded to
embrace most of the zone between 45
and 70°N, where droughts may also
be serious to the many densely popu¬
lated countries.
At the same time, the shifting posi¬
tions from month to month, and from
one year to the next, occupied by the
main anticyclone centres in this belt
have introduced an abnormal variability
of temperature and precipitation. A
similar development may explain the
sequence of droughts and floods in
different parts of Australia in 1972-3.
All these events have raised an
anxious demand for ultra-long-range
forecasting of climate, which calls for
intensified effort towards understand¬
ing of the atmosphere (and its inter¬
actions with the ocean) and for further
reconstruction of the facts of the past
climatic record.
