2. Three-pronged attack
on private life
HE invasions of individual
privacy made possible by the newly-
developed techniques are divided in
the U.N. study into three categories:
auditory and visual invasions, psy¬
chological and physical invasions, and
invasions by data surveillance.
The study deals, for example, with
the use of wire-taps, microphones,
transmitters and tape-recorders, and
telescopic lenses, candid cameras,
two-way mirrors and closed-circuit
television. With regard to the psy¬
chological and physical invasion of
privacy, it covers such matters as the
use for non-medical purposes of per¬
sonality tests, "lie-detectors", narco¬
analysis, and blood and breath tests.
There is a recognizable reciprocal
relationship between respect for the
privacy of the individual and the pro¬
tection of certain other human rights,
the effect being one of mutual re¬
inforcement. This interaction is not
new but has been receiving renewed
attention lately in view of the increased
opportunities for violations of privacy
afforded by recent scientific and tech¬
nological developments.
Among the rights which may be
affected by invasion of privacy is the
right of everyone to freedom of
opinion and expression proclaimed in
article 19 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and dealt with In
article 19 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights.
Two others are the right to freedom
of thought, conscience and religion
(article 18 of the Universal Declaration
and article 18 of the Covenant); and
the right to a fair and public hearing in
the determination of the individual's
rights and obligations and of any
criminal charge against him, including
various rights of the defendants in
penal proceedings (articles 10 and 11
of the Universal Declaration and arti¬
cles 14 and 15 of the Covenant).
Questions are being asked such as
whether invasion of privacy by means
of listening and recording devices or
of certain psychological and physical
tests in connexion with penal pro¬
ceedings do not, in fact, lead to
violations of existing guarantees
against self-incrimination, an aspect of
the right to a fair hearing, and
connected procedural guarantees dealt
with in the Universal Declaration and
the International Covenant.
Article 14 of the Covenant requires
that in the determination of any cri¬
minal charge against him, everyone
shall be entitled to certain minimum
guarantees, including "not to be
compelled to testify against himself
or to confess guilt".
Infringements upon privacy by
modern methods of auditory and visual
surveillance may also, under certain
circumstances, violate guarantees
against arbitrary interference with the
family, with the home, with the secrecy
of correspondence, in particular
through the tapping of telephone
conversations, and with guarantees
against attacks on one's honour and
reputation (article 12 of the Universal
Declaration and article 17 of the
Covenant).
The connexion existing between
the enjoyment of privacy and of other
human rights has been summarized as
follows:
Wholesale invasions of privacy
inhibit liberty, often purposely. This
is particularly true of surreptitious
invasions, like electronic eavesdrop¬
ping, spies, informers, entrappers, and
psychological testing, of the existence
of which the subject is often unaware
until too late. The community becomes
fear-ridden, and no one can be trusted,
whether he be family, friend or asso¬
ciate; indeed, a person may be led to
continual distrust of himself, as his
efforts at individual self-fulfilment
conflict with the norms of authority.
This destruction of trust is one of
the major dangers to a free society.
