Views of the majesticavenues, ornamental
lakes and fountains and
pavilions of the Shala-
mar Gardens, Lahore
laid out in the 17th cen¬
tury during the reign of
Shah Jahan. In the 18th
century the Gardens
were despoiled of their
marble and other decor¬
ations, but under the
care of Pakistan's De¬
partment of Archaeolo¬
gy and Museums this
gem of Moghul land-
scape architecture is
gradually being restored
to its former splendour.
Photo Guy Thomas © Paplgny Parla



THE GLORY
THAT WAS
SHALAMAR
Restoring the splendours of Lahore's
17th century garden of delights
by
Muhammad
Ishtiaq Khan
34
MUHAMMAD ISHTIAQ KHAN is General
Director of Archaeology and Museums in
Pakistan. He has excavated at the 8th-cen-
tury Arab city of Banbhore near Karachi and
other important sites. His mam field of study
is Islamic archaeology.
"A
at^ garden", observed Em¬
peror Babur, founder of the Moghul dy¬
nasty, "is the purest of human pleas¬
ures". His successors Humayun,
Akbar, Jahangir and Shah Jahan true
to their tradition stinted neither time
nor money in satisfying their craving
for beauty.
The Shalamar Gardens, laid out near
Lahore at the command of Emperor
Shah Jahan, express the pure aesthe¬
tic taste of Moghul landscape archi¬
tecture.
They thus embody the Moghul con¬
ception of a perfect garden: a deli-
ciously cool and pleasant atmosphere,
the murmuring waters of canals, calm
mirrored surfaces of ornamental tanks,
splashing fountains, rippling and sing¬
ing cascades and the sombre forms
of swaying cypresses.
The name "Shalamar" has been vari¬
ously interpreted, most popularly of
all as "abode of bliss" or "light of the
moon". The most plausible interpre¬
tation, however, seems to be that the
word is a corruption of "Shalimar",
from "Shali" (rice paddy) and "Mar"
(black loamy soil) in the Kashmiri lan¬
guage.

fl*
I
"Shalimar" therefore meant "black
loamy soil for rice-growing". But
exactly when the gardens at Lahore
came to be given the name Shalamar
is not known.
In 1639, Ali Mardan Khan, a Persian
noble and Governor of Lahore, infor¬
med Emperor Shah Jahan that he could
call on the services of expert canal
engineers, and sought permission to
build a canal from the river Ravi to
Lahore.
His request was granted, funds were
placed at his disposal and within two
years the "Shah Nahar" or Royal Canal
was completed with the help of Mulla
Alaul Mulk Tuni, an expert in hydro¬
logy.
In 1641 Khalilullah Khan, a noble of
Shah Jahan's court, was directed by
the emperor to select a suitable site
on the newly dug canal for laying out
a garden. The site he chose was on
the old bed of the river Ravi.
On October 31, 1642, exactly one
year, five months and four days after
the foundations had been laid, the
Emperor Shah Jahan paid his first
state visit to the completed gardens.
A typical Moghul garden, the Sha¬
lamar at Lahore is surrounded by a
high battlemented wall, enclosing
canals with running waters, large tanks
with fountains, rippling cascades, and
"Khayabans" or shady promenades. It
:*.-
was laid out in three descending ter¬
races from south to north covering
some forty acres. Originally, the ter¬
races were entered through an elegant
gateway pierced in the western wall of
the lower terrace. In this manner the
cascades faced the visitor and new
delights were revealed as each ter¬
race was surmounted.
While the upper terrace is nearly
15 ft. higher than the middle terrace,
the difference in level between the
middle and the lower terrace is only
5 ft. Within the upper and lower terra¬
ces, each measuring 290 yds. square,
the symmetrical garden plots are divi¬
ded by intersecting canals into four
square parterres. The 20 ft. broad
canals are paved and contain rows of
fountains in red sandstone and marble.
Tanks containing fountains are placed
at the intersections of the canals.
The middle terrace measuring 290
yds. by 84 yds. is subdivided length¬
wise into three parts. The central part
contains the great tank over two
hundred feet across and having more
than one hundred fountains four
pavilions and the great cascade. This
is the most spectacular feature of the
garden. The tinkling music of the foun¬
tain jets and their falling sprays res¬
embling masses of diamonds, the rip¬
pling and singing cascades and the
sweet fragrance of flowers create an
atmosphere little short of magical.
Photo © Vautier Deoool. Paris
The original names of the terraces
"Farah Bakhsh" (Bestower of Plea¬
sure) and "Faiz Bakhsh" (Bestower of
Plenty) clearly indicate that while in
the upper terrace only flowers and
sweet scented shrubs were planted, the
middle and lower terraces were reser¬
ved for fruit trees. The eastern and
western parts of the middle terrace
were composed entirely of rosebeds.
Cypresses, poplars and chenar trees
lined the sides of the "khayabans" or
raised brick pavements, transforming
them into beautiful shady avenues.
Historians of that time record that
within the gardens were planted
fruit trees of every season and
climate, such as mango, cherry, apri¬
cot, peach, apple, almond, quince,
seedless mulberry and sweet and bitter
orange. Roses, tulips, irises, cyclamen,
crown imperials, lilies, pinks, narcissus,
jasmine, lilac, lotus and many other
flowers bloomed exquisitely.
The canal waters, brought from the
river Ravi, entered the gardens from
the south, rippled over the great cas¬
cade and flowed into the main tank on
the middle terrace. After splitting into
three cascades, they passed into the
lower terrace canals and eventually
flowed out of the northern side of the
Shalamar Gardens.
"The garden contains so many build¬
ings" wrote a 17th century historian,
Muhammad Salih, "that when the Em¬
peror, along with the royal harem, en-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
35

SHALAMAR (Continued)
camps there not a single tent need be
pitched".
The upper terrace alone has eight
buildings, including the royal "Aram-
gah" (resting place) whose middle
room has a beautiful cup-shaped mar¬
ble basin with a fountain "like a foam¬
ing spring". Another building on its
eastern side and now known as "Naq-
qar Khana", or place of fanfare, was
originally the "Jharoka-e-Daulat Khana-
e-Khas-o-Am" or Balcony of the Hall
of Private and Public Audience. On
the western side of the terrace is the
"Khwabgah" or sleeping chambers of
the Empress.
The arcaded building on the nor¬
thern side, overlooking the great mar¬
ble cascade and the two lower ter¬
races, is the "Aiwan" or Grand Hall,
the walls of which were originally
decorated with panelling and frescoes.
Each corner of this terrace is occu¬
pied by a "burj" or tower comprising
an octagonal chamber surmounted by
a red sandstone octagonal pavilion.
In the south-east corner of the mid¬
dle terrace is the "hamam" or royal
bath comprising a "Sard Khana" (cold
bath) "Garm Khana" (hot bath) and a
large "Rakht Khana" (dressing room).
Originally the interior of the bath was
decorated with delicate pletra-dura
work.
IN THE
REALM
OF THE
GREAT
MOGHUL
Chaynes, belles & guilt banners...
For four years, from 1615 to 1619, Sir Thomas Roe diplo¬
mat and author, served as English ambassador to the
court of the Moghul emperor Jahangir, father of Shah
Jahan who built the Shalamar Gardens at Lahore. The
journals kept by Sir Thomas and the reports and letters
he despatched from the Moghul court are enriched with
vivid descriptive accounts and copious details of local
customs. Below a short extract from "Embassy of Sir
T. Roe to the Court of the Great Moghul" (edited with
an introduction by William Foster. London 1899) :
This day was the Birth of the king and solemnized as a
great feast . . . The tyme was spent in bringing of his
greatest Eliphantes before him, some of which, beeing
Lord Eliphants. had their chaynes, belles, and furniture
of Gould and siluer, attended with many guilt banners
and flagges. and 8 or 10 Eliphantes wayting on him
On the eastern and western fringes
of the great tank are two pavilions
originally built in red sandstone but
now lime plastered. In the centre of
the great tank approached by red
sandstone causeways is a raised plat¬
form called "Mahtabi" or "of the moon"
since it was used for sitting out of
doors to enjoy the moonlight.
On the lower terrace is the "Chini-
Khana", a three sided "abshar" or
waterfall. Its three marble-faced walls
have small niches in which golden
flower vases were placed in the
daytime and camphored .wax candles
at night.
Since the lamps make an endless
chain of light and create coloured
reflections on the water sheet falling
on the opposite walls it is also called
"Dip Mala", or chain of lights.
Facing it is a three-arched ruined
pavilion, the "Daulat Khana-e-Khas" or
Hall of Private Audience of the Em¬
peror. Its dado was in marble and
its walls were originally decorated
with frescoes.
The beauty of the garden was en-
36 -mi»
J. '"}

clothed in gould. silke and situer. Thus passed about
twelve Companyes most richly furnished, the first having
all the plates on his head and breast sett with rubyes
and emeraldes, beeing a beast of a woonderfull stature
and beauty. They all bowed downe before the king,
making reuerence very handsomly, and was a showe as
woorthy as I euer saw any of beasts only. The keepers
of euery Chefe Eliphant gaue a present. So with gratious
complements to mee he rose and went in.
Palaces, orchards & bazaars...
The text presented below is taken from the journal of
Fray Sebastien Manrique, an Augustinian missionary,
entitled: "Itinerary of the missions in Eastern India
together with a brief account of the great and wealthy
kingdom of the Emperor and Grand Moghul Shah Jahan,
and other kings who, during their reign, aided the missio
naries of Saint Augustine". During these missions Fray
Manrique spent 13 years (1629-1643) travelling throughout
the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent. The extract given here
is from an English edition of his journal. Volume II,
Oxford, 1927.
This city of Laor [Lahore] is the second city of the Moghul
Empire, famous both as having been... a place of residence
for its monarchs, and also owing to its wealth and gran¬
deur. This is augmented by its being adorned with magni¬
ficent Palaces, delightful gardens, and fruitful orchards,
full of reservoirs and springs of excellent water. The
riches discernible in its main street, or as the inhabitants
style it. Bazaar of the Souk, were such as already proved
the advantages derived by these regions from the richest
and most powerful parts of Europe, especially on this
occasion, when the Emperor was present for the feast
of the Nauruz [New Year], which that year fell during
Ramadan, with its thirty days fast.
joyed by many Moghul rulers, and it
was here that the Princess Zebunnisa,
talented daughter of Emperor Aurang-
zeb, moved by the rhythmic sound of
the cascade, composed these verses:
"O waterfall I for whose sake art thou
[weeping?
In whose sorrowful recollection hast
[thou wrinkled thy brows?
What pain was it that impelled thee,
[like myself, the whole night
To strike thy head against stone and
[to shed tears?"
The gardens were well looked after
during the Moghul period but after the
collapse of Moghul authority in the
Punjab the Shalamar was plundered.
A Sikh governor of the province later
on undertook to preserve the gardens.
He redug the canals and tanks and
restored the water supply, stopped all
ploughing within the walls and lime
plastered the denuded structures. But
for his belated patronage the Shalamar
Gardens would have disappeared.
Since the gardens were handed
over to the Pakistan Department of
Archaeology, sustained efforts have
been made to preserve the buildings,
to restore the gardens to their origi¬
nal appearance and to recreate the
former atmosphere.
A phased programme to illuminate
the garden has already been initiated
and a master plan for its preservation
and restoration, costing over $2 mil¬
lion, has been prepared.
The Government of Pakistan has
already taken steps to execute this
master plan. When completed it will
go a long way towards reviving the
glory that was Shalamar.
ISLAMABAD
modern capital
of
an ancient land
Since 1961 a great modern city
Pakistan's new capital Islamabad
has risen, Brasilia-like, on the
Potwar Plateau between Rawal¬
pindi and ancient Taxilia. Isla¬
mabad is a striking achievement
of architectural design and town
planning. When completed it will
have administrative, residential,
industrial and business sectors,
a diplomatic enclave, a sector for
special institutions, a green-belt
area and a national park with an
Olympic village and zoological and
botanical gardens. Designers have
incorporated traditional Islamic
styles in buildings such as govern¬
ment offices (left) and the imposing
hotel on opposite page. In form,
as In name, Islamabad harmonizes
Pakistan's history and traditions
with modernity and innovation.
37
