by Peter Rogers
WHAT CAN
WE DO ABOUT
TROPICAL
CYCLONES ?
The answer is 'quite a lot'.
An early-warning system
now exists, but...
N
52
I OT without justification the
tropical cyclone has been described
as the greatest storm on earth.
Spawned over the warm waters of
the tropical oceans, cyclones have,
throughout the ages, taken a terrible
toll of human lives and created misery
and damage of unknown extent. In
the long catalogue of meteorological
disasters from which mankind suffers
they have been responsible for 80 per
cent of all the lives lost.
What is a tropical cyclone? It
may be broadly described as a large
vortex of air spiralling inward towards
the centre where the pressure is at
a minimum. This area, known as the
eye of the storm, contains only light
winds or may even be calm.
Around the eye explosive cloud
growth takes place as warm, moist
tropical air escapes upwards reaching
perhaps, above 12.000 metres. This
is the region of maximum winds
which in a mature storm may exceed
270 km. per hour.
The effects of the cyclone may be
felt over as much as 500 km. from the
eye, diminishing progressively in vio¬
lence away from the centre.
The meteorologist classifies them
according to their intensity, calling
PETER ROGERS is a specialist on tropical
cyclones at the World Meteorological Organ¬
ization. He has been c/ose/y associated with
the World Weather Watch and with WMO
projects to reduce damage and loss of life
caused by cyclones, in particular the pro¬
gramme of the typhoon committee of south¬
east Asian countries set up In 1968.
them tropical depressions with winds
up to 60 km. per hour, tropical storms
with winds up to 115 km. per hour
and hurricanes' at higher sustained
wind speeds. Considerable areas are
affected by violent winds and protract¬
ed heavy rains, causing extensive
flooding and damage.
For the layman there is often confus¬
ion between tropical cyolones, hurri¬
canes and typhoons. In fact all are
the same phenomenon; in the Carib¬
bean they are known as hurricanes
and in the north-west Pacific they are
termed typhoons. Tropical cyclones
also occur in the south-west Indian
Ocean, in the Bay of Bengal and the
Arabian Sea, and in parts of the
South Pacific, as well as around the
northern coasts of Australia.
History records many examples of
severe tropical cyclones causing
enormous loss of life and destruction.
We need not look back far because
what may have been the worst cyc¬
lone ever struck what is now Bangla¬
desh on the night of 12-13 November
1970.
The accompanying storm surge,
caused by low barometric pressure
and hurricane force winds, was fun¬
nelled into the head of the Bay of
Bengal by the converging coastline
and shallow waters. Its landfall almost
coincided with flood tide. The height
of the surge varied from 3 to 9 m. and
when it had swept over the offshore
islands and low-lying coastal belt
300,000 people lay dead.
Catastrophes of this magnitude in¬
variably arouse man's indignation. He
feels strongly that nature must be
tamed and not permitted to wreak its
havoc unchecked. Man has always
resisted the intemperate moods of
nature, too often vainly. Can we do
anything about tropical cyclones?
The answer to this question is an
emphatic "Yes".
Even though we may be far from
discovering how to tame their fury,
sensible precautions together with an
effective warning system save many
lives and limit damage. In fact it has
been estimated that at least 80 per
cent of the lives lost can be saved.
While the cost of damage shows
a steady upward trend in almost all
countries, much can still be done to
keep it to a minimum. For example,
a building code that increases the
cost of construction by only 6 per
cent can reduce damage by 60 per
cent for sustained winds up to 240 km.
per hour. It is not considered econo¬
mically feasible to build to protect
property against winds over 270 km.
per hour.
To achieve this calls for a sophisti¬
cated warning system and the closest
co-operation between all those with
responsibilities for community prep¬
aredness and disaster prevention, as
well as relief and rehabilitation. The
first step is, naturally, the detection,
tracking and forecasting of where the
cyclone will strike, and of its expected
CONTINUED PAGE 56

BANGLADESH
most
devastating
cyclone
of this
century
The tropical cyclone which
ravaged Bangladesh in Nov¬
ember 1970 was one of the
most devastating of this cen¬
tury. Here an elderly man
from Bangladesh weeps for
the loss of family and friends
swept away in the disaster.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

p¿r3£>«*$
BANGLADESH (Continued from page 53)
Life-saving ' Killas '
Nearly half a million people lost their lives in the cyclone that
struck Bangladesh on the night of November 12/13, 1970. Many
of these lives could have been saved if communications had
been better and if the chain of artificial mounds known as "killas"
(opposite bottom) where men and cattle can take refuge in time
of flood, now being constructed with the help of the Red Cross,
had been in existence. Evidence of the formation of a cyclone
over the Bay of Bengal, moving rapidly north north-east, was
provided by photos such as the one above received from satellite-
ITOS 1 at 0957 hours on November 10, 1970. By then it was
apparently too late to alert the inhabitants of the scattered
villages of the low-lying, coastal regions of Bengal in time for
them to flee the huge tidal wave bearing down on them in the
path of the cyclone. With nowhere to run to (above) most of
the victims died of drowning. Material damage (below) was
immense, leaving the survivors deprived of their livelihood and
entirely dependent for many months on supplies flown in in a vast
international rescue operation (opposite top).
Photo Marilyn Silverstone © Magnum, Paris
ft I
I
54
ft
A i.


TROPICAL CYCLONES (Continued from page 52)
... much remains to be done to save lives
and reduce damage from typhoons
effects in terms of wind strength, rain¬
fall and flooding.
Earth-orbiting satellites, and more
especially geostationary satellites,
have largely relieved the meteorologist
of the difficult problem of detecting
the formation of a cyclone over dist¬
ant ocean waters from which he has
little other information. Precise posi¬
tioning of the cyclone centre some¬
times remains difficult but steadily
advancing technology should resolve
this problem.
Cyclone tracks are notoriously
erratic. In a 24-hour forecast, an
error of only 10° in predicting the
track results in the cyclone striking
the coast more than 185 km. from the
expected spot. Surveillance by satel¬
lite, by specially-equipped reconnais¬
sance aircraft and finally by 10 cm.
storm warning radar when the cyclone
is within 300-400 km. can ensure that
its path into the coast is closely moni¬
tored. Thus, a meteorological system
making. full use of modern technolo¬
gical aids is a prerequisite for the
accurate forecasting of cyclone move¬
ment and development and the issue
of accurate warnings.
B
56
UT the best forecast is
useless if nothing is done to act upon
it. There must be carefully prepared
and detailed national plans so that all
those responsible for the safety of
human lives and property know exactly
what to do when a warning is received.
Above all, it is vital that the warnings
reach everyone threatened by the
cyclone in good time; people must
also know how to protect themselves
and their property and fully understand
what the risks are.
A vigorous campaign of public edu¬
cation is the only means of achieving
this and must be repeated before each
tropical cyclone season if the lessons
learned are not to be forgotten.
There must be the closest co-opera¬
tion between the technical agencies
and those in the social welfare field
if the total system is to work effi¬
ciently.
The population cannot be success¬
fully protected from the 'onslaught of
a tropical cyclone if responsibilities
for different parts of the system are
broken down into separate, unco¬
ordinated parts.
Ultimately, the success or failure of
the warning system depends upon
its weakest link man himself. An
accurate forecast, a well-designed dis¬
aster prevention system, and all the
aids that technology provides count
for little if the human response is not
geared to the realities of the occasion.
Every cyclone brings forth a crop of
stories demonstrating the endless div¬
ersity of human reaction to the disas¬
ter threat. Age, health, education,
family situation, previous disaster
experience and many other factors
play a role, but a role so complex that
no clear-cut pattern of behaviour
emerges for general application to
future disaster situations. The aero¬
space engineer in Texas can be as
obstinate as the Bengali farmer in
refusing to leave his home when
advised to do so.
Few authorities have the power to
compel evacuation of danger areas.
And yet the pressures of increasing
population force people into low-lying
agricultural or coastal areas prone to
storm-surges. The potential for loss
of human lives is growing in many
cyclone areas and can only be re¬
versed by the remorseless application
of strict development controls. Very
little has so far been done in this
respect and even the planning of
satisfactory escape routes for evacua¬
tion is frequently neglected.
In some regions such as Bangla¬
desh, evacuation from low-lying
islands may not be feasible. There,
under a project sponsored by the
League of Red Cross Societies, "killas"
earthen mounds about 7 m. high
have been constructed to provide
refuge for the local population. Such
relatively simple measures can drastic¬
ally reduce the loss of life from
tropical cyclones, 90 per cent of which
is caused by drowning.
In spite of their violence, hurricane-
force winds account for relatively few
deaths. Flying objects propelled at
great speeds constitute the prime
menace but are easily avoided by
taking cover within a sound structure
until the danger is past.
The eye of the storm, with its light
winds, must not be taken as an indi¬
cation that danger is over. After a
short pause, the wind will blow with
renewed violence from the opposite
quarter. Here, the need for careful
education of the public is again evid¬
ent.
How are these measures being car¬
ried out in the 40-odd nations of the
world afflicted by tropical cyclones?
Obviously the problems have been
the same for many centuries but it is
only in recent times that man has rea¬
lized how much he can do to reduce
casualties and prevent the serious
inroads of cyclone damage into the
national economy.
In most countries a warning system
has grown up to face this age-old
menace but in many lands it is insuffi¬
ciently well-developed to be com¬
pletely effective. The World Meteoro¬
logical Organization began to take a
special interest in helping these coun¬
tries in 1966, in close co-operation
with the U.N. Economic Commission
for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).
HE urgent need to reduce
the economic impact of typhoons
amongst the developing countries of
south-east Asia led to the setting up
of the Intergovernmental Typhoon
Committee in 1968. Seven countries
and territories (1) formed this Com¬
mittee with the avowed purpose of
conducting a joint programme to
accelerate action to reduce the loss of
life and damage caused by typhoons.
The programme encompasses meteo¬
rological and hydrological facilities
in the member countries to improve
the forecasting and warnings of ty¬
phoons, training and research, and
community preparedness and disaster
prevention to ensure that the public
are ready to meet the risks brought
each year by typhoons.
Five years have elapsed since this
programme began, bringing substan¬
tial improvements to the Typhoon
Committee countries. New technolo¬
gical aids, such as satellite read-out
equipment (APT), radar, telemetering
rain and stream-gauging equipment,
help in the fight to improve the pre¬
diction of typhoons and life-claiming
floods. Speedier telecommunications
permit the flow of vital data to all
interested countries, and the training
of national staff in the latest techniques
fosters increased awareness of the
ways in which science can help to
defeat the typhoon bogy.
In March this year, with the help of
the League of Red Cross Societies,
WMO and ECAFE sent a three-man
team to Hong Kong, Korea and Thai¬
land. Its object was to promote closer
co-operation between the various na¬
tional agencies active in pre-disaster
(1) Hong-Kong, Japan, Khmer Rep., Rep. of
Korea, Laos, Philippines, Thailand.

planning and to prepare a programme
of further action. This enterprise was
the first of its kind and should do
much to stimulate a more co-ordinated
approach to disaster prevention.
These pioneering activities of the
Typhoon Committee soon evoked
growing attention in other tropical
areas. One direct consequence has
been the setting up of two other re¬
gional groups with closely similar
objectives one for the Bay of Bengal
and the Arabian Sea, and the other
for the south-west Indian Ocean.
Although they are only now beginning
their task, there are good grounds
for hoping that the regional appjpach
applied in the typhoon area will be
equally efficacious in these other
areas.
The tragic Bay of Bengal cyclone
of 1970 became the starting point for
a further focussing of WMO's efforts
on the cyclone problem. When soon
afterwards a series of typhoons rav¬
aged the Philippines causing further
heavy loss of life and massive dam¬
age, the Typhoon Committee appealed
to the United Nations General Assem¬
bly for international action. The
General Assembly reacted promptly
to this appeal, calling upon WMO to
mobilize scientists and resources to
discover ways of mitigating the harm¬
ful effects of these storms and of
removing or minimizing their destruct¬
ive potential.
WMO responded by setting up its
Tropical Cyclone Project. It then
assembled a group of international
experts in tropical cyclones to review
the state of forecasting, warning and
other needs for damage reduction, and
to define the objectives of the Project.
It next drew up a plan of action for
this long-term project. The plan
covers the detection and forecasting
of tropical cyclones, storm-surge and
flood forecasting, warning systems,
risk evaluation and disaster preven¬
tion and community preparedness, as
well as disaster relief, training and
research, and the development of
instruments and equipment.
If the best methods and techniques
available in the world are to be used
by all countries in their struggle to
reduce the impact of tropical cyclones,
a great many studies and much devel¬
opment work must be carried out. It
is an ambitious scheme in which the
topmost scientific talent in this field
must be given the resources to do
a job of profound humanitarian impor¬
tance.
Research into tropical cyclones has
been carried out in many countries
over a long period of years. Much
progress has been made but there is
a pressing need to harness the talents
of scientists in different lands for an
all-out attack on outstanding problems.
Only by the co-ordinated efforts of
many workers can these problems be
finally solved. One of the objectives
of the WMO Tropical Cyclone Project
is to foster this international effort
and to see that it is mainly directed
to saving human lives and improving
the quality of life by damage reduction.
It would be idle to deny that no
instant breakthrough can be expected.
The horrors caused by tropical cyc¬
lones have plagued mankind for cen¬
turies and it would be unrealistic to
think that they can be effaced over¬
night. We must plan for a long-term
programme, measured perhaps in
decades.
Whilst this essential work is going
on, it may confidently be expected
that steady progress in applying mod¬
ern technology to improving warning
systems through the various regional
programmes sponsored by WMO will
continue and will effectively benefit
many countries. M
STURMSIGNAL
	
Japan, the Philippines and other parts of East Asia are periodically
swept by typhoons and other natural disasters that take a heavy toll
of life and property. Effective warning systems are being set up in
different areas to meet the danger. Here, a storm signal is posted in
a street in Zamboanga on the island of Mindanao (Philippines). In this
warning system one siren blast means 50 to 90 km/h winds; two blasts
signifies 90 to 120 km/h winds.
57
