I v
-
Photo V. Yegorov © APN, Moscow
The Bible recounts how,
after the Flood, Noah's
ark came to rest on
Mount Ararat, in present-
day Turkey. The inhabi¬
tants of Yerevan, capital
of the Armenian Soviet
Socialist Republic, enjoy
a breathtaking view of the
mountain which looks
down majestically over
the city. Yerevan is the
home of the Matenadaran,
the world-famous collec¬
tion of priceless, ancient
Armenian manuscripts.
Above left, an expert
examines the largest of
these manuscripts, com¬
pleted in 1204. It weighs
over 32 kilograms, mea¬
sures 70 cm. X 51 cm.,
and 600 calf hides were
| used to make the parch¬
ís ment for it. Left, the same
J tome shown in compari-
. son with the smallest
«j manuscript which weighs
>- only 18 grammes, includ-
© ing the binding. It was
| produced in 1434 at Kaffa
-* (now Feodosia), in the
¡5 Crimea, from tiny parch-
¿ ment sheets measuring
" 3 cm. X 4 cm.

THE SAGA OF ARMENIA'S
LOST MANUSCRIPTS
How they came to rest in the
Matenadaran at the foot of Mount Ararat
by David Fiks
DAVID FIKS, Soviet journalist and educator,
is a member of the editorial staff of the
Russian language edition of the 'Unesco
Courier" in Moscow. For several years
he has been literary editor of the Russian
edition.
LCCORDING to an old
saying, books have their special
destiny, just as men do. And this is
clear to anyone who examines the
ancient manuscripts in the Matenada¬
ran archives at Yerevan, capital of the
Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic.
Not only are the documents cracked,
bloodstained and damaged by fire and
weapons, but in many places great
holes gape like open wounds where
there were once delicate illuminated
miniatures of outstanding beauty.
The Matenadaran, today an institute
for the study of ancient manuscripts,
was originally a library founded in the
5th century by the Patriarch of Ech¬
miadzin, near Yerevan.
Its rich collection of manuscripts
symbolizes the tragic past of the Ar¬
menian people; the two histories are in
fact identical. And it is not by chance
that when old Armenian documents
speak of these books they use terms
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
27

MASTER AND PUPIL. Statue of
Mesrop Mashtotz, inventor of the
Armenian alphabet in 405 A.D. The
statue, showing the famous monk
teaching a pupil how to read, stands
at the entrance to the Matenadaran
which Is dedicated to him.
SACRED MINIATURES. The miniature
was a major form of pictorial art in
medieval Armenia. On the following
pages we present just a few of the
thousands of miniatures in the Maten¬
adaran collection. The names of the
artists are generally unknown although
a few have come down, to us, such
as Toros Roslin whose "Annunciation"
(right) adorns a page of a 13th century
gospel. Below, a page from another
gospel, known as "The Gospel of the
Seven Painters", shows the casting out
of devils and healing the Centurion's
servant In 1967 the Matenadaran
Institute published a beautifully Illus¬
trated volume entitled "Armenian
Miniatures", by L.A. Dournovo and
R.G. Drampian, with texts and captions
in Armenian, Russian and French.
28
ARMENIA'S MANUSCRIPTS (Continued)
normally applied to human beings,
telling how the works were "taken
prisoner" or "ransomed".
The adventures of many of these
manuscripts could indeed provide
themes for novels or short stories.
To save them from foreign vandalism
they were often buried, hidden in
forests or taken off into the mountains.
In 1204, after three years of
ceaseless work, Vardan Kafaetsi of
Mush (in western Armenia) finished
copying a set of sermons. Six hundred
calfskins had been used to make the
parchment, and the completed manu¬
script weighed 32 kilos (over 70
pounds). The owner valued it more
than anything else he possessed. But
he perished when the town was
invaded by the Seljuks who carried
off the manuscript.
Hundreds of men and women helped-
pay the ransom of 4,000 drachmas
(1 drachma was worth 4.65 grammes
of silver), and their names were
inscribed in the book. For nearly
seven hundred years it was kept in
the- library of the Holy Apostles Mon¬
astery in Mush then came the tragic
events of 1915. . .
Escaping from a massacre, two Ar¬
menian women spent the night in the
ruined monastery. In the morning they
discovered the enormous volume
abandoned in the church. They divided
it into two parts, to reduce the weight,
and having wrapped one part in a
piece of clothing, they left it beside
the road, thinking some honest folk
would find it and would do what they
could to save the book.
The manuscript was lost several
times, but after long wanderings the
first part was brought to the Matena¬
daran archives. Nobody knew what
had become of the rest. But a few
itnfiuf é¿r,i(Lu4¡_ r(l4 L-r* «»*"*¥ U4gjfcu*{_ -. lj***i*"*-%_2à
I:

years ago, the Matenadaran purchased
a very old manuscript, and it turned
out to be the missing half.
The two parts are now reunited
under the same binding. But a certain
number of illuminations have gone for
ever. Many pages are missing too,
though 17 of them turned up and are
now at the Church of the Mekhitharists
on the Island of San Lazzaro in Venice.
In fact nearly 4,000 Armenian manu¬
scripts are in the keeping of the
Venetian Mekhitharists, and 1,200 are
with the same congregation in Vienna.
Some 5,000 others are in Jerusalem
and nearly 1,000 at Isfahan. There are
also a number of Armenian manuscripts
in the British Museum, the Bibliothèque
Nationale in Paris, the Saltykov-
Shchedrin Public Library in Leningrad,
the Institute of Oriental Studies in
Moscow, the Historical Museum in
Tbilisi, etc.
At a rough estimate, about 24,000
Armenian manuscripts have survived
to the present day. But a great many
have unfortunately been lost.
The Matenadaran collection is not
only the world's largest, with over
11,000 texts, but also the most valuable.
It contains the oldest manuscripts and
therefore those of the greatest histori¬
cal interest. Many of them came not
only from Armenia but also from India,
Egypt, the Philippines, Cyprus and the
Crimea, and from cities such as Lvov,
Alexandria, Constantinople, Aleppo
and Leghorn.
This is not surprising, since by the
11th century the Armenian diaspora
had already begun, as the inhabitants
sought refuge from invasions and
conquests. They founded colonies all
over the world, and it was in these
places that the manuscripts were
made; for this was the only way the
Armenians could prevent their national
culture from degenerating or dying
out. Against the power of arms they
opposed the power of the word, and
the word prevailed.
Thanks to the copyists, the Ar¬
menian chronicles were written down
and the great heritage was preserved.
The copyists devoted their whole lives
to this noble task. They were often
poor and even destitute, living in
primitive lodgings and suffering from
cold or heat, but they worked on their
manuscripts from early morning until
late at night with extraordinary fervour
and they asked very little in return for
their labours. All they wanted was
"to be remembered". And they were
extremely meticulous.
"I know it only too well," records
one, "there are countless imperfec¬
tions in this manuscript, but I have
done what I could. My hand was
trembling and I could scarcely see
my first finger was paralyzed and I had
to use the middle one. What a
calamity. I have been working for
42 years now, and nothing like this
has ever happened before. I am
ashamed. Please forgive me . . ."
Often, a work was begun by one
copyist, continued by a second, and
completed by a third. At the end .of
the manuscript, the copyist generally
left what are called "commemorative
inscriptions". These are a precious
source of information about the politi¬
cal, social and economic situation at
the time. They teach us a great deal
about the copyist himself, too.
The copies were sometimes com¬
missioned by individuals, but generally
by monasteries, whose libraries had
been the main centres of written
culture since a poor unknown monk,
Mesrop Mashtotz, invented the Ar¬
menian alphabet in the 5th century.
In the 15th century, all the monastic
manuscripts were moved to Echmiad¬
zin, near Yerevan, where the seat of
the Supreme Catholicos, the head of
the Armenian Church, was transferred.
This collection forms the nucleus of
the present Matenadaran archives.
Until then, the manuscripts had been
kept in jumbled piles in cellars; and
the bad conditions had caused their
progressive deterioration. But in the
second half of the 18th century they
were finally given proper attention.
In the first half of the 19th century,
they were finally sorted, classified,
and arranged in specially designed
cupboards in two well-lit rooms near
the Catholicos' apartments. The first
list of these manuscripts was published
in 1837, Russian and French versions
of it being issued by Academician
M. Brosset in Saint Petersburg in 1840.
It only gave details of 312 manuscripts,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
29

ARMENIA'S MANUSCRIPTS (Continued)
30
but it marked the beginning of their
proper study.
On December 17, 1920, the govern¬
ment of the Armenian Soviet Republic
recognized the Matenadaran as a
publicly owned State institution. In
1939, the Matenadaran was transferred
to Yerevan, where it became the
State archive of ancient manuscripts,
records and documents, to which was
later attached a scientific research
institute entrusted with the collection,
preservation and study of the manu¬
scripts.
Today, the Matenadaran houses
10,572 intact manuscripts in Old Ar¬
menian and 1,889 fragments, as well
as 1,365 texts in Arabic, Persian,
Greek, Latin, Ancient Hebrew, Russian,
Slavonic, Syrian, Ethiopian, Georgian,
Azerbaijanian and a number of other
languages, covering nearly 2,000 years
of the history of mankind, from the
4th to the 18th centuries.
It also contains more than 100,000
public records and a valuable collec¬
tion of ancient Armenian printed works,
including the first book printed in
Armenian: "Parzatumar" (a calendar
of church feasts published in Venice
in 1512 by the first Armenian printer,
Akop Megapart), as well as the first
Armenian journal "Azdarar" (the Mess¬
enger), published in Madras in 1794-6.
The oldest Armenian treasures in
the Matenadaran are fragments of
written texts from the 5th and 6th
centuries and illuminations from the
6th and 7th centuries. The very first
manuscript which has come down to
us in its entirety is a New Testament
inscribed on parchment in 887 A.D.
A secular work dating from 971 A.D.
is the oldest manuscript written on
paper existing in the U.S.S.R.
Among the unique specimens in the
Matenadaran, there is a history of
the Afghans, the ancestors of the
present-day Azerbaijanians, written
by Movses Kagankatvatsi in the 10th
century, and also very ancient written
copies of works from various coun¬
tries whose original texts are lost.
These works now exist only in their
Armenian translation. They include
"On Nature", by Zeno of Citium (4th-
3rd century B.C. Greek philosopher);
"The Chronicle", by Eusebius of
Caesarea (3rd-4th century A.D. bishop
and ecclesiastical historian); the seven
philosophical treatises of Philo Judaeus
(the great Hellenistic-Jewish philo¬
sopher who wrote during the first
40-50 years A.D.); "The Definitions"
of Hermes Trismegistos (the Greek
name given to Toth, the Egyptian god
of wisdom, as the reputed author or
source of the "Hermetic" works of
revelation); the last four chapters of
"The Preliminaries", by Theon of
Alexandria (4th century A.D. Greek
astronomer and mathematician).
The list of rare works in the Mat¬
enadaran is of course much longer, but
it is more important to stress that
there is not a single field of human
knowledge that has not found an
echo in these manuscripts.
Research workers find these docu¬
ments an inexhaustible source of infor¬
mation on ancient times and the
Middle Ages, as well as on philosophy,
theology, and law, on cosmography,
astronomy and geography, on peda¬
gogy, mathematics, chemistry and
alchemy, and en poetry, prose, music,
and art.
It is this that makes them so impor¬
tant for the science and history of
mankind. As the Chilean poet and
Nobel Prizewinner, Pablo Neruda has
noted: "The old sacred books of
wisdom and poetry continue to live
here like dried roses, still full of invisi¬
ble seeds..."
Many of the manuscripts have
already been published, mostly in
Armenian, but translations into foreign
languages have also appeared. This
has been made possible by detailed
study of the manuscripts following a
large-scale inventory. Each index card
lists the number of the manuscript,
the number of pages, the format, the
material (parchment, paper), the state
of preservation, the date and place of
production, the number of scribes,
the name of the person commissioning
the work and those of the restorers,
as well as details of the text itself.
A thematic catalogue has also been
made, classified according to branch
of knowledge.
Special methods have been worked
out for the preservation of the manu¬
scripts, based on the most recent
scientific and technological Innova¬
tions and the rooms are kept at a
constant temperature. Before being
placed in the archives, a "new" manu¬
script is disinfected and cleaned,
sheet by sheet; and the Matenadaran
Chemical and Microbiological Labora¬
tory is studying new and better ways
of disinfecting, restoring, preserving
and "treating" the manuscripts (the

most damaged sheets are consolidat¬
ed with a gelatine solution).
In the restoration laboratory, new
ways of counteracting harmful agents
attacking the manuscripts are being
worked out. The binding services
restore the flexibility of the dried skins
of the old covers and make new ones.
Microfilms and photographs are made
of unique copies.
All this enormous and difficult work
carried out in the Matenadaran is
State-supported. In 1959, a special
building was constructed to house the
Matenadaran manuscripts. This is not
only a depot, where the survival of
the precious words of human wisdom
and knowledge is assured, but also
a magnificent memorial to the thou¬
sands of Armenian sages, translators
and copyists who created and preserv¬
ed a vast cultural heritage which now
has its place among the treasures of
world culture.
MASTERPIECES
OF ILLUMINATION
The paintings and illuminations that embellish most of the Armenian manuscripts preserved
at the Matenadaran are masterpieces of the art of Illustration. They usually depict biblical
scenes: above, Jonah emerging from the whale's belly, painted by Toros Roslin; below
the Nativity and the Adoration of the Magi; left, a portrait of the apostle St John.
ip ^"lTtfhfJrc!
Photos © Ayastan Publishers, Yerevan, Armenia
31
