The making
of a new universe
Why Copernicus was dissatisfied
with the astronomy of his time
by Olaf Pedersen
The Dragon (Draco)
WeHEN Alexander Pope wrote
his famous couplet:
Neture and Nature's Laws lay hid in
[night;
God said, Let Newton be! and all
was light
he gave vent to a common feeling
towards prominent figures in the
history of science.
Posterity has always been inclined
to regard men like Newton, or Einstein,
or Darwin, as radical innovators who,
all of a sudden and without previous
warning, changed the general course
of science and as a consequence
perturbed the whole attitude of man
towards the universe.
Certainly this has been the fate of
Copernicus who more than any other
scientist has been hailed as the first
harbinger of modern astronomy after
the long scientific somnolence of the
Middle Ages.
That such a view could emerge was
connected with the fact that the basic
14
OLAF PEDERSEN, internationally-known au¬
thority on the history of astronomy, Is pro¬
fessor of the history of science at the Uni¬
versity of Aarhus (Denmark), where he is
also director of the Institute for the History
of Exact Sciences. He is a member of the
International Astronomical Union and of the
International Union of the History and Phi¬
losophy of Science. Prof. Pedersen has
written many studies on medieval astronomy
and is currently working on two books: a
commentary to Ptolemy's "Almagest", and a
Historical Introduction to Classical Physics.
principles of Copernican cosmology
were simple enough to be accessible
to a large public.
First, the Earth was set spinning
around its own axis. In Copernicus'
own words: Together with its surround¬
ing elements the Earth during a diurnal
motion performs a complete revolution
round its fixed poles, while the fir¬
mament and the highest heavens
remain motionless.
It is true that this idea was neither
new nor unknown to the late Middle
Ages, but it was so contrary to
ingrained conceptions that very few
had been able to believe in it or
assert it as true.
Next the Earth was removed from
its traditional position: The centre of
the Earth is not the centre of the Uni¬
verse ... All spheres rotate about the
Sun as their central point and therefore
the Sun is the centre of the Universe,
that is, of the planetary system and
the distant sphere of the fixed stars
which still was the outer boundary of
a world that even to Copernicus
remained spherical and of a finite size.
Finally, the Earth was deprived of
its unique character and reduced to a
mere planet among others: That which
to us appears as a movement of the
Sun is not due to any motion of the
latter, but to a motion of the Earth . . .
during which we rotate about the Sun
like any other planet.
Such assertions were clearly incom¬
patible not only with time-honoured
CONTINUED PAGE 16
The Virgin (Virgo)

In De revolutionibus, Coper¬
nicus refers to observations
made by early Islamic astrono¬
mers, and one work he may
well have known about was
the famous "Treatise on the
Fixed Stars", written in Arabic
by the 10th century Persian
astronomer Abd ar-Rahman
As-Sufi. Early in the 15th cen¬
tury, Ulugh-Beg, grandson of
Tamerlane and ruler of the
Timurid empire which spread
over vast areas of Central
Asia, ordered ca/ligraphers to
make a copy of the "Treatise".
The richly illuminated work
was completed in time for a
conference of astronomers
summoned by Ulugh-Beg to
Samarkand in about 1435. The
illustrations, unique in Islamic
art, were the work of a Persian
artist living in Samarkand and
show evidence of Chinese in¬
fluence. The paintings are mat
colour- washes, scarcely colour¬
ed at the edges, typical of
the Chinese technique of the
period. The figures are depicted
in Mongol dress which was the
fashion in the Timurid empire.
The captions, in literary Arabic,
give the names of each constel¬
lation and indicate the cardinal
points and angles from which
the constellations are seen.
^M
The Strong Man (Orion)
Pegasus (Caption reads "Perhaps the moon
has descended into the village of the fox")
,l-M¿j) . V::.:.\r.-Î rüLM
"^
k&y*- rt&
/r
^é
-N ^&P
I Ä# i
/C¿0$L j«.«'
py v>-
J*
Two positions of The Cup (Crater) in the southern hemisphere


NEW UNIVERSE (Continued)
Aristarchus of Samos:
the man forgotten by Antiquity
conceptions of the universe but also
with the belief in man's favoured abode
near the very centre of all creation.
This explains why the inevitable
clash between the rival cosmologies
had to spread far beyond scientific
circles, arousing an ideological combat
on a scale and of a ruthlessness which
the world was not to see again until
the coming of evolutionism challenged
a different, but equally cherished set
of ideas about the uniqueness of man.
Thus the Copernican revolution
became a paramount factor in the
intellectual development of mankind,
and we have sufficient reasons for
honouring the memory of the man who
first inaugurated it.
But along with general or popular
discussions went the more careful
deliberations of professional astro¬
nomers on the more technical implica¬
tions of the new theory. Copernicus
had himself clad it in the well-known
mathematical language of traditional
astronomy.
Consequently his great work, De
revolutionibus orbium coelestium (Con¬
cerning the Revolutions of the Celes¬
tial Spheres), was intelligible to any¬
body who knew and understood Ptol¬
emy's Almagest upon which it was
modelled. This meant that all com
petent scholars were soon forced to
admit that Copernican astronomy was
acceptable as a possible and consis¬
tent mathematical hypothesis.
But this was not the crux of the
matter. Any careful reader of De
revolutionibus would realize that Coper¬
nicus went much further, claiming his
theory to be true in the sense that it
gave a correct picture of the physical
structure of the universe. This claim
was the starting point of the extra¬
ordinary scientific development fol¬
lowing in the wake of Copernican
astronomy.
On the one hand it gave rise to the
attempts at verifying the new theory
by means of observations, first and
foremost through a search for the
annual parallactic motion of the fixed
stars implied by the movement of the
Earth around the Sun. This work
occupied successive generations of
practical astronomers from Tycho
Brahe onwards until in 1838 it was
finally crowned by success when
Bessel succeeded in determining the
parallax of the star 61 Cygni.
On the other hand the claim that
the Copernican system was true in a
physical sense guided Galileo and
many other physicists in their attempts
to create a theory of mechanics compa-
Below, books from Copernicus' own library, now. preserved at Uppsala,
Sweden. The volume adorned with spheres is the great Roman calendar
of 1518, drawn up by the German astronomer Johann Stoff1er, who died In 1531.
Right foreground, the first printed edition (1515) of the "Almagest" by Ptolemy,
the renowned Greek astronomer whose geocentric theories held sway
until overthrown by Copernicus.
16
The first European treatise on astro¬
nomy, "Sphaera mundi", was written In
about 1230 by an English cleric John
of Hollywood, or Johannis de Sacro-
bosco as he signed his name in Latin.
His work was based on an elementary
Arab version of Ptolemy's "Almagest".
In it the earth is seen as motionless
at the centre of the universe. Widely
distributed throughout Europe, Sacro-
bosco's work was spreading the doc¬
trine of geocentrism long after the
publication of Copernicus' studies, as
witness these engravings (above) from
an edition published in 1567, with anno¬
tations by a Florentine theologian. From
top to bottom: 1. Position of the moon
on a line from the earth to the sun. 2.
Eclipses of the moon. 3. Solar eclipses.
Photos Bibliothèque de l'Observatoire
© Claude Michaelides, Paris

tibie with the new astronomy and able
to remove the obstacles raised by the
traditional, Aristotelian physics, in par¬
ticular the doctrine of natural motion
and natural place, and the conception
of gravity as a force directed towards
the centre of the universe. The maj¬
estic structure of classical, Newtonian
mechanics was the final outcome of
this struggle.
These few remarks will suffice to
justify the opinion that Copernicus is
one of the founders of the modern
world, both in the ideological and
scientific sense. It is no wonder that
both the history of ideas and the his¬
tory of science have found a wealth
of material in the Copernican heritage
and that they are still far from having
exhausted it.
On the other hand we must admit
that Copernicus presents also other
problems of a more intriguing nature.
Certainly, to prove his importance it
is enough to point to the consequen¬
ces of his achievement; but to eval¬
uate his greatness it is also neces¬
sary to examine the background of
his work.
No single event in the intellectual
history of mankind exists in isolation.
It has its antecedents, and although
individual scientists occasionally suc¬
ceed in presenting the world with a
new idea, there will always be certain
conditioning influences for which the
historian has to search not in order
to deprive the real innovator of his
creative genius, but to put it into a
broader perspective and underline the
fundamental continuity of the historical
process.
1 OPERNICUS had his scien¬
tific initiation at the University of
Cracow which was deeply imbued
with the spirit of the Viennese astro¬
nomers Peurbach and Regiomontanus.
As good Humanists they had tried to
reform astronomy through a conscious
return to its classical sources, for
instance by undertaking a new and im¬
proved translation of Ptolemy's Alma¬
gest.
In the preface to De revolutionibus,
Copernicus admits to a similar
Humanist approach; in fact, his search
through classical authors had led him
to two Pythagorean astronomers, Hice-
tas and Ecphantos, who assumed a
moving earth. However, this is practi¬
cally everything we know about them,
and one hesitates to regard such
a slender tradition as the source of
one of the major cosmological revolu¬
tions of all times.
And Copernicus' more aesthetic
reflections on the most suitable posi¬
tion of such an august body as the
sun may be regarded as a mere after¬
thought without real importance to the
establishing of his cosmology.
A much more plausible inspiration
would have been the famous Aris-
tarchus of Samos who in the third
century B.C. devised an heliocentric
cosmology very similar to the Coper¬
nican system. In fact, the original
manuscript of De revolutionibus dev¬
otes a long passage to Aristarchus
who accordingly was well known to
Copernicus who, nevertheless, deleted
this very passage from the printed
version of his book.
This remarkable omission is, indeed,
hard to explain; perhaps Copernicus
was afraid that the memory of how
the heliocentric system was rejected
in Antiquity might prejudice the accep¬
tance of his own theory.
The surmise that Copernicus found
in Aristarchus a point of departure
for his own thought does not answer
the fundamental question why he was
so dissatisfied with the prevailing
astronomical ideas that he had to
seek an alternative description of
celestial phenomena. This is a more
intricate problem which cannot be
illustrated by mere cosmological con¬
siderations without reference to theo¬
retical astronomy and planetary theory.
Here it is evident that Copernicus
was not concerned with renewing the
mathematical tools of traditional astro¬
nomy. Like Hipparchus and Ptolemy
he described the movements of the
planets by constructing geometrico-
kinematical models simulating the
observable phenomena as closely as
possible.
Ultimately everything had to be re¬
duced to an interplay of circular mo¬
tions which must be uniform about
their respective centres, a fundamental
assumption to which Copernicus
adhered even more strictly than Ptol¬
emy. In this respect Copernicus ap¬
pears in a most traditional light and
it was left to Kepler to introduce
fundamentally new conceptions in the
form of elliptical orbits.
Such geometrical models had to be
provided with numerical parameters
derived from observations. Here, too,
Copernicus proceeded exactly in the
same way as many Arabic or Latin
astronomers, relying upon data record¬
ed by Ptolemy or other ancient obser¬
vers, and supplementing them by a
few observations of his own.
Because a long span of time had
elapsed since Antiquity this should
lead to improved values of the various
mean motions; but it is important to
remember that such improvements are
independent of cosmological consid¬
erations. A simple transformation of
co-ordinates from a geocentric to a
heliocentric frame of reference is
unable to increase the accuracy of
astronomical theories.
Accordingly we must conclude that
the desire for more accurate theories
was no argument for the Copernican
system. On the other hand the new
system could not be proved or dis¬
proved until observational astronomy
was accurate enough to decide whe¬
ther the fixed stars have a parallax,
that is, a small, apparent displacement
due to the annual motion of the
Earth. This moved Tycho Brahe and
later astronomers to improve obser¬
vational techniques until finally in 1838
the effect was discovered by Bessel.
new and unexpected light
was shed upon some of the more
technical details of the work of Coper¬
nicus when in 1957 V. Roberts show¬
ed that the beautiful theory of the
moon's motion contained in. De revo¬
lutionibus was in every respect iden¬
tical with the Lunar theory of the 14th
century Damascene astronomer Ibn
ash-Shatir.
Further research by V. Roberts,
E.S. Kennedy, and F. Abbud proved
also that the geometrical structure
of the theory of Mercury was the same
in the two authors. In particular they
both make use of a special kinematical
device for producing rectilinear
motion by combining two circular
motions. This device was invented
by the 13th century Maragha scien¬
tist Nasir al-Din al-Tusi. W. Hartner
has argued in a very convincing way
that this remarkable agreement proves
that Copernicus was influenced by
Moslem astronomy through chan¬
nels which remain to be identified.
These discoveries do not detract
from the originality of Copernicus.
There is not the slightest trace of
heliocentric ideas in any of the Oriental
astronomers mentioned above, and the
credit for the most important break¬
through in the history of astronomy still
goes undiminished to the author of
De revolutionibus orbium coelestium.
Everything considered it seems that
the most plausible motivation for the
new system was Copernicus' earnest
desire for a cosmology which would
give more simplicity and uniformity to
theoretical astronomy than the old,
geocentric view of the universe.
In particular he seems to have
been worried by two obvious short¬
comings of Ptolemaic astronomy. First, .
although Ptolemy had to use a variety 1 7
of geometrical models for the motions
of the different planets, he also had to
provide each model with a component,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

NEW UNIVERSE (Continued)
18
circular motion with a period of revolu¬
tion of precisely one year.
Second, Ptolemy was unable to
determine both the absolute as well as
the relative distances of the planets
from the Earth, so that their commonly
accepted order was no more than an
arbitrary convention.
Both these facts had been known
since Antiquity, but no astronomer
seems to have been seriously troubled
by them until Copernicus showed how
they could be overcome by a single
remedy. Here we must admit that the
heliocentric theory was a real stroke
of genius.
Thus the annual period found in all
planetary motions ceased to be a
mysterious coincidence and became a
simple consequence of the annual
motion of the Earth around the Sun.
One of the most enigmatic features of
the motions of the planets had thus
found a rational explanation.
A further consequence was that
Copernicus could dispense with the
five circles usually called epicycles
which in Ptolemaic astronomy had
been responsible for the annual period
in the motions of the five ordinary
planets. As a result the geometry of
the whole planetary system became
somewhat simplified, the role of the
five epicycles being taken over by
the one orbit of the Earth.
The final triumph of the Copernican
system followed directly from this latter
circumstance. Already Ptolemy had
been able to determine (from observa¬
tions) the ratio of the radius of each
epicycle to the mean distance of the
corresponding planet. The Copernican
theory reduced, as it were, all the
epicycles to the same size (viz. that
of the orbit of the Earth). Conse¬
quently the mean distances of all the
planets can be expressed in units of
the radius of the orbit of the Earth.
To the greater clarity and simplicity
of his system' Copernicus was thus
able to add the correct order, and
exact distances of the planets from
the Sun. For the first time in the
history of astronomy the solar system
became an ordered whole instead of
an arbitrary structure.
The Copernican system had a pre¬
history comprising many separate
elements cosmological speculations
of ancient astronomers, mathematical
tools borrowed from Ptolemy and the
Arabs, and a series of observations
ranging from classical times to Coper¬
nicus himself.
The proper genius of Copernicus
lay in the fact that he was the first to
wonder at mysterious coincidences and
arbitrary conventions with which lesser
spirits had long ago come to terms. M
At Torun, birthplace of Nicholas Copernicus, the secondary
school is named in honour of the town's most famous citizen.
Here, children proudly lift a bust of Copernicus to place it on a
pedestal at the school.
Special children's supplement
We are pleased to publish on the following pages Copernicus as told to
children, a 16-page supplement written specially for the " Unesco Courier "
by Jean-Claude Pecker, professor at the Collège de France and director of
the Institute of Astrophysics at the French National Centre of Scientific
Research, in Paris. Secretary-General from 1964 to 1967 of the International
Astronomical Union, Prof. Pecker is a member of the French National Commi¬
ssion for Unesco. Besides his many scientific studies, he has written several
books for lay and young audiences. He is the author of a popular children's
book in French, Papa dis-moi, l'astronomie qu'est-ce que c'est ? (Daddy, tell
me, what is Astronomy?) published by Editions Ophrys, Paris, 1971.
