Drawing of the international communications
satellite Intelstat III. in operation for the past
four years. Only three countries to date possess
communication satellites for radio and T.V.
broadcasts: U.S.A.. U.S.S.R. and Canada. But
many countries and indeed whole regions are
actively planning the use of such satellites in
the ii=nr future. Two examples: India will
shortly begin an experiment with an educa¬
tional T.V. satellite: South America is studying
an ambitious scheme for a satellite to be used
by 9 of its countries. In both cases Unesco is
co-operating closely in the planning stages.
"OTT
t /'
Drawing © from " Satellite Communications ". Kokusai Denshin Denwa ¡Co,, Ltd., Tokyo

INTERNATIONAL PROBLEMS
OF TELEVISION VIA SATELLITE
A major debate at Unesco's
recent General Conference
by
Gunnar Naesselund
GUNNAR NAESSELUND is Director of Unes¬
co's Department of Free Flow of Information
and Development of Communication. Before
joining Unesco he was Managing Director and
Editor in Chief of "Ritzaus Bureau", the
Danish national news agency. He has been
deputy chairman of the International Press
Telecommunications Council and was formerly
a lecturer at the school of journalism at
Aarhus University (Denmark).
HE satellite broadcasts of
tomorrow became the focus of the
debate on communications at Unesco's
seventeenth General Conference in
Paris in October-November 1972, al¬
most ten years to the day after the
first authorization given by the Gen¬
eral Conference to the Director-Gen¬
eral to undertake studies of the conse¬
quences which new techniques of
communication by artificial satellites
might have on the achievement of
Unesco's objectives.
A series of studies, meetings and
negotiations culminated in a "Declara¬
tion of Guiding Principles on the Use
of Satellite Broadcasting for the Free
Flow of Information, the Spread of
Education and Greater Cultural Ex¬
change", setting out in a Preamble and
eleven Articles principles for guidance
of member states in the use and dev¬
elopment of this new technology.
The guidelines were finally adopted
at the General Conference by a large
majority, but the debates as well
as the voting figures revealed a
conflict of views which will not be
easily reconciled.
The deepest of these is the basic
issue of freedom of expression. Ano¬
ther is the authority of organizations
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
21

A declaration of 11 'guiding principles'
1
2
3
4
5
6
The use of Outer Space being governed by international law, the development of satellite broad¬
casting shall be guided by the principles and rules of international law, in particular the Charter
of the United Nations and the Outer Space Treaty.
Satellite broadcasting shall respect the sovereignty and equality of all States.
Satellite broadcasting shall be apolitical and conducted with due regard for the rights of indivi¬
dual persons and non-governmental entities, as recognized by States and international law.
The benefits of satellite broadcasting should be available to all countries without discrimination
and regardless of their degree of development.
The use of satellites for broadcasting should be based on international co-operation, world¬
wide and regional, intergovernmental and professional.
Satellite broadcasting provides a new means of disseminating knowledge and promoting better
understanding among peoples.
The fulfilment of these potentialities requires that account be taken of the needs and rights of
audiences, as well as the objectives of peace, friendship and co-operation between peoples,
and of economic, social and cultural progress.
The objective of satellite broadcasting for the free flow of information is to ensure the widest
possible dissemination, among the peoples of the world, of news of all countries, developed
and developing alike.
Satellite broadcasting, making possible instantaneous world-wide dissemination of news,
requires that every effort be made to ensure the factual accuracy of the information reaching
the public. News broadcasts shall identify the body which assumes responsibility for the news
programme as a whole, attributing where appropriate particular news items to their source.
The objectives of satellite broadcasting for the spread of education are to accelerate the expan¬
sion of education, extend educational opportunities, improve the content of school curricula.
22
T.V. VIA SATELLITE (Continued)
within the U.N. family to deal with
these questions. On the one hand
are the fears of developing and other
nations of being exposed to unwanted
programmes, over which they have no
control. On the other are the obvious
benefits which individual countries
could gain from having access to
programmes, which would promote the
exchange of ideas and knowledge.
All these issues are Interrelated and,
in part, contradictory, which in itself
explains the complexity of the problem
and the conflicts which emerged during
the General Conference debate.
Broadcasting satellites are a new
generation of communication satellites,
which will make it possible to transmit
television programmes directly to com¬
munity or home receivers equipped
with adaptors and special antennae.
One such installation constructed in
the United States, will be used experi¬
mentally to pick up full colour tele¬
vision programmes from the NASA
experimental satellite ATS-F, which is
expected to be launched early in 1974.
The cost of these units will be about
two thousand dollars each, for an
order of 300 one for each of the
sites selected for the experiment.
Manufacture In large quantities may
halve the price. Later on the same
satellite may be used for similar pur¬
poses over India for a one-year experi¬
ment in about five thousand villages.
The United Nations Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space is
the focal point within the U.N. family
for co-ordination of the U.N. activities
in this sphere and has been kept
informed throughout of progress in the
preparation of the Unesco Declara¬
tion, but has not yet been able to
comment. It is expected to do so soon
when two of its organs may have the
text of the Declaration on their agenda.
Meantime, arising from a sugges¬
tion by the Soviet Union, the U.N.
General Assembly has requested its
Outer Space Committee to elaborate
principles for the use of satellites
for direct television broadcasting, with
a view to concluding an international
agreement.
A number of member states at the
Unesco General Conference consid¬
ered that no final decision should be
taken on the presented text until the
views of the United Nations had been
heard. Others remarked that there
was not much point in placing before
the U.N. Committee a text which had.
not been endorsed and therefore did
not represent a political reality.
A number of industrially developed
countries, including the United States,
Australia, Canada and the Fed. Rep.
of Germany, directed their interven¬
tions in the first place, towards a de¬
ferment of any conclusive Unesco
action. Others, grouping France, East¬
ern Europe and developing countries,
wanted the text adopted forthwith, and
won by a majority of 55 in favour, 7
against, with 22 abstentions.
The United States and others oppos¬
ed the Declaration also on the grounds
that any attempt to regulate by inter¬
national principles the use of outer
space for direct broadcasts was a
violation of the principle of freedom of
information, and thereby also of
Unesco's own statutes and goals.
Some referred to their national con¬
stitutions, which expressly forbade
measures restricting freedom of ex¬
pression.
The fear of the unknown and the
uncertainty surrounding a new power¬
ful technology at the service of the
few prevailed in the debate. These

We publish below the 11 "guiding principles" of the Declaration on the use of satellite broadcasting, adopted by Unesco's
General Conference on November IS, 1972, following very sharp differences of opinion.
further the training of educators, assist in the struggle against illiteracy, and help ensure
life-long education.
Each country has the right to decide on the content of the educational programmes broadcast
by satellite to its people and, in cases where such programmes are produced in co-operation
with other countries, to take part in their planning and production, on a free and equal footing.
7
8
9
10
11
The objective of satellite broadcasting for the promotion of cultural exchange is to foster
greater contact and mutual understanding between peoples by permitting audiences to enjoy,
on an unprecedented scale, programmes on each other's social and cultural life including
artistic performances and sporting and other events.
Cultural programmes, while promoting the enrichment of all cultures, should respect the
distinctive character, the value and the dignity of each, and the right of «11 countries and peoples
to preserve their cultures as part of the common heritage of mankind.
Broadcasters and their national, regional and international associations should be encouraged
to co-operate in the production and exchange of programmes and in all other aspects of satellite
broadcasting including the training of technical and programme personnel.
In order to further the objectives set out in the preceding articles, it is necessary that States,
taking into account the principle of freedom of information, reach or promote prior agreements
concerning direct satellite broadcasting to the population of countries other than the country
of origin of the transmission.
With respect to commercial advertising, its transmission shall be subject to specific agreement
between the originating and receiving countries.
In the preparation of programmes for direct broadcasting to other countries, account shall be
taken of differences in the national laws of the countries of reception.
The principles of this Declaration shall be applied with due regard for human rights and funda
mental freedoms.
considerations were met by the princi¬
pal Articles of the Declaration recog¬
nizing that development of satellite
broadcasting shall be guided by the
principles and rules of international
law, in particular the Charter of the
United Nations and the Outer Space
Treaty; that it shall respect the sov¬
ereignty and equality of all States; and
that States shall reach or promote
prior agreements concerning direct
satellite broadcasting to the popula¬
tion of countries other than the coun¬
try of origin of the transmission. This,
of course, would include transmissions
of commercial advertising.
There is no doubt that many States
could reach mutual agreements on the
content of satellite programmes in the
fields of education, science, culture
and information, dealt with in the
Declaration. There would, however,
be other cases where such agreement
could not be reached and where plans
for satellite transmissions would have
to be abandoned or revised consid¬
erably to avoid breach of the Declara¬
tion.
Those who would disregard such
considerations would expose them¬
selves to accusations of violating inter
nationally recognized principles, even
though the Unesco Declaration is not
a binding legal instrument.
Unlike short wave radio broadcasts
across frontiers, TV transmissions via
broadcast satellite will be extremely
difficult to jam. The recognition that
this situation is made possible expli¬
citly by the use of outer space which
is declared to be governed by inter¬
national law is seen by some as a
justification for the demand for prior
consent.
The Declaration, it should be noted,
does not attempt to embrace tradi¬
tional use of radio waves nor does it
touch the point-to-point communica¬
tions that are carried over the INTEL¬
SAT systems or similar future satel¬
lite systems serviced by large ground
stations, over which governments nor¬
mally will have full control.
Two viewpoints are at loggerheads.
One holds that there is an infringement
of the right of the individual to have
access to information regardless of
frontiers, and the other, that there is a
violation of the rights of sovereign and
independent states to decide for them¬
selves what programmes their people
should be exposed to.
There are also those who, while
supporting in principle the right of the
individual to have access to informa¬
tion regardless of frontiers, maintain
that so long as broadcasting by satel¬
lite remains a monopoly of a few
countries this right is meaningless and
even prejudicial to countries without
access to satellites.
The Unesco Declaration attempted
to establish a balance between con¬
flicting views while formulating princi¬
ples which would be meaningful and
internationally accepted. As the Gen¬
eral Conference debate showed, how¬
ever, full consensus was not achieved.
Meanwhile, the technology is mov¬
ing forward rapidly. The newly launch¬
ed Canadian satellite AN1K is trans¬
mitting colour television signals which
may be picked up in the United States,
without hindrance, as well as in Can¬
ada, by means of specially construct¬
ed antannae much less expensive than
the large ground stations previously
used. Direct broadcast satellites are
already being manufactured.
The world of tomorrow is upon us,
and mankind will face it once more in
dilemma, with a mixture of anxiety and
hope.
23
