No nation can as yet claim true expertise In environmental man¬
agement. The so-called developed nations are only a few years
ahead of the developing states in awareness and experience. Here,
a highly advanced Argentinian farmer, near the city of Rosario,
steers his harvester round a clump of trees in the centre of his
beautifully worked field.

A world policy
for the
environment
by Lynton K. Caldwell
4
HE basic concept of world
environmental policy and decision¬
making is now the biosphere. This
term, and the idea it expresses, is scar¬
cely more than a century old. Its devel¬
opment has been truly international.
Its origins have been traced to the
French naturalist, Lamarck; the term
first appeared (1875) in the scientific
writings of the Austrian geographer,
Suess; and its full development and
entry into the lexicon of modern
science was largely the work of the
Russian mineralogist, V.l. Vernadsky.
Scientific recognition of the practi-
LYIMTON K. CALDWELL'S Professor of Pub¬
lic and Environmental Affairs and of Poli¬
tical Science at Indiana University (U.S.A.),
and Chairman of the Committee on Environ¬
mental Policy, Law and Administration of the
International Union for Conservation of
Nature and Natural Resources in Morges
(Switzerland). He has published five books
on problems of the environment, including
"Environment: A Challenge to Modern So¬
ciety' (Natural History Press, 1970; Anchor
Paperbacks, 1971), and more than 100 arti¬
cles and papers. His most recent book, 'In
Defense of Earth" (Indiana University Press.
1972) describes the growth of International
efforts to protect the biosphere. A new book,
'Man and Environment: Public Policy and
Administration' will be published In 1973 by
Harper and Row, New York.
cal significance of the complex unity
of the biosphere preceded, by several
decades, a comparable political
awareness. Not until the Paris Bio¬
sphere Conference of 1968, sponsored
by Unesco (in co-operation with the
United Nations, the World Health
Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization, the International Union
for Conservation of Nature and Nat¬
ural Resources, and the International
Biological Programme of the Internat¬
ional Council of Scientific Unions) did
the world environment, as biosphere,
appear upon the agenda of official
representatives of nations and inter¬
national organizations.
United Nations conferences in 1949
(Conservation and Utilization of Re¬
sources) and 1963 (Application of
Science and Technology for the Bene¬
fit of Less Developed Areas) may have
tacitly assumed the oneness of the
planet Earth. But they did not exam¬
ine the implications of this complex
unity for man-environment relation¬
ships. The behaviour of peoples and
governments toward the biosphere
was left largely unexplored until 1968.
As often happens in public affairs,
non-governmental action preceded offi¬
cial political recognition. In 1948, at
Fontainebleau (France) with the assis¬
tance of Unesco, the International
Union for Conservation of Nature
(IUCN) was established. The Union
has now become the world conserva¬
tion organization, its name extended
to include Natural Resources, and its
functions enlarged to environmental
policy, law, and administration.
More recently (1970), the Internation¬
al Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU)
established its Scientific Committee on
Problems of the Environment (SCOPE).
As with IUCN, SCOPE has found that
its primarily scientific mission cannot
be adequately performed without con¬
sidering the human impact upon the
environment.
This impact, however, results not
only from the activities of human indi¬
viduals; it is widely organized and
mediated through governments, cor¬
porations, and international organiza¬
tions. Even to analyze and describe
the interactions of man with the envi¬
ronment requires inputs from social
and behavioural disciplines not fully
represented among the scientific
bodies forming ICSU.
In microcosm this need to integrate
all relevant sciences and professional

skills in analyzing the environmental
decision process reflects the larger
problem of governments and inter¬
national organizations in coping with
complex environmental questions to
which no single discipline can provide
an adequate answer.
If the Biosphere Conference of 1968
marked the arrival of international poli¬
tical awareness of the world environ¬
ment, the United Nations Conference
on the Human Environment, meeting
in Stockholm in June 1972, provided
confirmation of this awareness.
The Biosphere Conference was
technically an assembly of scientific
experts, whereas the United Nations
Conference was a meeting of political
representatives of governments. Rep¬
resentatives of more than 110 na¬
tions were present at Stockholm and
adopted an Action Plan of 109 recom¬
mendations to national government and
international organizations. The Con¬
ference also adopted a declaration,
and proposed new U.N. machinery to
assist the translation of the work of the
Conference into scientific and political
action.
To facilitate this task the Conference
urged establishment of a World Envi
ronment Fund, made up of the volun¬
tary contributions of national govern¬
ments. Support for the Fund has al¬
ready been pledged by a number of
states, including Canada, the German
Federal Republic, Iran, Japan, Sweden,
the Netherlands, and the United States.
Disposition of the Stockholm recom¬
mendations rests, of course, with the
General Assembly of the U.N., with
national governments, and with the
U.N. Specialized Agencies. Imple¬
mentation of the Action Plan cannot be
accomplished overnight, but there are
good reasons for believing that most
of it will ultimately be put into effect.
Even without official endorsement,
many of the recommendations may
influence and guide the environmental
decisions of governmental and inter¬
national officials.
Support for guarded optimism may
be found in action taken by national
governments to cope with their envi¬
ronmental problems. As late as 1968,
no country was organized politically
or administratively to deal with "envi¬
ronment" as such. Decisions affecting
man-environment interactions were
made pursuant to other considera¬
tions, such as public health, econo¬
mic policy, tourism, national security,
or preservation of a national heritage.
The analogy of the biosphere as the
planetary life-support system achieved
popular comprehension as a conse¬
quence of the voyages into outer space
by Americans and Soviets (the Spa¬
ceship Earth concept); the vision
of the lonely blue planet viewed by
the astronauts and cosmonauts had a
profound psychological impact upon
the peoples of the Earth.
No event in historic time has dra¬
matized more powerfully the unity and
fragility of the biosphere. The symbol
of "only one earth" transcended lan¬
guages and ideologies; its message
readable even by the illiterate. And
while it would be difficult to demons¬
trate that the lunar voyages directly
influenced specific environmental deci¬
sions, they clearly affected the climate
of thought and opinion in which action
was taken by governments and inter¬
national organizations after 1968.
Between 1969 and 1972, nearly
every industrialized nation took legisla¬
tive or administrative action to cope
more effectively with its environmental
problems. A landmark in national
legislation was the signing on January 1 ,
1970 by the President of the United
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

6
WORLD POLICY (Continued)
States of the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969. This far-reaching
law established criteria to guide the
decisions of agencies of the United
States Government that had a signi¬
ficant impact upon the environment.
The Act contains a novel method of
enforcement. For any action by any
federal agency having a significant
environmental impact, a responsible
official must prepare a five-point
statement explaining, and justifying,
the action proposed. These statements
have been made subject to review by
the high-level Council on Environmen¬
tal Quality (also established by the
Act) and are made available to state
governments, to other federal agencies,
and to the concerned public.
In 1970, the United Kingdom provi¬
ded, in a White Paper on Protection
of the Environment, a basis for govern¬
mental reorganization leading to estab¬
lishment of the Department of the
Environment. In 1971, the French
Government established a Ministry for
the Protection of Nature and the Envi¬
ronment. In Sweden, Canada, Japan,
and many other countries, new envi¬
ronmental agencies were created, or
existing departments and ministries
were reorganized.
The world-wide impact of environ¬
mental concepts upon governmental
organization was evident in the reports
submitted by as many as 80 countries
to the Preparatory Committee for the
United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment.
Prior to the U.N. Conference, and
at the plenary sessions at Stockholm,
representatives of national govern¬
ments issued formal declarations re¬
garding the environmental policies of
their nations. A collection of these
statements has been assembled for
publication by the IUCN, and they
indicate a. widespread commitment by
heads of state and high-ranking offi¬
cials to the objectives of environ¬
mental improvement and protection.
A major task in institutionalizing
national decisions on environmental
issues is to find ways to reconcile
ecology and economics. National dev¬
elopment goals and policies, regard¬
ing the applications of science and
technology, have often been formu¬
lated without adequate regard to their
ecological consequences.
In the past, the political and admin¬
istrative structures, through which
decisions were taken, handicapped and
often precluded, co-ordination and re¬
conciliation of environmental and
developmental policies. In pursuit of
development goals serious ecological
errors have been made in many coun¬
tries, leading too often to disappoint¬
ing failures of development and to
waste of scarce resources.
There has been recently published
a 1,060 page volume of case studies
and analyses by 70 internationally-
known scientists examining develop¬
ment projects that were unsuccessful
or that produced destructive side-
effects because of failure to reconcile
technology with ecological realities
and development goals: (The Careless
Technology: Ecology and International
Development. Edited by M.T. Farvar
and J.P. Milton, Natural History Press,
1972).
In nearly all of the more than 50
cases reported, the miscarriage of
development may be explained by in¬
adequacies in the structuring of deci¬
sion-making. At policy formulating
levels there was seldom adequate
means for obtaining a full input of
relevant scientific data, for identifying
alternate means to development goals,
or for testing the probable outcomes
of these alternatives.
Moreover, institutional machinery for
project execution seldom was provided
with guidelines, check points, and peri¬
odic reassessments of technical pro¬
cedures that could enable projects to
be redirected when self-defeating or
when dysfunctional effects appeared.
It is not always easy to discover
exactly where and how the structure
of decision-making has led to un-
desired results. The actual mechanisms
of decision in governmental and inter¬
national agencies are seldom fully
open to public scrutiny or to beha¬
vioural research. Private corporate de¬
cisions are usually even less amenable
to investigation. And yet the wide¬
spread current tendency of govern¬
ments to reorganize for environmental
management indicates that there is a
recognized desire for structural im¬
provement.
Many of the U.N. Specialized Agen¬
cies have established environmental
offices or co-ordinative arrangements
for environmental affairs; and the
Stockholm Conference (as previously
noted) recommended the establish¬
ment of an environmental office in the
United Nations Secretariat. The Eco¬
nomic and Financial Committee of
the U.N. General Assembly recently
CONTINUED PAGE 32

The bicycles
of
Stockholm
Last summer, Stockholm was the scene of an International meeting of vital concern to all peoples and
governments the U.N. Conference on the Human Environment In photo left, U.N. Secretary-General,
Kurt Waldheim, is dwarfed by the giant emblem symbolizing man and the biosphere, as he opens the
first meeting. Many thousands of young people from virtually every country congregated in Stock¬
holm at the time (photos above), and at the U.N. conference, as well as at independent Environment
Forums and spontaneous gatherings, gave voice (and music) to their views and feelings about pollu¬
tion, war, overpopulation and other environmental questions. Delegates scorned autos and other
polluting transport and took to bicycles instead. Photo below, General Secretary of the U.N. meeting
Maurice Strong (second from left) leads a group of delegates through the streets of Stockholm.
*

A WORLD POLICY FOR THE ENVIRONMENT
32
recommended that the environment
secretariat should be located in Nai¬
robi (Kenya).
Innovations now undertaken at na¬
tional and international levels should,
within a few years, give us some prac¬
tical evidence of how best to struc¬
turally organize and integrate develop¬
mental and environmental goals and
operational programme. To obtain an
input of information, properly balanced
in relation to programme needs, pre¬
sents an additional challenge.
Availability of information in a usable
form is a necessary, but insufficient,
step toward better environmental deci¬
sions. There is also need to insure
that a broad spectrum of decision¬
makers are aware of the availability
of the data, and that they correctly
appraise its significance for their work.
Both the Biosphere Conference and
the U.N. Stockholm Conference re¬
commended education and training
programmes for technical, professional,
and administrative personnel to enable
them more effectively to integrate eco¬
logical concepts into their work. And,
because many environmental decisions
require a scientific input, it has been
necessary to improve the ability of
scientists to advise and to assist public
officials in arriving at ecologically
valid environmental and developmental
decisions.
Prior to the Stockholm Conference,
the International Council of Scientific
Unions' Scientific Committee on Prob¬
lems of the Environment brought to¬
gether, at Canberra (Australia), a group
of scientists from developing countries
for the purpose of clarifying environ¬
mental issues, especially in relation
to development objectives.
Regional seminars for officials,
chiefly from developing countries, were
sponsored by the United Nations
Economic Commissions and the
Regional Office in Beirut; and the
Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on the Human
Environment convened a panel of
experts in June 1971 at Founex
(Switzerland) to consider the inter¬
relationships of development and
environment, with emphasis on policy
formulation and action.
These efforts are among the more
important of a much larger number of
official and unofficial conferences,
seminars, and workshops intended
ultimately to improve the quality of
environmental decision-making. Pre-
Stockholm efforts in this direction were
necessarily experimental; post-Stock¬
holm training for environmental deci¬
sion-making will almost certainly be¬
come a regular and continuing func¬
tion of many public agencies and scien¬
tific and commercial organizations.
The purpose of decision-making is
to arrive at a judgment regarding
proposed action: whether, how, or
when to act. A decision against action
may be as significant as one for action,
and the way in which a decision is
made may be as important as the
substance of what is decided.
ÍT international levels, the
diversities among nations require a
broad base of deliberation for deci¬
sions that affect all or large groups of
national states. At national levels (but
increasingly at international levels
also) there is need to benefit from the
contributions of the non-governmental
organizations to the decision process.
Non-governmental organizations were
strongly represented at the Stockholm
Conference and made major direct and
indirect contributions to official action.
A structure for environmental deci¬
sion-making is thus emerging, slowly
(Continued from page 6)
perhaps in relation to need but
rapidly by historical precedent. This
structure may in time provide a
coherent system for environmental
decision-making that links all political
levels local, national, regional, and
international, and that provides regular
channels for continuous communica¬
tion among scientists, planners, and
decision-makers, as well as between
official and non-governmental agencies.
But meanwhile, who makes the deci¬
sions on environmental affairs?
A superficial answer would be:
almost everybody or in some in¬
stances, nobody. The present disorders
of our global environment reflect the
inadequacy of our decision process at
all jurisdictional levels. No nation as
yet can claim true expertise in envi¬
ronmental management. The so-called
developed nations are only a few
years ahead of the developing states
in awareness and experience.
Environmental protection technolo¬
gies may be rapidly transferred where
receptive conditions exist. Awareness
of the need for wise environmental
management is rapidly becoming evi¬
dent among the leadership in many
developing countries. Ecologically
sound policies are increasingly under¬
stood to go hand in hand with effect¬
ive development. There is indeed
ground for optimism that, at least,
some developing countries may bring
their environmental problems under
control more rapidly than will the older
industrialized states.
The task of international environ¬
mental and developmental policy today
is to develop the concepts, criteria,
and institutional arrangements which
will give the best chances for public
action addressed to the broad range
of human needs experienced by all
mankind.
Lynton K. Caldwell
