To teach
or not
to teach?
Should education about drugs be
introduced into the curriculum?
Results of a Unesco international inquiry
lI N 1971 and 1972 Unesco carried out an
international inquiry to find out what role education should play and
actually is playing to combat the growing problem of drug abuse today.
The inquiry covered fourteen countries, two in Asia (India, Iran),
two in Africa (Nigeria, Senegal), six in Europe (Denmark, France, Fed.
Rep. of Germany, Sweden, Switzerland, U.K.), and four in the Americas
(Brazil, Costa Rica, Jamaica, U.S.A.).
The Unesco inquiry was not limited to education in schools; the
broad questionnaire sent to Unesco Member States included questions
on the role of the information media and the social sciences.
Unesco has just issued two preliminary reports which contain an
analysis of the replies received, the first entitled "Patterns of Drug-
taking and Official Policies"; the second, "Prevention of Drug Abuse
by Education and the Mass Media". The articles below and on page
12 are based on the findings of the latter study. The results of an
inquiry into the controversial question of the harmfulness of cannabis
based on the first-mentioned study are presented on page 23.
6
F the 14 countries covered
by Unesco's international inquiry, nine
(Brazil, Denmark, the Federal Republic
of Germany, India, Jamaica, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom and
the United States) favour a drugs edu¬
cation policy in schools, universities
and out-of-school education. All
these countries have initiated some
form of drugs education, and India is
preparing a large-scale project.
Among the five other countries, two
(Nigeria and Senegal) expressed no
opinion on the value of drugs educa¬
tion. Costa Rica indicated that no
action had been undertaken apart from
the distribution of information leaflets
in secondary schools and that no par¬
ticular measures are envisaged by the
Ministry of Education. The Costa
Rican Ministry of Public Health, how¬
ever, replied that it was in favour of a
policy of drugs education within the
school system and elsewhere.
The remaining countries (Iran and
France) are opposed to introducing
specific instruction on the abuse and
characteristics of the different drugs
into school programmes.
Iran's position is that "in order not
to attract the attention of young peo¬
ple, and in view of existing social
conditions, it is wiser for the moment
not to include in school programmes an
open campaign against the use of
drugs. In many of the remoter parts
of Iran even the names of heroin and
morphine are, fortunately, still un¬
known. The mere fact of talking about
them could provoke among the young
an urge to indulge in drugs, if only for
fun or out of curiosity." (See also foot¬
note page 14.)
The French attitude to the question
is less clear-cut, but reflects the same
fear of talking too much about drugs
and thus inciting young people to
experiment. A 1971, Ministry of Edu¬
cation circular on "the fight against
drug addiction in institutions of higher
education and in schools" urges the
heads of such establishments to show
"vigilance and discernment". It calls
for preventive action, help for drug-
addicts and protection of the school
against drug-pushers coupled with the
general policy of keeping school doc¬
tors, parents and teachers informed.
For the time being no specific edu¬
cation programme is envisaged in
France. Courses on drugs and the dis¬
tribution of explanatory leaflets are
both considered undesirable and direct
action is advised only when absolutely
essential. Excessive publicity, it is
felt, might well encourage the spread
of drug-taking.
However, the French reply mentions
a project for civic, health and social
education intended for third and fourth
year secondary pupils which would
include some information on drugs. It
is feared that a course entirely devoted
to drugs might have harmful effects.
Being autonomous, French universi¬
ties are free to introduce lectures on
drug abuse, though "this is a problem
which preoccupies students far less
than is generally believed". But edu¬
cation for teachers and opinion-makers
is foreseen.
Countries which favour education
against drug abuse realize that young
people, through their own grapevines,
get hold of a great deal of informa¬
tion, some of which is true, some
partially true and some false. Surveys
show that an increasing number of
young people have experimented with
various drugs and that an even greater
number are exposed to the temptation
to experiment.
Yet agreement in principle to the
need for education is always coupled
with reservations due to the fear of

t
Photo © from "Elementary Grammar of the Image"
by Albert Plécy, Editions Estlenne, Paris
saying too much, of saying it badly, of
stimulating an already active interest
in drugs among young people by ill-
considered remarks from teachers who
themselves are not well-informed on
the problem. All these reservations
concern what methods to use and their
effectiveness which is extremely diffi¬
cult to assess since so far no evalua¬
tion of programmes and different types
of action has been made.
Unesco's inquiry shows that coun
tries which favour education for drug
prevention tend to adopt two main
approaches: to put the young on their
guard against drugs, and to eliminate
the aura of drama that surrounds
drugs.
In support of the first approach it is
argued that young people receive one¬
sided information on drugs from unoffi¬
cial sources (fellow-students, maga¬
zines, drug-addicts, etc.) which stress
the pleasures of drug-taking while
saying almost nothing about its dan¬
gers. The young must therefore be
told about the risks of drug abuse if
a change of attitude is to be brought
about.
The second approach sets out to dis¬
pel the magic aura, the romantic and
fascinating aspect of drugs, which may
well account for the attraction they hold
for the younger generation. Much of the
drama would be taken out of drug edu¬
cation, and thus out of drugs them-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

TO TEACH OR NOT TO TEACH? (Continued)
selves, if it formed an integral part of
the school curriculum, given as part
of a health instruction class sand¬
wiched between classes on mathe¬
matics and languages.
A warning taken from a United
Kingdom health instruction manual
stresses that the subject of drug-
taking' "should not be handled in such
a way as to lend it glamour or to
encourage its concealment... It should
be discussed in the proper context as.
an aspect of health education." This
view is shared by the United States,
the Federal Republic of Germany, Den¬
mark and Sweden.
All these countries emphasize the
need for objectivity in presenting infor¬
mation to students and to young peo¬
ple generally. Denmark, for instance,
maintains that the first principle is that
"all education should be as truthful as
possible."
A manual for teachers published in
the United States quotes the following
example: "If 20 per cent of the stu
dents in a classroom of 50 have used
a drug, there are at least 10 students
carefully measuring the teacher's
words against empirical knowledge.
At least 30 students will know the
10 as users and be briefed by them.
With 40 of the audience of 50 in a
good position to judge the accuracy
of a teacher's statement about a drug
he has probably never tried, any dis¬
crepancies will be quickly noted and
used to breed distrust of the total
presentation."
And the manual adds that "the
'why it's dangerous to use drugs'
approach is likely to make any teen¬
agers feel that if they haven't tried
drugs they're missing something."
In almost all countries where educa¬
tional campaigns have either been
launched or are in preparation the
initiative has come from government
organizations operating on a national
scale.
Thus, in the United States, the Drug
Abuse Education Act of 1970 aims "to
encourage the development of new
and improved curricula on the prob¬
lems of drug abuse; to demonstrate
the use of such curricula in model
educational programmes and to eval¬
uate their effectiveness; to dissemi¬
nate curricular materials and signifi¬
cant information for use in educational
programmes throughout the nation; to
provide training programmes for
teachers, counsellors, law enforce¬
ment officials, and other public service
and community leaders; and to offer
community education programmes for
parents and others, on drug abuse
problems."
The Act also sets out in detail the
different fields of application of this
education policy. The directives and
plan of action communicated by the
United States originate from federal
agencies. The National Clearing
House for Mental Health Information, a
branch of the National Institute of
Public Health, is the main agency for
the assembly and dissemination of
8
UNITED STATES: A broad range of comprehensive educational
programmes against drug abuse have been drawn up in the U.S.A.
Only a small sampling is given here (see also article page 13).
Among the countries which replied to Unesco's Inquiry, only
the U.S. reported action at the pre-school level. Most of the
programmes for the very young begin in the kindergarten; for
example, a painting album, such as "Katy's Colouring Book about
Drugs and Health" (published by the Bureau of Narcotics and
Dangerous Drugs, Guide for teachers and parents), is used in
discussions on the place of medicines In the life of children. The
main theme is: only sick people need medicines.
Another programme of the same type suggests that teachers
should.
get children into the habit of asking parents or other respon¬
sible adults before eating or drinking anything new;
make them aware that some everyday items may be harmful
if used improperly.
The methods recommended in the "model" lesson are active
methods: games, such as "We Ask First"; or dramatic play,
such as "The Day Baby Got Sick"; the making of individual
safety scrapbooks which each child shows to his parents for
their comments and evaluation. Transparent prints and slides
are also available.
Warnings against the abuse of medicaments and drugs are
generally given in a full course on physical health and mental
hygiene. Children should learn the value of good health and
"what their healthy bodies can do so they will appreciate them".
A large number of comprehensive programmes have been drawn
up by different States:
èl three series of programmes go from kindergarten to senior
high school inclusive;
two others are intended for grades 4, 5, and 6, and for grades
6 to 12.
Most of the programmes include a statement of the basic orien¬
tations and of the psychological and moral principles underlying
them which can be summed up in three main points:
Instruction on drugs should hinge naturally on some school
subject (according to the level, on health education, biology, or
the social sciences).
Health education should stimulate the young to have more
positive motivations with regard to themselves (a sense of physi¬
cal and mental health), to others, and to society as a whole (the
urge to play a social role, to take part in the life of the community
and assume responsibility towards it).
Confronted with numerous sources of information, young people
should learn to sort out for themselves the data on a given
subject (in this instance drugs), to select the pertinent information
and make a decision. Particular emphasis should be given to
decision-making.
The programmes also include plans for model lessons that
cover objectives, time-tables, themes (with bibliographical refer¬
ences) and available audio-visual aids (filmstrips, slides, films,
pamphlets and folders, posters, etc.).
A great deal of audio-visual material is available including at
least seven 16 mm films suitable for junior and senior high
schools: "Are drugs the answer?", "A day in the death of Danny
B.", "Drugs and the nervous system" and "Hooked", among other
titles.
JAMAICA undertook a variety of activities during its "Beware
of Drugs" campaign, in which films, lectures and leaflets were
all used. Most of the material came from the United States.
Leaflets distributed by the Regional Centre for Technical Aid and
the Alliance for Progress include: "Narcotics: Some ' Questions
and Answers", "Marijuana: Some Questions and Answers", "The
Up and Down Drugs: Amphetamines and Barbiturates", "Barbi¬
turates as Addicting Drugs", "LSD: Questions Concerning Students
and thf Abuse of Drugs", "Living Death: the Truth About Drug
Addiction", "An American Father Speaks Frankly about Marijuana".

information concerning pedagogical
experiments undertaken at the local or
State level.
A number of courses are selected,
reproduced and sent on request to
schools and teachers. They carry no
recommendation as to their adoption
but are distributed as documentary
material to help schools undertake or
improve their general programme.
The National Clearing House also
circulates for the use of teachers,
research findings, bibliographies, film
listings and information leaflets on the
different drugs, as well as audio¬
visual aids to illustrate the courses.
More particularly, the Social Action
Office for Drug Abuse Prevention pro¬
vides up-to-date information on avail¬
able educational programmes, their
approach and their different fields of
application.
The Bureau of Narcotics and Danger¬
ous Drugs of the Federal Department
of Justice is also highly active in the
field of prevention but is less directly
specialized in educational matters. It
has, nevertheless, prepared a number
of programmes for study courses.
In the Federal Republic of Germany
prevention programmes are closely
supervised by the Federal Ministry of
Youth, the Family and Health. A num¬
ber of inter-ministerial working groups
are also active in the fight against the
misuse of drugs and the protection of
youth.
In addition, the Central Federal
Office for Health Information has
launched an extensive campaign of
prevention through education and
information. Because of the dearth of
qualified instructors, however, the in¬
clusion of teaching on drugs in school
curricula has been postponed. But as
a start, the Office is contacting those
who are well placed to pass on their
knowledge to a large public, particu¬
larly teachers, instructors, education¬
ists, youth movement leaders, social
workers and student representatives
on school administration councils. It
is planned to increase the number of
model seminars to provide rapid in¬
struction for all those engaged in
education.
The German Head Office for Com¬
batting the Dangers of Drug Addic¬
tion co-ordinates at the federal level
all activities, including the publication
and free distribution of written mat¬
erial, films and slides specially pre¬
pared for schools, youth movement
leaders, apprentices, etc.
In Switzerland, prevention program¬
mes are the responsibility of the
Cantonal educational authorities. Sev¬
eral Cantons have taken steps to in¬
troduce preventive educational pro¬
grammes, often as part of general
health instruction, and to co-ordinate
the activities of public and private or¬
ganizations. A large travelling exhibi¬
tion, intended for schoolchildren as
well as the general public, is now
visiting towns throughout the country.
(See also page 28.)
In Denmark, the United Kingdom and
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
in six countries
COSTA RICA also draws largely on the same United States
material translated into Spanish. The Costa Rican Ministry
of Public Health also published, in 1970, a comprehensive
leaflet entitled "Marijuana, the Poison of Youth".
In general, the leaflets and colour folders are well presented
and sum up the main points about a particular drug: definition and
characteristics, physical and psychical effects, medical use, abuse
and consequences, physiological and psychical dependence, and,
where appropriate, the results of research and the addresses
of information or treatment centres. The information given is
objective and essentially factual.
THE UNITED KINGDOM: Like many other countries, including
the Fed. Rep. of Germany, the United Kingdom has not formulated
systematic programmes at this level. The only educational material
communicated by the U.K. is a pamphlet for teachers to accompany
a 23-mlnute educational film in colour, entitled "One Way Ticket".
This is a real-life story, adapted and designed for education
on the use of drugs in the modern world. Intended for 14 to
17 year-olds and based on the case histories of several young
people living in an industrial town, it provides a starting-point for
a discussion on the principal effects of cannabis, LSD, amphe¬
tamines, barbiturates and, to a lesser degree, heroin.
The accompanying pamphlet includes a guide for debate on
the film and on factors conducive to drug-taking and dependence.
It also describes a number of actual cases and makes suggestions
for further study.
9 SWEDEN: In Sweden, education on alcohol and other drugs
was provided for in schools as long ago as 1928. In fact, these
subjects were dealt with only to the extent that time permitted and
according to the interest of the individual teacher.
In 1962, the Swedish Parliament laid down new directives on
the teaching of different subjects. The only reference to alcohol,
drugs and tobacco was under intermediate level science in the
Grundskola (the Grundskola in Sweden provides nine years
compulsory education from 7 to 16, at elementary, intermediate
and higher levels).
Education on alcohol, tobacco and other drugs occupies a
prominent place in the new programmes adopted in 1970, the
aim being to give students "an education that enables them to
make independent and responsible decisions, both in principle
and in concrete choices, regarding their own use of things."
At the elementary level children can be taught about tobacco,
alcohol and, if such questions are in the news, the use of solvents
and drugs, during discussions regarding health, bodily functions,
social behaviour and habits.
"Using well-informed and detailed arguments, the school should
point out the positive value of total abstinence from alcohol and
tobacco first of all during the period of growth. It should also
be made clear that all use of drugs not prescribed by a doctor
spells danger and is contrary to the law," says a study published
by Sweden's National Board of Education.
At the intermediate and higher levels, it says, education should
be directed towards fields of interest in sociology and the natural
sciences. At the higher level opportunities should be found to
discuss behaviour and the results of scientific surveys on this
subject as well as the role of publicity in shaping attitudes.
Moreover, it is important that the school should co-operate
closely with parents and with representatives of the various
health institutions and agencies so as to reinforce what has been
learned at school.
DENMARK reports the use of several well-designed programmes
in schools. Education on drug abuse forms part of the health,
and later, the biology programme.
Educational television broadcasts have also been devoted to
the subject. A network of consultants and specialized teachers
has been organized so that information given out may be co¬
ordinated.
9

TO TEACH OR NOT TO TEACH? (Continued)
Sweden, the education programmes
are drawn up under the auspices of
the Ministry of Education, within the
framework either of a commission
studying the drug problem in general
(in Denmark, a commission on the
abuse of drugs by the young; in Swe¬
den, a committee for protection
against drug abuse) or of a special
council for health education (in the
United Kingdom, the Health Education
Council, set up in 1968).
In India, the National Council of
Educational Research and Training is
preparing an education project for
young people designed to prevent
drug abuse, particularly in secondary
schools, teacher-training schools and
centres and universities. It plans to
include an appropriate lesson in text¬
books when they are next revised.
In Costa Rica, the Ministry of Public
Health is contemplating an education
programme to be drawn up by the
Ministry of National Education. The
two ministries are to study whether
or not to include a special programme
in school and college programmes,
and how to prepare teachers and
parents to understand and accept this
teaching.
In Jamaica and Brazil, the sporadic
action so far taken in regard to school
and out-of-school drugs education has
not been directly initiated by the
Government.
Denmark, the Fed. Rep. of Germany,
Sweden, U.K. and U.S.A. all subscribe
to two educational principles. They
reject the so-called traditional tactics
of intimidation; their view is that from
an educational point of view, stressing
only the dangers of drugs serves no
useful purpose, because many teen¬
agers feel it is natural to take risks
and are rarely likely to feel themselves
directly affected by the dangers
described.
They also advocate the presentation
of facts, not of the value judgements
of an authoritarian educational system.
Teenagers are by nature often
rebellious, and clumsily imposed pro¬
hibitions can incite them to defiance.
Nevertheless, these countries fall
into two distinct groupings. There are
Photo Gilles Peress © Magnum

those who believe in the effectiveness
of drugs education and who have
produced programmes and started
distributing them on a nation-wide
scale (primarily U.S.A., followed, to a
lesser degree, by Denmark and
Sweden).
The other group, including the U.K.,
for example, feels that the drug prob¬
lem has not yet affected a sufficient
section of its population to justify
prolonged and systematic drugs educ¬
ation, which might risk attracting the
attention of young people; the Federal
Republic of Germany is waiting for the
results of regional surveys and socio¬
logical studies. In practice both
countries end up with the same policy.
Several countries have reservations
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE


12
TO TEACH OR NOT TO TEACH 7
(Continued)
about systematic drugs education.
In the Fed. Rep. of Germany, owing
to the shortage of trained personnel
and because research is still going on,
no action has been prescribed at the
federal level, though some recommen¬
dations have been made. The number
of hours of drugs education, its place
in the programme and the choice of
methods are left to the local authorities
to decide. Meanwhile, the content of
this education is being examined, and
a number of guiding principles for
teachers can be singled out:
Emphasize the risks of the unknown
(the exact effect of a drug cannot
be foreseen).
Tell pupils not only about the
physiological effects of drugs, but
also about the way they interfere
with brain function in a way com¬
parable to the processes that occur
in the mentally sick.
Do not ostracize the sub-cultures.
Point out that only a small percent¬
age of young people take drugs.
Do not allow yourself to be shocked
or speak of drug-taking as being
unquestionably a form of depravity.
Point out that:
Anyone who takes drugs is evad¬
ing life; he is a daydreamer, incap¬
able of coming to grips with the
realities of life. He is not really
living, just being manipulated by
drugs.
Drugs do not broaden conscious¬
ness, but force it to function
abnormally (this is particularly
serious at a time of physical and
mental growth).
In the U.K., freedom of choice is left
to the schools and local education
authorities. In fact, action has only
been taken in areas where drugs pose
a specific problem. Many schools and
education authorities appear to have
reservations about systematic drugs
education since they are afraid of
stimulating students' interest and
encouraging experimentation.
They have even stronger reserv¬
ations concerning the drawbacks of
using methods such as highly emo¬
tional films and television programmes,
or lurid accounts of their experiences
by former drug-addicts.
In general, it is recommended that
precise details of drugs should not be
given (how they are taken, their
appearance, their effects); the teen¬
ager should be helped to use his own
judgement. Above all, care should be
taken not to exaggerate, as drug-
addicts do, the personal and social
importance of drugs and related prob¬
lems. It is better to show that drugs
are a very poor substitute for a real
commitment to life.

