POETRY & REALISM
IN MOGHUL
MINIATURE PAINTING
by Mumtaz Hasan
¿LS í * ****£** I
An 18th century miniature
painting of the great
Moghul Emperor Akbar
(1542-1602),
now in the Louvre, Paris.
A generous patron of the arts
he was the founder of
the Moghul school of art.
OGHUL minia¬
ture painting represents
the finest in the miniature
arts of the Indo-Pakistan
sub-continent. This es¬
sentially Muslim school of
painting flourished under
the inspiring patronage of
the Moghul Emperors for
well over two hundred
years from the second
quarter of the sixteenth
to the close of the eight¬
eenth century.
At its zenith, its fame
reached such distant
lands as those of Europe
where it aroused the ad¬
miration of a master of
the calibre of Rembrandt.
At home, it exercised a
profound influence on a
large number of schools
of miniature painting,
such as the Rajput, «an¬
gra, and Deccan Schools.
The art of miniature
painting began in the sub-continent during the later phase
of the reign of the Emperor Humayun, who on his return
from Iran brought with him two master miniature painters
of the court of King Tahmasp I Sayyid Ali and Abdus
Samad. A host of local artists worked under the supervision
of these masters from Iran. Moghul art was largely a con¬
tinuation and an offshoot of the arabesque, two-dimension¬
al decorative Iranian School which, in its earlier stages, was
influenced by Chinese painting.
The earlier formative stages of Moghul painting, however,
were soon followed by a phase of assertive identity when
it showed signs of contact with European art to which it
was most probably introduced by the early Christian
missionaries.
In course of time, the school evolved a vision of reality
all its own. It was undoubtedly this vision, pulsating with
life and vigour, that imparted to Moghul art an indivi¬
duality which is easy to recognize and easier to appreciate.
In this sense, the Emperor Akbar is the real founder of
the Moghul school of art. During most of the fifty years
MUMTAZ HASAN is President of the Museums Association of Pakis¬
tan. He has been Pakistan's permanent Secretary for Finance and
was for many years President of the National Bank of Pakistan.
Doctor Honoris Causa of the Goethe Institute (Fed. Rep. of Germany)
he has always been interested in the promotion of cultural activities.
His publications include a study of Iqbal, the great philosopher and
poet who has been called "the spiritual father of Pakistan", and
"In Search of Debul", an historical account of the earliest Muslim
city in the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent. He edited the English edition
of "The Adventures of Hir and Ran¡ha" from the Punjabi poem by
Waris Shah.
of his reign a large number of painters were busy in his
atelier illustrating manuscripts, mostly epics, such as Hamza
Nameh, Shah Nameh, Tarikh-i-Khandan-i-Taimuriyan and
Akbar Nameh and painting portraits of the royal personage
and his nobles.
In the manuscripts and album paintings, the Iranian deli¬
cacy of detail and linear grace combined with the charac¬
teristic Indian palette of varied greens, glowing reds
and oranges.
Among the local artists at the royal court were masters
such as Mansur, Daswanth and Basawan, who illustrated
the Hamza Nameh, but most of their finest work was
produced in the shape of isolated miniature paintings for
albums, portrait drawings, paintings of animals and flowers,
hunting scenes and paintings depicting incidents of court
life. This was executed in a style which basically was
Safavid, but indigenous in most of its details.
During the reign of the Emperor Jahangir, the natura¬
listic tendency was predominant. It is evident in the careful
studies of animals, birds, flowers and trees executed
during this period, which rank among the most exquisite
examples of Moghul art.
It was during this period that Moghul art reached the
zenith of its glory. Whatever Persian influence had lingered
during the reign of Akbar, disappeared from the paintings
of Jahangir's time. Besides scenes from nature, of which
the Emperor was a keen lover, depiction of court life largely
constituted the thematic component of the paintings o)
this period, and the practice of elaborately decorating the
mounts of paintings came into vogue.
The style of Jahangir's period continued and was per¬
fected during the reign of the Emperor Shah Jahan, the
builder of the Taj Mahal. Technical perfection, uninhibited
yet judicious use of colours, and masterly brushwork are
the outstanding features of the paintings of this time. The-
matically, the court and its splendour along with portraits
in groups, of courtiers or dervishes, often dominate the
miniatures of Shah Jahan's time.
A new technique of portraiture, which originated during
Jahangir's reign and amounted to lightly touching a sketch
with colour or gold, came into its own during this period.
It attained nobility, representative character and refinement,
although it lacked, to some extent, the vitality of Akbar's
time and the keen interest in life shown by Jahangir's
painters.
It is a tribute to the vitality of Moghul art that even after
passing its zenith after the reign of the Emperor Shah Jahan,
which ended in 1658, it retained most of its greatness, so
far as technique was concerned, till the close of the reign
of Muhammad Shah in 1748.
During his reign and that of his predecessor, Farrukhsiyar
(1713-1718), painting again became a favourite art at court,
but the decline of the Moghul Empire saw artists turning
more and more to Nawabs and Rajahs, the local potentates
who had established independent or semi-independent
states of their own, in search of new patrons and security.
At their courts, the imitation of the Imperial Moghul style
flourished for nearly another century.
27
