This ordinary-looking wrist watch conceals
a tiny radio transmitter and telescopic
antenna (here extended fully). Such a
device can easily be used secretly to
pick up and transmit conversations. In
conjunction with an electronic robot
receiver, the transmitter could also serve
as a remote control switch to set a tape
recorder in motion. The growing micro¬
miniaturization of electronic equipment has
enormously Increased the danger of
eavesdropping with a host of devices.


3. The walls etc...
have electronic ears
'NE of the oldest among
the modern methods of auditory
surveillance is the wire-tap.
Such "direct taps" could take place
anywhere between the voice-piece of
the telephone and the main telephone
exchange. They interfered sometimes
with clear transmission, however, and
were subject to discovery by physical
inspection.
Describing the techniques of wire¬
tapping, in his book "Privacy and
Freedom" (New York, Atheneum,
1967), Alan F. Westin says that the
major innovation in wire-tapping
before 1941, and still the leading
technique, uses the induction coil.
By this technique an induction coil
is placed a few feet from the telephone
or near its various connecting wires
at any point before it is mixed with
other lines. This requires no cutting
or breaking into the telephone wires
or equipment. The coil, being in the
magnetic field carrying the voice
signal, draws off a very small amount
of that signal and carries it to a
receiver that permits the listening to
or recording of conversations.
In addition to their use as "planted"
devices, says Westin, induction coils
can also be uëed as portable devices
when kept in a pocket and wired to
a pocket recorder. In this way calls
have been tapped by investigators
sitting in waiting-rooms outside
business, law, and government offices,
from rooms adjoining those of hotel
guests, and even from the street
outside a building when a phone is
near the sidewalk.
Techniques are being developed in
several countries which make it
possible to identify persons speaking
on the telephone without reference to
the contents of the conversation.
Microphones may be used for
monitoring ordinary conversations,
not carried over telephone wires.
Some of these microphones require
external wire connexion to their source
of power, others work on internal
batteries. Some have to be introduced
into the premises where the conversa¬
tion takes place, others are able to
monitor from outside.
A simple microphone requires
positioning on the premises in ques-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

HUMAN RIGHTS AND THE THREAT TO PRIVACY (Continued)
8
tion, where it may be secretly left,
connected by wire to a loudspeaker
over which the conversations taking
place may be heard outside the
premises.
Micro-miniaturization has enabled
microphones to be reduced to the size
of a match-head. The transmission
range is from 300 feet to more than
a quarter of a mile. These tiny
mikes can be placed inside a
telephone, a flower-pot, a picture
frame or in any other object in the
room. A common practice is to tape
them to the underside of furniture.
No wires are required for the Fre¬
quency Modulation (FM) microphones
which have a built-in battery-operated
radio transmitter. They can give a
constant transmission for five days
with a 14 ounce battery.
Small devices exist which can be
worn on the person. For example,
magnetic microphones are on the
market weighing about 5 grammes,
which may be hidden behind the lapels
of a suit jacket. The diameter of the
mouthpiece, visible in the button¬
hole, measures 9 millimetres. It may
be connected to a pocket tape-
recorder or to a miniature transmitter.
This device and variations working on
the same general principle (such as
cuff-links and fountain pens containing
microphones are said to be widely
used.
'OME microphones do not
need to be placed inside the premises
in which the conversation takes place.
Directional microphones, for instance,
are able to pick up sounds from the
outside through any openings in a
room, such as open windows.
They may also be used to listen to
conversations held outdoors, for
example on park benches or in fields,
hundreds of feet away. Some direc¬
tional microphones are, moreover,
able to monitor sounds through closed
windows. They have a range of 40 to
50 metres.
Another type of microphone which
does not require trespassing on the
premises concerned is the contact-
microphone. This device, which may
be the size of a lima bean, can be
attached to the outside of the wall
of a room. When sound waves set up
by speech strike the wall, it picks up
enough of the vibration to permit
accurate recording.
Where the walls are too thick, a
variation on the contact-microphone,
a "spike-mike", may be used. The
vibrations in that case are transmitted
through "spikes" the size of a small
nail to contact-microphones and then
recorded.
Another instrument for recording
speech from a closed room is a device
that uses a reflector made of a thin
diaphragm and a microwave antenna.
The device is activated by a microwave
beam that goes through solid walls
and has a range of a city block. When
activated it sends the vibrations in the
room to an outside receiver and the
conversation is recorded.
"Micro-balles", i.e., microphone
bullets, may be shot at windows by
a special rifle, to catch sound of
speech from outside the window.
A technique exists for taking sound
out of rooms using laser microphones.
One such device is portable and sends
out an invisible infra-red beam, which
may travel for miles before reaching
the target room. The returning beam
having been modulated by the sound
waves in the room, a photo amplifier
at the listening post makes it possible
to transform the returning light into
sound.
Tape-recorders have been minia¬
turized and transistorized and are
capable of recording for several hours
without any need for changing the reel.
Some tape-recorders are self-activated
by sound and stop of themselves
when silence returns. Such devices,
may, for example, be built into
briefcases.
It has also been reported that a
dentist, while filling a tooth cavity,
may insert there a miniature micro¬
phone capable of transmitting every
word spoken by the person concerned
during the day, or a small transmitter
emitting a signal permitting an operator
in a distant room to follow closely the
person's movements all over a city;
and that miniature transmitters exist
which a person may swallow without
his knowledge.
Miniature transmitters may also be
placed inside a car, whence they emit
a signal which can be tracked by
portable receivers in other vehicles,
miles away.
Ordinary telephones may be trans¬
formed into transmitters by processes
requiring entry into the premises
concerned. One such telephone-
based transmitter, the "Harmonica
Bug", has been described by one
expert as follows:
"Once this is installed in the
telephone of the victim, the eaves¬
dropper, who can be anywhere, even
thousands of miles away provided
that he is on a direct dialing system,
merely dials the victim's number and
blows a predetermined musical note
on a harmonica. This note is picked
up by the device in the victim's
telephone, and prevents it from
ringing. At the same time it connects
the telephone microphone into the line
so that the eavesdropper can listen to
any conversations that are taking place
within earshot of the victim's
telephone."
The "internal telephone transmitter"
is a miniaturized transmitter that
resembles the microphone in the
mouthpiece of the telephone receiver,
for which it is substituted. It sends the
voice impulses created by the use
of the telephone to a transistorized FM
receiver, set at the device's transmis¬
sion frequency. The transmitter
receives its power from the telephone
line in question.
There exist small, unobtrusive
electronic devices to be worn or
implanted on one's person; these
devices emit signals permitting a
monitor located some distance away
to determine the wearer's location.
Existing technology is, moreover, able
to produce devices which can, in
addition, monitor such bodily reactions
as pulse rate and blood pressure as
well as the sounds in the wearer's
immediate surroundings, for example,
his conversations.
Another device for electronic sur¬
veillance permits a person within a
range of three or four city blocks to
learn whether a television set is
operating within a house and, if so,
to which channel it is tuned. Radar-
type equipment in a truck or nearby
building is able to pick up signals
known as horizontal oscillators, given
off by TV sets, compare them with
the particular signal produced for each
channel, and identify the one in use,
all within a fraction of a second. The
developers of this device, intended
for measuring television audience
choices, state that they are also able
to identify radio stations.

