The text below by the Director-General of
Unesco. René Maheu. has just appeared
in a limited edition monograph published
by the Polish National Commission for
Unesco, in co-operation with Unesco, on
the occasion of the ceremonies organized
in Paris on February 19, 1973. to mark the
500th anniversary of the birth of Copernicus.
The monograph, printed in 2,000 copies
on paper specially hand-made in Poland,
is not on sale. It contains the texts of the
addresses delivered at the Unesco-sponsored
ceremonies by René Maheu, Janusz
Groszkowski, Member of the Polish
Academy of Sciences, Olaf Pedersen,
Member of the International Union of the
History and Philosophy of Science, and
by Umberto Forth science historian.
Right, an illustration from the monograph,
the frontispiece to Galileo's Dialogus de
Systemate Mundi, showing, from left to
right, Aristotle, Ptolemy and Copernicus.
A NEW VISION
OF
THE UNIVERSE
by René Maheu
Director-General of Unesco
H
32
IISTORY affords few examples of scientific
discoveries that have had such profound reper¬
cussions on the spiritual development of mankind
as that of the great Polish astronomer Nicholas
Copernicus. Unlike later discoveries, such as those
of Ampère or Faraday, the replacement of the Ptole¬
maic model of the solar system by the Copernican
conception did not lead to any technological inno¬
vations. It did, however, bring about a veritable
intellectual revolution, which had a profound and
far-reaching effect upon man's conception of his
place in the universe and hence of the human condi¬
tion itself.
Man now realized that he was living on a planet
which was spinning through the immensity of a
universe whose dimensions were beyond his ima¬
gining; but at the same time he became convinced
that human thought was capable of grasping the
laws which govern that universe and of predicting
the motions of the heavenly bodies. Before he could
arrive at such a conviction, however, he had to
discard many preconceived ideas which had hardly
changed since the days of Aristotle, and to cease
regarding himself as the centre of the universe.
This liberating experience opened the way for
other discoveries which have gradually shaped our
present view of man's place and purpose in nature,
for it is through the realization of his own physical
insignificance in relation to the universe around him
that man has come to appreciate his true greatness,
which is spiritual.
Astronomers today have at their disposal instru¬
ments that are infinitely more powerful and accurate
than the simple armillary sphere and astrolabe with
which Copernicus and his contemporaries worked.
Giant radio-telescopes and spacecraft supply them
with information about phenomena previously beyond
their ken; but in the last analysis creative imagination,
stimulated by insatiable curiosity, remains the deci¬
sive factor In intellectual progress.
Thus, despite the five hundred years that separate
us from him, the force of his genius still keeps
Nicholas Copernicus close to us. In paying tribute
to him, we reaffirm our faith in man and In man's
constantly renewed ability to master, by the sheer
power of rational thought, a universe whose outlines
forever elude him and whose scale and complexity
offer an unending challenge to human intelligence.
