PAKISTAN
5,000 YEARS
OF ART
r & CULTURE
by Syed A. Naqvi
Photo Guy Thomas © J. Biltgen, Paris
4 Islamabad is the new capital of Pakistan, but for a short period before its construction, Rawalpindi nearby
had the honour of being Pakistan's interim capital. Located near the ruins of Taxila, it marks the site of the
Stone Age civilization of the Soan valley (see page 5). Photo shows delicately carved minarets and dome
of a mosque in Rawalpindi.

'ULTURAL relics of a coun¬
try are the virtual foundations for
advancement in corporate life. As
achievements acquired after prolonged
struggle with nature and environment,
they manifest the store of creative
intelligence, initiative, perseverance
and integrity that have gone into the
making of a particular national charac¬
ter.
Pakistan has been very fortunate in
this respect. Admittedly, this land has
been an important primeval stage for
the grand and grim drama of man's
first endeavour, his integral rise, his
phenomenal fall and the great resili¬
ence which kept the stream of human
life in action in spite of all obstructions
and intermittent lapses.
Rough and rugged implements un¬
earthed by the eroding current of the
river Soan near Rawalpindi carry the
saga of human toil and labour to the
interglacial ages roughly estimated at
500,000 years before our time. These
are stone "choppers" and "hand-axes"
which are hardly different from river-
rounded pebbles to the layman's eye.
They have revealed a written chapter
to the archaeologist proving that even
in so remote a period man had proved
his intellectual superiority over all
other beings of the jungle. Indomitable
and free, he roved through the thick
forests and hunted other animals for
food and perhaps even for sport.
But we have no other records to
link those interglacial anthropos to
their primate ancestors or to more
civilized progeny. It is in the mounds
of Baluchistan that a chink is opened
to the distant past.
The pieces of pottery excavated in
Baluchistan dislose the existence of a
new era. Here we find a more con¬
tinuous chapter of human activity
dating back to 5000 B.C. though still
in the Stone Age. Here, man is already
established both as herdsman and
farmer. He is found settled in villages
in the little valleys amongst the hills
or occasionally on the outskirts of the
plains. He is seen growing crops,
milking cows and shearing sheep.
Yet much more has to be explored
to reconstruct the true position of
Pakistan in this vital phase of growth
and experiment which culminated in
the great civilization of ancient Meso¬
potamia on one side and the Indus
Valley on the other.
Between the years 2500 and 1500
B.C., there flourished in the Indus plain
one of the most well-developed civi¬
lizations of the ancient Middle East.
SYED A. NAQVI, Internationally known
archaeologist and museologist, was General
Director of Pakistan's Department of Archaeo¬
logy and Museums until last July, when he
joined Unesco's Division for the Development
of the Cultural Heritage. Former head of the
National Museum of Pakistan, in Karachi, he
has excavated at many Pakistani sites Includ¬
ing Moenjodaro, Taxlla and Mansura. Among
his studies on archaeology and ancient art are
'The Muslim Art" (1966), "Gandhara Art"
(1967) and "1,400 Years of Quranic Calligra¬
phy" (1973).

Moenjodaro and Harappa, the two
important city sites of this civilization
exposed by the archaeologist's spade,
are the outstanding examples of
regimented life.
The wide, straight roads dividing and
sub-dividing the city in square blocks,
well planned houses and underground
system of drainage are still a model
to the present day town-planner. The
inhabitants lived largely by agriculture
but also maintained a trade with lands
as far away as Mesopotamia and
northern Afghanistan.
Of the early stages of this civi¬
lization, nothing was known till the
recent excavations at Kot Diji in Upper
Sind which provided important clues
to this question and also brought to
light remains of an earlier culture of
equally remarkable character, roughly
datable from 3000 to 2500 B.C. It
seems to have influenced different
aspects of life and culture of the Indus
people, though our information is still
very meagre.
By about 1500 B.C., the Indus Valley
Civilization, however, seems to have
disappeared under inexplicable con¬
ditions followed by a wide gap of
about one thousand years. The
excavated remains at Taxila and a
number of monasteries and stupas in
the north-west now bring us down to
the period of recorded history. It was
no longer an isolated culture.
Although separated by the lofty
Himalayas and the Hindu Kush ranges
from the neighbouring cities of central
Asia, Taxila still formed part of one
and the same Buddhistic civilization.
The first city of Taxila or Bhir Mound
as it is known, has preserved little to
show any notable advancement in art
and architecture (see "Unesco Cour¬
ier", October 1972).
The serene pool of this life was,
however, rudely disturbed by the
haughty and youthful Macedonian
intruder in 326 B.C. But this conquest
by Alexander proved a boon in
disguise. The pagan Greeks soon
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
5

Photo Turab All, Karachi, Pakistan
6
PAKISTAN (Continued)
found themselves subdued by the
superior religious logic of the Bud¬
dhists and employed all their art and
intelligence in creating a new Buddha
with beautiful Greco-Roman features
and an oriental halo. This mode of
sculpture, which has since come to be
known as Gandhara Art, marked an
escape from the conventional Indian
style.
In 711 A.D., at the time when the
Gothic Kingdom of Spain was captured
and when Kashghar was being con¬
quered by an Arab army, the provinces
of Sind and Multan were annexed to
the dominions of Islam. This first
impact of Islam on the life and culture
of this region is markedly manifest in
the excavated remains of Banbhore,
an Arab port near Karachi, and in the
early Islamic art and architecture of
Hyderabad, Multan, Rohri, Uch, Seh-
wan and Brahmanabad.
The culture which the Muslims
brought from Syria and Persia created,
with the fusion of local elements, a
tradition which was henceforth to
dominate the scene, and gradually
became identical with the art and
culture, thought and aspirations of the
sub-continent.
The political conquest of the land
was, however, left to the Turks who
came in the wake of the invasions of
Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni in the 11th
century A.D. But, with the exception of
very few specimens, most of the sur¬
viving relics of Islam may be attributed
Photo Dept. of Archaeology and Museums, Pakistan
Few sculptures in stone have been found at Moenjodaro. Above, two striking pieces now in
the National Museum of Pakistan, at Karachi. Left, a limestone head from the late period of Moen¬
jodaro (1500 B.C.). The hair is cut short and held in place with a net. Right, the famous
King-Priest, carved in steatite (about 2500 B.C.). The trefoil pattern on his tunic suggests his
priestly functions. From Mesopotamia to the Indus the trefoil was a religious symbol closely
linked with the cult of the stars.
to the Imperial Moghuls or their con¬
temporary local dynasties. The marked
absence of Muslim monuments prior
to the Moghuls is a strange phenom¬
enon and difficult to explain unless
it is supposed that the enhanced build¬
ing activity of the 16th and the later
centuries completely swept away
earlier and outmoded structures.
The existing monuments of this pre-
Moghul Sultanate period (1206-1526)
are grouped save a few tombs at
Thatta in Multan. The finest of them,
the tomb of saint Shah Rukn-i-Alam
(1320-24), has been described as "one
of the most splendid memorials ever
erected in honour of the dead". It is
octagonal in plan and the brickwork
is elaborately carved with a liberal
inter-mixture of azure and white glazed
tiles.
Architecturally, the tomb marks an
epoch in Indo-lslamic forms and antici¬
pates elements which went into the
making of a number of Moghul monu¬
ments during the following centuries.
The features which distinguish the
architecture of this period are a rugged
simplicity and massiveness showing
central Asian and Persian influence,
circular or polygonal forms, and
extensive use of local material.
The Moghul Empire of India was
established by Emperor Babur in 1526.
But it was Akbar the Great who laid
its real foundation. Born in 1542 at
Umarkot in Sind, he left before his
death in 1605 not only a large empire
and a dynamic social and economic
system, but also a distinct style of
art and architecture created by a
harmonious fusion of the parallel
strains of central Asian, Persian and
indigenous traditions. This Indo-lranian
Moghul style was further developed
and refined in the succeeding century
by his grandson Shah Jahan, the
Master Builder. Pakistan possesses
some of the finest creations of this
Golden Era.
Many buildings from the Moghul
period are to be seen in Thatta, the
ancient capital of Sind. Here, in the
old city lies Shah Jahan's Mosque,
a marvel in coloured tile work, while
countless mausoleums of princes,
ministers, governors and holy men
spread over an area of six square
miles on the nearby Makli Hill, the
biggest necropolis of the East.
With the advent of the Moghuls,
Lahore entered the front rank of Asian
cities with the construction of a series
of magnificent structures. Today, many
of the great relics of Moghul architec¬
tural achievements can still be seen
there including the fortified citadel
begun by Akbar and subsequently
enriched with dainty palaces by his
successors. Jahangir's mausoleum,
Noorjahan's tomb, the Shalamar
Gardens and Wazir Khan's Mosque
are some of the other outstanding
monuments which remind us of the
great role played by the Moghuls as
patrons of art and architecture.

5th century
peregrinations
of the
Chinese monk
Fa-Hsien
The Chinese Buddhist monk, Fa-
Hsien, is famous as one of the great
traveller-scholars of antiquity. At
the beginning of the 5th century
he undertook an extraordinary
pilgrimage, traversing thousands
of miles of desert, mountain and
jungle to follow in the footsteps
of the Buddha across the ancient
Indo-Pakistan sub-continent. For
15 years, from 399 to 414 A.D.. Fa-
Hsien travelled in search of all the
places visited by the Buddha, recor¬
ding every scrap of information
about him and describing festivals
held in his honour and the monu¬
ments erected to him. Below, a short
passage from Fa-Hsien's "Record
of Buddhistic Kingdoms" (trans¬
lated by J. Legge, Oxford, 1886) :
...Seven days Journey to the east
brought the travellers to the
kingdom of Takshasila, [Taxila]
which means "the severed head"
in the language of China. Here
when Buddha was a Bodhisattva,
he gave away his head to a man;
and from this circumstance the
kingdom got its name.
Going on further for two days to
the east, they came to the place
where the Bodhisattva threw down
his body to feed a starving tigress.
In these places also large topes
[shrines] have been built, both
adorned with layers of all the
precious substances. The kings,
ministers and peoples of the king¬
doms around vie with one another
in making offerings at them. The
trains of those who come to scatter
flowers and light lamps at them
never cease. The nations of those
quarters call those (and the other
two mentioned before) " the four
great topes "...
Right, detail of a statue of
a bodhisattva or future
Buddha. The folds of the
robe and the style of the
sandal are characteristic of
a form of Greco-Buddhist
art known as " Gandhara "
(4th and 3rd centuries
B.C.) which flourished in
an area around Peshawar
in north-west Pakistan.
VÍ
Photo Guy Thomas © J. Biltgen, Peshawar Museum, Pakistan
