Photo © Nina Smolarz, "Poland" Warsaw
Copernicus, Galileo
and Giordano Bruno
Three thinkers who dared to challenge
the powerful forces of tradition
by Vincenzo Cappelletti

I N his famous treatise
Metaphysics, Aristotle says that,
among the mathematical sciences,
astronomy is closest to philosophy
since it deals with the nature of the
stars, and these are eternal even
though perceptible to our senses. In
the order of things, as seen by Aris¬
totle, God was thought of thought
and Prime Mover of the eternal heav¬
ens.
The old, pre-Christian world shrank
from pursuing this line of philosoph¬
ical thought to its ultimate conclusion
which would have led to the separa¬
tion of God from nature. In some
way nature had to be cloaked in
divinity so that metaphysics and reli¬
gion could be reconciled with the
evidence of the senses.
VINCENZO CAPPELLETTI is professor of the
History of Science at the University of Rome.
Director-General of the "Enciclopedia Ita¬
liana", and director of the review "II Veltro",
he is author of many books on the history
of biology, physics and psychology. His
publications on these subjects Include 'Ente-
lechla" (1965), "Helmholtz" (1967), "S. Weil
- Su//a Scienza' (1971) and "Metapsicologia
di Freud" (1972).
Before Copernicus, metaphysics and
the phenomena experienced by the
senses were in agreement on one
point the earth was fixed in the cos¬
mos and it was the stars that moved.
They moved in a circular path, that
is to say with a movement in which
beginning and end were ever joined,
thus reproducing eternity in time.
The important thing for the Ancients,
in the platonists' famous phrase, was
"to preserve the phenomena" (to fit
observed facts into theory), and this
seemed a better way of "preserving"
them than any other.
On this point, in Galileo's Dialogue
of the Two Chief World Systems,
Simplicio makes an enlightening com¬
ment: "The Copernican doctrine means
denying the senses and above all the
sensations. This must be the case if,
though we are aware of the gentlest
breeze, we cannot feel the blast of
a perpetual wind reaching us at a
speed of over 2,559 miles an hour,
for this is the distance that the cen¬
tre of the earth covers in one hour
along the circumference of the great
orb, according to Copernicus' meticu¬
lous calculations."
To commemorate the
achievement of Copernicus,
the authorities of Torun, birth¬
place of the great astronomer,
organized a nationwide design
contest for a monument to be
raised in the town (see also
page 4). Here are two of the
30 or so projects expressing the
Copernican conception of the
solar system submitted by Polish
sculptors. Far left, "Dawn" by
Bronislaw Chromy; left,
"Nicholas Copernicus" by
Gustaw Zemla.
Many things seemed, and would
seem, more simple if the immobility
of the heavenly body on which man
lives were to be accepted. It was
not until Galileo and his intuition of-
the notion of mass that this assertion
could be disproved.
Aristotelian thinking had succeeded
in separating the destructible, imper¬
fect earth, from the indestructible
purity of the heavens in which it set
God the Mover of the world.
In spite of St. Paul and St. Augus¬
tine, early Christian thinkers found
themselves in the blind alley of natu¬
ralistic theology. The fathers of the
Syriac church formulated a literal
interpretation of Genesis (the crea¬
tion of the world in seven days) which
was in many respects at variance
with the Greek scientific tradition;
Cosmas Indicopleustes (a little-known
Greek thinker who visited India)
attempted to replace pagan topogra¬
phy and cosmology by "a Christian n-m
topography of the Universe". For Cos- //
mas, the earth was not in the centre
of the universe but at the lowest
point of the solar system; a rectan-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

COPERNICUS, GALILEO, BRUNO (Continued)
The sphere, the most perfect shape of all.
28
guiar plane covered by the vault of
the firmament.
The real interest in all this, how¬
ever, lies not in the mistake itself (a
mistake which was to cause Coper¬
nicus serious difficulties and bring
Galileo before his judges), but thev
criterion on which it was based that
science was subservient to religion
and metaphysics.
Copernicus himself believed in an
order, a perfection of the world which
had to be preserved. And it is in
this respect, in spite of the majestic
grandeur of his work which is due
to the unswerving rationality of his
system, that Copernicus still seems
to us to belong to antiquity. In the
dedication of De revolutionibus (On
the Revolutions) to Pope Paul III, he
maintains that in accepting the theory
of eccentrics and epicycles the cham¬
pions of geocentrism have compro¬
mised "the shape of the world and
the undoubted symmetry of its parts".
The first chapter of De revolutioni¬
bus opens with a further profession
of faith in the perfect structure of
nature: "We must first observe that
the world is spherical both because
this shape is the most perfect of all,
forming an unbroken totality, and
because this shape has the greatest
capacity and therefore is the most
suitable for that which is required
to embrace and conserve all things".
The central position of the earth
was finally accepted by the Chris¬
tians of the Middle Ages as it had
been by pagan antiquity. Aristotle
and the Bible, the Ptolemaic universe
and the universe revealed by the
Bible could both agree with Thomas
Aquinas that reason and revelation
were not self-contradictory.
Whether as God's pedestal, accord¬
ing to Cosmas Indicopleustes, the
part of the world opposite to the fir¬
mament-paradise, according to Hono-
rius d'Autun, or the seat of hell, as
Dante saw it, the earth was given
a precise position in the cosmos by
a Christianity as yet not fully aware
of the spiritual revolution brought
about by the Gospels.
In fact, naturalistic metaphysics had
deformed the facts of experience, or
rather it had glossed over the contra¬
dictory aspects of observation. In
its endeavour to reconcile the world
and God it had omitted to reconcile
the world with the mind, with human
thought. In a marvellous passage, in
De revolutionibus, Copernicus speaks
of "thought blown hither and thither".
The original purity of the system
of spheres all with the same centre,
conceived by the Greek mathemati¬
cian Eudoxus of Cnidus early in the
4th century B.C., had undergone gra¬
dual decay, interrupted by moments
of true inventive genius, to culminate
in the tardy synthesis of Claudius
Ptolemy's Almagest in the 2nd cen¬
tury A.D. Although the evidence of
the senses appeared to support the
cause of geocentric astronomy, it
also contained elements which provid¬
ed a basis for the formulation of
various other theories.
In Galileo's Dialogue, Simplicio
asks Salviati: "But from what do you
argue that it is not the earth but
the sun which is the centre of the
movements of the planets?" And
Salviati replies: "This is a matter of
observations which are wholly obvious
and therefore necessarily conclusive;
and of these observations, the most
telling, which allows us to remove
the earth from the centre and put
the sun in its place, is the fact that
all these planets are sometimes close
to the earth and sometimes farther
away. And these variations in dis¬
tance are so great that Venus, for
example, is six times farther away
from us when at her farthest point
than at her closest point, and that
Mars is eight times farther away. You
can clearly see that Aristotle was
somewhat mistaken in thinking that
these planets were always at the
same distance from the earth."
As well as the geocentric princi¬
ple, the ancient world had known the
heliocentric principle devised in the
first half of the 3rd century B.C. by
Aristarchus of Samos. Archimedes,
through whom we know of Aristachus'
heliocentric theory, put forward some
objections but was not unduly shock¬
ed by it.
Photo © Erich Müller, Kassel - from "City of the Stargazers"
by Kenneth Heuer, Charles Scribner's Sons, New York

Copernicus makes many referen¬
ces to the heliocentrism of the
ancients as if needing the hallowed
authority of the classical era as sup¬
port to his own revolutionary proposi¬
tions. In De revolutionibus he
demands the same "freedom to ima¬
gine" that Aristarchus and others had
allowed themselves in their explana¬
tions of astronomical phenomena.
And Copernicus allowed himself to
be carried away by the potency of the
solar symbol, stating that the sun
veritable light of the world was more
worthy than the earth to occupy the
centre of the universe. Thus he too
ended by referring to a divinified
concept of nature such as that which
had led the astronomy of antiquity
into a blind alley.
Yet Copernicus invoked the laws
of reason and not those of a divini¬
fied nature when building his magni¬
ficent theoretical construction, based
in part on original observation, but
mainly on already available data. In
Copernicus, faith in reason takes on
almost mystic overtones. He even
goes so far as to imagine a non¬
existent letter from a Pythagorean in
which truth is regarded as a religious
secret to be communicated only to the
privileged few.
Giordano Bruno in his writings,
forty years after De revolutionibus,
showed the fullest understanding of
the Copernican revolution. Coperni¬
cus had restored the dominion of
reason over the senses and opened
the path to the affirmation of the infi¬
nite and the freedom of thought of
modern man. In Aristotelian and
Ptolemaic astronomy Bruno saw a
codification of the universe based on
partial data supplied by that limited
tool of knowledge, the evidence of
the senses.
Reality grasped by thought and the
understanding is an infinite reality,
whereas that grasped by the senses
is always limited. Bruno brought out
the rationalist and platonist aspects
of Copernicus, the Copernicus who
could not accept thinking that was
"blown hither and thither", but who
based everything on reason, because
for him reason was the divine, the
absolute, the infinite. So bold was
this way of thinking that it had over¬
thrown a thousand-year-old scientific
tradition.
Thus Copernicus, the last fine
flower of the ancient era, was soon
to trigger off a new and historic phase
of human culture. Towards the end
of the 16th century the perennial dia¬
lectic of the finite and the infinite
saw the intuition of the infinite re-
emerge and win the day, thanks to
an astronomy which itself had not
yet dared to postulate the infinity
of the universe.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
^iw; y<.«*--h*| Ù, ,v*i u*- ».
is- e,
V-
t
v,lJV
t
ÜV
a.
E"
H U>J~H* M,**^"** "-»Hi«« I» »11,1,
PTOLEMY SCANS THE CIRCLING STARS. "I know that I am mortal and ephemeral, but when I scan the circling
spirals of the stars, no longer do I touch earth with my feet, but sit with Zeus himself..." wrote Claudius Ptolemy,
the 2nd century Graeco-Egyptian astronomer and mathematician. Left, a wooden figure of Ptolemy In Ulm Cathedral
(Fed. Rep. of Germany) carved by Jörg Syrlin, a famous 15th century German craftsman. Ptolemy holds an armillary
sphere (see pages 24-25). Above, the Letronne Papyrus, the oldest known illustrated Greek papyrus, inscribed with
texts on astronomy. Dating from the 2nd century B.C., it contains instructions about the celestial spheres based
on propositions by Eudoxus, a 4th century B.C. Greek scholar. Crudely drawn diagrams of the constellations
and the zodiac are interspersed with the text
29

COPERNICUS, GALILEO, BRUNO (Continued)
The Copernican world, it should be
stressed, was a finite world; the
world was finite, but not reality, since
reality was thought and thought went
beyond all boundaries, all specific
ideas or systems. One of the heret¬
ical propositions that sent Bruno to
the stake on February 17, 1600, con¬
cerned the plurality of worlds. Do
many worlds exist? Or are there many
notions of worlds which might exist?
Perhaps Copernicus had little inkl¬
ing of the dramatic developments that
would result from the repudiation of
the long-established compromise bet¬
ween the senses and reason embodi¬
ed in the Ptolemaic scheme of the uni¬
verse. At the time there were no
immediate repercussions. But later,
in an Italy disturbed and stripped of
its preconceived ideas by the Renais¬
sance, the argument about the infinite
exploded, involving not only the macro¬
cosm but also the human microcosm.
Bruno read Copernicus in literal
and metaphorical terms, just as others,
in the past had read Aristotle and
Genesis. Some interpretations were
erroneous. A theory of the dissolv¬
ing of the solid heavenly spheres
was attributed to Copernicus which
appears, to say the least, doubtful
to anyone reading De revolutionibus
with care. But what was authentic
was the re-affirmation of the infinite
in man's reason and the intuition of
a new path towards the absolute and
towards necessity.
When he died for refusing to recant,
Bruno bore witness to the anguish
that the problem of reality creates
in the minds of men, to the enduring
value of the Socratic plea to question
all things, and to human civilization's
need for the toleration denied it by
Calvin's Geneva and the Rome of
the Inquisition.
Bruno had come to understand that
finite and infinite could become merg¬
ed in the individual. The individual
is finite and limited because he is
not other individuals; but he is infi¬
nite and unlimited because he is
unconditionally himself. The wonder¬
ful precision and clarity of the Coper¬
nican scheme of things were given
new depth and transmuted into this
new dimension of human conscious¬
ness individuality.
Galileo was destined to become
the finest example of this individu¬
ality. What shines out from each of
his pages is the workings of a mind
whose thoughts become precise enun¬
ciations of things, postulates, theo¬
rems, problems. Each time, the limi¬
tations of "the experiences of the
senses" is transcended by the infin¬
ity of reason and converted into the
individuality of affirmation. And this
is why Galileo has for us the intense
fascination of the completely modern
man, the man for all seasons and of
all places.
The Copernicus brought back to
life by Galileo in his Dialogue is the
defender of logical evidence against
authoritarianism, verbalism, and the
surrender of human responsibility.
He is a figure of not only intellectual
but also moral virtue, with a clarity of
mind which is also a kind of courage,
the courage which enabled the new
science to develop its own fertility in
face of "the over-cautious and jea¬
lous protagonists of the immutability
of the heavens."
In short, as seen by Galileo, Coper¬
nicus the rationalist appears as the
father and guarantor of Copernicus
the cosmologist. The astounding,
sensational astronomical revelation
had been preceded by a subjective,
internal revelation. Emerging from
EUREKA ( It Is through the famous 3rd century B.C. mathematician and
inventor, Archimedes of Syracuse, that we have learned about the helio¬
centric theory of the universe advanced at that time by Aristarchus of
Samos. In his book, "Arenarius", Archimedes describes some of the ideas
held by Aristarchus. Below, this 16th century engraving illustrates Archi¬
medes' famous bath-night discovery of the principle of the displacement
of water. Overjoyed by his discovery, Archimedes is said to have leaped
from the bath shouting "Eurekal" ("I have found it"). Near the bath are
gold and silver vessels and a crown used by Archimedes for his experiment
the mind of the canon of Frombork
(Copernicus), it was transmitted to the
Dominican of Ñola (Bruno) to appear
again refined and intensified in the
thinking of the mathematician of the
Medici court (Galileo).
Whilst the ancient world had trans¬
cended its metaphysical naturalism
with the creation by its greatest
thinkers of a theory of knowledge, the
modern era saw Copernicus, Bruno
and Galileo united in an effort to
establish a concept of existence that
would be open to the requirement of
infinity.
Individuality and the individual were
their goal individuality as the reco¬
gnizable origin of everything. Coper¬
nicus' recurrent fears about the conse¬
quences of his own theories, the
stake at which Bruno died, and the
trial of Galileo bear witness to the
liberating power of this revolution
born of man, projected into the hea¬
vens and then embodied in the theory
of existence itself.
Sterile scientific tradition, false
philosophical reasoning, and religious
idolatry may succeed in imposing
themselves by force, but they will
always be condemned by the judgment
of history and the example given by
"the innovators" to succeeding
generations.
