Like some horrific, mythical monster rising from
the sea, this infra-red photograph shows atmo¬
spheric pertubations over a huge area of the Atlan¬
tic. The photo was taken from a height of 800 kilo¬
metres by the weather satellite Nimbus II. Study of
the general circulation of the atmosphere under the
Global Atmospheric Research Programme of the
World Meteorological Organization promises to
result in much more reliable long-range weather
forecasting.


LONG-RANGE
FORECASTING
OF DROUGHT
AND FLOODS
Is there any chance that
present forecasts can
be extended beyond a month?
48
by Jerome Namias
JEROME NAMIAS, Research Meteorologist
at Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La
lolla, California, is one of America's leading
weather scientists. He has received many
awards for his research in meteorology, and
he is widely known for the system he devel¬
oped of up-to-one-month weather forecasting.
I
N this era of rapid commu¬
nication everyone is quickly informed
about meteorological disasters such
as floods, droughts, tropical cyclones
and tornadoes. Some disasters, such
as cyclones and tornadoes, are pre¬
dictable over a time span of a day
or so, so that precautions can save
life and property.
Other natural phenomena are more
insidious. Drought, for example, de¬
velops over months, seasons, and
sometimes years and causes even
greater human suffering through fam¬
ine and economic dislocations. Are
these insidious long-term disasters
predictable? If not, what is the hope
that they ever will be?
We are all aware of the ravages of
natural events of the recent past the
devastating Russian drought of 1972;
current drought in sub-Saharan coun¬
tries, especially Mali, Mauritania and
the Upper Volta, which seems to have
persisted and become aggravated in
the last few years; the occasional
seasonal droughts in parts of India
and Australia and the "Seca" or"
drought which occurs in some years
in northeast Brazil.
On the wet side, we have the
eastern U.S.A. floods in June, 1972,
associated, in part, with hurricane
Agnes the most costly storm in U.S.
history, and we remember the 1966
tragic flood of Florence. These are

but a sample of spectacular events
from the climatological record.
From time immemorial there have
been occasions when nature "goes on
a rampage" and makes it appear that
the climate is changing. Why does
nature do this? Unfortunately man
does not yet fully understand the
causes of these events, and therefore
he is unable to predict them reliably.
Yet meteorologists and climatolo-
gists have made great strides in study¬
ing them over the past few decades.
The World Weather Watch (WWW)
programme of the World Meteorologi¬
cal Organization (WMO) and comple¬
mentary (WMO - International Council
of Scientific Unions) Global Atmos¬
pheric Research Programme (GARP)
promises to bring much greater under¬
standing and perhaps reliable long-
range weather prediction (see articles
pages 4 and 21).
At present scientifically-based long-
range predictions are limited to a
month or, at most, to a season in
advance. These are general in nature
and mainly attempt to predict whether
precipitation over broad areas will be
above, below or near the long period
average (normal) and whether these
areas will have subnormal, normal or
above normal temperatures.
The methods used are, for the most
part, not precise enough to indicate
the beginning or ending of great
droughts, which span more than one
season and may last for years. Nei¬
ther are the methods precise enough
to forecast the record-breaking per¬
sistent rains which lead to floods.
Let us examine some of the known
factors associated with drought, for
this may give some idea of the com¬
plexity of long-term atmospheric be¬
haviour. The immediate cause of
drought is sinking motions of air mas¬
ses. These descending air motions, of
the order of a few hundred metres a
day, result in compressional warming
of the air since it is subjected to
increasing pressure in descent. This is
analogous to the heating of a bicycle
pump in use.
While the absolute quantity of
water vapour in an air parcel remains
unchanged in descent, the relative
humidity decreases because the capa¬
city for holding moisture has been
increased in the warmed air. In this
manner cloud formation is inhibited
or if clouds are formed, they are soon
dissipated.
The areas over which such sinking
air motion (called subsidence) prevails
may involve 5,000,000 square kilo¬
metres or an area as great as western
Europe. With ascent of air, cooling
leads to increase in relative humidity,
cloud and eventually precipitation.
The atmospheric circulations which
lead to this subsidence or ascent (the
"centres of action"), are linked to
horizontal wave patterns in the west
to east flow that prevails in temperate
latitudes. These wave patterns are
clearest at levéis between 3 and 15
km. above the earth.
Thus the westerly winds aloft are
usualJy contorted in the form of pole¬
ward or equatorward bulges (ridges
or troughs, respectively) great me¬
anders resembling the sine waves of
trigonometry. There may be five or six
such waves in a hemisphere at one
time. The sinking motion takes place
mainly in the ridges and the air
ascends in the troughs.
These planetary features can be
observed, of course, on any one day's
weather map, but they, also appear
even when maps are averaged over
a month, a season, and even a year
or period of years. The reason is
that a series of persistently recurrent
atmospheric systems, often of an ab¬
normal type, can dominate a specific
area. If these systems are ridges,
then the stage is set for persistent
subsidence of air masses, dryness
and drought; if troughs persist, the
stage is set for ascent of air, cloud
and rain.
The placement of these statistically
averaged troughs and ridges is not
chaotic; they are frequently arranged
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
49

Mystery
air currents
of the
upper
atmosphere
Photo <D Vincent Schaefer, New York
In the upper reaches of the troposphere,
several miles above sea level, narrow
currents of fast-moving air flow in irregular,
meandering paths in an easterly direction
around the globe. The presence of these
currents was suspected early in this cen¬
tury, but it was the advent of high-flying
aircraft in the 1940s that confirmed the
existence of "jet streams" as these currents
are called. The strongest of these streams
occur in the middle latitudes. Over the
southern hemisphere they almost always
blow from dde west In the northern hemi¬
sphere the disturbing influence of the conti¬
nents causes some deviation and at times
they blow from west south-west over the
Atlantic and Pacific oceans and from the
west north-west over the continents of
North America, Europe and Asia. Above,
diagram of a jet stream encircling the nor¬
thern hemisphere. A jet stream generally
reaches its maximum speed at heights of
LONG-RANGE FORECASTING (Continued)
50
in patterns suggestive of a vast tele-
connective mechanism. In other
words, the position of one prevailing
ridge in the westerlies usually implies
troughs on either side and frequently
other ridges beyond these troughs.
This interrelationship is reasonably
well understood by meteorologists
both through theory and through em¬
piricism. But what factors cause one
or mere of the ridges or troughs? A
solution to this question would be a
major advance.
The present quest for reliable long-
range forecasting seems to narrow
down to two major possibilities, both
external to the atmosphere:
The abnormal waves in the west¬
erlies are in some unknown way gener¬
ated and maintained by extraterrestrial
events such as variations in solar
activity;
They are generated and main¬
tained by variations in the character
of the underlying earth's surface.
The latter possibility refers to chang¬
es in the amount of snow and ice,
mainly on the continents, and also to
the variable temperatures of the sur¬
face layers of the oceans. Both of
these surface features change much
more slowly than the restless over¬
lying atmosphere and thereby might
provide a "memory" so that persis¬
tently anomalous wind and weather
patterns are periodically restored.
Today's meteorologists are more apt
to espouse the second rather than
the first (extraterrestrial) hypothesis.
Many feel that we must first study,
as completely as possible, the terres¬
trial air-sea-land system before intro¬
ducing abnormal solar influences.
Of course, there exists another pos
sibility, which hopefully is not a prob¬
ability namely that the planetary
atmospheric wind systems are at the
whim of very small and immeasurable
forces so that chance alone deter¬
mines what form the atmosphere will
assume in the next month or next
season. Fortunately, meteorologists
have reason to believe that nature is
not playing dice with them.
In addition to the waves in the
upper westerlies, there are variations
in the latitudinal positions of these air
streams. Thus in some winters the
central core of the westerlies may be
10° to 15° of latitude farther south
than in others, so that storms prevail
in the sub-tropics while higher lati¬
tudes remain relatively storm free.
Such variations appear to be asso¬
ciated with big weather variations in
the tropics and even with hemispheric

9,000 to 12,000 metres- It usually blows
at about 190 km/h., but may attain speeds
of up to 500 km/h. Several distinct
currents of wind flow at differing speeds
along the axis of a jet stream with the
higher speeds occurring at the core of the
stream (see diagram right). The difference
in wind speeds along the axis of a jet
stream may be as much as 160 km/h. or
more. Occasionally a jet stream divides
into two main belts of very strong winds
a considerable distance apart. Jet streams
are of very great importance to aviation.
Modern aircraft often make use of these
powerful air currents. By "hitching-a lift"
in a jet stream an airliner can cut a long¬
distance flight time by nearly half with a
great saving in fuel. In weather forecast¬
ing jet streams are important because
certain types of storm occur most often
just beneath them. Left, high-flying cirrus
clouds being swept along in a jet stream.
a, i 7 / v -^-s*
>!' --: -z
Fe
*G**J&SÍK
inter-actions between northern and
southern hemispheres. One of the
ideas to emerge during the past few
years is that the tropical atmosphere
is forced into abnormal behaviour by
variations in the underlying ocean
temperatures along the equator, and
that these variations, by complex
transports, mould the patterns of the
westerlies in mid-latitudes.
There is also some evidence to indi¬
cate that the tropical systems, includ¬
ing the ocean temperatures along the
equator, are frequently forced by
events in the middle and sub-tropical
latitudes. Most probably there are
interactions and "feedbacks" both
ways.
Thus the question of which comes
first, like the "chicken or the egg",
may not get a satisfactory answer.
But this need not stop progress in
long-range forecasting a subject re¬
plete with complexly coupled systems
of many kinds.
To return to some of the anomalous
weather events cited at the beginning
of the article, we find some evidence
for the following connexions: The Rus¬
sian drought of '1972 was associated
with a persistent and strong ridge aloft
in both summer and the antecedent
winter a ridge which may have been
initially engendered by a strong trough
affecting the British Isles, a strong ridge
in mid-Atlantic, and by anomalous sea
surface temperature patterns over the
North Atlantic (cold in the north, warm
in the south).
The sub-Saharan drought seems to
have been associated with a failure of
the intertropical convergence zone (the
tropical mechanism for lifting large
quantities of air) to move northward
in the rainy seasons this failure may
have been due to wind systems in tem¬
perate latitudes or elsewhere.
The Eastern U.S.A. floods associated
with hurricane Agnes, and perhaps the
wet soil left from preceding storms,
appears to have occurred in a vul¬
nerable trough area separating two
ridges the strongest of which lay in
mid-Atlantic.
This ridge was probably related to
the one immediately responsible for the
Russian summer drought.
The above conclusions are by no
means borne out by physical calcula¬
tions, but a world-wide effort by GARP
and WWW may result in development
of mathematical-physical models using r\
billions of observations and high-speed Jl I
computers to unravel the secrets of
what is probably the world's second
most difficult problem.
