10
5. Lawless frontiers
of modern
technology
for recreational purposes. Directional
microphones, for example, are used in
connexion with public television
broadcasts Certain kinds of contact
microphones have been advertized as
super-stethoscopes capable of tracking
termites or detecting stress irregula¬
rities in metal structures.
I ANY devices for auditory
and visual surveillance have harmless
or even beneficial uses in a variety of
fields, including medicine, education,
crime prevention and law enforcement.
Small, portable tape recorders are
in common use in business as dic¬
tating machines as well as being used

Closed-circuit television is being
used, among many other purposes, to
relay lectures to additional class¬
rooms; to survey stores with high
shoplifting records and to guard
warehouses at night; or to help protect
tenants in apartment house lobbies
and elevators and riders on subways
from assaults and robberies.
Some techniques have been found
to be of great use in the field of medi¬
cine. Thus the principle of the "optical
fibre", which makes it possible to
transmit images along bent and curved
paths, may be applied for use in sur¬
gery. The modern nursing technique
of "intensive care" is dependent on
electronic systems of remote sur¬
veillance and the recording of vital
processes.
Closed-circuit television is also an
important tool in certain radiological
techniques and in the education of
members of health teams. The obser¬
vation of mentally disordered patients
is facilitated by the use of polaroid
glass windows in wards or recreation
rooms. It has been stressed that when
applied in the health and medical fields
these techniques and devices have as
their objective the good of the indivi¬
dual and that any invasion of his pri¬
vacy is an incidental by-product.
It has also been pointed out that
criminals have at their disposal the
products of modern science and
technology, including the moden media
of rapid communication and trans¬
portation, which enable them to plan
and carry out their schemes more
swiftly, over larger areas and less
conspicuously than previously; and
that, correspondingly, the law-enforce¬
ment agencies also need to avail
themselves of modern techniques to
be able to fight crime. Surveillance
devices are known to be used in the
interests of national security.
Despite the harmless and beneficial
uses which exist for modern methods
of surveillance, such methods ob¬
viously can be used equally well in
ways which threaten, or create
problems for, the privacy of the indi¬
vidual Many of the new surveillance
devices are relatively low in price,
easy to obtain or to put together from
components, simple to install or use,
cheap to operate or hard to detect, or
may combine various of these charac¬
teristics.
It appears that not only govern¬
ments but also private individuals are
availing themselves of the new sur¬
veillance technology to an increasing
extent and in a variety of contexts.
In "The Problem of Privacy in the
Year 2000" (Daedalus, Journal of the
American Academy of Arts and Scien¬
ces, Summer 1967), Harry Kalven, Jr.,
points out in this connexion that :
"Soon intrusions will not be limited
to government measures in aid of law
enforcement or national security. The
technology may become a common¬
place in the hands of private parties
employers interested in the off-
hours activities of employees, com¬
petitors interested in one another's
integrity and trade secrets, estranged
spouses interested in perfecting
grounds for divorce, insurance com¬
panies interested in the subsequent
health of personal injury claimants
they have paid, and the idly curious
who are just interested."
Examples exist of traditional situa¬
tions in which traditional methods of
supervision or surveillance by persons
are even now being replaced at times
by technical devices. Such methods
include the surveillance by means of
microphones or closed-circuit televi¬
sion of students and teachers in class¬
rooms, and of employees in places of
work, such as factories and stores.
The resulting transmissions may or
may not be recorded on tape. They
make it possible, depending on the
technique chosen, to monitor and to
record every gesture, facial expression
or remark, every minor lapse or every 4
confidential exchange of views bet- | |
ween friends, however brief.
Concern has been expressed as to
CONTINUED PAGE 32

Lawless frontiers (Continued from page 1 1)
the use, for purposes other than
accident or incident investigation, of
flight data recorders, and particularly
of cockpit voice recorders, which
cover all of a pilot's conversations
during a given flight. The International
Labour Organization has drawn atten¬
tion to certain aspects of this problem
as it affects freedom of association,
more particularly trade union rights,
and the personal freedom of the
individual.
In addition to the substitution of
modern techniques such as wire-taps,
secret microphones, transmitters and
cameras for more traditional methods
of supervision and surveillance, the
new technology makes possible en¬
tirely new approaches to surveillance.
It has been suggested, for instance,
that small sensing devices which may
monitor the location of and such other
facts about the wearer as his pulse
rate and the sounds in his immediate
surroundings, be worn by or implanted
on prisoners released on parole. This
would have the advantage not only of
disclosing immediately any violation
of some conditions of parole but also,
presumably, of inhibiting such vio¬
lations, thus making possible a more
widespread use of release on parole.
On the other hand, any utilization
of such devices for parole purposes
is being objected to on the grounds
that it would involve a total and
degrading deprivation ' of privacy,
beyond even conditions existing in the
average prison, which would make it
impossible for the parolee to establish
normal relations of love, friendship
and trust required for successful social
reintegration and would, moreover,
destroy the element of trust implicit
in the very concept of parole.
32
HE rapidly developing pro¬
ducts of a new technology are to some
extent being utilized in a legal vacuum,
since legal safeguards which evolved
at a time when such devices did not
exist may not cover them or may be
insufficient or inapplicable.
Thus, for example, telecommunica¬
tions legislation adopted in the 1930s
may be drafted in such a way as to
punish technical wire-taps but not
extend to the monitoring of telephone
conversations by other methods, such
as induction coils or miniature micro¬
phones.
Modern devices have also created
a new situation as regards the
remedies available to the person
whose privacy has been arbitrarily
invaded. Thus legal provisions
relating to trepass or unauthorized
entry of premises may be couched in
such language as to be inapplicable
in situations where the surveillance
device, though monitoring what is
happening inside the premises, is
installed on the outside.
In other cases the provisions, theor¬
etically applicable, may be so difficult
to enforce as to provide little or no
protection, as, for instance, where
hard-to-detect surveillance devices are
placed on the premises by persons
obtaining legal entry on false pretences
(for example, by a person pretending
to be a repairman or an employee of
a gas company).
The linking of computers to modern
surveillance devices is considered by
some as presenting "perhaps the most
significant threat to personal free¬
dom". An example given by one
expert, relating to telephonic communi¬
cations, describes such a combina¬
tion as follows:
"One of the simplest contemporary
snooping devices is the pen register,
which, when attached to a telephone
line, records a series of dashes
representing the number dialed from a
particular telephone. This snooping
capability could be magnified if the
information drawn in by the pen
register were automatically fed into a
central computer for analysis. Wide¬
spread use of this technique would
quickly reveal patterns of acquaintan¬
ces and dealings among a substantial
group of people."
The expert points out, however, that
such monitoring will soon be possible
without a pen register: "When tele¬
phone communications are completely
converted to digital transmission, it will
be easy to prepare a ready-made
machine-readable record of calls made
from other telephones to establish an
individual's or a group's associations."
Conflicts arise between the right
to privacy and the freedom to "seek,
receive and impart information and
ideas through any media and regard¬
less of frontiers" (Article 19 of the
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights).
This problem is not new and, in
fact, intrusions by the press have
previously given rise to many court
rulings concerning privacy. It has
been made more acute, however, by
the utilization on the part of the press
of new devices that facilitate clan¬
destine photography and the secret
recording of conversations.
Discussions of conflicts between
individual privacy and the freedom of
the press often revolve about the
question of what situations are to be
considered private or public, and of
whether legal remedies should be
available only where the material thus
published is defamatory or also where,
though not defamatory, it constitutes
an unwarranted intrusion upon a per¬
son's privacy.
Many studies concerning improved
protection of privacy stress that one
important factor is popular awareness
of the need to protect privacy, of the
means used to invade it and of mea¬
sures required to protect it.
Emphasis is also placed on the
existence of countermeasures to detect
or counteract the presence of sur¬
veillance devices. These include,
among others, searches of premises
for hidden devices; metal-locating
instruments; radio frequency probes;
the use of "scrambling" devices to
prevent eavesdropping on or tapping
of telephone or radio messages; and
lowering window shades to prevent
infra-red photography from outside.
expert suggests that
the easiest way of locating a trans¬
mitter microphone:
"is to have a radio receiver loud¬
speaker often a cheap FM transistor
radio receiver will do and tune this
receiver through its full range, making
sure that there is enough noise,
perhaps by whistling, to activate the
hidden microphone. The gain on the
transistor receiver should be set at
full volume. When the. receiver is
tuned to the frequency of the micro¬
phone radio transmitter any noise in
the room is likely to be picked up by
the microphone and transmitted to the
receiver which radiates it again from
its loudspeaker, and this feeds sound
energy back to the microphone.
"The result of this interaction is
usually a loud whistle or scream from
the transistor set, and by turning the
gain down until the scream stops and
then moving the transistor set until it
starts again, one can finally track down
the site of the microphone... The
system has the objection that the
generation of the squeal is a sure
indication to the eavesdropper that his
victim has awakened to the threat."
Television surveillance using an
infra-red sensitive eye for obtaining
pictures in an apparently dark room
could, it has been explained, be detect¬
ed by an infra-red photocell, rather
like those carried by military vehicles
and personnel to warn them when they
are coming under infra-red surveil¬
lance. But with the longer-wave infra¬
red devices, which work by the heat
radiated by bodies themselves, and
which are therefore "passive" such
a method of warning does not work.
While technical inventiveness can
make it possible to take counter-
measures, it can equally provide new
techniques to overcome counter-
measures, and so on ad infinitum.
