ONLY
ONE EARTH
Study of the biosphere has led us to take a new
look at the interaction of man with his planet. Right,
"The False Mirror", by the Belgian surrealist artist
René Magritte (1928). "We are", says Barbara
Ward, "the generation to see through the eyes of
the astronauts the astonishing 'earthrise' of our
small and beautiful planet above the barren hori¬
zons of the moon".
by Barbara Ward
Text © Copyright- Reproduction prohibited
I
cannot help wondering
whether we may not be present at
one of those turning points in man's
affairs when the human race begins
to see itself and its concerns from a
new angle of vision and, as a result,
finds new openings for action, for
courage and for hope.
I cannot help wondering whether
today's debates on the human environ¬
ment, in their passion, scale and ori¬
ginality, do not resemble the profound
questionings of the accepted order
which erupt into human history in
times of radical change.
One thinks of the intellectual ferment
which, over two millenia ago, accom¬
panied the end of China's feudal wars
and the establishment of the first
great centralized Han dynasty. In
more recent history men had almost
to stand on their heads to realize
that the sun did not go round the
earth, but the reverse. This "Coperni-
can Revolution" is the archetype of
fundamental change by which men
learn to rethink, totally, their place in
the scheme of things.
Our own epoch is, I believe, such an
age again. We belong to the genera-
BARBARA WARD (Lady Jackson), well-known
British economist and writer, Is co-author
(with René Dubos) of 'Only One Earth',
written specially for the U.N. Conference on
the Human Environment (details page 33). Her
other books Include "The Rich Nations and
the Poor Nations" (1962), "Spaceship Earth'
(1966), and "An Urban Planet" (1971). Bar¬
bara Ward is at present Schweitzer Profes¬
sor of International Economic Development
at Columbia University, in New York. The
full text of the article presented here will
shortly be published by W.W. Norton (New
York) In a collection of papers of the Dis¬
tinguished Lecture Series at Stockholm, 1972,
sponsored by the International Institute of
Environmental Affairs and the Population
Institute.
tidn that has used radio telescopes
to uncover 100,000 million other
galaxies each with 100,000 million
other suns. We belong to the genera¬
tion that has brought nuclear energy
to earth, made possible by computers
the simulation, acceleration and for¬
ward projection of infinitely complicat¬
ed human activities and provided us
with instantaneous worldwide and
interplanetary visible and audible
communication.
Above all, we are the generation to
see through the eyes of the astronauts
the astonishing "earthrise" of our
small and beautiful planet above the
barren horizons of the moon. Indeed,
we in this generation would be some
kind of psychological monstrosity if
this were not an age of Intense, pas¬
sionate, committed debate and search.
So vast is the scale of change
through which we live that there must
be an equally vast range of competitors
for first place as agents of upheaval.
I wish to suggest three areas in which
the concepts that are being virtually
forced upon us offer a startling break
from past patterns of thought and
accepted wisdom.
The first is the possibility of
making the planet unfit for life.
Hitherto, people have known that they
could do local damage. They could
farm carelessly and lose top soil or
deforest or overgraze or mine out a
mineral. They also contrived to live
through major natural disasters
earthquakes, tornadoes, ice ages. But
nobody thought that the planet itself
could be at risk.
Today our experts know something
new. They know that air, soil and
water form a totally interdependent
worldwide system or biosphere sus¬
taining all life, transmitting all energy
and in spite of its rugged powers of
survival, full or inmensely delicate and
vulnerable mechanisms, leaves, bac¬
teria, plankton, catalysts, levels of
dissolved oxygen, thermal balances
which alone permit the sun's searing
energies to be transmuted and life to
carry on.
Our experts also tell us what we do
not know. Given our suddenly and
vastly increasing numbers, our enor¬
mous rise in the use of energy,
including nuclear energy, and our
fabulous mastery of molecular chem¬
istry, we impinge on the fine balances
and mechanisms of the total system
in ways and with consequences that
we too often are in no position to
judge.
Let me give one example. Our
traditional vision of the oceans is
boundless. It is inconceivable to our
imagination that we should perma¬
nently damage this infinity of water.
But we have no idea of its capacity
to absorb as it ultimately must
virtually all the planet's wastes.
In the last two or three decades,
to give only one instance, a high
percentage of the long-lived chlori¬
nated hydrocarbons including DDT
appear to have been absorbed into
natural "sinks" in the biosphere.
Recent sample-taking suggests an
unexpectedly high dosage appearing
in the oceans.
Does this mean that natural storage
systems are filling up? Will further
effluents reinforce irreversible damage
to marine species known to be suscep¬
tible to such substances as DDT?
Is this part of a deeper risk of
deterioration from a steadily widening
range of chemical wastes? We do
not know.
Rivers and lakes teach us that there
are limits to water's self-cleansing

Photo © The Museum of Modern Art, New York
properties. Ultimately the oceans are
one vast cistern with no outlet. This
image is a safer one, perhaps, than
that of infinite and "moving waters at
their priest-like task of pure ablution
round earth's human shores."
And it underlines the need for world¬
wide monitoring and research to ensure
that over the next forty years of still
continuing growth in people, indus¬
trialization, consumption and inter¬
continental transport we do not, unwit¬
tingly, take the oceans themselves
past some still unmeasured threshold
of "no-return".
This concept of newly understood
limits is relevant to the second
reversal of earlier concepts whose
implications I would judge to be most
revolutionary for the present age. For
over a century now and with Increasing
enthusiasm in the last 25 years, we
have seen in economic growth, mea¬
sured by the satisfaction of both
ordinary and induced material needs,
a prime aim of national policy and
a powerful solvent of social conflict.
Inside the nation, as output and
incomes rise, the flow of goods will
be great enough to reward effort and
enterprise and provide on an upward
scale for the needs of the mass of
the people. In the world economy,
international trade and investment will
pull the developing peoples up in the
wake of the already developed nations.
This is a sort of "follow-my-leader"
concept of economic satisfactions
according to which, over the next fifty
years, per capita incomes all round
the world rise to meet, say, America's
present annual average of $4,000 or,
to use a concrete measurement, a
million calories and thirteen tons of
coal equivalent in energy. At the
same time developed standards would
rise to perhaps $10,000 or $15,000 per
capita with a two-home, three-car,
four-TV-set norm in the upper income
brackets.
But this implicit assumption of
unending expansion has two self-
reinforcing flaws. Even within the
wealthiest states, even with all the
transfers of resources from richer to
poorer citizens secured by tax and
welfare and social insurance, "trickle
down" economics do not ensure the
ending of poverty at the base of
society. The lowest twenty per cent
can have as little as five per cent of
national income, the top twenty per
cent as much as forty.
In the world at large, where no
systematic social transfers occur, the
richer states are pulling away from
the less developed ones. Even if
$10,000 a year per capita is a rea
sonable likelihood for developed
societies by the year 2000, for two
thirds of mankind, $400 a year looks
like being the utmost reach of
optimism. For perhaps a third, mal¬
nutrition, illiteracy, shanty-town dwel¬
ling and unemployment In other
words, the worst of all human environ¬
ments could be the most likely fate.
But now we must add another
constraint. Even if we assume unlimit¬
ed resources with which to develop,
development is, as we have seen,
grossly uneven. But suppose there
are indeed strict physical "limits to
growth"? Suppose that these delicate
mechanisms and balances in the
biosphere that make life possible
cannot sustain 10,000 million people
all aiming to produce and consume and
discard and pollute according to pre¬
sent developed standards?
Here, admittedly, the range of debate
is very wide. Some experts believe
that 20,000 million people can live at
America's present standards simply on
the products of atomic energy, water
and the minerals in common rock.
Others postulate irretrievable damage
in terms of exhausted resources, ther- rt
mal pollution, and environmental dis- H
ruption if even half that number secure
the current standards of the rich. We
are at the beginning of this debate.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

ONLY ONE EARTH (Continued)
10
But one point is surely clear. There
are limits. The biosphere is not infin¬
ite. Populations must become stable.
So must the demands they make.
But in that case, whose upward
aspirations must first be checked?
Given finite resources, we cannot
evade this basic social issue. Where
are the restraints to be put? What
is to be reduced, the luxuries of the
rich or the necessities of the poor?
What are the priorities a decent hu¬
man environment for the whole human
species or riches for some and squalor
for the majority?
We can slide over this fundamental
issue of environmental quality only if
"trickle down" economics work within
a context of unlimited resources.
Neither assumption is correct. So, as
nations, as a planet, we are compel¬
led to confront the fundamental Issues
of choice and justice.
But at this point we encounter
a third basic challenge to our habits
of thinking. Our effective instruments of
judgment, decision and action are
separate governments. The nations
give our planet its colour, its variety,
its richness of life and experience.
For those to whom full nationhood has
come only in the last quarter of a cen¬
tury, it expresses the essence of their
being and their hopes.
None of this can be doubted. Yet
it is also true that the cumulative effect
of the separate actions of separate
sovereign governments can, over time,
injure the basic national needs of all
of them.
If our airs and oceans can stand
only so much strain before they lose
their capacity for self-purification, it
will help no government to say that
others were responsible. The most
flagrant case is clearly the risk of
nuclear conflict and planetary nuclear
pollution. We may rejoice that a num¬
ber of intergovernmental agreements
now limit atomic testing in the air, keep
nuclear weapons from the seabed,
Outer Space and Antarctica.
But we could collectively pollute the
planet not "with a bang but a whim¬
per" by the small, steady accumu¬
lation of long-lasting poisons and pes¬
ticides, of chemicals and tailings, of
eroded soil and detritus and reach,
almost inadvertently, a creeping plan¬
etary disaster to which all have separ¬
ately made their cumulative contri¬
bution. No single nation can avert
this risk as numbers and activities rise.
Its control will be achieved by nations
acting together or not at all.
And this raises by another route
the issue of planetary justice which
equally cannot be solved by nations
acting alone. How do we ensure that
the need to check pollution does not
become an inhibition on the desperate
need of two thirds of humanity for
development? This is an area about
which we do not know too much.
It is certainly not clear that all non-
pollutive technologies are more expen¬
sive. It is also possible that in opting
straight away for pollution control,
developing states could take full
advantage of the greatest asset of late
comers to learn from other people's
mistakes. Equally it is possible that
to control wastes and effluents at an
early stage of modernization would
greatly add to costs and strains.
Should poorer countries then accept
added costs for development or even
their own modernization because dev¬
eloped nations have already, as it
were, pre-empted so much of the
biosphere's costless capacities for
self-cleansing?
We do not know the answers. But
we do know that nations, acting indi¬
vidually, will not necessarily produce
a workable planetary answer. The
relentless pursuit of separate national
interest by rich and poor alike can, in
a totally interdependent biosphere,
produce global disasters of irreversible
environmental damage.
HERE are then, I suggest,
three vital ways in which the reality
we are beginning to perceive diverges
from our habitual thinking.
We normally consider Nature as a
whole, the entire biosphere, to be safe
from man, even if we can chip away at
little bits of it. We have been taught
to believe, with increasing intensity in
recent decades, that we can moder¬
nize all our economies and settle most
issues of distribution by our unlimited
command of rising energy, technology
and resources. And by our millenial
history we have been taught to expect
final decisions to be taken by separ¬
ate sovereign states.
It requires a desperate wrench from
accepted thinking, a profound leap, a
Copernican leap of the imagination,
to begin to see that in stark physical
and scientific reality none of these
pre-suppositions are any longer true.
We can damage the entire biosphere.
Resources are not unlimited. States
acting separately can produce plan¬
etary disaster.
We all know enough of history to
realize how uncertain it is whether this
change in the direction of our thinking
will be made in time. Custom and
habit hold us to the traditional themes.
The sheer momentum of our present
activities could well be enough to drive
us on for another four or five decades
on our present path.
We could increase the damaging
impact upon our biosphere, accentuate
the deepening gulf between wealth
and opportunity for an elite of dev¬
eloped states and a squalid and det¬
eriorating human environment for
everyone else. We could arrive at
no intergovernmental agreements or
strategies to check either kind of
profound environmental degradation.
This is a possible "scenario".
Realists might even call it the most
likely one. But I would like to give
you three reasons why I feel it is
legitimate to entertain shall we say,
a modest hope?
The first is that the Stockholm
Conference was held at all. Once the
environmental concern moves nearer
to the centre of the nations' attention,
I do not doubt that its fuller implica¬
tions will inevitably unfold. For its
whole essence is interconnexion and
interdependence. Its whole message
is that separate drives, ambitions and
policies have to be made compatible
with the continuing common life of our
single, shared planetary system.
My second reason is precisely this
scientific imperative. We can cheat
on morals. We can cheat on politics.
We can deceive ourselves with dreams
and myths. But there is no mon¬
keying about with DNA or photosyn¬
thesis or eutrophication or nuclear fu¬
sion or the impact on all living things
of excessive radiation from the sun
or the hydrogen bomb.
And what our incredible scientific
breakthroughs of the last century
have taught us is that the ultimate
energy of the universe both sustains
or destroys life and that the mecha¬
nisms and balances by which it be¬
comes life-enhancing are fragile and
precious beyond our belief.
To act without rapacity, to use
knowledge with wisdom, to respect
interdependence, to operate without
hubris and greed are not simply
moral imperatives. They are an
accurate scientific description of the
means of survival. It is this compel¬
ling force of fact that may, I think,
control our separatist ambitions before
they overturn our planetary life.
But man does not live by fact alone.
Our human environment has within
it our perpetual striving to make it
humane as well. In the past, histor¬
ians tell us, there have been profound
revulsions against the aggression,
pride and rapacity of human systems.
The great ethical systems of man¬
kind in India, in China, in the, Middle
East, from the benign wisdom of
Confucius to the passionate social
protest of the Hebrew prophets all
sought to express an underlying moral
reality, that we live by moderation, by
compassion, by justice, that we die by
aggression, by pride, by rapacity and
greed.
Now in these latter days, the planet
itself in its underlying physical reality
repeats the witness of the sages and
the prophets. Our collective greeds
can degrade and destroy our basic
sources of life in air and soil and
water. Our collective injustice can
continue to create an intolerable imbal¬
ance between rich and poor. Envy
and fear can unleash the nuclear holo¬
caust. At last, in this age of ultimate
scientific discovery, our facts and our
morals have come together to tell us
how we must live. I for one believe
profoundly that they have done so just
in time.
