Incredible as it may seem, there are still over 40 million
children aged under fourteen throughout the world working
in factories, on farms and plantations, in small-scale indus¬
tries, handicraft workshops, hotels, restaurants, shops, as
street traders, etc. This is Just one of the surprising facts
to be found in the special report below based on (1) an
International Labour Office study, "Minimum Age for Admis¬
sion to Employment", published last year, and (2) a Unesco
study "Rights and Responsibilities of Youth".
6
OUNG adults, particularly
those under twenty, make up a con¬
siderable proportion of the labour force
throughout the world. In countries
where industry is expanding rapidly
and there is considerable progress in
education this proportion has shown a
marked and continuing decline.
In the developing countries, the per¬
centage of young people under twenty
in the working population, although
difficult to assess, remains high. The
fundamental causes of this phenome¬
non lie in the economic backwardness
of these countries, closely linked to
the colonial domination experienced by
the majority of them, the persistence
of obsolete social and economic struc
tures, the drastic falling off in school
attendance rates after the age of
eleven and, lastly, the population explo¬
sion which has resulted in an increased
proportion of young people up to
50 per cent and sometimes even more
in the total population.
One of the most important problems
arising from the employment of young
people is child labour work by chil¬
dren under fourteen to fifteen years of
age.
Under the influence of international
standards and minimum-age laws and
the pressure of economic and social
transformations, child labour in the
classic sense of mass exploitation of
children in mines and factories has
become an evil of the past. Yet, while
its nature and dimensions may have
changed, child labour itself remains
widespread and persistent.
Some idea of just how widespread
it is may be gained from the fact that
the number of children aged fourteen
or under working in the world was
thought to number more than 40 mil¬
lion in 1970.
More than 90 per cent of these
children were in the developing regions
of the world. In those regions working
children numbered 41,125,000 (or 5.1
per cent of all the children aged up
to fourteen) in 1960 and 39,975,000 (or
4 per cent) in 1970. In the industrial¬
ized regions, by contrast, the figures
.were 4,085,000 (1.4 per cent), and
3,343,000 (1.1 per cent).
Child labour is a very broad term
and does not have the same character¬
istics everywhere. The formal status
of the working child (that is, whether
he is a full-fledged employed person
as opposed to something like an
informal trainee or an unofficial helper
to an adult worker or an unpaid family
worker or an "adopted child"), the
nature, intensity and regularity of the
work, the hours of work and other

40 MILLION
CHILD-WORKERS
IN THE WORLD
TODAY
The scourge of child labour
- a blot on the conscience
of the developed
and developing countries
conditions of employment and the
effect of work upon schooling, are as
important as numbers in judging the
seriousness of the problem.
Child labour is least apparent in
large-scale, reasonably modern indus¬
try; more so in small, marginal fac¬
tories; very common in small-scale and
cottage industries, handicraft "work¬
shops, industrial home work, small
retail shops, hotels, restaurants, ser¬
vices, street trades and domestic ser¬
vice; and most prevalent by far in
agriculture.
Child labour in factories has not,
of course, altogether disappeared.
Appreciable numbers of children
clearly below the legal minimum age
are still employed in small, marginal
factories that rely on keeping wages
low. Such factories are most numerous
in Asia and, to a somewhat lesser
extent, in Latin America and the Middle
East, but they also exist in parts of
southern Europe and even in depressed
areas of more industrialized regions.
From the examples which recur in all
these regions, they seem to be particu¬
larly concentrated in certain industries:
textiles, clothing manufacture, food
processing and canning.
A striking illustration of the abuses
which occasionally arise in factories of
this kind was provided by a survey
made in one area of Thailand in 1965
covering a limited number of factories
employing ten or more workers.
The factories were engaged in manu¬
facturing or packaging such things as
bottles, cigarettes, textiles, sweets,
biscuits and seafood. Children, espe¬
cially girls, were found to constitute a
large part of the work force. Many of
them between ten and fifteen years
old, and some as young as six, were
working eight to fourteen hours a day,
seven days a week, for derisory wages
in overcrowded, poorly-lit, badly-venti¬
lated and insanitary premises.
Whole family groups were often at
work, with a parent or other older
relative alone receiving payment for
the entire group. In a cigarette factory
children were being hired as "assist¬
ants" by adult workers who gave them
only a fraction of what they had
actually earned, or paid them piece
rates. It was normal for periods of
lay-off to alternate with periods of
heavy overtime (worked at ordinary
rates).
Another survey, made two years
later and limited to textile factories and
workshops in part of the same area,
revealed similar conditions and also
showed that nearly half of the working
children under sixteen years of age
had never been to school.
The work done by children in fac¬
tories is generally relatively light but
they are often given tasks presenting
clear risks to their safety and health.
Numerous instances have been
observed in various countries of the
employment of children in dangerous
occupations, including the manufacture
of fireworks, glass-blowing, carrying
pieces of incandescent glass, the use
of toxic materials in dye houses, work
involving exposure to dust and lint in
textile mills and to extremes of heat
and cold in the manufacture of confec¬
tionery, work in foundries and, in all
sorts of factories, work near furnaces
and unguarded machinery. Even if
such practices are becoming less com¬
mon, they are still very disquieting.
Industrial work other than in fac¬
tories is a common activity among
children throughout Africa, Asia, Latin
America and the Middle East where
many small workshops, cottage indus¬
tries and handicraft undertakings em¬
ploying children are to be found.
Moreover, many children in parts
of both northern and southern Europe
as well as in these regions are known
to perform industrial work at home.
The jobs they perform include weaving,
spinning, sewing, embroidery, metal-
work, leather work, woodwork, making
pottery and carpets, clothing, shoes,
toys, buttons, baskets, fireworks, etc.
To a large extent, of course, these
are family undertakings in which the
children are working and learning a
traditional family trade under their
parents. But this is not the case as
often as it may seem. In one part of
Iran, for example, the labour inspection
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
7

8
CHILD-WORKERS (Continued)
service regards all handicraft work¬
shops as family undertakings and
therefore outside the scope of most
labour legislation even though, in fact,
many of the children working in them
are wage-earners employed by persons
other than their parents.
Child workers in certain countries
are also frequently represented as
apprentices or learners, and many of
them undoubtedly are in a sense, but
the training they get is often minimal,
the work strenuous, the treatment that
of servants and the pay far below
standard. Lighting, ventilation and
sanitary conditions in such workplaces
are generally poor. Safety precautions
are negligible and children can be seen
operating bellows, wielding acetylene
torches, using cutting or piercing tools,
working near furnaces and performing
other hazardous tasks.
Children are often brought to the
workshop by their parents or other
adults sometimes presumed to be their
parents; they work as "helpers" under
the responsibility of those adults and
are paid by them rather than by the
proprietor.
Thus, a recent inquiry in India found
that it was usual for weavers in both
handloom and powerloom establish¬
ments to be assisted by school-age
children, who were not regarded as
employees and whose wages, such as
they were, were paid only by the
weavers themselves. Arrangements,
such as these were found to be com¬
mon in carpet-weaving and brocade
work.
The hand-made carpet industry is a
large-scale and well-known employer
of child labour in other countries as
well, and the employment of children
in it often follows much the same
pattern.
In Iran, for example, carpets are
customarily made by women with the
assistance of girls, often but not
always their own daughters and often
extremely young. In government-
owned workshops, the legal minimum
age of twelve is observed and reason¬
able standards of wages, hours and
physical working conditions are main¬
tained. But the bulk of production
comes from small, private workshops
and especially, home work. Conditions
in such workshops are generally
extremely poor and the employment of
very young girls below the age of
twelve is normal.
Home work is an even greater prob¬
lem in Iran. The work is handed out
to women by middlemen who have
none of the responsibilities of em¬
ployers and is performed at home by
the women with their daughters or girls
CONTINUED PAGE 10
tov **' *%%*:.£ *.u.

¡£Ä
The scourge of child labour remains a
world-wide problem today, affecting devel¬
oped and developing countries alike.
Obliged to work for a living in agricul¬
ture, industry, handicraft workshops, etc.,
millions of children are deprived of their
right to education. Above left, shoe-
shine boys at work near a Brazilian beach.
Above, bent almost double under his
heavy load this young Peruvian returns
from a day's work in the fields. Right,
a young Iranian girl concentrates on the
meticulous work of weaving one of the
sumptuous Persian carpets for which Iran
is famous. Left, a group of Iraqi children
help in the building of a new village.

CHILD-WORKERS (Continued)
Under guise of 'adoption', young girls sold into domestic service
from other families. The girls are often
practically infants and their employ¬
ment and conditions of work are sub¬
ject to no controls. Similar practices
are found in many countries in handi¬
craft work.
Finally, many children are employed
in the building industry throughout
most of Asia, Latin America and the
Middle East, and also, recently, in parts
of southern Europe where large-scale
building has been intense. Older boys
below the legal minimum age seem to
be widely employed on building sites
in these areas as casual, unregistered
labourers to clear debris, carry equip¬
ment and do other odd jobs at low
wages; such jobs often involve serious
risks of accident and injury.
I
10
I N non-industrial employ¬
ment, very many children in all regions
of the world work in small shops, res¬
taurants, hotels, street trades and
various service occupations. In most
cities and towns in Africa, Asia, Latin
America and the Middle East, children
are commonly employed as waiters and
busboys in cafés and restaurants,
maids in hotels, sweepers, shop clerks,
garage assistants, barber-shop assis¬
tants, errand boys, shoe-shine boys,
automobile guards, street vendors and,
of course, beggars.
The street trades, in particular, are
certainly the most visible forms of child
labour and, for obvious reasons,
among the most difficult to control.
The children engaged in them are often
very young, homeless and grossly
exploited by adults.
The street trades are sometimes dis¬
missed as light, harmless occupations
that keep children busy and out of
trouble. In fact they prejudice the
safety, health, moral welfare and social
development of children whose uncon¬
trolled wanderings in the streets for
long hours, until late at night, con¬
stantly expose them not only to bad
weather, dirt, fumes and traffic but also
to the most sordid aspects of city life.
Domestic service is another largely
uncontrolled and widespread occupa¬
tion for children. In countries where
servants are normally found in all
reasonably well-off households, many
of them are bound to be children. This
is very often the case in Africa, Asia,
Latin America and the Middle East.
Recent studies by the International
Labour Organization tend to confirm
that in various countries substantial
numbers of children aged under four
teen are working as domestic servants
(often, it should be said, quite legally,
since the minimum age for domestic
service is sometimes twelve or thirteen
and sometimes no minimum is pre¬
scribed).
In some countries it is common for
very young children mainly girls in
Central America, the Middle East and
some parts of Asia to be brought to
cities from rural areas by their parents,
or purported parents, and virtually sold
into domestic service. The children are
usually unpaid and the practice is often
described, euphemistically, as "adop¬
tion". It is generally rationalized by
the argument that these children enjoy
much better conditions than in their
previous homes. While this may often
be true, there is always a potential
danger of overwork, neglect, mistreat¬
ment and exploitation.
This problem has from time to time
been drawn to public attention in
various countries, but the efforts that
have been made to control it through
laws and regulations, such as the legal
requirement to register domestic ser¬
vants now in force in some parts of
Sri Lanka (Ceylon), have had little
success.
Non-industrial child labour is also
a problem in southern Europe. Chil¬
dren below the legal minimum age are
employed fairly widely in shops, cafés
and restaurants and to a much lesser
extent in markets and street trades.
Employment is often combined with
school attendance, or at least school
enrolment, and provides a supplement
to family income.
In the more developed countries
also this problem sometimes arises,
but again it is of a different nature. In
most such countries children below the
basic minimum age can be legally
employed subject to certain safeguards
(the work must be limited to specified
activities, it must not be carried on
early in the morning or at night or
during school hours, the hours of work
must not exceed a specified maximum,
the children must not be under a speci¬
fied lower age limit, etc.). Failure to
observe these safeguards is probably
the most common problem.
The question has received consider¬
able attention over the past year in the
United Kingdom, where the regulation
of the employment of children aged
between thirteen and fifteen in non-
industrial activities is in large measure
a matter for local bylaws. Children
were reported to have been employed
in prohibited activities, particularly
during weekends and school holidays,
and, more frequently, at prohibited
times (such as delivering newspapers
or milk over one hour before school
started) or for excessively long hours.
Many instances of illegal employ¬
ment came to light only when teachers
inquired into the reasons why some
children had no time to do their home
work or could not stay for after-school
activities or were too tired to concen¬
trate on their school work or fell
asleep in class.
In the developed countries difficul¬
ties of a new and more specialized
kind occasionally appear. For instance,
in the application of safeguards for
child performers, problems have arisen
with television publicity films.
The head of a prominent children's
model agency in the United Kingdom
recently pointed out that children are
sometimes asked for during school
hours and that they can be called to
the studio early in the morning, only
to spend the whole day getting bored
and tired while waiting to be employed.
HE sector in which the bulk
of the children in every region are
employed is, of course, agriculture.
Traditionally, children begin at an early
age to do some work on the land being
cultivated by their parents: this is no
less true of Europe and North America
than of the countries of Asia, Africa
and Latin America. Minor farming jobs,
the care of animals and a certain
amount of field work are performed by
young children almost everywhere.
In the traditional, mainly subsistence
sector of agriculture in the developing
countries, the direct regulation of the
employment of children is generally
not practicable. Until primary educ¬
ation becomes universally available
and until it becomes possible for most
families to dispense with the work of
their children on farms, there is little
chance that child labour by unpaid
family workers will be reduced to any
significant extent.
Employment in commercially oriented
agriculture is a different matter. While
children are far less extensively em¬
ployed in commercial agriculture than
in unpaid family work, they do engage
in it to an appreciable extent in most
developing countries.
On plantations it often takes the form
of work as part of a family group: the
parents do the main field work and the
children either assist them (in plucking
tea leaves, picking coffee beans or
collecting latex) or do secondary jobs

such as weeding, spreading fertilizer
or caring for plants.
This is a fairly common pattern in
some Asian countries, including India
and Pakistan; it is also found, but to
a much lesser extent, in certain African
countries, especially at harvest time.
Most countries have at least some
legislation regulating the minimum age
for employment, but it is usually not
very effective. Even where the legis¬
lation is fairly well enforced, as on the
tea and rubber estates in Sri Lanka
(Ceylon), appreciable numbers of chil¬
dren work unofficially helping their
parents in weeding or other tasks.
The use of piece rates or contracts
specifying quotas tends to encourage
the unofficial employment of children
by parents on plantations. As a rule,
light work by children under certain
conditions is legally permitted, and to
some extent child labour is, in prac¬
tice, limited to such work.
It is by no means uncommon, how¬
ever, for children to do full-scale agri¬
cultural work, including such heavy
jobs as ploughing. In Brazil, the plant¬
ing of cotton, rice and sugar-cane and
the harvesting of coffee and cocoa are
frequently done by both children and
adults.
Child labour in agriculture is by no
means confined to the developing
countries. In southern Europe children
are widely employed as farmhands or
in caring for animals and are usually
paid very low wages sometimes in the
form of food and lodging. Many of
these children have left school at an
early age or attend irregularly.
In northern Europe such employment
is less widespread and more subordi¬
nated to schooling, but it does exist.
There are several countries in which
employment in .agriculture is not sub¬
ject to a minimum age as long as work
is not performed during school hours;
children often start work, either on
their family farms or on other local
farms, early in the morning before
school, put in additional work after
school and work long hours during
vacations.
In the United States interest in the
conditions of migratory labour has
brought to light over the past few years
a considerable amount of disquieting
information on the employment of chil¬
dren in agriculture generally.
Until 1966, the U.S. federal Fair
Labor Standards Act contained no
provisions regulating child labour in
agriculture outside school hours and
even now does so only for hazardous
occupations; moreover, few State laws
contain such provisions. Thus, chil¬
dren of any age can work legally in
agriculture at certain times in most
States. Many children do in fact have
such jobs and a large proportion are
migratory workers. In 1967 about
309,000 children under fourteen years
did some farm work for wages; about
38,000 of them were migratory.
According to several studies carried
out in the U.S.A. in the mid-1960s,
many migratory children worked prac¬
tically full time, but in recent years
there seems to have been an appre¬
ciable decline in the illegal employment
of children in agriculture.
'VER the past 55 years the
International Labour Conference has
adopted ten Conventions dealing with
the minimum age for employment.
The first of these, the Minimum Age
(Industry) Convention fixed this age,
in 1919, at fourteen. It was partially
revised in 1937 when the minimum age
for employment in industry was raised
to fifteen.
Among countries which have raised
the minimum age to sixteen i.e. a
higher level than the standards set in
these two Conventions are Australia,
Bulgaria, the U.S.S.R., the United Sta¬
tes (under federal legislation and under
the legislation of twenty States), and
in principle, Japan and Singapore.
In Europe, the minimum age for
employment in industry is fifteen in
Czechoslovakia, Italy, Netherlands (for
girls), Norway, Sweden and Yugosla¬
via; in Belgium, Denmark, Finland,
Hungary, Malta, Netherlands (for boys)
and Romania, it is fourteen. In Hun¬
gary and Romania work during school
attendance hours is forbidden for chil¬
dren who have not completed the com¬
pulsory schooling period.
In the United States the age limit is
fifteen in one State (Texas) and four¬
teen in 28 States and the District of
Columbia.
Jamaica has raised the minimum age
to fifteen. In Barbados, Chile, Colum¬
bia, Guyana, Trinidad and Tobago, the
age is fourteen.
In Asia and the Pacific a minimum
age of fifteen has been established in
certain States in Australia, in India (for
mining and transport), and New Zea¬
land. In certain other parts of Austra¬
lia, in India (work in factories), Pakis¬
tan (mining and transport), Thailand
and the Republic of Viet-Nam, the age
is fourteen.
In Africa a minimum age of fifteen
has been laid down in Ghana, Mauri¬
tius, Nigeria and Sierra Leone. In
Algeria, Cameroon, Ivory Coast and
Upper Volta, it is fourteen.
In a few countries the minimum age
is still below that established by the
two conventions. In Costa Rica, the
Arab Republic of Egypt, Iran, Pakistan
(work in factories) and Turkey, it is
fixed at twelve years of age.
Another important convention deal¬
ing with the age of admission of
children to agricultural work, was
adopted in 1921.
Under this convention children under
fourteen years of age may only work
in any public or private agricultural
undertaking outside the hours fixed for
school attendance. Such work shall
not be such as to prejudice their atten¬
dance at school.
It is clear that legislation on juvenile
labour in agriculture is less strict and
more limited in scope than that con¬
cerning employment in industry or at
sea. Fewer countries have established
a minimum age in this sector, and the
age is often fixed at fairly low levels.
Furthermore, family undertakings are
often excluded from the relevant provi¬
sions and light work is frequently
authorized.
LS a final comment concerning
children employed in agriculture, it is
worth emphasizing that, contrary to
traditional ideas on the healthful nature
of farm work, modern agriculture expo¬
ses workers to at least as much phy¬
sical risk as most other sectors.
This is not only .a matter of heat,
sun, dust and insects or the strains
caused by stooping and lifting: the
increasing mechanization of agriculture
has made it an especially hazardous
occupation. The dangers created by
the use of power-driven machinery,
such as harvesters, threshers, reapers,
tractors, are obviously all the greater
for children and young persons.
Some countries, like the United Sta¬
tes, have made special efforts both to
prevent the employment of children in
dangerous agricultural work and to
train young persons in handling machi¬
nery safely.
In the United States, agriculture is
classified after mining and construc¬
tion as the third most hazardous occu¬
pation. In the state of New York alone,
official satisfies indicate that during the
period 1949-67, forty-seven children
aged between five and fourteen years 1 1
old died as a result of occupational
accidents: forty-two of these were in
agriculture.
