Far right, visitors at the Moenjodaro Museum
examine an artist's impression of the ancient city
at the height of its prosperity. Right, a once bustling
street in the lower city of Moenjodaro. Preserved
for centuries beneath a protective layer of soil,
the excavated city now faces the triple threat of a
rising water table, corrosion by salts and flooding
by the river Indus.
5»*v" 1
1
* flUVt



MOENJODARO
IN PERIL
Unesco alerts world opinion
to an imminent catastrophe
by Hiroshi Daifuku
16
HIROSHI DAIFUKU is head of Unesco's
Division for the Development of the Cultural
Heritage. The author of many studies on
anthropology, conservation and museography,
he has contributed frequently to the "Unesco
Courier".
'HANGE is ever present
and stability an illusion. Even conti¬
nents, once thought to be immovable,
are known to be great rafts floating
above the liquid core of the earth.
Their movements affect the rise and
fall of mountains, the shape of the
coastline, and only the relatively short
lifespan of man makes them seem
immutable.
Streams form, change their courses
or disappear. Temperature changes,
from those of long duration lasting
millenia to changes which take place
in a few minutes (due to a passing
cloud), the growth of bacteria, lichens,
woody plants and trees, all contribute
towards the change of the environ¬
ment.
Preservation of a site or monument
represents, therefore, a constant strug¬
gle to stay or to slow this process.
Inevitably, if the climate is harsh and
there are great variations in tempera¬
ture and humidity, as in the case of
the site of Moenjodaro in Pakistan,
the task becomes difficult and costly.
It is a semi-arid region with an aver¬
age annual rainfall of about 12 cm.
(under 5 inches). It is a region of low
relief and as a result the Indus river,
through silting, raises its bed above
the plain (during the rainy season the
mean level of the river is about
3 metres above the level of the site).
The river thus forms great loops, suc¬
ceeded by ox-bow lakes, and con¬
stantly shifts its bed. At times it
moves away from Moenjodaro; at
others (as at present) it turns towards
the site to threaten its eventual
destruction.
The construction of a dam (the
Sukkur Barrage) nearby and the
development of irrigation agriculture
have contributed to a rise of the water
table. While irrigation agriculture can
be productive in semi-arid lands,
drainage in a nearly level flood plain
is very difficult, and all too frequently
irrigation results in the rise of a
heavily saline water table.
In the southern reaches of the Indus
the area of canal-irrigated and cul-

Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
tivated land which has been seriously
damaged by water-logging and salinity
is close to 5 million acres. In the area
of Moenjodaro, low-lying land al¬
ready glints with salt and lies aban¬
doned. At the site itself the level of
the water table varies seasonally from
1.5 to 3.9 metres below the surface,
reflecting the rise and fall of the level
of the river, and seasonal irrigations.
Through capillary action water rises
about 2.4 metres (8 feet) above the
aqueous layer and introduces salts
into the bricks composing the monu¬
ment. During the day high tempera¬
tures and low humidity result in rapid
evaporation leaving behind, in the
bricks, a deposit of salts.
These salts (of which sodium,
magnesium and potassium sulphates
and carbonates are among the most
destructive) crystallize. Those found
below the surface exert pressure on
the bricks, causing fragments to flake
off, progressively destroying the sur¬
face and weakening the interior. In
solution the salts help to corrode and
weaken the structure of the bricks.
Thus, the preservation of Moenjo¬
daro is one face of a problem invol¬
ving the development of the entire
Larkana region. Anxiety about the
future of Moenjodaro increased as
the bricks began to show greater wear.
At the request of the Pakistan Gov¬
ernment, Unesco sent a team of
experts to Moenjodaro in January 1964.
The mission was led by Dr. Harold
J. Plenderleith, then Director of the
International Centre for the Study of
the Preservation and the Restoration of
Cultural Property in Rome. He was
accompanied by Mr. C. Th. de Beau¬
fort, a Dutch engineer with con¬
siderable experience in working on
desalinization problems in Iraq and by
Dr. Caesar Voûte, a Dutch geologist.
The team reviewed with Pakistani
specialists all the problems involved
as well as the measures which had
been taken.
Despite severe handicaps, the
Pakistani Department of Archaeology
maintained the site for many years,
using mud-plaster and mud-brick
cappings to help leach the salts away.
When the plaster is moist the salts
within the bricks will migrate to the
mud until the two solutions attain an
equilibrium. The removal of the now
contaminated mud and its replacement
by desalinized mud helped to lessen
the concentration of salts and pre¬
vented the formation of crystals on or
just below the surface.
This did not, however, arrest eros¬
ion as constant new supplies of salt
were introduced from the ground
water and the Department lacked the
means to attack the basic source of
contamination, the rise of the water
table.
The measures to be followed in the
preservation of the site are known
and include: deflection of the river;
lowering the water table; removing or
leaching out the salts found in the
walls of the buildings. All of these
are costly. The decision taken to aid
the Pakistani Government in raising
funds through voluntary contributions
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

18
MOENJODARO IN PERIL (Continued)
from the international community will
make possible the following measures:
the construction of a slanting
barrier in the river which will
deflect the current and turn the
river away from the site;
the construction of a ring of tube
wells surrounding the excavated
area to lower the water table;
salt removal and conservation.
The first measure required poses
few problems, the technology is known
and the results predictable. Insofar
as the lowering of the water table is
concerned, there are some unknowns.
The use of tube wells in Pakistan to
lower a saline water table has already
been carried out by the government
on a large-scale agricultural project
in the Punjab.
The discharge of water from the
wells at Moenjodaro can eventually
contribute towards land irrigation.
Nevertheless the process must be
carried out with care. The lowering
of the water level may result in com¬
pression and the effects, particularly
on massive structures, must be care¬
fully observed so as to avoid damage
and ensure the preservation of the
site.
Once the water table is sufficiently
lowered the area found within the ring
of tube wells will be progressively
desalinized. This too may be a long
process as the best methods to be
used have still to be worked out.
The salts found in the monuments
dissolve readily which should make it
easy to leach them out. On the
other hand the fired brick is not of
good quality and the mud mortar
would wash away if too much water
is used.
A common method used to extract
salts from stone or brick is to cover
it with wet paper pulp. The salts
migrate to the pulp which upon drying,
is removed. The experimental use of
fresh mud (uncontaminated with salt)
instead of paper pulp by the Depart¬
ment of Archaeology showed some
promise. But it was abandoned as
it became a veritable labour of Sisy¬
phus since the salts were constantly
replenished from the ground water
below.
Once the tube wells are in oper¬
ation, however, it should be possible
to carry out thorough leaching of the
salts and to follow this by ordinary
maintenance.
The rapid deterioration of the bricks,
noted by the Archaeology Department
Colour pages
and by the experts sent there should
then cease. But work to ensure the
continued survival of the monument
will have to be continued on a long
term basis. Obviously the water table
cannot be permitted to rise again, so
the tube wells will have to be checked
and the machinery periodically renew¬
ed (experience in the Punjab gives an
average life of 20 years).
Airborne salts, while not an important
factor must also be taken into account.
Worn bricks must either be replaced
with sound ones or somehow consoli¬
dated.
I NTERNATIONAL assist¬
ance to solve the problems of Moenjo¬
daro has taken many forms. In 1969,
leading archaeologists under the chair¬
manship of Sir Mortimer Wheeler
examined several proposals to save the
site. In 1972, Raoul Curiel (France) led
a team which reviewed the final con¬
servation project of the Government
of Pakistan. Early this year, Mr. Zulfi-
kar Ali Bhutto, then President of Pa¬
kistan and today its Prime Minister
opened an international symposium
on the preservation of Moenjodaro
organized on the site with Unesco's
assistance.
Practical aspects were not neglected
and in 1972-73, Unesco supplied
equipment for two experimental tube
wells, including pumps which work
inside the tubes and thus remove the
need for above surface buildings. A
laboratory equipped by Unesco is being
built by the Pakistan Government and
Unesco is providing a fellowship for
the chemist in charge to study the
latest techniques used in other coun¬
tries.
Unesco's Executive Board recently
examined the joint Pakistan-Unesco
Moenjodaro preservation project which
in its first phase will cost an estimated
$7.5 million. It authorized Unesco's
Director-General to launch an interna¬
tional fund-raising campaign with a
target figure of $5 million.
After the work of conservation is
completed, the sale of water from the
tube wells for irrigation and the
revenue from tourism will pay the
expenses of maintaining the equipment
and site. But while the measures
foreseen will stop the primary cause
of erosion, constant vigilance and care
will be needed if the site is to survive
as a vivid reminder that here was the
birthplace of an ancient civilization.
