WEATHER LORE
WN THE AGESIII
A meteorologist discusses
facts and fancies of traditional
weather-wise sayings
by Roger Clausse
58
HE time may come when
tomorrow's weather will be announced
with sure-fire certainly because by then
Man will make his own weather,
causing clouds and rain to appear and
disappear as he pleases.
Strangely enough this is how the
peoples of ancient times approached
the problems of meteorology, although
it was then believed that weather was
controlled by the gods who had only
to be invoked in order to change the
course of a storm or end a drought.
Such practices existed in all bygone
civilizations, from the shamans of the
Arctic who were reputed to control the
cold and the ancient peoples of Black
Africa with their tom-toms for calling
down the rain, to the rain-making sacri¬
fices shown in 3,000-year old pictures
discovered at Sumer in Asia.
Similar methods and beliefs also
existed in ancient China and Japan,
among the North American Indians and
the Aryans in India, the Greeks and
Romans, in short in all the countries
now represented in organizations and
authorities concerned with world
meteorology.
But in terms of ideas and research
ROGER CLAUSSE fsee biographical note on
page 43).
on the study of the weather, a world
of difference exists between these
ancient and outmoded practices and
the still tentative attempts being made
in our own time to influence the
weather.
Men learned first to observe pheno¬
mena in order to understand them.
Then, noting coincidences or instances
when the same phenomena were re¬
peated, they learned to distinguish the
laws, or rather regularities, linking
these phenomena together.
The first things that men observed
were naturally those around them, and
hence their observations and their
deductions were based on the behavi¬
our of plants and animals.
The weight which these deductions
carried and the wide credence which
they gained depended on the relation¬
ship between the village headmen or
elders who made them and their au¬
diences. The authority of the elders
(in days when they were listened to and
respected) gave their sayings the cha¬
racter of infallible pronouncements. It
is thus no wonder that, transmitted from
generation to generation with varying
degrees of distortion, these old saws
of weather wisdom have survived for
centuries.
At all events, we can take a look at
some of the ancient sayings, that cer¬
tain persons still accept without ques¬
tion, and try to distinguish between
what is clearly true or false in them,
though we cannot hope to explain cer¬
tain "mysteries" of the animal world.
Old almanacs going back nearly five
hundred years and manuscripts much
older still give impressive lists of
various symptoms of animal behavi¬
our presaging rain or the return of fine
weather.
It is quite true that animals, being
closer to nature than man and, unlike
man, not taking medicaments of all
kinds, have preserved a number of pri¬
mitive responses to natural phenomena
and to the various ways in which they
impinge on the living world.
Just as some species possess
instincts, probably based on sensorial
perceptions unknown to us, which
enable them to find their way back
over great distances to their seasonal
haunts or to detect the approach of
an enemy from far away, it is quite
likely that some animals are sensitive
to variations in atmospheric conditions
heralding changes in the weather. As
we shall see, men can also forecast
these changes by looking out for cer¬
tain clues.
Let us take a few examples of be¬
haviour in animals and even in plants
which are supposedly significant in re¬
lation to the weather. Right away, and
at the risk of seeming ignorant, we
have to admit we are not sure what to
make of the various sayings, often con¬
tradictory or perhaps too subtle
about the abilities of frogs and toads
to forecast fine weather or rain.
LCCORDING to one old
French saying:
"If toads caN today, the sun's on
the way".
But another saying goes:
"When toads loudly call, rain's sure
to fall."
Are the sayings really contradictory,
or does it take a keen musical ear to
distinguish between one kind of call
and another? In any case, a tame frog
kept in a bowl in a warm house is
hardly in contact with nature, and must
have lost any instinctive reactions to
the weather it may ever have had.

"No one recognizes the
value of water until it
is lacking," says a
Spanish proverb. Right,
a young Mexican boy
drinking from a stream.
Before a shower of rain, certain kinds
of voles and field mice are supposed
to run about outside their burrows,
moles are supposed to scurry in and
out of their holes in agitation, wolves
howl, goats and rams butt each other,
donkeys bray and waggle their ears,
and pigs grunt and become restless
in other words, they all "feel the
bad weather coming on".
This agitated behaviour would be
understandable if the particular sensa¬
tions they felt really did herald storms
or rain, which are indeed no fun for
creatures dwelling in the open or in
burrows which can be flooded by sud¬
den downpours. But for this to be the
case, the animal "forecasters" would
have to be surrounded by a mass of
air possessing certain characteristics
announcing the change in the weather.
We now know, of course, that, the
weather for the next twenty-four
hours, at any given place, is in process
of formation at distances of hundreds
of kilometres around that place, and
that atmospheric changes occur only
shortly before the arrival of rain,
usually starting in the upper atmo¬
sphere.
Some factors may perhaps vary in
the preceding twenty-four hours, atmo¬
spheric pressure for instance (though
it seems fairly unlikely that animals are
sensitive to this) or gradual changes in
wind direction, sometimes also the
moisture content of the air or atmo¬
spheric electricity.
Since the atmospheric changes pre¬
ceding the approach of rain are so
complex and give so little clue as to
what the weather is going to be, and
especially as any of these changes can
occur without rain or storm following,
one can be pretty sure that the ways
in which animals behave are probably
due to a variety of causes; if their
behaviour sometimes precedes a
change in the weather, this is a mere
coincidence.
It is commonly believed that when
a cat rubs its paw behind its ear, it
means there will be rain. The cat itself
doesn't "mean" anything by its ges¬
ture: it rubs its ear because atmo¬
spheric electricity has changed, the
humidity has decreased, or simply be¬
cause it has an itch. But it is true
that felines are particularly sensitive to
changes in the magnetic field of the
atmosphere and become restless when
thunderstorms or snow are in the air.
Birds have always been regarded as
weather prophets. This reputation may
be due in no small measure to the great
bird migrations. Although the why
and how of these great movements are
still not fully explained, experts have
pointed out that some species, such
as swifts and storks, set off practically
on the same date every year, and that
the occasional slight differences of a
few days either way are connected
mainly with local variations in atmo¬
spheric conditions and in particular
with the availability of food small
insects or seeds but not with ap-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
59

WEATHER LORE (Continued)
60
proaching changes in meteorological
conditions.
Swallows often die on the way south
in sudden cold snaps, such as the
snowstorm in Burgundy (France) in
October 1939 in which thousands of
these birds perished. Sea-gulls fleeing
inland may indeed be harbingers of the
storm provided the storm is going the
same way as they are; but it sometimes
happens that after sea-gulls have
prudently taken refuge from an Atlantic
gale on the banks of the Seine, the
sky in Paris remains clear while the
storm veers away towards Amsterdam.
Other instances of bird behaviour
which have been noted seem to be
connected with more immediate meteo¬
rological factors. Swallows flying low
are supposed to foretell rain, and
flying high, fair weather.
The explanation may be that convec¬
tion currents from the overheated
ground in fine weather carry up the
midges which provide the swallows'
food, whilst the general downward
movement of air masses preceding
rain keeps them close to the ground
and thus compels the birds to fly low.
On the other hand, the upward move¬
ments of air and convection currents
that cause the swallows to fly high
can, if they are strong enough, be
followed by rain or thunderstorms so
meteorology poses problems, even for
the birds.
In India, certain lizards are even re¬
puted to go into reverse when rain and
floods are in the offing, climbing trees
tail first. Throughout India, incident¬
ally, when popular sayings speak of
fine weather, rain is meant, drought
being reckoned as "bad weather".
OPULAR wisdom attribu¬
tes to creatures lower down the animal
scale a similar sensitivity to the appro¬
ach of bad weather: crayfish are sup¬
posed to leave their hiding places and
come out of their streams, dragon-flies
skim the surface of the water, snails
venture forth (especially after the
rain I) spiders spin their webs, fish
refuse to bite and stay near the sur¬
face ready to snap at the insects
which now fly low above it.
Is this behaviour due to changes
in atmospheric pressure or temperat¬
ure, which by acting on the oxygen
content of the water, make the fish
rise as the pressure falls, perhaps be¬
cause rain is on the way?
True or not, this belief is firmly held
by anglers for whom it provides an
additional excuse when they come
hone empty-handed, so let us not be
so rash as to challenge it.
Plants as well as animals respond
to the weather and its changes, hence
their reputation as weather forecast¬
ers. Their life-cycle is so closely
bound up with atmospheric conditions
that they can be taken as ready-made
devices for totalizing the climatic
variables.
The cycle of germination and vege¬
tation leaves, flowers, fruit
is controlled by rain, sun and tem¬
perature; by taking the. dates on which
different species flower, it is even
possible to draw up charts showing
the climatic conditions in different
areas in the preceding months.
But here we are dealing with direct
climatic effects, not the forecasting of
weather. At most, they make it pos¬
sible to reckon the probable date of
the harvest from the state of advance¬
ment of the crop, always provided that
weather conditions are normal in the
intervening months.
Thus, for instance, the fact that an
onion has many thick skins does not,
as some people claim, mean that it
will be a hard winter, but indicates
merely that certain conditions of heat
and dryness obtained while it was
growing, and statistically speaking,
next winter's weather bears no rela¬
tion to the weather in the preceding
seasons.
Plants are sensitive to immediate
local conditions of humidity, heat or
sunlight, and there is nothing myster¬
ious about the fact that the pimpernel,
the convolvulus or the daisy close
when the air becomes humid, although
this does not necessarily mean it is
going to rain.
The leaves of the artichoke, like the
scales of the pine cone, open in dry
weather and close in damp, but all
that this tells us is how humid the
air is, just as does the little man
with the umbrella who pops out of
the weather house when the hair to
which he is attached expands with the
dampness of the air.
In any case, even if all our doubts
were to be removed and our scepti¬
cism shown to be misplaced, even if
it were to be conclusively proved that
in a reasonable percentage of cases
these signs were reliable, what could
we learn from close observation of
the convolvulus, the toad or the
grooming habits of cats? It would not
in fact amount to very much.
At a more scientific level of obser¬
vation, we know for certain that a
halo, the bright ring sometimes seen
round the sun or moon, indicates to
the meteorologist the presence of
warm air at high altitudes, often the
prelude to rain.
Whereas human beings have few
instincts to alert them to weather chan
ges except for the aches and pains
which may start in wet or cold wea¬
ther what they do have are means
for observing and measuring the
atmospheric factors to which animals
and plants may unconsciously react.
Every day, thousands of meteorolo¬
gists, at stations equipped with radar,
barometers, hydrometers, thermome¬
ters, radiosonde balloons and even
receivers for picking up pictures sent
back by satellites of the clouds sur-
Drawinq © Mas, Paris.
Specially drawn for the "Unesco Courier"
(see also pages 62 and 64)
"When spiders weave their webs
by noon, fine weather Is coming
soon." (Japan)
rounding the earth, measure with great
accuracy the same water vapour or
electricity in the air which disturbs
cats, the same variations in atmo¬
spheric pressure which bring fish to the
surface, the strength of the rising or
falling currents which makes swallows
fly high or low, and many other para¬
meters.
It must be admitted that the results
of these measurements, taken at some
10,000 different points around the
world, are much more reliable and
more readily usable than the purely
subjective reactions of animals. The
measurements can be transferred to
maps covering vast areas a quarter,
a half or even the whole of a hemi¬
sphere to give an overall picture of
world weather.
These maps help meteorologists to
analyse the state of the atmosphere
at any given moment, to discover
CONTINUED PAGE 64

WEATHER LORE DOWN THE AGES
Continued from page 60
Drawing © Mas. Paris
64
where storms are raging, how the cur¬
rents which carry them along move,
which regions are likely to suffer
cyclones and which are likely to have
flat calm and mists.
Taking into account this up-to-date
information on what is happening bet¬
ween ground level and an altitude of
25 to 40 km., together with the physi¬
cal laws and rules governing the at¬
mosphere, they can foresee the air
currents for the next day and follow¬
ing days, pinpoint the cloud masses
and the rain, in short, forecast the
weather.
For some time now, they have been
able to do even better. The number
of instrument readings going to make
up the overall weather picture is so
great, and the equations needed to
calculate their significance are so
complicated that it would take all the
meteorologists in the world several
months to work out the data required
for one twenty four-hour forecast. Big
modern computers, however, once
they have been programmed to un¬
derstand the laws of the atmosphere,
can process all the information in an
hour.
Bemusing, certainly, for those who
base their weather forecasts on hints
gleaned from plants or animals.
Though, during the process of civi¬
lization, man may have lost some of
his natural "instruments", he has re¬
placed them with scientific methods
that tell him far more accurately whe¬
ther or not it will be fine tomorrow.
Roger Clausse
