LET THE TRUMPETS SOUND...
In Tibetan music, wind instru¬
ments play a predominant role.
Invariably played in pairs, they
symbolize the eternal links bet¬
ween Knowledge and Method,
between Male and Female, or
the voices of peaceful and hos¬
tile divinities. The instruments
are usually made of copper
and silver, sometimes embellish¬
ed with precious stones. Pho¬
tos show from left to right: short
trumpets, oboes, long trumpets
resting on a support represent¬
ing a supernatural being, and
telescopic horns which can be
extended to enormous lengths
(up to four metres).
Photos © Sangltacharya Manfred M. Junius. Venice
28
O the unaccustomed ear
the sounds are unbelievably deep and
rich. Guttural voices seem endowed
with superhuman power as, without
pausing for breath, their chanting chan¬
ges from stately psalmody to elegant
harmonious melody. Deep-throated
IVAN VANDOR, Hungarian-born Italian com¬
poser and ethno-musicologist Is a specialist
on Tibetan music and has written many
works on the subject. He Is a member of
the Italian delegation to the International
Society for Contemporary Music and his com¬
positions have earned him several internat¬
ional awards including the Prize of the Italian
Society for Contemporary Music for a piece
of chamber music and the Taormina Prize for
his orchestral work 'Dance Music". The
article presented here is based on an exhaus¬
tive study entitled "Rolmo: the Buddhist
Musical Tradition of Thibet", to be published
by the International Institute for Comparative
Music Studies (Berlin and Venice).


Cymbals and trumpets
from the
'roof of the world1
by
Ivan Vandor
wind instruments weave a majestic
pattern of sound, punctuated and sus¬
tained by the percussion, drawing the
listener on towards distant, unexplored
musical horizons.
Disconcerting though the music is,
even the layman cannot fail to recog¬
nize in it a strict order and discipline
which leaves nothing to chance. What
we are listening to is the ancient
Buddhist music of Tibet, brought to
us by the magic of the gramophone.
Tibet, the region of China that is
often called "the roof of the world", is
the cradle of an astonishing civilization.
It lies at altitudes varying between
10,000 and 23,000 feet and its only
relatively hospitable region is a plateau
some 13,000 feet up between the peaks
of the Himalayas and the trans-
Himalayas.
These geographical details throw
an interesting light on some aspects
of Tibetan culture. Before the con¬
struction of roads and the modern¬
ization of Tibet carried out by the
Chinese during the 1950s, it took
months, even a year, for a caravan
from Peking to reach Lhasa the capita!.
Yet over the centuries Tibetan cul¬
ture was enriched and influenced by
other civilizations. Whilst the ethni¬
cally mixed population remained cha¬
racteristically Mongol, the country had
contacts to the west with India, Iran
and even Greece, to the north with
the Turko-Mongol peoples, to the east
with the Han civilization of China, and
to the south, north and east with
peoples among whom the Buddhist
tradition was. already established
Nepal, Khotan and Yunnan.
Buddhism reached Tibet during the

Photo Pradhan © Top-Réalltés, París
seventh and eighth centuries. It came
from northern India and was steeped
in tantrism (from the Sanskrit word
tantra, meaning warp, originally of a
fabric, later "doctrine" or "rule"). In
Tibet, it gradually replaced the old
shamanistic local religion known as
Pön, which, in a variety of forms, had
spread throughout Central Asia from
the Eastern marches of Iran to China.
Pön was not unconnected with tan¬
trism, with the result that tantrism,
Pön and Buddhism mingled, and also
absotbed the ancient Tibetan religion
called the "religion of men" (as against
the "religion of the gods"), thus giving
Tibetan Buddhism its own particular
character.
This tantric Buddhism which spread
throughout the Himalayan countries
outside Tibet itself Nepal, Bhutan,
Sikkim and Kaddak (see "Unesco
Courier" February 1969) as well as
certain parts of West Bengal and
India was to produce one of the
most original forms of music to emerge
anywhere in the world. Today, thanks
to the gramophone record, this music,
or fragments of it at least, may be
heard far from its land of birth.
The origins and history of Tibetan
Buddhist music have not yet been
explored to the full. The facts given
here are based on material gathered
during eight months' research in Nepal.
Tibetan Buddhist music, extremely
subtle and complex, is indissociable
from the ancient traditions which give
it its full significance, a music with an
essentially spiritual purpose. Whether
vocal or instrumental, it demands not
only a perfect knowledge of the orally-
transmitted texts but a high degree of
virtuosity.
Being closely linked with religion, it
plays a leading part in the life of the
monastic community. The lamaseries,
or monasteries, are thus schools of
music where monk-musicians receive
training of an advanced level, form
vocal and instrumental groups, and
preserve an original art form with its
own carefully codified system of
expression.
The instruments used (wind and per¬
cussion alike) are of mixed local and
foreign origin. Some come from India,
as for example the great white conch-
shell trumpet, dung kar, which is
fished in the waters off the east coast
of Hindustan. This is the instrument
which, according to the great Hindu
religious classic, the Bhagavad Gita,
emits "that awesome noise which
shakes heaven and earth"; its player
needs an unfailing ear and lungs of
steel. The handbell and the hour¬
glass drum the damaru of Shiva
are also Indian.
Other instruments appear to be Tibe¬
tan in origin, for instance the kang
ling, a trumpet made of a human shin-
bone, and the chö dar, an hour-glass
drum made of two human skulls, to
the "waist" of which are attached
thongs with strikers at the ends.
Iranian influence, direct or indirect,
via India, is present in a form of oboe,
the rgya-gling, and Chinese influence
in that of cymbals. It is difficult to
say where the other instruments came
from, but it seems likely that Tibetan
Buddhist music, like Tibetan Buddism
itself, picked up elements from various
sources, while retaining certain ancient
characteristics particular to Tibetan
civilization.
In a tradition so steeped in religion
as is Tibetan music, it is not always
easy to define exactly what is meant
by religious music. The great national
epic of Tibet, recounting the exploits
of the King and magic hero, Gesar of
Ling, and sometimes called the "Iliad
of Central Asia", as well as the secular
drama of Lhamo, for instance, contain
numerous important religious elements,
while even many folk songs are
directly inspired by religious themes.
Here, the term religious music is
used to mean what in Tibetan is
known as rolmo : the vocal or instru¬
mental music accompanying various
rituals. Performed exclusively by
monks, as already pointed out, it is
distinguishable from the other Tibetan
musical traditions by its vocal tech¬
nique, the instruments used, the rules
which it obeys, and its symbolism.
It is performed both inside the
monastery and outside. Inside, it
accompanies religious ceremonies,
particularly in the prayer halls, and
sometimes, for certain rites, in the
courtyard. It is played as a signal
for the lamas to begin their medita¬
tion in their cells or to make offerings
to certain divinities, in the latter case
being played on the roof of the monas¬
tery so that the sound carries far.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
29

CYMBALS AND TRUMPETS (Continued)
Outside the monastery, it is perform¬
ed in private homes for births, mar¬
riages, deaths or other special occa¬
sions, or because someone wishes to
gain "merit" so as to obtain a better
reincarnation. It is also played in
processions, or to welcome eminent
visitors. Musicians practise outside the
monastery, as the sound of the instru¬
ments, most of which are very loud,
might disturb the other monks at their
prayers or studies.
The music is also played, outside the
monastery or in the courtyard, as an
accompaniment to the cham, masked
religious dances performed only by
the monks and representing, with
comic episodes, the triumph of
Buddhism over the older Tibetan
religion.
The orchestras consist only of wind
or percussion instruments. The for¬
mer include, in addition to the conch
and the shin-bone trumpet already
mentioned, copper or silver trumpets,
horns of the same metals measuring
up to twelve feet long, and a kind of
long, conical oboe.
The percussion instruments include
two types of cymbals, one bearing the
same name, rolmo, as the ritual reli¬
gious music, two gongs of different
sizes, a kettledrum which may be as
much as six feet across, a smaller
upright drum played with a sickle-
shaped stick, the two drums already
referred to the chö dar (Tibetan)
and the damaru (Indian) a handbell,
and the ting sha, two metal discs on
a string.
In the bigger monasteries, other,
less common instruments were some¬
times used : a long, telescopic horn
fitting into another giant horn which
impressively amplified its sound,
various other huge horns, a side-blown
flute, gongs and an enormous bell.
30
EVERYTHING about this
music, the instruments and the sounds
they make, is laden with symbolism.
According to certain monastic trad¬
itions, the sound of the trumpets
symbolizes the voices of certain
aggressive divinities, whilst the oboes
represent those of peaceable divinities.
In the Tibetan Book of the Dead, the
Bardo Thödol, the parallel is drawn
between the sounds of the instruments
and the inner sounds which only cer¬
tain lamas who have attained great
proficiency in the practice of medita¬
tion can hear a spiritual exercise in
which auditory perception replaces
vision. The handbell symbolizes both
wisdom (or knowledge) and the sacred
power of the word. The shape of the
bell, seen from above, recalls that of
the mándala the geometrical figure
representing the nature of the world.
Even the orchestration is dictated
by the symbolic relationship between
the instruments and the divinities.
Peaceful divinities such as Dolma and
the Buddha himself are associated
with the oboes, conchs and cymbals,
and the warlike divinities, whose func¬
tion is to defend truth and to extermi¬
nate hostile spirits, with the short
trumpet and the smaller rolmo cym¬
bals, while horns and drums are asso¬
ciated with both.
It is usually the leader of the orches¬
tra who plays the cymbals, on which
the relationship between the parts
played by the various instruments lar¬
gely depends. It is also the leader
who conducts the ceremony, the sing¬
ing and recitation of prayers, and sets
the tempo of the performance.
The more important the occasion,
the slower the tempo is, and its varia¬
bility may even effect the oboe melody
line. The oboe players must learn to
try and work out, for a particular
tempo, on what note they have to
stop as the piece comes to an end,
and how long to hold a particular note
in order to finish with the rest of the
orchestra. As a result, no two perfor¬
mances are quite alike, and this mix¬
ture of strictness and flexibility, pre¬
cise rules and improvization, is a cha¬
racteristic feature of Tibetan music.
In the books of certain religious
orders, there are special signs to show
where the instruments come in, signs
which incidentally change from one
monastery to another, while for some
instruments oboe, hour-glass drum
and handbells there is no form of
notation.
The special type of vocal music
known as yang also has its own nota¬
tion, contained in the yang-yin (books
of special prayers) and often varying
from one book to the next. The nota¬
tion indicates not so much the pitch
as the volume, which varies within a
very limited range, and also certain
details of voice production. Red ink
is sometimes used to indicate the
parts to be sung solo by the monk
in charge of the ceremony.
Tibetan Buddhist musical notation
would in fact be virtually undeciphe¬
rable if it were not for the oral tradi¬
tion, and it leaves large areas of
music uncovered, being intended only
as a mnemonic device and to a lesser
degree as an aid to the learner.
In the yang style of singing a
continuous melodic line the voices
are deep and guttural, and the sylla¬
bles of the text are chanted very
slowly. It is this chanting which, per¬
haps even more than the orchestral
accompaniment, produces even in the
casual listener the extraordinary
impression of entering an unfamiliar
world, transcending that of the senses ;
for yang, as a Tibetan commentary
explains, aims to communicate with
the gods, and the manner in which one
communicates with gods is not the
same as that in which one communi¬
cates with men.
But there is nothing haphazard about
this singular style : everything is subor¬
dinate to rules which demand of the
performer the utmost skill. From
childhood the singers practise produc¬
ing sounds as low and guttural as
possible.
II N some monasteries, this
modification of the human voice is
carried to lengths which seem to verge
on the impossible. This practice is
probably connected with the tantric
belief that the deeper the sound, the
more " immaterial", the closer to
silence it is. The surprising result is
that the voice thus produces harmonics
at the same time as the basic note,
so that each singer becomes, as it
were, a "one-man choir".
This technique, however, is not
exclusively Tibetan ; it is to be found
also in Mongolia and in certain parts
of Siberia.
This musical phenomenon is not
constructed on a particular set of more
or less homogeneous concepts, but
appears to spring direct from the
actual art of musical performance,
which is itself intimately bound up with
religious theory.
Tibetan Buddhist music, however,
pays little attention to aesthetic theory,
but is on the other hand inseparable
from the idea of a consummate artistry
which obeys the established rules,
demands an unfailing musical sense,
and manifests itself in the quality of
vocal and instrumental sound and in
the fine balance between the two.
For the monks, the music is a means
of spiritual expression and is played
only for the gods. The fact that the
musician, though conscious of the
essentially "celestial" nature of the
music, takes a professional pride and
interest in it, does not conflict with the
nature of the music, but on the con¬
trary ensures that the tradition, though
essentially religious in inspiration and
ultimate purpose, survives on earth.
