This scene of death and desolation in Mauritania is being repeated
over thousands of kilometres in Africa south of the Sahara.
Drought and famine have stricken at least a dozen countries,
among the worst affected being Senegal, Mauritania, Upper
Volta, Mali, Niger and Chad. Cattle are the livelihood of some
70 per cent of the population of this area and the U.N. Food
and Agriculture Organization has estimated that the virtual
extinction of many of the herds vital to villagers and nomad
herdsmen Is now a serious possibility.

DROUGHT
OVER AFRICA
1- tragedy strikes millions
of men and cattle
2- is the Sahara desert
moving South?
J --
by Jean Dresch
44
JEAN DRESCH Is professor of geography
at the University of Pans and at France's
Ecole Normale Supérieure. He is a leading
authority on the world's arid zones, notably
those of North Africa and Africa south of
the Sahara, and has written extensively on
this subject.
T AMINE threatens millions
of villagers and herdsmen with their
decimated flocks, today forced into an
unprecedented migration in search of
food and water, in all the West African
countries to the south of the Sahara,
from Mauritania to the Sudan.
Its cause is drought, a prolonged
decline in rainfall that has been
recorded as far as central Asia,
throughout the periphery of the arid
zone, extending from the tropical
desert of the Sahara to the continental
deserts of temperate Eurasia.
Drought, admittedly, is the normal
condition in these countries, and the
living world has adapted to it. In Africa
these regions bear the Arabic name
of Sahel, which means the border,
whether of the desert or of the sea;
for they are not really part of the
desert proper.
The soil is less purely mineral than
the present-day soil of the Sahara and
bears a generally open, scattered
vegetation in the form of "steppes" of
trees, bushes and annuals Gramina-
ceae or of other families.
The vegetation grows denser and
lusher in the lower latitudes and
becomes savanna, a closed formation
which feeds herbivores, and hence
carnivores, in increasing numbers but
exposes them to burning in brush fires.
In these regions man is no longer
obliged, as he is in the desert, to lead
either a nomadic life linked to the
dromedary or the secluded life of the
watered oases. He can raise cattle
and small livestock. He can till the soil
without irrigation.
For all that, these are the frontiers
of the desert. Man and the other
living creatures follow the rhythm of
two main seasons, one the longer
almost completely dry, the other both
humid and hot.

.
\*ft-
The Sahel feels the effect of cells
of tropical high pressure, which separ¬
ate the low-pressure areas of the
equatorial latitudes from those often
characteristic of medium' latitudes.
These high-pressure cells set very
regular, dry winds blowing towards the
low latitudes: these are the continental
trade winds, called in West Africa the
Harmattan.
The rains follow the apparent motion
of the sun to the Tropic of Cancer
during the northern summer. Thus
masses of moist air advance coming
from the Atlantic Ocean or the Congo
Basin with southerly winds, which are
diverted north-eastwards as they cross
into the northern hemisphere.
These air masses and winds, known
as monsoons, encounter the tropical
dry air and the trade winds (inter¬
tropical convergence), plunge beneath
them and lift them. That is the time
when the rains fall; they are plentiful
and long-lasting in the south when the
moist air mass is thick. Further north
they are less and less so. Disturban¬
ces still occur but the hot-air tornadoes
of the late afternoon are increasingly
often dry as the moist air mass thins
out and loses more of its moisture.
Under these conditions the precipi¬
tation decreases together with the
duration of the wet season from 600 to
800 mm., where the wet season lasts
five to six months, down to 250 mm.,
where the season is only three months
long.
The shorter the rainy season, the
more irregular it is in space, in time
over the year, and from one year to
another. The rains may start earlier
or later, and may last a longer or a
shorter time.
Furthermore, temperatures also rise
with the apparent motion of the sun,
so that mean maximum temperatures
exceed 35 and 40 degrees C. in April
and May, except near the sea. The
coming of the rains brings them down
a little, but they are still high enough
to cause three times more évapotrans¬
piration (loss of water by evaporation
from the soil and by transpiration from
plants) during the day than during the
night.
To be of practical value, therefore,
the rainfall must not only be generally
abundant, but also intense yet not
too intense, about 20 to 25 mm. during
one or two days at the beginning of
the rainy season.
The rains are not always spread to
the best advantage over the course
of a year, and each year is different
from the next. Sometimes a series
of good years occurs, only to be
followed by a bad year or a series of
bad years.
A sequence of dry years is remem¬
bered in 1910-1914, when they caused
a real famine. 1941 and 1942 were
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
45

Horns of thousands of cattle killed by thirst in Senegal lie
whitening under the African sun (below), while survivors (left)
rummage in anything they can find. Since 1968 a vast belt
of countries south of the Sahara has been hit by unremitting
drought. Last year and this year famine and death have reached
crisis proportions. Some rainfall in Mauritania and elsewhere
in the summer of 1973 has brought slight relief. Right, in a
Chad village, two children gulp down a rare drink of water.
Below right, a woman of Upper Volta shares her water ration
with her donkey.
'VT.
DROUGHT OVER AFRICA (Continued)
46
no better; and dry years have been
succeeding one another since 1968,
whereas the decade 1951-1960 was
wetter. But there is no cyclical rhythm
from which to predict disasters.
This year-to-year irregularity in rain¬
fall is also characteristic of the Sahel
on a larger time-scale. More and more
is being learned about the detailed
development of climatic conditions
over the Quaternary era. It appears
that sweeping changes occurred, from
fairly wet periods to extremely dry
periods in which the Saharan winds
pushed the dunes 200 to 300 km.
further south than the living dunes of
today.
On the other hand several wet
phases have been detected, the most
recent being put at 6,000 to 2,300 years
ago. The entire Sahara was better
watered during that time. There were
extensive lakes, and it is probable that
black populations practised agriculture
in the Sahel.
Cattle-rearing went on till much later,
it was replaced by horse and then
camel-rearing. Even in the Middle
Ages, however, the aridity was not so
severe. Many farming villages sur¬
vived in the Mauritanian Adrar for
example. The rate of precipitation
must have been 400 to 450 mm, the
strict minimum for rain-watered tillage
and double the present rate.
It is thought likely that the subse¬
quent drying-out process has speeded
up since the end of the last century.
It is said that rainfall is diminishing,
wells are running dry, rivers are flood¬
ing less often and in less volume,
dunes are being revitalized, vegetation
is deteriorating and game animals are
scarcer.
Does this mean that the climate
itself is becoming drier? Fluctuations
are a matter of historical record; they
are as yet unexplained, but they are
not always in the same direction.
Over the decade 1950-1960 there was
enough rain to speed up the northward
movement of the cattle-herders, the
Peul, and of the millet-growers. The
herdsmen come looking for grazing,
and contend for it with the Saharans
who have to leave the desert in the
dry season.
The millet-growers colonize the
Sahel, like a pioneer fringe, in search
of new lands, whether they are black
peasants or former Saharans, often the
servants of nomadic tribes in process
of settling.
The natural conditions in the Sahel,
then, are known, and man, with. his
age-old techniques, has managed to
adapt his economy and his migratory
movements to them.
Today it should be possible to put
better scientific knowledge of the
Sahel and modern techniques to use,
not only in relieving the victims of
drought but in bringing drought itself
under control. However, it must be
recognized that the Sahels are very
marginal regions for the international
economy.
Development activities have been
focused on regions further south,
which were better watered and which
could grow crops at a profit for foreign
markets. As a rule these are non-food
crops such as groundnut and cotton;
it is known that they have not enriched
the countries where they are grown,
much less the peasants who grow
them. They have helped to degrade
the vegetation and hence to worsen
the threat of drought.
Population growth has forced the
Sahelian peoples to increase their
herds and to bring more land under
cultivation. In dry-year periods, over¬
grazing and renewed ground-clearing
activity are carried to danger point.
But people must live.

HORNS
OF UNPLENTY
Photo Marie-Laure de Decker © Gamma. Paris
However, there has never been
enough investment in these marginal
regions. Wells have been dug, but
not enough of them, and they require
upkeep. Grazing land can be devel¬
oped, controlled and improved; but
little of this has been tried. Better use
can be made of water resources,
aquifers and, even more, rivers; but
their development often stops short at
the planning stage.
In this ebbing century, forecasting
is feasible. Through scientific studies
of natural and human conditions,
solutions can be found. But that
entails applying the will and the necess¬
ary means, before disaster strikes.
This article first appeared in the May 1973
Issue of "Development Forum", a new
monthly newspaper published by the United
Nations Centre for Economic and Social
Information (C.E.S.I.). "Development Forum"
deals with the action of the United Nations
in the economic and social fields, and notably
with the major problems of the developing
countries, wasteful spending on arms, the
inequitable distribution of resources, the
population explosion and the deterioration of
the environment. For a complimentary
subscription, write to: C.E.S.I., P3/16, Room
C 525, Palais des Nations, 1211, Geneva,
Switzerland.
