LEONARDO
THE MUSICIAN
by Emanuel Winternitz
Text © Copyright
Reproduction prohibited
rdT:
\LTHOUGH Leonardo has always
been extolled as "the universal
genius", his musical thought
and his musical activities have
received little serious attention and
have never been treated systematically.
It is characteristic that the standard
works of Leonardo, even in our
considerable number of ingenious
musical instruments and made im¬
provements on existing ones. He also
had some highly original ideas about
the philosophy of music that were
intimately connected with his philo¬
sophy of painting.
Vasari records that "after Lodovico
>-v
EMANUEL WINTERNITZ is curator of
musical Instruments at the New York Metro¬
politan Museum of Art and is also visiting
professor of music at City University of
New York. This article Is a condensation of
a chapter entitled 'Leonardo and Music",
which will appear in the volume 'The Unknown
Leonardo", to be published this autumn by
McGraw-Hill Book Company.
century, do not mention music at
all, or content themselves with
quoting remarks by Vasari, the
author of the famous Lives of the
Painters.
Leonardo was, in fact, profoundly
occupied with music. He was a
performer and teacher of music; he
was deeply interested in acoustics and
made many experiments in this field
that had immediate bearing on music;
he wrestled with the concept of
musical time; and he invented a
Sforza became the Duke of Milan,
Leonardo, already famous, was brought
to the duke to play for him, since the
duke had a great liking for the sound
of the lira; and Leonardo brought
there the instrument which he had
built with his own hands, made largely
of silver but in the shape of a horse
skull a bizarre, new thing so that
the sound (I'armonia) would have
greater sonority; with this, he sur¬
passed all the musicians who met
there to play. In addition, he was the
16

best improviser of rhymes of his time."
A number of later historians also
extolled his musical ability, notably
the Milanese painter Giovanni Paolo
Lomazzo, who in his Trattato dell'arte
delta pittura of 1584, and Idea del
tempio delta pittura of 1590, names
"Leonardo Vinci painter" as one of
the outstanding masters of the lira.
The lira mentioned in these sources
was the lira da braccio, the most noble
and subtle polyphonic bowed instru¬
ment of Leonardo's day a fiddle with
seven strings.
Leonardo inquired into the origin of
sound ("What is sound produced by a
blow?") and examined the sonorous
impact of bodies upon bodies, ex¬
panding age-old Pythagorean notions.
He investigated the phenomenon of
vibration and sympathetic vibration, of
how the percussion of a body makes
it oscillate and communicate its oscil¬
lation to the surrounding air or to
liquid or solid matter, for example.
He studied the propagation of sound
waves as differentiated from light
waves, the reflection and refraction
of sound waves and the phenomenon
of echo, the speed of sound and the
factors that determine degrees of
loudness, investigating the laws that
govern the fading of sound by varying
the distance between its source and
the ear.
Especially characteristic of his
approach in this context is his estab¬
lishment of what can be called a
perspective of sound, parallel to the
laws of optical and pictorial perspec¬
tive so important to him as a painter.
Also, as a musician he was naturally
occupied with the factors that deter¬
mine musical pitch, and he experi¬
mented with vases of different shapes
and varying apertures. Of musical
importance, though Leonardo could
not foresee Its implication, was another
of his observations: when he struck
a table with a hammer, small heaps of
dust formed on its surface; here
Leonardo anticipated by three cen¬
turies the German physicist E.F.F.
Chladni's discovery of the geometric
sand figures produced by setting the
edge of a plate in vibration with a
fiddle bow.
Leonardo's notes and designs
dealing with musical instruments are
scattered in many of his manuscripts.
Cryptic as many of these notes and
drawings appear to be if studied
in isolation, methodical comparison
reveals that they are not merely
diverting devices for performing magic
tricks, but that they serve systematic
efforts by Leonardo to realize some
basic aims.
The most important of these aims
are the following: automation of
certain instruments and facilitation of.
playing technique through new kinds V
<$*-
ï
Leonardo was a highly proficient musician.
He invented some new musical instruments
and improved others. He was deeply
interested in the construction of drums and
sketched many different kinds in his
notebooks. He wanted to extend the
musical possibilities of drums and also
make them easier to play through various
methods of automation. This drawing
(opposite page) of a mechanized military
drum in the Codex Atlanticus with Ha
battery of drumsticks looks like part of
a street musician's one-man band. The axle
of the carriage wheel drives a central
cogwheel which then turns other cogs
which activate the five drumsticks on each
side of the cylindrical drum.
5 ,
i
©
KtV-^
In his work in art and science, Leonardo
gave much attention to studies in anatomy,
such as the drawing above of the
larynx and trachea (now in the Windsor
Collection). This probably inspired in him
the idea for the two musical pipes, above
left, in a drawing from the Codex Atlanticus.
Leonardo wrote that the pipes changed
their tone "in the manner of the human
voice", and there Is a close resemblance
between upper opening of the larynx shown
here and that of a recorder.
17

L of keyboards; increasing the speed of
playing; extension of tonal range to
make it possible, for instance, to play
melodies on drums; overcoming the
quick fading of the sound of plucked
strings, by giving the instruments an
endless bow; enriching comparatively
simple instruments to make them
capable of polyphony or a wide range
of successive tones; and even having
a polyphony of the sounds of bowed
strings at the control of a keyboard.
Leonardo was greatly interested in
the construction of drums. He not
only tried to make them easier to play
but also expanded their musical
possibilities, such as tonal range, far
beyond the limitations of the con¬
ventional instruments of his time.
Leonardo endeavours to enrich the
traditional function of drums by making
them capable of producing chords and
scales. For this he tries two different
methods. One is the combination of
several drums or skins of different
pitch into one single instrument. The
other consists of devices to make one
skin produce tones of different pitch
in rapid succession.
This aim is realized in various ways:
either through the introduction of side
holes, or through the use of scissor
levers or screw devices to change the
tension of the skin while it is beaten,
or through slides that open and close
a large hole in the resonating body,
or, finally, through mechanisms that
detach the skin cover from the body
of a pot drum.
Among the many musical instru¬
ments contrived by Leonardo, the viola
organista is by far the most com¬
plicated. No less than six different
pages in the notebooks contain
sketches for it.
The drawings are all concerned with
the idea of a stringed instrument with
keyboard, in which the strings are set
The ingenious drum design shown below
in detail of a page from the Codex Arundel
is of outstanding importance because it
allowed the drum's pitch to be changed
while it was actually being played. By
moving the scissor-like levers at either side
of the square drumhead the player could
tighten or slacken the drumskin. A drum
whose pitch can be changed during
performance did not appear in the West
until the close of the 19th century.
Codex Arundel © British Museum, London
The most complicated of the new musical
instruments contrived by Leonardo was the
viola organista, a string instrument with
a keyboard. We do not know how near
Leonardo came to constructing it. The
strings were to be set into vibration
mechanically, and in his various notebooks
Leonardo drew several devices for bowing
many strings simultaneously. The most
feasible and elaborate solution is in the
sketch shown above, from a manuscript in
the Institut de France. It shows a
workable keyboard instrument with a belt
of horsehair passing across the strings
in an endless bow.
Photo © Institut de France, Parla
In his typical way, Leonardo is here trying
to obtain from a single bell sounds which
could normally only be produced by four
bells. The bell, sketched in Codex
Madrid II, is fixed; it does not swing.
Two hammers strike its rim at opposite
sides. Leonardo has noted: "The same
bell will appear to be four bells. Organ
keys with a fixed bell. And when struck
by hammers, there will be a change
of tones as in an organ."
Drawing © 1974 by McGraw-Hill Book Co. (UK)
Limited. Maidenhead, England and Taurus Edicio¬
nes, S.A., Madrid, Spain
into vibration by a mechanical device
a wheel, a bow with a back-and-forth
motion, or a belt of hair moving across
the strings as a sort of endless bow.
Such an instrument would fill a big gap
in the multitudinous array of instru¬
ments, not only in Leonardo's time
but also in our own.
It would combine the polyphonic
possibilities of the keyboard with the
tone colour of bowed strings and thus
would be something like an organ
with string timbre Instead of wind
timbre, and in addition it would provide
the possibility of producing crescendos
and decrescendos by finger pressure.
Although it is not known in what
order Leonardo made his sketches, it
is possible to arrange the drawings
in a logical sequence if we assume
that Leonardo progressed from less
workable solutions to more practical
18
ones. In fact, he proceeds from an
instrument with a bow moving back
and forth across the strings, to one
with a friction wheel, and finally to
several versions of a revolving band
of hair that sets the many strings into
vibration.
The most workable, and apparently
ultimate, solution is in Manuscript H,
where we find a sketch of a perfectly
consistent, workable keyboard instru¬
ment with an endless bow (archetto),
a belt of hair moved by a motor
attached to the side of the sound box
and passed across the strings by
means of two small rollers. Leonardo
also designed a mechanism permitting
the player, 'by pushing the small pro¬
jecting buttons, tq,select the desired
strings and draw' them against' the
archetto.
We do not know, however, how near
Leonardo came to the actual con¬
struction of the viola organista or
whether he ever made working models.
Today, with an electric motor in place
of one using weights or springs, the
construction of the instrument would
be greatly facilitated.
We must finally consider two instru¬
ments which have special interest
because their invention seems directly
inspired by Leonardo's anatomical
studies; in fact they are applications
of mechanisms Leonardo found in the
human body. The first is in the Codex
Atlanticus, where we find, among
numerous small sketches for various
machinery, drawings of two pipes.
Every connoisseur of musical
instruments will recognize immediately
two recorders by their characteristic
heads and mouth holes. Their basic
structure has not changed substantially
since Leonardo's time. Beneath the
upper end held by the player's lips is
a hole with a sharp edge which is
struck by the air-stream emanating
from his mouth.
Ordinarily recorders have on their
sides six finger holes which are closed
and opened by the fingertips of the
player to produce the distinct tones
of the scale. But Leonardo's recorders
CONTINUED PAGE 35

Continued from page 18
look strange. The one on the left has
two broad slits on the side of the tube,
and the other has one long, thin slit.
Fortunately we have an explanatory
text in Leonardo's most beautiful
calligraphy, running from right to left:
"These two flutes do not change their
tone by leaps as most wind instru¬
ments do, but in the manner of the
human voice; and one does it by
moving the hand up and down just as
with the coiled trumpet and more so
in the pipe a; and you can obtain one
eighth or sixteenth of the tone and just
as much as you want."
Obtaining an eighth or a six¬
teenth obviously means in acoustical
language to reach the upper octaves;
and "moving the hand up and down"
evidently means not to stop pre¬
arranged finger holes, but to move
along the silts to change pitch gradu¬
ally, or as we say today, to produce
glissandos, or gliding tones.
Where could he have found the idea
or a model for his glissando pipes?
The clue lies in the words "the human
voice", though I must confess that
I found the solution by chance and
then had it confirmed by Leonardo's
own words. The model for our glis¬
sando pipes is found in the larynx,
and it is significant that Leonardo calls
the larynx "the human voice", applying
this term to the machinery that
produces the voice as well.
Leonardo made designs of the
larynx and the trachea, now in Windsor
Castle, in which we recognize im¬
mediately that the upper opening
resembles that of a recorder. Fur¬
thermore, in accompanying texts in the
anatomy manuscripts the trachea is
called fistola, 'fthich is also the name
of a vertical flute such as the recorder.
There is, though, one flaw in our
analogy: Leonardo wrongly attributed
the change of pitch of the human voice
to the narrowing or widening of the
cartilage rings of the trachea and
failed to observe the function of the
vocal cords in the larynx. This failure
was probably caused by the technical
difficulty of dissecting the small and
fragile larynx. (By the way, Leonardo's
drawings are thought to have been
based on the anatomy of an ox.)
Still, we have in Leonardo's glis¬
sando recorder a new musical instru¬
ment which opened, or could have
opened, a new musical horizon; which
works well (some reconstructions that
I have made function perfectly); and
which was patterned after an ana¬
tomical analogy, that of the larynx,
even though Leonardo misunderstood
its actual function. Hence we have
here a positive result built upon
wrong premises.
The Madrid Codices contain only a
few pages devoted to musical matters,
but they add considerably to our
knowledge of Leonardo's interest in
music and musical instruments and to
our comprehension of his indefatigable
mind, so overwhelmed by new ideas,
associations, and technological im¬
agination that he could cope with this
onslaught only by jotting down passing
thoughts, often so sketchily that im-
ln drawing, above from Codex Arundel,
Leonardo has combined three drums into
a single instrument. It consists of three
shallow boxes beaten by mechanism
attached to left of drum, and was intended
to produce a chord of three tones. Models
have been made of most types of drum
sketched by Leonardo and they have
been found to work well.
portant details, which he evidently
took for granted, are neither delineated
nor explained in his comments.
One of Leonardo's drawings of
musical instruments In the Madrid
Codices is of a bell with a wide rim.
Instead of a clapper inside, ¿fcwo
hammers strike the rim from opposite
sides. To the left of the bell there is
a mechanism including what seems to
be a set of four keys operating on
a tracker action that in its turn controls
four levers ending in oval heads. In
my opinion, these heads must be
dampers. The accompanying text says,
"The same bell will appear to be four
bells. Organ keys with a fixed bell.
And when struck by two hammers,
there will be a change of tones as in
an organ."
Acoustically important in this ex¬
planation are the indication that the
bell is firm, neither swinging nor
equipped with a clapper In the manner
of a church bell, and the statement
that It produces "a change of tones",
which is in all probability one of pitch,
not of timbre.
Thus Leonardo must have believed
that the upper section of the bell has
ring-shaped areas that produce tones
of different pitch If they are slightly
muted when the rim is set into
vibration by the hammers. It is in¬
teresting that Leonardo, here as in
many other of his musical inventions,
tried to obtain from one instrument
what could normally be produced only
by several instruments or by an entire
set of instruments.
Emanuel Winternitz
%1Û o
Another of Leonardo's brilliant solutions
to the problem of obtaining different tones
from a single drum is shown in sketch
above from Codex Arundel. This drum has
holes in its sides like a flute. It has been
reconstructed by the author of this article,
who found that by closing the various
holes while beating the drum he could
in fact obtain differences in pitch.
Drawinqs from Codex Arundel
¡D British Museum, London
Drum shown below, one of the series
Leonardo drew in Codex Arundel, is
another attempt to combine several drums
into one. It was almost certainly intended
to produce a chord. Unfortunately,
Leonardo's drawing does not allow us to
understand the connexion between the body
of the drum and the curious cones
inserted into iL
35
