False prophets
of doom
by
Maaza Bekele



An Ethiopian educator
challenges the idea
that Africa needs
population control
42
MAAZA BEKELE is head of the Social Ser¬
vices Department in Ethiopia's Planning
Commission Office, and has taught at the
Haile Selassie University in Addis Ababa.
Her article Is an edited and abridged version
of a study she presented last May at an
African seminar on population and economic
development, held in Dar es Sa/am (Tanzania),
under the auspices of the World University
Service. The study has also been published
by "Ceres", FAO Review on Development,
Rome.
O write about the "popu¬
lation problem" in Africa is to fall into
the convenient trap of admitting that
there is a problem caused by the
existence in Africa of a certain num¬
ber of people with certain demographic
characteristics. To write about Africa
in global terms is also to deny the
fact that this particular region of the
Third World is not a homogeneous
unit, but is a mosaic of peoples,
cultures and differing conditions.
Perhaps the only common denominator
is the economic underdevelopment of
the different countries of *he region,
contrasted with the great potential of
a great people.
In many centres of learning in the
Western world, sophisticated men and
machines are engaged in the "num¬
bers game". They work out elegant
models to prove that the world is
threatened with disaster, attributable
largely to the "population explosion"
occurring in developing regions such
as Africa. A continuous stream of
articles points to the dangers inherent
in "decreasing mortality rates" and
"unchecked fertility".
But it is encouraging to note that
some scholars question the value of
this "numbers game". John Maddox,
in his book "The Doomsday Syn¬
drome", lodges a "complaint" against
the prophets of doom and their hys¬
terical pronouncements. David Evers-
ley, himself engaged in demographic
research, has the humility to admit that
nearly all the "theories" put forward so
far by demographers can be exploded.
None can encompass the complexity
of human behaviour and the reproduc¬
tion of the species.
In fact, not much is known today
about African population trends. Such
demographic data as are available are
recapitulated below. What is of con¬
cern is that the recurring explosive
statements made about Africa's pop¬
ulation may only serve to distract
attention, both within and without
Africa, from the real problem that
millions of people living in a rich envi¬
ronment today have a less than ade¬
quate opportunity to develop their
true potential.
The demographic data base in Africa
is exceedingly tenuous, consequently
it is difficult to state with any degree
of certainty the exact size of the
population. Today, the situation is not
much better than that described by
Jonathan Swift in the 18th century:
"...Geographers, in Afric maps,
With savage pictures fill their gaps,
And, o'er unhabitable downs
Place elephants for want of towns."
In two publications put out by the
same organization, at about the same
time, the estimated total African
population is stated in one to be
363 million in 1970, and in the other
338 million in 1971. A 2.8 per cent
growth rate per annum, assumed in
another publication, gives us the total
of 329 million in 1970 a difference of
34 million for the same year. Crude
projections to the year 2000 on a
2.8 per cent growth rate, yield a diffe¬
rence of 76 million souls, (which was
close to the estimated size of the
entire Eastern African sub-region in
1970). One need hardly stress how dan¬
gerous it could be to play the "numbers
game" with this quality of data.
If we assume that the size of the
population lies somewhere between
these estimates, say, 350 million in
1970, this represents between 9 and
10 per cent of the total world popu¬
lation occupying just over 20 per cent
of the earth's land surface. If by the
year 2000 the African population
should increase to about 818 million,
it would represent 12.6 per cent of the
world's total. It is interesting to note,
however, that in 1650 the population
in Africa constituted 20 per cent of
the total.
The decimation perpetrated during
the slave trade in the 17th and 18th
centuries, military engagements which
attempted to ward off impending
colonization in the 19th century, the
subsequent exploitation of African
labour, the introduction of new dis¬
eases from Europe and the spread of
locally endemic diseases through the
migration set in motion at that time,
all contributed to an absolute decline
in the number of African people over
a period of 200 years. Thus, the per¬
centage relative to the rest of the
world was quite dramatically lowered.

It is only since the beginning of this
century that the rebuilding of the Afri¬
can population has begun.
Today, Africa is constituted of
41 independent states and a number
of colonial territories. There is also
South Africa with almost 23 million
people, one fifth of whom are a white
racist minority.
In 1970, of the 41 independent states,
only 9 had a population over 10 million;
13 had less than 2 million and the
remaining 19 had a median population
of about 4 million. Only Egypt, Ethio¬
pia, Nigeria and Zaire can be consid¬
ered large countries with populations
in excess of 20 million.
Population densities as compared to
the rest of the world are low, averag¬
ing 11 persons per square kilometre
in 1968 as against the world average
of 26. A more useful measure in Afri¬
can agricultural societies is, however,
density per square kilometre of arable
impending disaster which will be caus¬
ed by decline in mortality, due to
improved health care.
The argument goes something like
this: a decline in mortality means an
increase in the number of infants, with
a consequent rise in the dependency
burden. Many more adults will reach
a ripe old age, thereby creating a
demand for more jobs and services.
Pressure on the land will increase
rapidly and there will not be enough
arable land left to produce sufficient
food. At the same time, the number
of women in the reproductive age
group will increase, with a potential
impact on fertility.
This "high level of fertility", as the
World Bank's Sector Working Paper
on Population Planning puts it, "...can
be expected to decline everywhere.
However, cultural and social factors
are significant enough to make for
important differences in fertility levels
Photo © Francisco Hidalgo, Pans
land. This was estimated to be 184
in 1968, a much lower average than
the world figure of 248.
But perhaps the most challenging
characteristic of the African population,
as in the rest of the developing world,
is the predominance of young people.
Close to 44 per cent of Africa's popu¬
lation is under 15 years while less
than 3 per cent is 65 and over.
The prophets of doom contend that
both the structure and the consequent
potential size of the African population
(as one component of Third World
potential), is a threat to general world
prosperity and a deterrent to econo¬
mic development in the African coun¬
tries. They see an absolute decline
in fertility as the only remedy to the
Photo © Paul Almasy, Pans
among areas of the world. In the face
of continuing success in reducing mor¬
tality, no developing country has yet
experienced a fertility decline suffi¬
cient to reduce the rate of population
growth to the average level of 1 per
cent per annum characteristic of the
developed economies of Europe, North
America and Japan. Falling fertility is
the only factor that can accomplish
such a reduction except, of course, a
return to much higher mortality rates."
This one-dimensional approach in¬
variably leads to pressure on African
governments to adopt population con¬
trol programmes as the panacea for
their and the world's ills. It has also
resulted in extremely simplistic state¬
ments and propaganda handouts which
are often not politically sensitive,
hinting in some cases at the threat to
white children, which a growing
coloured population represents.
But what in fact does the future hold
for these white children? A 100 per
cent chance to finish secondary
school; more than 50 per cent chance
of a university education and if they
live in San Francisco, London, Stock¬
holm, or Moscow, they will consume
a much larger proportion of the
planet's resources than any child born
in Addis Ababa, Accra, Lagos or
Algiers, and several thousand-fold that
of children born in the vast rural areas
south of the Sahara.
In Africa we cannot afford to look
upon our growing population as a
problem. We have to face up to the
challenge of engaging our young,
expectant peoples in the struggle to
achieve the most rapid development
possible, while ensuring an equitable
distribution of the fruits of develop¬
ment. And Africa must accomplish this
in the face of tremendous pressures
and the general lack of concern in the
developed world for promoting global
development.
The focal point of the challenge lies
in the speed with which African nations
can introduce fundamental changes in
the structures they have largely inheri¬
ted and ensure (1) efficient allocation
of available financial resources, (2)
adequate and timely investment in the
intellectual and physical potential of
the majority of the African people, and
(3) maximum participation by the Afri¬
can people in planning and executing
development programmes within an
economic and social system that
appeals to the idealism and imagina¬
tion of a young population.
Many African countries have fallen
victim to the economic concepts of the
1950s which assume a dualism be¬
tween growth and equity and have
given priority to rapid growth. But
Africa is composed of traditional, rural-
agrarian societies not easily incorpor¬
ated in simplistic growth models.
Pressures, mainly from without, have
led to the allocation of scarce re¬
sources to a largely artificial, modem
industrial sector. This has caused
increasing underemployment in rural
areas, accompanied by rural-urban
migration and a reduction in food
supplies.
The modern sector, on the other
hand, is not creating jobs fast enough
to absorb displaced labour. Hence
an increase in overt unemployment in ._
many African cities, particularly among ñ 4
school leavers whose western-biased
education has led them to expect jobs *
which the system just cannot provide, r

" Population densities in
Africa as compared to the rest
of the world are low,
averaging 1 1 persons per square
kilometre in 1968 as against
the world average of 26. "
44
It is open to question whether the
growing employment problem in Africa
is primarily a product of population
growth, or can be attributed to the
allocation of resources away from
rural agricultural development, the
greatest overall potential in Africa.
Africa's economic development has
and continues to be dictated largely by
the world economic structure. Trade
relations are distorted and the pro¬
duction process in most African
countries is not geared to meeting
African needs but must of necessity
be oriented to the export sector from
which much-needed foreign exchange
is obtained. Many African countries
have become overdependent on one
crop coffee in East and West Africa,
cocoa in Ghana, groundnuts in Sene¬
gal, and so on.
Despite the efforts of the U.N.
Conference on Trade and Develop¬
ment, the developed world has not
yet responded to the challenge of
changing its structure of production
so as to absorb the products of
developing countries. In Africa there¬
fore we can only continue to press for
the required changes in trade relations
between rich and poor countries. But
the new move in Africa is much more
important a move toward economic
co-operation between and among
African nations, which together can
provide a market large enough to
admit of viable trade.
Within African states also is the
further move toward fundamental
restructuring of economic and social
development, based on Africa's agri¬
cultural potential. Physical and social
infrastructure, including marketing
arrangements, must be built up; insti¬
tutional reforms, particularly land
reform and settlement, must be carried
out; technology suited to the African
reality smallholder agriculture must
be developed, and policies pursued
which will ensure that the private cost
of capital does not cheapen the price
of labour, available in abundance all
over Africa.
Timely intervention and investment
in critical areas such as the Sahel
belt will forestall disaster in drought-
threatened areas south of the Sahara.
Thus investment in agriculture will not
only build up Africa's economic base
and absorb its labour force, it will
also provide the food required by
Africa's growing population.
Given its existing structure and the
"bulge" that could accompany even a
small improvement in nutrition and
general living standards, a doubling
of the population in many African
countries by the turn of the century
may be inevitable. This is the eventu¬
ality Ethiopia for instance faces. The
first priority must therefore be to meet
the needs of this increasing population.
Children and adults must be educated
and services provided. The capacity
to cope with life today and in the 21st
century must be built up in the citizens
of Africa.
Both financial resources and trained
manpower are in short supply in most
African countries. This is why many
governments are searching for new
and more imaginative approaches
which will permit them to offer the
largest majority of children and illiter¬
ate adults the opportunity to acquire
basic education and the skills required
to promote development in rural
agrarian economies. The bold experi¬
ment in Tanzania is a case in point.
Ethiopia's recent Education Sector
Review also indicates that it is possible
within available resources to achieve
this goal in 10-15 years.
The physical capacity of the African
people must also be built up through
improvement in the general levels of
health and a better standard and
quality of life. Today, average life
expectancy in Africa is only 40 years.
Infant mortality rates are astronomical
over 150 per 1,000 live births in
14 out of 25 countries. There is an
exceedingly high death-rate among
children under 5 years. The advocates
of population control argue that family
planning will result in lower infant
mortality and child deaths. Almost
unlimited funds are made available for
family planning programmes, but they
are often withheld where no official
programme exists.
It seems almost sinister that there
is so much money available to control
life and hardly any to promote it.
It also seems unrealistic to expect
that poverty-stricken, hard-working
African mothers many close to death
before the age of 35 can be expected
to limit the number of their children
when only 1 out of 3 or 4 survive.
The onus is on the "controllers" to
demonstrate to these women that 3 out
of 4 of their children will survive.

They cannot run the risk that their
major creative contribution to humanity
(given that the rest of their existence
is almost pure drudgery), will be
denied them. In each woman is the
grain of hope that life for her offspring
will be better than hers.
Besides, in African society, pro¬
creation and the loving, tender rearing
of children is one of society's most
important goals. Children are not a
burden, they are an asset in the
average farm family.
It is little wonder therefore that
family planning programmes have so
far had little success in Africa. Only
8 African countries Botswana, Egypt,
Ghana, Kenya, Mauritius, Morocco,
Nigeria and Tunisia have officially
instituted family planning programmes.
By and large these are mainly concen¬
trated in the urban areas where fertility
levels are already lower than in rural
areas, and only a minuscule portion of
all women in these countries is being
reached. Little attention is paid to
evaluating either the impact or the
cost of these programmes.
One attempt at evaluation is Lars
Bondestam's report on "Population
Growth Control in Kenya". This study
indicates that it is mainly women who
" The prophets of doom contend that both the
structure and potential size ofAfrica's
population is a threat to worldprosperity
and a deterrent to economic development in Africa.
This is a one-dimensional approach. In Africa
we cannot afford to look upon our growing
population as a problem. We have to face up
to the challenge of engaging our youth in the
struggle to achieve the most rapid development
possible. Africa must accomplish this in the
face of tremendous pressures. "
have a comparatively high standard of
living who are involved in the family
planning programme. Only the edu¬
cated among them tend to start con¬
traception early in their child-bearing
period. Only about half of the
acceptors remain in the programme
after one year, and a sizeable pro¬
portion of these are women who have
few or no children. Bondestam also
contends that the cost of the pro¬
gramme, now in its fifth year, is
exceedingly high compared to other
countries. There were some 8,000
births prevented in 1969/1970 at a
unit cost of about U.S. $155.
The view is widely held in Africa
that until a greater proportion of
children are able to stay alive, large
numbers will continue to be born. An
increase in the survival rate will, how¬
ever, depend on two factors the rate
at which the level of health of the
majority of the African people can be
improved, and a steady and per¬
ceptible rise in the standard and
quality of their lives.
The road to economic development
in the 1970s is being charted. This
development can make it possible to
offer to the majority of African vil¬
lagers and the urban poor a simple
package of health promoting services
a package which costs very much
less than elaborate hospital services
available in the African metropolis.
Perhaps the greatest challenge that
Africa faces is that of mobilizing the
hearts and minds of the mass of Afri¬
can people in the development effort,
releasing their latent energies so that
they themselves will take the challenge
of developing their land to its full
potential. This means more involve¬
ment of local communities and the
African youth in the decision-making
process and in the implementation of
programmes which benefit the majority
by providing productive employment.
Traditional organizations in Africa
must be adapted to meet this need.
African women must be given a real
stake in producing and reaping the
fruits of development. It may even
be so that in cities like Lagos and
Accra, Cairo, Nairobi and Addis
Ababa, the emerging role of women in
today's social and economic activities
has begun to affect both productivity
and fertility trends.
The only evidence we have in human
history of "population stabilization",
or reduced population growth, is the
experience of the now developed
countries that decline in fertility is a
function of prosperity. There is no
reason to expect underdeveloped
Africa to follow a different path.
Maaza Bekele
