What ducks have taught us
about 'biological clocks'
HE sun is essential to all forms of life,
but it can have injurious as well as beneficial effects. These twin aspects
of the effects of sunlight were highlighted in the "Sun and Life" section of
the international congress, "The Sun in the Service of Mankind", held at
Unesco headquarters in July 1973.
Ultra-violet rays, for example, play an important role in the development
of the human bone structure, but can also have a harmful effect upon the
skin (see back cover).
A number of studies described the effect of light on the nervous system,
on muscular reaction time, etc.
Human beings and ducks enjoy and need the sun (see opposite page),
and experiments with ducks have taught biologists a great deal about the
physiological mechanism by which light affects various glands. Research
carried out by Jacques Benoit, honorary professor at the Collège de
France, Paris, has shown the effects of orange and red radiations in
stimulating the gonads (sexual glands) and endocrine glands. Light
stimulation occurs through the eye, but experiments have shown that it
can act directly upon the hypothalamus (a sort of mini-brain within the
brain proper) and cause rapid development of the gonads.
Other studies show that our organs and their activities are regulated
by an internal, biological "clock" mechanism directly linked to the
day/night solar rhythm. " Jet-lag ", the feeling of malaise, loss of appetite,
difficulty in sleeping, etc., experienced by an air passenger transported
thousands of miles in a few hours, results from the sudden upsetting of
biological rhythms.
After a flight from New York to Paris, for example, it takes several
days to re-establish the waking-sleeping rhythm, a week to re-establish
the temperature rhythm, and several weeks for certain glandular activities
to resume normal functioning. The precise cause and effect of this
phenomenon have yet to be fully understood and explained.
Professor Benoit's experiments with ducks have helped to clarify the
relationship between light and human biology. Drakes were confined
either in total darkness or in uninterrupted light ; in both cases they
went through three or four sexual cycles during a year instead of the
usual single cycle.
Such discoveries mark the birth of " chronobiology ", a new discipline
of great importance since it has shown that the human organism is
affected by medicines or toxins to a greater or lesser degree according
to the time of day. The mortality rate of rats injected with nicotine varied
from 83 per cent at 1800 hours to only 8 per cent at 1300 hours. Similarly,
reaction to penicillin varied as much a« 41 per cent, the most favourable
period being between 1900 hours and 0400 hours.
Other experiments described at the congress included those carried
out by Professor Jean Dorst of the Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris,
on the seasonal migration of birds and fish. These experiments show
that birds are able to keep track of the sun's position throughout the day
and when in flight to make the necessary corrections of course every
hour to compensate for the apparent movement of the sun. This implies
that birds also have a form of internal " clock " which " reminds " them
to take this factor into account.
All this research is revealing hitherto unsuspected facts about the
mechanism of these biological " clocks ".

