Lotus eyes of the Buddha
Text © Copyright - Reproduction prohibited
i\ccording to Buddhist tradition, the first great stupas
were built during the reign of the Indian emperor Ashoka
in the third century B.C. and were erected in the region
of present day Nepal. The Tibetan Chörten is derived
from the Indian Stûpa or Caitya, and its architecture
developed from the pre- Buddhistic autochthonous Indian
grave-mound. Under these mounds the saintly ascetics
were buried; their bodies were seated on the ground in
Yoga posture and then covered over with earth. These
dome-shaped graves, or tumuli, of the saints were
regarded as holy places.
In Nepal today the former sepulchral mound rises as
the gigantic dome of a temple, and from these famous
Nepalese Eye-Chörtens, the eyes of Buddha above the
coupola gaze in four directions. Analogous but smaller
Chörtens were built in the far east of Bhutan; according
to local reports, they were constructed at the end of the
eighth century.
The basic structure of a Chörten consists of a square
foundation symbolizing the earth, a dome symbolizing
water, and thirteen tapering steps of enlightenment
symbolizing the element of fire. These steps lead to a
stylized parasol, the symbol of wind, which is topped in
the ethereal sphere by the well-known "twin-symbol"
uniting sun and moon, which is the shimmering crown of
a Chörten.
Blanche Christine Olschak and Geshé Thupten Wangyal
from Mystic Art of Ancient Tibet
© 1973, published by George Allen and Unwin Ltd., London
Drawings © from "Mystic Art of Ancient Tibet", by B.C. Olschak and G.T. Wangyal.
SCENES FROM THE LIFE OF THE
BUDDHA. Right, Buddhist tomb-
sanctuaries known as "Chörtens."
(See explanatory text above.) They
commemorate important episodes in
the life of the Buddha Shakyamuni.
From left to right: (1) birth of the
Buddha; (2) visit of the Great
Teacher to the celestial sphere of
the Gods; the heavenly ladder by
which he returned to earth can be
seen on the front of this Chörten;
(3) the Buddha's 'struggle against
the forces of evil; (4) his victory
over these evil forces; (5) the
Buddha's final Enlightenment and
absolute purity, i.e. freedom from
and all worldly illusions; (6) the
three paths leading to spiritual
liberation; (7) the Buddha's attain¬
ment of the highest Nirvana.
28

I
" Lotus Eyes " are a feature of
many Nepalese monuments, with
the Buddha's eyes and eyebrows
painted on the four sides of the
building. Opposite page, lotus
eyes on Swayambhunath stupa,
standing on the sacred hill where
according to Nepalese tradition
the primordial Buddha first
appeared. Swayambhunath has
long been a great centre of
pilgrimage, where worshippers
old and young (above) pay
homage. Left, the Hindu eye
which scrutinizes all comers,
carved on a door of the royal
palace at Patan (also known
as Lalitpur), one of Nepal's
most beautiful towns.
A^r^rs^M^Â
