TOWARDS
AN INTERNATIONAL
LANGUAGE
OF GESTURES
The World Federation of the Deaf
has been compiling since 1951
a dictionary of signs for universal use
by Cesare Magarotto
repeated movement of the
right hand towards oneself, palm
upwards, means "come here"; the
opposite movement, palm downwards,
means "go away". Putting one's hands
over one's face Indicates "shame",
whereas raising the right hand or plac¬
ing It on a sacred object signifies
"taking an oath". Pointing a thumb
or index finger at oneself means "I",
and pointing it at the person with
whom one is talking means "You".
These and hundreds of other gestures
accompany the spoken languages
of all peoples and are universally un¬
derstood. Used, in conjunction with,
gestures, expressions of. the face, by
slight contractions of the. facial mus¬
cles, give value and meaning of varying
Intensity to what we wish to commu-
CESARE MAGAROTTO has been Secretary-
General of the World Federation of the Deaf
since its foundation in 1951. He is Director-
General of the Italian National Association
of the Deaf and Dumb. (ENS) and President
of the State Technical Institute for the Deaf
and Dumb in Rome.. He has published
numerous studies on ' deafness, including-
"Problems of the Deaf", Rome. ENS. 7955
(also in Italian and French); "The Deaf and
Professional Education', Rome, ENS, 1961
(also in Italian, French and Spanish); 'Help
for the Deaf After the Age of 13", ENS, 1969
(also In French).
nicate. The gesture for "come here",
for example, can equally well be
expressed as an Imperative command
or as an affectionate invitation.
Persons who can hear use gestures
merely to emphasize spoken language
and communicate shades and intensity
of meaning through the tones and
modulations of the voice. But the deaf
express these feelings and nuances
through appropriate facial expressions
and by modulating the gestures.
Gestures, like man's first vocal ex¬
pressions, date back to prehistoric
times and formed a valid system of
communication which could be easily
understood by different peoples be¬
cause ¡t always related to concrete
things.
Proof of the common origin of "na¬
tural gestures" lies in the fact that
even today they are almost identical
or so similar that deaf Europeans
manage to communicate just as well
with American Indians as with tribes
of Africa and South America.
Deaf people from anywhere irr the
world are able not only to understand
each other, but can communicate effec¬
tively after a few hours' "conversa¬
tion", used mainly to check the con¬
ventional signs which over many cen¬
turies have been added to natural
ones.
If we think for a moment how dif¬
ficult it is to reach mutual understand¬
ing among persons speaking different
languages, thinking along different
lines and often quibbling over trivia
lities, and if we consider what an
impact this has had and is still having
on international relations, we have to
admire the deaf. Through the language
of gestures, which they practise and
keep alive, the deaf are able to estab¬
lish friendly relations across any
frontier.
In 1951, at the first Congress in
Rome constituting the World Federa¬
tion of the Deaf, it was possible to
observe that reality. The Congress
was attended by the representatives
of 25 countries with national associa¬
tions of the deaf, an well as specia¬
lists, doctors, educationalists, audio-
logists and psychologists.
There were lengthy debates but the
quickest and most practical conclusions
were drawn by the deaf. Using their
own language, they were able to
discuss and decide on the constitution
of the World Federation which today
covers 54 countries and numbers hun- "
dreds of experts In various disciplines
from every continent. No political
issues, no partisan views, no legal
quibbles hampered their clear, precise
argument.
Deaf people (and here we mean
those who cannot even hear with a
hearing aid) can be taught to speak
and to understand lip-reading.
But this "art" involves considerable
limitations and difficulties, added to
the abysmally isolating effect of deaf¬
ness itself. Consequently the deaf
make considerable efforts -and sacri¬
fices to adjust themselves to the world
of sound (unnatural to them), and

The deaf have evolved
a shorthand language of
hand signs and gestures
for use In conferences
and meetings. Photos
show how the words
United Nations and Unesco
are formed. Far left,
crossed hands signify "to
unite", "union", or "United
Nations". If this sign
is then followed by the
gesture for "organization
on a world scale", top left,
the words "United Nations
Organization" are indicat¬
ed. If the first gesture is
followed by the sign for
"education", bottom left,
the meaning Is "Unesco".
Other U.N. agencies have
"U.N." plus another sign.
to develop their personality, their cul¬
ture, their rehabilitation, and the use
of leisure in their communities, aiming
to offer society the fruits of their
experience and abilities.
In Italy, for example, thanks to the
action of the National Association of
the Deaf, a special programme for the
deaf Is televised every Tuesday even¬
ing with the announcer using lan¬
guage gestures. It features reports
on the most important news of the
week followed by variety and cultural
items. The programme is much appre¬
ciated by the deaf, and in numerous
other countries the deaf are asking
for a similar television feature.
At the same time Italy, like the
U.S.A., the U.S.S.R., Denmark, Sweden
and other countries, is organizing for
its cultural centres of the deaf the
circulation of video tapes with sub¬
titles and gesture-language to replace
sound.
The use of sign language among
the deaf Is lost in the mists of time
and, as we see, there is a "natural
language" which Is the same or similar
all over the world and which enables
the deaf to understand one another
easily.
Over the centuries conventional ges¬
tures have been added to this natural
language. In 1951 the World Fed¬
eration of the Deaf decided to compile
a "Dictionary of Gestures for Inter¬
national Conferences" in order to pro¬
vide for everyone the possibility of
accurate and rational Interpretation.
The first instalment appeared in 1961
after ten years spent In methodically
collecting the conventional gestures
most frequently used in International
conferences and seminars. Thousands
of gestures were recorded and care¬
fully screened. Lack of funds meant
that it was possible to publish only
a small volume of 339 photographs
and an English and French glossary.
In 1971 the second volume was
published, containing a further 300 of
the most important gestures used In
international conferences.
At the present time a committee
of experts is engaged In compiling a
new dictionary of over 1,500 words
which is to be presented at the
Seventh Congress of the World
Federation of the Deaf to be held In
Washington, in 1975.
The work is particularly complex
as it consists In examining scores of
publications from different countries,
selecting the terms most frequently
used in international conferences,
picking out those which originated in
natural gestures without reference to
alphabetical signs, confirming exact
rules which are already an integral
part of the sign language and permit
abstract discourse, and so on.
We hope that as in the past this
enterprising work of the deaf and their
culture may be of service to the world
community. It is worthwhile recalling
that the international language of the
deaf is the basis of the sign language
used by underwater divers, crane op¬
erators, airline personnel and others
who work in noisy surroundings or In
conditions of complete silence, such
as radio and TV studios. It is also
the basis of the little glossaries of
100 signs translated into 36 languages
which airlines issue to their cabin staff
and to passengers for communicating
in an emergency.
But the most urgent need of man¬
kind is peace and understanding among
all peoples. The international sign
language may perhaps make Its own
special contribution towards achieving
this aspiration.
