The three drawings shown on these
pages reveal in what detail 'Leonardo
studied the problems of casting his
colossal bronze statue. Never before
had such a great statue been cast in
a single operation. On manuscript
sheet from Codex Madrid II
(opposite page, top) Leonardo
sketched the horse, jotted down the date,
December 20, 1493, and wrote : "I have
decided to cast the horse without tail
and lying on the side." (In fact he later
changed his mind and decided to cast
it upside down to allow proper distribution
of the molten bronze. See illustration
page 38.) Above, sketch from Codex
Madrid II of structure for transporting
the huge mould and placing
it in position in the ground.
Opposite, Madrid II sketch showing
now the mould would be opened.
36

i, ( iifc" JThr story pi
the colossal horse
1 ^¡rV^SrASTT **
»*
Drawinqs © 1974 by McGraw-Hill Book Co. (UK) Limited. Maidenhead.
England and Taurus Ediciones. S. A Madrid, Spain
NN 1482 Leonardo wrote a remarkable letter to the
lruler of Milan, Lodovico Sforza. In it, the brilliant
. /and self-confident young man of thirty offered his
\~S services as engineer and architect, and at the end
of the letter, in a cunning attempt to arouse Lodovlco's
interest, he suggested that "the bronze horse may be taken
In hand, which is to be to the immortal glory of the prince
your father of happy memory..."
He was referring to the equestrian statue which Lodovico
wanted to construct of his father Francesco Sforza.
Leonardo was hired as an engineer by Lodovico and
during the next ten years or so he pondered and planned
how to construct this great monument, in the intervals
between amusing the court with entertainments and paint¬
ing The Last Supper.
Originally the bronze statue was to be life-size, but as
Lodovico's power and ambitions mounted, so did the size of
the monument. Finally the horse alone was to be over
23 feet high. To cast it, 100 tons of bronze would be
required. No sculpture of this size had ever been attempted
before.
Leonardo wanted to cast the colossal statue in a single
operation to avoid the disfiguring seams which mar statues
cast in several pieces. But existing technology was inade¬
quate for a single casting on such a scale.
By May 1491 Leonardo had completed a full-scale clay
model of the great horse. It was unveiled in the old yard
of Lodovico's ducal residence at a betrothal ceremony
in November 1493, and became one of the wonders of
Milan. But the horse was never cast. In 1494 the bronze
set aside for it was sent to Lodovico's brother-in-law to be
made into cannon.
For centuries no one could be sure whether Leonardo
had solved the intractable problems of casting on such a
massive scale. Now the problem is clarified by almost
twenty fascinating pages in the second Madrid notebook
in which we can actually see Leonardo thinking aloud about
the casting. These notes are virtually a treatise on casting
problems. *
Leonardo draws the horse's pose. He sketches the r
37

Drawings taken from "The Unknown Leonardo"
© 1974. McGraw-Hill Book Co
(UK) Limited, Maidenhead, England
Outer mould
of the great horse
from Codex Madrid II shown
on front cover.
Photos above and right reveal the
remarkable similarities between the casting
method Leonardo invented and that used
two centuries later in the making of the
statue of Louis XIV (above) with its
network of tubes into which the bronze
was poured. Right, a page of Codex
Madrid II on which Leonardo visualized
the casting pit for his horse, with,
above centre, an 18th-century schematic
drawing (from above) of the casting pit of
the Louis XIV statue. The resemblance
between the two pits is unmistakable.
Sketch at bottom of manuscript page
(right) was made by Leonardo after he
had decided to cast the horse upside down.
(See illustration on previous page.)
mould. It "can be made in one day", he notes. "Half a
boatload of plaster will serve you. Good." He decides to
cast the horse on its side. Then he changes his mind and
thinks that It would be better upside down. He draws the
bolts which will hold the outside mould together. The
ideas tumble onto the page from his fertile brain.
Leonardo abandoned the traditional "lost-wax" method
of casting, whereby a wax model was created over a clay
core, an outer mould applied, the wax then being heated and
drained off, to be replaced by the molten bronze. The
worst disadvantage Is that the original model is lost.
Leonardo's method was much more complex. He does
not describe it fully In the Madrid manuscript, but it can
be more or less reconstructed as follows. First an outer
female plaster mould was to be made from the original clay
model. This outer mould was then to be lined with wax or
potter's clay and inside it a male mould of refractory clay
was to be made.
This male mould would then be baked, the wax or clay

s**uírvl*~'* «i
H
\
ht 4
1 »»«»*-»
lining removed, and in the empty space between the two
moulds a wax countermodel cast. All imperfections were
to be eliminated from this wax model and then a new
female mould of refractory clay was to be made over it.
The wax would then be heated and tapped off, the outside
mould removed, strengthened, and then refitted on the
male.
The molten bronze would then be poured in.
This was the new system Leonardo devised. Historical
circumstances deprived him of an opportunity to put it
completely to the test.
The great clay horse came to a sad end too. When
the French conquered Milan in 1499, their bowmen used
the horse for target practice. It cracked, and then fell to
pieces. The mould was also soon lost.
It is interesting to note that some 200 years later when
a huge equestrian statue of Louis XIV was constructed in
Paris in 1699, the moulding and casting process used was
almost identical with Leonardo's.
Leonardo's manuscripts are filled with countless
sketches of horses, showing his unceasing
study of their various postures and movements,
which he drew without compromising the
spontaneous quality of real horses. Many
sketches, like the study of a foreleg above
from the Windsor Collection in England show
the minute precision with which he drew horses,
dividing their bodies into sections
and measuring them.
