SPIRITUAL
LANDSCAPE
OF NEPAL
Meeting ground of cultures
and religions in the shadow
of the Himalayas
14
by
Bal Chandra Sharma
BAL CHANDRA SHARMA is ambassador of
Nepal to France and Permanent Representative
of Nepal to Unesco. Vice-chancel/or of the
Royal Nepal Academy, he was formerly Nepal's
Minister of Education and Speaker of the
Nepalese Parliament. He has written extensively
on the history of Nepal and is the editor of a
dictionary of the Nepali language.

Left, typical Nepalese mountain village, dominated
by the mighty snow-covered Himalayan massif
of Annapurna. Below, detail from a 16th-century
Nepalese illuminated manuscript, depicting the serpent,
which figures in the legendary origins of Nepal.
The story goes that Nepal's Kathmandu valley was once
a lake filled with serpents and hemmed in by mountains.
A hero is said to have cloven the mountains with his sword
and the water flowed out, carrying the serpents away.
FROM time Immemorial Nepal
has been a land where people
have sought and found peace. The
scriptures, epics and such famous
works of the Hindus and Buddhists as
the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, the
Puranas, the Buddhacarita and others
have told of tribes, races and dynasties
of brave and cultured people who
lived and ruled there.
In the shadow of the Himalayas,
hermits, philosophers and thinkers
meditated upon man and human
happiness. In the eastern lowlands of
Nepal, the saints Yaguanvalkya and
his wife Gargl preached a kind of
human dignity and nobility that could
lead men to the divine. Janak, King
of Bideha, the prototype of the perfect
ruler and ideal man, established lasting
ethical and moral precepts. His
daughter, Sita, came to symbolize the
ideal of Asian womanhood, and she
and her husband, Rama, are the subject
of the Ramayana, composed by the
poet-saint Valmlki near the Gandak
river in southern Nepal.
This epic, loved and cherished over
most of Asia, has been an endless
literary and artistic source of inspi¬
ration. The philosopher-saint Kapil
meditated on the immortal figure of
the Buddha, the Enlightened One, who
said to his disciples: "I teach only
two things: the cause of human sorrow
and the way to be free from it."
This is the heritage of Nepal and
of its people, thinkers, poets and
artists. Stupas, pagodas and temples
honour Shiva, god of peace and
prosperity, or the Buddha in meditation
themes which inspire all the arts:
literature, music, dance, painting,
sculpture. Hospitality, optimism, tol¬
erance, understanding, creativity and
contentment are hereditary qualities
that created a social environment
which quite apart from Nepal's geo¬
graphical position made it an ideal
meeting place for different trends of
thought and culture.
The fertile valley of Kathmandu
escaped the strife and turmoil of
neighbouring countries. Thinkers and
artists here found welcome, peace and
quiet beneath the great blue sky, where
the solemn, mystic peaks of the Hima¬
layas stand guard, beyond vast ex¬
panses of green woodlands with their
orchids and rhododendrons, their
never-ending music of streams and
birds.
Ar-Niko was one of the Nepalese
artists and master-craftsmen at the
Court of Hublaii Han (Kublai Khan) in
the 13th century. He became Imperial
Minister for Building and Arts in China.
Best known among his contributions
to architecture, metal casting and
painting is the Buddhist Chaitya,
15

popularly known as the White Dagoba,
which he had placed on a hillock in
the Central Park in Peking.
The rise of the Hans of China and
Mongolia carried his fame and in¬
fluence to Mongolia where he was
known as Bolbo-Khu (Bolbo being the
Mongol for Nepal, and Khu meaning
young man in that language), and was
accorded god-like status utter the
name of Bolbo-Khu before a simple
Mongol, and his head will bend in
reverence.
The Nepalese have never fought in
the name of god or religion, and have
no word for a crusade or holy war.
Battles and fighting did of course
occur during Nepal's long history, but
the total number of people lost in all
of them does not exceed a thousand.
There have been no quarrels over
language, or between sects. And yet
Nepal is the home of the Gurkhas,
whose bravery and valour were dis¬
played in helping to defend the world
against tyranny in two world wars.
In this there Is no paradox. Nepal
is proud of Its age-old liberty and
independence. It has never been a
colony of any foreign power. The
people defended both themselves and
others who called upon them for
assistance. Non-alignment, opposition
to all forms of racialism, colonialism
and exploitation; peaceful co-existence
and friendship for all these have
been the guiding characteristics of
Nepal's foreign policy.
However, Nepal had to undergo the
nightmare of a century of family auto¬
cracy under the Ranas (from 1846 to
1951) before democracy was restored
by King Tribhuvan. The reign of his
son and heir. King Mahendra, was one
of reconstruction and progress. He
installed the Panchayat system in
1962.
The main purpose of the Panchayat
system is to ensure maximum partici¬
pation of people in government and
administration by encouraging the
development of local government
institutions at different levels, and
making them Into an integral part of
the structure of national government.
The basic unit Is the village Pan¬
chayat or council of village people,
always a traditional concept in Nepal¬
ese society, but now given a new form
and new functions. There are two
political bodies at the village level: the
Assembly, which includes all adult
members of the village; and the Pan¬
chayat, or executive, consisting of
eleven members elected by it on the
basis of adult franchise.
The successor of King Mahendra,
the present King Birendra Bir Bikram
Shah Dev, has come to the throne with
new ideas and a deep understanding
of world affairs and of the contem¬
porary problems facing his country.
Bal Chandra Sharma
