
THE THEATRE
OF THE SILENT
Shakespeare, Schiller, Gogol, Aeschylus,
performed by deaf-mute actors
LS the theatre lights dim
slowly, the clash of a gong announces
that the performance is about to begin.
Silence falls as the audience hears the
sound. The actors perceive the sound
waves as a physical sensation mounting
through the soles of their feet and
take their places on the stage.
But the silence remains unbroken
throughout the performance. Cos¬
tumes and scenery are unnecessary:
body-hugging black tights and white-
painted faces are all the props needed.
Body and face become the focal point
of Aspects of Man, a pantomime
created by the theatre group of
Special Evening School No. 2028 for
Deaf Adolescents and Adults, in
Santa Fe, Argentina.
Here, the gestures usual In the
normal child from the age of eight
months, which constitute a sign, rep¬
resenting a situation or object, become
the symbols of a more abstract
language In the case of handicapped
children. Loss of hearing is compen¬
sated by highly developed powers of
observation and translation Into terms
of gesture which enable the performers
to give expression, often in a very
symbolic manner, to the realities of
their universe.
This theatre group, which is directed
by a psycho-pedagogical specialist,
Professor Néstor Didier, has not only
given performances In Santa Fe and
other Argentinian cities, but was the
only deaf-mute group at the First Latin-
American Mime Congress and Festival,
held in Buenos Aires in August 1973.
With the conviction that the theatre
can be used as a remedial aid,
Professor Didier launched this type of
activity five years ago in the Special
School, producing pantomime with the
participation of all the pupils, whose
ages range from 15 to 35. The most
gifted among them go on to join the
theatre group.
After a prolonged period of adap¬
tation and familiarization members
work together in groups. The disci¬
pline includes individual and collective
concentration upon given situations,
with themes suggested by pupils,
gradually progressing from the concrete
Simple imitation or representation of
an object or a situation to the
abstract, involving concepts such as
Science, Politics, Love, Friendship,
God. Professor Didier considers that
communication of this kind facilitates
learning of the various subjects taught
in school.
The group's success at the First
Latin-American Mime Festival led Its
organizers to request Professor Didier
to give a series of short courses on
the theatre for handicapped persons
in general, in other words, not only
for the deaf and dumb, but also for
the blind an unusual and fascinating
experiment which merits the closest
attention.
At the 6th Congress of the World
Federation of the Deaf, held at Unesco
Headquarters In Paris in August 1971,
the Director of the Santa Fe Special
School stated that he had observed
that the pupils' drama activities en¬
abled each Individual to acquire a
deeper knowledge of his or her own
personality. Drama was thus extremely
effective in helping the handicapped to
overcome their inhibitions, to establish
closer relationships within the group
and to Improve their social contacts In
general.
During the same Congress, Pro¬
fessor V. Indjef of Bulgaria spoke of
the rôle of pantomime in visual and
movement co-ordination, in visual per¬
ception and in the enrichment of the
sign language of the deaf. He stressed
that this art above all others helped
the deaf to overcome their feelings of
inferiority.
Italy's Professor N. Palazzotto went
even further. After pointing out the
widely recognized educational rôle of
the theatre In general as a stimulus to
creativity and acquiring culture, he
underlined the therapeutic value of
pantomime for the deaf.
Mime requires a continuous gym¬
nastic and respiratory preparation
which is an extremely important factor
In the process of speech rehabilitation
of deaf children. In view of this, he
strongly recommended the teaching of
mime in all schools for the deaf,
whatever the level or grade.
Another aspect of this art is pre¬
sented by the Moscow Theatre of
Mime and Gesture, a team of deaf
and dumb actors directed by Victor
S. Znamerovsky. Not only has
Znamerovsky succeeded in making
each actor discover his own "voice",
his personal "tone" in the gesture,
the smile, in the sudden change of
expression, but he has also managed
to a certain extent to reconstruct the
"text" of the works performed.
The company's repertory includes
Aeschylus' Prometheus Bound; Sha¬
kespeare's Twelfth Night ; Intrigue and
Love by Schiller; Marriage by Gogol,
and a number of works by contempor¬
ary Soviet writers, such as That Time
in Seville, a story by S. Aleshin about
Don Juan, and The Enchanted Island by
Y. Jaritonov. The group has performed
with outstanding success outside the
Soviet Union, notably In Sofia, Warsaw
and Budapest.
The same "fidelity" to the text is
also characteristic of the Deutsches
Gehörlosen Theater (The German
Theatre of the Deaf) from Dortmund,
Federal Republic of Germany, which
performed Shakespeare's Romeo and
Juliet and Büchner's Woyzeck In Paris
during the 6th Congress of the World
Federation of the Deaf.
H1ERE one should certainly
mention a curious experience common
to both the Argentine and the Soviet
troupes. In the pantomime Aspects of
Man the voice of an invisible narrator
sometimes supplements the gestures
and links up the various sketches.
When The Enchanted Island was filmed
(the film won the Silver Dragon award
at the Cracow international film festival m>j
in Poland), it had to be dubbed for //
persons with normal hearing. In other
words, the language of the deaf, just
like any other language in the world,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

THE THEATRE
OF THE SILENT (Continued)
needs to be translated or interpreted
for those who are unfamiliar with it.
A rather different case from these
two is the National Theater of the Deaf
in Connecticut, U.S.A. Founded and
directed by David Hays, a well-known
Broadway set-designer, this company
toured North America, Europe and
the Middle East, performing before
aijdiences in which over 80 per cent of
the spectators had normal hearing.
This is a troupe of professional
actors, and is particularly distinguished
for its liveliness. Since the entire
performance is based on gestures, the
members of the troupe are intensely
observant and seem twice as alive as
most other actors. As Hays points
out, however, the Theater of the Deaf
is not "help for the handicapped." So
the real aim is to educate the public,
not the actors.
"Our biggest problem", says Hays,
"is to break through uninformed atti¬
tudes concerning deaf people and
obtain the feeling we want in terms of
appreciating the theatre company for
fully entertaining, fresh and beautiful
performances."
The best summary of the group's
objectives is that given by one of the
actors "We just want to be judged as
performers." Far from seeking any form
whatever of sympathy or paternalism,
this attitude already takes for granted
full Integration into "normal" society.
Photo © Central Studio of Documentary Films, Moscow
Above, using sign language, an interpreter transmits the director's
instructions to deaf and deaf-mute actors and actresses of the U.S.S.R.
Theatre of Mime and Gesture in Moscow. Right, curtain call for players
at the National Theater of the Deaf in Waterford (Connecticut, U.S.A.).
The troupe, whose voices must be "seen" to be "heard" respond
happily to audience applause.

