Plan of central Paris
shows the location of
two neighbouring sites
in one of the oldest parts
of the city, which are
today being redeveloped
in a bold programme of
urban planning. At right
of plan, the Beaubourg
Centre, already under
construction. It will be
rary <
brary, moi
lections, advanced au¬
diovisual equipment,
etc. At top of plan, the
former site of the
come a vast leisure and
commercial complex.
a»*4




Paris gets
a
new heart
by Nino Frank

A bold project
is changing
the appearance
and cultural life
of the
French capital
lI T goes without saying that
urbanism can have some influence on
the development of new and expanding
cities. It can reconcile the imperatives
of growth with the need to insert
buildings elegantly and rationally into
the environment.
In great old cities this is not the
case. They took shape slowly and
often capriciously in the course of
centuries, and In most of them
especially in their "historic centres"
only limited changes and sanitary
improvements are possible.
In these cities, everything flows
towards and converges on a densely
populated centre, where there is heavy
traffic, office buildings predominate,
NINO FRANK Is a Swiss writer and ¡ournalist
who specializes in cultural questions, parti¬
cularly literature and the cinema. He is the
author of several radio and television plays,
two volumes of memoirs, and books on
Paris literary and artistic life. He was for¬
merly a staff member in Unesco's Office of
Public Information.
Plan © Blondel la Rougery, ~ Paris
and the vestiges of the past have
accumulated. Here dwellings are
overcrowded and dilapidated. At the
heart of old cities there are often
vast Insalubrious areas where city
planners come up against a great
many largely insoluble problems.
We must renovate our surroundings
and adapt them to the future. But at
the same time there ¡s nothing we
can do with these city centres where
for centuries life has gone on in a
concentrated welter of activity, creat¬
ing a situation of virtually inextricable
complexity. Experts' dreams of re¬
creating these city centres or of
Infusing new life Into them can only
come true in the unlikely event of a
cataclysm.
In Paris this cataclysm has happened
and the urbanists' dreams have come
true. Of course, the va'st redevelop¬
ment operation now going on in the
heart of the city is exceptional. But
it is also instructive and fit to serve
as a model. Not surprisingly it is ^
attracting international interest. An r
21

22
additional and stronger reason for this
is that the French architects and
urbanists engaged on the project are,
in accordance with the wishes of the
authorities, working closely with
experts from other countries.
This bold . enterprise is underway
virtually at the geometric centre of
Paris, in the quarter which for cen¬
turies contained Paris's great central
markets Les Halles Centrales
among streets which formed part of
the great road, dating from the early
Middle Ages, which led from Flanders
to the Mediterranean and crossed
Paris from north to south. Later,
another great highway led from the
Marais quarter in the east, the centre
of Paris at the time of the Valois kings,
to the wooded suburbs in the west.
At the intersection of these two great
roads, Les Halles were built.
In the course of time the quarter
became cluttered and dilapidated
through the volume of traffic which
met there. This deterioration took
place in two separate areas which
circumstances have now combined to
join together.
To the west of the north-south axis
lay the Halles, with their bustling
nocturnal activity, their convoys of
lorries bringing loads of produce In
from the countryside, and their great
piles of refuse. The great French
novelist Emile Zola was inspired to
name one of his novels after this
teeming quarter, which he called "Le
ventre de Paris" the belly of Paris.
To the east is one of the oldest
quarters in the city, known as Beau¬
bourg because it was once a suburb
("faubourg") called beautiful ("beau")
because of the allure of the ladies who
lived ¡n it. From the end of the Middle
Ages, when the great Lombard finan¬
ciers did business there, until the time
of the Scottish financier John Law
and his spectacular bankruptcy in the
18th century, the neighbourhood was
a great banking district. Then It de¬
teriorated and in time became the most
decrepit and noisome part of Paris.
Photo Centre Beaubourg, Paris
About 40 years ago, the narrow
alleys of Beaubourg had become
sordid slums. Its tottering buildings
were condemned and razed to the
ground. The resulting big patch of
waste ground soon fell into the tenta¬
cular clutches of Les Halles, for which
it became a much-needed parking lot.
And this is how it would have stayed
had not the Halles themselves, too
sprawling and too inadequate for their
task, been condemned after the
Second World War.
On 4 and 5 March, 1969, there took
place what has been called Paris's
removal operation of the century. The
markets left the famous metal pavilions
built by the architect Baltard during
the Second Empire and moved out to
the suburbs. In this way, they returned
to their original extra-mural state, for
back in the 12th century their site lay
outside the city walls.
This colossal transfer freed 15 hec¬
tares of land, ten of them where the
Halles had been, five at Beaubourg.
This was the golden opportunity for
the urbanists; now they could, not so
much improve, as recreate entirely the
centre of a great city.
Of course, plans to fill these empty
spaces with massige buildings soon
began to appear in a steady stream.
It was proposed to install ministries on
them, or to make them the site of the
University of Paris. But this would
have meant that one problem would
have been replaced by another. In¬
stead of congestion at night there
would have been even worse con¬
gestion by day. It was at this point,
fortunately, that other Ideas prevailed.
Why, it was asked, not turn these
15 hectares into an oasis in the heart
of the city, a resting place from the
daily, turmoil? And why not restore
to each site its own autonomous
personality? Why not create a com-
. mercial centre thus respecting one
of the quarter's traditional activities
and a leisure centre on the site of
the Halles?
Why not turn the Beaubourg site
into a cultural meeting place, espe¬
cially by transferring to it Paris's
modern art museums?
A fundamental stipulation of this
project was that the ground level of
each area should be a pedestrian
precinct where people will be able to
stroll at their ease.
Work on this vast project has been
going on for some time, and immense
gaping craters have been excavated
on each site. So vast and deep are
they that scenes for a film were shot
in one of them during a halt in the
work.
The operation is instructive for
several reasons, and the way in which
the architects have solved the prob¬
lems facing them is particularly
admirable.
The redevelopment of the larger site,
the former Halles, will be a long job.
If everything goes according to plan,
work will be completed by 1982 or
1983. There will be several buildings
above the surface, and also an ex-

H ;-Ü:íWv P^P^P^P^P^HP^P^M
M
"'
*»«iPiíiiiy¡
,-*- r,
jL
Z2r<_
1
*I
/U -i
II.
FROM CAR PARK
TO PALACE
OF CULTURE
A great cultural centre is to rise
In the heart of Paris . on the Place
Beaubourg, for many years used as a
car park (1). In the words of its director,
Robert Bordaz, the Beaubourg Centre
"will bring to the public the living and
immediate image of art in process of
creation". Architect's model (3) re¬
veals the original features of the
metal-ribbed structure with Its immense
glass windows. Visitors will move
from floor to floor on escalators (2
and 4) set in transparent tubes and
attached to the facade so as to leave
the maximum of free space within
the building itself.
traordinary five-storey underground
structure, extending 25 metres below
ground level and covering 50,000
square metres in the form of a hol-
lowed-out inverted pyramid. This is
the "forum", which will be an area to
walk and relax in. It will have shops,
restaurants and cinemas, and the
whole area will be open to daylight
through a set of terraces.
Another feature of the project will
endow the commercial centre and the
forum with a unique and delightful
atmosphere. There will be almost five
hectares of park around them: a riot
of vegetation and trees.
The English landscape architect
Russell Page, who is preparing the
plans for this park, wants it to be
planted not only with traditional city
trees, such as chestnuts and limes, but
with exotic ones, such as cedars from
the Himalayas, maples from Canada,
tulip trees from Virginia, and rowans
from Tibet, so that passersby can
look at trees in bloom all the year
round. In addition wonder of won
ders in Paris there will also be lawns,
where In fine weather people will be
allowed to walk or lie down, a stream,
and ponds at ground level where they
will be free to take a paddle.
One of these tree-lined walks (as
well as underground corridors for
those who want to avoid the traffic
in the streets above) will lead to the
other area being developed, where
the visitor will be In a totally different
world. Here, If there is any commerce
at all, it will be a commerce In new
ideas and new inventions in art and
culture. Here, in 1976 the Beaubourg
Centre will open its doors, under the
direction of M. Robert Bordaz,
former director-general of the French
national radio and television network.
It will be a remarkable building: resem¬
bling a kind of light, transparent, lumi¬
nous ship a ship whose superstruc¬
ture is now rising from the earth.
In the area is the Fountain of the
Innocents, the work of the great 16th-
century French sculptor Jean Goujon.
It brings to mind the medieval charnel-
house where, In the previous century,
the great poet of France's highways
and by-ways, François Villon, would
go and dream in front of a Danse
Macabre painted on the walls.
Also nearby was a cabaret which
during the reign of Louis XIV was the
meeting place of a corporation of
dancing masters led by a man known
as the King of the Violins. In 1661
this corporation was awarded the pri¬
vilege of a title: the Royal Academy
of Dance. Later it merged with the
Royal Academy of Music. These were
the beginnings of the Paris Opéra,
which still has these titles today.
In short, culture is no stranger here.
(International culture too, since the
story goes that Giovanni Boccaccio,
the 13th-century Italian author of the
Decameron, was born not far away.)
President Georges Pompidou an¬
nounced the foundation of the Beau- aa
bourg Centre in 1969, and after his £A
death last April, it was decided that ¡t
should bear his name. In a speech .
made in 1972, President Pompidou r

, expressed his feelings as follows: "I
passionately want Paris to have a
cultural centre which will be both a
museum and a centre for creativity, a
place where the plastic arts may take
their place beside music, the cinema,
books, and audiovisual research. And
of course, creativity can only mean
modern art, in constant evolution."
And so the original idea of a
museum to which the state-owned
modern art collections should be
transferred and then enriched has
broadened to embrace a whole concept
of living culture. The building itself
will be as spacious as a cathedral,
but above all It will have the non-stop
animation of life on board ship, as
Renzo Piano, one of the architects in
charge of the project, has pointed out.
"The analogy with a ship is accurate
in several respects: concerning the
structure, concerning its scale, and
above all concerning its relationship
with a moving environment." One
cannot help thinking of the motto on
Paris's coat of arms: 'Fluctuât nee
mergitur' (It floats and does not sink.)
In 1970 a competition was held for
this great development project. In
order to stress the international charac¬
ter of the undertaking, it was thrown
open to architects all over the world.
This was unprecedented for such an
operation in France. 681 sets of plans
were submitted, 491 of them from
countries other than France.
An initial choice of 31 was made by
the International jury, which included
Oscar Niemeyer (Brazil) and Philip
Johnson (U.S.A.). The final choice
was a project submitted by architects
Renzo Piano and Gianfranco Franchini
(Italy), and Richard Rogers (U.K.)
assisted by engineering consultants of
Ove Arup and Partners (U.K.). The
project combined extreme technical
audacity with purity and simplicity of
line.
As revealed by the mock-ups, the
Beaubourg Centre will be an Immense
cage of light, 42 metres high, 60 metres
wide, and 166 metres long. There will
be five storeys, each with an area of
7,500 square metres "enough for two
football pitches on each floor", as the
architects point out. There will be no
partitions nor pillars, and all machinery
air conditioning, electricity, etc. will
be at the top of the building.
Thus each floor will be totally free.
People will move between storeys on
escalators covered by transparent
screens. These escalators will be at
the side of the building, and it will
be an impressive experience to make
this diagonal climb. On one side the
visitor will be able to see what Is
going on inside the building; on the
other, as he climbs, he will have
Paris stretched out at his feet from
the towers of Notre-Dame, the Seine,
and the dome of the Pantheon to the
green countryside beyond. The visi¬
tor's first impression as he approaches
the Beaubourg Centre will be this mov¬
ing tide of people, rising and falling.
Inside the building, forming a
counterpoint to this decor, there will
be, first of all, the vast department
of the plastic arts for which the Beau¬
bourg Centre was originally con¬
ceived. This will cover a considerable
area, since it will house two institu¬
tions which already exist elsewhere in
Paris: the Paris Museum of Modern
Art, whose collections will take up
three floors of the vast glass palace,
and the National Centre of Contem¬
porary Art, which was created to
promote avant-garde art. There will
also be rooms for temporary exhibi¬
tions and an extensive documentation
service.
For the first five years, the Swedish
museologist Pontus Hulten will be in
charge of this department. In 1956 he
created the Moderna Museet in
Stockholm, and has since won a
world-wide reputation for his depar¬
tures from the conventions of tradi¬
tional museum presentation i.e., sim¬
ply exhibiting famous works and letting
them speak for themselves and for
his conception of "art in movement".
For it is not enough simply to exhibit
a picture or the entire work of artists
such as Chirico, Picasso or Härtung.
To understand art forms with which
it is unfamiliar, the public needs to
appreciate the techniques, the thinking
and the feeling which go into their
creation. To understand an artist's
work, it is indispensable to have a
SURVIVAL
OF THE INNOCENTS
The Fountain of the Innocents, a 16th-cen¬
tury work by the great French sculptor
Jean Goujon, stands on the site now being
excavated as part of the Halles develop¬
ment project in central Paris. Above, the
fountain as it was before work began. Top
photo, to protect it during the excavations
it has been placed in a metal case sup¬
ported by steel props. (See also photo
opposite page.)
Photo J. Quldeau © Gamma, Paris
24
CANYON
IN THE CITY
Right, horsemen riding through
the rubble of the Halles develop¬
ment site are actors in a film made
by the Italian director Marco Ferrer!.
Opposite page, global view of the
gaping crater from which a com¬
mercial and recreational complex
will rise. The Fountain of the
Innocents (see photos above) In its
protective coffer set on stilts can
be seen In centre background.

grasp, not only of the social and his¬
torical conditions In which he lived but
of the total artistic context in which he
worked music, literature, and films,
for example. Thus one might present
a Cubist painting by Picasso, for
example, by also showing an African
mask against the background of a
Spanish landscape, in an atmosphere
created by readings of Apollinaire's
poems and the performance of music
composed by Erik Satie for the Bal¬
lets Russes. "People must have the
chance to be surprised", says Pontus
Hulten. "We must give them an oppor¬
tunity to react, to accept or to reject."
Books, films, microfilms, recordings
and manuscripts will be available in
a Documentation Centre, where there
will also be exhibition rooms and ex¬
perimental galleries. Artists will be
able to work in studios forming part
of the Centre.
Another important section of the
Beaubourg Centre will be an industrial
design centre, concerned with every¬
thing from objects to urbanism on a
large scale which contributes to the
forming and transforming of the
environment. A computer-controlled
filing system, extending over 2,000
square metres, will answer questions
put by experts and the public. Tem¬
porary exhibitions will be held, and
there will be a retrospective gallery
devoted to the historical development
of industrial design, throughout the
world.
But culture also and primarily
means reading. Thus the Beaubourg
Centre will house a great and unique
library, where it is planned to store
no less than a million documents, to
which visitors will have free and imme¬
diate access. This new-style library
will specialize in current events and
will be a kind of university without
walls. It will also include a big chil¬
dren's section. It will be on three
floors, extending over a total surface
area of 15,000 square metres.
The various forms of audiovisual
activity will also have a prominent
place at the Beaubourg Centre. First
of all there will be a film museum, a
cinémathèque, an offshoot of the world-
famous Cinémathèque Française,
whose founder, Henri Langlois, will
direct It.
Up-to-date audiovisual equipment
will be installed throughout the build¬
ing. It will include a closed-circuit
television network capable of being
linked to outside television channels,
as well as recording studios, audition
rooms, seven cinemas (with a seating
capacity ranging from 40 to 800 per¬
sons), theatres, music rooms, and a
television network, broadcasting pro¬
grammes throughout the Centre. There
will also be film studios with editing
rooms, and television studios where
portable video equipment will be avail¬
able (see article on page 9).
Another feature of this vast complex
will be a "Médiathèque", containing all
the tools of modern mass communica¬
tions, from slides and printed matter
to video-cassettes and video-discs,
small format films and videotape
recorders.
A "Piazza" stretching over some
10,000 square metres the same area
as the building itself will be created
in front of the main facade of the
Beaubourg Centre. Here people will
be able to relax, stroll, and play games.
Improvised activities will take place
around inflatable domes in this leafy,
verdant setting.
Across the Piazza will stand an
important annex to/ the Centre, a five-
storey building which will house an
accoustical-musical research and co¬
ordination institute. This is sure to be
one of the Centre's most interesting
and attractive features.
The institute is an entirely new Idea.
Directed by the famous French con¬
ductor and composer Pierre Boulez,
it will be a laboratory for avant-garde
music. In it composers and research¬
ers, working closely with specialists
in accoustlcs and computer science,
will carry out research into music and
sound. Perhaps who knows? they
may one day launch a revolution in
music. The institute will not be for
professionals only. There will be con¬
certs for the public, and visitors will
also have the opportunity to come and
see on television screens musicians
and scientists at work in their studios.
All this vast complex is now about
to rise from the earth. But, on an
outlying part of the site, one feature
of the Beaubourg Centre can already
be seen. This is the Saint Merri
school, which takes its name from the
patron saint of the fine church nearby.
One of the first of its kind In a city,
this school is dedicated to the idea
of freedom of expression: there are
no partitions, neither in the teaching
areas nor in the teaching itself. During
the day about 1,000 children will attend
the school, and in the evening it will
be open to adults. Six studios, direct¬
ed by experts, will provide facilities for
modelling, cinema, photography, video,
and comic strips.
It is estimated that up to 10,000
people a day from all over the world
will visit this vast complex now being
built in the heart of Paris.
The architectural concept of this
"school without walls" reflects the
determination of the Beaubourg Centre
to break down the barriers within cul¬
ture itself. For the underlying con¬
ception of the Centre is that it shall
not simply be a place where separate,
autonomous activities go on. It is
to be a place where the spirit of
enquiry in its various forms can move
freely from one centre of interest to
another, a cross-roads where people
and ideas can meet and interact.
Nino Frank
Photo © Laurent Rousseau. Paris
