A WORLD
GONE MAD
It is time to stop squandering
nature's resources
by René Dumont

RENE DUMONT is internationally known for
his hard-hitting studies on the plight of rural
populations in developing countries and what
he considers the chaos of the world's econ¬
omic, social and agricultural situations. An
agronomist by profession, he is professor of
agriculture at the National Institute of Agron¬
omy in Paris. His books have appeared in
many languages. "False Start in Africa" and
"The Hungry Future" are published by Praeger,
New York. His latest book, "L'Utopie ou la
Mort" (Utopia or Death), published last year
in French and Greek, will shortly appear in
English. In May 1974, René Dumont was a
candidate for the French presidency, and
based his electoral campaign on the ecologi¬
cal issue.
_ ENS of millions of children
in the poorer countries are being
deprived of normal brain development
as a result of a serious lack of
essential proteins in their diet. This
is perhaps the most heart-rending
crime of our time, though it may not
be the most spectacular or the best
known. If present inequalities in food
distribution continue, untold millions of
children will suffer cerebral under¬
development in the decades ahead.
Those who for a long time have
opposed any kind of contraception,
and who still reject certain forms such
as abortions in the early stages of
pregnancy, unwittingly bear a large
share of responsibility for this intol¬
erable situation. But they are not
alone. The blame must be shared by
all who help to perpetuate an increas¬
ingly inadmissible social situation.
The tragedy is that there would be
more than enough protein sources in
the world to satisfy the minimum needs
of all today's children if these sub¬
stances were distributed rationally and
equally. What happens is that they are
shared out almost solely in proportion
to financial resources, and this leads
to appalling waste.
Powdered milk, for example, is one
of the best sources of protein, but
much of it goes to animals. Over
30 per cent of the world fish catch is
transformed into flour and the per¬
centage is rising and most of it is
used for animal fodder. A good milk
cow consumes six grammes of veg¬
etable protein for every gramme of
milk protein it produces. The wastage
is even higher for beef cattle.
Thus, like mineral and petroleum
reserves, which are also limited, the
semi-rare protein resources of the
world are being woefully squandered

by wealthy countries at the expense
of poor ones.
If proteins were distributed more
fairly there would be enough to go
round, but this would mean a certain
amount of austerity in the eating
habits of the rich, which in turn would
presuppose a social revolution pat¬
terned to some degree on that of China.
A Food and Agriculture Organization
nutrition expert has shown that if we
tried to combat undernourishment
simply by increasing production without
altering distribution, we should have to
increase the food production of the
so-called developing countries sixfold
between 1970 and the year 2000, a
task which is obviously impossible.
The first conclusion to be drawn is
this: if we really wish to overcome
malnutrition, it is absolutely essential
to improve food distribution by making
it no longer depend on the buying
power of the individual. It has been
calculated that present world food
production would only satisfy or
should we say gorge a billion persons
if they were all to eat as much as most
people in the United States do. And
the world's population is almost four
billion already! Current industrial
output, moreover, could only satisfy
600 million such avid consumers.
Our world has gone mad. It has
lost all control, both over its population
growth and its production techniques.
In some places people are over¬
worked, while more and more young
people in the Third World are un¬
employed. Above all there is the
unbridled rise of the consumer society,
most blatantly exemplified by the cult
of tfie private motor car.
Attempts to boost food production
alone are therefore not enough, though
they remain none the less an absolute
must. This, of course, is the specific
task of agronomists like myself.
When the FAO completed its Indica¬
tive World Plan in 1969-1970, it esti¬
mated that the "backward" countries
would have to achieve an agricultural
growth rate of 3.8 per cent per year
in order to eliminate most of their
malnutrition by 1985, the end of the
period under consideration.
Twelve years have now gone by
since the beginning of the base year,
1962, and in those twelve years these
countries have fallen further behind.
Although it is difficult to make a
precise assessment, it seems more
than likely that the poor countries are,
on average, as undernourished as they
were before the Second World War.
It even seems quite probable that the
poorer classes in India, Bangladesh
and most of the Andean mountain
regions are less well nourished than
they were in the eighteenth century,
periods of famine apart.
In 1970, which marked the beginning
of the Second Development Decade,
it was foreseen that an annual growth
rate of 4 per cent in food production
would be necessary in order to make
up for the accumulated deficit. But
at the end of November 1972, Mr. A. H.
Boerma, Director-General of FAO,
pointed out that in the first two years
of the decade the increase in food
production had barely exceeded 1 per
cent a year whereas population in the
countries concerned had increased by
over 2.5 per cent.
Unless an extraordinary effort was
made, he concluded, unless a miracle
took place, the Second Development
Decade was already doomed to fail in
agriculture. Miracles, alas, are not the
agronomist's speciality; he is much too
realistic and down to earth to envisage
such possibilities.
He can only issue a serious warning
to any demographers who still think
it impossible to bring about a rapid
reduction in population growth and
who consider the ageing of society
more ominous than over-population.
He may also address a timely word to
governments responsible for civic
education, a tool of which far more
use could be made.
If the experts are unable to work
out a co-ordinated programme designed
to halt population increase, then we
face the prospect of a series of
catastrophes, whose precise nature no
one can predict at this stage. Everyone
has a responsibility in this matter.
The Green Revolution, it is true, gave
promise of miracles, and it would be
wrong to underestimate its achieve¬
ments. New tropical cereal seeds,
including wheat, rice and maize, now
have a potential comparable to those
of their counterparts in the temperate
zones a dramatic change from the
situation twenty years ago.
From Mexico to Pakistan and north¬
west India, the so-called Mexican
wheat, cultivated in irrigated fields,
often on a large scale, by farmers
who have financial backing and new
techniques at their disposal, has been
a great success. In India alone wheat
production jumped from 12 to 26 million
tons in a six-year period.
The picture is more mixed in the
rice fields. In the Philippines the rate
of growth of the new miracle rice is
still erratic. In Java, Sri Lanka (Ceylon),
Bangladesh and India the yields of the
seeds developed at the International
Rice Research Institute at Los Baños
(Philippines) have so far been ex¬
tremely disappointing.
Too many rice fields in these
countries are still only rain-fed, un-
levelled and dependent on the irregu¬
larities of the monsoon. When the
government builds an irrigation net¬
work, it sometimes leaves the farmers
to install the final channels to connect
their land to the water mains, and
this they usually fail to do.
In Sri Lanka, on the other hand, r
-
"Every car you buy usually long before you have worn out the one
you've got means that farmers in the tropics will have so much less
steel for the ploughs they desperately need to lighten their burden
and increase their productivity".
René DUMONT
L'Utopie ou la Mort (Utopia or death)
15

16
irrigation water is provided free of
charge, or virtually so, and hence it
is distressingly wasted. Each hectare
receives three or four times as much
water as it needs, and this means that
three or four fewer harvests are being
irrigated. Employment is consequently
on the down grade.
The existence of 800,000 unemployed
in this little country caused its young
"intellectuals" to revolt. In point of
fact, they are more interested in a
steady office job than standing bare¬
foot in the mud of the rice paddies,
like their Chinese counterparts.
In Bangladesh only 320,000 hectares,
out of a total of nine million under
cultivation, are irrigated in the dry
season, yet this is the most favourable
period for watering. If all the pumps
and tubed wells that are available
were fully used, it would be possible
to irrigate three times as much land,
but these facilities are rented to
farmers for a tenth of their cost and
only a third of their capacity is used.
To cap all, a number of them are
completely out of order and those in
charge of them have little incentive to
repair them, since they know that they
will receive their wages in any event.
There are also 250,000 hectares
of ponds and reservoirs in Bangla¬
desh, but three-quarters of their
area 190,000 hectares have gradu¬
ally become choked with earth. If
they were excavated to an average
depth of two metres or more, 4,000
million cubic metres of food-producing
water would immediately collect, since
these pools could be stocked with
fish or used as irrigation reservoirs.
This project would provide 2,000
million man-days, or in other words,
100 extra days of work over a period
of five years for four million landless
men who at present are unemployed
for just such a period every year.
The increase in the irrigation po¬
tential thus achieved would then bring
about full employment provided, of
course, that the population explosion
was halted. The cost could easily be
met by levying a property tax on the
rice fields and on disused reservoirs,
and allowing for a moderate rate of
inflation (as in Germany in 1933).
A report by the World Bank,
however, states that "reasonable
expectations" for Bangladesh are a
population that will amount to 140-
170 million inhabitants by the year 2000,
with "a total percentage of rural un¬
employment remaining constant at
30 per cent, in the 30 years between
1970 and 2000." The report takes no
account of the possible mobilization
of the labour of the rural population,
and all the extensions to the irrigation
system it foresees will be provided
by external aid. Similarly, increased
output will be the result of using
chemical fertilizers and insecticides,
with little effort being made to utilize
organic fertilizers and other means.
As early as 1960 a vast co-operative
experiment was made in Bangladesh
then East Pakistan by grouping small
farmers who owned at least one acre
of land into village co-operatives
where they could deposit their savings,
borrow money and find an organized
community framework.
A meeting was held each week at
which everyone deposited a quarter
of a rupee about $0.13 at the current
official rate of exchange in his sav¬
ings account, listened to the advice
which the "model-farmer" of the village
had obtained from the technicians of
the district, etc. Substantial loans
were soon granted to try to spread
the Green Revolution more quickly.
But repayment began to lag in 1967
and a number of village co-operatives
are now in a state of actual or virtual
bankruptcy. The production of IR 8
rice and vegetables has considerably
increased, but most of the farmers
even in the vicinity of Comilla, which
was the hub of this experiment and
gave it its name, were still in debt
to private money-lenders when I visited
them in January 1973.
The landless 20 per cent of the
population and the 25 per. cent who
own less than one acre are not ad¬
mitted to the co-operatives and are
sometimes excluded from other advan¬
tages. Tenant farmers are still obliged
to turn over half of the harvest to a
landowner who usually does not con¬
tribute to cultivation costs. Landless
persons can find work as hired hands
for only eight months a year; during
the other four, they say, "we eat one
meal a day instead of three."
How is it possible to turn the unem¬
ployment of this half of the population
to account so long as most of their
earnings continue to go to the land¬
owners, the money-lenders and trades¬
men? Women are traditionally confined
to the house and its precincts because
they would be disgraced if they went
out to the fields, yet in China, Vietnam
and India, women take part in replant¬
ing, weeding and harvesting.
In the northern part of Senegal, in
the region around Louga, when tradi¬
tional methods of cultivation were
used, the land was allowed to lie
fallow for long periods of time and
this kept the soil structure in good
condition. With the unchecked in¬
crease in population and in the acreage
which had to be devoted to the ground¬
nut crop, fallow land has been reduced
indeed, in the already overpopulated
area inhabited by the Serer people,
sometimes even totally eliminated
and thus the amount of humus in the
soil has been reduced.
As a result, the less solid compo¬
nents, such as fine sand and loam,
are not held firmly in the soil, but get
blown away by the wind. What remains
is mostly coarse sand which does not
retain the water from the all too irre¬
gular and infrequent rainfalls. A simi¬
lar situation is found in the semi-arid
belt that stretches across Africa from
Mauritania to Chad and the Sudan,
and south to Tanzania.
The drought in these regions in
"The top-priority task for our gen¬
eration ought to be to triple food
production between now and the
year 2000... To speed up agricultural
development is now a basic aim for
all the nations in the Third World".
René DUMONT
Hungry Future

1972 caused a wholesale loss of
cattle. Over-pasturing has destroyed
all vegetation in the proximity of wells.
Farther away some dry grass still
grows but there is no water to drink.
Some cattle are therefore doomed to
die either from hunger or thirst. Mean¬
while the inhabitants of these regions
are suffering great privations and are
dying in increasing numbers.
The vast agricultural expanses of the
Soviet Union one hectare per inhab¬
itant plus extensive pasture-land and
forests can, of course, be greatly
affected by cold and drought. Never¬
theless, the country should have been
able to accumulate enough grain
reserves, after the excellent harvests
in 1970 and 1971, to avoid the necessity
of buying so much wheat in 1972-
1973. What it did purchase, mainly
because it feeds its cattle on grain,
is no longer available for famine-
stricken areas elsewhere, and these
areas can no longer pay the high prices
caused by world shortages.
The well-to-do countries eat too
much meat produced from cereals and
are therefore unable to give proper
aid to the poorer countries. A world
sugar shortage is also impending, and
the scarcity of beef is going to make
the inequalities between rich and poor
even more glaring.
Since 1960 some effort has been
made in Central America to raise cattle
production on the latifundia where the
pastos naturales (natural pasture-
lands) had an incredibly low output.
In the western part of the Venezuelan
state of Guárico which lies within the
llanos of the Orinoco River, I estimated
in 1959 that one hectare yielded 5 kg.
of meat (live weight) per year!
The large estates in Guatemala, par¬
ticularly, have since improved their
pastos and installed slaughter-houses
so that they can export their beef,
boned and refrigerated, to the United
States where consumption by the well-
off, who form the greater part of the
population, is constantly rising.
Increased exportation has naturally
driven the price of meat up at home
and this has led to a drop in con¬
sumption, to between 11 and 15 kg. a
year per person in many places, in a
country where the great majority are
already poor enough. The disparity in
protein nourishment between the pri¬
vileged few and the many who remain
poor, or who are becoming poorer, is
therefore constantly widening.
These new resources thus do not by
any means constitute, as was hoped,
a springboard for agricultural develop¬
ment and thus for the national economy
as a whole. Where land is so unevenly
distributed, the great majority of the
holdings are inevitably too small to
be able to feed the livestock they are
required to support. Small farmers
have 15 per cent of the country's
cattle, but they own only 3 per cent
of the grazing lands and are without
the means to improve them.
The enormous agricultural potential
of the vast under-used natural pasture-

lands of "Indian" (as opposed to
"Latin") America is thus largely left
dormant and unproductive. The Brazil¬
ian "miracle", like the Green Revolu¬
tion in India, is only making the rich
richer and the poor poorer.
It does not leave the small producers
the minimum buying power that would
stimulate a widespread development of
vegetable gardening and hence a more
general revitalization of agriculture.
Central and South America, which are
so rich in potential resources, are not
even able to make their food produc¬
tion keep pace with their population
growth. The agrarian reform in Peru
is an attempt to redress this situation,
so far without brilliant results.
It was thought in 1950 that educa¬
tion was the key factor in all develop¬
ment, even more important than the
accumulation of capital. It is indeed
true that capital, to be used to good
effect, requires a wealth of knowledge.
The crime of crimes was com¬
mitted, however, when the schools
began teaching or at any rate ins¬
tilling in students a disdain for ma¬
nual labour, especially that of the
farmer, who was "soiled" with mud
or dust, depending on the season. In
a traditionally stratified society, work
on the land was already generally
considered sufficiently "degrading".
The farmer's children, anxious for
social advancement, consequently
and in a sense, rightly wished to rise
above such "degradation" and this led
them to see in school a means of
escaping from their dependence on
the land. As a result, schools in the
tropics have been swelling the num¬
bers of the unemployable.
The Chinese model is more interest¬
ing. In China all children begin their
education in an environment where
work and study are constantly blended,
and this, together with their civic train¬
ing, helps inculcate in them a respect
for work and for workers.
Wage differences are kept to a
minimum, which prevents the import¬
ing of luxury items. "Relying on its
own strength" and "walking on its own
two feet", China is modernizing its
technology only to the extent that
this does not cause unemployment or
require too much buying abroad. Out
of necessity all by-products are used
and therefore it wastes much less than
richer countries.
This is not to say that I consider
China to be politically and econo¬
mically perfect. Its rate of agricultural
development seems low to me, and
even somewhat lower than I thought
might be expected from the total re¬
organization of the agrarian structure
and the wide extension of irrigation.
More than two-thirds of Chinese
fields are irrigated, compared with
only slightly over a quarter of the
fields in India, yet China's harvest
was only twice that of India, even in a
dry year (1972), for something like 750
million inhabitants. China, however,
is developing its agriculture without
unemployment and without foreign aid.
Admittedly an exact duplication of the
Chinese model elsewhere would be
ill-advised. Fundamental differences,
such as historical heritage, traditional
outlook, social structure, and espe¬
cially recent political history, must all
be taken into account.
China is not a country or a nation
in the Western sense of those terms.
It is a continent, very much larger and
more populous than the whole of
Europe. It has abundant natural
resources which it has skilfully
located and learned to exploit and
lives largely cut off from outside
influences.
None the less, many of the princi¬
ples followed in China deserve to be
studied, to see whether, and to what
extent, they can be adapted else¬
where. Let there be no mistake on
one point, however: they will often
require as an inescapable condition
the abolition of privileges, and conse¬
quently a genuine social revolution.
Even without a revolution on the
Chinese model, there are many ways
in which education might be comple¬
tely transformed, as it must be if there
is to be the kind of general change
in outlook that would lead to a more
egalitarian society.
René Dumont
"People have criticized me because I have said that we are heading
for famine. We are not heading for famine we are already there' '.
René DUMONT
Paysanneries aux abois (Peasants at bay)
18
-=, 0)
._ o
O 09
O
