POWER FROM
THE SUN
Solar energy, already being tapped
in a multitude of ways,
now offers great promise for tomorrow
by Peter E. Glaser
16
riddle popular with French
children concerns a farmer, a pond,
and a water lily. It goes like this.
The lily is doubling In size every day.
In 30 days it will cover the entire
pond, killing all the creatures living
in it. The farmer does not want that
to happen, but being busy with other
chores, he decides to postpone cutting
back the plant until it covers half the
pond. The question is: on what day
will the lily cover half the pond? The
answer Is, on the twenty-ninth day
leaving the farmer just one day to
save his pond.
The realization that society will have
to find the answer to this riddle has
recently surfaced, and the issues of
limits to growth are being debated.
The "energy crisis" generated by the
massive production and use of energy
in the technologically advanced coun¬
tries is one of the major topics before
the public.
The question that needs to be
answered is: has society reached the
level of sophistication to apply solar
energy for its overall long-term bene¬
fit consistent with the balance of
nature? The answer is not yet obvious.
However, efforts required to provide
the answer are beginning to be made.
The amount of energy the earth
receives continuously from the sun
is enormous some 167,000 times more
PETER E. GLASER, of the United States, Is
an internationally known authority on the use
of solar energy. He has published and spoken
widely on the potential of solar power to
meet future energy needs. He has directed
a number of American engineering develop¬
ment projects in this field and is currently
in charge of feasibility studies on the concept
of a satellite solar power station. Dr. Glaser
is a past President of the International Solar
Energy Society and is Editor- in Chief of
the Society's tournai.
The solar energy falling on the
roof of a house in a year far
exceeds the energy used in the
most highly industrialized coun¬
tries to heat or cool a house.
Here, energy from the sun is
absorbed by batteries of collec¬
tors on a roof which are painted
black to aid absorption. Hot
water produced by solar energy
is stored in cylinders behind
the solar collectors. Experience
shows that 100,000 solar water
heaters of this type can save
$1 million in fuel bills.
energy than we now consume One
square metre of land exposed to direct
sunlight receives the energy equivalent
of about 1 horsepower, or about
1 kilowatt. Three hundred square
metres of land receive enough energy
when converted to meet the electrical
power requirement of a typical one-
family residence. If a piece of land
in a desert 150 miles square could
be covered with reasonably efficient
energy conversion equipment, it could
supply all the energy required by a
country like the United States.
There are two obvious problems in
efficiently harnessing solar energy.
First, solar energy is not constantly
available. Thus some sort of storage
is needed to sustain a solar-powered
system through the night and during
periods when local weather conditions
cut off the supply of solar energy.
Second, solar energy is diffuse.
While the total amount of energy avail¬
able is enormous, the amount available
at any point is not large enough to be
useful. Thus, solar energy must be
collected and converted Into useful
forms.
Radiant energy from the sun is
readily convertible to heat; one need
only provide a surface on which the
solar energy can be absorbed. If the
surface Is black, more than 95 per cent
of the radiant energy is absorbed and
converted to heat. If a fluid, such as
air or water, is then brought in contact
with the heated surface, the energy can
be transferred Into the fluid and sub¬
sequently utilized for practical pur¬
poses.
The two basic alternatives are fo¬
cussing solar collectors and flat-plate
collectors. Focussing collectors use
parabolic reflectors to concentrate
solar energy; the efficiency of such
devices is good, but they must track
the sun and this requirement makes
them complicated and expensive. Flat-
plate collectors are simpler and

Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris
cheaper to build, but they do not
reach high temperatures and have
lower efficiency.
Glass-covered, flat-plate solar col¬
lectors can deliver heated air or
water at typical temperatures of 100°
to 200°F, useful in such applications
as house heating, domestic water heat¬
ing, crop drying, and the like.
Focussing solar collectors can deli¬
ver comparatively large amounts of
energy to small receivers ; the recei¬
vers can be operated at high tem¬
peratures for such uses as steam gen¬
eration, melting of metals, and heat
treating of materials.
In more than a dozen countries
throughout the world, domestic hot
water supplies are heated by solar
energy. Several million solar water
heaters are in use, mainly in Japan,
Australia, Israel, the United States, and
U.S.S.R.
The system usually comprises a
blackened sheet of metal in a shallow
glass-covered box occupying 10 to
50 square feet of roof area. Water
circulates through tubing fastened to
the surface of the metal sheet, the
warmed water being stored in an insu¬
lated tank generally at a level above
the solar collector. In a sunny climate,
the hot water supply of an average
family can be provided by such a sys¬
tem. Auxiliary heat from an electric
heating element or other heat source
can be employed if desired.
A simpler design involves a trans¬
parent plastic envelope, similar to an
air mattress, with a black bottom sur¬
face. The unit is filled with cold
water in the morning; the solar energy
absorbed during the day then provides
a supply of warm water late in the
afternoon. This type has been used
extensively in Japan.
The principle employed in solar
water heaters can be applied directly
as well to the heating of houses with
solar energy. A number of houses
have already been built using solar
heating systems. By enlarging the
solar heating panels or using more
of them on the roof of a dwelling,
sufficient heat can be absorbed in the
circulating water to provide most of
the heating requirements of houses
located in sunny climates.
A heat storage tank must also be
supplied, practical considerations dic¬
tating sufficient capacity to carry most
of the heating demand for one or two
typical winter days. Conventional
energy sources would be used to
supply the balance of the hot water
demand during unfavourable weather.
Air may also be used as the heat-
transfer medium in house heating sys¬
tems that employ solar energy. Air is
circulated across or behind the
blackened surfaces in glass-covered
panels mounted on the roof, and hot
air is delivered by fan and ducts to
the rooms of the building.
In the past 25 years, more than
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

TODAY'S REALITY
TOMORROW'S DREAM
Left, design concept for a satellite solar
power station. This audacious project (to
say the least) of an American firm in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, would be in
orbit at a height of 36,000 km. in space
where solar energy is available virtually
24 hours a day. The station would have
two banks of solar cells, each 25 square
kilometres in size (5X5 km!). It would
convert solar energy directly into elec¬
tricity and feed it to microwave generators
incorporated in a transmitting antenna
(diameter 1 km.) at its centre. The antenna
would direct a microwave beam to a
receiving antenna (diameter 7 km.) on the
earth where the microwave energy would
be converted back to electricity. How such
a gigantic device could be blasted Into
space is another problem, but if successful
it would generate electric power ranging
from 3,000 to 20,000 megawatts (a mega¬
watt is 1 million watts). Right, Skylab I,
the U.S. space station, photographed a few
months ago from Skylab II Command
Service Module. Its panels of solar cells
(cross-shaped and rectangular) provide a
power output of about 20 Kw. Inset,
comparison of silicon-powered lamp and
kerosene oil lamp in a Pakistan village. The
lamp on the left is four times brighter than
the oil lamp. Silicon solar cell kits are
now available with batteries that store
electricity during the day to light Pakistan
village homes at night
18
POWER FROM THE SUN (Continued)
20 houses and laboratory buildings
have been heated, at least partially,
with solar energy on an experimental
basis. The United States, Australia,
and Japan have been most active in
this application. Most of the installa¬
tions have been technically successful.
Energy savings achieved through heat¬
ing homes with solar energy can have
a significant impact on energy con¬
sumption.
Residential cooling systems that rely
on absorption-refrigeration cycles will
require more technical development
before they can use solar-heated water
or air from a roof-mounted collector.
The Inherent advantage of solar
cooling is that the maximum require¬
ment coincides roughly with the time
when the maximum amount of energy
is available to operate the system, that
is, when the sun's radiation is most
intense. In addition, the solar col¬
lector, which is the most expensive
portion of the system, can be employed
nearly year-round if cooling is com
bined with solar heating.
The development of the devices
required to cool and heat houses with
solar energy has reached the stage
where these devices could be avail¬
able in less than 10 years if a mass
market is realized. In mass use, solar
heating and cooling devices could
reduce energy consumption. For
example, the potential energy savings
in the United States from the large-
scale introduction of solar heating and
cooling in buildings could exceed the
flow of oil expected from the Alaska
oil fields.
The primary advantage of converting
solar 'energy to power is the inherent
absence of virtually all of the undesir¬
able environmental conditions ascribed
to present and anticipated means of
power generation with fossil or nuclear
fuels.
Several imaginative concepts have
been proposed for the large-scale uti¬
lization of solar energy on Earth.
Which of the approaches will be the
most feasible alternative to present
power generation methods remains to
be established. The important fact is
that most of them are based on exist¬
ing technology and well-known physical
principles.
All large-scale terrestrial appli¬
cations of solar energy will require a
large land area because of the diffuse
nature of solar radiation. This favours
the development of energy conversion
devices which can either convert solar
energy directly into electricity, or,
through efficient processes, produce
high temperatures.
Very important to the success of
any large-scale use of solar energy on
Earth will be the capability of storing
energy when the sun Is not shining,
the transmission of electric power over
long distances, and the integration of
the transmission line into a power grid
system.
Solar energy can be converted
directly to electricity by means of a
cell constructed of a semiconductor

Photo NASA Photo © Atomic Energy Centre, Lahore, Pakistan
crystal such as silicon. This process
is called photovoltaic conversion.
In contrast to thermodynamic con¬
version, with photovoltaic conversion
there are no moving parts, no circu¬
lating fluid, and no material is
consumed. A solar cell can operate
for long periods without maintenance.
The first successful solar cell was
demonstrated in 1953. Today, similar
cells are a necessary part of the
power-supply system of most space¬
craft. As a result of the space pro¬
gramme, there is now a substantial
technological base for further dev¬
elopments. The two primary research
goals are increased efficiency and
lower costs. Efficiencies of 16 per cent
have been obtained. The theoretical
maximum for silicon solar cells is
23 per cent. Silicon solar cells can
be purchased today for about $20 a
watt.
New techniques in the production
of single-crystal silicon and automated
assembly of solar cells using mass
production methods could bring prices
as low as $1 per watt over the next
10 years. Once a major market has
opened up, the cost of silicon solar
cells could drop to only about 5 times
the cost of plate glass. Beach sand,
the material used to produce plate
glass, is the basic raw material for
silicon solar cells.
An alternative way of reducing costs
is by partially concentrating solar
radiation by means of mirror reflectors
to minimize the number of solar cells.
Large installations of reflecting mirrors
and solar cells could lead to low-
cost direct solar energy conversion
systems.
For example, one square mile cov¬
ered with such devices with an effi¬
ciency of only 10 per cent could gen¬
erate 180,000 kilowatts when the sun
shines. Since the sun does not shine
all of the time, energy storage would
be necessary with batteries or perhaps
through the production of hydrogen
by electrolysis.
The prospects of focussing the sun's
energy to generate steam for a power
plant have always been intriguing. A
solar powered steam engine, using a
large mirror to focus solar radiation
on a boiler, was displayed at a Paris
exhibition in 1878. Similar plants
were built in California in 1901 and in
Egypt in 1913.
Recently, large-scale terrestrial solar
power plants have been proposed to
work in conjunction with conventional
power plants. Several approaches for
the design of solar collectors and
thermal storage devices are being
investigated. Large areas of the desert
would have to be covered with arrays
of reflecting mirrors to focus the solar
radiation on to absorber tubes. At
least 100 square miles are needed to
generate 1,000 megawatts.
These tubes, which are coated with
selective radiation-absorbing coatings,
are expected to heat a circulating fluid
up to 1,000 "F. The fluid can then be
arranged to transfer the heat to thermal
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
19

20
POWER FROM THE SUN (Continued)
storage to permit withdrawal of the
heat during cloudy days and at night.
Alternatively, heat pipes can be used
to transfer the heat from the solar
collector to the thermal storage. Heat
is transferred from the thermal storage
to the working fluid which drives tur¬
bine generators to produce electricity.
If this work proves to be successful,
demonstration plants are expected to
be built in several years, and large-
scale power plants are expected to be
possible in about 20 to 30 years. The
primary location for such power plants
would have to be sunlit desert areas
receiving predictable and copious
amounts of solar energy.
Solar energy sustains the winds.
The power potential in the winds over
the continental United States and its
seashores exceeds by at least a factor
of 10 the United States projected
S^
A|«^V
m/r^ ^
^.
^^^^
^r /
SOLAR BOOST
FOR HYDROPOWER
Above, artist's concept of a
combined solar - hydroelectric
power installation envisioned
for Horse Mesa dam in Ari¬
zona (U.S.A.). During periods
of sunshine the solar conver¬
sion system would take over
electricity production from the
hydroelectric plant, thus effect¬
ing a considerable saving in
the dam's water reserves. The
installation shown here would
comprise a small solar power
pilot plant (left of photo) and
a more powerful production
module with twin batteries of
reflecting mirrors. Right, close-
up of the larger installation,
with its power house (left
of photo).
needs for electricity in the year 2000.
Winds are remarkably repeatable and
predictable. A wind power system
could incorporate its own electricity
storage which may include the elec¬
trolysis of water to produce hydrogen
for transmission through pipelines as
an alternate fuel.
In 1915, 100 megawatts of electricity
was being generated by wind power in
Denmark. In the 1940s, a 1.000 kilo¬
watt machine was operated in Vermont,
U.S.A., on an experimental basis.
Substantial advances in the design of
very light-weight aeroturbines indicate
that small as well as large scale wind
power generation may be feasible.
Projections indicate that wind power
could generate 20 per cent of the
year 2000's annual electricity produc¬
tion. This projection is based on the
use of wind turbines ranging in size
from 100 kilowatts to 2 megawatts.
The temperature difference between
the sun-heated upper layer and the
deeper cold water of oceans can be
used to power very large heat engines.
Experimental power plants were built
in 1929 off the coast of Cuba and
in 1956 off the coast of Africa.
These plants failed because of design
limitations and damage by a hurri¬
cane. If successfully developed, this
approach would make it possible
to tap the tremendous heat energy
stored, for example, in the Gulf
Stream with the potential to generate
26 trillion kilowatt hours per year.
To extract this energy, specially
designed ships (with a potential output
of 500 megawatts) would be anchored
in the Gulf Stream. The warm sur¬
face waters are passed through heat
exchangers which boil a fluid such as
propane to drive huge turbines coupled
to generators. The cold water pumped

from the ocean depth is circulated
through heat exchangers to condense
the working fluid (propane).
The process has to rely on heat
engines operated over a temperature
difference of about 40° F. A system
efficiency of less than 5 per cent is
projected. The major challenge is to
develop the very effective heat
exchangers and to design the large
turbines to extract energy from the
working fluid. In addition, materials
have to be chosen to withstand the
effects of seawater for prolonged
periods.
Terrestrial conversion systems suffer
from the fact that sunlight is not
constantly available and is diffuse.
This means terrestrial systems all need
large collecting areas and storage
capacity. This also means that conver¬
sion systems are economical in only
a few favourable geographical loca¬
tions.
These are earth-bound obstacles,
and the way to overcome them is to
place the conversion system in a satel¬
lite solar power station orbiting the
earth where solar energy is available
nearly 24 hours a day (during the
equinoxes the satellite will pass
through the earth's shadow for a
maximum of 72 minutes each day).
The maximum utilization of solar
energy can be made in an orbit around
the sun. The first step towards the
fullest use of solar energy is repre¬
sented by a satellite in orbit around
the Earth. This approach permits solar
energy conversion to be carried out
where it Is most effective with only
the final step arranged to take place
on Earth.
Similar to already existing satellite
world-wide communications networks,
power from space has the potential to
provide an economically viable and
environmentally and socially accept¬
able means to meet future world
energy requirements.
A satellite solar power station can
be maintained in synchronous orbit
36,000 km. from Earth's equator. Two
symmetrically-arranged solar collectors
convert solar energy directly to elec¬
tricity by the photovoltaic process. The
electricity is fed to microwave gen¬
erators incorporated in a transmitting
antenna located between the two solar
collectors. The antenna directs a
microwave beam to a receiving antenna
on Earth where the microwave energy
is converted back to electricity.
Such a satellite can be designed
to generate electrical power on Earth
ranging from 3,000 to 20,000 mega¬
watts. A system of satellites main¬
tained in a desired orbital location
could deliver power to most desired
geographic locations with the receiving
antenna placed either on land or on
platforms over water near major load
centres.
The use of the microwave beam
allows all-weather transmission, so
that full use can be made of the nearly
24 hours of solar radiation available
in a synchronous orbit.
Only a limited expenditure of propel-
lants for altitude control is required
to overcome orbit-disturbing influ¬
ences, such as the gravitational effects
of the sun and moon, solar pressure
and the eccentricity of the Earth.
The power generated by the Satellite
Solar Power Station must be trans¬
mitted to a receiving antenna on the
surface of the Earth and then rectified.
The power must be In a form suitable
for efficient transmission in large
amounts .across long distances with
minimum losses and without affecting
the ionosphere and atmosphere.
The power flux densities received
on Earth must also be at levels which
do not produce undesirable environ¬
mental or biological effects. Fortu¬
nately, man has considerable experi¬
ence in high-power microwave gener¬
ation, transmission and rectification,
to achieve these design objectives.
A high-volume, two-stage transpor¬
tation system will be required for a
Satellite Solar Power Station. A low-
cost stage capable of carrying a high
volume of payloads to low-Earth orbit
and a high-performance stage capable
of delivering partially assembled el¬
ements to synchronous orbit for final
assembly and deployment.
The challenge of a Satellite Solar
Power Station capable of generating,
for example, 5,000 megawatts of power
on earth is to place into orbit a payload
of about 25 million pounds and propel-
lant supplies for station-keeping
purposes of about 30,000 pounds per
year. This challenge could be met
by a space transportation system with
the first phase represented by the
space shuttle now under development
in the United States.
Solar energy applications are still
in an early stage of development. It
is too early to tell which of the tech¬
niques now being studied will be
useful in the long run. The prospect
for developing these applications as
alternatives to other energy production
techniques appears to be very bright.
But no quick solutions are in sight.
However the successful development
of even a few significant solar energy
applications over the next few decades
will permit society to look beyond the
year 2000 with assurance that future
energy requirements of all nations
will be met without endangering the
planet Earth.
DOWN
ON THE
SOLAR
FARM
I HE old way to run a steam
turbine with solar energy is to do it with
mirrors or optical lenses. They catch the
sun, they focus it into a single hot spot
to heat a boiler and raise steam. Then the
turbine starts spinning to turn a dynamo
and produce electricity.
It's a simple idea but it's not economic.
Since the sun does not stay put, the
mirrors or the lenses must be moved by
a complicated tracking system to follow
it through the sky. On cloudy days or
even when the sun is obscured by a thin
haze, they do not work very well. There's
little heat, no steam and no electricity.
Several researchers have stopped look¬
ing into mirrors and, instead, they are
turning to flat-plate collectors of which
the simplest example is a black surface
covered with a pane of glass. This is a
"selective surface", it absorbs more heat
than it radiates and the difference can be
piped off and put to use. It catches heat
even when the sun is not directly overhead
so it need not be moved.
Since these surfaces do not concentrate
sunlight nearly as much as mirrors do, a
large area is needed to gather heat.
Mirrors are measured in square metres,
but selective surfaces are cheap and they
could be spread over hectares. This has
led to the concept of a solar power farm
with land covered by sunshine collectors
instead of crops.
Or. Aden P. Meinel, director of the
Optical Sciences Center at the University
of Arizona, and his wife, Marjorie Pettit
Meinel, have calculated that a square
measuring 118 kilometres on a side could
collect enough sunshine in the south¬
western United States to generate a million
megawatts (a megawatt is a million watts).
They think that a plant could be set up
in the Colorado River area where it would
occupy some ten per cent of now uninhabit¬
ed desert. Waste heat from the turbines
could be used to desalinate enough water
from the Pacific Ocean to meet the daily
needs of 120 million people.
The Meinels have developed a "planar"
collector that they use to heat their
Arizona home and they have recommend¬
ed that a 1-acre demonstration farm be set
up with a three year budget of $4 million
to test their system. In one model of a
solar power farm, they propose four rec¬
tangular plots of solar collectors which
would send heat to central storage tanks
feeding turbines.
This would be a power plant with no
tall smokestacks to smudge the air. The
Meinels note that even motor cars would
have to be banned from the area so that
smog would not reduce power delivery
from the sky. For once, more muck would
mean less money. I
