From the snail to the galaxy
Nature has evolved an infinity of
SPIRALS
by Gerald Oster
m ROM microscopic marine
shells to the celestial galaxies, spirals
abound in Nature. In geometric terms,
a spiral is a plane curve that winds
around a central point while moving
ever farther from or closer to it. The
figure is thus produced by the com-'
bined operations of rotation and ex¬
pansion or contraction.
The essential feature of a spiral is
that a straight line drawn from the
centre to the curve, known as the
radius vector, changes in length with
the rotation. A tight spiral has a small
change in its radius vector for a given
amount of turning, an open spiral has
a large change.
The extreme example of a tight
spiral is a circle, a figure produced
by pure rotation in which the radius
remains constant. The extreme case
of an open spiral is a straight line.
Here the figure is produced by pure
expansion without any rotation and
the radius is infinite.
The ancient Greeks were evidently
fascinated by the spiral. They in¬
corporated it in the capitals of their
Ionic . columns and based many of
their vases, such as the amphoras,
on whole or partial spirals. Typically
for the Greeks, all of these man-made
12
GERALD OSTER Is professor of biophysics
at Mount Sinai School of Medicine of the
City University of New York. A pioneer in
the study of moiré patterns, he has written
"The Science of Moiré Patterns', published
by Edmund Scientific, Barrington, New Jer¬
sey, 1969. (Moiré patterns are formed when
two regular patterns overlap, and have various
uses in scientific research, including the
examination of the atomic structure of crys¬
tals.) Professor Oster is currently research¬
ing into questions of human reproduction.
curves followed strict mathematical
rules.
There are many kinds of spirals;
their differences depend on the
manner In which the length of the
radius vector changes with angle of
turning. Perhaps the simplest spiral
to conceive of is the one discovered
by Archimedes in the 3rd century B.C.
and described in some detail In his
book On Spirals.
The Archimedes spiral is the figure
produced by a sailor when he coils
a rope. While each turn moves the
curve uniformly farther and farther
from its centre, the distance between
adjacent coils remains constant. In
other words, the length of the radius
vector is proportional to the angle of
rotation.
Some other examples of this type
of spiral can be illustrated by the
movements of an imaginary ant. If an
ant was to move outward from the
centre of a rotating turntable at a
constant velocity in what it presumed
to be a straight line, it would actually
be moving in an Archimedes spiral.
The functioning of the common
record player is the ant trick in
reverse. The pickup arm, guided by
the needle, is constrained to follow
the Archimedes spiral groove of the
record and hence moves from the
outside inward at a uniform velocity.
If an ant was trained to climb up

From the galaxy to the atom, spi¬
rals abound In Nature, appearing
whenever there is outward growth
combined with rotation. Here we
show four examples: (1) A nautilus
shell, the perfect example of an
equiangular spiral, its structure here
revealed by X-ray; (2) A spiral galaxy
seen in the heaveYis as a diffused
luminous mass and similar in form
to our own galaxy; (3) Nuclear part¬
icles visible as a spiral in a nuclear
research bubble chamber; (4) A
spiral formed by a drop of oil on a
glass plate turning at constant speed.
a cone at a constant slant, its course
a conical helix when viewed from
above, would be seen to be an Archi¬
medes spiral. Similarly, mountain
roads that ascend at a constant incli¬
nation appear in aerial views as such
spirals.
Crystals that grow around imperfec¬
tions, called screw dislocations, in the
orderly arrangement of their atoms
exhibit the Archimedes spiral.
Electron micrographs of a cross
section of developing nerve fibres in
prenatal human life and in infants up
to about a year old also show an
Archimedes spiral. This suggests that
the nerve covering, or the myelin
sheath, is laid down like the insulation
wrapped around an electrical wire.
Another wrapped spiral structure in
the body is the organ of hearing with¬
in the ear, the cochlea, which gets its
name from the Greek word for snail.
Let us return to the ant climbing
up the cone. If, as it nears the top,
it becomes progressively more tired
and takes a path of diminished slope,
the spiral it describes will become
tighter and tighter. If the ant's degree
of tiredness follows a geometric
progression, the spiral will be of the
type known as equiangular.
The equiangular spiral has been the
subject of considerable study since
the French philosopher and mathema¬
tician René Descartes first correctly
defined it In 1638, In this figure, as
the name implies, the spiral cuts all
Its radii at the same angle. The
smaller that angle, the more open the
spiral; conversely, the larger the angle, ^
the tighter the spiral. r
ma / k:
f¿ prjpp --I / / * S=
\
\
\
. . . « . vl
- " >
- ft"^ r;i, ^T,T_ 1 > 1 /
ri^ali~.-i L/All pppppi- ».
v' <C -XT' -1 -JL "^-« --Vj^ '-i
.~r . -^-jjpjpj
r^r-s?5H»
V \ ^
-:< -:¿£
Photo © Alvaraz Group, University of California
Photo 0 Jekabs Zvilna

If a sea captain should stubbornly
order his ship to follow a fixed com¬
pass course, the vessel would cut the
meridians at a constant angle and the
projected curve it would follow would
thus be an equiangular spiral. In
theory, such a course would cause
the ship to spiral into either the North
or South Pole.
Flying ants follow an equiangular
trajectory when moving toward a
source of light; a peculiarity of the
insect's eye causes it to maintain a
fixed angle of approach. A pilot will
also often follow an equiangular
trajectory when homing toward an
airport.
Strictly speaking, if the climbing and
flying ants, the sea captain, and the
pilot followed a true equiangular spiral,
they would never reach their destina¬
tions. Destinations sought by such a
course are called asymptotic poles;
they can be approached but never
reached.
Among the special properties of
the equiangular spiral is the fact that
the radii increase exponentially in
length as the curve moves away from
the centre. It was the Swiss mathema¬
tician Jacob Bernoulli who demon¬
strated in 1698 that the logarithm of
the radius is proportional to the angle
of rotation.
Because of its logarithmic character,
the equiangular spiral is also called
the logarithmic spiral. In his investiga¬
tion of this spiral Bernoulli noted
that if any part of the curve is en¬
larged, thereby tending to flatten it,
the segment will exactly match some
other part of the same spiral.
This invariant property so impressed
him that he ordered that his tomb¬
stone be inscribed with a logarithmic
spiral and the motto "although changed
I always come back the same". The
stonecutter got the motto right but
unfortunately chiselled an Archimedes
spiral by mistake.
The equiangular spiral expands
rapidly with the rotation of the figure.
With its swirling arm and exponentially
expanding radius, it seems a more
dynamic form than the plodding, slowly
changing Archimedes spiral.
There are many examples of equi¬
angular spirals in nature: the web of
the spider Epeira, the scales of the
pine cone, the florets of the daisy
and the giant sunflower, the shoots
of flowering cymose plants, the struc¬
ture of hurricanes.
Perhaps the most nearly perfect
equiangular spiral to be found is the ©
shell of the chambered nautilus. The |
chambers of this mollusc shell grow ¿
SPIRALLING FLOWERS
CITIES AND HERDS
From pine-cones to cauliflowers, from pineapples to
sunflowers, the seeds, petals and leaves of the plant
world are often arranged in spiral form. This was per¬
ceptively observed by the famous Japanese painter
Hokusai (1760-1849), as this flower painting shows
(below). The plan of Auroville in India (left) shows how
urban growth may take spiral form; its whorls are
similar to those of Hokusai's Japanese flower. Right,
a herd of reindeer takes fright, turning in on itself in
a tight spiral formation as it stampedes.

in size in a geometric progression;
the curve cuts the radius vector at
an angle of 85 degrees. The shell
grows larger within a fixed form, that
is, it grows without a change in mor¬
phology. Given these conditions, the
only shape it can take is a spiral.
As with all true equiangular spirals,
a magnified view of a horizontal
section through the pole, or centre,
looks identical to the whole curve.
The nautilus shell grows at one end
only and in this respect it resembles
the horns of the rhinoceros or moun¬
tain goat, which also have some spiral
character.
Tiny marine organisms called for-
aminfera, which inhabit all marine
waters, also have shells shaped like
crude equiangular spirals. In fossil¬
ized form, these shells make up the
material of chalk cliffs and much of
the ooze on the ocean bottom.
Some foraminfera shells turn clock-
ART, LIKE NATURE, has adopted the
spiral as the form which lends itself most
readily to regular and simultaneous expan¬
sion in length and width and also height
in forms evolving around a central point.
One example is the helicoidal form of this
17th-century portrayal of the tower of
Babel (opposite page), rising upwards like
the shell of the fossilized gasteropod (left),
whose whorls coil around a hollow axis.
wise, others turn counterclockwise,
from the apex of the shell. The
direction of rotation depends on the
temperature of the water at the time
of the shell's growth.
By studying the ratio of clockwise
to counterclockwise shells in ocean
bottoms, it is possible to ascertain the
relative temperatures that probably
pertained during the Ice Age some
600,000 to 1,000,000 years ago, when
these shells originally grew.
Geologists have utilized the direc¬
tion of coiling of foraminfera shells in
petroleum exploration to make stratifi¬
cation correlations between various oil
wells and determine whether they are
part of the same bed.
How spiral growth commences is
something of a mystery. In all em¬
bryonic structures, cells are ordin¬
arily laid down radially In the first
few cleavages. The spiral character of
spiral organisms is visible after the
third cleavage, when 23 or eight cells
have been formed. The spiraling
characteristic is apparently a property
of the original starting cell.
In that connexion, it is of interest
that the majority of identical twins
have hair whorls that turn in opposite
directions and the same pairs of .
identical twins that have that form of r
Photo © Wideroes Flyveselskap, Norway
15

THE PAINTER
AND THE SPIDER
In his painting "Dialectic" (detail
shown here), the Italian Renaissance
artist Paolo Veronese depicts the
Greek myth of Arachne the weaver,
who enraged the goddess Athena
and was changed into a spider. In
spinning their webs, spiders follow
a spiral movement (see "Unesco
Courier", December 1969). This fact
escaped Veronese, who incorrectly
showed a web consisting of parallel
polygons.
16
mirror imagery also often exhibit
differences In right- and left-handed-
ness and reversed dental asymmetry.
The grandest of all spirals are the
spiral galaxies, which measure thou¬
sands of light years in diameter. They
are clusters of stars in the form of
multi-armed crude equiangular spirals
with centres at a common pole. About
50 per cent of all galaxies are spirals.
The form of the majority of these is
the same; they are double 73 degree,
equiangular spirals.
Our own galaxy, usually called the
Milky Way galaxy, is a spiral. The
earth is about 25,000 light years, or
approximately halfway, from the centre,
and, along with neighbouring stars,
rotates around it at the rate of about
150 miles per second.
It was once thought that a spiral
galaxy was like a rotating pinwheel
firecracker with stars being thrown out
from the centre. Recent observations
show this interpretation to be incorrect,
although at present astrophysicists
are generally at a loss to explain the
origin of spiral galaxies.
Such is not the case with the spiral
form of hurricanes, which can be clear¬
ly seen in aerial photographs. Warm
moist air rising in the storm system
and subject to the earth's rotation
produces a vortex motion, which cre¬
ates the spiral cloud formation. The
rotation of the vortex of a hurricane
is clockwise in the southern hemi¬
sphere and counterclockwise in the
northern hemisphere.
Counter spirals, those whose direc¬
tion has been reversed, appear in the
seed patterns of many plants. The
florets of the daisy and the sunflower
are arranged along sets of intersecting
equiangular spirals, one of which
rotates clockwise, the other counter¬
clockwise, from the plant's head.
The florets increase in age, and
hence in size, as the curves move
out from the centre. In the daisy
there are 21 clockwise spirals and 34
counterclockwise ones. In the giant
sunflower there are usually 34 clock¬
wise and 55 counterclockwise spirals,
but the largest of these flowers may
contain 89 clockwise and 144 counter¬
clockwise spirals.
The seeds of the pine cone and of
the pineapple are likewise laid down
as spirals; five clockwise and eight
counterclockwise in the pine cone;
eight clockwise and thirteen counter¬
clockwise in the pineapple.
The numbers of spirals in these
plants are successive terms of a
series called the Fibonacci sequence,
named for the twelfth-century Italian
mathematician credited with devising
it. The Fibonacci series is 1, 1, 2, 3, 5,
8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144 and so forth,
each number being the sum of the
two previous numbers.
So far, we have described spirals
.in terms of how the length of the
radius vector, or the distance from
the centre, changes with the angle of
turning. Spirals can be equally well
defined in terms of the manner in
which the amount of curvature changes
as one moves along the figure.
Thus, in an equiangular spiral, an
arc along the curve tends to flatten
out as one moves away from the
centre. In the circle, of course, an
arc taken anywhere along the figure
has the same amount of curvature as
any other arc.
There is yet another kind of spiral,
called a clothoid, from the Greek word
for spin, which has. two poles, or
centres, and two arms that curve in
reversed directions. In this figure, the
curvature becomes tighter the farther
one moves from a point midway bet¬
ween the poles. Each arm of the
clothoid, known also as Euler's spiral
for the Swiss mathematician who dis¬
covered it in 1744, resembles the
mainspring of a watch whose torque
on a shaft remains constant regardless
of how tightly the spring is wound.
Many individuals have hair that
curves in the form of one arm of a
clothoid. Hair like that Is flatter in
cross section than straight hair. Micro¬
scopic examination shows that one side
of such hair expands more with
moisture than the other side. The
expansion of the moisture-sensitive
side forces hair to curl over. Develop¬
ing ferns similarly often take on the
appearance of a clothoid arm due to
the unequal growth rate of the cells
at the tip of the plant.
In pondering on spirals, can we
find an underlying generality to
account for their existence from atoms
to galaxies? The most we can safely
say without blundering into anthropo¬
morphic or teleological philosophizing
is that wherever there is outward
growth, or a radial force, combined
with rotation, "a spiral is created.
Gerald Oster
