World's oldest youth hostel (above),
at Altena Castle in Westphalia
(Fed. Rep. of Germany), was opened
in 1909 and is still going strong.
By providing cheap overnight
accommodation for young people
without distinction of race, nationality or
colour, the youth hostels movement
contributes greatly to international
understanding and racial equality.



by Graham Heath
YOUTH HOSTELS
AGAINST RACISM
A world-wide movement promoting
better relations between young people
of all nations
SIXTY-FIVE years ago a young
German school teacher, Richard
Schirrmann, distressed by the
plight of the underprivileged children
living in the great industrial cities of
the Ruhr, established the first youth
hostel on the edge of an unspoiled
area of wooded hills. That first youth
hostel was simple enough an empty
school building with straw-filled sacks
to serve as beds but for many young
city dwellers it provided the first
glimpse of the countryside and their
first opportunity to travel.
During the first half of the 20th
century the youth hostel idea gradu-
GRAHAM HEATH, of Great Britain, has been
associated with the youth hostel movement for
many years. He became Secretary-General to
the International Youth Hostel Federation in
1968. He is the author of a biography of the
founder of the youth hostel movement entitled
" Richard Schirrmann, The first youth hosteller. "
Published by the International Youth Hostel
Federation, Copenhagen, in 1962, it has since
been translated into five languages.
ally spread throughout Europe, and
young people with rucksacks on their
backs became a familiar sight on the
roads and footpaths of many countries.
Youth hostels had an atmosphere of
friendliness and informality which was
unusual at the time: no distinctions
were made between rich and poor,
university students and young workers,
Germans and French. The status of
the young traveller depended only on
his willingness to co-operate and make
friends.
In the years following the Second
World War, the youth hostel idea
spread to other parts of the world and
the same spirit was maintained. The
International Youth Hostel Federation,
IYHF, which was set up to co-ordinate
activities in the various national associ¬
ations, incorporated in its constitution
the principle that in youth hostels
"there shall be no distinctions of race,
nationality, colour, religion, class or
political opinions." This, it should be
noted, was at a time when the prin¬
ciples of racial equality and brother¬
hood were by no means so widely
acknowledged as they are now.
There is normally no age bar at
youth hostels. Exceptions are Switzer¬
land and Bavaria, where there is a
maximum age of 25 and 27 years res¬
pectively. Generally, however, the
hostels are intended to meet the needs
of two main groups: senior secondary
schoolchildren, university students and
young workers, travelling indepen¬
dently (the age range here being about
16 to 25), and schoolchildren travelling
with a teacher on educational visits,
and aged between about 11 and 18.
The principal contribution of the
youth hostel movement to the attack on
racism is the fact that in the 4,364
hostels throughout the world the
brotherhood of man is taken for grant¬
ed and practised quietly and without
any ostentation.
25

If you walk into the common-room
of a big youth hostel in Cracow or Mu¬
nich, Lahore or Canberra, you will
find young people of every race and
nationality sitting down together to
share their experiences and discuss the
world's problems. As a Malaysian boy
recently remarked: "A youth hostel
is a place where you will never feel
lost".
In accordance with its constitution,
the IYHF has never admitted to mem¬
bership youth hostel associations in
South Africa and Rhodesia, because
legislation in those countries makes it
impossible for people of different
races to share youth hostel facilities.
But an interesting new project is
under way in Lesotho, with the
financial and technical support of the
Federation: the construction of a youth
hostel specifically designed to carry
out an educational task in southern
Africa by opening its doors to young
people of all races from neighbouring
and more distant countries. Situated
just outside the capital, Maseru, the
youth hostel will also provide accom¬
modation for young people of Lesotho
attending study and training courses.
The very comprehensive statistics
maintained by the IYHF show the
movement of young people from
country to country in some detail. It
can be seen, for instance, that 10,827
"overnights" were recorded in 1972 by
young Americans in the hostels of
Japan, and 5,643 by young visitors from
India in the youth hostels of West
Germany. Although these figures are
small in absolute terms, they represent
a network of individual human contacts
among young people which can influ¬
ence outlooks and opinions at the
grass roots.
In countries where particular racial
problems exist, the national youth
hostel associations take special action
to counter them. In the United States,
for instance, the national youth hostel
association has for several years
operated an "inner-city programme"
by which underprivileged children from
the big cities are taken out on excur¬
sions into the countryside and intro¬
duced to the spirit of the youth hostel.
In the past three years some
20,000 inner-city youth, mainly black
Americans and Puerto Ricans, from
nine major cities, have participated in
this programme. Leaders have been
provided and trained by the American
Youth Hostels Association, sometimes
with the aid of outside agencies.
In England, young field officers
appointed by the English Youth
Hostel Association regularly lead
groups of underprivileged youth, many
of them immigrants, on trips to the
countryside, using funds provided by
the King George Jubilee Trust. Diane
Cunningham, one of these field offic¬
ers, organized a winter weekend trip
from London with a party of 23, includ¬
ing boys and girls from Nigeria, the
West Indies, Cyprus and other
countries. Before the weekend she
visited all the schools involved, met
the youngsters, lent them rucksacks
and gave them details of what to bring
with them.
Walking together through the
countryside of Kent, stopping on the
way to play football, enjoying the
novelty of country things (many of the
children had never been out of London
in their lives), joining with other people
in the youth hostels to cook their meals
or wash up all these were part of the
experience. By simple means such as
these the young people were intro¬
duced to a new world of beauty and
friendship.
The youth hostel movement so far
has developed mainly in Europe and
Japan, but there has been some
interesting progress in recent years in
India and Egypt, where the govern¬
ments have begun to give substantial
financial support to youth hostels as
a means of encouraging young people
to know other parts of their own
country.
In Indian youth hostels special
efforts are made to bring together
young people from different racial and
linguistic groups. An annual trekking
programme in the Himalayas involves
some 500 boys and girls from various
areas. For twelve days, the members
of each group, under expert super¬
vision, walk and climb together, cover¬
ing distances of 120 kilometres and
reaching altitudes of 4,000 metres.
Plans are in hand to involve young
people from Australia and New Zealand
in these programmes. In the south of
India, an organized cycle trail, cover¬
ing 750 miles in the Bombay-Mysore
area, involves several hundred boys .
each year, including youngsters from
cities and rural areas.
It is no wonder that leading states¬
men throughout the world have praised
the work of the youth hostels in pro¬
moting better race relations at the
grass roots. "Today, the whole world
has become our country", said Sir
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, former Pre¬
sident of India. "We wish to foster
understanding and goodwill among
nations. In this age of division we
wish to take the path of unity. It is
not our aim to have a uniform world
we wish to have a united world. That
is the reason why your movement
gives central guidance but provides for
local autonomy."
The 0ueen °f England, inaugurating
a new youth hostel in London, empha¬
sized ' the fact that it would provide
a meeting place for the young people
of all nations. "Here", she said, "they
may learn that mutual understanding
and trust, for the lack of which their
elders have so often and so bitterly
suffered."
The International Youth Hostel Fed¬
eration, which enjoys consultative
status with Unesco, is proud to be
able to play a small but practical part
in the United Nations struggle against
racism.
Graham Heath
26
