Scientist O. Avezov of the Uzbe¬
kistan Academy of Sciences takes
a compact solar still which he
helped to invent for a practical
test in the desert. The "portable
well", as it has been dubbed,
weighs only three kilograms and
can hold two litres of salt water.
Folding solar panels open out to
capture the sun's energy and
provide drinking water.

HUNTING THE SUN
IN THE STEPPES
OF CENTRAL ASIA
Drinking water in the desert
now fifty times cheaper
VADIM ORLOV is widely known in the U.S.S.R. for his work as a popularizer of
science. He is a member of the editorial board of "Technology for Youth", one of the
Soviet Union's most popular magazines with a circulation of two million.
by Vadim Orlov
I| N one of his essays,
Maxim Gorky describes a curious inci¬
dent involving Anton Chekhov: "One
day I saw Chekhov, while sitting in his
garden, try unsuccessfully to catch a
sunbeam with his hat and put it on his
head. The would-be sun-catcher
became more and more irritated by his
failure, and his face became more and
more angry. Finally, after tapping his
hat disconsolately on his knee, he
abruptly rammed it onto his head."
The reason why I recall this vignette
of Gorky's is that I am convinced that
scientists, in the depths of their hearts,
cherish the same dream of capturing
the sun's rays, only they do not express
it in quite such a direct way, having
long been in the habit of speaking the
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
33

34
HUNTING THE SUN (Continued)
language of figures and formulas rather
than the language of poets.
There was a wave of interest in solar
devices in the eighteenth century. In
1741, Mikhail Lomonosov submitted a
paper to the Russian Academy of
Sciences, in which he suggested
"exploring the electrical force in the
focus of an instrument of combustion".
There is an illustration of an imposing
machine for concentrating the sun's
rays in a treatise by Lavoisier.
Scientists in the second half of the
twentieth century, with their more
business-like approach to the future,
have turned with fresh enthusiasm to
this ancient problem of harnessing the
sun's energy. In 1950, the French
physicist Frédéric Joliot-Curie de¬
clared: "If we had the proper equip¬
ment and if we could use only 10 per
cent of the solar radiation falling on a
surface equivalent to the area of
Egypt, we would obtain as much energy
as the whole world produces today."
Certain enthusiasts of technological
progress, accustomed to juggling with
the astronomical figures of power out¬
put of modern industrial plants, conti¬
nued to take the traditional view of
I
solar devices as technically impracti¬
cable curiosities. The error is for¬
givable: Watt's steam engine, Diesel's
motor, Laval's turbine and Tsiolkov-
sky's rockets were all regarded by
their less far-sighted contemporaries as
little more than fairground attractions.
Soviet scientists fully realize the
potentialities of what many of them call
the "noble fuel". The pros and cons of
modern solar technology have also
been carefully weighed from the eco¬
nomic point of view. As a result, an
integrated plan for Soviet research in
this field has been produced.
The research and development plan
takes into account the guidelines
which have been laid down for the
economic development of the U.S.S.R.
and which foresee the irrigation of
millions of acres of natural pasture and
the sinking of tens of thousands of
boreholes. It would in many cases be
advantageous if the pumps required
for this purpose could be powered by
solar energy. This would make it
easier to keep herds on distant pas¬
tures and would mean a saving of
millions of roubles.
Most of the uses of solar technology
are connected with agriculture, but
there is also a very wide range of pos¬
sible domestic uses, and the integrated
research plan provides for a number
of laboratories to specialize in this
aspect.
Scientists in Uzbekistan have con¬
centrated their attention on the trans¬
formation of solar energy into elec¬
tricity using semi-conductors, and are
building domestic solar water-heaters,
cookers, stills and refrigerators on this
principle. Specialists in Turkmenia are
working on air-conditioning devices for
appartments as well as for devices to
supply drinking water to cattle pas¬
tures.
The heating of buildings by solar
means is being studied in Georgia,
while in Armenia the possibility of
constructing devices or plants for
metal-smelting operations, where a
high degree of purity is required, is
being explored. A laboratory of the
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences' Power
Institute (Moscow) is seeking to im¬
prove the technical specifications of
solar devices by studying the physical
processes involved.

This concerted scientific programme
is already beginning to bear fruit in
some parts of Soviet central Asia and
the Transcaucasus. A powerful solar
still has been installed on the Shafir-
kan State Farm in Uzbekistan, where
sheep are bred to produce astrakhan.
It supplies about four metric tons of
fresh water a day, at only 2 roubles a
cubic metre. This is quite an achieve¬
ment, when it is recalled that in some
desert regions the same quantity of
water costs a hundred roubles. The
still can work perfectly well even in
winter.
A group of research scientists
under Corresponding Member of the
Uzbeck Academy of Sciences Giyas
Umarov has built and successfully
tested prototypes of a compact solar
cooker and a portable solar still. The
heat source for the cooker is a folding
parabolic collector with a diameter of
1.2 metres. In clear weather, it pro¬
duces as much heat as an 800 watt
electric cooker and a volume produc¬
tion model costs no more than
35 roubles.
The still, which its inventors have
called a "portable well", weighs only
3 kg. when empty, and when full can
hold 2 litres of saline water. A factory
now being built in Bokhara will begin
to turn out these devices in 1974, and
when in full operation will produce
25,000 water-heaters, cookers and
stills a year.
In the deserts of central Asia, where
even in the shade the temperature
sometimes reaches 50°C, the problem
of keeping food is particularly difficult.
The ordinary domestic refrigerator
works by the evaporation of a liquid
refrigerant and must therefore incor¬
porate a pump, which complicates the
design of the refrigerator and makes
the apparatus less reliable.
A member of the physics Faculty of
the Bokhara Institute of Education,
Orif Shodiev, has built a refrigerator
using a solid refrigerant, ammoniate,
which evaporates directly when heated
by solar energy, without passing
through the liquid phase, and then
re-crystallizes. This refrigerator requi¬
res no pump, is simple to use and
reliable and the hotter the weather
the more ice it produces.
The Bakharden State Farm in the
heart of Turkmenia's Karakum desert
has been using a unique solar still for
the last five years. It supplies three
metric tons of drinking water for the
farm's sheep every 24 hours. This
fully automatic device uses solar
power both to pump the saline solution
out of the ground and to distill it.
The main components are a collector
with a surface area of 20 square
metres and a solar battery with an area
of about 1 square metre. Its operating
voltage is about 27 V and its power
output is half a kilowatt. It is automa¬
tically equipped to follow the sun
across the sky, to find it again after it
has emerged from behind clouds and
to swing back from west to east in the
morning. An apparatus of this type
becomes economically viable when
alternative sources of fresh water are
more than 35 to 40 kilometres away.
Tests carried out in the Central Asian
republics with photo-electric genera¬
tors which activate the sluices of
automated irrigation systems show that
it is cheaper to instal such a system
than to bring in a low-voltage power
line.
The heat of the sun is now har¬
nessed to operate driers of various
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
SOLAR-POWERED
RAZORS
AND SHEPHERDS'
STOVES
Left: this device generates
enough electricity to power
a razor or a radio. Five
photovaltaic solar cells in
the bulb-like central unit
convert sunlight reflected
by the parabolic mirror
into electricity.
Right: Uzbekistan shep¬
herds gather for an open-
air meal prepared on a
solar cooker designed at
the ultra-modern Institute
of Applied Physics of the
Uzbekistan Academy of
Sciences, Tashkent.

36
HUNTING THE SUN (Continued)
sorts for fruit, grain, sunflower seeds,
meal, fish, timber, etc., and the
temperature in greenhouses and driers
can be raised by 9 or 10°C by using
selective glass which lets through
sunlight at the short-wave end of the
spectrum and reflects long-wave radia¬
tion from its inner surface.
Until recently, no attention was paid
to solar radiation in the design of
insulation for buildings; only the
external winter temperature was taken
into account. In recent years, however,
a new field of science, to which the
name of "constructional actinometry"
or "heliotechnics" has been given in
the U.S.S.R., has come into being and
has considerably influenced thinking in
this area.
A device now being tested in Turk¬
menia is capable of "servicing" a four-
storey block of flats using only solar
energy. It provides air-conditioning,
water heating (up to 300 litres per
household per day), and central
heating. Installation of this apparatus
increases building costs by only 4 to
6 per cent and in any case pays for
itself in two to three years from
savings in electricity and fuel. Resi¬
dential and industrial buildings using
this system are to be constructed in
many parts of the Soviet Union, parti¬
cularly in places a long way away from
grid supplies.
Some of the solar devices which
have been built in the U.S.S.R. are by
no means small-scale units. The huge
solar furnace which is being built in
Erevan, capital of Armenia, will be
unique of its kind. The parabolic
mirror will be 10 metres in diameter
and the furnace will develop 50 kilo¬
watts at a temperature of about
4,000°C. The Erevan furnace- will be
used both for research and for indus¬
trial applications.
Less powerful prototypes are already
in operation. Only with the use of
solar energy is it possible to reach the
high degree of purity nowadays requi¬
red in order to obtain heat-resistant
materials, semi-conductors, lumino¬
phores and new chemical compounds.
Scientists are already saying that a
"solar era" in power engineering is on
the way if not in the twentieth then
in the twenty-first century. A preview
of this era was offered by a recent
exhibition of science-fiction paintings,
"Tomorrow's World", held In Moscow.
A picture by the Soviet astronaut
Alexei Leonov and the painter Aleksan-
der Sokolov showed a gigantic mirror
orbiting in space. Lighting up vast
regions of the earth at night, such a
device could be immensely useful to
places where ground and air traffic is
particularly heavy after dark.

