\
w
/ Recent advances in
electronics have
produced devices
that help deaf chil¬
dren and adults to
overcome the added
handicap of speech
difficulties. Here
students in a read¬
ing class at the
Roohi School for
the Deaf in Teheran
(Iran) use audio-
electronic equip¬
ment to improve
their reading.



NEW VISTAS
IN SPECIAL EDUCATION
by John McKenna
JOHN McKENNA is Director of Psychology at the St. John of God Child
Guidance Clinic, Dublin, Professor of Psychology at the Royal College
of Surgeons in Ireland and lecturer at University College, Dublin. He is a
Fellow of the Irish and British Psychological Societies and is a member of
the Council of the International League of Societies for the Mentally
Handicapped. He has been a consultant to Unesco and Is the author
of the introduction and conclusions of " The Present Situation and
Trends of Research in the Field of Special Education ', just published
by Unesco (see inside back cover).
IfcVERY year many children
begin life with a handicap which
could prevent them from making
a useful contribution to society as
adults. In the absence of special help,
handicapped children can experience
life as more difficult than it need be,
and a sense of alienation can follow
as a consequence. Every child needs
help to adjust to life but some are so
clearly deprived of the requirements
for normal learning that their need for
special help is clearly seen. Let us
take a look at the principal categories
of handicap which can prevent children
from benefiting from ordinary edu¬
cation available to all.
rThe child who is
K S SE S
Cimcirrht I start °^ '^e Decause
I his need for help is
I recognized Immedi¬
ately. Perhaps that Is the chief reason
for the surprising success of the blind
In so many high-level jobs. Early
ascertainment of the defect allows
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
15

SPECIAL EDUCATION (Continued)
early appropriate treatment and the
minimizing of unfavourable conse¬
quences and sjde-effects resulting
from impaired vision.
There is virtually no limit to the level
of achievement to which the blind can
aspire if appropriately trained teaching
personnel and equipment are available
for their education. For example, blind
students can now do highly advanced
laboratory work, hitherto impossible, in
physics, chemistry and geography,
thanks to research in the use of new
apparatus.
A reading machine has been devel¬
oped in the U.S.S.R. which identifies
words and groups of words rather than
letters, hence speeding the process of
reading. In the U.S.A. at M.I.T., the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
in Boston, a centre specializing in
apparatus for the blind has developed
high-speed electric Braille writers and
a means of converting Braille type¬
setting tapes to spoken words.
The direct conversion of print to
Braille Is a possibility now being ex¬
plored. Improved guidance devices
have also been developed which help
the blind to find their way about with
. less hazards than ever before.
The education of the
deaf child poses one
of the greatest chal¬
lenges to education-
I alists. A serious
hearing defect in
early life can have a lasting effect on
the personality and may be responsible
for Inhibiting the development of the
brain itself, hence affecting Intellectual
functioning.
It is from listening to the adults who
surround them that children learn their
language. The ability to express one's
thoughts in speech constitutes one of
the most important aspects of human
intellectual development, and language
is an essential prerequisite for reading
and writing. That is why early diag¬
nosis of deafness is so important.
Research and observation of young
children indicate that language devel¬
opment goes through various stages
requiring appropriate stimulation at
each stage. Deprivation of sound,
speech and language stimulation can
lead to Incomplete development of
the mind.
While there has been no dramatic
breakthrough in the education of the
deaf, the application of our increased
knowledge of early childhood devel¬
opment is beginning to show favour¬
able results. Improved technological
approaches and transistorized hearing
aids are being Increasingly used
around the world. These, in con¬
junction with more sophisticated
teaching methods, make spoken
language a greater possibility for many
more deaf children, giving them a
greater range of expression than
dactyl speech sign language with
fingers.
For instance, special equipment for
the visual presentation of spoken
words helps the deaf to correct defects
of speech. New electro-acoustic
devices have also been invented which
supplement lip-reading. These so-
called "tactile devices" pass vibrations
to the perception through the touch.
They permit the deaf to differentiate
sounds on an acoustic basis which are
Indistinguishable to them when lip-
reading.
Experiments carried out in the
U.S.S.R. In recent years show that
almost all children with defective
hearing can perceive musical rhythm,
tempo, measure, vibration, rests and
chords. A certain combination of
chords and rests creates "music" for
disturbed
them, allowing them to organize their
movements. Even their peculiar
singing gives deaf children great
aesthetic pleasure.
One group of handi-
capped children
whose needs are
difficult to meet are
the emotionally dis-
turbed. Reactions to
unmet psychological needs show them¬
selves in many ways stuttering, fears
of school, nail-biting, thumb-sucking,
temper tantrums, bed-wetting, stealing,
lying, cruelty and truancy.
Possibly it Is difficult to deal with
such children because they do not
form a homogeneous or readily iden¬
tifiable group. Some are mildly anxious
or disturbed, others are severely
disturbed, some are timid and with¬
drawn, others are aggressive and
delinquent, some appear to improve
without treatment, others deteriorate
and become chronically disturbed. It
is now becoming clear that there are
not enough psychiatrists and psychol¬
ogists to determine which children will
need treatment, or even to attend to
those who do need treatment.
Many emotionally disturbed children
are under-achievers at school. Many
have difficulty in expressing themselves
and this probably makes it much harder
to educate them socially and Inculcate
values and standards. There ¡s a
growing conviction In many places that
the teacher is in the best position to
help such children to achieve scholas¬
tic proficiency and social competence.
Some teacher-training programmes,
especially those for teachers of the
handicapped, are beginning to reflect
this expanded role of the teacher in
relation to emotionally disturbed pupils.
By and large we are beginning to
realize that mental health is Influenced
THE TONOSCOPE
MAKES THE EYES HEAR
The "tonoscope" is a new instrument
which makes sound visible. It is a
box-shaped apparatus (photo far right)
fitted with a speaking tube and covered
by a flexible diaphragm. When a
person speaks into the tube, grains of
sand or coloured quartz on the dia¬
phragm form patterns corresponding
to the sound vibrations (photo right).
Hence the tonoscope offers possibili¬
ties for the deaf, to familiarize them¬
selves with visible patterns of normal
speech and practise reproducing the
same sound forms. The tonoscope was
designed by the late Dr. Hans Jenny,
a Swiss scientist. His collaborator,
Christiaan Stuten, is carrying on
his studies in the new field of research
on vibrations known as Cymatics, at
the Hans Jenny Vibrations Institute, at
Dornach, in Switzerland (see "Unesco
Courier", Dec. 1969).
Photos © J.C. Stuten, Dornach, Switzerland

FINGERS THAT SEE
Teaching blind children sculpture, model¬
ling and collages helps them to explore
the world around them and discover its
many forms. (See also "Sculpture by the
Blind", "Unesco Courier" May 1957).
Left, a young Japanese girl at the Special
School forthe Blind, in Kobe. Herteacher,
Mr. Shiro Fukurai, encourages the chil¬
dren "to express freely all they feel".
Right, "Mother and Child", a collage of
papers of different texture, by a young
Egyptian girl who was born blind. She
produced this moving work at the "Light
and Hope" School for Blind Children run
by Mme Samira Abou Zayd in the Cairo
suburb of Heliopolis.
\
Photo Fred Mayer © Magnum, Paris Photo © S. Abou Zayd, Cairo, Arab Republic of Egypt
by the society in which one lives and
that some societies may be more
beneficial for growth than others. A
society which allows each member to
develop physically, intellectually and
emotionally, respecting at the same
time the rights of others to do likewise,
is likeíy to promote mental health.
The school is the place where these
¡deals can best be exemplified and
promoted.
In the last decade
there has been» a
; marked Increase of
research in speech,
| in language and com¬
munication disorders,
and in the. role of experience in the
acquisition of language,..Research has
not only helped in more accurate
diagnosis of different types of speech
defect and suggested special methods
to correct them, but has also indicated,
the necessity for early treatment.
In the U.S.S.R.. stuttering, a universal
problem, is treated, even before the
child enters school, not as an in¬
dependent symptom, but in the general
context of psychological development.
A special technique involving manual
work with pre-school children Is
showing promising results in the
elimination of stuttering.
In the U.S.A. research on stuttering
has also concentrated on general
personality factors, but many speech
therapists are treating stuttering as a
symptom. Practice and research on
the speech-handicapped in the U.S.A.
as in many other countries, however,
does not appear to be well integrated
in educational programming. This
would suggest that speech pathology
should occupy a more Important place
in the training of teachers, since we
know that speech ¡s a necessary
basis for reading and writing.
Follow-up studies on
I children who have
spent some "time in
hospital show that
separation from par-
ents and home can
have a damaging effect on the person¬
ality. The younger the child and the
longer the period away from the per¬
sonal attention and affection of the
family the greater the chance for
personality disturbance and the more
irreversible the consequences.
With the increase of pediatric spe¬
cialists, hospitalization has changed
very much in character. Steps are
now taken to protect young children
from the effects of being deprived of
their mothers and of their affection.
For those children where the basic
foundations for healthy development
have already been laid, Illness and hos¬
pitalization need not necessarily entail
special education.
At the end of the 1960s in edu¬
cational reviews in the U.S.A. the cate¬
gory of "health Impaired" was repre¬
sented solely by learning disabilities.
The labels they used for brain
disorders and learning difficulties
referred to those pupils who presented
themselves as a special problem be¬
cause of their failure in one specific
area, often reading, although they might
be otherwise bright and Intelligent.
Research will probably throw more
light on the "late developer", the
supposed dullard at school who
achieves remarkable success in more
practical work after leaving school. It
promises to throw more light on one
of the great problems for teachers
those pupils who, otherwise bright,
fail to achieve a mastery of reading.
In many ways men-
I tally handicapped
I children present the
greatest potential
source of social
problems in modern,
complex, urbanized societies. There
are different degrees of mental retard¬
ation and hence the needs of the
handicapped vary considerably.
Because of their lower levels of
Intelligence, work with the mentally
handicapped presents many problems
and difficulties not found in the other
categories of handicapped. Despite .
this, it is in the field of the mentally
handicapped that the most progressive
developments are taking place around
the world.
In Sweden, for example, the tradi¬
tional system of special classes for
slow learners has been challenged
since the 1960s. Doubts have been
raised about the appropriateness of
placing the handicapped in a secluded
milieu. Swedish research projects
appeared to confirm the main conclu¬
sions from American studies that the
advantages of placing mentally handi¬
capped children In special classes
were not evident for all categories.
The research suggested that the spe¬
cial classes tended to lower the child- 4 "f
ren's self-esteem. Hence special educ- | |
ation methods are being carefully re¬
assessed and new arrangements tried.
For an increasing number of slow
CONTINUED PAGE 33

ALL HANDS
Cards : National Association of the Deaf, U.S A,

ON DECK
Using a "natural language" of gestures (almost identical all over the world), to
which conventional signs have been added over the years, deaf persons have no
trouble in understanding each other (see article next page). Here we show a
selection of signs from this international language, published as a deck of playing
cards by the U.S. National Association of the Deaf, and reproducing 26 word
signs commonly used by deaf persons. The deck (52 cards and a joker) comprises
26 pairs of cards: one card with a word sign and a picture of the object it repre¬
sents; the other with the same word sign, but with only the object's written
name. In addition to gesture language, deaf and deaf-mute persons have an
international hand alphabet in which special positions of the fingers and hands
stand for letters or figures. The alphabet was first developed by the Abbé Charles
de l'Épée, a famous French teacher of the deaf, in the 18th century and with slight
modifications was later adapted for international use by the World Federation
of the Deaf. The deaf quickly develop great facility and speed at finger spelling.

NEW VISTAS IN SPECIAL EDUCATION
(Continued from page 17)
learners, remedial instruction is now
given outside the class in additional
or substitute courses, but the pupils
remain in their ordinary classes.
In the U.S.S.R., however, Increasing
emphasis is placed on the system of
special schools and classes. Special
programmes are carried out for each
type and degree of handicap.
Pre-school establishments for sev¬
erely handicapped children are show¬
ing very promising results. Before
decisions about placing a child In a
special school are taken each child
is examined by a committee compris¬
ing the director of the special school,
a school inspector, a pediatrician, a
neurologist, a teacher from an ordinary
school, and a teacher from a special
school. Thus the rights of the child
to appropriate educational measures
are well safeguarded.
In the U.S.A. a great amount of
research has been carried out on the
various ways of educating the han¬
dicapped. This has frequently resulted
in conflicting findings. The discrepan¬
cies in themselves merely show the
complexity of the subject and how
much we still have to learn. Follow-up
studies are likely to indicate the extent
to which early remedial action can
Improve the Intellectual growth In
children who might otherwise have
been mentally retarded.
In Uruguay early identification of
mental handicaps js regarded as of
vital importance, but this is considered
of little avail without immediate follow-
up remedial measures. The Latin Amer¬
ican Perinatology and Human Devel¬
opment Centre (handling the problems
of infants and children) therefore pro¬
vides courses for obstetricians, pedia¬
tricians, teachers and public-health
specialists.
The outcome of these courses
should offer a greater chance for early
treatment of infants whose mental de¬
velopment appears doubtful, and for
helping the mother and her new-born
child. Doctors, nurses and teachers are
alerted to physical factors, social con¬
ditions and family relationships which
can have a good or bad influence on
intellectual growth.
An outstanding landmark was the
adoption by the United Nations In 1971
of the Declaration on the Rights of
Mentally Retarded Persons which had
been earlier proclaimed by the Inter¬
national League of Societies for the
Mentally Handicapped.
The Declaration is an unequivocal
acceptance of the principle of integra¬
tion for the mentally handicapped. It is
also a declaration of intent to ensure
that the 1970s will see an end to the
policies of segregation or even the
public neglect which characterized
attitudes to the mentally handicapped
in too many places.
Initial handicaps do
not on their own
retard development.
They are always re¬
inforced by other
factors and by sec¬
ondary defects. Thus, a belief that
the handicapped cannot learn leads to
lack of stimulation and of opportunities
for learning. A feeling of shame or
the hostility of others can exclude the
handicapped from normal opportunities
for social development. But the term
"multiple handicap" generally refers to
a combination of two or more primary
handicaps, for instance "blind and
mentally handicapped" or "deaf and
emotionally disturbed".
In the past, teachers have been
trained to specialize in only one handi¬
cap, so it Is difficult to find people who
can meet all the needs of those suffer¬
ing from multiple handicaps. Since, in
a certain sense, all handicapped per¬
sons suffer from multiple handicaps this
has led many to reconsider not only
the traditional special teacher-training
programmes but also organization of
services for the handicapped.
Our inability to deal effectively with
those who are worst off may lead to
a clearer conception of what is best
for all the handicapped. In fact the
selection, training and professional
qualifications of those who deal with
the handicapped may become the
major focus of research in this decade.
One of the characteristic features
of the past decade has been the exten¬
sion of scientific knowledge to the
extent that a new science the science
of knowledge utilization has devel¬
oped. This embraces the collection,
analysis, dissemination and utilization
of research findings.
Studies of the effects of different
types of early environments, of the
development of language and of its
effects on intelligence, and of the unin¬
tentional side-effects of many of our
educational structures have neces¬
sitated reconsideration of the social
processes through which handicapped
children are obliged to pass and of
the possibilities for growth In human
intelligence.
Some of the significant principles
which have emerged and are effecting
changes in educational practice are:
The earlier we recognize handicaps
and the sooner we start remedial
action, the better the chances of
influencing a child's future develop¬
ment. Pre-school programmes have
been set up for all types of handicaps
to compensate for initial defects and
to prevent the growth of secondary
defects.
Intelligence levels are not now as¬
sumed to be as constant as many have
hitherto supposed. Theories which
maintain that a child's mental abilities
cannot be Improved have been called
in question by recent research projects.
These demonstrate how plastic and
modifiable intelligence is and how
much it depends on experiences parti¬
cularly In early life: ways of bringing
up children, what parents expect of
them, the frustrations or deprivations
children may feel, how the children's
actions affect parents' behaviour and
vice-versa, as well as many other
complex variables.
The results of intelligence tests,
especially with the young and handi¬
capped, have little value for predicting
how a child will develop intellectually
In the future. Hence the results of
IQ tests are useful In determining a
child's mental make-up at a given
moment but should not be used to
separate children Into rigid, permanent
mental categories.
For the best development, handi¬
capped children need many educators.
Parents, with guidance from special
teachers, can become useful auxiliaries
in the more formal aspects of early
education. Perhaps the modification
and changing of child-rearing practices
and the attitudes of parents of the
handicapped will become one of the
most important objectives of special
education in the next decade.
Education is a community resource
in part delegated to teachers. All
members of the community can help
in establishing satisfactory patterns of
life for the handicapped. The setting
in which learning takes place has a
profound effect on the learner and if
handicapped children are sent to iso¬
lated institutions it is no surprise that
they become "institutionalized". New
arrangements are being tried to see
how best "normalization" and "inte¬
gration" can be effected for the handi¬
capped.
To accomplish the aims of special
education the teacher must remain
informed and keep an open mind. He
must be prepared at all times to
examine the efficacy of his teaching
methods and to analyze those factors
outside the classroom which can best
enhance the lives and promote the
development of his pupils. Hence a
body of well-trained teachers is likely
to become the most effective profes- f»
sional instrument in helping many \<
handicapped children towards a more *»**
joyous life.
John McKenna
