The valley of Kathmandu
From temple precincts to terraced
rice-fields, an extraordinary civilization
flourishes in harmony with nature
The first complete survey-inventory of the cultural and historical monuments of the
Kathmandu valley in Nepal has recently been completed by Carl Pruscha of Austria, a
U.N. town planning specialist, in collaboration with Nepalese experts. Covering well
over 800 monuments, settlements, sanctuaries and nature preserves, the inventory will
serve as the basis for Nepal's global plan for the preservation of its rich cultural and
natural heritage. The preservation plan and the detailed inventory of the Kathmandu
valley's monuments and sites are to be published as a two-volume study early in 1975
by the Government of Nepal with financial support from Unesco, the John D. Rocke¬
feller III Fund and the Austrian Government (1). Entitled "The Kathmandu Valley: The
Preservation of Physical Environment and Cultural Heritage (A Protective Inventory)",
the study was prepared by Carl Pruscha, in conjunction with Nepalese colleagues.. In
the article that follows, Carl Pruscha describes the main features of the Kathmandu
valley and its historic sites set in an environment of extraordinary beauty.
(1) Published by Anton Schroll Publishers (Vienna, Austria,' and Munich, Fed. 'Rep. of Germany). The two volumes
(296 and 264 pages) are illustrated with 873 black and white photo reproductions and 831 line-drawings, and have an
explanatory text in English. Price, for the two volumes, about US. $65.
30

mm&
C ^
r im
5« *
Photos © Yvette Vincent-Alleaume, Paris
The Nepalese mastery of the art of shaping their environment is revealed both in their
temple architecture and in the intensively cultivated terraced hillsides where they grow
rice and other crops. These terraces harmonize perfectly with the steps and staircases
of many of Nepal's temples, such as Pashupatinath Temple (opposite page), Nepal's
national shrine, which stands on the banks of the sacred Bagmati river near Kathmandu.
by Carl Pruscha
CARL PRUSCHA of Austria, is an architect,
town planner and landscape artist, and has been
working since the beginning of 1965 in Nepal
for the United Nations. He helped the Nepal
government to set up a Department of Physical
Planning, and between 1967 and 1973 was its
regular consultant. He helped direct and carry
out Nepal's major monument survey in the
Kathmandu valley.
IN our present age, mankind can
claim to have conquered and ex¬
tended its dominion over all the earth,
but at the cost of destroying an
earthly paradise. Many of the world's
incomparable sites, shaped by nature
or the hand of man, are already damag¬
ed or destroyed. The few that still
remain to us are today threatened by
an almost irresistible tide of ugliness
and defacement.
Thus we often find ourselves
looking back in a spiritual search for
the old lost havens of the world. In
our hunger for a Shangri-La we are
drawn back to the snow-capped roof
of the world, the Himalayas. There,
on any mountain peak, we seem to
glimpse the Hindu god Shiva, whose
icy locks melt into the valleys and flow
in many tributaries to the Ganges.
Between these cold mountain
streams rushing down into the depths,
we find an oval-shaped island of
tranquillity the valley of Kathmandu.
It is not hard, seeing it, to believe the
legend that this was once a great lake.
In the centre of the lake lay a small
island, on which the primordial Buddha,
Vairocana, sprang from a lotus bud.
When Manjushri, the bodhisattva
(or future Buddha), personifying
supreme wisdom, travelled from Tibet
to worship the primordial Buddha, he
first used his sword to cleave gaps in
the chain of hills surrounding the
valley, to let the waters drain away.
This one-time island now a hill
became the site of one of the
oldest Buddhist temples in the world.
This Stupa of Swayambhunath (the
self-existent Lord) displays in many
versions the Buddhist Mándala, a
graphic mystic symbol of the universe,
combining the geometric forms of the
circle and the square.
A steep flight of stairs leads up to
the stupa from the east. On the top¬
most level stands Akshobhya (one of
the five "Buddhas of Meditation"), his
right hand pointing down to the earth.
Akshobhya's colour is blue, his element
is the air and his symbol is the vajra
(see photo page 37). To the south
is the Buddha Ratnasambhava making
the gift-bestowing gesture. His colour
is yellow, his element is the earth and
his symbol is the jewel. To the west
stands the Buddha Amitabha in the
posture of meditation. His colour is
red, his element is fire, and his sym- ^
31

k bol is the lotus. To the north is the
Buddha Amoghasiddhi, the fifth Buddha
of Meditation, in the posture of
protection. His colour is green, his
element is water and his symbol is
the sword. In the centre of the stupa
is the primordial Buddha himself, Vai-
rocana, making the gesture of teaching.
His colour is white, his element is the
ether, and the wheel is his symbol.
However far back in time this
Buddhist holy place was founded, its
presence in the valley has made it
the focal point and cradle of an
unusual civilization, spanning many
centuries, and still flourishing today.
The valley of Kathmandu, a unique
centre of peace and serenity, is still
filled with the spiritual strength which
inspired its original inhabitants to
found this civilization.
The highly fertile soil of the old lake
bottom provides the local population
with their material needs. The symbol
of this dependence on nature's bounty
is the rice shoot, whose production
imposes a basic set of rules for
keeping man in touch with his environ¬
ment. These rules have never been
written down, but they are universally
seen as the basis for the survival of
the population and the preservation of
a healthy environment. They hold the
streams to be holy; they determine the
amount of land that should be' culti¬
vated, and they preserve the integrity
of woods and forests.
Settlements and towns have been
set up on terraced slopes but always
close to streams and groves, and often
in the proximity of sacred rivers on
whose banks the ritual cremation of the
dead takes place.
The settlements themselves, per¬
fectly fitted into the contours of the
land, are as compact as possible and
laid out in concentric rings according
to occupation from priests, merchants
craftsmen and farmers down to those
who carry out the lowliest tasks in
the community.
The handing down of role and
function over the generations within
the settlements rules out any outward
spillover into further rings, which
imposes an upward, vertical growth
pattern on the population. Once the
limits of this have been reached,
daughter settlements spring up outside
the original site, but following the
same pattern. In this way, 29 settle¬
ments of varying sizes have grown up
around the three royal cities of Kath¬
mandu, Patan and Bhadgaon.
While the basic occupation of the
population is the cultivation of rice,
each settlement also has its own
typical manufacturing speciality. Thus
Thimi is well-known as the centre for
CONTINUED PAGE 36
1
í*4.
i
- > iJ> *
iÄ
fgäp*^'
t&A
r«
ZZoaim*
Opposite page, the Shiva-Parvati temple in the heart of Kathmandu. Shiva
and his consort can be seen peering down at passersby from niche top centre
of photo, with at each side of them a "wheel of life" motif carved in wood.
The temple is at present undergoing restoration. The people of the Kath¬
mandu valley have long been renowned as woodcarvers, and Nepal abounds
in countless examples of ornately carved doors, struts, balconies and win¬
dows (above). The carvers' work can also be seen in private houses in
Nepal the construction of houses is considered a sacred act. Below, a large
lingam surrounded by several smaller ones, in a Nepalese temple. The
lingam is the generative emblem of Shiva and the principal sacred symbol
placed at the centre of a Hindu temple. It is usually shown, as here, placed
on the "yoni", the female generative emblem.
WM
32

Ib
Vf*
*¿#**
	r
, f .'
*> *> /£* £
.«*:
J*
-d*í*¿»
!»
'
BBV
1
\

VALLEY OF KATHMANDU (Continued from page 32)
pottery, Sankhu for its cotton-weaving,
Khokana for its oil-pressing industry,
and the tiny village of Pyangaon for
basket-weaving.
The houses in the Kathmandu valley
are built of tiles, either fired or wind-
dried. The roofs, built in heavy wood
with wide guttering, are covered by
small rectangular fired tiles, which
from a distance give the impression
that each house has been topped with
a hand-woven woollen blanket.
The dwellings, set up on tiny patches
of land, have storage space for tools
on the ground floor, bedrooms on the
first floor and a big living room and
kitchen on the second. The dining
room and private prayer room are on
the top floor. The houses are normally
built round an inner courtyard, to allow
the inhabitants to live together as
though forming a single big family.
Since the houses are too small to
allow much social communication
outside the immediate family, covered
platforms have been built at cross¬
roads and squares, where the men of
the town can meet and talk together.
The women have their own meeting
places by the springs, where they go
daily to bathe, wash clothing and to
fetch drinking water.
In the centre of each town can be
found special gathering places built
round the symbol of godliness, the
many-roofed pagodas constructed on
stepped pyramids. This particular
architectural form, which the in¬
habitants of the Kathmandu valley
claim to have invented, can now be
found in the area in a hundred different
versions.
These pagodas with their steps are
often used by hundreds of spectators
as vantage points from which to watch
the frequent and often lively festivals,
while their spreading roofs offer shade
and protection from the rain.
But it is not only within the towns
and settlements that holy places can
be found. They exist also in great
numbers in the open country beyond.
These sanctuaries are smaller but
sometimes more important, since many
can be traced back to ancient
times. Some are built of pipal trees
of giant size, or undressed stone.
Many such holy places are no more
than chambers dug in the soil per¬
haps as a sign of the close link with
the Earth Mother.
All these many holy places, without
exception, harmonize with their natural
surroundings, in settings which under¬
line their significance. The majority
of sites are by streams and rivers,
such as those of Pashupati and
Guheshwari, Gokarna. Sankhunul and
36

GUARDIANS
OF
THE
SHRINES
Left, statues of elephants
and a lion guard the long flight
of steps leading up to Nepal's
tallest pagoda, the five-storey
Nyatapola Temple at Bhadgaon.
In Nepal, where there is a long
tradition of religious tolerance,
pagodas are used by Hindus and
Buddhists alike. A form of
Buddhism widely practised in
Nepal is Tantrism, so named
after its Holy Scriptures, the
Tantra. An important ritual
object of Tantric Buddhism is the
"vajra", or thunderbolt, symbol
of the Absolute. Photo right
shows a huge vajra on the terrace
of Swayambhunath stupa near
Kathmandu. Most vajras are
much smaller in size and are held
in the hand by monks as a sacred
sceptre.
Chobar. Many are set by springs and
pools, as at Buddhanilkhantha, Goda-
vari or Balaju. Others, such as Chan-
gunarayan, stand on hilltops. Forests
and grottoes have also been chosen
as sanctuaries for many divinities.
The sites are regularly visited by the
inhabitants of the valley, either singly
or in groups. Once a year thousands
of persons make their way across the
fields on pilgrimages to the most
important sanctuaries.
The care and veneration shown by
the valley's inhabitants for their settle¬
ments and towns, their temples and
holy places, is closely matched by
their concern for the natural environ¬
ment, in the sowing and harvesting of
the rice which is their staple diet.
Thus, farming becomes an artistic
creation. Over the centuries, the face
of the land has been shaped by this
process. Thousands of terraces have
been constructed and the landscape
veined by countless canals to irrigate
the growing rice. This great task of
landscaping has been carried out with
no other tools but simple hoes.
Now the valley has hardly an acre
of land which has not been pressed
into use. Here man has genuinely
conquered the earth but without
destroying it. In close creative inter¬
play, man and nature have developed
together.
When the dry winter etches the grey
tones of the terraces against the
white backdrop of mountain peaks,
the handiwork of man is most clearly
seen for a few short weeks. Soon
the heavy monsoon rains turn the
picture Into a waterscape, with
hundreds of small lakes rising in tiers.
Then, very soon, the rice begins to
grow looking from a distance like
light moss and fills the landscape
with innumerable shades of green.
Finally comes the ripening, and the
rice takes on a burning brightness
ranging from yellow to orange.
The settlements themselves, built of
the same material and the same earth,
also change with the seasons, always
maintaining their essential relationship
with the soil on which they stand.
Until now this people has preserved
intact its environment, maintained its
traditional way of life based on its
system of the extended family and
continued undisturbed its communion
with the spiritual and the infinite.
But today the people of the Kath¬
mandu valley face a critical choice:
whether to build their future quietly
on the foundations of their past, and
go on living in their own paradise, or
whether to opt for a 20th-century way
of life so often beset with commercia¬
lism and the errors of misapplied tech¬
nology.
Is it not the duty of the entire world
community to help them in seeking a
solution to this problem ?
Carl Pruscha
Photos O Yvette Vincent-Alleaume. Paris
37
