This imposing head forms the spout of an oval-shaped
terracotta vessel. It was moulded by a potter of the
Tuncahuan culture which flowered on the plateaus of northern
Ecuador between 500 B.C. and 500 A.D. About one metre
high and possibly representing a sarcophagus, the amphora
is embellished with black and red geometric patterns
suggestive of the texture and design of a fabric.




THE ENIGMA
OF ECUADOR'S
ANCIENT POTTERY
Did it receive the imprint
of an Asian people 4,500 years ago ?
by Jorge Enrique Adoum
24
LDDRESSING the Royal
Geological Society in London just
over a century ago, Sir Roderick Mur-
chison, a well-known British geologist
declared: "There was human civiliz¬
ation... in South America at the time
of the older Stone Age in Western
Europe."
Sir Roderick based his statement
on the discovery of some ceramic
vessels and gold figurines that James
S. Wilson had unearthed two years
earlier, in 1860, at an archaeological
site on the coast of Ecuador.
The site of the discoveries was the
scene of the first known "geological
tragedy" in that part of the South
American continent which was destin¬
ed to become Ecuador. It consisted
of a stratum of vegetal loam covered
over with a thick layer of marine
deposits, indicating that the Ecuadorian
coast was once inhabited but then sank
into the sea, only to rise again
thousands of years later.
We do not know exactly what the
objects were that Wilson discovered
or where they are today. What we do
know is that the "biography" of the
Ecuadorian people goes back to the
Valdivia culture which dates from 3200
to 1800 B.C. A number of ceramic
pieces of this period are to be seen in
JORGE ENRIQUE ADOUM, Ecuadorian poet
and writer, was formerly National Director
of Culture in Ecuador. Among his works
are a 4-volume poetic cycle, "Los Cuadernos
de la Tierra' (Notebooks on my Country,
1952-1962), and a play on the fall of the Inca
Empire following the Spanish Conquest
entitled "El Sol Bajo las Patas de los
Caballos' (The Sun Trampled by Horses'
Hooves). He is now a member of the
editorial staff of the 'Unesco Courier'.
a magnificent exhibition of pre-Colum¬
bian art from Ecuador that has been
travelling through Europe since 1973.
How Ecuador was given its name it
mean "equator" in Spanish makes an
interesting story. It was originally a
confederation of tribes which 16th
century chroniclers baptized the King¬
dom of Quito. In the Spanish colonial
period it was known as the Real
Audiencia de Quito (the Judicial Dis¬
trict of Quito under the authority of
the Spanish Crown), and afterwards
the Presidencia (Presidential District)
of Quito.
By 1736 it was well known that the
earth was round and measurements
had been made of the terrestrial
meridians in the polar regions. That
year the French Royal Academy of
Science sent a mission of geodesists
to Quito to ascertain whether, as a
result of its rotation, the earth was
flattened at the equator as Giovanni
Domenico Cassini, director of the
Paris observatory, had claimed, instead
of at the poles as Newton had main¬
tained.
The surveyors found the equinoctial
line to be twenty kilometres north of
the capital, Quito. This is -probably
the only place where the line is not
just an imaginary one: it has been
drawn on the concrete base of a
commemorative pyramid. The country
then began to be called the "Land of
the Equator" and subsequently this
name was officially adopted, though it
was somewhat ambiguous and could
suggest that the country lay in Africa
or some other place through which
the earth's longest parallel passes.
The relative isolation of South
America from the rest of the world
was originally a geological phenomenon
dating back some two hundred million
years. According to the theory of the
German geophysicist, Alfred Wegener,
South America was once a part of a
single land mass that also included
what are now the territories of
Antarctica, Africa, India and Australia.
This mass had in turn broken off from
the primeval land mass that further
comprised present-day Europe, North
America, Greenland and Asia.
The future continents separated and
moved westward, and as they did so
they left behind telltale traces of their
breakaway. The Red Sea, for example,
is a vestige of the sundering of Africa
from Asia, and North America seems
to have left Greenland behind as it
migrated ever farther to the west.
Meanwhile South America had worked
itself loose from the vast continent that
Wegener called Gondwana, and form¬
ed an immense island drifting away
from the rest of the world.
If we look closely at a map of the
world, we see that the eastern coast
of South America fits perfectly into
the western coast of Africa, like a
piece in a jigsaw puzzle about to be
set in place. (For an earlier treatment
of Wegener's theory of continental
drift, which he formulated in 1912,
see the "Unesco Courier", October
1963, p. 7.)
Science, however, is not content,
to rely on such superficial evidence.
It has dug deeper and found convinc¬
ing proof of Wegener's thesis in the
geological links between South Amer¬
ica, Africa, India and Australia, in
the continuity of the Mid-Ocean Ridge
with its branches, and in a certain
"family connexion" to be found bet-
CONTINUED PAGE 26


ECUADOR'S ANCIENT POTTERY
(Continued)
ween animal species that are now
extinct on the New Continent such as
the woolly mammoth and the sabre-
toothed tiger and those, past and
present, of the African continent.
Here let us note that the oral
history of peoples always begins with
a legend. Throughout South America
there is a legend, first recorded by the
Spanish Chroniclers of the Indies,
about an invasion of giants who came
from the sea, destroyed the indigenous
towns and raised megalithic monu¬
ments along the Pacific coast.
This legend may have its origin in
the discovery of large-sized bones
which, according to Alexander Hum¬
boldt, the German scientist and
explorer (1769-1859), must have
been "the remains of enormous un¬
known cetaceans"; according to some
more imaginative archaeologists, they
were the bones of the Andes masto¬
don or "carnivorous elephant".
But anthropologists are also per¬
plexed by the enigma of America.
They are not so much concerned with
giants as with knowing how man first
came to South America. The mon¬
goloid features that are still apparent
in the New World Indians seem to
point to an Asian origin.
Professor Juan Comas, a leading
authority on Latin American anthropo¬
logy, asserts and it is now consider¬
ed an established factthat 40,000
years ago wanderers from Asia cross¬
ed the Bering Strait on an ice bridge
about fifty miles wide that then linked
the two continents (See article by
Prof. Comas, in the "Unesco Courier",
August-September 1972, p. 46). By
that time the land bridge of Central
America had emerged from the ocean
and thus enabled the nomads from
the north to travel as far south as
Tierra del Fuego.
Other theorists, such as Professor
Paul Rivet, former director of the
Paris Musée de l'Homme, who carried
out research in Ecuador, claim that
there was a twofold current of mi¬
gration, a northern one made up of
Mongolians and Eskimos who came
by way of the Bering Strait, and a
southern one consisting of Malayan-
Polynesians who crossed the Pacific
Ocean in fragile open sailing-craft.
Characteristics of the australoid
race of Lagoa Santa in Brazil are
also exhibited by the first-known
"Ecuadorian", Punin man, whose skull
was unearthed some 50 years ago in
central Ecuador. Punin man is 6,000
years old according to carbon-14 tests.
DOUBLE-CONE CERAMIC JAR
Bartholomé Ruiz, the first Spanish
navigator to reach the coast of
Ecuador in 1526, described with
wonder a sea-going craft used by
the Mantas Indians (a raft with a
lateen sail) and the objects it carried.
Dating from 500 B.C., the Mantena
culture on the central coast of Ecuador
was noted for its outstanding
craftsmanship in metal and stone.
Its pottery, usually coloured black,
featured superb animal and human
figures, realistically depicted or
stylized in shapes as unexpected
as this double-cone vessel topped
with a human head.
Pre-Columbian remains found along
the coast of Ecuador have been seen
by some as evidence that Asians
came to Ecuador 2,500 years before
the Christian Era, blown off their
course by a storm, and exerted a
strong influence on the aboriginal
cultures.
Dolico-cephalic skulls (long narrow)
belonging to a fishing people were
found in a lower stratum in Valdivia,
whereas a more recent level has
yielded the remains of a brachy-ce-
phalic people (round headed) who
introduced agriculture and a technique
of baking clay so highly developed
that the Valdivia culture may be
considered the first ceramic centre in
the New World.
Moreover, their ceramic "Venuses"
have certain traits in common with
the statuettes of the Jomon culture
in Japan, and both types may possibly
be related to some fertility cult
common to both sides of the Pacific.
The figurines aiso suggest that an
early matriarchal society existed in
Ecuador. Some of the coastal tribes
worshipped the goddess Umiña, "god¬
dess of the green stone", which may
be a reference to jade.
Additional evidence of links with
Asia comes from the Chorrera culture
of Ecuador (1800 to 500 B.C.) with

VENUS
OF VALDIVIA
These three figurines are
believed to represent female
divinities. They are works
of pottery of the Valdivia
culture which developed on
the southern coast of Ecuador
from 3200 to 1800 B.C.
Valdivia potters produced a
great variety of ceramic
"Venuses" (rarely over
5 cm. high) using finger-nails
to shape eyes and eyebrows,
mouths and hair. Certain
scholars have advanced the
hypothesis that pottery was
introduced to Ecuador by an
Asian (Japanese?) people
who reached the Ecuadorian
coast by 2500 B.C. and under
whose influence the modelling
and baking of clay developed.
its figures displaying typically oriental
features and its finely-drawn ceramic
work decorated with an iridescent
metallic paint the technique of which
remains unknown subjected to tem¬
peratures of 1,000 degrees in labora¬
tory tests, the metallic film still clings
to the underlying pottery.
Other Asian associations are seen
in the Chorrera clay models of build¬
ings on truncated or stepped pyramids
that are reminiscent of pagoda struc¬
tures, and, most particularly, in a large
number of "neck rests", similar to the
type of, oriental pillow made of fine
porcelain or willow branches that could
still be purchased in antique shops in
Peking or Shanghai when the author
was there a few years ago.
The most convincing piece of
evidence, however, for certain advo¬
cates of the Asian hypothesis is to be
found in the similarity between the
rudders of rafts still used for navig¬
ation in South America, Viet-Nam and
Taiwan. Since such rudders existed
in China five centuries before the
Christian Era, it has been assumed
that they could have come from Asia
to South America.
But the sea can be crossed in both
directions. In 1947 Thor Heyerdahl,
the Norwegian anthropologist and
explorer, built one of these rafts, the
Kon-Tiki, on which he sailed from the
Peruvian port of Callao to the atoll
of Raroia in an attempt to prove that
the islands of Polynesia were origin¬
ally inhabited by aborigines from
South America, remote ancestors of
the mythical "noble savage" imagined
by Montesquieu and discovered later
by the French navigator, Louis de
Bougainville, and by Captain James
Cook.
Whatever the point of departure
may have been, there is no doubt
that there were trans-Pacific and
inter-American contacts. The gigantic
sculptures of Chile's Easter Island are
parents or children of Polynesian
wood sculpture. The cultivation of
maize spread from Central America
to the southernmost part of the South
American continent. Utensils indispu¬
tably made in Ecuador have been
found in Panamanian graves. In Ecua¬
dor and Peru there are place-names
of Arawakan-Caribbean origin, and
the great variety of human types
found in the statuettes of the La
Tolita culture in northern Ecuador
either reflect striking ethnic differen¬
ces or are the exaggerated, grotesque
or even caricatural rendering of the
features of strange invaders who
landed on the coasts.
Some clay models represent houses
on stilts for protection against floods
and wild beasts; others, built like
sanctuaries on platforms, seem to
imply the existence of a hierarchized
and stratified society where political
and religious power was in the hands
of priest-chiefs and shamans whose
dignity was easily recognized by their
pectoral ornaments and nose-rings.
Ocarinas, whistles, rattles and drums
no doubt played an important part
in the religious rites performed to
appease the gods. From mollusc
shells they made recipients, orna¬
ments, and strings of beads as fine
as two millimetres in -diameter which
served as a kind of money for trade
with the Andean peoples who acquir¬
ed them in order to compel their own
gods to give them rain.
All these cultures had different
languages and different customs,
though they had some features in
common. For example, they all equat¬
ed art and craftsmanship. The artist
was considered a useful member of
society because he wrought vessels
and utensils for domestic use, and
the artist, feeling the community's
need for art, produced artifacts that __
were aesthetically pleasing to behold jl
and to live with. **'
The extraordinary number of fig¬
urines found in La Tolita lead neces-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

28
ECUADOR'S ANCIENT POTTERY
(Continued)
sarily to the conclusion that many
people, perhaps the entire population,
were engaged in making and selling
their artistic well-crafted products.
These were cultures whose oral
traditions escape us. Centuries of
imagination, creative effort and spiri¬
tual turmoil would be needed in order
to develop systematic religion with
mythical concepts of bird-men or
leopard-men and idofs which did not
merely represent divinities, but actually
incarnated them.
No one knows how this ideological
process evolved or how long it went
on. It must have culminated in a
belief in some sort of survival of the
soul, otherwise why would they have
placed the bodies of their dead in a
foetal position and buried them with
jewels, pottery, clothing and food, as
though replacing them in the womb
of earth to be reborn to another life?
What intense hope must have gone
into the effort to replace realism by
a more abstract representation, and
led to the unbridled "baroque" decor¬
ation on the vessels known as
"witches' cauldrons", and the overly
ornamented costumes still worn
by dancers in solstice celebrations
and on other high days. These co¬
incide with the major feasts of the
Christian calendar, though their signi¬
ficance has been forgotten. Perhaps,
like all popular festivities, they are a
way to cast off all restraints, perhaps
nothing more than a manifestation of
the humble human need to be "king
for a day".
It is important to remember that
since the wheel was unknown in these
early cultures, they had no wheel on
which to mould pottery. But nothing
has ever prevented any people from
developing the noble and all-embrac¬
ing art of pottery in which man takes
a handful of earth and fashions his
own creations.
Perfectly symmetrical whorls for
spindles were made by craftsmen of
the Guangala culture of Ecuador (500
B.C. to 500 A.D.) and its jars have
been compared to those of Crete.
Olaf Holm, the German archaeologist,
maintained that the ancient potters
must have used large disk-shaped
platters which they rotated with one
hand while modelling the vessel they
were making with the other.
The road from clay to metal was
also a long one. No doubt gold was
more elegantly wrought in other coun¬
tries, but it was in La Tolita, from
500 B.C. to 500 A.D., that man first
worked with platinum. The Danish
scientist, Paul Bergsoe, discovered
that the secret lay in softening the
platinum by mixing it with molten
gold a technique that only began to
be used in Europe in the 18th century.
These cultures lacked the plough
in addition to the wheel. They sur¬
vived as some still do on cereals
and potatoes. From one period to
the next, and from one region to
another, they doggedly waged their
dramatic struggle against the environ¬
ment, though not always successfully.
Along the coast they were plagued
with eruptions of now extinct volca¬
noes, long periods of drought, and
the formation of saltpetre beds that
make agriculture impossible.
In the mountains there was the
bleak paramo with its scrubby vege¬
tation, its drizzly rain and the mist
which envelops the two Cordilleras of
the Andes that double backbone of
the land, made up of volcanoes and
snow-covered peaks rising as high as
six thousand metres above sea level,
with warm, temperate valleys between
them like hollows in the vertebrae of
a continental spinal column.
And on the other side of the moun¬
tain range were the Amazonian
jungles, the domain of wild monkeys
and jaguars, where snakes laid their
eggs on leaves that had been piling
up since primeval times.
The diversity of climates gave rise
to a wide variety of products and
cultivation techniques, but man was
first of all, here as elsewhere, a
hunter. The deer was not only a
figure in the mythology and art of
primitive man but also provided his
basic food and bony material with
which to manufacture tools.
The tutelary and totemic animal of
the South American Indians was
the llama, a symbol of the silent
wastes of the Andes. From time to
time fish crop up as decorative motifs
on their pottery, but this was the mark
of other cultures which sooner or
later began to influence them, or a
result of the descent of mountain
tribes to the coast.
The desolation of the brushwood
tablelands, the stillness scarcely bro¬
ken by the wind and the mountainous
landscape with its double barrier that
acts like a set of blinkers preventing
man from seeing beyond them all
those forced the individual to look
either down at the ground or up at
the stars, both of which prompted him
to ask questions about himself.
The plateau-dweller had the same
aesthetic feeling for utensils of current
use and the same desire to decorate
functional objects as his cousins on the
coast, but the austerity of his environ¬
ment caused him to express himself
in more severe art forms.
The Carchi culture had a clear pre¬
ference for negative painting. The
hieratic attitude of their sculptured
figures was emphasized by the use
of black, and a dramatic facial
expression was obtained by using
substances that made the eyes seem
to shed tears of colour.
CONTINUED PAGE 36

PREHISTORIC
SURREALISM
The sculptures found at
La Tolita, an island at the
northern end of the Ecuadorian
coast, show a highly
developed form of art. They
may represent religious,
human-animal figures to
conjure' evil spirits. Left,
the terracotta figure
(21.5 cm. by 25.5 cm.) is a
fragment of a pottery of
unknown shape. Right,
earthenware head, half feline,
half human, also found at
La Tolita, strongly suggests
links between this culture
and those' of Central America.
So many of these objects
have been found in La Tolita
that it would seem that the
whole population of the island
was engaged in pottery-making.
Photos © Gerard Dufresne. Pan
From 1800 B.C. to 500 A.D. a great culture extended over much of Ecuador.
Specialists consider this civilization (known as Chorrera) to have been the cradle
of indigenous Ecuadorian culture. Below, two typical pottery figures of Chorrera.
The vessel in the shape of a man lying on his back, left, and the bottle, right,
are characteristic of Chorrera ceramic art, with such distinctive
features as the so-called "coffee-bean" eyes.

ECUADOR'S ANCIENT POTTERY
This curious object is a whistle-bottle
of the Bahia culture of Ecuador,
composed of three round
inter-connected vessels of polished
grey earthenware decorated with
human-animal heads. The Bahia
culture produced earthenware
headrests and structures with
pagoda-shaped roofs. These and
other objects have been seen by certain
specialists as evidence of direct
early contact between Asia
and South America.
Half tortoise, half ¡guana, the vessel
immediately below was produced by
the Bahia culture during Ecuador's
so-called "Period of Regional
Development" (500 B.C. to 500 A.D.).
The tripod with human feet belongs
to the Carchi culture of northern Ecuador.
It is of the so-called "Period of
Integration" (500 to 1500 A.D.).
The geometric motif is produced by
painting the background and leaving
the pattern the colour of the original
clay, a technique known as "negative
painting". The two works bring to mind
similar Chinese objects.
Photos © Gabriel Cruz Nardi. Quito
36
Continued from page 28
Physical anthropologists may sigh
when they come upon skulls that have
been deformed into the shape of a
cone (probably for ritualistic reasons),
and when figurative representations
depart from strict realism and do not
portray the typical physical traits
that they are looking for. But the
gradual development of art is the
result of changes in man's way of
looking at himself.
The Cashaloma and Tacalshapa
cultures, the last ones to survive
before the invasion of the great
Inca armies, had worked out a theory
of form and colour, mass and line,
in harmony with their environment.
Here we find an early manifestation
of artistic freedom with a breakaway
from stylized forms, the use of free,
arbitrary shapes, the asymmetrical
application of colours, and the transfer
of textile designs onto the nude bodies
of the miniature caryatids that sup¬
ported their fruit dishes. Could this
be the origin of.tatooing in Ecuador?
These cultures possessed no writing.
But their masks seem to indicate that
they had developed a rudimentary form
of theatre. The features are usually
very expressive, contorted, grimacing
or wrinkled, and sometimes sardonic.
I wonder whether the masks found
in tombs, on skulls ten or twenty cent¬
uries old, are meant to capture the
true essence of the departed, faceless
and unknown. Or were they intended
as a disguise so that the divinities
could not recognize the person enter¬
ing heaven? Or were they simply to
frighten off evil spirits and demons?
True art never really answers ques
tions; on the contrary it gives rise to
them. The axiom that aesthetics has
precedence over logic, or that a sense
of form came before speech was
developed, may apply to the Pre-
Columbian civilizations in Ecuador.
The examples of Pre-Columbian art
touring Europe are a retrospective
exhibition of the works of the Ecua¬
dorian artist covering slightly more
than three thousand years. A whole
people left the sign of its hand on
these, plates, pitchers and statuettes,
and thus created a cultural identity
that can be recognized not only
through the objects but in the works
of art themselves.
The Incas arrived from the south in
the middle of the 15th century. Theirs
was one of the great great civilizations
of history: theocratic (they worshipped
the sun), an absolute hierarchy (the
Inca was considered the son of God
and his mediator on earth), imperialist
(they called their Empire "The Four
Corners of the Earth", encompassing
the entire universe).
When they conquered the aboriginal
tribes they made Quito their second
capital. They amazed the Spanish
with their mathematically hierarchized
social organization, their dignified and
forbidding demeanour, and their gift
for town-planning based, as an Ecua¬
dorian archaeologist recently wrote,
"upon a respect for ecology and the
introduction of Nature into the urban
environment and the architectonic
space." This briefly, is a description
of the colossal sacred citadel of
Machu Picchu the mystery of whose
construction may never be deciphered.
But that is another story.
Jorge Enrique Adoum
All the artifacts illustrated in this
article are preserved in the
Archaeological Museum of the
Bank of Ecuador, Quito.
