1+1
Every day
over 200,000 more
mouths to feed
4
HE clock is ticking. Every
second there are two additional mouths
to feed. Every day there are 200,000
more births than deaths, six million
more every month. At last count more
than 74 million Individuals were added
to the world population in one year.
And the increase is greater annually.
The effects of today's population
trends will be felt decades and
centuries from now. Measures aimed
at modifying these trends or the
failure to find and implement such
measures will be felt by generations
to come. It is those future generations
who will either reap the benefits or pay
the price for our action or inaction
today.
Because of the great time lag bet¬
ween action and effect, it Is important
to begin today to find out on a global
scale where we are headed. This, in
essence, is the objective of the World
Population Year, 1974, as designated
by the United Nations, and is the
substance of the agenda for the World
Population Conference to be held in
Bucharest (Romania) in August, 1974.
Then, representatives from United
Nations member countries will convene
to discuss, analyse and make recom¬
mendations upon what has become
known, generally, as the "population
problem".
There are differing viewpoints as to
the urgency of the world population
problem; some believe global catas¬
trophe already threatens the human
race due to the vast population in¬
crease multiplied by effects and
demands of industry and technology.
Others are optimistic, seeing the
solution in terms of technological
progress that will meet the needs of
countless more billions. The need for
radical structural reforms of an econ¬
omic, social and political nature on a
world and national scale is often
stressed, and some oppose what they
consider to be an overemphasis on
family planning and population control.
Whatever the differences, there is
wide agreement on certain assumptions
that inevitably relate to population
problems: that nations are more inter
dependent than ever before; that the
rich have an obligation to help the
poor; that no matter how many people
the earth might eventually support, too
many too soon can have, and are
having, harmful effects; that society
should seek to improve the living
standards and the quality of life of all
people; that overcrowding, pollution,
poverty, ignorance, disease, waste of
resources and social alienation must
be eliminated; that the earth itself
fields and forests, lakes and seas is
now measurably affected by man's
activities and must be protected against
man's abuses in order to save mankind;
that children should be born into a
family and a world that wants them;
that nations can and should help one
another and combine their knowledge
for the benefit of all.
The population situation is different
in each country. The United Nations
General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and its Population
Commission have frequently em¬
phasized that it is the sovereign right
of each government to establish its
own policy relating to population. Yet
they have also recognized a need for
nations to come together and find
common aims. The World Population
Year, 1974, and the World Population
Conference are expressions of this
position.
"The evidence is all around us," U.N.
Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim ob¬
served in announcing the World Popu¬
lation Year and Conference. "Each
year 127 million children are born, each
year 95 million come of school age and
each year 19 million reach age 65.
These totals are likely to rise steeply
in the years ahead as more young
adults swell the ranks of potential
parents, and improved medical care
advances life expectancy... Each
nation, each community, each family
must assess in detail how these trends
affect their hopes for higher living
standards, a better education, and
greater health and happiness."
World Population Year, 1974 has
been dedicated by the United Nations
to the task of evolving a world consen¬
sus on population matters and a better
understanding of how to deal with
the complex and varied population
problems arising in different forms
throughout the world.

¿^
The United Nations Population Com¬
mission, a subsidiary body of the
Economic and Social Council, is super¬
vising arrangements for the Year and
Conference. The Commission has
outlined these main objectives of the
Year:
To improve command of the facts
concerning population trends and
prospects and the relevant associated
factors.
To sharpen awareness and heighten
appreciation of population problems
and their implications among individual
governments, non-governmental organ¬
izations, scientific institutions and the
media.
To provide effective education on
population dynamics, family life and
reproductive functions through formal
and other educational systems.
To stimulate discussion and thinking
on alternative policies, promotion of
demographic, consideration in develop¬
ment planning, and development of
policies and programmes in the popu¬
lation field which individual govern¬
ments might wish to undertake.
To expand international co-operation
in population fields and supply in¬
creased and suitable technical assist¬
ance to countries desiring it, in
accordance with their needs.
Development of programmes in those
areas is guided by the following prin¬
ciples:
Respect for the sovereign right of
each nation to decide, on the basis of
informed awareness, what its own
population policy should be.
Respect for the personal right of
a couple to decide the size of the
family.
Recognition of the social and cul¬
tural value differences among nations
and communities, in formulating and
implementing population programmes,
most of which are, therefore, country-
based.
The world population situation is
regarded as a complex matter which
varies in its nature and substance from
place to place rather than as one
responsive to a simplistic overall
solution.
Photo René Maltête © Rapho, Paris
