A vast continent
where different
conditions
have produced
different answers
62
other regions of the
world, and perhaps even more than
others, Latin America is a mosaic of
widely varying attitudes, criteria and
standards vis-à-vis the world-wide
phenomenon which is known as the
"population explosion".
Countries in this region have adopt¬
ed very different and even completely
opposed positions in their approach
to this immense problem. There are
countries, such as Argentina, which
are categorically in favour of a policy
of openly encouraging high population
growth, while others, such as El Salva¬
dor and the Dominican Republic, are
pursuing a no less categorical policy
of birth control.
Whatever their positions, however,
there is unanimous agreement among
Latin American governments that the
formulation of population policy is the
sovereign right of each country.
These were the main conclusions
which emerged from the discussions of
the Latin American meeting prepara¬
tory to the forthcoming World Popu¬
lation Conference. This was held in
San José, Costa Rica, last April.
During the meeting it became clear
that the governments of the region
shared a deep preoccupation with the
phenomenon of population growth,
matched by an equally deep appreci¬
ation of the diverse political, social and
economic circumstances obtaining in
this part of the world. These circum¬
stances inevitably determine the
approach to population questions
adopted by each country.
A study prepared by the United
Nations Economic Commission for
Latin America (CEPAL), which was
used as a basis for debate at the Costa
Rica meeting, divides Latin American
countries into five categories according
to their attitudes on matters of popu¬
lation policy. These are as follows:
1 Countries whose governments
have declared themselves in
favour of accelerated popula¬
tion growth. This is the case of Argen¬
tina and Uruguay.
According to the Argentinian repre¬
sentative at the Costa Rica meeting,
"Latin America should defend popu¬
lation growth as a positive factor in
development." Argentina's new popu¬
lation policy has two main objectives:
to increase the population at a more
rapid rate and to ensure a more
balanced distribution of the population
throughout the country.
This means that "the country's
demographic patterns must be chang¬
ed in order to ensure a high growth
rate and thereby occupy our territory
more efficiently, develop our resources
to the full and be able to rely upon an
adequate domestic market", etc.
2 Countries whose governments
consider that the present popu¬
lation statistics and their estim¬
ated future trends are satisfactory
and that in consequence the State
should avoid setting population stan¬
dards and objectives. This is the
position of Brazil and Peru.
The government of the latter country
considers that understanding of the
world population problem would gain
in amplitude and depth if there were to
be an objective analysis of existing
relationships between demographic,
social, economic and political factors.
The Peruvian delegate to the Costa
Rica meeting stressed the vital import¬
ance of "pointing out and rejecting the
fallacy of those who consider that the
problems of Peru (in other words, the
problems characteristic of a developing
country) are caused by high population
growth and that the solution to these
problems lies in curbing it."
The fact is, he declared, there is no
harm in a demographic growth rate of
2.9 per cent "in a country with plenty
of space and an adequate quantity and
variety of natural resources, as is the
case in Peru. The Revolutionary
Government and the Peruvian people
must therefore concentrate their
attention and all their efforts on finding
a radical solution to all those problems
of a structural order which constitute

the real source of difficulty for the
people of Peru."
The Brazilian Delegate, Miguel
A. Ozorio de Almeyda, emphasized the
fact that in a number of Latin American
countries a considerable population
increase is essential for acceleration
of their economic development.
3 The third group consists of
countries whose governments
have stated their intention of
taking action through nation-wide pro¬
grammes designed to have long-term
effects on their birth-rates, but which
have refrained from setting definite
population objectives. This group
includes Colombia, Mexico, Cuba,
Costa Rica, Chile, Guatemala, Nicara¬
gua, Panama and perhaps to some
extent Ecuador.
Mexico is applying a qualitative
rather than a quantitative population
policy, whose essential aim is "to raise
the standard of living of all Mexicans"
and to make every effort "to provide
greater opportunities for all with a
view to bringing about continued
change, and not as a limitation to
protect privileges."
Cuba considers that underdevelop¬
ment problems are not caused by
population growth at all, and its efforts
have therefore been directed not at
controlling demographic processes,
but at bringing about structural change
aimed at stimulating development.
The Cuban representative at the meet¬
ing expressed the view that a rigid
population policy can only be defined
in the context of overall development
policy, which it should reinforce and
complement; the history of world popu¬
lation growth shows that the adoption
of population control is a corollary to
development, not a prerequisite.
Within the same group, Guatemala
also maintains that birth control is not
the universal panacea, the unique for¬
mula for the solution of problems of
population and their consequences.
There is no national family planning
policy in Guatemala, but there exist
family guidance programmes adapted
to the attitudes and motivations speci¬
fic to the Guatemalan people.
4 The fourth group identified by
CEPAL comprises those coun¬
tries whose governments sup¬
port special family planning program¬
mes at local level or on a limited scale.
S The fifth and final group con¬
sists of countries which have
formulated and applied overall
policies designed to reduce popula¬
tion: El Salvador, the Dominican
Republic and Honduras.
El Salvador, a country with high
population density and intense demo¬
graphic growth, advocates the formu¬
lation of an integrated population
policy which its delegate defined as"a
series of actions planned and co¬
ordinated by the public authorities",
aimed at bringing about the greatest
possible individual, family and social
well-being by means of the "rationaliz¬
ation of population dynamics."
Finally, in the Dominican Republic,
another of the decidedly antinatalist
Latin American countries, the govern¬
ment gives its unqualified support to
every type of action aimed at curbing
the birth-rate, and actively promotes
family planning programmes to enable
couples to avoid unwanted pregnancies
and to have children who are wanted
at the time they believe to be right.
It must be pointed out that these
widely divergent attitudes to population
policy are determined by numerous and
extremely varied factors, some of
which are common to the world at
large and others which are confined
to Latin America.
Without attempting to make an
analysis, which would of necessity be
a big and complicated task, one can
list some of these factors. They are:
population growth index (with radical
differences such as that between
Argentina's 1.2 and Costa Rica's 3.8);
density of population (El Salvador has
a "European" population density, while
Argentina, Brazil and Bolivia have vast
areas of virtually uninhabited territory);
the ethnic composition of the popula¬
tion (countries with a very large Indian
or mixed-blood population such as
Mexico, Peru, etc., or with a population
of essentially European origin, such
as those of the "Cono Sur"); wealth or
scarcity of natural resources; psycho¬
logical and cultural factors, the type of
general policy applied in each country.
With so many variables, it is not
surprising that Latin America does not
speak with one voice in the great
population debate.
63
