IRRADIATED SEEDLINGS
FOR BETTER CROPS
Using concentrated light impulses we can
now alterthe genetic characteristics of plants
by Aleksander Shakhov
38
LLTHOUGH solar energy is
the very basis of agriculture and
forestry, paradoxically, little attention
has been paid to the problem of
increasing the efficiency with which
plant life makes use of solar energy.
It is true that scientists have for
years been studying the process of
photosynthesis whereby plants, in the
presence of sunlight, can assimilate
carbon dioxide from the air and pro¬
duce oxygen. The study of this
process over the last 200 years has
given us considerable insight into the
mechanism which enables plants to
use sunlight and into the biosynthesis
of the products of chemical changes
in living matter.
But the hopes which scientists
entertained of bringing about a signi¬
ficant increase in the productivity of
agricultural crops by improving the
process of photosynthesis have been
disappointed. In the course of many
millions of years of evolution, plants
would appear to have developed such
a sophisticated apparatus for captur¬
ing and processing light in their leaves
that it would be extremely difficult, if
not impossible, to improve on it and
make it even more productive.
Nature appears to have provided
plants with the ability to assimilate
light in limited quantities, so that the
processes within the plant cells are
not harmed by large doses. Even in
countries with a humid tropical cli¬
mate and favourable conditions of
temperature, the rate of photosynthesis
is not very high.
It has been calculated that plants
in the process of photosynthesis assi¬
milate only from half to one per cent
of all the light energy absorbed by
their leaves, and only in the most
favourable circumstances does this
figure rise to 4 or 5 per cent, which
is the absolute limit.
ALEKSANDER SHAKHOV, Soviet expert on
plant physiology, is a pioneer of studies on
techniques designed to increase crop yields
by exposing plant seeds, pollen and tubers
to concentrated sunlight. He heads a research
team at the Timiryazev Institute of the Phy¬
siology of Plants of the U.S.S.R. Academy
of Sciences in Moscow.
Scientists have nevertheless per¬
sisted for many years in their desire
to increase the amount of light which
can be used by plants. Could plants
use more solar energy if it could be
introduced into those parts, such as
seeds, pollen or tubers, which do not
have the faculty of photosynthesis?
Would it not be possible to improve
yields of plants and thus improve crops
by using intense sunlight in some way?
This was an idea which occured to
my colleagues and myself in the late
1950's when we were doing research
in the Kola peninsula in the Arctic on
the effects of 24-hour sunlight. In
these regions, where the sun is very
low in the sky, the sunlight contains a
relatively high proportion of red and
infrared rays. Although infrared rays
play no part in photosynthesis, they
are more actively absorbed by plants
in the Arctic than in the middle lati¬
tudes, as if to make up for the heat
which the plants lack.
We set out this idea in a paper
which we published in 1957 on "The
photothermic hypothesis of the adapt¬
ation of plants in Arctic conditions".
This theory stressed the possible
significance of non-photosynthetic use
of solar energy. This idea found
further confirmation when we were
able to observe the striking effect of
concentrated sunlight on non-photo-
synthesizing seeds, pollen and tubers.
When, by subsequent research, we
were able to prove that the biochem¬
ical processes in those components
of the plant's cell known as mitochon¬
dria and peroxisomes and the cell
nucleus changed under the influence
of light, we advanced a theory of the
"non-photosynthetic transformation of
light energy by plants".
Many years of experiments over the
length and breadth of the Soviet Union
have shown that the transformation of
light in the non-photosynthesizing
organs of plants can produce appre¬
ciable effects and that this is there¬
fore a new way of increasing plant
yields. In our early research on this
subject, we subjected plants and seeds
to a brief but intense "shower" of
light, using sunlight reflected and
intensified by the mirror of a solar
device. In order not to singe the
plant, it is irradiated in short bursts
pulses of from 1 to 0.01 second's
duration. The period between the
pulses is a fraction of a second. Dur¬
ing irradiation, the plant receives
thousands of pulses or "light quanta".
By treating the seeds of various
plants (e.g. potatoes) in this way, it
is possible to accelerate and Improve
germination and the growth of shoots.
Piercing the leaf or pollen grain
thousands of times and penetrating
deep into the cell itself, the light
quanta act directly upon the funda¬
mental cell processes. They stimulate
the formation of a membranous system
in those parts of the cell where the
energy processes take place, increas¬
ing the activity of the enzymes which
are the catalysts of biochemical reac¬
tions. More important still is the fact
that irradiation with pulses of light
affects the synthesis of proteins and
nucleic acids and also affects the
chromosomes and genes which govern
heredity.
As a result of experiments it has
been possible, for instance, to Increase
the early crop of tomatoes and cucum¬
bers in Kazakhstan by 20 to 30 per
cent. The overall yield on experi¬
mental fields with an area of between
10 and 20 hectares has been increased
by 15 to 16 per cent.
ROMISING results have
been obtained in some sugar-beet
growing areas of the Soviet Union.
Pulsed-light irradiation of sugar-beet
seeds has produced not only a heavier
yield but has also increased the sugar
content by from 0.5 to 1.5 per cent
and more as against the 0.5 to 0.7 per
cent increase which has been pro¬
duced by selective breeding over a
period of 25 years.
In Kazakhstan, by subjecting pota¬
toes and melon, water-melon and soya
bean seeds to 45 minutes of irradia¬
tion, yield of those crops have been
increased by 15 to 20 per cent, and

cotton yields have similarly increased
in Uzbekistan by 5 to 10 per cent.
Such is the effect of pulses of
concentrated sunlight en the non-pho-
tosynthesizing organs of plants. This
effect is even more pronounced when
the light alters the hereditary charac¬
teristics of the plant, but this requires
a longer period of irradiation.
If seedlings of spring-sown wheat
are submitted to a daily dose of
pulsed-light radiation of 30 minutes for
between 10 and 20 days, the next year
the descendants of these plants will
have bigger ears with a larger number
of grains and will ripen a week earlier.
The yield of the new strains, known
as photomutants genetically stable
over several generations is 50 %
higher than that of the original plants.
In Moldavia, irradiation of winter
wheat at various, stages of develop¬
ment has produced 5-6 per cent of
photomutants. Some of these were
strains with a shorter and stronger
stalk and a larger protein content in
the grain. These plants have annually
produced genetically identical offspring
for five or six generations.
After soya beans had been sub¬
jected to pulse-light radiation for half
an hour a day throughout the veget¬
ative stage, photomutants were
obtained which ripen three to four
weeks earlier than their predecessors.
The fact that these plants remain gen¬
etically stable through six generations
while continuing to produce the initial
crop of 30 quintals per hectare shows
that plant breeders have something
new to work on here.
Poplar buds given radiation while
growing produced a coarser type of
pollen. Seedlings pollinated with this
grow better in their first year or two
of life, which could be very important
for forestry in semi-arid regions.
Lastly, Dr. C. V. Moraru, working in
Moldavia, has managed, by irradiating
winter wheat throughout the summer
period during the hours when the sun
is high in the sky and sunlight is at
its most intense, to produce photo-
mutants which are genetically stable
for ten generations.
Such photomutants are now being
carefully studied and are being tried
out in the fields and in plant gen
eticists' laboratories, where they will
be used for further selective breeding.
Thousands of acres in Moldavia are
being sown with a photomutant strain
of wheat to obtain selected seeds.
This high-grade wheat has already pro¬
duced thousands of quintals of grain.
Thus, by using the concentrated rays
of the sun, man is now able to alter
and improve agricultural crops and to
produce new, heavy-cropping varieties.
At the same time, the overall problem
of changing the genetic characteristics
of agricultural plants by means of light
is still a new and very difficult one.
All we have done is to make a
successful start, to take the first steps
to prove that solar energy can be
used by man to transform plants by
acting on their genetic characteristics.
Since plant life depends on sunlight
and is controlled by genes and since
the sun and the genes together are
the motive forces of agriculture, it is
to be hoped that this new science of
"photo-energetics" will be instrumental
in improving the productivity of agri¬
culture.
39
