THE
A To link unites the family of man more than
2 \ his need for food. For food is an essential
condition of life, common to all people;
wherever they are, whatever they do, they share
alike in this need.
The stark truth is that man's ability to produce
food is not keeping pace with his need.




Despite efforts by governments and the
international community to solve world food
problems, more people are hungry today than
ever before.
Hundreds of millions of the world's people
are undernourished. Population growth is
adding 75 to 80 million more people each year,
200,000 each day. Within the next 25 years or
so our present numbers of nearly 4 billion
will be nearly 7 billion.* They must
all be fed.
The world food situation took a sharp turn
for the worse in 1 972 and 1 973 :
4
We publish here a "Declaration on Food and Population"', signed
by more than 1,500 prominent citizens of nearly 100 countries,
which was presented to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Kurt Waldheim, on 25 April 1974. The signatories
include 16 Nobel Prize-winners as well as distinguished scien¬
tists and scholars, artists, statesmen, economists, and govern¬
ment and non-governmental officials.
1. Stocks of grain have hit an all-time low
since the end of World War II. Surplus stocks
formerly held in reserve have nearly been
exhausted and no longer offer security
against widespread hunger and starvation.
2. Food prices have reached new highs.
Last year, despite a record world harvest,
escalating demand nearly doubled grain prices.
The increasing cost of food threatens to cause
serious hardship for many people already
spending most of what they have on food.
3. Less of the cheaper protein foods, which
normally supplement grain diets, is
available. The world's fish catch and per caput
production of protein-rich legumes, the staple
diet in many countries, have declined.
4. Food shortages have created serious social
unrest in many parts of the world and are
particularly severe in countries where hunger
and the diseases that thrive on under-nourished
bodies are prevalent. This scarcity
has been aggravated by the consumption
of more and more grain to produce meat,
eggs and milk.
5. Mounting fertilizer and energy shortages are
reducing food production in certain areas and
increasing food prices.
In this new and threatening situation, a bad
monsoon in Asia (which could occur in any
year), or a drought in North America (like
those in the 1960's and 1950's), could mean
severe malnutrition for hundreds of millions
and death for many millions.

address this declaration
on food and population
to governments
and men and women everywhere
IMDERSIGKED...
rhis dangerously unstable world food picture,
when seen against an unprecedented
population increase, has created an
immediate sense of urgency. The dangers of
food shortages could remain a threat for the
rest of this centuryeven if, hopefully,
bumper crops in some years create temporary
surpluses and even if the trend toward reduced
birth rates becomes general throughout the
world.
World food production in the years ahead
must rise at least 2 per cent a year to keep pace
with the present rate of population growth. But
it must rise a good deal more if the world's
people are to be provided with an adequate
diet. This required annual increase in food
production is considerably greater than that
which occurred during recent decadesand
seems to be increasingly harder to achieve each
year. But unless there is this necessary and
continuous increase in food production, there
will be even more hunger and malnutrition and
soaring food prices.
The need to seek solutions is pressing. The
nature of the problem, the precarious state of
world food production made critical by
predicted expectations of continued
population growth, calls for concerted action by
the world community. There is only one cure
for hunger and that is food. No palliatives or
panaceas in the form of reports or resolutions
can alleviate the pain of empty stomachs that
must be filled. International resolutions,
however high-minded, are a mockery if they
do not have a tangible impact on the human
condition.
rhe United Nations is now providing
leadership on both these problems. In
August the United Nations will convene the
World Population Conference in Bucharest. In
November it will convene the World Food
Conference in Rome. These are the first
occasions when governments have agreed to
meet to consider these crucial questions and
to consider taking action on them.
With these two conferences only a few
months away, we urge governments, acting
before, at and after these two global
conferences, to consider realistic and purposeful
measures such as the following:
1. Give high priority to programmes in each
country which will increase the production of
grains, legumes and other staple food crops;
ensure the availability of protein-rich foods,
particularly to the more vulnerable population
groups; expand the production of fertilizer;
and improve the opportunities for small
farmers to make a reasonable living. Develop a
comprehensive and constructive World Food
Plan for adoption at the World Food Conference.
2. Support sound population policies relevant
to national needs which respect national
sovereignty and the diversity of social,
economic and cultural conditions; accept and
assure the human right of each couple to decide
for themselves the spacing and size of their
families;** and recognize the corresponding
responsibility of governments to provide their
peoples the information and the means to
* The "Unesco Courier" has adopted the use of billion
to mean 1,000 million.
** United Nations Teheran Declaration of Human Rights, 1968.
5

WE
THE
UM)ERSI(MED'
^ exercise this right effectively.*** Embody these
policies in a World Population Plan of Action
to be agreed upon by governments at the
World Population Conference.
3. Recognize that the interdependence of the
world community creates an obligation to assist
in the necessary funding of food and population
programmes by both developing and developed
countries. This calls for the elaboration and
implementation of a global strategy by the
United Nations and its family of agencies,
including the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities.
4. Establish sufficient food reserves through
national and international efforts to provide
continuing vital insurance against food
shortages.
5. Recognize that, in our finite world where
resources are limited, the family of man
must one day, and hopefully fairly soon, bring
birth-rates into reasonable balance with the
lowered death-rates that have been achieved.
Many governments see the need to guide
national policy toward this objective.
6
*** Resolution 1672 of the United Nations Economic and Social
Council, 1969.
A solution to the present world food crisis
f\ must be found within the next few years.
The social transformation which can lead
to a reduction in the world rate of fertility,
along with lowering the rate of mortality, will
take decades to accomplish. But a start must be
made now because the millions of people being
born each year place a heavy burden on the
resources available to many nations for
education, health, employment and the
maintenance of environmental quality.
A reduction in population growth could help
alleviate this burden. Effective measures toward
resolving both the world food and population
problems must come within a total strategy of
development. Not only is social and economic
development desirable in itself, but also it
contributes to moderating population growth.
All these measures are designed to improve the
quality of life.
In this Declaration, we focus on food because
it is the most critical of the pressures on the
world today. It is the greatest manifestation
of world poverty, which has many aspects.
The absolute numbers of desperately poor are
far greater today than ever before in history.
The need to eradicate acute poverty is being
recognized more than ever as a collective
responsibility. It is a task which global
partnership and the demands of social justice
make imperative.
We repeat, food is crucial because literally
tens of millions of lives are suspended in the
delicate balance between world population and
world food supplies. Growing populations,
denied sufficient food needed for survival, resist
all efforts to secure a peaceful world. With
increased production and more equitable
distribution of food, the future could provide a
prospect of less misery and more hope for
countless people now deprived of the basic
necessities that are their right.
The World Food Conference represents a unique
opportunity. This opportunity must not
be missed. Comprehensive international
agreements must be reached to assure at least
minimal food supplies, with sufficient annual
carry-over stocks. Disastrous breakdowns in the
world food supply can thus be avoided. All
nations may then rest secure in the knowledge
thas this, the most critical of their immediate
problems, is being attacked with wisdom, vigour
and unity of purpose.
In the name of humanity we call upon all
governments and peoples everywhere, rich and
poor, regardless of political and social systems,
to act-to act togetherand to act in time.
