FAMILY
PLANNING

UNITED
NATIONS
WORLD
SURVEY
fciARLY this year the United
Nations published a report on a second
world inquiry into population and dev¬
elopment. Carried out by the U.N.
Economic and Social Council with the
governments of 80 countries, the
inquiry covered many aspects of the
population question.
In its May 1974 issue, the "Unesco
Courier" presented the findings of the
survey with respect to government
attitudes and policies towards popu¬
lation. In this issue we publish its
conclusions with respect to the provi¬
sion of family planning facilities.
"Family planning activities organized,
sponsored or permitted by govern¬
ments are spreading throughout the
world", the U.N. report says, "even
in those countries where no explicit
population policy has been adopted
or where pronatalist objectives are
being pursued." In many countries
such services are made available in
the interests of mothers' and children's
health, sometimes on a state basis,
sometimes through clinics operated by
voluntary bodies.
The U.N. report describes the
countries covered by the survey as
falling into four distinct categories
where family planning is concerned:
1. Countries where governments
organize or actively sponsor broad
national family planning programmes,
including countries where such activi¬
ties are foreseen for the near future;
2. Countries where the population
is practising birth control with the
assistance of private, non-govern¬
mental bodies;
3. Countries where family planning
is not officially endorsed or assisted,
or where it is even forbidden;
4. Countries where no information
is available on family planning.
The U.N. report summarizes its find¬
ings on family planning in the major
regions of the world as follows:
Africa
Egypt, Kenya and Tunisia have well
advanced national family planning pro¬
grammes and are making further
efforts to improve these activities. The
Government of Swaziland stated that
family planning advice will increasingly
become an integral part of the basic
health services. Madagascar is con¬
sidering undertaking a pilot study in
family planning. The U.N. Economic
Commission for Africa reports that
Tanzania officially accepts family
planning services offered by a private
association but has no official national
programme of its own.
Gabon is totally against any form of
family planning measures because of
its low fertility and is the only country
in Africa where the sale of contracep¬
tives is an offence. In Malawi family
planning has not, so far, been offi¬
cially endorsed as a national policy.
Zambia too ^ has no specific official
policy of family planning.
Information available to the Eco¬
nomic Commission for Africa shows
that to date eight countries with about
24.5 per cent of Africa's population
have official family planning program¬
mes while 13 other countries with
48 per cent of the region's total popu¬
lation, though having no official pro¬
grammes, have programmes run by
voluntary associations, some of which
receive government support. There
are, on the other hand, some 21 count¬
ries with 27 per cent of Africa's total
population which are at present either
not interested in or are opposed to
family planning programmes and,
therefore, have no programmes at all.
Latin America
Countries of Latin America are also
in a somewhat early stage of develop¬
ing family planning activities. Barba¬
dos, Colombia, Panama and Trinidad
and Tobago have national family
planning programmes. In Mexico,
family planning is understood as a
social and medical service to which
the whole population is entitled, es¬
pecially those of lower income. (Fur¬
ther details on population questions in
Latin America are given in a special
article published on page 62.)
Asia
In the Asian continent, family
planning programmes are widespread.
Twelve countries, among them the
most populous, have national pro¬
grammes. China, India, Iran, Japan,
Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines, the
Republic of Viet-Nam, Singapore, Sri
Lanka, Thailand and Turkey have
accumulated valuable experience, and
achieved significant results in influenc¬
ing fertility through family planning.
In Israel and to a less extent in the
Khmer Republic, family planning ser¬
vices are provided by medical insti¬
tutions but are not endorsed as an
official government policy. They are
not intended to reduce the birth-rate
but serve the purposes of general
welfare and responsible parenthood.
In several other Asian countries, Bah¬
rain, Jordan, Laos, and in the near
future possibly also the Syrian Arab
Republic, family planning is the work of
the health and welfare administration.
In Iraq, the government is not
expected to take measures in the near
future to reduce the birth-rate.
47

^^ Lita* á0**l m
miMimm fyzmdsi ißmm]j
< É
k Europe
The European continent is in a dif¬
ferent demographic situation from most
other regions. Family planning ser¬
vices are promoted in many European
countries and it is known that the
population at large is availing itself
of the existing contraceptive methods,
medical advice and often also liber¬
alized abortion laws.
Countries most closely concerned
with family planning are the United
Kingdom, Denmark, Netherlands, Yu¬
goslavia and some eastern European
socialist countries. In Romania family
planning is approved by the govern¬
ment for reasons of family health and
welfare with rather pronatalist general
tendencies. Hungary is sympathetic to
family planning services mainly as a
means of avoiding induced abortions.
In most western European countries
private family planning services exist
within the general health and social
welfare programmes, along with a
widespread use of different contracep¬
tive means and methods, and birth
control is regarded as a strictly private
matter. This is clearly the case in
Sweden but can also be inferred in
Austria, France, the Federal Republic
of Germany, Finland and Norway.
The position of the Ukrainian S.S.R.
and the Soviet Union is less clear.
Family planning is officially not en¬
dorsed although contraceptive means
and relevant medical and social ser¬
vices are widely available. Greece,
Spain and Italy have no official or
officially recognized private family
planning services.
48 North America
In Canada the government's role is
to encourage the development of
family planning services and provide
advice and assistance. The Canadian
family planning programme was ini¬
tiated in 1970.
The Federal Government and Con¬
gress of the United States support
family planning programmes on the
premise that the spacing and limitation
of births strengthen the health of the
mother, increase the integrity of the
family and provide greater opportu¬
nities for the children.
Oceania
In Fiji a Government family planning
programme has been operative for
several years. New Zealand did not
have an official national family
planning programme until 1971 when
the Government decided to introduce
one and to extend the activities it had
hitherto been supporting in this field.
In Australia, there are no official
family planning activities and advertis¬
ing of contraceptives is prohibited, but
family planning services are expected
to attract more government support in
the years to come.
In conclusion, the U.N. Report makes
two general observations:
The most advanced family planning
activities organized by government
agencies are in Asia and North Africa.
On the other hand Europe and North
America are the continents where
family planning appears to be most
widely practised by the population
even though these measures do not
usually form part of government policy.
The situation in the countries sur¬
veyed clearly indicates a tendency
toward the spreading and improvement
of family planning activities and their
development as an integral part of
health and welfare programmes.
Above, family planning poster in Madras,
India. The Tamil slogans read: "Two
or three children are enough" and "Your
doctor will advise you". The same
poster in different languages is displayed
in the other regions of India.
