Photo <Ö V. lakobson, Moscow
This leafy, exotic-looking plant, a Siberian
cow parsnip, might seem like the product of
a tropical climate. In fact it has grown to
giant size at an altitude of 2,500 metres in
the Pamirs region of Soviet Central Asia,
where plant life flourishes through a unique
combination of natural conditions.
by
Anatoly V. Pokrovsky
ANATOLY V. POKROVSKY, Soviet Journa¬
list, writes regularly on the role and significance
of science and scientific discoveries in modern
life. In recent years he has been specializing
in the problems of the development of science
in the Soviet republics of Central Asia.

y^r
ip^S, *. V.
ENIGMAS
OF THE PLANT WORLD
OF CENTRAL ASIA
Soviet scientists study the paradoxical
botanical wealth of the Pamirs
THE Pamirs, a region of high
mountains in Soviet Central Asia,
has been called since far off
times the "roof of the world". Today
its .ancient name is acquiring some
new meanings.
Climbing high into these mountains,
one finds that the "roof" of the Pamirs
is formed by glaciers, crystal-clear
streams and patches of fields bordered
by boulders. Like a coherent and well-
co-ordinated piece of engineering, it
rises high over the world.
Resourceful Nature has provided a
reservoir of water in the form of a
solid ocean thousands of square kilo¬
metres of glaciers, the only way of
preserving water for the arid valleys
of the Pamirs. These glaciers feed
over 300 rivers and streams which
bring water and life to the valleys.
Without them the scorching sun would
turn the green fields into barren
deserts.
These great mountains, among the
highest in the world, bring bread and
water alike to the vast territories of
Central Asia, and now scientific
research is shedding new light on their
role as a provider of nourishment.
From the end of the 13th century
almost until the 19th, the only source
of knowledge about the Pamirs was ^
27

I « *
W this description by the famous traveller
~ Marco Polo. "For 12 days," he wrote,
"our route lay along this elevated
plain, which is named Pamer; and as
during all that time you do not come
across any habitations, it is necessary
to make provision accordingly. So
great is the height of the mountains,
that no birds are to be seen near their
summits; and however extraordinary
it may seem, it was found that from
the keenness of the air, fires do not
give the same heat as in lower
situations, nor produce the same effect
in cooking food."
This view of the Pamirs as a grim
and desolate mountainous country
prevailed for many centuries. Even
the great explorer Alexander Humboldt,
who crossed the whole of Russia right
to her eastern border in 1829, had to
make do with unreliable sources when
he mentioned the Pamirs in his work.
The situation changed just over a
hundred years ago, in the summer of
1871, with the first scientific expedition
to the northern foothills of the Pamirs.
The expedition was led by the well-
known Russian naturalist and explorer
Alexei P. Fedchenko, and collected the
first accurate information about the
Pamirs. In the 20th century, the "roof
28
of the world" has attracted the special
attention of biologists, with the famous
expeditions led by the Russian plant
geneticist Nikolai Ivanovich Vavilov,
one of the founders of the scientific
principles of modern plant-breeding.
The Pamirs came into scientific
prominence with a seemingly unim¬
portant event: Vavilov's discovery
during an expedition of a hitherto
unknown variety of rye. But this find
later came to be viewed as the first
link in the chain of his discoveries: his
theory of the world centres of origin
of cultivated plants and his law of the
homologous series of hereditary adapt-
iveness. "This alone made the journey
to the Pamirs worth while," he wrote
later.
Exploration of the Pamirs and other
isolated mountain regions in the world
has revealed that they were the
sources from where the world's
cultivated plants originally came. The
mechanism of their distribution was
studied by Vavilov through the
example of "rye, of which he found
many varieties in the Pamirs. He
followed its distribution from low-lying
areas with warm climates, where rye
is looked on as a weed in wheat fields,
to highlands with climates unfavourable
to agriculture but where rye has been
gradually introduced as a food crop.
What is true of vertical plant distri¬
bution must also be true of horizontal
plant distribution. Moving further
north, cultivated plants meet in¬
creasingly severe weather conditions.
From the foothills of those isolated
mountain regions which, due to
prevailing natural conditions, produce
the widest variability of strains of
cultivated plants, food crops extend
over an immense area, from Meso¬
potamia to Siberia and throughout
Europe as far as the limits of crop
farming.
The ancient centres of world
civilization should not pride themselves
overmuch on their achievements, when
one thinks what these piles of rocks,
once thought to be desolate, have
produced. "In the past man did not
achieve his * greatest successes in
farming in low-lying sub-tropical and
tropical zones with their rich natural
resources and flourishing vegetation,
but in zones bordering deserts, in
mountains, overcoming enormous diffi¬
culties and fighting for every patch of
land," wrote Nikolai Vavilov in his
report on the agricultural development
of the Pamirs.

The three photos on this
double-page spread were
taken 2,500 metres above sea
level in the Pamirs, where a
determined effort is being
made to preserve and study
the natural environment. The
sunflower (left) is thriving
in the Pamirs Botanical Gar¬
dens; in the background can
be seen a row of the poplars
which grow to a great height
in this region. Fruit trees also
flourish in this setting, which
is an extraordinary mixture
of fertility and desolation;
there are 90 varieties of apple
tree alone (right). Among
the plants from all over the
world which have success¬
fully adapted to conditions in
the Pamirs Botanical Gardens
are these curious "green
onions" (below).
Photos © V, lakobson, Moscow
Ecologists are particularly interested
in research into "extreme" living
conditions: in high mountain plateaux,
in deserts, in the polar regions. In
such conditions a plant's living
functions undergo distinctive changes
which make it resistant to the un¬
favourable effects of its surroundings.
All plant geneticists dream of dev¬
eloping and putting to use this
adaptive faculty in living organisms.
There is much more to be said,
however, about plant life in the Pamirs.
Visitors to Khorog, the main town of
Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Re¬
gion (Tadzhik S.S.R.) are invariably
astonished by the great, almost un¬
natural, height of the local poplars.
A French scientist, G. Bonnier,
experimenting with various plants in
the Alps and the Pyrenees, worked
out the rule that the higher the
mountains the smaller the plants which
grow there. And yet in the Pamirs, at
an altitude of some 2,000 metres, these
poplars have grown to giant size.
Meticulous research into this
phenomenon was carried out over
several decades, involving many ex¬
peditions led by prominent scientists.
The Soviet government has spared
neither effort nor money to encourage
the agricultural development and ex¬
ploration of the high mountain regions.
As early as 1928 there was an
expedition to the Tadzhik Pamirs, and
exploration of the heart of the Pamirs
and its riches took a step further in
1934, with the Pamirs expedition
sponsored by the Lenin Central Asia
University. This expedition led to the
establishment of permanent scientific
centres, a biological station in the
eastern Pamirs and Botanical Gardens
in the west.
29

y The Botanical Gardens are a
spectacular sight. In a setting some
2,100 to 3,800 metres high grow plants
brought from Central and Eastern Asia,
the Crimea and the Caucasus, Europe
and North America. And there are not
just one or two representative varieties
there are between 130 and 200
species. Here Amur cork and Penn¬
sylvania bird-cherry, American oak and
California ash, Far Eastern aralia and
Siberian larch grow side by side. The
Botanical Gardens also boast 90 strains
of apple, 38 of apricot, 15 of peach,.
14 of pear, 20 of plum, etc.
It is a magical scene, and especially
startling when one remembers that
these are the "desolate" Pamirs. Not
only have these plants from the diffe¬
rent continents of the world become
acclimatized here, they have also
revealed remarkable new properties.
Here the oak grows at .a rate of three
metres a year and yields acorns when
four years old. A tomato plant pro¬
duces up to 11.5 kilos of tomatoes.
Potato tubers' weigh two kilos each,
and sunflowers send bunches of some
50 flowers shooting out from a single
stem.
One might argue that all these
amazing things happen in a garden
made and tended by man. What
actually happens in natural surround¬
ings is shown by the case of the
walnut-tree. Till recent times nobody
in the Pamirs cultivated walnut-trees.
There was a superstition that anyone
who planted one would die. And yet
there are now varieties of walnut
growing in the Pamirs with an oil
content and nut yields superior to
those of world-famous strains.
The reason for this is natural
selection, thanks to the many species
of walnut-tree in the Pamirs. The same
is true of apple-trees. According to
Professor Anatoly V. Gursky, the first
director of the. Botanical Gardens,
about 90 per cent of the apple-trees
grown by man in the Pamirs originate
from wild species.
ANOTHER curious fact was the
discovery of an unknown
variety of poplar at the
Khaburabat Pass. So far it has not
been established whether it is a,
hybrid or a spontaneous polyploid
(a plant whose germ plasms are ar¬
ranged in several sets of chromo¬
somes). Whatever the case may be,
this poplar is outstanding for its
colossal power of growth and un¬
commonly large leaves. Spontaneous
polyploids are preponderant among
the main cultivated plants, showing
that the Pamirs was and still is a
region producing a wide variety of
plants. This discovery encouraged
scientists to set about unravelling the
region's botanical mysteries.
It is now accepted that trees and
shrubs in the Pamirs grow faster and
yield bigger crops than those on the
plains because they develop between
two and three times more buds.
This process, known as fasciation,
occurs frequently, causing neighbouring
shoots, flowers and fruits to join and
grow together in one piece.
Experiments have revealed that
growth and ' fruit-bearing are most
active at a height of 2,000 to 2,500
metres. Scientists are anxious to get
to the bottom of this puzzle, and this
is why a few years ago the Biological
Institute of the Pamirs was founded.
Its director is Khudoyor Yusufbekov,
once a herdsman and now a leading
scientist and a Corresponding Member
of the Tadzhik Academy of Sciences.
The first' and simplest explanation
of the phenomenon is that ultraviolet
radiation, whose intensity in the Pamirs
is 50 per cent higher than normal,
boosts plant growth. But a. series of
experiments conducted by Professor
Yelizaveta K. Kardo-Sysoyeva, in which
the short-wave region of the solar
spectrum was cut off, revealed that
ultraviolet emission alone was not the
cause. The mountain light acts upon
plants as a whole, and the air in the
Pamirs has a high degree of trans¬
parency and dryness which promote
an intense solar reaction.
Moreover, the carbon dioxide con¬
tent of this mountain air is only half
as much as that of the air on the plains.
How does this affect plants? And why
do they withstand such enormous
temperature fluctuations: 30° C. below
zero in November-March and 35°
above zero in July? It is also worth
mentioning that on calm nights in the
Pamirs chilly air descends upon the
valleys and creates so-called frosty
depressions.
The experiments with ultraviolet
rays provided some answers to these
questions. The intense ultraviolet
irradiation strengthens the plants'
resistance to low temperatures. But
scientists now tend to believe that a
unique combination of local conditions
enables the plant to use its latent
reserves. In the words of the Russian
scientist, Ivan M. Sechenov: "The
organism sustaining its own existence
without the environment is impossible;
therefore a scientific determination of
the organism must include the medium
which affects it."
And so the biologists of the Pamirs
still Jiave before them a considerable
task, which is of great importance
for farming. When the mystery of this
rapid growth and these bumper crops
has been explained, man will be able
to exercise full control over the crops
he grows.
The scientific and technological re¬
volution has provided man with new
farm implements, boosted agricultural
production and, above all, opened up
many more possibilities to plant-
breeders. Biologists have made break¬
throughs which entitle us to hope that
strains of high-yield plants can be bred,
and above all strains of high-yield
cereals.
Academician Dmitri D. Brezhnev, of
the Lenin Ail-Union Academy of Agri¬
cultural Sciences in Moscow, believes
30
that the concept of an ideal grain
species includes qualities such as a
yield capacity of some 10 metric tons
per hectare; a firm stalk which will
not get beaten down; resistance to
major diseases and poor environmental
conditions; early ripening and a top-
quality kernel with high content of
protein and indispensable amino-acids.
But special genetic stock is needed to
breed such an "ideal" strain.
A number of international organ¬
izations are tackling this problem,
experimenting with a stock of different
strains built up by plant genetics
throughout the world. Distinguished
plant geneticists from many countries,
including the U.S.S.R., are working
with these international bodies. At the
International Maize and Wheat Im¬
provement Centre in Mexico, Nobel
Prize-winner Norman E. Borlaug, head
of the World Spring Wheat Programme,
and his co-workers succeeded in
breeding new strains of corn which
have increased the yield capacity of
crops in South Asia (See "Unesco
Courier", February 1972).
ANY scientific institutions of
CMEA (Council for Mutual
Economic Assistance) member
countries are taking an active part in
this world-wide effort, collecting stock
for the plant geneticists to work from.
The Ail-Union Institute of Crop Hus¬
bandry (U.S.S.R.), the Institute of Gen¬
etics and Plant-Breeding (Bulgaria),
the State Institute of Agrobotanics
(Hungary), and scientific institutions in
other Socialist countries have orga¬
nized scores of expeditions specifically
to explore those areas of the world
where cultivated plants are known to
have originated.
This joint effort has led to the
collection of 325,000 plant species and
varieties. One third of them are
studied annually in various ecological
conditions, and this, research has
produced a vast amount of ex¬
perimental data and led to important
practical results.
In the U.S.S.R., 1,600 strains bred
by the scientists of Bulgaria, the
German Democratic Republic, Hungary
and Czechoslovakia have been tested,
and 5,000 strains developed in the
Soviet Union have been put through
their paces in other Socialist countries.
The grain farmers of Bulgaria and
Hungary have grown the Soviet
Bezostaya-I wheat strain and harvested
an extra 750,000 tons of wheat. In
Czechoslovakia, the Mironovskaya-808
wheat strain yielded an extra 181,000
tons of wheat. The co-operating
countries will also produce more
potatoes, sugar-beet, maize, barley and
other crops from new strains grown by
the plant geneticists of Hungary,
Poland, the German Democratic Rep¬
ublic, U.S.S.R. and Czechoslovakia.
One thing which complicates the
plant geneticist's task is that man in¬
herited from his ancestors a rich
choice of cultivated plants which pro-

vide him with food. As more and more
land came into cultivation, the primitive
varieties were gradually ousted, but
it is these primitive varieties which
preserve the reserves of genetic varia¬
bility. Today, when conditions for bree¬
ding an "ideal strain" exist, the role
of the genetic stock is more important
than ever and thus the world's vege¬
tation resources must be fully mobi¬
lized.
This explains why the world's
scientists are gravely concerned about
the extinction of certain species, and
why the task of conserving the earth's
genetic riches has become a global
problem. The importance of the Pamirs
in current research is expressed in
Nikolai Vavilov's conclusion that the
places where cultivated plants orig¬
inated are also the areas where they
grow in greatest diversity, providing
rich sources of plant breeding stock.
The Head of the Genetics and Piant-
Breeding Section of the Pamirs Bio¬
logical Institute, Fazrullah Nigmatullin,
discovered during an expedition an
unknown variety of wheat, which would
not have survived in any other region
but the isolated and mountainous
Pamirs. This find is of botanical
interest, but it also has a bearing on
major problems facing modern genetics
and plant-breeding.
Moreover, the biologists at the
Pamirs Institute have had long-estab¬
lished scientific contacts with Soviet
physicists. Anyone unaware of this
association and its history may be
surprised to learn that an installation
at the Kurchatov Institute of Atomic
Energy in Moscow has been named
after the Pamirs. What connexion
could there be between research into
the atomic structure of hydrogen and
the experiments conducted by the
Pamirs biologists?
The answer is that the director of
research at the Moscow "Pamirs"
installation, Yuri L. Sokolov, spent
about 14 years in the Pamirs, where
he met Professor A.V. Gursky and
took part in his research. Later, Soko¬
lov informed Academician I.V. Kur¬
chatov of the experimental work being
carried out by the biologists in the
Pamirs, and in 1957 the Pamirs Bota¬
nical Gardens received from the
Moscow physicists a portable spectro¬
meter made at the Institute of Atomic
Energy, and later a quartz monochro-
mator for studying the power distri¬
bution of solar radiation over the
spectrum.
This was the start of close collab¬
oration between physicists, who seek
to harness thermonuclear energy for
man's benefit, and biologists, who study
photosynthesis the process by which
plants use solar energy to convert
water, carbon-dioxide and minerals
into oxygen and energy-rich com¬
pounds. Today, in the Pamirs, rightly
called "Nature's Laboratory", these
scientists, using ultra-modern equip¬
ment, are gradually resolving the
mysteries of the world of plants.
Anatoly V. Pokrovsky
Photo © V. lakobson, Moscow
Because of the extraordinary fecundity and diversity of plant life high in
the Pamirs, the region has become an important centre of research into
the conditions of plant growth. Biologists are trying hard to find out
why trees and shrubs should yield heavier crops at this great height than
on the plains below. Above, research worker at the Pamirs Biological Institute
measures the intensity of sunlight using a heliograph. Below, planting
trees at a height of 3,800 metres.
Photo © Y. Trankvllitsky, Moscow
31
