Carved and painted in 1867, this
tombstone at Bogojevic (Yugoslavia)
depicts a villager, Uros Simeunovic,
holding his son by the hand and his
horse by the reins. Everyday objects,
ornaments, animals and birds are
often portrayed alongside human
figures in this Serbian gravestone
art (see also back cover).
UNUSUAL TOMBSTONE ART
OF YUGOSLAVIA
'*: Si




Folk images carved
and painted
by 19th-century
Serbian artists
by
Dusan Stanimirovic
HE Southern Slavs are
known to have practised a funerary
art in the days when as nomads they
first came to the Balkans and began
peopling regions which bore the stamp
of a strong Hellenistic influence and
of Roman occupation. Traces of this
art have survived in the form of carved
and decorated wooden tombs, a few
of which can still be seen in the
Belgrade Ethnographical Museum.
Then, in the course of time, stone
was substituted for wood. Perhaps
the transformation of a nomadic civi¬
lization into a sedentary one imposed
the choice of stone because of its
permanent quality. Or perhaps it
followed naturally from contact with
builders and hewers of stone. Stone
was already dominant in the 14th and
15th centuries, especially in Bosnia,
with its funeral monuments of the
Bogomil religious sect, and to a lesser
extent in Serbia. These gravestones
were sculpted and in most cases in¬
cluded a representation of the human
figure.
Whatever the case may be, the
beginning of the 19th century saw a
sudden and remarkable development
of a specific tombstone art, which
flourished and reached its peak during
that century. It was still in evidence
at the beginning of the 20th century,
CONTINUED PAGE 20
DUSAN STANIMIROVIC, of Yugoslavia, is
an engineer whose career has taken him to
many countries and given him the opportunity
to take striking and original photographs,
which have earned him recognition as one
of the world's outstanding amateur photo¬
graphers.
17


PORTRAITS
An unusual form of popular art the carving
and decoration of tombstones grew up
and flourished in central Serbia during the
19th century. The artists depicted human
figures with surprising realism and a sharp
eye for detail as these examples show.
(1) Soldier from the village of Mrcajevci,
carrying a pistol thrust through his belt.
(2) Young woman of Tresnjevica, wearing
earrings and a flowered headdress. (5) Old
lady of Pogled carrying her gloves and
umbrella. (3) Traces of paint that survive
show how it was used to accentuate such
details as the moustache and eyebrows of
this soldier. (4) Rain and wind have effac¬
ed all traces of paint from this head, giv¬
ing its features an expression of power
and serenity.

TOMBSTONE ART (Continued trom page 17)
20
but apart from a few exceptions, it
has virtually disappeared today.
Originating in central Serbia, this
form of art is mainly concentrated in
the Sumadija region south of Belgrade,
where the towns of Kragujevac, Cacak,
Ivanica and Titovo Uzice are situated.
Its emergence was not an isolated
phenomenon, and it is not confined to
a few scattered places. The art was
practised in all the villages and small
towns of Sumadija and sometimes
beyond the bounds of that artistically
well-endowed region. It consisted
essentially of representing the dead
and perpetuating their memory by
detailing who and what they were and
what they did in carved and painted
stone.
Here we see everyday people, the
objects they used, the emblems of
their craft or profession, and very
often to one side of the slab, a tree
of life ending in a flourish of leaves
. pecked by a dove, representing the
. dead person's soul.
The mere depiction of a person's
life, however, sometimes takes second
place to portrayal of character. A
coquettish woman gives you a flirta¬
tious glance; a pessimist with down-
turned mouth evokes eternal dis¬
appointment; elsewhere the radiance
of contemplation and the inner life is
suggested by lowered eyes. And
everywhere there are soldiers, single
or in groups, frozen to eternal atten¬
tion, witnesses to lost battles and
vanquished illusions.
A whole motionless world of people
is represented, for whom the salvation
of the soul or the satisfaction of bodily
desires are cares of the past.
The originality of this art is beyond
question, and its variety amazing. It
is obviously related to an authentic
popular peasant art, and an attentive
and curious mind could today form an
Idea of the evolution of Serbian society
from peasant to urban life, using
only these gravestones as a guide.
What explains the extraordinary and
unexpected quality of what one would
a priori be tempted to consider a minor
art? The answer is that these artists
are true masters, and that their work
shows great originality and spontaneity.
It contains a real emotional element
which, though sometimes subtly
restrained, is invariably present, and is
often humorous.
This should really come as no sur¬
prise, for the Serbian people have
always felt an innate need both to
endure and to express their desire
for permanence. Even in a peasant
society with extremely limited possi¬
bilities the gifted found a natural outlet
for their creative talent in this humble
form of painted sculpture rooted in
the earth and the customs of daily life.
This is the explanation of its richness
and variety.
However, the development of urban
civilization changed the sources of
inspiration of these artists, whose
vocational talent was gradually super¬
seded by purely professional skill. The
very few craftsmen who still cut these
tombstones today possess neither the
technical mastery, nor the freshness
of inspiration, nor the spontaneity of
execution of the old masters.
Most of these tombstones were
worked in bas-relief and in some cases
there is no more than a simple outline
cut into the stone, with no relief at
all. Some were sculpted in the round,
but these are extremely rare.
It is highly probable that at first the
sculptors used white marble from the
quarries of Studenica, whose stone¬
cutters had been famous throughout
the country from time immemorial.
Although close examination reveals a
few traces of paint on these marble
tombstones, the very fine grain of the
marble prevented colour from holding
firmly.
Later on a highly porous stone was
used which was a conglomerate of
very fine particles; this had the advan¬
tage of being more easily worked than
marble and of absorbing the paint,
thus preserving the colours. In other
cases the porous stone has an overlay
of finer porosity which acted as a
support for the colour.
Some tombstones are engraved with
phrases and maxims describing how
the person died or his or her quirks of
character. Here are some examples:
"Alasl I am like a drooping flower
which has bloomed too soon and
withered fast, like a rose in the
burning sun."
"Far from home, the flowers of
Serbia will never bloom upon my1
grave. Tell my loved ones that I
shall never more return."
"He died against his will, struck
down by the hand of the guard in
the presence of the authorities."
(This is an elliptical way of saying
that he was executed.)
"Come closer, beloved brother and
traveller, I have nothing against you.
See where my youth is laid to rest."
"Here in calm repose lies Kruna,
first wife of Ljubomir Tadlc. She
was weary and wanted rest. May
she forgive us for having sinned.
Her bereaved husband Ljubomir and
his second wife Ljubovanka."
"Here I lie at rest while you look
at me. I wish you were in my place
and I could be looking at you."
These gravestones give no impres¬
sion of despair, but rather a certain
melancholy, great serenity, resigned
acceptance of a fate which was some¬
times unjust, a simple philosophy of
life and a sense of humour.
In their turn the works are slowly
dying under the assault of wind and
weather, time and neglect.
Dusan Stanimirovic
