HOW I PERCEIVE
THE WORLD
AROUND ME
In 1972 a book entitled
"How I Perceive, Imagine and Understand the World
Around Me" was published in Moscow. Its author, a
poet and essayist named Olga Skorokhodova, is both
blind and deaf. Hers is an extraordinary life story
and a no less astounding achievement. She was born
in 1914 in a village of Southern Ukraine. Before the
age of five she contracted meningitis and completely
lost first her sight and then her hearing, so that her
speech became impaired. At that time she lost both
her parents.
Aï the Odessa School
for the Blind, where she was sent in 1922, the teachers
could do nothing to bring her out of her isolation.
In 1925 she entered the clinic for deaf, dumb and
blind children set up in Kharkov two years earlier
by Professor Ivan Sokolyansky. There her speech
was restored. With the help of special methods
devised by Professor Sokolyansky and with Braille,
she was taught regular school subjects and completed
her secondary education. She is now a member of
the Institute for the Handicapped of the U.S.S.R.
Academy of Educational Sciences in Moscow and
holds a Master's degree in educational psychology.
She also teaches at a special deaf-blind school at
Zagorsk, near Moscow whose pioneering work for
the handicapped has won it a worldwide reputation.
WlTH her latest book,
Olga Skorokhodova completes a trilogy describing
how a person deprived of the most important senses
sight and hearing perceives, imagines and com¬
prehends the world around. On the following pages
we present salient passages from this moving and
inspiring work.
by Olga Skorokhodova Text below © Copyright - Reproduction prohibited
I
10
T is not difficult to per¬
ceive, to "look at" an object with
the hands; it is much more difficult
to describe in words exactly how
I perceive that object, to convey my
mental ¡mage of it. When deaf, dumb
and blind people describe their sens¬
ations, perceptions, and ideas in the
language of those who can see,
although they use the same words,
they feel with different sense organs.
When someone with normal sight
sees a cow in the distance, he may
say: "I'm looking at the cow; it is
brown with white spots; it has big,
beautiful eyes", etc.
A blind person, describing his own
Immediate sensations and perceptions,
would say something like this: "I can
feel the cow with my hands, it has
a smooth, soft coat. I have felt its
legs and its head- On its head I
found horns which seem to me
to be very hard."
How could a deaf person describe
someone playing a piano? The only
thing he could say would be something
like the following: "I put my hands on
the top of the piano and I could feel
the vibration of what those who can
hear call sounds."
I have experienced many things, and
the more contact I have had with peo¬
ple and the better I have got to know
life and nature, the richer and more
complex my- perceptions and Ideas
about the external world have become.
Consequently, it has become all the
harder for me to find the necessary
words for each separate fact of my
experience.
Year by year I have extended my
knowledge and enriched my literary
vocabulary. The reader may or may
not believe me that is up to him
when I say that I am Indebted for my
knowledge and for my literary language
to reading, more reading, and yet more
reading, particularly of works of liter¬
ature.
Reading can be the salvation of the
blind, the deaf and the dumb, and
especially of those who combine all
three handicaps. When those who are
responsible for the education and up¬
bringing of the severely handicapped
realize this, much greater progress will
be made in that education than is now
the case.
'Seeing' with my hands
My hands partly replace sight and
hearing, but my feet also come in use¬
ful. When I am walking in the street
or in a park, I can easily feel the
slightest slope in the ground and for
this reason I know when I am coming
to the edge of the pavement, where
I have to step down onto the roadway

The
extraordinary story
of a woman writer,
blind and deaf
from the age of five
Olga Skorokhodova
and when I get to the other side where
I have to step up onto the pavement
again. Even indoors I can feel when
the floor slopes slightly In any
direction...
When L.I. shakes hands with me I
always know how she is feeling. I
always notice, for instance, if she is
upset about anything. I can feel this
by the movement of her fingers, by the
tension in her hand and by a slight
trembling.
If I ask her what Is wrong, she often
replies that nothing is wrong at all, but
I know her hand and her movements so
well that I don't believe her. I don't
think that if I could see and study
her face I would be any better able to
judge her physical state and her mood
from the expression of her face than
from the subtle signs which are com¬
municated to me by touch...
One day I remarked to Maria that
her dress, which had been very short,
had been lengthened. I felt to see how
the dressmaker had done it and I
noticed that the tacking had been left
in. I called A.I. and asked her: "Why
didn't they take the tacking out? It's
hardly noticeable, but it should have
been taken out..."
I was once reading with C, when
she was called away for a few minutes
and I was left by myself. Next to me
on the table was a heap of books.
They were not books for the blind and
I had no means of knowing what they
were, but on the cover of one of them
I felt a circle, in the middle of which
was a portrait in relief.
I ran my fingers over it and I Iden¬
tified the face, and also easily located
the eyes, nose, mouth, chin and ear.
When C. came back I asked her:
"What Is this book?" She replied that
it was Lamarck's "Philosophy of Zoo¬
logy". I asked if the head on the cover
was a portrait of Lamarck, and she
replied that it was...
It is very difficult for people with
normal hearing to appreciate what ¡s
meant by reading something "express¬
ively" with the fingers. I have often
explained this to people who have been
reading to me and demonstrated what
I mean with my fingers, but It is difficult
for those who can see to grasp,
although I and the children we teach
can feel this very clearly.
B., for Instance, when she Is talking
about things or people she likes, uses
a gentle, as it were caressing move¬
ment of the fingers; if she does not like
something or if she Is displeased with
somebody, she makes rapid, abrupt
movements of the fingers, although she
has never been taught to do so. What
I call "expressive hands" are hands
in which I can feel to use the lan¬
guage of those who can see and hear,
a "lively, mobile face" or "an intona¬
tion of voice".
Most blind people are completely
reliant on those who can see when
11
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

12
they want to thread a needle. The
few blind people who can thread a
needle for themselves usually do so
by placing the eye of the needle
against the tip of their tongue, so
that when the end of the thread passes
through they can feel it with their
tongue.
My method is different: I take the
needle between the thumb and middle
finger of the left hand, holding it near
to the eye, and the thread between
the thumb and Index finger of my right
hand; I can then easily thread it
straight away, as long as the needle is
a good straight one and does not slip
about in my fingers.
In fact, not only am I Independent in
this respect of the help of colleagues
who can see, but I am often able to
help them when the light is poor. A.I.
has often asked me to help her in this
way, and when I have asked her why
she could not do It herself, she has
explained that it was dark and that
she could not see to thread the needle
because it was a small one. For some
reason, I find it easier to thread a fine
needle than a larger one...
Once when T.A. was reading to me,
K. came in and began talking to her.
I put my hands on the two speakers'
throats and "listened" to their voices,
then I "looked at" their faces. "Are
we beautiful?" asked T.A., jokingly.
"Well, your face is better than K's", I
replied. "No she has a fresher com¬
plexion than I", said T.A. "That may
be", I replied, "but you have finer
features than her."
Later, in conversation with L.I., I
told her about this incident and asked
her whether my judgement had been
right, and she confirmed that it had.
The sense of smell
Sometime last year, I was reading
the papers with U. When we had
read all that were available, U. went
off to see H. to get some more, but
when she brought the new papers and
gave me one I told her I had already
read It. When she asked me how I
knew, even before she had read It out
to me, I replied that I recognized its
smell and knew that I had read that
particular newspaper with R.G. She
then said that was quite impossible
since H. would not have given her the
HOW I PERCEIVE THE WORLD (Continued)
paper if I had already read it. So
I asked her to read out a headline
from the paper, and I was able to
convince her that I had indeed read
the paper before with R.G.
Although I can neither see nor hear,
I am still very fond of nature. I can
smell all the different perfumes, I can
touch the petals of a flower, Individual
blades of grass, twigs and leaves- I
can feel the baking heat of the sun,
and I know how pleasantly refreshing
shade and cold water are to the body
after the heat.
I love the seaside, and I have always
been able to tell by the smell when
we were getting near to the sea. Al¬
though I cannot see it or hear the
murmur of its waves, it is a great
pleasure to me to be near the sea and
to breathe the bracing air. When I have
been by the sea, I have experienced
a feeling of reverence and awe at Its
might and beauty, of which I have
formed a mental picture...
One day when E.A. came to see
me, I could detect there was an odour
of rubber. I asked her why there was
this smell, and she replied that she
had been working with some children
on the word "ball" and had been
holding a rubber ball in her hands.
'Hearing' by vibrations
I can detect and distinguish the
various sorts of noise made by furni¬
ture being moved, just as easily as I
can smell. I can pick up these move¬
ments by the vibrations of the floor.
In the dining-room where I was
working one day with G. there are
two big wooden calendars which can
be turned In any direction, especially
made for our children. When the
calendars are turned they make a tapp¬
ing noise. Sensing the noise, which
was annoying me and stopping me
from concentrating, I did not imme¬
diately realize that it came from one of
the calendars and I asked G. who was
tapping. She replied that she could
not hear anything-
This reply greatly surprised me. I
was sure that if I could feel the noise
through the vibration of the floor, then
she should be able to hear it before I
felt it. But the tapping noise continued
and I could not concentrate on what
G. was reading out to me.
I waited a while, until the tapping
was repeated several times, then asked
her again If she heard anything. This
time she replied that she could hear
the noise and that it was the tapping
of the calendar. She said that the
noise had not disturbed her and she
paid no attention to it.
It occurred to me then that people
who can see and hear are so used to
various noises that they are quite con
vinced they are not hearing or seeing
anything at all...
When I enter an unfamiliar building,
I immediately know what sort of floor
or staircase it has. For instance, if
there Is a wooden staircase, I can feel
a sort of long vibration from my own
footsteps, but if it is a concrete stair¬
case, the sensation is of a shorter
vibration...
I have several times taken a boat
trip down the Dnieper. As these trips
took place In the summer-time, I stayed
the whole time on deck. I could feel
the movement of the boat very clearly,
and could feel the engines working
away like the beating of a great heart
somewhere below the decks...
I would think very few people who
have all their faculties would believe
that someone who Is blind and deaf
can "listen" to singing and music In
fact, a blind and deaf person can have
a very clear sensation of the sound
of a voice and of instrumental music,
and can derive great pleasure from
them.
The difference is, of course, that he
"listens" not with his ears, but with
his hands. I am very fond of putting
my hands on a piano or some other
musical Instrument when It is being
played. I also like to place my hand
on the throat of a person who is sing¬
ing or speaking.
L.I. and C. were once talking in my
presence. I had heard L.l.'s voice
many times before and was very fond
of it. I had never heard C.'s voice
before and was therefore interested by
It. I placed my hand on L.l.'s throat
and then on C.'s. I could feel C.'s
voice was somewhat lower than LI. 's
and at the same time I could tell that
C.'s voice had a pleasant timbre. I
asked L.I. if in fact C.'s voice was
lower than hers and she replied that
in her opinion it was not lower but C.
was simply talking louder than usual.
I nevertheless still had the impres¬
sion that C.'s voice was lower and I

decided to ask my friend N., who has
a good musical ear. The next day I
introduced N. to C. and asked her to
pay attention to the voice. After talk¬
ing to C. for a while, N. told me that
her voice was indeed somewhat lower
than L.l.'s but that It had a com¬
pletely different timbre. It was there¬
fore not Immediately obvious whose
voice was the lower...
As I can feel other people's voices
by putting my hand on their throats,
I often feel my own throat when I am
speaking. I do this so that I can to
some extent correct my voice and con¬
trol Its pitch, volume and tone.
This may seem strange or even ridi¬
culous to some, but in fact I cari feel
my own voice with my hand almost
as well as I could hear It with my own
ears. I think It would be a good
thing for all deaf and dumb people to
get into the habit of holding their
throats while speaking. It would help
them to speak In a much more pleasant
way and much more clearly. When I
am talking to someone new, I often
use this method of controllng my
voice...
If I am near a piano, I can feel
the sounds very well even when I have
not got my hands on the top of the
Instrument. This is not as strange as
it may seem: the sound vibrations are
transmitted through the instrument and
across the floor, and I can feel them
through my feet, especially loud
chords.
Once when I was at my friend N.'s
house, I was lying on a settee while
she played the piano, which stood
next to it. At some point I began to
doze, but was suddenly awakened by
strong sound vibrations. N. was play¬
ing a piece in which there were a
number of powerful chords and, lying
on the settee, I had the impression that
there was some piano-like musical ins¬
trument in the settee itself, so strongly
were the sound vibrations transmitted...
I had a friend who played the clarinet
in an orchestra, and on one occasion I
sat next to him while he was playing.
I do not remember what the music was,
but I remember that my friend held my
hand and I beat time to the music.
When the music was finished, I asked
if I had been keeping time correctly
and he replied that I had...
It would be a mistake to think that
deaf people cannot distinguish one per¬
son's walk from another. Some people
have a walk which annoys me. I often
sit reading in the canteen. A.N. often
walks through the canteen, and his
walk greatly annoys me. I don't know
what sort of noise he makes when he
walks, but to me, sensing the noise
by other means, it seems as if A.N.
is walking on four legs rather than two,
and making more noise with two of his
feet than with the other two. Apparent¬
ly this is because he does not tie
up his shoe-laces properly and makes
a scuffling noise with his heels...
I read recently in a magazine for the
blind that a blind schoolboy had sug¬
gested there should be special tea¬
pots for the blind so that they would
not spill the tea when pouring it into a
cup. This would not be a bad idea
but personally I do not feel any need
for a special teapot.
. When I pour hot or cold water
into a cup or glass, I do not hold the
cup in the way most people do but
put my fingers round It In such a way
that I can feel the temperature of the
water and where it comes up to in the
cup. Only very rarely do I let the
water spill over, and that is usually
because I am thinking of something
else and not paying attention to what
I am doing.
My many efforts
to understand
what colours are
Many people have asked me whether
I have any idea of colours. Some
people have even asked me whether
I can feel different colours. My reply
to both these questions is "Of course
not", but as I speak the same language
as people who can see, I talk , about
colours, using the same words as are
normally used.
I would very much like to have a
mental picture of colours and when I
was younger I often tried to get my
friends and relations to explain colours
to me. Once, for instance, I had a
dress made and was told that
it was coffee-coloured. I liked the
cut of the dress very much and was
therefore especially keen to know what
this coffee colour was. My friends
told me: "It is just the same as milky
coffee. Do you understand?"
Of course I had a mental image of
a cup of hot coffee with milk, and I
could even imagine the smell and the
taste of the coffee, but not the colour
instead of the colour I thought of my
dress, which I ran my fingers over
very carefully, although I knew I was
not able to "see" the coffee colour
with my fingers.
On another occasion I asked what
colour my scarf was and was told
that it was sandy coloured. I asked
what a sandy colour was and someone
again replied "Just like sand. Do you
understand?" I had a very clear image
of the sand in our garden where the
children used to play with their buckets
and spades. I had another image of a
river bank where there was lots of
damp, cold sand.
Another ¡mage which came to mind
was that of a beach by the seaside
which I knew well, where the sand was
dry and hot to the feet. But none of
this gave me any idea what a sandy
colour might be. Friends also tried
to explain green to me by comparing
it with grass or the leaves of trees,
and I thought of grass or leaves but of
nothing else...
My idea of a cloud may be of inte¬
rest. I Imagine the warm rays of the
sun after a storm, and somewhere to
the side of the sun, floating in the air
a dark (to use a word that people
who can see use I only imagine it as
dark), rectangular mass, a lump of
some dense substance-
This object moves nearer and nearer
to the sun and finally blots out the
sun's heat. If I am walking along the
street and a cloud covers the sun, I
Immediately feel the difference in the
air temperature, and it is this change
from warmth to coolness which gives
me my idea of a cloud.
I imagine a storm-cloud as a big
circle in the sky (the sky itself a bound¬
less expanse of air), with zigzag lines
of gleaming hot lightning around the
edges. Big chunks of the circle then -
break away and move about in a
disorderly fashion, colliding with each
other and producing thunder. The
colliding fragments then fly apart,
breaking up into minute particles
which fall to earth as cold raindrops...




How I image
the Milky Way
and the Moon
I do not know what the Milky Way
Is really like, but my idea of it is
quite different from what those who
can see must have of it. When I
read about the Milky Way, I imagine
a long, rather narrow piece of the
finest, lightest, softest muslin, some¬
thing like a veil, stretching across the
sky far, far above the earth.
I do not know how beautiful the
Milky Way is, but it seems to me that
if this muslin is light in colour and
the sky beyond is dark blue, then it
must be beautiful. I have heard people
who can see talking about such a
combination of colours. 1Q
When I read In a book about the
Milky Way gleaming, I first imagine
milk, and feel Its taste in my mouth.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

HOW I PERCEIVE THE WORLD (Continued)
'/
s
14
I know that milk is white so I presume
that the muslin of the Milky Way must
also be white or very nearly white.
Thus I repeat that I am constantly
obliged to use the language of people
who can see and hear, for there is no
separate language for the blind and
the deaf-
People often talk about the moon
and I have read about it in many books.
In old books, the moon is described as
a lamp hanging in the sky at night,
and this is the image which some
people who can see have of the moon.
I have tried to imagine the moon in the
same way, but I cannot visualize it as
a lamp hanging by a chain- I remember
when I was a little girl in the country
we had a lamp, although I did not
know what It was called or what pur¬
pose it served. Why do I not imagine
the moon as a lamp?
My mental ¡mage of the moon is of
a big, hollow porcelain globe I can
somehow feel its smooth surface. That
is how I imagine the full moon. I
imagine the globe to be shining, not
because I have any visual conception
of light or darkness; I have no real idea
of light or darkness, but I have the
epidermal sensations of heat and cold
which run into those of light and dark.
But as those who can see the moon
speak of the moon shining, I think of
it as a shining globe.
As I cannot feel moonlight, however,
it does not appear to me to be as
pleasant, as joyful and life-giving as
sunlight. ' I often smile when I feel the
faint rays of the winter or spring sun
touch my face, but I never smile,
indeed I feel complete indifference,
when someone tells me how bright the
moon is shining. The moon is not
always full, however. When I hear
or read about the crescent moon, I
imagine a thin, carefully cut slice of
pumpkin with one of its sharply pointed
ends uppermost.
I can feel the music
with my hand
I was once invited to a concert in
a club for the blind. I was somewhat
at a loss at first, knowing that I would
not be able to hear the singers, but
everything went well. M.N. told me
the words of the songs on one hand
while S.A. held my other hand and
made it beat in time to the rhythm of the
music. Of course I could get no real
Idea of the tunes which were being
sung, but the rhythm of the music cor¬
responded with the rhythm of the verse
and this In Itself gave me great
pleasure- The day after the concert I
moved around my room to the rhythm
which I had felt through my hand.
I sometimes go to the shows given
for the deaf and dumb in the House
of the Unions in Moscow. Usually
these shows consist mainly of per¬
formances by clowns, acrobats, magi¬
cians and dancers. I cannot follow
this sort of turn very well and so it is
not of any great interest to me.
Somebody usually tells me what is
going on and if I can also follow the
movements of the person who is
"translating" for me, then I can ima¬
gine the things as they happen on the
stage. It Is even better when I sit in
the front row, very near the stage,
and can feel the tapping of the feet
during the dancing.
On one occasion, it was announced
that a Caucasian dancer was to per¬
form in national costume. I had never
seen such a costume, but when the
performer began to dance and I, sitting
in the front row, could feel the gay
rhythm of his feet, it seemed as if I
could almost see this dancing figure
for myself.
I imagined him as being of middle
height (although no one had told me
how tall he was), with a laughing face
and rapid, confident movements. I
could not visualize the upper part of
the costume very clearly, but I could
imagine wide, flapping sleeves and
Turkish-style trousers. As I could feel
the sounds of the piano and the
drumming of his feet, I could imagine
the speed and vigour with which he
was dancing.
The fire of his dancing seemed to
communicate itself to me. I seemed
to be electrified and 1 could have sworn
that I could see the dancer, that I was
running my hands over his body, over
his tunic with the wide sleeves and
his face heated by the dance, and It
seemed to me that he was not at all
tired but, on the contrary, was smiling
broadly, showing big, well-shaped
teeth.
No one had said anything to me
about any of this. This image of the
dancer arose in my imagination only
because I felt the vibration of the
joyous music and the gay drumming of
his feet. I derived great pleasure from
that concert and returned home in the
highest of spirits.
How I visualize
a painting
When I go to a museum and the
person accompanying me tries to des¬
cribe what is represented in a parti¬
cular painting, I listen with Interest
but I do not always Imagine the paint¬
ing as it must really be.
If the painting represents things
with which I am already familiar such
as people, trees, country paths, fami¬
liar birds and animals, I can gather a
rough Idea of it.
If the painting represents, for ins¬
tance, a sunrise or a sunset, a land¬
scape or a stormy sea with a sinking
ship, I imagine the completely smooth
surface of the canvas, which I can
touch with my hands, and the sun or
the sea I imagine quite separately,
quite independent of the painting and
as I have perceived them in nature
the sun warming me with Its rays, the
sea splashing up to my feet and
sending spray over me ; I can even
call to mind the special smell of the
sea.
When I leave the museum, I can
remember the paintings as I perceive
them, that is to say I remember their
dimensions, I can remember the glass
if the painting was under glass and
the frame smooth or carved but not
the pictures themselves, i.e. the things
represented.
I remember only the content, the
subject, plus some other vague recol¬
lections. For this reason I prefer
sculpture, which is completely acces¬
sible to my tactile "sight" and hence
to my understanding. But as I use
the language of those who see and
hear and as I read books, I could
quite well describe probably no
worse than anyone else In fact some
picture which I had never seen but
the subject of which I knew.
Someone reading what I wrote would
probably find it hard to believe that I
had never seen the picture, yet I write
nothing but the truth and I would not
wish to ascribe to myself familiarity
with things which I have not seen or
imagined.
