From
Confucius
to Malthus
Since antiquity men have asked :
'Is there an optimum population?'
66
IAN has been concerned
with population problems since ancient
times. From antiquity, statesmen and
thinkers have held opinions, based on
political, military, social and economic
considerations, about such issues as
the most desirable number of people
or the need to stimulate or retard
population growth.
Ideas and theories on population
have nearly always revolved round the
real or supposed problems of individual
societies and have stimulated the most
response when directed specifically
towards those problems. Thus the
ideas of the philosophers of ancient
Greece dealt mainly with the population
questions faced by the city-state with
a relatively small population. In the
Roman Empire the views on population
reflected the populationist outlook of
a society in which population was
considered a source of power.
The thesis that excessive population
growth may reduce output per worker,
depress levels of living for the masses
and engender strife is of great antiquity.
It appears in the works of Confucius
and his school, as well as in the works
of other ancient Chinese philosophers.-
Some of these writings suggest that
the authors had some concept of
optimum population, as far as the
population engaged in agriculture was
concerned. Postulating an ideal pro¬
portion between land and population,
they held the government primarily
responsible for maintaining such a
proportion by moving people from
over-populated to under-populated
areas, although noting also that govern¬
ment action was reinforced at times by
spontaneous migration.
These ancient Chinese writers also
paid some attention to another aspect
which has occupied an important place
in subsequent literature on population
theory, that is, the checks to population
growth. They observed that mortality
increases when food supply is in
sufficient, that premature marriage
makes for high infant mortality rates,
that war checks population growth and
that costly marriage ceremonies reduce
the marriage rates, although they paid
little attention to the manner in
which numbers adjusted to resources.
Despite these views on population and
resources, the doctrines of Confucius
regarding family, marriage and pro¬
creation were essentially favourable to
population increase.
The writers of early Greece were
more concerned with the formulation
of policies and rules for population
than With theories about it. Plato and
Aristotle discussed the question of the
"optimum" population with respect to
the Greek city-state in their writings
on the ideal conditions for the full
development of man's potential.
They considered the problem of
population size not so much in
economic terms, but more from the
point of view of defence, security and
government. The thought was that
population should be self-sufficient,
and thus possess enough territory to
supply its needs but not be so large
as to render constitutional govern¬
ment impossible.
The more specific observations on
these conditions were made by Plato,
particularly in his Laws. He held that
if the so-called "highest good" was to
be achieved, the city-state should have
5,040 citizens. Since the actual course
of demographic trends might result
in either an excess or a shortage
of population, Plato also proposed
measures to be taken in order to
maintain the desired size. In the case
of under-population, he recommended
rewards, advice or rebuke to the young
in order to increase the birth-rate, and,
in the last resort, immigration. To
remedy over-population he proposed
birth control for large families and, if
necessary, colonization.
Aristotle dealt with population
problems particularly in his Política.
He was less specific than Plato on the
matter of optimum population but
stated that in size and extent the State
should be such as to enable the in¬
habitants to live at once temperately
and liberally in the enjoyment of leisure.
He held that land and property could
not be increased as rapidly as the
population would grow and concluded
that an excessive number of inhabitants
would breed poverty and social ills.
Among the factors which could prevent
an excessive population he mentioned
child exposure and abortion.
The Romans viewed population
questions in the perspective of a great
empire rather than a small city-state.
They were less conscious than the
Greeks of possible limits to population
growth and more alert to its ad¬
vantages for military and related pur¬
poses. Perhaps because of this
difference in outlook, Roman writers
paid less attention to population than
the Greeks. Cicero rejected Plato's
communism in wives and children and
held that the State's population must
be kept up by monogamous marriage.
The preoccupation with population
growth, the disapproval of celibacy and
the view of marriage as primarily and
fundamentally for procreation was
mainly reflected in the Roman legis¬
lation of that time. Particularly the
laws of Augustus, creating privileges
for those married and having children
and discriminating financially against
those not married, aimed at raising the
marriage and birth-rates.
The Hebrew sacred books placed

much emphasis on procreation and
multiplication and, for this reason,
unfruitfulness was regarded as a
serious misfortune. In general, Orien¬
tal philosophers appear to have favour¬
ed fertility and multiplication. An
exponent of some of the views on
population for the period dating back
to some three to four centuries B.C. is
Arthasàstra, a book written as a guide
for rulers and attributed to Kautalya.
The work discusses such aspects as
the desirability of a large population
as a source of military and economic
power (although recognizing that the
population may become too large) ;
the effects of war, famine and pesti¬
lence, and the colonization and settle¬
ment of new areas.
Early and medieval Christian writers
considered questions of population
almost entirely from a moral and ethical
standpoint. Their doctrines were
mainly populationist but less so than
those of Hebrew writers. On the one
hand, they condemned polygamy,
divorce, abortion, infanticide and child
exposure; on the other, they glorified
virginity and continence and frowned
upon second marriage.
The main arguments in favour
of celibate practices are found in
the teachings of St. Paul. Some early
Christian defenders of ecclesiastical
celibacy resorted to economic argu¬
ments not unlike some of those later
used by Malthus. Referring to the
growth of the known world's popu¬
lation, they attributed want and poverty
to this cause and cited pestilence,
famine, war, etc., as nature's means
of reducing excess population.
The prevailing tendency, however,
was to favour, as in earlier times,
population growth. The high mortality
which was found everywhere and the
constant threat of sudden depopulation
through famine, epidemics and wars
predisposed most writers towards the
maintenance of a high birth-rate. The
opposition to birth control, for instance,
was based not only on church doctrine
but also on a fear of depopulation.
The views of Muslim authors on
population resemble those of the
Hebrew and Christian authors. Special
mention should be made, however, of
the interesting but long unrecognized
work by Ibn Khaldoun, an Arab author
of the fourteenth century. His opinions
are noteworthy in two respects.
In the first place, he held that a
densely settled population was con¬
ducive to higher levels of living since
it permitted a greater division of
labour, a better use of resources and
military and political security.
Secondly, he maintained that a
State's periods of prosperity alternate
with periods of decline and that cyclical
variations in the population occur in
rhythm with these economic fluc¬
tuations. Favourable economic con¬
ditions and political order stimulate
population growth by increasing natality
and checking mortality. In the wake
of these periods of economic progress
come luxury, rising taxes and other
changes which in several generations
produce political decline, economic
depression and depopulation.
At the dawn of the modern era, the
emergence of the nation-states and the
related issue of power led mercantilist
writers to emphasize once again the
advantages, both political and econ¬
omic, of a large population. Malthus's
contrary theory had its roots in
political, economic and social issues
which existed during his time. The
same can be said of Marxist views on
population.
More recent developments in popu¬
lation theories have been influenced
predominantly by two factors. The first
of these was the upsurge of population
growth, especially in the developing
countries. This fact has created a
need for a better understanding of the
factors in population growth. Secondly,
the nearly universal preoccupation with
the problems of development has
called for a considerably more pen¬
etrating theoretical framework for
assessing the interrelations between
population and economic and social
development.
The search for an acceptable popu¬
lation theory has thus gained
importance. If such a theory could be
elaborated, it would provide a better
insight into the development process,
and could constitute a basic element
in policy-making and planning for
development.
This text is abridged from the chapter on C |
population theory in "The Determinants and U I
Consequences of Population Trends', a 2-
volume study published by the U.N. Depart¬
ment of Economic and Social Affairs (New
York, December 1973, $24).
