LIVING
ON A VOLCANO a
Despite its name, Iceland
is one of the 25 natural
'hot-spots' of the world
4
SIGURDUR THORARINSSON, professor of geology and geography at
the University of Iceland, is a leading authority on glaciology and volca-
nology. Former director of the Department of Geology and Geography
al the Museum of Natural History in Reykjavik, he has written many
studies on Iceland's geology and volcanoes, including 'The Eruptions
of Hekla in Historical Times' and "Surtsey, the New Island in the North
Atlantic', both published in J 967.
by
Sigurdur Thórarinsson
June day in the year 1000.
At Thingvellir on the Oxará River, in
Iceland, the Althing has been In ses¬
sion for some days. For threescore
and ten years this assembly, which in
modern times has sometimes been
referred to as "the Grandmother of^
Parliaments", has been convening for
two nightless weeks in June every
summer. At its session this summer
the Althing has to decide a question
more fateful than any it has ever been
faced with: whether in the future paga¬
nism or Christianity shall reign In the
land.
Thingvellir is an extraordinary setting
for a parliament: the level, grassy
banks of the Oxará River, and above
the west bank a lava slope which rises
to form the east wall of a great lava

The towering pillars of an Icelandic
basalt rock formation, thrown up by
millenial volcanic upheavals and form¬
ing a natural "Parthenon" of the Hyper-
boreas, or "Land Beyond the North"
of Greek legend.
E leven centuries ago, the westward wave of
Scandinavian migration reached a new land,
just south of the Arctic Circle, where ice
contended with fire, where glaciers, volcanoes
and boiling springs seemed to hurl defiance at
man and at each other. This was Iceland. In this
issue of the "Unesco Courier" we recount the
saga of the Icelandic people's unending struggle
with a hostile climate, the splendours of the
literary heritage of a unique culture, and the
beauty and geological contrasts of a country
still shrouded in legend but in which myth has
blended into the modernity of the 20th century.
chasm. The dark west wall of the
chasm echoes every word spoken on
the brink at the top of the lava slope,
the site of Lögberg, the Law Rock.
From this rock the Law Speaker, the
supreme officer of the Althing, must
annually recite before the assembly
and the general public the unwritten
laws of the nation, one third of the
code for each of his three years in
office, in order that the law may be
known and that the legislature may
alter and amend it as needed.
The conflict between pagans and
Christians appears beyond peaceful
settlement and the young republic is
on the brink of religious civil war.
"But at that moment", says one of
the ancient sources, "a man came
running with the message that an
earthfire had broken out in ölfus and
was likely to overrun the farm of
Thóroddur, the Chieftain-Priest."
Those of the heathen party said:
"It is no wonder that the gods are
angered by such words as have been
spoken here." Then Snorri the Chief¬
tain-Priest asked: "What angered the
gods when this rock burned on which
we are now standing?" The heathen
leaders were at a loss for words.
Everyone present knew quite well that
he was standing on ancient lava that
had flowed long before the country
was settled. The Althing of 1000 A.D.
ended by resolving that henceforth
all Icelanders would be Christians.
July 20, 1783. The scene is Kirkju-
baejarklaustur, an ancient estate in the
heart of the district of Sida in south¬
ern Iceland. In the parish church, a
decaying, low-roofed structure of
stone and turf, a service is In progress.
This service is to go down in Icelandic
history as "the Fire-Mass", but the
subject of the preacher's sermon this
Sunday is not the Fire of Hell: he
speaks of the fire in the earth which
for forty days and forty nights had
been harrying the region.
On June 8, a twelve kilometre long
fissure had opened up in the highland
pastures south-west of Vatnajökull
Glacier. The lava flowed down along
the gorge of the Skaftá River and
spread out over the farming districts
of Sida and Medalland. It has been
calculated that during those first forty
days the average flow from the fissure
was twice that of the Rhine at its
mouth.
When the eruption finally came to
an end almost six months later, the
lava flow covered 565 square kilo¬
metres, and by the end of the following
year, seventy-five per cent of the
country's livestock had perished, either
directly from the poisonous effects of
fluorine and other pollutants or because
of the failure of the grass crop
caused by the blue haze, and some
10,000 people, or rather more than a
fifth of the nation, had died of hunger
or disease caused by the eruption.
May 2, 1970. In the valley of Thjór- Jl
sárdalur in southern Iceland a sizeable
group of people have gathered for a
festive occasion: a 220,000 kW. hydro-
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

Winter and summer alike the
people of Reykjavik, the
world's northernmost capital,
enjoy a swim in the open-
air bathing pools (opposite)
heated by water from the
natural hot springs in and
near the city. Most of the
city's houses and public build¬
ings are also heated by hot
spring water (see article page
24). Right, farmer from the
Lake Myvatn district of
northern Iceland. Below, the
springtime of youth.
6
LIVING ON A VOLCANO (Continued)
electric power plant, the largest by far
in the country and one of the greatest
engineering projects ever undertaken
in Iceland, is about to be inaugurated.
During the first centuries after the
colonization of Iceland, this then hos¬
pitable valley sheltered a flourishing
farming community. But in 1104 Hekla
erupted for the first time In the nation's
history, making the larger part of Thjór-
sárdalur so utterly waste that no
resettlement was ever attempted.
Through all these centuries the
upper part of the valley remained a
white desert, covered with light-colour¬
ed rhyolitic pumice. But with the
harnessing of the Thjórsá River, efforts
were made to cover the desert with
grass in order to prevent the drifting of
dust and sand around the powerhouse.
The guests at the dedication cere¬
mony see grassy ground on every
hand, and the President and other
speakers talk of the white desert
having at last taken on again the green
colour of life. Three days later, a rain
of coarse cinders and ash beats down
on the roof of the powerhouse. Hekla
has started again. And when the ash
fall lets up after two hours, the valley
once more ¡s a desert. A black desert,
this time.
These are three incidents in the his¬
tory of country which in spite of its
Photo © Icelandic Photo and Press Service, Reykjavik, Iceland

Photo © Gamma, París
coldest-sounding name is nevertheless
one of the hottest. For Iceland is one
of the twenty-five or so regions in the
world now referred to by geologists
as "hot-spots". Virtually all of Iceland
has been built up in volcanic eruptions,
and about one third of the country is
an active volcanic region.
The principal zone of activity lies in
a broad belt across the country from
north to south, the southern half form¬
ing two distinct branches. This vol¬
canic region forms part of the system
of rifts and ridges that runs the length
of the Atlantic ocean.
In the volcanic regions of Iceland
nearly every type of volcano found
on the globe is represented, but the
commonest type is the crater row.
It is characteristic of Iceland that
some of the most active and most
vigorous of the country's volcanoes
are covered by eternal ice, so that the
eruptions are accompanied by gigantic
water floods, the so-called jökulhlaup,
or glacier bursts, the heat from the
eruption melting the ice from below
until the water forces its way out from
under the ice cover.
It is thought that volcanic activity
has occurred in about thirty different
locations in Iceland since the country
was settled and that on the average
one eruption takes place every fifth
year.
The main feature of volcanic activity
in Iceland Is that many volcanoes
erupt only once and that in the volcanic
zones a new volcano may come Into
being almost anywhere and at almost
any time. Usually this happens far
from human habitations, but fissures
have been known to open up to spew
their fire practically on people's door¬
steps.
The most recent eruption in a settled
area occurred in the early hours of
January 23, 1973, when a one and a
half kilometre long rift opened up on
Heimaey, the principal island in the
Vestmannaeyjar (Westmann) group,
about 100 metres from the houses on
the southern edge of the most import¬
ant fishing town in the country (see
photos pages 16 to 19).
This eruption lasted for five months.
Where once stood dwelling houses,
there now rises a new mountain, Eldfell,
about 220 metres high, and a third of
this once bustling town, where one
fifth of the nation's total catch of fish
used to be brought ashore, has
disappeared under a thick cover of
cinders and lava.
And how does the Icelandic nation
like living with all this volcanic
activity? How does it feel about its
volcanoes?
Innumerable place-names testify to
the wonder and Interest with which
the settlers regarded vulcanism and
the phenomena associated with it, such
as thermal springs and earthquakes;
after all, they had had no experience
of such things in their former homes.
It is more than likely that the descrip¬
tion of Ragnarök, the final destruction
of the world, in the Eddie poem "The
Sybil's Prophecy" was partly inspired
by a great ash eruption.
The Icelanders soon learned to view
such natural phenomena in a rational
and realistic light. There are few signs
of any superstitious beliefs centering
on volcanoes in Iceland. The idea that
Hell was situated under Mount Hekla
in Iceland never caught on with the
Icelanders.
In accounts of earthquakes and
other natural catastrophes In former
ages, the only feature that smacks
of the legendary is that Invariably one
individual somehow survives: the soul
of the nation refuses to acknowledge
total defeat by the forces of nature.
To be sure, the Icelanders have a |
healthy respect of their volcanoes, and
they have now taken steps to reduce
the damage caused by eruptions,
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

ICELAND GEOLOGICAL HOT-SPOT. A purely oceanic island with no foundation of continental rock, Iceland
has been almost entirely built up by volcanic action and remains one of the geological "hot-spots" of the
world, with an average of one eruption every five years. The map below (part of a larger map of the Atlantic
ocean floor, reproduced here by special permission of the National Geographic Society, Washington D.C.,
U.S.A.) shows Iceland rising from the crest of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, the immense submarine mountain
range, itself only part of the Mid-Oceanic Ridge which encircles the entire globe. Key to figures shown on
map: -4500, depth in feet below sea level; (11500), height in feet above the 16,000-foot average depth of
the abyssal plain.
Copyright © 1968 by the National Geographic Society, Washington, D.C.
¡K UIQUUON
V1» ^"^^HHPI
LIVING ON A VOLCANO (Continued)
8
including a warning system in the
volcanic zone, which proved Its value
during the Eldfell eruption. But they
have also, ever since Romantic writers
first opened men's eyes to the beauties
of nature, regarded their volcanoes
with an admiration that in somes cases
verges on veneration.
What Popocatepetl and Iztaccihuatl
are to the people of Mexico City or
Fuji to the Japanese, Snaefellsjökull
is to the inhabitants of Reykjavik.
While the great eruption of Hekla In
1947 was going on, the principal worry
of some of the people In the neigh¬
bourhood seemed to be that the
shape of the mountain might somehow
be spoiled as a result of the eruption.
But the Icelanders have also learned
to make use on an ever Increasing
scale of the wealth of natural heat that
is one consequence of their country
being a young volcanic one. (See
article page 24.) Ever since settle¬
ment times 1,000 years ago, they have
used the hot springs for washing and
bathing. A famous incident connected
with the conversion to Christianity in
the year 1000 involved the refusal of
the Northerners present at the Althing
to be immersed in the cold water of
Thingvellir; they had to be taken to a
hot spring fifteen miles away before
they would consent to being baptized.
In areas with hot springs it was
formerly the custom to bake bread
by burying the dough in the boiling
hot mud or sand. But It was rrot until
the fourth decade of the present cen¬
tury that the natural heat began to be
harnessed on any considerable scale.
At first it was mainly used for
heating houses, and by now more than
half the nation, including virtually the
entire population of the capital, lives
in houses heated by natural hot water.
Greenhouses heated in the same
fashion supply the population with
flowers and vegetables, and even
grapes and such tropical fruits as
bananas may be found there, although
to tell the truth, their cultivation Is
of rather greater significance for the
tourist brochures than for the national
economy. The great majority of people
can go for a healthful swim the year
around in outdoor pools heated with
water from hot springs.
In addition, the natural heat repre¬
sents an enormous untapped source of
energy which in the future may be
expected to provide a basis for further
industrial development.
It is safe to claim that in spite of
severe blows from eruptions and earth¬
quakes every now and then, the vol¬
canic character of Iceland makes It a
better country to live In than it would
otherwise be.
During the recent eruption in
Vestmannaeyjar, it became evident
once more that living with the forces
of Icelandic nature has ingrained into
the nation an attitude of stoic
composure, grounded in the knowledge
that such things are no more than
what one must always expect on the
fiery Atlantic island where this small
nation has, after all, held out for eleven
hundred years.
