Lost treasures
of the cinema
Unesco Courier drswlno by Al«»»ndrlnl

A call to halt the negligence
(and even vandalism) through which
many thousands of films
have perished since the birth
of the cinema industry
by Bhagwan D. Garga
IIT is a fair assumption that
more movies (of the silent era, at least)
have disappeared than have survived.
How much of the work of Lumière,
Méliès, Feuillade, Ince, Griffith, Sjös-
tröm, Dupont, Pabst, Chaplin, Max
Linder, Clair and other great pioneers
of the cinema has been lost to pos¬
terity through wilful destruction or plain
neglect? How many millions of metres
of priceless documentary material, that
could bring alive a whole era, have
vanished?
Some years ago, I was engaged
in making a film anthology of the
Indian cinema. Enthusiastically, I
drew up a list of significant films and
proceeded to search for them. In
Calcutta, I went to see the proprietor
of a well-known film production com¬
pany and asked him to let me use
excerpts from them. These Included
both silent and sound films. He took
one look at the list and handed it back
to me, saying, "I don't have any of
them".
"What happened to them?"
"They were lying around for quite
a while, then we decided to send
them to Madras."
"Why Madras?"
"Because the junkmen there, for
some reason, paid a better price than
in Calcutta."
To my horror, I was to discover
later that of the total production of
BHAGWAN D. GARGA of India Is a well-
known film-maker, cinema historian and film
critic. He has written on many aspects of
the Indian cinema and has produced a num¬
ber of documentary films on Indian film-mak¬
ing and Indian art. He was a member of
the Unesco committee of experts on Anthol¬
ogies of the History of the Cinema, and in
1971 won the Grand Prix at the 4th Interna¬
tional Film Review, Colombo (Sri Lanka).
some 1,300 silent films, not even half
a dozen had survived. Of these, two
The Light of Asia and A Throw of
Dice were Indo-German co-produc¬
tions, copies of which had somehow
found their way to the Cinémathèque
Française and the National Film Ar¬
chive of Great Britain.
The lost films included such well-
known works as Balidan (Sacrifice)
based on a play by Rabindranath Ta-
gore; Mrichakatika (The Little Clay
Cart) an adaptation of Sudaraka's
Sanskrit classical play of that name
(3rd-4th century A.D.), and a film on
non-violence called The Wrath in which
the protagonist was a Gandhi-like char¬
acter. There were numerous mytho¬
logy films done in the style and on the
scale of the Italian super-production
Cabiria, and our own variations on
Pearl White's The Perils of Pauline.
Vandalism was not confined only to
the silent cinema. Hundreds of well-
known sound films had been made
over to junk dealers as a matter of
routine. There was no trace, for Ins¬
tance, of the first Indian sound film,
Alam Ara. Consequently, the history
of Indian cinema has yawning gaps
that no amount of academic research
can now close.
India Is not the only case. The
destruction of films has continued
unabated all over the world. The great
director Fritz Lang, in a foreword to
Herman G. Weinberg's nostalgic book,
Saint Cinema, recalls the lost films
of H. d'Abbadie d'Arrast, who died in
1968, the creator of "eight of the love¬
liest films ever made by anyone".
Lang says: "His films are lost for
ever, like many other films important
for the art of the cinema and for its
historians, because studio policies
aimed at the destruction of old films
printed on inflammable nitrate stock.
These same studios, as Erich von Stro-
heim has pointed out, "were not above
salvaging the few cents worth of silver
which formed part of the cellulose
base'."
In 1956, on the occasion of the
twentieth anniversary of the founding
of the Cinémathèque Française, its di¬
rector, Henri Langlois, gave an alarm
ing recital of films lost or destroyed
through neglect or wanton callousness.
The answers I received In response .
to a questionnaire I recently sent to
several film archives, are enlightening.
Eileen Bowser, Associate Curator of
the Department of Film in the Museum
of Modern Art, New York:
"There is no law against the des¬
truction of films in this country. I wish
there was, but it is unlikely we could
achieve such a law under our system.
There is a form of legal deposit In
that if you wish your film to be protect¬
ed by copyright, you must eventually
deposit a copy of it in the Library
of Congress."
Of the lost films in the United States,
she added, "There are hundreds of
significant American films that have
been lost over the years, not neces¬
sarily because of destruction, but be¬
cause nitrate films have been allowed
to deteriorate. A few years ago, we
did an exhibition of still photographs
and brought out a publication called
'Lost Films', to call attention to some
of the important films which had
disappeared, which had the result of
finding a few of them."
lb Monty, Director of the Danish
Film Museum:
"We could draw up an enormous
list of Danish silent films that have
been lost. Out of a production of
around 1,700 silent films only around
225 have been preserved."
Jörn Donner of the Svenska Film
Institute, Stockholm:
"Many of the significant films from
the silent period have disappeared;
according to our estimates about two-
thirds of all films and about half the
valuable films."
Kevin Gough-Yates, Deputy Curator
of the National Film Archive, London:
"There is no law in England against
the destruction of films... There are
many significant films that seem to
have been lost, not only British ones.
Merton of the Movies, for example, is *1
one that cannot be found, but there
are many others." He further added- w
"My own view is that unless the *

Some of the world's great films are now no
more than names in the history of the cinema.
Fragile, an easy prey to neglect, indifference
and outright vandalism, they are lost forever,
except for a few stills which have survived in
archives. Here we show scenes from three of
these films: (1) Broken Blossoms, made in 1919
by the great American director D.W. Griffith
(1875-1948); (2) L'Atlantide, directed by the
French film-maker Jacques Feyder (1885-1948);
(3) The Wrath, an Indian film whose hero is a
Gandhi-like character. Others, which were once
thought to have disappeared, have in fact sur¬
vived, a single copy having narrowly escaped
destruction. An example is Jean Renoir's, The
River (4), made In India in 1951. Other films
have been preserved because they were bought
by their stars or their directors. Here are
scenes from two of them, starring famous
American comics: (5) Safety Last, made in
1923, with Harold Lloyd; and (6) Go West,
1926, starring Buster Keaton (1896-1966), who
was also its director.
6
^government Introduces legislation to
^enforce producers to deposit material
with the national archive much material
will be lost."
What about the socialist countries
where production is state-sponsored
and controlled? It came as a reve¬
lation to me when Jan Zbigniw Pas-
tuszko, Director of the Polish Film
Archive, wrote to say that there was
no law against the destruction of films
in his country. Poland, he said, aimed
at preserving films produced before
1945, but present-day films were left
to fend for themselves.
Dr. Sandor Papp, Director of the
Hungarian Institute of Film Science and
Archives, informed me that the Hun¬
garian Film Archive "has been func¬
tioning since 1948, and from 1957 as
an independent organization. Most of
the films before this period, including
about 50 per cent of those made
between 1930 and 1944, have been
lost."
In India, the largest producer of
films In the world, the situation is even
more dismal. The National Film Ar¬
chive of India was established in 1964,
although a recommendation that one
should be created was contained in
an Enquiry Committee report published
as far back as 1927-28. The proposal
was revived in 1951 with much greater
emphasis by another committee ap¬
pointed by the Indian government.
The National Film Archive finally came
into being 13 years later.
According to an official publication
(Reference Annual, 1974), the "Ar¬
chive's collection, as of December 31,
1972, totalled 835 films, consisting of
624 Indian and 211 foreign films" a
far from impressive figure considering
that in the same year, India produced
414 feature films, not counting the vast
number of documentary and reportage
films. Since the advent of sound (in
1931) India has produced well over
11,000 feature films and perhaps an
equal number of short films. It is
apparent that most of these have
either perished orare in various stages
of deterioration.
Indian laboratories in all the major
centres of film production Bombay,
Calcutta and Madras still hold hun¬
dreds of nitrate base films which no¬
body claims, yet in the absence of a
legal fiat to do so, the laboratories
are unable to make them over to an
archive. To the trade wing of the
industry, the moment a "property"
ceases to be "productive", it is best
forgotten.
The researcher and the historian
apart, the man who really feels con¬
cerned about it is the creator of the
film. But not having any commercial

SAVED IN THE
NICK OF TIME
I HREE dates stand out in the dramatic story of old
films and their preservation: 1895, when the cinematograph
was invented; 1914, when films first began to be hired out;
and the mid-1 930s, when the first film libraries were founded.
In all the arts, there are works which have been lost to
posterity. All trace of them has disappeared forever. This is
hardly surprising In the case of pre-medieval music and musical
notation for dancing. But it has taken only a few decades for
similar havoc to be wrought on works of the cinema, the
youngest of the arts, although films are relatively easy to
preserve.
One could draw up a long list of fine films which today
only exist in histories of the cinema, beginning with the often-
quoted examples of Broken Blossoms (1919), by D.W. Griffith,
the first great American director, and Jacques Feyder's L'Atlan¬
tide (1921), of which only stills remain.
The first well-known film library, the Cinémathèque Française,
was founded in Paris in 1936 by an ardent "cinema buff, Henri
Langlois. Langlois already had a small collection of old films,
which he had been buying for four or five years. It was then
relatively easy to get hold of "antique" films, dating from before
the introduction of the rental system, because the original
owners eventually got rid of them and they ended up in flea-
markets and junkshops. At that time, of course, people did
not realize all the precautions that were needed to preserve
old film stock.
Furthermore, a number of the major studios kept extensive
film archives; as a result, it has been possible to re-issue many
interesting films in recent years and to put together documen¬
taries and comedy films from old newsreels and shorts.
But at the time, no-one bothered to keep old films: once their
commercial career was over, producers lost interest in them.
Even before film libraries started to become more numerous,
however, private collectors were at work, and film stars and
directors in particular, had already begun to save copies of
their films. Mary Pickford, for instance, is said to own copies of
nearly all the films in which she and her husband, Douglas
Fairbanks Sr., appeared.
Perhaps the most interesting story, however, is that of the
three great stars of early American film comedy: Harold Lloyd,
Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton. Comedy films, whether
shorts or feature-length, date less and are often a better
reflection of the vitality of cinematic art than straight films.
The first comedies were made around 1905-1906, in France
and Italy, with Max Linder, André Deed, Charles Prince (Riga-
din), etc. It was not until 1910 that Mack Sennett in the
United States set out to emulate the French and Italians, Imme¬
diately achieving immense popularity. The next few years saw
the débuts of the great stars of comic films: Lloyd (the most
popular in the U.S.A.) and Chaplin in 1913, Keaton in 1917.
According to the histories of the cinema, Lloyd made 180
shorts, Chaplin 66 and Keaton 67. Between 1921 and 1923, a
turning-point in the history of the cinema, all three of them
began to make full-length films: Keaton made most63 films
of more than four reels (1,200 metres), Lloyd 18 and Chap¬
lin 14.
As they approached the height of their popularity, they tried
to collect copies of their own films. Apparently, Keaton was
the least successful; he was the least wealthy of the three, and
retrieving 63 feature films is no mean task. Harold Lloyd, who
left the cinema In 1947 and became a successful businessman
and President of the Beverley Hills Chamber of Commerce,
was more or less successful, and his collection is famous
throughout the United States. As for Chaplin, he owns and
markets all his feature-length films. It is to be hoped that
sooner or later all these treasures of the U.S. cinema will end
up in America's greatest film collection, that of the New York
Museum of Modern Art.
control over it, he is a helpless spec¬
tator of the destruction of what is
really part of himself.
A few years ago, Jean Renoir, the
famous French director, was desper¬
ately looking for a copy of his film
The River, which he had shot in India
and which he so dearly loved. The
negative of the film was fast deteriorat¬
ing but the producer (a Hollywood
florist) was in no hurry to do anything
about it. In the absence of an ade¬
quate authorization, the laboratory was
reluctant to take out a print. One can
imagine Renoir's agony. As it hap¬
pens, the film has since been revived
commercially, but a master's work
could have been lost forever.
Not every film-maker, however, has
the means and the foresight of a
Renoir or a Chaplin (see box above).
Nor are the archives over-anxious to
save all the films. Most curators

L select films for preservation according
^to their pet preferences.
Are these preferences and preju¬
dices justified? Do we know which
of the current films will interest scho¬
lars 30 or a hundred years from now?
Doesn't this indifference towards some
and preference for others constitute
a kind of vandalism? I had better
leave the answer to the man most
qualified to give it, and who, more
than anyone else, has put the world
cinema in his debt: Henri Langlois.
In an interview with Rudolph Chel-
minski of Life, Langlois said: "The most
important role of a cinémathèque, is
to preserve. There are many things
which seem to be without value, to
which time gives style invisible today.
Baudelaire and the Eiffel Tower are
examples. Other cinémathèques be¬
fore the war had plenty of money and
could have saved many films. Why
didn't they succeed? Because they
thought of choosing, while they really
ought to have been thinking of saving
everything.
"Judging, like criticism, is a game.
It is gambling with the future. So I
take all films I have no reason to
refuse any of them. I even have films
I detest.
"I never accepted that films couldn't
be saved. Once I got a bunch of the
old films and sent them out to a lab
to be cleaned and put on new reels.
They sent them right back. They're
all stuck together, they said. You
might as well chuck them In the gar¬
bage can.
"Well, I'm just a poor dope, not a
chemist. So I sat down and unstuck
them image by image, washed off the
sections and hung them out to dry on
clothespins.
"After that I got stubborn and read
up on how to recondition films it's
all there in the books, you know, but
no one had ever bothered to look.
Everyone told me that films would
. only last 20 or 30 years at the most,
so what was the use of trying to keep
them? Well, we have some of the
very earliest silent films In our collec¬
tion and we're still waiting for them
to deteriorate."
Perhaps, this is a film lover's ap¬
proach. Certainly there aren't many
around. What is of paramount impor¬
tance is the preservation of films, all
films, no matter where produced. They
should be treated on a par with the
rest of our artistic heritage a heritage
in which all of us have a stake.
Bhagwan D. Garga
