
WHAT'S UP
IN HIGHER EDUCATION?
The findings of two Unesco
international inquiries
VICTOR G. ONUSHKIN is director of research on world higher edu¬
cation at Unesco's International Institute for Educational Planning
in Paris. He is editor of a 4- volume HEP report "Planning the
Development of Universities", of which two volumes have already
appeared. Until 1967, Dr. Onushkin was professor of economics
at the University of Leningrad and head of its Postgraduates'
Institute of Social Sciences.
ANTONY BROCK, British writer and journalist specializing in
educational questions, is English language editor in Unesco's
Press Division.
by Victor G. Onushkin
and Antony Brock
IIN the past decade higher
education has changed so dramatically
throughout the world that some people
are calling for a halt or even demand¬
ing that the process go into reverse.
From the outside, the changes are
striking enough. Numbers have grown
everywhere, both of students and
of institutions. Colleges which have
been exclusively male for centuries
have suddenly admitted women as
undergraduates. New kinds of stu¬
dents have enrolled, from social back¬
grounds which used not to be regard¬
ed as producing scholars. New kinds
of universities have been created and
new methods of teaching employed.
In some countries, student demon¬
strations, not only about political
questions but also about the conditions
and aims of study, have become almost
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE
31

Model of a monumental sculpture for a uni¬
versity by Marino Di Teana, a distinguished
Argentinian sculptor.
WHAT'S UP IN HIGHER EDUCATION? (Continued)
32
as regular a feature of university life
as examinations.
Internally, higher education systems
have had to cope with an explosion
of knowledge, for in the last twenty
years scientists have found out rough¬
ly as much again about the natural
world and human nature as the sum of
all human knowledge up to 1950.
The scientific and technological
revolution has coincided with a period
of great social and economic change
in all parts of the world, calling into
question the accepted aims of higher
education. So many problems have
arisen that there is even much talk
among some people of a "world crisis
in education", and the need for
guidelines is obvious.
O help find solutions to
some of the problems which
higher educational systems are facing,
Unesco's International Institute for
Educational Planning (HEP) in Paris
undertook a world-wide study on the
planning of university development.
This involved computer-analyzing re¬
plies by 80 universities to a compre¬
hensive questionnaire and carrying out
21 case-studies of university activity,
including the teaching process,
research work and the formation of
teaching teams.
Since the universities participating
were located in more than fifty
countries, the International Institute had
a sufficiently representative group to
classify the information and this yielded
significant results. Thus the type and
level of planning was found to range
from comprehensive social and econo¬
mic planning in socialist countries to
indicative type planning in some wes¬
tern European countries, rudimentary
planning, or even, in more than a
quarter of the universities, no planning
at all.
The Institute was .able to work out a
diagnosis of the present situation of
higher education in different parts of
the world and in different groups of
countries. This showed how rash it
is to make assertions about "the
world crisis" without differentiating
between certain groups.
While there are many new pheno¬
mena in university development which
are common to many countries, their
consequences vary according to the
social, political and economic structure
of each country. There is a variety
of situations ranging from the very
critical (including periods of complete
disruption of university life as in
France and the United States) to the
smooth development of higher edu¬
cation in those countries where overall
social and economic planning is the
rule.
But important general conclusions
can be drawn. The first is that in
very many universities there is a
serious and increasing gap between
their activities and the actual needs
of their countries for qualified man¬
power In industry, agriculture or the
professions. The exceptions to this
are the universities in socialist
countries whose functions are pro¬
grammed in the overall national plan¬
ning which is part of their system.
Other universities are badly Informed
about these needs; very often they
have little or no idea how many of their
graduates will be required, or in which
fields of employment. Of the sample
of universities analysed, only 16 per
cent said that they were adequately
informed about the demand for their
graduates. The rest either did not
have this information at all or used
very unreliable methods to estimate
the demand.
The inquiry shows that in terms of
both quantity and quality universities
do not always relate their programmes
directly to national needs. This can
produce an unbalanced mixture of
graduates, leading to "intellectual
unemployment" and a shortage of
much-needed specialists. In India
and Ceylon, for example, there is
a predominance of social science and
humanities' graduates over those in
engineering. And this imbalance is
particularly apparent in some develop¬
ing countries of Africa where curricula
copied from those of European
countries are not strictly relevant to
their own particular situation.
In the last decade universities
around the world have had to cope
with soaring enrolments, as in Africa
where they tripled In the five years up
to 1968. Their concern has thus been
with questions of quantity: how to
expand their facilities, how to increase
their budgets and so on.
But quantity is no longer the main
problem as the global inquiry of the
International Institute revealed. This
was confirmed by a special survey
carried out by Unesco for the Con¬
ference of European Ministers of Edu
cation which it organized in Bucharest
in December last. In most countries
the rate of growth in enrolments is
declining and this trend is expected
to continue. In the view of university
heads, the focus must now be on
quality, on defining the aims of higher
education, on reforming curricula, on
raising the standard of teaching staff
and on making better use of existing
facilities.
A conclusion of particular import¬
ance to international organizations Is
the fact that despite the rapid growth
of higher education in developing
countries, the quality gap between
their universities and those in Indus¬
trially developed countries is not
diminishing with time, but widening.
This is true of both qualified teaching
staff and material resources, and as
a result, of the quality of teaching and
the amount and level of research work.

Some countries in Africa and Latin
America face serious difficulties in
training highly qualified staff and then
in keeping them at the university
where they have been trained. Very
often conditions are inadequate for
research work, and although good
training can be had abroad, the
chances of putting it to practical use
in the students' home countries are
sometimes so slim that foreign trained
graduates prefer to stay where they
can utilize their knowledge and so the
"brain drain" increases.
One of the most paradoxical facts
to emerge from the study is that many
universities which are active on the
frontiers of knowledge and research
have neither the information nor the
administrative means to plan and
manage their own affairs. Many
university authorities, while insisting
on the need for more money, more
teaching and research equipment and
expanded facilities, are not even aware
how existing facilities are being used.
Traditional university structures do
not as a rule contribute to interdisci¬
plinary or multidisciplinary studies
and research, but tend to separate
units instead of creating an atmos¬
phere of co-operation. Their jealously
guarded autonomy tends to isolate
universities from their social and
economic environment and they often
remain prisoners of traditions going
back to the Middle Ages.
Little information was available on
the social and economic backgrounds
of students but what there was indi¬
cates that despite the rapid growth In
numbers, in many countries large
sectors of the population, particularly
industrial and agricultural workers, are
not adequately represented at the
universities. This can be traced back
to the kinds of primary and secondary
education available to different social
groups and the fact that certain types
of school have" very weak links with
universities or none at all; some
schools are no more than educational
"dead ends".
Another important social aspect to
emerge from the Unesco study is that
although the proportion of women
students has been growing rapidly
during the last decade women still only
add up to an average of just over
30 per cent in the global sample. How¬
ever, the latest figures for Europe,
collected for the Bucharest confer¬
ence, show women making up 42 per
cent of the total of students and in one
country, Bulgaria, actually being in the
majority at 53.6 per cent.
The study also showed that many
countries do not provide proper
guidance and counselling for students.
CONTINUED PAGE 38
33

WHAT'S UP IN HIGHER EDUCATION ? (Continued from page 33)
38
As a result, young people often opt
for currently "fashionable" courses.
The social sciences, for example, are
now growing much faster than other
disciplines whereas engineering and
other subjects which are vital for the
economy, are frequently under-pro¬
ducing.
To a great extent the so-called
"open system" of admission contri¬
butes to these imbalances. Univer¬
sities such as those in France, where
everyone who has a secondary edu¬
cation certificate automatically has the
right to entrance, have serious diffi¬
culties because they cannot predict
the size of student admissions and
because the percentage of drop-outs
is much higher than in universities
where admission is by selective
examination or assessment. In any
case, the aim of unlimited access to
higher education often proves an
illusion, since selection does In fact
exist in other forms, either at the lower
levels of education or in the form of
a high rate of drop-out.
ENCOURAGING findings
are that teaching staffs have increased
rapidly in numbers, and despite the
fact that junior staff now make up an
even greater proportion of teachers,
the level of their qualifications has
risen. A far larger ratio of today's
teachers possess the highest academic
degrees.
University teaching staff certainly
need all the advantages of youth and
high qualifications. They have to face
ever new situations as more and more
students from widely varying edu¬
cational backgrounds enrol, specializ¬
ation is modified by new knowledge
and sources of scientific information
continue to multiply. Merely keeping
abreast of a subject has become
almost a full time job.
All this has changed the role of the
teacher. From being mainly a source
of Information, the teacher must now
evolve into an organizer of the teach¬
ing-learning process and in this stu¬
dents themselves need to play an active
part. A consequence Is the need to
develop the techniques of teaching in
higher education. Some universities
(the University of London for example)
have started work in this direction
and in several countries, the U.S.S.R.
actively among them, systematic
courses for the improvement of the
qualifications of university teaching
staff have been organized.
The Unesco-International Institute
investigation shows that universities
are experimenting with new technical
media for the teaching process, but
partly because of their relatively high
costs and partly because of the tradi¬
tional approach towards teaching,
change here is still far behind the level
which one might expect to see. For
example, computer-assisted instruction
was used by only eleven per cent of
universities in the sample, U.S. uni¬
versities being well ahead of others.
One of the directions in which
higher education is likely to develop
is obviously towards greater democ¬
ratization. But as the analysis of
students' social backgrounds shows,
democratization does not happen
merely because greater numbers of
students are admitted; both the acade¬
mic and the material conditions have
to be created to allow the access of
all social groups and classes to higher
education.
In some countries, notably the
Soviet Union and Poland, special
preparatory courses for working youth
have been created in order to com¬
pensate for varying levels of second¬
ary education and bring young workers
directly to the university. In other
countries, continuing education centres
are introduced to fill these gaps while
in the United Kingdom, the Open
University, a combination of broadcast
and televised instruction with corre¬
spondence courses, has been set up
to offer the chance of higher education
to anyone with the will and the time
for it.
Rules of admission are also being
eased. Thus, it was reported that in
Finland some institutions are required
to accept a fixed percentage of stu¬
dents without matriculation; in Sweden,
students with a minimum of two years
of secondary education can be ad¬
mitted after an aptitude test; in
Yugoslavia adults may enter if they
have worked for four years in an
activity connected with their proposed
studies. In the Soviet Union, technical
studies in a specialized school may be
accepted instead of the normal
secondary courses.
LNOTHER step In the direc¬
tion of- democratization is the wide¬
spread introduction of short courses of
up to 24 months which are preliminary
to, but independent of, full-length uni¬
versity courses of three or more years.
A further contribution is the develop¬
ment of the concept of life-long edu¬
cation and its introduction into the
university framework. This, while
helping to bring people of all ages
and different social origins into the
university, can also prepare univer¬
sities for their new function coping
with "the knowledge explosion" by
providing refresher courses where
qualifications can be improved and
graduates retrained. Such functions
will help the present higher educa¬
tional systems to find closer links with
working life.
The results of both Unesco Inquiries
show that universities need to seek
clearer definitions of their aims and
objectives and to give their programmes
more flexibility to meet the goals.
The studies point out that this could be
achieved through better planning and
the use of modern management
techniques.
The Unesco study into European
higher education shows that the pro¬
portion actually enrolled of the age-
group who could be at university (20-
24 years old) is already very high:
23 per cent in the U.S.S.R., well over
20 per cent in Sweden and the Nether¬
lands, around 15 per cent in Bulgaria,
France, the German Democratic
Republic, the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many and Yugoslavia, and just over
14 per cent In the U.K.
MUDENT bodies are be¬
coming increasingly international in
Europe where higher educational insti¬
tutions receive over 40 per cent of all
the world's students taking courses
abroad. Latin Americans, in particu¬
lar, study in Spain, students from
African and Arab States in France,
and Asians in Britain, while In the
U.S.S.R. and the German Democratic
Republic foreign students come from
a wide range of countries.
Spain and Switzerland reported a
balance between the flow Into higher
education and foreseeable job oppor¬
tunities, but other European countries
had some "overproduction" in medi¬
cine and dentistry in Ireland and the
social sciences in Sweden.
At their Bucharest meeting the Euro¬
pean ministers agreed on the need
for more plastic surgery for changing
the face of higher education. Apart
from increasing access to higher
education, countries should build
bridges between its different forms,
doing away with the "class distinction"
between university and technical train¬
ing and making it possible for students
to move between them.
They suggested that students at
upper secondary school should be
prepared both for jobs and for further
studies, so that they have a real choice
between going to work or going to the
university when they leave. They
urged universities to admit adults on
the same basis as school-leavers and
to adapt their organization and
methods to accommodate more mature
people, who clearly have different
experience and family needs from
those of the traditional young student.
The ministers also called for greater
exchanges of students and professors
and asked Unesco to tackle the
biggest obstacle to mobility in higher
education by speeding preparation of
a European convention on the mutual
recognition of diplomas. At present,
substantial agreement exists only
between the socialist countries and
inside the Nordic group of countries. M
Victor G. Onushkin
and Antony Brock
z
5
UJ
Q¿
O
LU
