FAMILY
PLANNING
Indonesian
experiment
by Haryono Suyono
58
HARYONO SUYONO is deputy-chairman
and co-ordinator of research and development
of Indonesia's National Family Planning Co¬
ordinating Board, in Jakarta.
NE of the major problems
which Indonesia like other develop¬
ing countries has to tackle is the
alarming growth of its population.
With 119 million people in 1971, Indo¬
nesia is today the fifth most populous
nation in the world, exceeded only by
China, India, the Soviet Union and the
United States of America. The 1930
census listed 61 million in Indonesia,
hence within forty years our people
have doubled in number. This tremen¬
dous increase is neutralizing to a large
extent our efforts for planned develop¬
ment and higher living standards.
The huge concentration of people
has caused many social and economic
disturbances as well as hampering
development efforts. In an attempt to
remedy this situation, a national family
planning programme was integrated in
Indonesia's five year development pro¬
gramme in 1970.
Demographers who work in Indo¬
nesia are reluctant to give a single
figure for the current growth rate. The
census in 1971 gave an average annual
increase of 2.08 per cent, while the
first preliminary count in 1970-1971
gave a growth rate of 2.67 per cent.
There is evidence that growth rates in
the regions outside Java are higher
than in Java.
With the development of basic
medical and public health services,
especially after Independence in 1945,
deaths from epidemics like cholera,
malaria and others were controlled
or eliminated altogether. All these
improvements resulted in a decline in
the death-rate, which is now believed
to be 17-19 per 1,000. It is highly
probable that the mortality decline
will continue.- As a result, the popu¬
lation of Indonesia is bound to continue
its upward leap.

In 1973, Unesco organized a literacy study linked with
population and family planning in Indonesia, at the request
of the Indonesian government. Left, a Unesco literacy team makes
a house-to-house survey to check knowledge of family planning
in the village of Cikahuripan. Below, in a subsequent
functional literacy class a housewife reports after group
discussions of the question, and, below left, a farmer works out
his family's food budget Unesco functional literacy teams have
carried out similar missions in Tunisia, El Salvador and
Philippines at the governments' request
Another problem is the age compo¬
sition of the population. Like other
developing countries, Indonesia has a
young population with a heavy concen¬
tration in the ages 0 to 15. The
dependency load in Java and Bali, for
example, is 84 per 100 people. This
causes heavy burdens for provision
of schools and other related needs.
The population aged 10 years and
over for Indonesia as a whole was
80.4 million in 1972. 41 per cent had
no formal education, 33 per cent had
some primary school education and
19 per cent had completed primary
school. In Java and Madura, 93 per
cent had only some primary education
or none at all. The remaining seven
per cent had secondary or higher
education.
There are marked regional variations
in population density. The islands of
Java, Madura and Bali make up less
than seven per cent of the land area,
but they contain two-thirds of the
population. Java had a population
density of 565 persons per square
kilometre in 1971. This makes it one
of the most densely populated large
areas of the world. The density in the
other islands ranged from only 9 in
Kalimantan to 37 in Sulawesi.
Many proposals have been elabor¬
ated for the movement of large num¬
bers of people from Java to the outer
provinces. These efforts began long
before the independence of the country
in 1945. However, the colonial author¬
ities never managed to move as many
as 60,000 people from Java, even dur¬
ing the period of greatest efforts in
the 1930s.
After Independence in 1945 the
government continued the colonial
approach. During the 1950s, a max¬
imum of 40,000 people were moved,
a negligible number when related to
the size of the problem. In 1969, the
year of the largest migration (46,000
people), the population of Java
increased by over a million and a
half I And while the government was
trying to move people from Java to
the outer islands, a spontaneous
migration in the opposite direction was
occurring which might well have
resulted in net migration inwards.
In 1953, a small group began to
promote family planning. Their early
efforts were limited to giving inform¬
ation about the aims and ideas of
family planning and inviting the opin¬
ions of community organizations and
religious leaders. They provided
limited services through Maternal and
Child Health Clinics. These efforts
culminated in the formation of the
Indonesian Planned Parenthood Asso¬
ciation, in 1957.
In 1967, in his speech to the people
on Independence Day, August 16,
President Suharto stressed the need
to adopt family planning programmes,
and in 1969 the government formed
a semi-governmental family planning
council, the National Institute for
Family Planning. It soon became clear,
however, that more government invol¬
vement was needed, and a National
Family Planning Co-ordinating Board
was created on January 22, 1970. This
Board co-ordinates all family planning
activities throughout the country.
The key elements of the programme
are communication and provision of
family planning services. Both are now
taken to the people, involving, where
possible, voluntary organizations and
local leaders. The idea is to motivate
the people to accept the "norm of
a small family" and to facilitate its
adoption by providing advice and ser¬
vices as near as possible to the home.
If family planning is to be accepted
as a way of life by the people, an
understanding of the limiting social-
psychological factors and other bar¬
riers is essential. The relevant factors
include:
universality of marriage,
early age of marriage,
obligation of parenthood,
desire for sons;
and also some social-economic factors
such as:
low level of education,
low standard of living,
the belief that each child has his
own value. ^
59

60
k To counterbalance these, there are
also many advantages that the pro¬
grammes have enjoyed, including the
strong support of the government and
the absence of organized religious or
social opposition.
The information and motivation cam¬
paign embraces long-term and short-
term stategies. The short-term stategy
comprises three programmes:
public information, by use of
mass media such as television, radio,
newspapers, magazines, films and
others.
community education, by use of
workshops, seminars, group talks and
community-oriented family planning
campaigns.
face-to-face programmes by use
of specially trained field workers who
visit eligible couples in their homes,
making them aware of the possibilities
of contraception and persuading them
to become acceptors.
The aim in the short term is to
diffuse the idea of family planning and
eliminate barriers. In the long term,
population education will be carried
out both in and out of school, as is the
practice with other programmes aiming
at bringing about a change in attitudes
and behaviour.
Population education is seen as a
process going beyond family limitation
in the narrow sense, to make family
planning a way of life. Beyond family
planning as such is our concern for
the totality of the family... health, edu¬
cation, standard of living, quality of
life, etc. Family limitation, as we see
it, should be an integral part of the
larger fabric of family life.
The relationship between the pro¬
cesses of communication and educa¬
tion is fairly clear. In each case,
information is provided, persuasion is
attempted, and changes in attitudes
and behaviour are reinforced. A re¬
cent paper published by World Educa¬
tion Reports defines the act of edu¬
cating as a sequence of activities that
incorporate the teaching and learning
of separate attitudes, skills, ideas and
facts, a linking together of these ele¬
ments, and obtaining feedback or
reinforcement from one's surroundings
that may or may not cause the person
to incorporate the new attitude or
behaviour into his or her personality
or behaviour.
Given the structure of the popula¬
tion of Indonesia, and the huge percen¬
tage who are not able to go to school,
we believe that population education
is one of the most important means of
implanting family planning ideas. If we
combine literacy programmes and
population education, we have what
might be termed functional population
planning or functional education for
family life planning, as it has been
called.
What has our national family plan¬
ning programme achieved so far?
In general the level of awareness
of the people toward the idea of family
planning has increased tremendously.
When we did a study in 1968-69 we
found that the level of knowledge
about family planning was far below
50 per cent. Today this level has
increased to 80 per cent. A recent
study in Jogjakarta indicated that 82 per
cent of the respondents had heard of
family planning and knew that family
planning was concerned with the
control and spacing of births.
Couples who decide to adopt family
planning have the choice of 2,067
family planning clinics throughout Java
and Bali. They can also go to private
doctors if they wish, and are free to
select any method they desire, free of
charge. Since 1969, 3 million couples
have used these facilities and become
new acceptors. 58 per cent are taking
pills, 35 per cent use an intra-uterine
device (IUD) and the remainder various
other methods.
A recent study in West Java indi¬
cated that the continuation rate of pill
acceptors after two years was 63 to
79 per cent, while the figure for IUD
was 78 to 95 per cent. Other studies
carried out a year before revealed a
similar picture.
Who are the new acceptors? A
10 per cent sample of all new accep¬
tors during the first semester of 1972
indicated that more than 54 per cent
were 30 years of age or below, and
more than 87 per cent had only ele¬
mentary school or lower education.
The number of illiterate new acceptors
was as high as 38 per cent. Peasants
constituted 57 per cent of all the new
acceptors.
Other significant achievements have
been in the field of face-to-face com¬
munication, training of medical, para¬
medical and motivational personnel,
research and evaluation, logistics and
the infrastructure, and a rapid feed¬
back reporting system. All these
generally have developed with the
rapid acceleration of the programmes.
In conclusion, one can say that the
family planning programme in Indo¬
nesia has been favourably accepted
by the people. Though the acceptance
rate is not yet as high as we should
like in relation to the total population,
the acceptors are highly motivated.
We are confident that population
education and functional literacy pro¬
grammes as part of an integrated
approach to family planning will even¬
tually spread the acceptance of the
family planning concept throughout
Indonesia.
Haryono Suyono
PUPPETS
PROMOTE
FAMILY
PLANNING
Photos Unesco
