Dominique Darr. Paris
8 The development of lightweight, portable v'deo equipment has decentralized
television, freeing it from the confines of the studio. Video camera crews,
like these young people in an Indian village, today film and record things on
the spot as they happen. Many video groups use the new technique to provide
a forum for discussion of " grassroot " problems in the community.
Bp«íb8pBmBmíIb

Portable videotape equipment now permits
people all over the world
to master the art of television
instead of being passively exposed to it
pWUROPEAN Ministers of
Culture, meeting under Unesco's
auspices in Helsinki, in June 1972,
noted with concern that the mass
media, while helping to extend access
to culture, also "fragment society and
induce a sense of alienation." They
consequently invited "the anonymous,
solitary and helpless spectator" to do
all he could to "break out of the pas¬
sive role to which he may be led."
But at a time when radio and tele¬
vision systems were expanding every¬
where a development strongly sup¬
ported by Unesco by what means
and at what cost could the television-
viewer, alone or in a group, be ensured
of effective participation in the pro¬
duction of information whose output
had hitherto been a one-way process?
To these questions a group of
experts meeting Jn Vichy about this
time under the auspices of the French
National Commission for Unesco,
proposed this tentative answer: por¬
table video.
This was the period when electronic
videotape recorders of an easy-to-
handle type, such as the "Portapack",
were beginning to . appear. These
combine cameras and recorders,
weigh less than twenty pounds, are
battery-operated, give half an hour's
continuous shooting and record
extremely precise ¡mages of 300 to
400 lines on half-inch or 2/3 inch video¬
tape. Their price Is less than that of a
low-powered car.
Some might have thought that this
possibility of being recorded on tape
and viewing oneself immediately on a
screen was at most a technical
gimmick, a sort of electronic polaroid
camera.
Others saw portable video as a
useful instrument for making in-depth
analyses of individual performances,
suited, for Instance, to helping
Olympic champions perfect their
HENRI DIEUZEIDE is director of Unesco's
division of methods, materials and tech¬
niques in education and director of "Pros¬
pects", Unesco's quarterly review of education.
An expert in audio-visual teaching methods, he
created and directed the educational radio
and television department of France's Natio¬
nal Pedagogical Institute. He has made a
number of films on teaching and has written
several books on education, including "Les
Techniques Audio-Visuelles de l'Enseigne¬
ment" (Audio-Visual Techniques In Education)
which has been translated into five languages.
swimming-stroke or their sprint, or for
door-to-door salesmen to improve the
technique of "putting their foot in the
door."
But even at this early stage, in a
few industrialized countries this new
technique began to be used for social
action, and it has continued to be
developed along these lines ever
since.
In New York, the People's Video
Theater started up, along with the Rain-
dance Corporation, Global Village
(named for the expression coined by
Marshall McLuhan), Videofreex and
Urban Video; in California, the Mafundi
Institute, Videofree America and the
Media Access Center. In Canada
there was Matrix Video in Vancouver,
and in Great Britain, the VTX London
Video Co-op. In France, Collectif
Vidéo and Video Out were founded in
Paris and Vidéo Gazette in Grenoble.
The groups which survived this
period were those which were able
to obtain political and financial support.
Some became connected with uni¬
versities or television organizations.
In Canada, a "social action group"
called Société Nouvelle in Quebec and
Challenge for Change in the other
provinces has been financed since
1971 by the National Film Board.
Challenge for Change is designed "to
improve communication, create greater
understanding, promote new ideas
and provoke social change."
In France, since 1972, the Centre
National d'Animation Audio-Visuelle
(National Audio-Visual Centre) created
by the Fonds d'Intervention Culturelle
(Fund for Cultural Action) has been
supporting some video groups.
In the United States, despite their
precarious institutional footing, most
of these groups are going concerns:
some have contracts with foundations
or federal bodies and hire out video
equipment by the day, hold seminars
and even courses counting as credits
at university and provide training
sessions for adult organizations and
for industry. Some have opened up
"video theatres" to which admission
is charged, or produce documentaries
to order on local or family celebrations.
All in all, there are around a hundred
active "alternative video" groups
scattered through the United States
and Canada, Japan and Western
Europe, and Unesco is currently
studying their activities.
Most of these groups still show
signs of their origins in the under¬
ground and in protest movements.
Although they obviously take their
inspiration from the underground
press, which is written, distributed and
revamped by its readers, they are
more concerned with fulfilling an
"ecological" role: while opposed to
"visual pollution", they consider that
the biological equilibrium of the indi¬
vidual depends on his being fed
information. "An image-addict loses
the ability to evolve", they say. "To
survive in a communicational environ¬
ment, one needs to have and to master
the tools of communication."
For this reason they reject tele¬
vision, which they regard as an
industrial, prefabricated product, and
have come to spearhead the major
critical movement which sees mass
communication as an archaic instru¬
ment and a source of alienation.
u'NDOUBTEDLY more in¬
fluenced by cybernetics than its Euro¬
pean counterpart, the new American
generation is indeed particularly con¬
scious of the one-sided, non-reversible
character of television and of the
passive rôle of the viewer on whom an
image is imposed without his being
able to project anything back in return.
They are also aware of the social
tensions and psychological deviations
which may result from this. A case in
point is that of the demonstrators in
Great Britain who suddenly brought
their demonstration to an end so as
to be able to get home in time to see
themselves on the news. One of the
aims of the video revolution is to give
back to the passive viewer, who has
become an object, his essential
dignity as a subject.
With the "Portapack", which makes
it possible instantaneously to repro¬
duce from life any event as It occurs
(an "electronic ball-point pen" they
call it in Quebec), the video groups
see an opportunity of removing the
barrier which exists between the
producer and the consumer.
Unlike conventional television, what
is recorded can immediately be seen A
and discussed. Each individual viewer H
can participate in the process. What
counts is no longer mass response ^
but individual exchanges and inter- F

TELEVISION IN THE STREET
Portable video equipment is today being widely used as a tool for
community development. In the province of Emilia-Romagna, in
Italy, for example, the provincial authorities have provided various
groups (workers, teachers, lawyers, students, etc.) with video
sets to record TV films for broadcasting throughout the region.
Right, one of these groups interviews a passer-by on Piazza Verdi
In Bologna.
In Africa, video tape recording is being used in the countryside
of Tanzania experimentally to open a dialogue between village
groups and local and central government as part of the country's
creation of the Ujamaa community villages. Unesco is studying
the setting up in Tanzania of a video centre to train the villagers
to use this new type of communication for development.
10
actions, creating via the image a two-
way traffic. Video provides a com¬
munication process and not consumer
products: it is a tool for bringing
people together, not a means of
isolating them.
What these groups are trying to do,
for instance, is to arrange for every
recording to be seen and discussed
by people in a group, at the same time
recording the discussion so that the
viewers become participants in the
first recording, at one remove. In this
way, instead of there being one-way
communication, there is multi-direc¬
tional communication which, like
mirror-play, can go on indefinitely and
is both creative and liberating.
Despite the few attempts that have
been made by American groups to
create a "video art", most of these
groups deliberately seek not to create
finished works. Of course, sometimes
they do not have the means or the
technical skill, but on the whole what
they are out to obtain is a totally un-
contrived and even stark visual effect.
Their messages are "open-ended",
capable of being constantly modified
close-ups of faces in the street, people
casually % or vigorously exchanging
words, slices of life, visual fantasies.
The ¡mage recorded on the tape is
ephemeral by nature: it can be erased,
in time it fades. A work which is
unfinished bears the mark of authen¬
ticity: what is produced is an un-
embellished image and not the
finished result of an elaborate organ¬
izational process. Video is to tele¬
vision what the "happening" is to
traditional theatre.
Although politically, aesthetically
and morally opposed to traditional
television, these groups do not seem
to be really concerned about forming
pressure-groups aimed at influencing
the mass media. Their concept of
alternative television does not hinge
on a desire to programme the system
differently but rather on the desire
for a different system or even for a
complete absence of system in which
everyone would be both a spectator
and an actor.
Although they often take as their
slogan "guerrilla television", these
groups generally appear to be pro¬
foundly "non-violent". They want
neither to take over nor to destroy
existing television organizations, but to
deprofessionalize and de-institution
alize them. They are tired of "public ,
writers" holding a monopoly on
writing for a people of illiterates.
From this ferment of activity, which
is leading people to speak out, or
rather to attempt the difficult task of
mastering the still relatively undevelop¬
ed medium of visual communication,
a certain number of trends seem to
be emerging.
First of all, video Is used in social
therapy by bringing people into
contact with images of themselves
recorded in conditions of complete
freedom and spontaneity, .and in this
way, relations between them are
transformed: the camera does not lie
and one's own image becomes a
source of self revelation.
In America, psychiatrists have begun
treating problem-families using re¬
cordings made in their homes. At the
psychiatric hospital of La Chesnaye
in France, patients have been produc¬
ing their own programmes since 1971.
More generally, the image serves to
bring people into relationship with
each other, providing a way out of
situations of conflict by making them
talk about problems which directly
concern them. The free image spells
free communication.
It has become common practice in
America to establish "visual records"
for the authorities on the basis of
recordings of protests, grievances,
proposals and discussions within a
community. In France, a team travel¬
ling in a videobus through villages
in the Landes, carried out an exper¬
iment aimed at getting communities to
express their views on the develop¬
ment of the Aquitaine region.
The most significant advances have
been made in Quebec with "Vidéo-
graphe", a combined video work¬
shop, theatre, public forum and dis¬
tribution centre. As early as 1971 for
the first time a professional television
crew was placed, twenty-four hours a
day, at the service of all citizens
wishing to produce and present to a
public of their choice a programme
over which they had total control.
Today, after using video to pioneer
community TV and help revitalize the
economically failing rural areas of the
Saint-Jean Lake region and the poor
districts of Montreal, the Quebec
video-operators plan to take a video-
bus to the Indians of Abitibi and to
thirty or so deprived parishes in the
remote area of Gaspésie so as to give
the people there the chance to air
their views.
In the province of Emilia-Romagna
in Italy, efforts have been made to
"reverse the flow of information
between leadership and the grass
roots" by providing groups (factories,
schools, housing estates, hospitals)
with portable equipment to enable
them freely to express their points of
view.. Here, in contrast with the
"Vidéographe" project, it is the
organized group and not the indi¬
vidual citizen that is given the chance
to speak.
In New York, the black communities
of Harlem and the Puerto Ricans of
East Side have taken part in re¬
cordings in which group spokesmen
were invited to express their opinions
about "those on the other side" and
then to examine these opinions
together, the discussions being re¬
corded in their turn.
In the Bronx, a vast campaign
organized by Hunter College provided
a large number of the inhabitants
with the opportunity to speak about

m9
the various possible futures that they
wanted for their district. In various
instances in the United States the use
of video at key-moments in situations
of racial conflict in communities seems
to have acted as a safety-valve.
There is no escaping the fact,
however, that these attempts to stimu¬
late social communication have a
tendency to bring out latent conflicts
and that, here and there, they have
presented the authorities with a few
problems. After agreeing to give their
support to community relations activi¬
ties based on the use of video, some
mayors have been criticized by their
own electors, to the surprise of
everyone.
Education itself has been affected.
It has been observed that young
people born around 1960, those who
in the United States are called the "VT
generation" (videotape) in contrast
with the earlier, "TV generation",
display considerable expertise in the
use of portable videotape recorders
and that they readily make use of them
to express their views on society and
on the future. This generation is out
to master the image for itself instead
of being passively exposed to it.
In Washington, an experiment is
currently being carried out in which
a group of a hundred or so children
is being provided with video equip¬
ment and being given the task of
preparing a series of visual projects
aimed at bringing improvements to the
city.
In Philadelphia, the Clinton Project
represents a very enterprising effort to
get young school-children to use
mobile video so as to improve their
perceptive awareness and personal
interaction.
Video is also beginning to be used
by teachers for their own professional,
and especially in-service, training at
most training colleges in the United
States. This is true to an even greater
extent in Great Britain, where portable
equipment belonging to the Inner
London Education Authority is used to
record what is known as micro-
teaching, i.e. schoolwork performed in
small groups. The recording is sub¬
sequently subjected to detailed critical
analysis by the teacher concerned, by
other teachers and by the pupils, so
as gradually to define an ¡deal refer¬
ence model for improving interactions
between teachers and pupils and
between videotape-operators and
groups.
Recent studies carried out at the
University of Lausanne show that the
industrial applications of video should
help to establish new relations between
management and workers. Within the
factory or company, video makes it
possible to provide an overall view
of the organization and to simplify
descriptions of its activities, thanks
for instance to the visual analysis of
jobs. It enables viewpoints to be
compared and brings out the con¬
tradictions between real-life situations
and the formal reality of regulations.
Lastly, mention should be made of
the temptation to turn video into a
new political weapon. The American
groups that have moved on from a
very militant conception of the use
of video to more pragmatic views,
often express their surprise in face of
the tendency of most European video
groups to broadcast a traditional
political speech.«
CONTINUED PAGE 32
11

THE VIDEO REVOLUTION (Continued from page 11)
American groups see video as a
tool for direct political action in the
street or for the analysis of the way
people behave on the public highway,
for instance recording the attitude of
the police towards demonstrators film
can be erased by being exposed to
the light, but videotape can be wiped
clean only by means of electronic
equipment.
They may also use it for filming a
television crew making a report, thus
showing how it chooses and organizes
the elements of reality, or even to
reveal a teacher objecting to his
lesson being filmed by his students.
All these are typical cases of the
¡mage as action: the fact that those
watching are watched in their turn
leads them to modify their behaviour.
Far from considering these attempts
as games played by the pampered
children of the rich countries, some of
the developing countries are seeking
to explore the possibilities which might
be open to them.
The Canadian assistance pro¬
gramme, after its successful experi¬
ence in Quebec, is conducting video
campaigns in the south of Tunisia on
the development of simple visual forms
for the teaching of new farming
techniques.
In Bangladesh, a team from the
Global Village of New York attempted
in 1972-73, by showing in villages
videorecordings made in other vil¬
lages, to change the attitudes of
isolated and closed communities
towards all form of evolution, particul¬
arly birth control and new crop
techniques ("We can change if others
like us accept change too.").
I
32
N Tanzania, the programme
TY 16 (Tanzania Year 16), benefiting
from Canadian and Scandinavian sup¬
port, led to the launching between 1971
and 1973 of a programme of "perma¬
nent protest" via video aimed at spurr¬
ing on the building of Ujamaa com¬
munity villages.
Video makes it possible to pinpoint
conflicts with the authorities and to
locate bureaucratic bottlenecks. The
Tanzanian group, in the course of
successively recorded discussions,
thoroughly investigated the problems
of collectivization ("Is the land of the
ancestors to become everyone's
land?"). Video analyzes the pro¬
blems, records the remarks of the
villagers and then the comments of
the local and central authorities. All
of the recordings are then projected
before the villagers whose reactions
are recorded once again. At the
present time, Unesco is studying the
setting up in Tanzania of a video
communication centre which would
train the villagers in the systematic
use of this new type of communication
for development.
Projects are becoming more and
more numerous: Algeria is now pre¬
paring a campaign for the promotion
of rural activities known as the
"thousand villages campaign" which
will make wide use of video tech¬
niques, while in the Ivory Coast these
techniques are to be used In the
framework of rural development.
But it is probably in the most
deprived countries as the examples
of Tanzania and Bangladesh appear
to suggest that the uses of re¬
versible and simplified visual com¬
munications affording participation will
be most effective, inasmuch as they
will make it possible to break down
the resistance of archaic communities
without manipulating them, and pre¬
pare them collectively to face up to
the necessary innovations.
What then, over and above these
specific uses, is the future of portable
video?
For many, it represents a first
generation, a step towards other, more
institutional forms of group communi¬
cation. Undeniably there is a strong
possibility of its being taken over and
institutionalized by community tele¬
vision using cable-relay systems.
This development has moved on
apace over the last five years in some
countries: six million homes in the
United States, a million and a half in
Canada and two million in Great
Britain are now provided with local pro-«
grammes by cable-relay companies.
These programmes consist of weather
reports, sports results, etc.
Others have been in the project
stage in France (seven towns) and in
the Netherlands (six towns) since 1973.
These companies will have a great
need of ¡mages to broadcast and will
probably want to use the production
of the free video groups. In Canada,
the production workshop, "Vidéo-
graphe" of Montreal, has exper¬
imentally been connected by cable to
10,000 television receivers in three
neighbouring towns which have
been able on request to obtain
80 programmes recorded by non¬
professionals either at "Vidéographe"
itself, or outside (Sélectovision).
Pretty well everywhere in Europe,
experiments using portable video
within local communities are being
used to pave the way for cable tele¬
vision installations. But it is unlikely
that most of the video groups which
have been formed in recent years
will agree to become part of a one¬
way broadcasting system which, after
all, is fairly similar to what they hope
to replace.
If they do, it will be necessary, in
order to maintain the spirit of dialogue
which is their raison d'être, to install
two-way telecommunications making
it possible for images to be returned
to those transmitting them.
The projects which have been
developed in the United States, par¬
ticularly MINERVA (Multiple Input
Network for Evaluation, Reaction,
Votes and Attitudes) which should be
in operation in 1985 and which aims
at organizing citizens in uniform
groups of 30 correspondents linked
by telephone, these groups being
themselves connected to each other
by cable, show the absurdity, however,,
of wanting to "organize" participation
at any price through rigid networks
formed by complex technological
machinery.
more promising direction
would appear to be that pointed to by
the creation by Vidéographe of a tiny,
low-powered television station at Saint
Lambert in Quebec, installed In the
village church-tower to serve only the
village, or the Pic Saint-Loup project
in France which aims at combining
extremely mobile video equipment with
small local low-power transmitters for
transmission in rural areas. In both
cases the structures involved are
technically flexible, economically ac¬
ceptable and in keeping with the social
spirit of the video pioneers.
Indeed, one of the striking features
of these pathfinders is their wariness
as regards all that is institutional. They
also have a horror of advertising.
"Over-exposure brings under-develop-
ment in its wake", one of them said
recently.
In their attitudes these young
experimenters often display a certain
Puritanism and a moral outlook which,
in its tendency to strip things down
to the essential, seems sometimes to
borrow its metaphors from Maoism:
"One must be in the people like fish
in the water... The major' television
organizations remain on the bank and
see only the surface, never the depths
of the people", and so on. The
"Guerrilla television" handbook offers
the following advice: "Sell your car
and buy a Portapack." More than one
person seems to have done so in
the U.S.A. and Canada.
Could this belief in the liberating
potentialities of a technique perhaps
be naive and anachronistic? What is
striking about it, however, is its
serious-mindedness, and it is highly
possible that the intuition from which
it stems will turn out to be decisive
for the future.
It has often been observed that
the political and cultural criteria which
still govern the international community
seem to be borrowed from the period
of the Second World War, whereas
the basic technologies of our society
all came into existence after the war,
these technologies being information-
producing ones chiefly computers
and television.
In the last quarter of a century, so

sociologists tell us, we have evolved
from a "métallurgie" society to a
"semiurgic" society (1), that is to say
from a system founded on the pro¬
duction, circulation and exchange of
products to another based on the
production, circulation and exchange
of signs and symbols, as is borne out,
for instance, by the increasing import¬
ance of labels and packaging for
consumer goods.
All the theories of material wealth
inherited from the 19th century were
incapable, and understandably so, of
taking into account this phenomenon
which is just beginning to be explored
by sociologists and economists. In the
event, one may well wonder whether,
(I) From the same root as "semiotics", the
study of signs.
with the advent of video, this new
economic science of signs is not itself
already being challenged.
For now visual communication is no
longer an object which is distributed
like a piece of merchandise; there are
no longer manufacturers and con¬
sumers, producers and receivers of
images, but persons communicating
with each other from all sides. A
utopia is taking shape: signs, messages
and symbols are being produced,
passed on and freely shared out
independently of the traditional cor¬
porate bodies and monopolies.
Whether it is a question of com¬
munities equipped with cable-relay
systems, of tiny low-power transmitters
or of "video ball-point pens", there is
evidence that, in a steadily Increasing
number of countries, the ¡mage is
being discreetly divested of its magical'
powers and is being used to revitalize
the social fabric. It is doing so by
providing minorities with the oppor¬
tunity for free expression, waking
people up to the environment and to
themselves, and serving as a basis
for the promotion of community ac¬
tivities and other forms of interaction
yet to see the light.
Everywhere "electronic literacy" is
gaining new ground, and not to the
detriment of conventional literacy. Do
not both forms constitute a contribution
to the task to which the international
community is summoned by Unesco:
the conquest of freedom and demo¬
cracy?
Henri Dleuzeide
33
