by Marie-Pierre Herzog
The first
world conference
of women
FROM June 19 to July 2, 1975, the
United Nations-sponsored World
Conference of International Women's
Year took place in Mexico City.
Attended by more than 8,000 women
representing 133 countries and 113
non-governmental organizations, the
immense gathering was an unparalleled
event in the history of the struggle for
women's rights, by the number and
standing of the delegates, the range of
issues they discussed and the keen
controversy revealed by some of the
debates.
An event which drew global attention
(some 1,200 journalists from every
continent were in Mexico City to report
on its deliberations) the conference
naturally gave rise to some criticism
and misgivings, and even drew some
sarcastic comments, but everywhere
it aroused great interest.
Were specifically feminist demands
and issues in fact submerged in the
MARIE-PIERRE HERZOG is director of
Unesco's Human Rights Co-ordination Unit and
was previously head of Unesco's Philosophy
Division. She represented Unesco at the recent
World Conference of International Women's
Year, in Mexico City.
general political discussions which took
place in Mexico City?
This first world conference on the
status of women showed, not un¬
surprisingly, that it could not escape,
to some extent, reflecting the tensions
that affect the life of the entire world
community: the problems posed by
racialism and apartheid, by the gap
between poor and rich countries, the
problems of armed conflict, of peace
and disarmament, human rights, the
creation of a new world economic
order, the population explosion, etc.
How would it have been possible to
discuss the three main themes of
International Women's Year equality
between men and women, the inte¬
gration of women into development
and the promotion of peace without
also taking into consideration these
major world problems and their conse¬
quences for women?
But something more than social and
political commitment by women is
needed if effective campaigns are to
be waged against the countless forms
of discrimination of which women are
still the victims and against which all
women in the world must be protected.
Drawing
"One difficulty in carrying out a plan of action for women's liberation is
that men occupy all the top posts at the decision-making level."
The Mexico City conference drew up
and adopted a 10-year World Plan of
Action, a Declaration of principles and
34 resolutions which form an un¬
precedented set of guidelines and
targets for action to improve the
status of women, comprising a wide
variety of clearly-defined and practical
measures to be taken in all fields
affecting women, at national, regional,
and international levels.
The Plan vigorously reaffirms that
the objective of International Women's
Year is to build a society in which
women can fully participate in a real
and full sense in economic, social and
political life. It urges governments to
ensure for both women and men
equality before the law, equal access
to education, job training and employ¬
ment as well as the right to equal
conditions of employment, including
pay and adequate social security.
Among other steps towards a more
equitable society, the Plan of Action
stresses the need for the establish¬
ment of a new international economic
order as envisaged in the U.N. General
Assembly's declaration of May 1974.
Many proposals deal with specifi¬
cally feminist demands and problems
of the family. The basic condition of
any real equality between the sexes,
affirms the Plan of Action, is the right
of individuals and couples "to deter¬
mine the number and spacing of their
children and to receive all the infor¬
mation and the means to do so."
In retrospect, the texts, resolutions
and proposals emanating from the
conference on the major problems of
improving women's status will increas¬
ingly be seen as an achievement
whose long-term effects will mark a
turning point in history.
Parallel to the conference itself, an
International Women's Year "Tribune"
was successfully organized in Mexico
City by non-governmental organ¬
izations. Attended by nearly 6,000
women, from every kind of organ¬
ization, it was a forum of wide-ranging
and lively debates and produced a host
of ideas and proposals.
This raises the question of how the
ideas which came out of the unofficial
Tribune can be applied in practice to
help solve the many problems of
women's rights. It is inconceivable
that such vigour and momentum should
fail to produce positive results, even ^
67

(.though it did not find adequate means
of expression during the conference
and among governments and inter¬
national organizations.
And how, for that matter, will the
Plan of Action be implemented? For
every plan of this kind tends to pose
the same problem: how can govern¬
ments and groups of all kinds be
persuaded to carry out recommen¬
dations drawn up at an international
level which are not legally binding?
A big effort will be needed to ensure
that countries incorporate into their
national policies and programmes the
maximum number of these international
recommendations.
The difficulties involved in im¬
plementing any world plan of action
are even greater when it comes to
improving the status of women owing
to the fact that the top posts at the
decision-making level are usually held
by men.
Another question of fundamental
importance concerns the concept of
the family, its size and its role in
society, and what is nowadays
referred to either as "responsible
parenthood" or "family planning".
Discussions at the conference re¬
vealed many divergencies on this
question, so that final decisions are
still left to the discretion of each
government. This is seen as a defeat;
for a great many women it is a bitter
disappointment and it will be a serious
handicap in the years ahead.
Another world conference for Inter¬
national Women's Year will meet in
East Berlin (German Democratic Re¬
public) from October 20 to 24, 1975,
organized by the Women's International
Democratic Federation. Once again
thousands of women will take part and
it will be interesting to see how they
react to the results obtained and the
problems raised by the Mexico City
conference.
At all events, the Mexico City
conference has been a pioneering
achievement and it can be hoped that
the East Berlin congress, the second
outstanding event of International
Women's Year, will serve to develop
and complete its work.
Marie-Pierre Herzog

