ARTISTS
WHO RESHAPED
REALITY
B Y virtue of its outstanding qual¬
ity and originality, Celtic art
must be considered one of the most
remarkable aesthetic developments In
human history.
In using the term Celtic art, how¬
ever, there ¡s a risk of perpetuating
a misunderstanding that arose in the
19th century when examples of an
original art form, either previously
unknown or else disdained, began to
be discovered. This misunderstanding
is still found in a number of recent
books which attribute to the Celts cer¬
tain megalithic monuments that ante¬
date them by several thousand years.
Some specialists consider the
people of the Bronze Age (the first
half of the second millenium B.C.) as
proto-Celts; others maintain that the
appearance of the Celts on the stage
of history coincides with the emer¬
gence of the Iron Age cultures. But
most writers agree that the strictly Cel¬
tic period belongs to the late Iron Age.
Yet so many changes took place
in this period that one may well wonder
whether it represented the develop¬
ment of a single culture or whether
these changes reflect the influence of
outside forces and different peoples.
The late Iron Age, which is still
known as the La Tène epoch, from
the name of an archaeological site
discovered in Switzerland a little over
a century ago, has been subdivided
into three periods because of the
variety of archaeological findings
made there.
La Tène art did not come about
suddenly. It owed much to earlier
aesthetic developments in the wide¬
spread territories that the Celts
overran, and to the contacts they had
more numerous than was formerly
supposed with the so-called classical
civilizations, as well as with the art
of the steppes. But one should note
that La Tène art was scarcely influ¬
enced by the art of the early Iron Age.
It has sometimes been said that
there was a gap between the Hallstatt
culture (named from the site of a
Celtic settlement in Austria, see
page 12) and that of La Tène. From
the point of view of art there was a
real break between the two. The
art of the early Iron Age was based
on straight-line geometrical patterns,
whereas curves and counter-curves
are predominant in true Celtic art.
by René Joffroy
The Celts loved beautiful objects and
lavished as much care and skill on making
household pots as on fashioning their most
precious ornaments. Their taste for
artistic enrichment led them to embellish
some imported works that were not
ornate enough for their liking. A Celtic
metalsmith covered this
wooden bowl (below) with gold
openwork mounting. Celtic
craftsmen of the Rhineland, where the
bowl was discovered, were past masters
of the art of repoussé (raised) metalwork.
Opposite page, enlarged detail of two
gold neck-rings, a chance find unearthed
by a bulldozer at Erstfeld (Switzerland)
in 1962. Dating from the 4th cent.
B.C. (like the bowl), they display a
remarkable combination of naturalism
and fantasy in which the Celtic
goldsmith has interlaced half-animal,
half-human creatures. On neck-ring at
left they are attached like Siamese twins,
one facing into the ring, one facing
outwards. On neck-ring at right is a
large-eyed creature with snub nose and
short curling horns.
RENÉ JOFFROY is curator-in-chief of the
Museum of National Antiquities at St-Germain-
en-Laye (France). He has carried out excavations
at many prehistoric sites in France and is
particularly well known for his archaeological
work on the oppidum (fortified settlement) of
Mont-Lassois at Vix, eastern France. Here in
1952 he uncovered the tomb of a Celtic princess
containing a remarkable collection of Italo -
Greek objects. Among his published works are
La Tombe de Vix (The tomb of Vix), Presses
Universitaires de France. Paris, 1954; Les
Sépultures à Char de l'Age du Fer (Iron Age
chariot burials). Picard, Paris, 1958; and
L'Oppidum de Vix et la Civilisation Hallstat-
tienne Finale dans l'est de la France (The
oppidum of Vix and the late Hallstatt civilization
in eastern France) Les Belles Lettres, Paris, 1960.
32

If we consider the different types of
art objects involved, we find that most
of them are articles of everyday use,
such as weapons and jewellery, and
ceramic work that has been decorated
to some extent. Except for the occa¬
sional piece of monumental sculpture
found in southern France and in the
Rhine Valley, practically nothing is
known about the Celts' architecture,
for the obvious reason that they did
not use stone to build their dwellings.
Their homes were simply huts with
wood and mud walls that quite naturally
have not survived.
We may. however, attempt to out
line chronologically the various styles
that succeeded one another over the
five-hundred-year history of Celtic
craftsmanship and art, and use this
as a framework to try to bring order
out of its infinite complexity.
By the middle of the fifth century
B.C., Celtic -art had already acquired
its main themes. Greece had provid¬
ed it with a basic motif, namely the
palmette frond. The Celtic palmette,
however, differed from its Greek
counterpart in that it was more sim¬
plified and yet complicated by ad¬
ditional features that overburdened it
and deprived it of its original character.
There is still a certain rigidity, or
rather a kind of symmetry, in the
early style that is usually described
as severe, whereas in the 4th century
B.C. various influences were mingled,
compounded and blended to form
what is known as the Waldalgesheim
Style, named after a princely burial
site in Germany.
Side by side and sometimes inter¬
mingled with flowing geometrical
curves, there appear animal and human
forms. But the Celtic artists were no
respecters of reality. Animal shapes
were distorted, made monsterlike and ^
twisted to form complex designs. V
33

Purity of line and a firm style gave
way to flexibility, profusion and orna¬
mental excess. This taste for greater
artistic enrichment appears on certain
drinking vessels imported from Greece
which were discovered in Germany.
Their Celtic owners had apparently
felt that the objects themselves were
not sufficiently ornate and had their
outer surfaces covered with gold leaf
decoration.
This technique of applying gold leaf
was used on a wooden bowl found at
Schwarzenbach (Germany) and on a
remarkable flagon unearthed at Eygen-
bilsen (Belgium). Gold jewellery, tores
or neck-rings, and bracelets present an
amazing variety of styles.
The recent discovery of a number of
gold tores at Erstfeld in the Swiss can¬
ton of Uri has brought to light fresh
examples of this art in which fantasy is
blended with a remarkable sense of
composition. Human monsters criss¬
cross with distorted animals in intricate
patterns.
When metalwork from the Italian and
Greek world became known to the
Celts, especially much-prized bronze
vessels such as oenochoes (wine
jugs) and situlae (pails), a need was
felt to embellish them. Gold bands of
repoussé work were therefore applied
to the wine jugs. Sometimes the ves¬
sels themselves were copied and the
imitations surpassed the originals.
A Celtic wine jug with a three-lobed
spout, found at Diirrnberg (Austria)
has its sides decorated with foliated
scrolls, the base of the handle adorned
with a human head framed with inter¬
laced S motifs, and two fantastic ani¬
mals whose heads end in long trunks
supporting the rim of the vessel.
The finest examples of this Celtic
work, inspired by classical art forms
but adapted to . Celtic tastes, are
two wine jugs discovered at Basse
Yutz, near the town of Metz (France).
The vessels are richly decorated with
coral dots and plaquettes. A strange
animal forms the handle and two other
equally fantastic beasts are fitted along
the rims.
This use of coral, a substance
unknown to the classical world or
disdained by it was common in Celtic
art where it served to decorate many
objects. Later, when the markets of
the Far East absorbed the coral pro¬
duced in the Mediterranean area, it
was replaced by red enamel which was
in general use down to the end of the
La Tène period.
Combat chariots small, light, two-
wheeled vehicles of wood drawn by a
team of horses were decorated with
phalerae, bronze open-work discs,
which reveal the great technical skill
of Celtic craftsmen who were able to
transform heavy metal into thin leaf
and lacy filigree.
Certain tombs discovered in the
north-eastern area of France, espe¬
cially those containing the bodies of
chieftains buried with their combat
chariots, have yielded magnificent
CONTINUED PAGE 37
34

Salzburger Museum. Salzburg, Austri
Photos © Erich Lessing-Magnum, Pari
A taste for wine
and fantasy
The Celts were reputed to be prodigious drinkers.
Through their trade-links with the Mediterranean world
they imported Greek wine via Massilia (Marseilles) and
other ports. This superb bronze oenochoe. or wine-jug,
(right) exemplifies the technical mastery and stylistic
elegance with which the Celts embellished their drinking
vessels. It dates from the late 5th cent. B.C. and was
discovered at Dürrnberg (Austria). The upper part of
the handle (above) has the form of a strange beast
devouring a human head. Its lower part (above left) is
decorated with a human head surrounded by scroll-like
motifs. A grotesque little monster (left) embellishes
each side of the jug rim. These figures have leonine tails
and a trunk-like extension of the head ending in a whorl.
On each monster's back is the profile of a bird.
35

Curves
and
knobbly
twists
Celtic men and women alike were
greatly attached to jewellery. Celtic
jewellers worked in a variety of
metals and styles, and their ere-'
ations display a remarkable flair for
elegant ornamentation. The most
characteristic Celtic ornament was.
the tore or neck-ring. (1 ) This tore,
made of eight twisted strands of
electrum (a silver and gold alloy)
was discovered at Snettisham, Nor¬
folk (England). Each strand consists
of eight twisted wires soldered into
the chased end-pieces. (2) Bronze
pendant with openwork "S" motifs,
about 4 cms in diameter (Bussy-le-
Château, France). (3) Detail of a
gold bracelet (Waldalgesheim, Ger¬
man Fed. Rep.). The distinctive style,
with its writhing and asymmetrical
plant spirals, suggests Scythian'
influence. This style is believed by
some authorities to be the work of
a single metalsmith, the so-called
"Waldalgesheim Master", who may
have lived near the Rhine in the late
4th cent. B.C. (4) Gold armlet
(3rd cent. B.C.) found at Aurillac
(France). Artistic sleight-of-hand
creates an impression of acorns,
buds and leaves, but the design in-
fact owes nothing to nature. (6) 3rd
cent. B.C. bronze chariot ring (Paris,
France) embodying three human
masks which may be Gaulish inter¬
pretations of the face of Cu Chu¬
lainn, hero of a famous Irish epic.
(5) An unusual bronze brooch from
Manetin (Czechoslovakia) its bow'
decorated by a 8.8 cm human figure.
Marks and sockets on the body were
probably inlaid with coral.
36
Museum of National Antiquities. St-Germain-en-Laye. France
Photo © Belzeaux-Zodiaque

useum of National Antiquities, Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France
hoto © Belzeaux-Zodiaque
Rhein-Landesmuseum, Bonn, Germany (Fed. Rep 1
Photo ~ 		'
5
apadoceské Muz . .Plzen, Czechoslovakia
hoto © from "Art of the European Iron Age"
y J.V.S. Megaiv, New York, 1970
, specimens of this art. Among them
are triangular openwork plates, thought
to be chariot-shaft ends, decorated
with opposing S forms in a continuous
lyre pattern and rows of tiny coral rods
along the bottom.
Conical helmets made of sheet
bronze were found in several graves.
Some of them are decorated with in¬
cised palmettes or coral beads. But the
most impressive of these is a later one
from Amfreville-sous-les-Monts in
northern France. It is formed of a
bronze headpiece on which has been
affixed a gold band stamped with tris-
kelions, typically Celtic threeway de¬
signs made up of spiral lines.
Bronze jewellery constitutes another
Important branch of Celtic art with its
masses of bracelets, tores and fibulas
(brooches).
Bracelets are found in the graves of
both men and women. They are made
of flat or twisted metal bands chased
with parallel or oblique lines. The bra¬
celets are usually broken rings with
knob-like terminals or tips that can be
clasped. The bands are sometimes
pierced.
Tores or rigid neck-rings are made
of metal bars, usually bronze, ending
In terminals of varying size that are
occasionally hollow. Along the outer
edge they may have a flowing pattern
made of S's or spiral lines in relief.
Tores were worn by women at the
beginning of the late Iron Age, but
subsequently seem to have been reser¬
ved for heroes or gods. The large-
sized gold tore recently found at
Mailly-le-Camp in eastern France,
and now preserved in the Museum of
National Antiquities at St-Germain-en-
Laye near Paris, is apparently one of
the latter type.
Clothes were fastened together by
means of brooches, called fibulas,
which offered scope for all manner of
intricate decoration. Those from the
Champagne district of eastern France
are of relatively simple design, where¬
as in Central Europe we find a
whole series of these ornaments called
"mask fibulas". Here Celtic craftsmen
gave free rein to their imagination,
combining fabulous animals with hu¬
man shapes that border on caricature
in an unreal phantasmagorical world
where dream and reality, naturalism
and abstract art, go hand in hand.
Representations of heads seem to
have had a magical or religious pur¬
pose as well as an aesthetic one.
This motif is used so frequently on
jewellery and discs that some art histo¬
rians have been led to speak of an
"exaltation of the head" among the-
Celts.
An echo of some such cult is reflec¬
ted in Celtic architecture. The entran¬
ce to a sanctuary discovered at Roque-
pertuse in the south of France, and
now preserved in the Borély Museum
in Marseilles, is decorated with small
niches that still contain human skulls.
This is an exceptional vestige since,
as we have said, the Celts used no
durable building materials. It was only
after the Roman conquest that the use
of stone became common.
It seems, however, that the "Gauls"
the Celts who inhabited Gaul were
sculptors. Caesar mentions their simu¬
lacra (or images) and this term may
refer to statues. No stone statue dating
from before the Roman conquest has
ever been discovered in France, though
pillars decorated with human heads
have been found in Germany at Pfalz¬
feld and Holzgerlingen.
But although many grave sites have
been excavated In what was formerly
Gaul, no sculpture has come to light. It
is true that the figure of a two-headed
god, a kind of thin-lipped, straight-
nosed Janus was found in southern
France, where the Roquepertuse rock
sanctuary was also discovered but
this area had no doubt come under
the influence of the Ligurians, a non-
Celtic people.
A curious head of a warrior with
protruding eyes, a flat face with mous¬
taches and oddly spiralling eyebrows,
was discovered at Msecké Zehrovice
(Czechoslovakia), In a square enclo¬
sure where a cult was practised. The
tore round the neck indicates that this
strange face, now in the Prague Mu¬
seum, dates from the first century B.C.
The influence of this original art was
still felt long after the Roman conquest
of Gaul, however, since idols of stone
or sheet bronze have been found in
areas that were purely Gallo-Roman.
One is a small limestone statue of a
god found at Euffigneix in eastern
France. The god is wearing a tore
with buffer-like terminals. On his chest
is the figure of a boar ; on one side
is a great staring eye, and on the
other an ear. Was this the portrayal of
a god of the hunt?
The head of another statue, known
as the Bouray god, is cast in two
sections and the body is of sheet-
bronze. The god is represented in a
crosslegged position. His feet seem to
end in deerlike hooves, and his en¬
amelled eyes give him a fixed ex¬
pression.
But figurative representation is rare.
The Celts did not usually give their
gods human form. When the Celts
pillaged the temples at Delphi in the
year 278, Brennus, their leader, was
scandalized to see statues of the Greek
gods in the likeness of human beings.
This seemed sacrilegious to him be¬
cause while the Celts adored the for¬
ces of Nature, they portrayed them
only symbolically in their art. For this
reason Celtic whorls and spirals have
been interpreted as being emblematic
of lightning, and their three-way motifs
as embodiments of the protection
afforded by the magic number 3.
The famous silver cauldron of Gun-
destrup (now in the Copenhagen Natio¬
nal Museum) has caused much contro¬
versy. This large vessel, faced inside
and out with decorative silver plates,
was found in a peat-bog in Denmark.
Its decorative motifs recall the whole
range of Gaulish mythology. Specia-
CONTINUED PAGE 40
37

L lists disagree as to its age. Some
date it to the first century B.C. ; others
consider it more recent and to have
actually been produced in the Chris¬
tian era (see page 42).
Celtic artists may well have displayed
their finest talent In the minting of
coins (see pages 38-39).
Originally their coins were imitations
of the gold stater struck by Philip of
Macedón (356-336 B.C.). The obverse
of this coin bore a head of Apollo
crowned with a laurel wreath; on the
reverse was the "biga" or two-horse
chariot, an allusion to the Olympic
games in which Philip's chariots had
been victorious.
Gradually the motifs of this proto¬
type were Celticized. The hair be¬
came flowing spirals, strings of beads
and cascading curls; the eye was en¬
larged; the symbols and motifs of
classical Celtic art spirals, discs and
triskelions were increasingly used.
The horse was dismembered and put
back together to form a number of
mythical creatures, some with human
heads or else was replaced by the
wild boar, birds or snakes.
Every tribe had its own decorative
style and this makes the study of Cel¬
tic coins difficult because certain eso¬
teric symbols are intelligible only to
specialists.
Each coin is an epitome of an art
which succeeded in making a harmo¬
nious blend of curved geometrical pat¬
terns and unreal figures in extremely
free linear designs. This is a two-
dimensional, decorative art.
Despite local variations, it had a
wide influence in Western Europe,
extending as far as Ireland which es¬
caped Roman domination. From there
it was brought back to the continent
. in the 9th century by Irish missionaries,
and ultimately became one of the
sources of Romanesque art.
Rene Jofftoy
40
In regions occupied by the Celts, between Hungary and Ireland,
portrayals of Janus (twin-faced) heads have been discovered.
They are thought to reflect the belief of the Iron Age Celts in the
power of divinities to look forwards into the Otherworld and
backwards into the world of the living. Right, Janus-faced stone
statue (2nd cent. B.C. ; 23 cm. high) found at Badacsony-Labdihegy
(Hungary). Twin faces were also often used for ornamental
motifs as on the bronze mount shown above. It was unearthed
from a grave at Malomerice in Brno (Czechoslovakia) and
dates from the 3rd century B.C.
