IS THERE
A SOLUTION
TO THE WORLD
FOOD CRISIS ?
by SayedAhmed Marei
OVER six months have now elaps¬
ed since the World Food Con¬
ference met in Rome, on November 5,
1974. Many of us are wondering
what next?
The present world food crisis,
originating from a combination of
longer term, deep-seated problems,
and temporary setbacks, suddenly
emerged in a pronounced form in 1972
due to the disastrous weather con¬
ditions in that year.
World output of food declined. In
particular, world output of cereals
(wheat, coarse grains and rice) fell by
a large amount 33 million tons. This
coincided with a number of recent
events which compounded the effects
on prices, trade and payments.
Examples of these events are: the
unprecedented boom in economic
activity in the developed countries,
leading to a high demand for com¬
modities, and the worldwide inflation-
SAYED AHMED MAREI. Chairman of the
People's Assembly of the Arab Republic of
Egypt, was Secretary-General of the U.N. World
Food Conference, held in Rome in November
1974. A leading authority on farming, he was
the architect of Egypt's far-reaching land reform
programmes in the 1950s. He has held key
posts in the Egyptian government, notably as
Minister for Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
(1958-1961) and as Deputy Prime Minister for
Agriculture and Irrigation (1969-1972).
ary forces accentuated by monetary
instability and speculative activities.
Add to these, two other factors fer¬
tilizers and energy which burst onto
the scene in 1973.
True, production shortfall has charac¬
terized the fertilizer market since the
end of 1971, leading to high prices and
physical shortage, but the problem
worsened with the rise in petroleum
prices in late 1973 (which increased
the cost of fuel in agriculture) and
the shortage and high prices of raw
materials for fertilizer manufacture.
But these are only the recent causes
of the worsening food situation. Of
greater concern are the deep-rooted
causes dominating many parts of the
developing countries.
The major problem facing the dev¬
eloping countries, in spite of the
remarkable expansion of their agri¬
cultural output in the 1950s and
1960s, lay in the increased rate of
demand3.5 per centdue to faster
population growth. Although the
degree of imbalance varies from
country to country and from region to
region, in the majority of developing
countries the agricultural shortfall has
become a grave impediment to the
achievement of overall development.
Failure of food production means
a rise in the developing countries'
cereal imports, which consequently
results in large food import bills. In
the past, the burden of payment was
mitigated by the availability of food
aid, which in the 1960s ranged between
30 per cent and 45 per cent of total
food imports. But with the recent
running down of cereal stocks, the
volume of food aid has drastically
diminished.
There have been parallel disap¬
pointments in development assistance
whose volume has fallen far short of
the targets set up in several inter¬
governmental assemblies. Although in
monetary terms the annual value of
development assistance doubled bet¬
ween 1961 and 1972, in real terms the
increase was marginal.
Another imbalance is the mal¬
distribution of food within countries,
giving rise to the vital issue of the
nutritional adequacy of available
supplies. Malnutrition affects some
460 million people in the developing
world. Large numbers of people lack
adequate and appropriate food diets
resulting in adverse effects on their
health, their development and their
ability to learn and work for their basic
livelihood.
In these countries, the problem is
not only that of physical privation of
human beings, but the fact that such
situations usually lead to violence and
strife at a time when overconsumption
among the affluent peoples is impair¬
ing their health.
12

We travel together,
passengers on a little
spaceship, dependent on
its vulnerable reserves
of air and soil... We
cannot maintain it half
fortunate, half
miserable, half confident,
half despairing, half
slave to the ancient
enemies of man, half
free in a liberation of
resources undreamed of
until this day. No craft,
no crew can travel safely
with such vast
contradictions. On their
resolution depends
the survival of us all.
Adlai Stevenson
Left, from two verses of the Koran,
classical Arabic calligraphy shapes a boat.
It is in such a world, with great
wealth and affluence enjoyed by only
one-third of its population, that the
2300-year-old words of the Greek
Cynic philosopher Diogenes come
back to haunt us. When asked for
the proper time to eat, he responded,
in his own practical manner: "If a
rich man, when you will; if a poor man,
when you can."
However, the situation may not look
so bleak if we remember the enormous
reservoir of production potentialities
in the developing nations that are still
untapped.
Vast areas of arable land in Latin
America and Asia are still unexploited.
This is due to many well-known causes
such as inaccessibility, insufficient
technology, prevalence of infestations
and undeveloped water resources.
Progressive removal of these ob¬
stacles, though costly, is technically
foreseeable.
In livestock production there is also
considerable potential for growth.
This could be done through improving
animal health conditions, upgrading
herd quality and expanding the feed
base.
The same goes for fertilizers, pesti¬
cides and herbicides, and improved
quality seed. The per hectare use of
these inputs remains on average low
and thus the full potentialities of soils,
irrigation water, and high-yielding seed
varieties will not be realized. Indeed,
the growth of future production lies in
opportunities to increase yields per
unit of land or per animal. Therefore,
there is need for further investment in
research, extension and credit supplies.
Another area ready for further
exploitation is the fish industry. Devel¬
opment of aquaculture needs to be
given more priority in the future.
Most important of all are the human
resources. Here is an immense
potential waiting to be released,
organized, and generously provided
with the needed technological know-
how and tools of production.
The foregoing analysis concentrated
on the obstacles and difficulties
concerning which action is needed if
new and more satisfactory trends are
to be established. It also emphasized
the fact that many developing countries
have the potential to produce more
food. But to do this one needs
massive investments, more appropriate
techniques, better management, and
improved institutions. Moreover, inter¬
national assistance is called for.
It is with this background knowledge
that we went to the World Food Con¬
ference in Rome last November. The
main purpose of the meeting was to
find solutions to the food problem in
order to achieve freedom from hunger
in the world of tomorrow.
In my judgement, the first ac
complishment of the Conference was
the widespread interest and concern
generated regarding hunger and mal¬
nutrition. Whatever differences of
viewpoints existed, everyone re¬
cognized that we live in an age of
interdependence, and that no country
can exist in isolation.
Resolutions were adopted dealing
with all important aspects of food
production, distribution, nutrition, re¬
serves and food aid. But they were
not left at that. Provisions were made
for the assignment of each subject to
a follow-up organization.
The main follow-up mechanism,
established to co-ordinate efforts on
these fronts by all U.N. agencies in
the agricultural field, is the World Food
Council approved by the U.N. Gen¬
eral Assembly on January 30, 1975.
For this Council to implement the
various resolutions, it should have
enough political authority and support.
The Council will be serviced within
the framework of the U.N. Food and
Agriculture Organization and will thus
not add to the burden of other U.N.
agencies.
The Conference also approved a
recommendation for the establishment
of an International Fund for Agri¬
cultural Development (IFAD) to channel
investment towards improving agri¬
culture in the developing countries.
The successful operation of this fund P
13

Bumper yields
from
little seedlings
Shown here are 200 baby plants being
grown in a comparative experiment in a
special laboratory of the Agricultural
Research Center at Beltsville (Mary¬
land) U.S.A. The experiments are being
conducted in a search for increased
food yields. Covering over 4,000 hec¬
tares, the centre has experimental
pastures, orchards, gardens and woods.
It employs 1,000 scientists who are
seeking new knowledge in crop and
livestock production, agricultural en¬
gineering, plant and animal diseases
and defence against parasites. The
search for higher-yielding food plants
with greater resistance to disease is
an essential part of the global war
against hunger and is being carried
out in many countries.
t rests upon the joint efforts and good¬
will of the developed and oil-producing
countries.
Another major initiative was the
agreement to institute an international
undertaking on world food security.
This is obviously a long-term plan to
co-ordinate stock-holding policies for
basic foods (mainly cereals) in order
to avert the kind of fluctuations in
world stocks that lead to dangerous
food shortages. The undertaking is to
be supported by a worldwide infor¬
mation system of food production and
supply.
Apart from proposals for the main
follow-up institutions, the Conference
also agreed on a number of resol¬
utions dealing with specific aspects
of the world's food problem and agri¬
cultural development. These included
strengthening rural development, in¬
creasing research and training, man¬
agement of water resources, pest
control and seed production.
In addition, resolutions urged inter
national organizations and bilateral aid
agencies to intensify efforts to meet
the critical needs of developing
countries for supplies of fertilizers
and to support, both materially and
financially, the recently established
International Fertilizer Supply Scheme.
Finally, the Conference approved a
forward planning strategy for food aid.
There was general agreement that at
least 10 million tons of grain be
guaranteed for food aid every year.
It must be remembered that however
vigorous the efforts may be to in¬
crease agricultural output, the results
will only appear after a lapse of time.
Meanwhile, food aid and import financ¬
ing problems are to be dealt with as
matters of urgency and deserve care¬
ful consideration in the interim period.
This leads us to the inevitable and
vital issue of financing food supplies.
It is obvious that the task of accelerat¬
ing the expansion of production will
require investment on a massive scale.
But, however great the efforts
exerted by the developing countries,
Photo J.-P. Laffont © Sygma, Pans
a significant part of the financing will
have to be provided by the developed
and oil-producing countries either
directly or through some international
institution. Economic history might
give an insight. Could it be that we
need something equivalent to the
Marshall Plan of the late 1940s?
The Marshall Plan of 1947, named
after its initiator, the then U.S.
Secretary of State, George C. Marsh¬
all, aimed at helping European econ¬
omies recover after the devastation of
World War II. In Europe there was
need to rebuild, to develop, and to
make up for scarcities. The news¬
papers of those days often referred
to the "dollar shortage" or "dollar
gap". Technically, this meant that the
demand for dollars from outside
America, to finance needed imports,
was much greater than the supply of
such dollars to those countries.
The Marshall Plan, with far-sighted¬
ness and sound economic reasoning,
stated that aid to Europe should not
be "on a piecemeal basis as various
14

Voices
from five continents.
JAMAICA
Keble Munn, Minister of Agriculture:
"Developing countries are handicapped in increas¬
ing their food production by the high cost of fertilizers
and machinery, largely imported from the rich nations.
Agricultural production for export in the developing
countries, on the other hand, is for the most part
unprofitable and unstable.
"The small farmer equates agriculture with poverty
and seeks desperately to find ways of leaving the
land. Farmers must be given concrete evidence that
farming is a profitable enterprise."
BANGLADESH
Abdus Samad Azad, Minister for Agriculture,
Local Government, Rural Development and
Co-operatives :
"The people of Bangladesh, in common with the
peoples of many other newly-independent countries,
find themselves confronted with the equally monstrous
problems of food and shelter, hunger and malnutrition.
"It is gratifying to note that the world has come to
realize the enormity of the problem and that the
developed and the developing countries have got
together in a collective search for a solution to this
problem now threatening the survival of millions of
human beings.
"We have received valuable assistance. But the
needs are so wide-ranging, urgent and critical that
such assistance falls short."
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Bohuslav Vecera, Minister of Agriculture
and Food :
"World land resources are sufficient to feed all,
even with a rising population. Developing countries
have great reservoirs of natural resources and man¬
power. But one cannot expect full success in agricul¬
tural production without deep modifications in the
social and economic structure."
ALGERIA
Layachi Yaker, Minister of Trade:
"Algeria calls for increased food production in all
developed countries. These countries have to replace
the idea of production for commercial marketing to
production for the needs of mankind. And the commit¬
ment of developed countries should not be confined
to foodstuffs alone; it should include all agricultural
inputs, such as fertilizer, pesticides and machinery."
CONTINUED PAGE 23
crises develop" but "should provide
a cure rather than a mere palliative".
The Plan aimed at the development of
those countries by supporting needed
imports of equipment and supplies,
and encouraging internal measures to
promote financial stability.
Each country was to formulate a
plan for the four-year period 1948-
1951, proposing measures to in¬
crease production and reduce balance
of payments deficits. The plans were
to be reviewed and co-ordinated by
the Organization for European Econ¬
omic Co-operation and screened by
the U.S. Economic Co-operation
Administration.
This ensured that the U.S. would
provide only necessary assistance,
and gave it a measure of control over
the monetary and fiscal policies of the
participating countries. Over the
four-year period of the operation of
the European Recovery Program, the
U.S. extended $11.4 billion of aid to
Europe almost 90 per cent of which
was in the form of outright grants.
The result was encouraging. Sub¬
stantial expansion of European pro¬
duction was achieved. In 1951
production in Western Europe was
about 40 per cent greater than in 1938,
itself a record year.
There seems to be some similarity
between the period of the dollar
shortage of the late 1940s and what
today may be called the "petro-money
shortage". In the late 1940s it was
America which had greater liquidity
while Europe had a shortage. Today,
oil-exporting countries are generating
surplus funds while other countries,
especially the developing countries of
Asia and Africa, are taking the place
of Europe of the late 1940s.
Therefore, it would be a move in the
right direction if some sort of a
"Trustee" for these funds were to be
formed by a number of banks say,
15 headed by the World Bank. Its
function would be to channel funds
into development, reconstruction, and
elimination of scarcities. Funds would
flow in a regularized fashion, according
to documented needs of the different
countries, thus avoiding the inevitable
quarrels on who gets what.
This is just one possible way of
tackling this topical issue. But we
must remember that authorizing the
establishment of institutions and
passing resolutions will not grow more
wheat or feed more people. It all
depends on the willingness of govern¬
ments and the people themselves to
do what is necessary, if we are to live
in a better world a world where no
child shall ever go hungry again.
Sayed Ahmed Marel
15

VOICES FROM FIVE CONTINENTS. (Continued from page 15)
MEXICO
President Luis Echeverría Alvarez :
"The consumer and waste society has upset thé
essential priorities of human development. The famine
that today is paralyzing the activities of entire nations
has been manufactured with the same detachment as
that employed in the construction of the atomic bomb.
The progressive transformation of cereals and grains
into meat that makes over-consumption of meat in
certain affluent areas of the world possible, destroys
the possibility of a sufficient amount of protein in
other parts of the world.
"A large part of one-crop agriculture in the Third
World is established within the specific sphere of the
needs of certain empires or multinational companies.
The consequence of this has been ecological imba¬
lance, erosion and the annual abandonment of hun¬
dreds of thousands of hectares in favour of continuing
each year with a gigantic operation of geographic
devastation.
"We propose a World Food Plan which will
designate crop areas, make collective action possible,
establish the bases for regulating the use of fertilizers,
seeds and water, suggest new crops or new types of
agricultural production and also provide true universal
education as regards the value of food and the
importance of protein in development."
SENEGAL
Adrien Senghor, Minister of Rural Development
and Water Resources :
"There is still hope that a world seemingly dominated
by egoism, with the 'haves' wasting grains for feeding
their animals. . . will be able tc unite in the face of
threatened famine.
"Immediate measures should be taken for the estab¬
lishment of food stocks, particularly grains and pro¬
teins, in order to prevent crises such as those recently
witnessed and still rampant, particularly in the Sahel.
These stocks must be placed at strategic points near
famine areas. The international community should
urgently finance the necessary installations."
PHILIPPINES
Carlos P. Romulo, Secretary of Foreign Affairs:
"It is no use, it is indeed shameful and degrading
to wait for the developed countries to come to the
rescue every time we come to the brink of starvation.
Of course, when millions are faced with misery, offers
of assistance must be welcomed, as demonstrations
of human solidarity. But we are not helpless we
must help ourselves."
MAURITIUS
VENEZUELA Satcam Boolell, Minister of Agriculture:
President Carlos Andrés Peréz :
"World hunger is not the result of the recent petro¬
leum crisis. During the last 50 years, when the price
of petroleum was insignificant, the problem of hungry
and undernourished people has co-existed with the
indifference of those countries who exploited their
resources and labour.
"A drastic revision is needed in the present terms
of international trade that favour the industrial coun¬
tries and discriminate harshly against the countries
producing raw materials."
"If you want to increase food production in the
developing countries, the necessary facilities for which
we have been asking for decades now must be
provided. The constraints which lie in our way should
be removed or mitigated. What are these constraints?
Shortage and high cost of fertilizers, high cost of
pesticides, high cost of farm machinery, lack of trained
personnel, lack of finance and, most important of all,
of a reasonable level of income for the farmers. This
can only be achieved by guaranteed and stable mar¬
kets and reasonable prices for farm products."
CONTINUED PAGE 33
23

VOICES FROM FIVE CONTINENTS... (Continued from page 23)
COLOMBIA
Luis Carlos Galan, Ambassador to Italy:
"The world is approaching the point where as many
people die daily of hunger or malnutrition as were
killed every 24 hours during World War II. The wield¬
ing of the world's economic power by a handful of
nations has made it impossible to guarantee the
majority of our fellow men even the most elementary
human rights.
"Colombia favours the establishment of a world
food security system, the reorganization of world food
commerce, increased agricultural production, and a
world agricultural information system.
"The oil producing nations have the opportunity to
prove before history that those who wield great power,
political or economic, can also use it for the benefit
of all mankind."
U.S.S.R.
Nicholas Rodionov, Vice-Minister of Foreign
Affairs:
"Some explain food problems in terms of the
population explosion but this is incorrect. Science in
theory and in practice has proved that given certain
social and economic conditions, there is great poten¬
tial for food production. Talking about a population
explosion appears to be an intentional attempt to veil
real causes, which are in the social, economic and
political fields.
"The solution to the problem of food supplies is
first of all dependent upon peace in the world. Vast
sums are spent on armaments and this undermines the
confidence of countries in each other. We endorse
the U.N. General Assembly resolution that permanent
members of the U.N. Security Council reduce their
arms spending by 10 per cent. The saving could be
applied to agricultural development in the Third World
countries."
CANADA
Allan J. MacEachen, Secretary of State for
External Affairs:
"In response to the situation of 'acute distress'
now confronting the food-deprived areas, Canada has
committed itself to supplying an average of 1,000,000
tons of food grains annually for each of the next three
years to the proposed minimum target for world aid
flows of 10 million tons a year."
POLAND
Kazimierz Barcikowski, Minister of Agriculture:
"The food problem was the result of wrong agricul¬
tural policies in vast parts of the world, motivated by
profits and the placing of obstacles to trade and the
rational exploitation of national resources. The first
aim must be to implement measures leading to a just
international division of labour."
SWEDEN
Svante Lundkvist, Minister of Agriculture:
"We are able to land on the moon on a predeter¬
mined spot and time but we fail every day in reach¬
ing thousands of hungry mouths on the earth with
the meal they need while there is still time."
BRAZIL
Alysson Paulinelli, Minister of Agriculture:
"Brazil cannot see how it is possible to stabilize
food prices at low levels if the products, equipment
and fertilizers developing countries buy on the inter¬
national market suffer a violent inflationary spiral."
PAKISTAN
Malik Khuda Bukhsh, Special Assistant for
Agriculture to the Prime Minister:
"The developing world will have to recognize that
the solution of its food problems lies in its own hands
and within its own countries. Agriculture will have
to be accorded the highest priority.
"Social and economic and aid policies of the 1960s
and 1970s have not permitted the developing world
to provide farmers with the knowledge, means and
incentives to increase production. How could the
producers of food be expected to feed the hungry
when they are themselves oppressed by a life of
misery, poverty and deprivation? We all talk about
farmers and endeavour to interpret their thinking and
aspirations. Has not the time come to start listening
to them at regional and international levels? Let the
feeders of the world get together to chart a new
strategy for the conquest of hunger."
TANZANIA
SUDAN
Abu el Gazim Mohammed Ibrahim, Minister of
Agriculture, Food and Natural Resources:
"Sudan is a big country that could contribute to
the battle against world food shortages. At present
only 9 per cent of the land that could be cultivated
is being farmed. But, like other developing coun¬
tries, we face major handicaps such as lack of ade¬
quate transport and finance."
J.J. Mungai, Minister for Agriculture:
"The biggest plight facing the Third World is that
our concerted effort to produce more is not a gua¬
rantee to increased earnings and capital for develop¬
ment investment. We in Tanzania have achieved
tremendous volume increases in all our major export
crops, but poor prices, compounded by higher prices
of imports from developed countries have been a
major constraint on our efforts to create a self-sustain¬
ing economy for our people." continued page 37
33


VOICES FROM FIVE CONTINENTS...
(Continued from page 33)
ECUADOR
Jaime E. Estrella, Chief of Planning Services,
Ministry of Agriculture:
"Future generations will critically judge this date in
history if we do not produce a positive reply to 1,000
million people who await our action. This is a time
when the destiny of humanity is in danger, when the
voice of people condemned to death by hunger grows
louder and louder."
MAURITANIA
Diop Mamadou Amadou, Minister for Rural
Development :
"The agricultural crisis has not arisen now nor even
recently, and it is not caused by the increase in oil
prices. For decades the producers of copper, bauxite,
rubber, coffee, and other raw materials sought better
prices for their exports in order to be able to finance
their agricultural development. But all this has been
to no avail."
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
Lionel M. Robinson, Minister of Agriculture,
Lands and Fisheries:
"A great poet once said "sweet are the uses of
adversity". If the crisis which we are all experiencing
and will hopefully survive serves to shock us into
a greater realization of the real importance of agri¬
culture. . . if it drives home the absolute necessity
from a security standpoint of maintaining adequate
stocks of food, then the crisis may well prove to be
a blessing in disguise."
FAO
Addeke H. Boerma, Director-General, U.N.
Food and Agriculture Organization :
"The food crisis is desperate for those in hunger-
stricken lands. This is the greatest scandal of our
time. For at planetary level, there need be no crisis
at all. The developed world feeds more cereals to
its livestock than are consumed as food by all the
vast populations of the developing countries together.
With less greed and more compassion, the world
would not today see death by hunger as a reality for
some, and a threat for many, among its citizens.
"What is needed is a world food policy, including
nutrition, as an integral part of a world development
policy. And not merely a world food policy, but a
commitment to action."
WORLD COUNCIL OF CHURCHES
Dr. Philip Potter, General Secretary:
"After several years of involvement in development
aid, the World Council which comprises 271 member
churches numbering hundreds of millions of Chris¬
tians has come to the conviction that a purely
economic growth concept should be replaced by a
process aiming at economic and social justice, self-
reliance and people's participation in decision-making
as a means to the objective of a globally just society."
