OUR OLDEST ANCESTORS,
THE MICROBES
The first inhabitants on the earth,
microbes have been the architects
and custodians of our planet
for four billion years
by Jan Wilhelm M. La Rivière
ICROBES were the first settlers
on earth. The oldest and
smallest coins in the money of life,
they arose out of complex organic
matter, abundantly present in the
oceans some 4,000,000,000 years ago,
and can rightfully be considered the
ancestors of all other forms of life
including man.
Life attained all its past and present
diversity by the process of evolution
in which random genetic changes
(mutations) created variations from
which the environment could select
those new forms of life that were best
fitted to survive in it.
Since microbes have played a
dominating role in shaping our present
environment, especially in determining
the composition of the atmosphere,
they have influenced life on earth in
two ways: by providing molecules that
could transfer the "memory" of ances¬
tral experience, the primordial genetic
material, and by taking part indirectly
in the selection process exerted by
the environment they had helped to
build.
The dual role of the microbial world
is not only an important historic
curiosity. Today, no less than in the
past, all higher forms of life depend
entirely for their survival on the
continuous activities of the invisible
microbial world.
The interrelationships of the king¬
doms of life are strikingly manifest in
JAN WILHELM MAURITS LA RIVIÈRE
of the Netherlands is Chairman of the inter¬
national Commission on Microbial Ecology
of the International Association of Micro¬
biological Societies. Secretary of the
Unesco-ICRO (International Cell Research
Organization) Panel on Microbiology, he
is engaged on microbial research relating to
new approaches to waste treatment and
water recovery especially for the developing
countries.
the cycles of carbon, of oxygen, of
nitrogen and of sulphur, four elements
that together with hydrogen, phos¬
phorus and several others compose
the substances from which all life is
made. These cycles are the mechan¬
isms by which dead organic matter is
converted again into building blocks
for new life processes in which mi¬
crobes are the main "pumps".
A simplified version of the carbon
cycle is shown in the cartoons on
page 28. In this cycle, thirty to fifty
per cent of the organic matter pro¬
duced by photosynthesis (by which
green plants use the energy of sunlight
to turn carbon dioxide and water into
food substances) is the work of mi¬
croscopic algae (plankton) inhabiting
the oceans.
By decomposing dead animal and
vegetable matter, microbes are in fact
responsible for the return of about
90 per cent of all carbon dioxide into
the atmosphere.
If this process of mineralization were
to come to a standstill, the carbon
dioxide content of the atmosphere
would drop to zero within a century
and plants would no longer be able
to grow. Thus microbes provide the
basis for marine productivity plankton
being the first stage in the marine food
chain and are at the same time the
main agents responsible for the natural
decomposition of wastes.
All animal life depends on that of
the plants, but after death both
inevitably fall prey to the microbes
that decompose them. In some cases
this microbial attack starts before
death has occurred, and such over-
zealous microbes (or pathogens) are
known to us as the carriers of
infectious disease.
However, out of the total mass of
all microbes on earth, which is of the
same order of magnitude as that of
the higher forms of life, pathogens
amount to less than 0.1 per cent.
Sometimes the decomposition pro¬
cesses proceed incompletely and
slowly, particularly if oxygen is in short
supply or absent, as at the bottom of
a lake, or when pressure is high, as
is the case at the bottom of the
oceans. Incomplete decomposition in
such cases can form products such
as humus and also fossil fuels like oil
and methane.
The important thing to remember is
that the process of photosynthesis
produces exactly the amount of oxygen
that will later be required for the
mineralization process. This clearly
demonstrates the close interrelation¬
ship between the cycles of carbon and
of oxygen.
We can say, first of all, therefore,
that all free oxygen present in the
atmosphere is fully balanced by the
total mass of organic matter on earth.
Fortunately, there is so much finely
dispersed organic material present in
many types of sediments that even if
all the world's fossil fuels were burned
by man the oxygen in our atmospheric
"bank account" would drop in con¬
centration only from 20.94 to 20.80 per
cent.
Nitrogen, like other elements used
by plants and animals, passes through
a cycle of chemical changes and
eventually returns to its original form.
The nitrogen cycle actually consists
of two cycles. One of them is confined
to water and soil. Inorganic nitrogen
compounds are released by microbes
from dead plants and animals and thus
provide nitrogenous material for the
synthesis of new plants.
As in the case of the carbon cycle,
we and the other animals "take a ride"
on the back of plants.
The second part of the cycle is due
CONTINUED PAGE 34
26


OUR OLDEST ANCESTORS, THE MICROBES (Continued from page 26)
to the fact that one of the inorganic
nitrogen compounds, nitrate, can be
converted by microbes into nitrogen
gas. This leak into the atmosphere is
fortunately compensated for by the
activity of other microbes capable of
converting gaseous nitrogen into pro¬
tein, which thus completes the second
cycle.
In addition, atmospheric nitrogen is
fixed by lightning and by the modern
fertilizer industry which produces
ammonia and nitrates in amounts now
reaching the same order of magnitude
as that of nitrogen fixed by bacteria.
The activity of microbes in these
cycles is enormous, both quantitatively
and qualitatively. Every year they
unobtrusively devour the equivalent of
the earth's total production in plant
and animal matter, thereby surpassing
in scope and ingenuity the fiercest
animal we know: man himself.
The secret of their high-powered
activities lies in their small size and
consequent large surface per gramme
of live matter. This fact plus their
short internal "transport lines" enables
the most voracious among them to
consume twice their weight in a quarter
of an hour.
The versatility of the microbial king¬
dom is illustrated by the very ubiquity
of microbes: one finds them in the
Dead Sea as well as in distilled water;
in the upper reaches of the atmosphere
as well as in the deepest ocean bed; in
hot springs as well as in the polar
regions. They even inhabit the intes¬
tines of mammals, where they help
digestion, and they thrive on the
surface of underground iron pipes
which they help to corrode.
It would be an understatement to
say that microbes are merely beneficial
to man because they are just as
essential to his environment as oxygen
and water. An adequately fed human
being consumes immense amounts of
carbohydrate and protein as well as
water and oxygen during his lifetime.
The production of all these depends
on one or more vital aspects of mi¬
crobial activity. About half of the
oxygen is produced by algae in the
oceans; drinkable fresh water would
not exist if microbes did not take care
of its natural purification; cereals and
sugar-producing plants cou'd not grow
if microbes failed to produce carbon
dioxide or were incapable of fixing
nitrogen; even plant-eating animals
could not grow without the microbial
population in their rumen that breaks
down the cellulose from vegetable
material into digestible substances.
One person alone would produce
a mountain of accumulated wastes
during his lifetime if all these products
were not broken down by microbes
and returned to the cycles of nature.
Instead of remaining passively de¬
pendent upon the microbial world for
his survival, man has learned to con¬
sciously exploit microbes for many
different purposes (as is explained
elsewhere in this issue).
One major use is sewage purifi¬
cation, the biggest microbiological
industry in the world, which is basically
nothing more than a technological
stepping up of natural microbial miner¬
alization in cases where waste dis¬
charges are so congested that the
microbes are locally overtaxed and
cannot fulfill their task unassisted (see
article page 29).
Man has not yet fully learned to turq
waste treatment from a defensive
action against a nuisance into a pro¬
ductive step in the framework of the
cycles. Too often the valuable energy
and minerals of waste are dissipated in
the environment instead' of being
brought to bear at strategic points in
the cycles where they may be needed.
But the pressure of events is now
rapidly teaching us to recycle rather
than merely treat our waste products.
The lessons come from many areas of
activity. One case where efficient
recycling is mandatory is that of
prolonged space travel, and the
designs for the life support systems
that will- be required are faithful
replicas of the bio-geochemical cycles
of our big spaceship Earth.
Our knowledge about the biogeo-
chemical cycles and the role microbes
play in them is barely a hundred years
old and only in the last few decades
has man begun to have some quanti¬
tative notions about these cycles.
Along with this growing awareness has
come concern for the unhampered
functioning of our life support system.
Scientists now recognize that man's
industrial and agricultural activity has
reached the point where damage could
be done to the cycles by man-made
imbalances due to increasing flows
(by burning fossil fuels or by increased
industrial nitrogen fixation) or by
reducing certain flows (through the
poisoning of groups of microbes).
The efforts of the United Nations to
preserve and to improve the human
environment should therefore ensure
that a careful watch is kept over the
activities of the microbial segment of
our biological environment.
Jan Wilhelm Maurits La Rivière

