by Octavio Paz
The noted
Mexican writer
reflects
on the delicate art
of striking
the right balance
Text © Copyright
Reproduction prohibited
OCTAVIO PAZ, Mexican poet, essayist and
translator, is one of the outstanding writers in
the Spanish language. He has been Mexico's
ambassador to India, and has taught in several
universities, including Cambridge (U.K.) where
he was Simon Bolivar Professor of Latin-Am¬
erican Studies. He has published several volumes
of poetry, including 'Libertad bajo palabra'
(Liberty on parole). English translations of his
essays include 'Labyrinth of Solitude ' (1961),
'Claude Lévi-Strauss: An Introduction' (1972)
and "Alternating Current' (1973). An antho¬
logy of his translations of poetry into Spanish
( Versiones y Diversiones ") was published
in 1973.
LEARNING to speak Implies
learning to translate. When a
child asks his mother what this or that
word means, what he is really asking
her to do is to translate the unknown
term into language that he can under¬
stand. In this sense, translation
within a language does not differ
basically from translation into another
language. The history of every people
re-enacts this childhood experience.
Even the most isolated tribes at one
time or another come up against the
language barrier of some alien group.
The sounds of a foreign language
may cause us wonder, anger, loathing
or amused perplexity, but soon make
us think about our own form of speech.
Language then loses Its universal
character and we become aware of the
existence of other tongues, each of
them strange and unintelligible to the
others.
In the past, translation dispelled any
doubts we might have entertained.
Even if there was no single uni¬
versal language, languages never¬
theless formed a universal society in
which everyone could understand one
another and communicate, once certain
difficulties had been overcome. Com¬
munication was possible because
*mm*ww
''((ftr.ffb.h
36

whatever the language, people every¬
where spoke about the same things.
This universality of the mind was
the answer to the confusion of Babel.
There may be many languages but they
have meaning in common. For Pascal
the very multiplicity of religions
constituted a proof of the truth of
Christianity. Translation offered the
Ideal of universal intelligibility to
counterbalance the diversity of
languages. Thus translation was not
only an additional proof of the unity of
mind but also a guarantee of that unity.
The modern age has destroyed that
security. When man rediscovered the
infinite variety of temperaments and
emotions that existed, and became
conscious of the multiplicity of customs
and institutions in the world, he
stopped seeing himself In other men.
Until that time the savage had been
an exception that had to be eliminated
through conversion or extermination,
by baptism or by the sword. The
savage who made his appearance In
the eighteenth-century salons was a
new type of creature. Even when he
spoke the language of his hosts to
perfection, there was a residual
strangeness about him. He was not
a candidate for conversion but a sub-
Below, detail of
" Metamorphosis II. 1940 ".
a work by the well-known
Netherlands engraver
Mauritz Cornell's Escher.
In this masterly feat of graphic
transformation, the artist
imperceptibly changes bees
into birds by way of fish.
Opposite page, the same
engraving reversed.
i
Photo © Haags Gemeentemuseum, The Hague
37

Velazquez Goya
kject for dispute and criticism. The
'originality of his judgements, the
simplicity of his customs and the very
violence of his emotions were proof of
the folly and vanity, if not the infamy,
of baptism and conversion.
Then things were reversed. The
religious search for a universal identity
gave way to an intellectual curiosity
anxious to discover differences that
were no less universal. Strangeness
ceased to be a deviation and became
exemplary In a paradoxical and
revealing way: the savage now rep¬
resented civilized man's yearning for
the past, his alter ego, his lost half.
Translation reflects these changes.
It is no longer an operation that tends
to prove the ultimate similarity of men
everywhere, but has become the
vehicle of their individualities. For¬
merly its purpose was to reveal the
likenesses that transcended their
disparities; henceforth it shows that
these disparities are absolute, whether
they reflect the strangeness of the
savage or that of our neighbours.
A remark made by Dr. Samuel John¬
son while on a journey expresses this
new outlook quite cogently. "A blade
of grass is always a blade of grass,
whether in one country or another,"
he said. "Men and women are my
subjects of inquiry; let us see how
these differ from those we have left
behind."
Two meanings are implicit in
Dr. Johnson's observation and they
both foreshadow the twofold path that
the modern age was to take. The first
concerns the separation between man
and Nature, a separation that would
later turn into an antagonistic relation¬
ship and a struggle between them,
with man considering that his mission
was no longer to save himself but to
dominate Nature. The second im¬
plication has to do with the separation
between man and man. The world
ceases to be one world, an indivisible
totality. It Is split into Nature and
Culture, and Culture Is broken up Into
cultures.
So we have a multiplicity of
languages and a multiplicity of
societies. Each language constitutes
a way of looking at the world, and
each civilization is a world in itself.
The sun that the Aztec poem glorifies
Is different from the. sun the Egyptians
worshipped, even though the astro¬
nomical body is the same.
For over two centuries philosophers
and historians, and now anthropol¬
ogists and ' linguists, have been
accumulating proof that the differences
between individuals, societies and
periods are irreducible. The major
division, scarcely less fundamental
than the one established between
Nature and Culture, is that which
separates primitive from civilized
peoples. Then come the variety and
heterogeneity of cultures.
Differences spring up within each
culture. The very languages that
enable us to communicate - between
ourselves also confine us In an in¬
visible network of sounds and mean¬
ings, with the result that nations
become prisoners of the languages
they speak. Each language spawns
Its own divisions in the form of
historical epochs, social classes and
successive generations. Individuals
may belong to the same community,
but each one is isolated, walled up
alive in his own skin.
All this ought to have discouraged
translators, but it has. not done so.
On the contrary, there is a contra¬
dictory and complementary tendency
to translate more and more. The
reason for this paradox is that, on the
one hand, translation does away with
the differences between one language
and another; and, on the other hand,
it brings them into greater prominence,
because through translation we become
more fully aware of the fact that other
people speak and think in ways that
differ from ours.
In one sense the world seems to us
like a collection of differences, and in
another like a pile of texts, each one
slightly different from the one before
it, resembling translations of trans¬
lations of translations.
Each text is unique,, yet at the same
time it is the translation of another
text. No text is entirely original,
because language itself is essentially
a translation. In the first place, it
translates from the non-verbal world.
Then, too, each sign, each sentence,
is the translation of another sign,
another sentence. This reasoning may
even be reversed without losing any
of Its force and we may assert that
all texts are original because every
translation Is different. To a certain
extent every translation Is an original
invention and thus constitutes a
unique text.
38

Translation and creation,
twin operations in art and literature
Painting as well as literature offers
notable examples of the art of translation.
The famous work by Velazquez, Las Meninas
(Ladies-in-Waiting) painted in 1656 and now
in the Prado Museum, in Madrid (far left)
was used as an original for works by two
equally celebrated artists: Goya and
Picasso. About 1780, Goya "translated " Las
Meninas by transposing it from painting to
engraving. His version (centre) is now in the
Petit Palais Museum, in Paris. Picasso's
"translation" of Velazquez' masterpiece
is a bold departure from the original and
bears the imprint of his own genius.
Left, the first of 45 variations of
aspects of Las Meninas painted by Picasso
in four months during 1957.
Picasso
What the discoveries of anthro¬
pology and linguistics condemn is not
translation itself but a naïve view of
translation, or in other words literal
translation which is significantly re¬
ferred to in English as slavish. It is,
of course, possible to translate literally,
but this is not translation. It is
generally no more than a string of
words intended to help us read a text
in Its original language. As such, it is
more like lexicography than translation.
In any event, even in cases where
it is only necessary to convey the
meaning, as in scientific works, trans¬
lation always implies a transformation
of the original. Such transformation
is necessarily literary because trans¬
lation is an operation that makes use
of the two modes of expression to
which, according to Roman Jakobson,
all literary processes can be reduced,
namely metonymy and metaphor.
The original text never reappears in
the other language: this would be
impossible. Nevertheless, it is always
present because, although the trans¬
lation' does not explicitly state as
much. It refers to the original text
constantly, or else converts It Into a
verbal object that differs from it, yet
reproduces It by metonymy or meta¬
phor. Both of these, as distinct from
explanatory or free translations, are
strict forms that are not incompatible
with exactness. Metonymy is an
indirect description; metaphor is a
verbal equation.
Poetry has always been considered
the form of writing that lends itself
least to translation. This prejudice is
surprising when we stop to think that
many of the best poems in every
Western language are translations, and
that many of these translations have
been made by outstanding poets.
Some years ago Georges Mounin,
the French critic and linguist, pointed
out that it Is usually admitted grudg¬
ingly, to be sure that the denotative
meanings of a text can be rendered
into a foreign language, whereas it Is
almost unanimously held that the
connotative meanings cannot.
Poetry contains overtones, reflec¬
tions and relationships between sound
and sense. It ¡s a tissue of con¬
notations, and these are deemed un¬
translatable. I confess that this view
goes against my grain, not only
because It conflicts with my conception
of the universality of poetry, but
because it is based on a false notion
of what translation really Is.
My ideas are not shared by
everyone, however. . Indeed, many
modern poets assert that poetry
simply cannot be translated. But they
are perhaps moved by an Infatuation
with verbal material and have been
caught In the snare of subjectivity.
Language becomes a landscape and
that landscape in turn Is an invention,
the metaphor of a nation or an
individual. It is a verbal topography
in which everything is communicated
and everything is translation. Sen¬
tences are mountain chains and the
mountains are the signs and ideo¬
grams of a culture.
But the play of resonances and
verbal interrelationships, while Intoxi
cating, conceals a certain danger.
Surrounded as we are by words on
all sides, there comes a time when
we suddenly feel dumbfounded and
alienated by the anguish of living with
names instead of things. Sometimes
it even seems strange to have a name
of one's own. Federico García Lorca
wrote:
Here amid the bulrushes in the late
[afternoon,
How odd that I should be named
[Federico I
This experience too is universal.
Garcia Lorca would have felt just as
strange had he been called Tom or
Pierre or Chuang-Tzu. Losing our
name would be like losing our shadow,
but to be only our name is to be
reduced to being a shadow. The lack
of conformity between things and their
names is doubly unbearable. Either
significance disappears, or the things
themselves seem to vanish. A world
of exclusively abstract meanings Is just
as unappealing as a world of things
devoid of meaning and nameless.
Language is what makes the world
livable. The amazement at being
named Federico or Sô Jl is Immediately
followed by the invention of another
name, a name which in a sense is a
translation of the previous one, the
metaphor or metonymy which, without
pronouncing It, implies it.
In recent years, owing perhaps to
the ascendancy of linguistics, there
has been a tendency to minimize the
eminently literary nature of trans¬
lation. Actually, there is no such .
thing as a science of translation, nor W
39

>can there be, though translation can
and should be studied scientifically.
Just as literature is a. specialized
function of language, so translation is
a specialized function of literature.
But what about translation machines?
If these devices one day succeed in
really translating, they will then be
performing a literary operation no
different from that which translators
now accomplish. ' They will be turning
out literature. Translation is a task
in which, apart from the requisite
knowledge of languages, what is
decisive Is the translator's initiative,
whether this be taken by a machine
that man has "programmed" or by a
human being surrounded with dic¬
tionaries.
Arthur Waley's words are convincing
here: "A French scholar wrote re¬
cently with regard to translators:
'Qu'ils s'effacent derrière les textes et
ceux-ci, s'ils ont été vraiment compris,
parleront d'eux-mêmes.' [Let them
efface' themselves. The texts, if they
have been properly understood, will
speak for themselves.] Except In the
rather rare case of plain concrete
statements such as The cat chases
the mouse", there are seldom sen¬
tences that have exact word-to-word
equivalents In another language. It
becomes a question of choosing
between various approximations ... I
have always found that it was I, not
the texts, that had to do the talking."
It would be hard to add a single word
to this statement.
Theoretically, poetry should be
translated only by poets, but in point
of fact poets are rarely good trans¬
lators because they almost Invariably
take someone else's poem as the
starting point for a poem of their own.
A good translator does just the
opposite: his aim is to produce a poem
that is similar to, though not identical
with, the original poem. He only
departs from it in order to follow it
more closely. A good translator of
poetry is a translator who Is also a
poet like Arthur Waley or a poet
who is also a good translator such as
Gérard de Nerval when he translated
the first Faust.
The reason why many poets are
unable to translate poetry Is not purely
psychological in naturethough the
cult of self does enter into it but
functional. " Poetic translation, as I
shall try to show, is an operation
similar to poetic creation, except that it
is executed in reverse.
Every word has a certain number of
possible meanings. When a word is
combined with others to form a sen¬
tence, one of its meanings is singled
out and becomes predominant. Mean¬
ing tends to be univocal in prose,
whereas one of the characteristics of
poetry, as has often been noted, and
possibly its chief quality, is that it
retains the several meanings of a word.
In reality, this is a property of
language in general. Poetry accen
tuates it, but It is also to be found In
everyday speech and even in prose.
Critics have lingered over this dis¬
turbing particularity of poetry without
noticing that the mobility and in-
definiteness of its meanings Is paral¬
leled by another equally fascinating
particularity, namely the immobility of
its signs. Poetry transforms language
radically and in a direction opposite to
that of prose. In the one case, the
mobility of signs coincides with a
tendency to establish a single mean¬
ing; in the other, the plurality of mean¬
ings coincides with the Immutability of
the signs.
Language is a- system of mobile
signs which, to some degree, may be
interchangeable. One word may be
replaced by another, and every sen¬
tence can be put In another way
(translated). We may say that the
meaning of -a word is always another
word. If we wish to prove this, we
have only to realize that each time we
ask "What does that sentence mean?"
the answer is always a different
sentence.
Once we enter into the realm of
poetry, however, words lose their
mobility and their interchangeabillty.
A poem has many shifting meanings,
but the words of a given poem are
unique and irreplaceable. To alter
them would be to destroy the poem.
Without ceasing to be a language
poetry transcends language.
The poet, caught up in the whirl of
language which is' a constant verbal
coming and going selects a few
words, or is selected by them. He
fashions his poem by combining them
and It then becomes a verbal object
made up of irreplaceable and irre¬
movable signs.
THE translator's starting point is
not language in motion, which
is the poet's raw material, but the fixed
language of the poem. It is a frozen
language, and yet it is quite alive. His
operation is the opposite of the poet's.
He is not called upon to forge an un¬
changeable text with changing signs,
but to take that text apart, set the
signs in motion again and return them
to the language. Up to this point the
translator's work is similar to that of
a reader or critic, since every reading
is a translation,, and every criticism Is,
or begins by, being, an interpretation.
Reading, however, is a translation
within the same language and criticism
is a free version, or more exactly a
transposition, of the poem. For the
critic a poem Is the jumping-off place
towards another text, his own, whereas
the translator, using another language
and different signs, must compose, a
poem similar to the original.
Thus at the second stage the trans¬
lator's activity Is comparable to that of
the poet, but with this important differ¬
ence: when the poet writes, he does
not know what his poem is going to
be like; when the translator translates,
he knows that his poem must re¬
produce the poem he has before him.
Translation and creation are twin
operations. As the cases of Baude¬
laire and Ezra Pound show, it is often
impossible to distinguish translation
from creation. Moreover, there is a
constant give and take between them,
a continual and mutual creative
influence. The great ages of poetry
In the West, from the time of its origin
with the Provençal troubadours down
to our own day, have been preceded
or accompanied by the interweaving
of various poetic traditions. These
cross-currents have sometimes taken
the form of Imitation and at other times
that of translation.
From this point of view the history
of European poetry may be looked
upon as the history of the mingling
of the many traditions that go to make
up what is known as Western litera¬
ture, not to mention Arabic presence
In Provençal lyricism or that of haiku
and Chinese poetry ¡n modern poetry.
Critics study "influences", but this
term is equivocal. It would be better
to consider Western literature as a
single whole In which the central
figures are not national traditions-
English, French, Portuguese or German
poetrybut styles and trends.
No trend or style has ever been
national, not even the so-called
"artistic nationalism". All styles have
been transllnguistic. John Donne is
closer to the Spanish poet Quevedo
than he is to Wordsworth; there is an
evident affinity between Góngora and
Marino, but there is nothing except
the Spanish language to connect
Góngora with the Archpriest of Hita,
who in turn is sometimes reminiscent
of Chaucer.
Styles are collective and pass from
one language to another; written
works, rooted in their verbal soil, are
unique. They are unique but not
Isolated, for each of them is born and
lives in relation to other works in
different languages.
In every period European poets and
now those of the two Americas as
wellwrite the same poem in their
several languages, and each of these
versions is likewise an original and
different poem.
The synchronization may not be
perfect, but if we withdraw a" bit, we
find that we are listening to a concert
In which the musicians, playing differ¬
ent instruments and without following
any orchestra leader or score, are
composing a collective work in which
improvisation is inseparable from
translation, and Invention is closely
bound up with imitation. Occasionally
one of the musicians launches into an
inspired solo. The others soon take
their cue from him and then go on to
introduce variations, while the original
motif becomes lost in the .new
creation.
Octavio Paz
40
