sahel 3. the 'outsiders'
;£e
Ili ^
1 -J
m;'y-y
VI
* " ^| V * '"i
f - - î
*
A :V
HP9TO' Kq S
m:h *
Li L
jjr M
* wVfH
Sa
"**<ä>
^i ^U
pr-^i u .
gfv Ta ¿ah
^ 'A' ;-fOT
ill 1 1
\ " ^ "i
i"
V*-' "
'"
' J" ^
* *1éUI * -i
ta 1
»
i
»«*..** r
v
'f..:;
* '.!.'XS-i
. « *.\\>í^ *. ?* «
. V *
N«r.«.
."Xî
äfci

on the trail to progress
THE policies of the colonial
period were fraught with ideo¬
logical and practical contradictions.
For one thing, currency was "given to
the myth of the noble shepherd
Tuareg or Peul while at the same
time the authorities extolled the black
farmers.
Certain measures were taken to help
the herders by sinking wells and
building a few nomad schools, but
simultaneously their "refuge" areas
were reduced by encouraging small¬
holders servants or freed captives
to settle there or by systematically
peopling the Inland delta of the Niger
River.
A careful study would no doubt
show that an "anti-pastoral outlook"
usually predominated, and this became
even more pronounced with the advent
of independence.
In the first place, there was a
tendency to look upon the nomads
with suspicion. They were as reluctant
to accept the new institutions as they
had been the previous ones. They
seemed elusive, arrogant, undisciplined
and more Interested In their cattle
than in the territorial limits of their new
countries. In short, they were poor
citizens.
Secondly, nomad problems were
customarily viewed through sedentary
eyes. By and large, policies were
defined and then applied by people
who were under the impression that
the rains came every year without fail.
The striking feature of policies with
regard to the Sahel is the large
measure of continuity from colonial
times down to the present, except
that in the post-independence period
measures to enable the population to
survive the difficult years have often
been overlooked.
Former pastoral policies were mostly
continued after independence by the
various governments concerned and
were Implemented in the different
Sahelian countries along quite similar
lines. Wells were dug along the
nomad trails and commercial routes,
and they were equipped with pumping
stations to replace the manpower of
captives used In days gone by.
Administrative rules and regulations
for stock-raising were introduced in
some parts, defining forbidden areas
and fire-protection zones, though these
regulations were usually not respected.
Similarly, almost everywhere the burn¬
ing of grasses was forbidden but this
prohibition too had little effect.
Water-holes offer the advantage of
providing ample water, In some cases
without requiring any special instal¬
lation, and also of opening trails to
new pastures. But the herds tended
to flock more and more round such
watering places and ruin the surround¬
ing land. Over-grazing and trampling
killed off the vegetation and con¬
tributed to topsoil erosion.
Thus the water-hole produces a
desert In its own vicinity. This means
that daily food must be sought farther
and farther away, thereby increasing
constantly the distance between the
pasture and the watering point. The
option Is then either to let the herds
die of thirst amid rich grazing lands,
or die of hunger near a well.
While the drilling of wells and the
conservation of pasture lands have
had both positive and negative effects,
veterinary prophylaxis has been
undeniably successful In this region.
Cattle-plague and lung-plague have
diminished in a spectacular way. The
Interstate campaign to wipe out cattle-
plague has led to a great Increase in
the number of cattle, followed by
rational stock-farming, which has
resulted in social problems and a
shortage of animal fodder due to over¬
grazing.
It soon became apparent however
that the very success of certain
aspects of the "modernization" policies
in the Sahel was going to spell disaster.
The likelihood of failure was all the
greater because little thought had been
given to the training needed to match
the changes that were taking place.
The expansion of education scarcely
touched the northern Sahel, and where
it did produce some results its effect
was mostly to drain off the "élite".
Once these people succeeded In their
studies, they hardly ever returned to
their area of origin.
Furthermore, here as elsewhere,
what the schools proposed was a
fictitious environment, modelled on
that of the developed countries, and
they trained young people for the life
of city bureaucrats rather than for
mastery of their own surroundings.
This is undoubtedly an essential
aspect of what has happened In the
Sahel. The gradual advance of a
money economy, the drilling of new
wells and the improved techniques In
veterinary medicine all form part of
a "development" philosophy aimed at
bringing the Sahel peoples into the
circuit of the dominant economic
system, without any accurate estimate
of the real risks Involved In achieving
such "progress".
Neither before nor after Indepen¬
dence was there any attempt to ask
a number of vital questions: Who
makes a profit from the outflow of the
Sahel's production and the distribution
of certain products consumed by the
nomads and farmers of this region? ^
Harvest time
in the Sahel
The cultivation of millet plays a major
part in the rural economy of the Sahel.
Grown by sedentary farmers (photo
opposite page shows heads of millet
ready for harvest), millet is sold or
bartered for meat and milk provided
by nomad herdsmen (see also page 22).
Above, a farmer digs holes in which
to plant millet seeds. Top photo,
harvesting millet in Niger. Tall millet
stalks preserve fertility of topsoil
by protecting it against wind erosion.
21

What proportion of these profits is
reinvested in the region to its benefit,
what proportion leaves the region,
especially for Europe or else remains
in the hands of the urban population?
How, for example, should one view
the increasingly widespread policy of
encouraging the development of ranch-
style stock-breeding? The fact that
the task of "modernizing" the Sahel Is
divided between a number of different
bodies makes it quite easy to avoid
posing questions of this kind.
The environment is rarely considered
as a whole. The people are only taken
into account as one factor among
many. Technical success the rapid
increase in the numbers of the Sahel's
livestock obscures some highly dis¬
turbing facts. Remoteness, compart-
mentalization and failure to appreciate
the complexity and interdependence
of the various physical, social and
economic factors of the nomad's life
and environment have long charac¬
terized action taken with regard to
stock-raising in the Niger Bend area
of the Sahel. Efforts to develop this
area, whether taken by colonial officials
or by national leaders since Indepen¬
dence, have thus been predestined to
failure and disappointment.
The objective of development plans
has often been an increase in the
number of cattle without devoting
sufficient attention to the age-old
organization of pasture-lands, the
control exercised by the herdsmen
themselves over the number of animals
grazing on any one area and the
proper use of watering places.
Options have generally been deter¬
mined by calculating profits on the
basis of principles worked out in the
industrialized countries in response to
needs that were quite different.
While the technocrats were often
oblivious of the defects and dangers
implicit in these Sahelian policies, the
nomads and many farmers were per¬
fectly aware of them. It is not sur¬
prising that stock-breeders were loath
to accept the directives of the public
authorities.
In the Menaka region, for example,
the installation of a number of "mod¬
ern" watering spots produced a
paradoxical reaction among the nomad
herders: they would not alter their
"pastoral calendar" and even refused
Millet is the staple diet of the Sahel's
nomads and settled farmers. But a
diet of millet alone can cause severe
and even fatal malnutrition and must be
supplemented with proteins (milk
and meat). Right, typical millet
granary found in the villages of Zerma
farmers in the neighbourhood of Niamey
(Niger). The dome-shaped structure of
plaited millet stalks is raised on wooden
piles to keep out rodents and insects.
Yet grain losses from village granaries
are of the order of 5 to 10 per cent,
according to FAO experts.
22

to pasture their herds in the area
where these new wells had been drilled.
New trails were opened up in the
Gourma region by drilling wells where
there were "no customs to upset", but
"the project met with Indifference and
even suspicion on the part of the
Gourma nomads towards government
intervention in the pasturing of their
herds."
In one sense the herdsmen benefit¬
ted from what the State did, including
its health campaigns, especially through
vaccination, which brought a sharp
drop in cases of measles and smallpox.
But on the other hand, the herdsmen
see some State action as an inter¬
ference in the way they like to roam
with their cattle and an attempt to
force them into commercialization.
A fact which is often overlooked,
yet which has been responsible for the
transformation of the Sahel and Sahara
belts in the last two decades, is the
rise of speculative stock-breeding,
brought on primarily by the rapid
growth of the large coastal towns.
There are three main aspects to the
emerging trend: the proportion of cattle
In the herds has risen; efforts have
been made to increase the size of
herds more rapidly; the sale of animal
products has been greatly expanded.
Thus the Sahel, and particularly the
area in the bend of the Niger River,
has become the meeting-place for a
"backward" system of animal hus¬
bandry and a system more directly
integrated in the prevailing economic
circuit.
Most of the Tuareg practise the
first system. Their salient character¬
istics are their attachment to traditional
values, their desire to increase the
size of their herds (but not necessarily
with the idea of selling the animals)
and their preference for barter in their
business deals.
On the other hand, a market-type
system of stock-breeding is found
among the Diawambé cattle dealers,
the sedentary Songhai cattlemen and
some of the Bousous who have
become sedentary.
The persistence, among the Tuareg
especially, of an attitude that leaves
little room for contact with a money
economy does not by any means
imply stagnation or unprogressiveness
in that society. On the contrary, there
are many signs of change. "From
contact with the farmers, his neigh¬
bours and trading partners to the
south, the nomad herdsman of the
Niger Bend has learned to consume
more and discover new needs.
"Women have been the first victims
of this confrontation between two
ways of life which differ in their
approach to production and consump¬
tion. Tuareg women have the greater
share of responsibility for the running
of the household. Even when they do
not work they manage the family
budget and either provide for or decide
about daily expenses.
"To judge by the demand for jewel¬
lery, fabrics and trading-company
products, they are currently playing an
active role in the change-over now
taking place in a 'pastoral com¬
munity." (1) New consumption patterns
are developing among the Tuareg
today, largely because economic
relations have an increasingly monetary
character.
Barter has long been the practice
throughout the Sahel. Historically it
has not been very advantageous for
the small farmers since it was carried
on in such a way that they could
obtain meat and milk but could not
form herds of their own.
After the struggle between the
herdsmen and those who worked the
land died down, and the generation
of those who remembered it had
passed away, the nomads had to agree
to what they had resisted for so long:
to trade off their heifers for sacks of
millet or maize and allow the farmers
to build up their own livestock.
Thus the Tuareg lost their virtual
monopoly over cattle-raising, and in
many places the sedentary folk were
the ones who henceforth set the terms
of exchange. In this way money came
into general use and caused a break
with the old system of barter.
Everyone living in the Sahel area,
for that matter, has felt the effects of
a trading economy ,and the system of
setting aside part of the agricultural
production. This fraction of the herd
and harvest which must be sold in
order to pay taxes and purchase such
goods as tea, sugar, cloth, blankets,
etc. is constantly increasing.
Most of the Sahelian peoples have
suffered from the depreciation in value
of livestock and millet in relation to
taxes and manufactured articles; the
nomads have watched their livestock
depreciate in relation to the price of
millet. Thus the nomads are subject
to a twofold exploitation: first, when
they pay taxes and buy certain
imported goods, and second, when
they trade their animals for millet.
However, this type of exploitation
scarcely affected the nomads' particu¬
lar way of life as long as climatic
conditions were normal. In addition,
modernization encouraged some in¬
crease in the number of livestock, and
this compensated to a small extent for
the deterioration of terms of trade.
But the growth of a money econ¬
omy introduced into Sahelian life
factors whose effects were to boost
trade and draw off profits more
systematically from the herdsmen's
resources.
The increase in the circulation of
money and the possibility of organizing
trade networks over long distances,
based on livestock which could be
(1) Ba Sayon Fofana. "L'élevage bovin
dans la boucle du Niger." (Cattle raising in
the Niger Bend). Faculté des Lettres et
Sciences humaines, Rouen, France, March
1974.
(2) Yveline Poncet. "La sécheresse en
Afrique Sahéllenne." See footnote page 11.
bought for "reasonable prices" were
to encourage some livestock-dealers
to venture as far as the seasonal
refuges and trails used by the nomads.
These new networks appear to have
been operating for just over ten years.
From 1962 to 1967, for example,
"livestock traders from the upper delta
of the Niger travelled north into the
Gourma, where they settled along
the river." (1) These traders were
mainly Diawambés, traditional livestock
dealers, along with some Sarakolés.
They all quickly adapted to the special
conditions of sedentary livestock
rearing in the Niger valley.
One result of this intrusion by new¬
comers has been an urgent demand
for paid herdsmen, either specialized
or unskilled, in the livestock-rearing
areas of the Niger Bend. More and
more shepherds, from the Bobo and In
some cases the Sarakolé peoples, are
receiving money for their work.
The emergence of new types of
relations between "antiquated" stock-
breeding and speculative stock-
breeding, and new forms of exchange
relations, have led to keener compe¬
tition for land in the Sahel.
First of all, there has been the
movement of black farmers into the
dry agricultural area. They need more
land not only because they double in
population every thirty years, but also
because in addition to their sub¬
sistence crops they cultivate ground¬
nuts and cotton.
But it might well be asked whether
or not this extension of the cultivated
area has to a large extent been
wasteful. "Even before the drought
reached alarming proportions, farmers
were becoming increasingly careless
about cultivating their fields: techniques
were being abandoned or neglected;
the tradition of organizing mutual aid
by farmers was disappearing; and
migrants who were supposed to return
during the season to cultivate their
land did not always do so. All the
evidence indicates that the farmers
were cultivating areas that were too
large, and doing it badly." (2)
The pioneer belt is not only being
occupied by farmers from the south,
however, and by villages which were
already there and have expanded. In
the intervening areas that remain, the
Bousous have set up their huts and
tents and are tilling the soil exten¬
sively. They are able to live on a bit
of grain, wild fruits and plants, and
when they have a few animals, from
the produce of this livestock. In any
case, the nomads and transhumant
herdsmen do not have such free
access to the stubble and fallow fields
as they once did.
What is still more serious for the
herders is the closing off of areas
where water is available. These areas
have either been fenced off with
hedges to protect alluvial crops culti¬
vated in the vicinity of pools, river
banks and basins that have been more
or less developed, or they are being t
23

K absorbed by the expanding cultivation
of rice.
Places which are still accessible to
the herds are quickly over-grazed. The
grass disappears and it is hard to
revive it. Villagers are Increasingly in¬
clined to deny the herders access to
refuge areas, and the leaner their har¬
vest, the more reluctant they are to
tolerate strangers in the vicinity.
Thus it is difficult for the nomads to
move from place to place with their
animals and they find themselves
partly excluded from the best areas.
"Cultivation of irrigated land is being
increased to the detriment of pastures.
This Is confirmed by such signs as the
increasing number of clashes between
stock-breeders and farmers over sea¬
sonal grazing grounds and by the much
shorter time spent by livestock In the
valley." (1)
These restrictions and the gradual
pushing back of the herdsmen create
new problems. Some of the nomad
groups have been forced to migrate
farther to the north. It is estimated that
from 1940 to 1970 the northernmost
limit of the area traversed by the Peul
nomads shifted upwards from the 15th
parallel to the 18th, a distance of more
than 200 km.
This drive northward has been made
with Bororo zebus tawny cows with a
high hump and horns in the form of
a lyre which is the breed these herds¬
men prefer, though at this latitude it is
slightly outside its normal ecological
setting since it is heavier and less
resistant than the Azavaq cows raised
by the Tuareg.
Furthermore, the Peul herds are
largely made up of cattle, whereas the
Tuareg herds are more diversified and
thus take better advantage of pasture-
lands, because sheep and goats can
graze on plants that cattle leave be¬
hind. It is not surprising therefore that
the Bororo livestock has suffered more
from the effects of exposure to pro¬
longed drought.
In any event, the introduction of this
specialized breed has placed an ad¬
ditional strain on the already over¬
worked pastures and has also led to an
excessive consumption of resources,
particularly wild cereals which might
have served to feed human beings had
the livestock not got to them first.
Naturally, this intrusion has brought
about conflict with the Tuareg in the
area. The most serious consequence
of the expansion of the sedentary
people and the nomad's northward
thrust has been the upsetting of the
traditional use made of grazing ranges
and watering points. On the one hand,
in the southern part of the Sahel and
in the refuge areas, newcomers have
appeared with livestock whose num¬
bers regularly increase ; on the other,
(1) Ba Sayon Fofana. "L'élevage bovin
dans la Boucle du Niger."
various groups of the nomads them¬
selves are encroaching on pasture-
land which is not traditionally theirs.
Customs and agreements regarding
the use of routes and wells "are disap¬
pearing under the combined pressures
of new cattle-owners and the State's
re-allocation of pasture-lands." (1)
Groups which had dug their own wells
and managed them have now had to
relinquish control over the organization
of their grazing land. After being dis¬
possessed politically, they are now
being dispossessed economically, and
this has created particular hardship for
Tuareg families.
One extremely serious matter is the
fact that a well may be drilled for
anyone who requests It. This does
away with all control by the traditional
assemblies and territorial chiefs, while
at the same time the "modern" regu¬
lations and laws are not enforced very
strictly. In reality, the cattle-raisers'
geographical freedom of movement is
what leads to the disorganization of
the pasture lands.
The authorities did in fact attempt to
replace this custom with other regu¬
lations. But in most cases their move
was not well received by the stock¬
breeders.
Nevertheless, after the first few
years of drought, numerous herders
changed their attitude. Rather than be
totally excluded from some areas, they
sometimes preferred to abide strictly
by the decisions that had been taken.
Yet even if, at that stage, an attempt
had been made to reorganize the Sahel
region, it would already have been too
late.
The determining factor here which
is the result of irregular rains is the
shortening or disappearance of the
period of active plant growth. Thus
certain grasses that need large
amounts of water adapt to drought
conditions but put forth one or two
blades instead of five or six. Vast
areas have completely lost their grassy
carpet and the soil Is painfully dry.
The average length of the Senegal
acacia leaf decreased from 34.3 mm in
1971-1972 to 24.7 mm in 1972-1973.
Fruit production has shown an even
greater decline : only one tree out of
six is bearing fruit two years in a row.
Still more alarming was the death of
a large percentage of trees and shrubs
In 1972-1973. Over half the Senegal
acacia trees died off in that period.
The drought has had harmful conse¬
quences, but the Sahel has also been
badly damaged by the herders who
have had no scruples about destroying
or mutilating the remaining bushes and
trees of the region in the hope of
saving their animals.
These clumps of trees and thickets
have had an extremely important func¬
tion in the Sahel. For one thing, they
formed tiny refuges that fostered the
growth of plant and small animal life,
and from which both could spread and
recover the intervening ground. They
also offered shade to the young
domestic animals and protected the
herders themselves from the torrid sun.
Cattle-raisers have suffered untold
hardships from the drought. A succes¬
sion of lean years up to 1972 debilitated
the livestock and contributed to a higher
mortality rate.. Farmers were obliged
to cut into the reserves that they kept
for their subsistence or for sale.
Then came 1973 with its sparse and
badly-timed rains. Dry crops gave a
poor yield and irrigated ones did not
produce what had been expected,
since the large rivers, as well as small
lakes and ponds, did not receive
enough water to overflow their banks
and allow the usual alluvial planting.
Pastures are indeed vanishing. Con¬
trary to what normally used to happen,
sheep and goats are now competing
with cattle for the same grass and the
same brush. Many wells and ponds
are drying up. The reduction or disap¬
pearance of surface water has a direct
effect on the herders and farmers
because this Is the water that is most
readily accessible to them and that
they can use with the techniques and
devices at their disposal.
It is at the group level however that
the breakdown of the environment has
been having its most dramatic impact.
The nomads, as we have seen, had
adapted to their arid surroundings by
moving from place to place and using
the meagre resources that they
encountered along the way.
The settlers adapted by using the
available water to best advantage, by
trying to reduce risks to a minimum
through their system of cultivation, by
storing several years' supply of grain
for their own consumption, and occa¬
sionally by trading with the nomads.
It was by dint of such expedients that
the Sahelian peoples were able to
protect themselves from the constant
threat of famine.
This is no longer the case. The herds
have grown, and extending the nomad
range has not sufficed to provide the
cattle with minimum food requirements.
Wherever a bit of hay is still to be
found, it is often far from the watering
points whose immediate vicinity has
been laid completely bare. Nomadism
has thus ceased to play its time-hon¬
oured role in the Sahel.
Farmers, on the other hand, have
been able to maintain their traditional
system of agriculture, but crops such
as peanuts and cotton have been intro¬
duced into the southern Sahel and
have progressed dangerously towards
vulnerable areas where they are upset¬
ting the old practice of crop rotation.
By 1972 and 1973 the deterioration
of the Sahelian environment and the
displacement of the northern Sahel
societies had entered a virtually irre¬
versible phase. It became evident that
the herds had grown too large.
In 1972, the cumulative effects of
24

previous bad years caused a disparity
between the size of the flocks and
herds and the extent of the remaining
pasture land which was this time irre¬
mediable.
The press of cattle round certain
wells was so great that they dried up.
The distance between watering points
that had not run dry, and between
these and grazing areas that could still
be used, increased to such an extent
that the weakened, thirsty beasts could
scarcely cover It. And by now the
refuge areas, too, were falling in their
function.
But how large were the herds when
the Tuaregs decided to undertake their
exodus? Was their size really that Im¬
portant? Perhaps the fact that nearly
all the horses and two-thirds of the
asses had died off was not so serious.
What alarmed the herdsmen more than
this was the loss of over half of their
camels and goats, along with 40 per
cent of their cows.
In addition to these numerical losses,
the value of livestock is dropping from
day to day. Cattle products were
already depreciating as compared
with the produce of the settled peoples.
Exchange rates plummeted and the
herders were the losers. After three
years of cereal-crop failure an 80 kilo¬
gramme sack of millet was selling at
the town of Gao, In April-May 1972, for
between 5,000 and 20,000 Malian
francs, whereas a cow was worth only
1,000 Malian francs, a heifer 3,000 and
a calf 450.
Three words water, pasture, millet
sum up the whole basis of life in the
Sahel. Drawing on reserves of grain,
farmers are better placed than
nomad herdsmen to weather periods
of scarcity and even serious drought.
Centre photo, a Hausa villager in Niger
grinds millet in the shadow of a
thatched hut (right of photo);
cylindrical granaries topped with
straw (left of photo) are stocked with
millet for the dry season. Even in
drought-free periods, the nomad faces
the uncertainty of water supplies.
Photo right, taken before the
disastrous years of 1973-1974,
shows Tuareg herds waiting near a
well for their turn to drink. Top photo,
efforts are now being made to
re-seed Sahel pastures that became
completely barren and eroded.
25
