llpí*af§ÉHEÉra ' ^-'«iSS
r *;
Photographs on this page illustrate one of
Nature's surprising tricks. The smiling face,
above, and the phrase Have a happy day
are not the work of an artist. Astonishingly,
both are formed from natural shapes taken
by genetic material in large bacteria (bac-
teroids) found in swellings on the roots of
a peanut plant. Examining the plant's root
tissues under a powerful electron-micros¬
cope, scientists at the applied biochemistry
laboratory of New Zealand's Dept. of Scien¬
tific and Industrial Research, in Palmerston
North, were intrigued to find how often
genetic material in these bacteria showed
up in the forms of letters of the Latin alpha¬
bet. From micrographs of these letter shapes
microbiologists Alan S. Craig and K.L. Giles
pieced together Have a happy day . Micro¬
graph, right, shows the type of bacteria in a
single cell of a peanut plant root, in which
the "genetic" letter s of the alphabet (arrowed)
showed up, among many other shapes.
V fe AWA P PW AW
.
<?im**£:
r-
./ 3i m
%*SF\
i
v «, -
fc¡
H*í:
'-. i?
¥'
. -<i<-'
í«
'¿
(
'T- ' %.x- 3&
éri
=M
Xj
&2&
m
-?*. - 3 m
i*
/- .'a
m
X'«
*#
-"'iñ
«
0
Photo ( Dept. of and Industrial Research, New Zealand.

MA, VOWL
.A
THE
NEW
WORLD
OF MICROBIOLOGY
by Elie L. Woilman
ELIE L. WOLLMAN, French geneticist and
researcher. Is Assistant Director of the Pas¬
teur Institute in Paris. His research has been
particularly concerned with the genetics
of bacteria and bacteriophages, often in
collaboration with François Jacob (Nobel
Prize for Physiology- Medicine. 1965). They
are co-authors of a major study, La Sexualité
des Bactéries ("Sexuality and the Genetics
of Bacteria" published in English by Aca¬
demic Press. London and New York, 1961).
IN the second half of the 17th cen¬
tury a Dutch merchant and ama¬
teur scientist, Antony Van Leeuwen-
hoek, discovered through the lenses
of his own home-made microscopes the
previously unsuspected world of micro¬
organisms. He was astounded both
by their extraordinary ubiquity and by
the extreme diversity of their forms.
Two centuries later, Louis Pasteur
was to demonstrate the part which
micro-organisms play in natural pro¬
cesses, astonishing the world by prov¬
ing that these tiny creatures were
responsible for many hitherto inexplic¬
able phenomena, some useful to
mankind such as the fermentation
which produces wine and beer, others
harmful like many of the diseases
which afflict humans and animals.
What chiefly interested scientists
for a long time were the many differ
ent effects which micro-organisms
produce. Their importance from the
point of view of public health, the food
industries and agriculture was so great
that they were studied rather in terms
of what they did than what they were.
Pasteur had himself, however, drawn
attention to the specificity of micro-
organic activity the fact that each
individual phenomenon (each disease
for example) was caused by a particu¬
lar species of micro-organisms. Hence,
microbiologists, inspired by the
example of the 19th-century German
bacteriologist Robert Koch in particu¬
lar, endeavoured to devise methods
of cultivating, isolating and identifying
the various species of microbes.
This was relatively easy in the case
of bacteria: a variety of nutritive media
and methods were developed, usually .
on an empirical basis, for studying r

SIX GREAT NAMES
ANTONY VAN LEEUWENHOEK (1632-1723), Dutch draper and amateur scien¬
tist, whose all-absorbing hobby was grinding lenses through which he exa¬
mined microbes (which he called "animalcules"). He made the first accurate
description of red blood cells and studied the composition of yeasts.
LOUIS PASTEUR (1822-1895), French chemist and biologist who has been
called the_ founder of microbiology. He proved that micro-organisms cause
fermentation and disease and was first to use vaccines for rabies. . Pas¬
teurization, a method of preserving food by heat or cold, is named after him.
ROBERT KOCH (1843-1910), German physician who established bacteriology
as a separate science. He discovered the germ that causes tuberculosis (named
after him) and also identified the germ of Asian cholera. For his discoveries
he was awarded the 1905 Nobel Prize in physiology and medicine.
ILYA MECHNIKOV (1845-1916), Russian zoologist and biologist. Won the
1908 Nobel Prize for Medicine for his discovery in animals of what he called
"phagocytes" or "devouring cells" which engulf and absorb foreign bodies
such as bacteria.
CARLOS JUAN FINLAY (1833-1915), Cuban doctor. His fundamental discovery
that yellow fever is transmitted by mosquitoes (later confirmed by the work
of the U.S. physician Walter Reed) made it possible to isolate the yellow fever
virus and thus reduce the ravages of this disease.
ALEXANDER FLEMING (1881-1955), British bacteriologist whose discovery
in a mould (1928) of a substance which he called penicillin, and which prevented
the growth of deadly staphylococci bacteria, prepared the way for antibiotic
therapy for infectious diseases. The isolation, purification and testing of
penicillin was carried out in 1939 by two British scientists, Ernst Boris Chain
and Howard Florey, who shared with Fleming the Nobel Prize in 1945.
> them. But one category of micro-
organism s those responsible for
diseases such as tobacco mosaic, -
rabies and poliomyelitis were not
visible under the microscope and could
not be cultivated in artificial media:
these were given the name of viruses.
Bacteriologists discovered that the
organisms they were studying pos¬
sessed a bewildering variety of proper¬
ties: some bacteria would only develop
in highly complex organic media, while
others would grow in simple synthetic
media.
Some aerobic b a c t e r i a would
only develop in the presence of air
and others anaerobic bacteria in
its absence; some could live in an
acid media, others in an alkaline
media, some at high temperatures and
others at low.
Microbiology thus offered an ex¬
tremely wide field of studies. From
microbiology itself and around it, a
number of specialized disciplines grew
up: virology, which is concerned with
infectious agents that can only be
cultivated in susceptible host organ¬
isms (plants, insects or animals) or on
living tissue from these organisms ;
immunology, which studies the reac¬
tions of the host to the infection;
epidemiology, which studies the dis¬
semination of pathogenic (disease-
causing) micro-organisms in nature,
the mechanisms whereby they are
propagated and the methods of
controlling their propagation; and
chemotherapy which studies the means
of combating micro-organisms, etc.
For many years microbiology devel¬
oped in relative isolation from the
other biological disciplines which were
concerned with multicellular, complex.
differentiated organisms. It was not
until cell physiology and biochemistry
developed that it became possible to
compare the microbial world .with the
rest of the living world.
Bacteria are single-cell organisms.
They are extremely small and it Is
thus very difficult to observe individual
bacteria directly or to experiment on
one. The researcher is usually dealing
not with a single bacterium but with
large populations: a scarcely visible
culture in a liquid medium may contain
some ten million individual bacteria
per cubic centimetre.
To multiply, bacteria simply divide in
two by a process called "fission".
Because of these characteristics, they
were long regarded as being outside
the field of study of general biology,
a situation which only changed in the
second quarter of the present century.
Each bacterium is, in fact, both a cell
and an organism. It draws susten¬
ance from the medium in which it
lives, grows and then divides, thus
giving birth to two bacteria identical
to the original cell. Many species can
be grown in the laboratory in sub-
tances known as "culture media" and
abundant, homogeneous cultures can
easily be obtained. It is thus possible
to follow the biochemical reactions
whereby the substances used for food
by bacteria are transformed or "metab¬
olized" and a bacterial culture devel¬
ops.
The world of bacteria, as we have al¬
ready seen, is also a world of the
greatest diversity. Species differ from
each other in their nutritional require¬
ments, in the food which they are
capable of utilizing, in the sources of
energy (chemical energy or energy
absorbed from sunlight) which they
use, in the substances which they are
capable of breaking down. All such
reactions require the presence of
biological catalysts known as enzymes, -
which are large protein molecules.
Enzymes are highly specific, each
kind promoting a particular reaction.
By collecting, crushing and fractionat¬
ing a bacterial culture it is thus poss¬
ible to isolate various enzymes, to
purify them, to study their properties
and to reproduce in a test-tube the
chemical changes for which they act
as catalyst.
In this way, it has been possible to
unravel the mysteries of the meta¬
bolic "pathways" whereby the organ¬
ism's food is broken down and the
essential constituents of living matter
are produced by biosynthesis. This
research has shown that despite the
great variety of physiological types
observed in the world of bacteria,
their main metabolic "pathways" are
basically similar to those of other
living creatures, thus confirming one
of the great concepts of biology: the
diversity and unity of the living world.
The results obtained from research
on bacteria were found to tie in with
those obtained from study of animal
and vegetable tissues. Bacteria, it
was shown, contain the same bio¬
chemical compounds as the tissues,
and enzymes performing the same
functions set off similar biochemical
reactions. Within the. extreme diver¬
sity of highly complex metabolic
"pathways" certain essential nodal
points and key «compounds were
observed.
All cells contain the same ingredi¬
ents, of which the main ones are
macro-molecules: the nucleic acids
6

PASTEUR
Left to right : Photo Museum of Natural History, Paris ; Photo Pasteur Institute, Paris ;
Photos WHO; Photo Museum of the History of Medical Sciences, Havana, Cuba; Photo WHO.
and the proteins. The nucleic acids
are deoxyribonucleic acid or DNA,
which is found in the nucleus of the
cell, and ribonucleic acids, which occur
mainly in the cytoplasm (the material
surrounding the cell's nucleus).
Proteins are large molecular struc¬
tures composed of a score or so of
amino acids. The most important of
the proteins are the enzymes which
constitute the "working parts" of the
cell. In order for a cell to grow and
multiply, its constituents must be
synthesized from the cell's food.
In this process, involving mechan¬
isms of great complexity, the food
material is broken down by means of
enzyme reactions to provide the raw
material for the synthesizing process
and at the same time the energy
needed to set off these processes.
All living things, despite their
apparent extreme diversity, thus
possess certain fundamental mechan¬
isms which are common to all and it
is due in great part to the study of
micro-organisms that this underlying
unity was discovered.
The first contacts between the physi¬
ology of micro-organisms and that of
higher organisms were made in the
1930s, through studies on nutrition.
It was then discovered that certain
substances (amino acids, purine or
pyrimidine compounds or bases, and
vitamins) were essential for the growth
of both higher organisms and micro¬
organisms.
Thanks in particular to the research
done by André Lwoff at the Pasteur
Institute, in Paris, the idea of essential
metabolites (substances indispensable
to all living creatures) emerged and
with it the idea that the organisms
that needed to be provided with these
substances were incapable of syn¬
thesizing them for themselves.
this idea was exploited ten years
or so later by George Beadle and
Edward Tatum at Stanford University,
California, in their genetic research
on a red bread mould known as
Neurospora Crassa.
Geneticists, following the discover¬
ies made by Gregor Mendel in the
19th century, had studied the results
of cross-breeding in sexually repro¬
ducing organisms peas, maize and
the fruit-fly or Drosophila. Their res¬
earch was concerned with complex
morphological characteristics such as
colour of flowers, shape of seeds,
length of wings, etc.
They had established the existence
of units of heredity or genes, strung
out along the chromosomes in the
nucleus of each cell, each character¬
istic being governed by a particular
gene. But the nature of the genes
and the way in which the genotype
(the information contained in the genes
of a given organism) governed the
phenotype (the characteristics which
appear in that organism) remained
unknown.
The Neurospora Crassa fungus can
be cultivated in a particular medium.
Strains with different characteristics
can be crossed and the results of this
crossing can be analysed quantitat¬
ively. Beadle and Tatum found that
by varying the environment of Neuros¬
pora, they could locate and identify
genetic changes or "mutants". They
exposed the mould to X-rays and
studied the altered nutritional require¬
ments of the mutants thus produced.
They showed that each nutritional
characteristic is governed by a gene,
each gene occupying a particular place
on one of the chromosomes of Neuro¬
spora. They concluded that each gene
determined the structure of a specific
enzyme which is present in the original
strain but lacking in the mutant. This
is the now famous "one gene-one
enzyme" concept which established
the link between genetics and the
biochemistry of micro-organisms, by
explaining the mechanism whereby
genes affect heredity by determining
enzyme structure.
Bacteria had until then been
considered completely outside the
realm of genetics. A culture of bac¬
teria, however, contains spontaneous
mutants which differ from the original
type in certain characteristics.
Edward Tatum applied the methods
used with Neurospora to induce
mutations and study biochemical
processes in the colon bacillus, and
isolated nutritional changes in these
bacteria which were comparable ifi
every respect to those of Neurospora.
A few years later, several mechan¬
isms for genetic transfer _ between
bacteria were discovered and 'analysed.
The positions of the genes on the
chromosomes were identified, and
bacteria soon became the primary
source of information concerning the
genetic control of biochemical pro¬
cesses in the cell.
In 1928, the British bacteriologist Fred
Griffith had discovered an extraordi¬
nary phenomenon which was to remain
unexplained for many years: when
certain pneumococci (microbes which
cause pneumonia) were placed in
contact with an extract of pneumococci.
of a different type, they acquired andp
7

, passed on by heredity certain proper¬
ties of the type from which the extract
had been
Nearly twenty years later, Oswald
Avery and his associates at the
Rockefeller Institute in New York,
demonstrated that the active substance
at work in this process is deoxyri¬
bonucleic acid or DNA. DNA is the
c'^ief material in the chromosomes in
all cells. It is found in all the bacteria
and in a large number of viruses. DNA
is the material of inheritance.
It is a very large molecule, a poly¬
nucleotide composed of six parts.
It consists of phosphate, a sugar called
deoxyribose, and four compounds, or
bases: adenine, guanine, cytosine and
thyamine.
In 1953, Francis Crick and James
Watson, two scientists working at
Cambridge University (England) built
a model of the structure of DNA
showing it to be composed of two
complementary strands, coiled round
each other into a helix. This model
accounts for all the properties which
the material of inheritance must pos¬
sess, and experience in the succeeding
twenty years has demonstrated its
validity. We now understand, for ins¬
tance, how genetic material can per¬
petuate itself unchanged from gen¬
eration to generation through the
process known as replication.
The genetic message contained in
DNA is transmitted by extremely com¬
plicated mechanisms which have been
explained, in particular, by the res¬
earch of François Jacob and Jacques
Monod at the Pasteur Institute. The
DNA is situated in the nucleus of the
cell and protein synthesis occurs in the
cytoplasm, in parts of the cell which
are rich in another acid, ribonucleic
acid or RNA.
It has been shown that the genetic
information contained in the DNA
molecule is first transcribed in the
form of a messenger RNA which is an
exact copy of the particular length of
DNA which is to be "translated". The
messenger RNA then frees itself from
the nucleus and travels towards the
cytoplasm where it attaches itself to
granules known as ribosomes (com¬
posed of RNA and proteins). When it
comes in contact with the ribosomes,
the messenger RNA is "translated"
into a specific protein.
The processes of genetic transcrip¬
tion and translation are governed by
complex mechanisms and controlled
by delicate regulating systems resem¬
bling those used in electronic circuits.
According to environmental con¬
ditions or, in the case of higher organ¬
isms the specialization of the cells
and tissues, everything depends on
whether a particular biochemical reac¬
tion occurs or does not occur, whether
or not a particular enzyme is synthes¬
ized, and whether or not a particular
gene functions.
For this reason, in addition to the
genes which provide the code for the
structure of enzymes, there are genes
which intervene at various levels of
the metabolic circuits to adjust and
regulate them.
So far we have spoken mainly
about bacteria, but we should also
take a brief look at the vast world of
viruses. For many years, viruses were
best known for the effects they pro¬
duced, and particularly as the agents
of diseases in plants, insects and
animals, including man.
Viruses are the simplest of living
things. They can produce identical
copies of themselves indefinitely, but
can only reproduce inside a host cell.
A virus is not itself a cell: it contains
only one nucleic acid which carries
its genetic information, in certain cases
only DNA, in others RNA. Not itself
possessing the necessary mechanism
for reproduction, the virus must use
that of the host cell. Its identity and
continuity are ensured by the nucleic
acid which is reproduced only by the
host cell.
Much of our present knowledge of
viruses, particularly with regard to
genetics, is due to research which has
been carried out on bacteriophages,
the viruses which infect bacteria.
In some cases, the bacteriophages
multiply within the bacteria which they
infect and destroy. Others behave
differently, possessing the remarkable
property of being able to integrate with
the genetic material of the host bac¬
teria, which in this case is not killed:
the DNA of the virus works its way
into the DNA of the host cell chromo¬
some.
The affected bacteria, known as
lysogenic bacteria, produce their own
genetic material and that of the virus
too, which in this state is called a
provirus. Sometimes, as the result of
a mutation, the provirus becomes
defective; it can no longer develop
into the infectious virus and continues
to reproduce itself as a provirus.
Certain viruses of animals are
known to be capable of causing can¬
cers. In this case, as with bacteria,
the nucleic acid of the virus integrates
with a chromosome of the host cell,
transforming it into a malignant cell.
It is not known whether any cancers
in human beings are caused by viruses,
but it is feasible that, as in the case of
lysogenic bacteria, some cancers may
be due to the action of proviruses.
The use of cell cultures has led
to great progress in modern virology.
Since cells can be grown in a culture,
it is possible to employ the methods
which have already been successfully
used in research on bacteria and bac¬
teriophages.
Immunology, the study of micro¬
organisms and other microscopic
substances that provide immunity from
disease, came into being as one of
the branches of microbiology and
infectious pathology.
When an animal organism is infected
by bacteria or viruses, defence
mechanisms come into operation
which protect it against reinfection.
These mechanisms of resistance to
infection, however, are not only subtle
and complex, but have a far wider
significance. Each species, and indeed
each individual within that species, has
an immunological identity of its own
and possesses mechanisms which
enable it to distinguish between the
materials of which it is constituted and
substances which are foreign to it.
A foreign substance may be an
infectious agent, a substance ori¬
ginating from another species, or even
the blood or an organ of an individual
of the same species.
Even without a detailed description
of the complex mechanism of the
immune reaction, it should be clear
that this reaction can be beneficial
"when it protects the individual against
infection and that it can also be harm¬
ful when it results in such effects as
allergies (adverse reactions of the
body) allergic reactions during blood
transfusion or the rejection of an organ
transplant.
Microbiology has thus made a very
important contribution to our under¬
standing of the living world. Thanks
particularly to the close collaboration
between geneticists and biochemists,
it has been possible to discover the
basic unity of the fundamental mecha¬
nisms governing the functioning of all
living things.
This idea, which was implicit in the
theory of evolution enunciated by
Darwin rather more than a century
ago, is now backed up by an impres¬
sive array of data. The revolution
which this has brought about in biology
can only be compared with that which
occurred in the physical sciences a
quarter of a century earlier as a result
of the successes achieved in atomic
physics.
This new approach to biological
phenomena, which consists in ana¬
lysing them in terms of the structure
and function of the chemical com¬
pounds involved, has been given the
name of molecular biology. After the
outstanding successes achieved in the
study of the simplest of organisms,
bacteria and viruses, the concepts and
methods of molecular biology are
now being applied throughout the
fields of biology and medicine.
Elle L. YJoilman
