VOICES
FROM BEYOND
THE ATOM
On these pages we present eyewitness accounts by
two Japanese of the destruction of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki by atom bombs in 1945. The texts are
passages from a book published in the Federal Re¬
public of Germany in 1961. Entitled Die Stimme des
Menschen (The voice of mankind) by Hans Walter
Bahr (R. Piper and Co. publishers, Munich), it is an
anthology of letters from all parts of the world writ¬
ten between 1939 and 1945 by men and women who
lost their lives as a result of the Second World War.
Texts © Copyright - Reproduction prohibited
LETTER FROM NAGASAKI
by Takashi Nagai
born in 1908, professor at the
Nagasaki Faculty of Medicine
D Nagasaki 1945
IRECTLY after the bomb exploded, the reaction of
those who could still move was either to remain
where they had been at the time of the explosion or to flee
immediately. Those who stayed where they were either
to help injured friends or to try to save their apartment,
office or factory were quickly hemmed in by the flames
and perished along with those they had wanted to save.
When the fire came closer, we took refuge on the hill near
our hospital. In this way my neighbours and I escaped
death by a hair's-breadth...
Getting through to the hillside was like forcing one's
way through a white-hot jungle. Huge flames crackled all
round us: they rose high above our heads, darting back
and forth and changing direction with the wind, so that
showers of sparks rained down on us. Here and there
we came across medical students and nurses lying on
the ground. We picked them up and carried them a
little further up the hill, out of reach of the fire. All the
time I was urging those around me to move faster.
I had a gash in the right temple and was losing a lot
of blood. Eventually I collapsed. Professor Shirade of
the surgical department tended my wound and hastily
stitched it up. For a few' moments I lost consciousness.
When I came to, I found that I was lying in the grass beneath
the billowing eddies of the atomic cloud. I was suffering
terribly from my wound and had to grit my teeth to
overcome the pain. Then I began to think about my wife.
If she were still alive, I told myself, she would have
already joined me.
Next day, looking down from the hill behind the clinic,
I could see the ruins of my house. Nothing remained of
Urakami but a great pile of white ashes. Nothing moved,
wherever one looked, in. the clear morning light...
For us the atomic bomb was something totally unexpected.
I was in the radio-therapy room when the bomb exploded.
At that precise moment it seemed to me that not only
was the present being smashed to smithereens but that
the past had been wiped out forever and the future utterly
destroyed. I had seen my beloved faculty and all the
students to whom I was so attached engulfed in a flash
by the flames. My wife was now nothing but a little heap
of charred bones which I collected one by one in the
ruins of our house. Her remains weighed no heavier than
a parcel you might send through the post. She had died
in the kitchen.
As for me, "atomic sickness" in its most acute form
now added its effects to those of the long-standing illness
caused by my research into X-rays. This, along with
the injury to my right side, completely disabled me. By
an extraordinary piece of luck, three days earlier our
two children had been sent to their grandmother In the
mountains and were thus safe and sound.
The huge numbers of people suffering from "atomic
sickness", the many different symptoms of this affliction, the
deaths that came one after another all this was agonizing
for me just to think about, and I began to make all
kinds of plans to take my mind off these things. Never
before had I found my work as a scientist such a painful
burden. Leaning on a stick, my body covered with wounds
which hampered my movements, I began with great effort
to climb mountains and cross rivers in order to visit my
patients. I kept this up for two months. Then I was
struck down by a violent attack of atomic sickness and
had to give up my medical work altogether.
Later...
Already I have to ask people to hand me the pages
of this manuscript one by one. I don't even have enough
energy to examine anything through a microscope any
more. Fortunately I carry the object of my research
about with me in my own body.
SrvV*
18

The whole world was shocked when the first bombs were
dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Indeed, I think that
those who only heard about the bombing indirectly felt
this shock even more violently than those of us who
were directly exposed to it. People suddenly learned,
without being prepared for it in any way, that it was
possible to reduce a big city to dust in a matter of seconds.
This prospect must have caused great consternation.
If such a weapon were used on a large scale in the
future, the human race and the whole of civilization would
be doomed to disappear.
Those of us who suffered the bombing had no idea at
all of what an atomic bomb could be. I myself never
thought for a moment that the bomb meant anything
so -cataclysmic, even though I was right underneath the
mushroom cloud. I thought it was just a super-bomb, or
something similar. It was only when the cloud began to
spread out and disperse and the sunlight (which it had
completely blotted out) began to filter through again until
it was bright enough for me to see something, that I
looked around and said to myself: "It's the end of the
world".
The rest of the world cried out in horror: "The atomic
bomb must never be used again".
And yet I hear that some people do not think the bomb
is as terrible as all that, or that it must never be used in
any circumstances: "A city is never entirely destroyed...",
they say. "There are always some survivors... Radio¬
activity disappears in time... It's only a new weapon, more
effective than any used before..."
More effective!... What do they know about it, the people
who talk like this?
Takashi Nagai
(Dr. Takashi Nagai died in 1951
from the effects of the atom bomb explosion.)
LETTER FROM HIROSHIMA
by Tamiki Hara
born in 1905 in Hiroshima
Hiroshima, August 1945
I got up about eight o'clock on that morning of August 6,
1945. The previous evening two air-raid warnings had
sounded, but no bombs were dropped...
Suddenly I received a blow on the head and everything
went dark in front of my eyes. I cried out and threw up
my arms. In the obscurity all I could hear was a sound
like the roar of a great storm. I couldn't make out what
was happening. Even my own cry seemed to have come
from someone else.
Then things around became visible again, though not very
clearly at first, and I had the feeling I was at the scene
of some great catastrophe. Behind the dense clouds of
dust a single patch of blue appeared, soon followed by
more and more.
Little flames began to shoot out of the building next
door a storage depot for pharmaceutical products. It
was time to get away from there. Along with K., I made
my way across piles of debris.
Billowing clouds of smoke were rising from the ruins
of houses. We reached a place where the heat from the
CONTINUED PAGE 32
HIROSHIMA 1945: a pencil drawing showing the horror of
Hiroshima by an American artist, Standish Backus, Jr.
Drawing courtesy of U.S. Navy Combat Collection, reproduced from
(World War II) by James Jones, Grosset and Dunlap, New York, 1975

LETTER FROM HIROSHIMA (Continued from page 19)
flames was unbearable, and then we found another street
which took us to the Sakai bridge. The crowds of refugees
making for this spot were getting bigger all the time. I
began to walk towards the Izumi palace. Bushes trampled
underfoot by those In flight had formed a kind of causeway.
Nearly every tree had been decapitated.
At first everyone had thought that only his or her house
had been hit. It was only when one came outside that
one saw that everything had been destroyed. And yet,
although every building had been demolished, there was no
sign of the craters usually made by bombs. On the other
bank of the river, fires which had seemed to be dying down
sprang up again more fiercely than ever.
Suddenly in the sky above the river I saw a mass of
air of extraordinary transparency sweeping upstream. I
hardly had time to shout "a tornado", when a terrifying
wind was upon us. Bushes and trees began to shake
madly; some were uprooted and tossed into the air from
where they shot down like arrows on to the grim chaos
below. It was as though the image of some fearful inferno
was being projected over the earth.
A moment after the whirlwind had swept past, a kind of
twilight overshadowed the sky. Just then I met my elder
brother. His face looked as If it were covered with a thin
film of grey paint. The back of his shirt was In shreds,
revealing a huge wound that resembled a sunburn.
As we went in search of a boat along the narrow quay
beside the river I sew many people who were completely
disfigured. They were everywhere along the river, their
shadows silhouetted against the water. Their faces
were so terribly puffed up that it was difficult to
distinguish men from women. Their eyes were mere slits
and their lips were monstrously swollen. They were nearly
all dying and their injured bodies were stripped of clothes.
As we passed close to them some called out to us In weak,
barely audible tones: "Give me a little water", or "Please
come and help me".
An agonizing cry pulled me up short. The naked body
of a young man was lying in the river and a few feet away,
crouched on a step, were two women. Their heads seemed
to have swollen in size by half again and their features
were pitifully deformed. It was only by their long hair,
half burned away, that I recognized them as women.
At last we found a little boat and rowed across to the
other side. It was almost dark by the time we reached
the bank. Many people seemed to have been injured on
this side of the river, too. A soldier squatting by the-
waterside asked me to give him a little hot water and
then, leaning on my shoulder, he walked painfully across
the sand. "We'd be better off dead", he said abruptly.
I silently agreed and at that moment, without exchanging a
single word, I knew we both felt the same ungovernable
rage at the senselessness of what lay around us.
A man with an enormously swollen head ravaged with
burns sat at a table drinking hot water from a tea cup.
His face might almost have been made out of black soya
seeds. His hair had been cut off in a straight line on
a level with his ears. Later, when I had seen more burn
victims with their hair like this, I realized that below the
brims of their hats it had all been scorched away.
As darkness fell, the scene became even more hellish.
Everywhere people were calling for water.
Suddenly there was an air-raid warning: somewhere a
siren must have escaped damage. Its screaming rent the
night air. Downstream the flickering glow of the flames
showed where the city was burning.
In the temple district, many badly injured people were
lying everywhere on the ground. There was not even
a tree or a tent to give them shade. We built ourselves
a roof by propping some flimsy boards against a wall and


then crawled underneath. Six of us were crammed into
this tiny space for 24 hours. Two metres away stood a
cherry-tree on which a few leaves still survived. Under
this tree two school-girls had collapsed. Their faces were
scorched and blackened and their skinny backs were
exposed to the sun. They begged for a little water. They
had come to Hiroshima the previous day to help with the
harvest and had thus become two more victims of this
terrible calamity.
The sun was now setting-
Even before sunrise we heard all around us the sound
of prayers; here people seemed to be dying one after the
other. The two schoolgirls died just as the sun came up.
Towards noon there was another air-raid warning. A
droning sound could be heard in the sky. All the time
people were dying and nobody came to remove the corpses.
Helpless and bewildered, the living wandered among the
dead.
By now we could see the devastated main streets. An
empty grey expanse stretched out beneath a leaden sky.
Only streets, bridges and the branches of the river were
still recognizable. In the middle of it all were hideously
mutilated and swollen bodies. Here hell had become a
reality.
Everything human had been obliterated. The faces of
the dead all looked alike, as if wearing an identical mask.
Pain made the limbs of the dying jerk in spasms, in
curiously rhythmic movements, before they finally stiffened
in death. Kilometres of cable and countless fragments of
the poles which had carried them were strewn about,
twisted and tangled. Looking at a tram which had been
upended and burned out in a flash, or a grotesquely swollen
dead horse, gave one the impression of being in the
middle of a surrealist painting.
We crossed a ruined wasteland which seemed endless.
The belt of shattered houses stretched far out into the
suburbs. It was only when we had passed through
Kusatsu that we came to green, unravaged countryside.
The sight of dragonflies in graceful, darting flight over
the green rice-fields moved us profoundly. Then we took
the long and monotonous road to the village of Yawata,
which we reached that night. In the morning we again
had to face our wretched existence. Not only were the
wounded getting no better, but the uninjured were growing
weaker each day, wasting away from lack of food.
Some days later I saw a schoolboy arrive. It was my
nephew who was later to die of his injuries. He was
at school at the moment the bomb exploded, and when
the blinding flash lit up his classroom he hurled himself
under his desk. The ceiling collapsed and buried him but
he managed to get out through a hole, with a few school¬
mates. Most of the children died instantly. My nephew
fled to Mount Hiji with his friends. While climbing the
mountain he kept on vomiting a white liquid. A week after
his arrival in the village his hair began to fall out and after
two days he was completely bald. Already the rumour had
spread that no injured person could survive if he lost his
hair and his nose bled. And yet my nephew was still to
survive for quite some time, despite his serious condition...
Towards evening, I crossed the bridge and set off across
country in the direction of the earthwork which stands on
the bank of the Yawata. A black dragonfly was drying
its wings on a rock. I bathed there, gulping in great
lungfuls of air. Turning my head I could see the foot
of the mountain wrapped in twilight, while the distant
summits still glinted in the setting sun. It might have been
a landscape out of a dream. Above me the sky was
absolutely silent. I felt as though I had only come into
the world after the explosion of the atom bomb.
Tamiki Hara
(A victim of atomic radiation in 1945,
Tamiki Hara committed suicide in 1951)
