MUSICDANCE
AND ECSTASY
by Alain Daniélou The sacred dance of the Turkish whirling dervishes
(below) : their movements as they whirl symbolize,
among other things, the rotation of the planets around
the sun. They dance with outstretched arms, right hands
raised to the sky imploring divine grace, left hands turned
downwards to transmit it to the earth. Right, illumination
from a 16th-century Persian manuscript showing dervishes
dancing to the sound of tambourines and a flute.
Photo © Paul Mauguln, Paris

Unesco-sponsored studies of different cultures
sometimes reveal the common origins of the great
currents of civilization from which the modern
world has evolved. Traditional music is a striking
example, particularly religious and ritual music
which have preserved a remarkable continuity
throughout religious, social and cultural changes.
Several recordings of religious and mystical music
were recently issued in three Unesco collections
of recorded traditional music Musical Sources,
Anthologies, and Musical Atlas produced by the
International Institute for Comparative Music
Studies (in Berlin and Venice) under its director
Alain Daniélou. These recordings are of outstand¬
ing interest since they add a new and living dimen¬
sion to the studies of archaeologists and linguists.
(See "Unesco Records", page 15). In the following
article, Alain Daniélou examines the origins, evo¬
lution and significance of some of the ancient
religious and ritual music that has come down
to us from the past.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE

ECSTATIC music and dances
date back to the earliest days
of mankind. Their aim is to create
states of mind and body In which men
and women, oblivious to material pre¬
occupations, try to enter into contact
with supernatural forces and to dis¬
cern realities beyond the threshold of
normal perception.
Such music and dancing are per-
ALAIN DANIELOU, world-famous ethno-
musico/ogist, is director of the International
Institute for Comparative Music Studies in
Berlin and Venice. He has been a member
of the Ecole Française d'Extrême-Orient
(Paris) since 1959 and consultant for
African and Asian music to the International
Music Council since 1960. General editor
and director of three series of recordings in
the "Unesco Collection', he is also the
author of many studies on comparative
music, Indian philosophy, religion and
history, including 'Situation de la Musique
et des Musiciens dans les Pays d'Orient"
(Florence, 1971).
formed not only by so-called "primi¬
tive" forest peoples but also by those
of the most developed cultures. For
the latter they offer a way of breaking
out of the rigid straitjacket imposed
by social Institutions, a possibility of
affirming the importance of the indivi¬
dual. A person who considers he is
being sacrificed to the overriding
demands of the group feels "re¬
habilitated" and uplifted through
personal contact with the mysterious
world of the spirits.
This use of sound to produce psycho¬
logical and magical effects would
appear to be one of the funda¬
mental rôles of music, perhaps even
its original function, though we tend
to forget this when considering the
aesthetic aspects of the art of music.
Yet this, indeed, is an essential
function of music and one that keeps
recurring. But we can only recognize
its characteristics if we are familiar
with the rhythmic, melodic and modal
techniques used and their correspond¬
ing dance movements.
In the ensemble of cultures spann¬
ing Asia from India to the Mediterra¬
nean the performance of certain forms
of ecstatic dances and music as a
means of communicating with the
supernatural world appears to have its
origins in a very ancient religion.
According to the Hindus, the God
Shiva created the world and all living
creatures through the harmony of his
dancing and the rhythms of his drum.
The legends of Shiva are told in a body
of texts, varying greatly as to date and
origin, somewhat similar to those of
the Bible. These texts, known as the
Purânâs ("ancient tales"), deal with a
wide variety of subjects.
The oldest sections of the Purânâs
were written at a very early date,
though they were only translated from
some now-forgotten tongue into Sans¬
krit at a much later period. According
ifi »
if
S2-S
o c
a.o-1
12
This miniature from a
15th-century Turkish
manuscript depicts a dancing
shaman of Central Asia.
Medicine-priests, shamans
mediated between the spirit
world and the members of
their community. Through
dancing they sought to enter
into contact with the world
beyond and obtain the power
to prophesy and heal sickness

to the chronology of the Purânâs,
around the 6th millenium B.C. an incar¬
nation of Shiva with the help of his
wife, the mother-goddess Pârvati,
taught men the practice of Yoga and
how to use music and dance so that
they could communicate with the gods.
Rites somewhat similar to these
seem to have played a major rôle
throughout the Indo-Mediterranean
world. An obvious kinship exists bet¬
ween the ancient religion of Crete, the
Egyptian cult of Osiris and the worship
of Dionysus or Bacchus in Greece and
Rome. Descriptions of bacchanals,
dithyrambs [songs honouring Dionysus]
and the ecstatic dances of the maenads
[female attendants] that have come
down to us correspond exactly with
dance forms still current in India today.
The Nordic peoples who invaded
India, Iran, Greece, and a large part of
Europe from the 2nd Millenium B.C.
onwards and who, in India, called
themselves Aryans, a word meaning
"noble" tried to stamp out these
ecstatic rites. But the people still clung
to them as their religion, and they re¬
appeared when the repression abated.
At about the same time, in the 5th cen¬
tury B.C., ecstatic dances and rites
once more became an accepted part
of official religion in both Greece and
India.
No doubt existed in the ancient world
that the Indian god Shiva and Diony¬
sus, the Greek god, were one and the
same. When Alexander the Great's
soldiers reached India they immediately
went to the Hill of Nysa, the sacred
hill of Shiva, to embrace their brothers
in Dionysus, the Bacchoi (followers of
Bacchus) who in India were known as
the bhaktas (participants).
There was a great revival of Diony-
siac rites in the troubled period that
saw the birth of Christianity, and these
rites strongly influenced both Orphic
ceremonies (inspired by Orpheus) and
Christian rituals. Until quite recently,
groups performing ecstatic dance
rituals were still to be found in the
Slavonic countries, In the Rhine region
and southern Italy.
Group dancing leading to ecstatic
slates is still performed in India, in the
form of Kirtana (the Song of Glory),
which is similar to the Greek dithy¬
ramb. I have watched these ceremo¬
nies in southern India. The partici¬
pants, standing in a circle and chant¬
ing repeated invocations, dance by
swaying their bodies and shaking their
heads in time with the deafening beat
of drums.
When the movements have become
automatic and almost unconscious, the
rhythm speeds up, and then suddenly
changes. This creates a shock, a dis¬
turbance which throws the dancers
into a trance. Some of them, usually
the women, are then possessed by a
spirit: they tear their clothes, roll about *
on the ground, uttering prophecies. In r
During their courting
dance, cranes march
in a circle, beating
their wings and feet
to the rhythm of their
cries. Right, young
Watusi women of
the Zaire Republic
execute the "dance
of the crowned
cranes". Observation
of nature has inspired
traditional dances in
many human
communities.

, other words, the spirit speaks through
their mouths.
The rhythms used are always un¬
even, in 5, 7 or 1 1 time. Even rhythms,
those with 4 or 8 beats, do not produce
this hypnotic effect. The process
Involved and the characteristics of
these dances are the same the world
over, in India, in the Middle East and
in Africa, for example.
Buddhism, which originally began
as a movement of moral, puritanical
reform known as the Hinâyâna (the
Lesser Vehicle), soon reabsorbed in
its popular forms the Tantric rites of
Shiva worship, including ecstatic rites,
dances and erotic symbols.
It was in this more popular form, the
Mahâyâna (the Great Vehicle) that
Buddhism spread to Tibet and influenc¬
ed the entire Far East. But while the
shomyo [classical chant of Buddhism
in Japan] contains many ritual gestures
and practices carried over from the
cult of Shiva, the ecstatic element is
completely absent.
This is not the case In the Middle
East. The Zikr or Dhekr rituals, which
are performed by Islamic brotherhoods
such as the Sufis, are directly descend¬
ed from the Dionysiac ceremonies of
Greece, whose musical techniques
they have preserved along with ges¬
tures that are practically identical to
those of India. These wonderful cere¬
monies give expression to one of the
mystical aspects both of Islam and
Hinduism.
Gatherings where the Zikr is per¬
formed are kept secret since they
demand total concentration on the part
of the participants, who must give
themselves over entirely to inspiration.
One comes across Zikrs in all the
Shiite and Sunnite Muslim countries,
in Syria, Lebanon, Egypt, Iran, Turkey,
Algeria and Morocco. They are also
performed in Yugoslavia, where the
style of the songs has remained very
close to their ancient Greek proto¬
types.
We were able to make recordings
of and issue as records several Zikrs
with the permission of the spiritual
leaders of these brotherhoods. While
these leaders are reluctant to allow
the presence of outsiders to disturb
the ceremonies, they nevertheless al¬
lowed us to make recordings of them
for the benefit of those who are inter¬
ested in these profound expressions
of spiritual and mystical experience.
Only those who are permitted
to take part in the rites of a brother¬
hood can learn the dance movements,
the head-shaking and the swaying of
the body that produce a state of
ecstasy. Yet even in recorded form,
the music and the singing create a
1 . This clay statuette of a dancing
figure, its stomach covered, with a
mask was discovered in the
Campeche region of Mexico and dates
from the 7th-10th centuries.
2. Caught in mid-step, her dress
swirling about her. a girl dances with
her partner at the feast of Apollo, the
Greek sun-god. Scene is a detail from
a 4th century B.C. vase-portrait
executed in southern Italy.
3. Jumping for joy. Today, as always,
dancing brings release from the cares
and burdens of everyday life.
14

deep impression on the listener, help¬
ing him to discover a new dimension
In the world of sound.
The Sufis, men inspired by a search
for spirituality, join together in brother¬
hoods, rejecting the comforts of city
life and practising a monastic austerity.
Bernard Mauguin, a French musicolo¬
gist, has written of them: "A great
many such groups were formed around
spiritual leaders known as Sheikhs,
in the 11th century. These groups
freely accepted a common disci¬
pline" and devotion to a ritual which
offered them a means of attaining the
supreme goal of their existence: a per¬
petual quest for perfection leading to
total dissolution of self in God (fana).
Thus were formed the great religious
brotherhoods of the dervishes (tari-
kat)... The Zikr is a formula for inward
concentration and for achieving deeper
knowledge of self... based on repeti¬
tion of the names of God."
The name itself cannot in this con¬
text be considered separately from the
rhythm of its repetition, for this alone
enables the dancers to assimilate it
into their own vital rhythms and to
identify themselves with it. This can
even be achieved through repeated
listening to a recording of the Zikr.
The aims and methods of the Zikr are
almost identical to those of certain
Tantric Yoga practices.
One can readily sense In the ins¬
tinctive impulses of modern youth a
yearning for a return to forms of
religious experience not limited to the
outward observance of social and
moral rules, but concerned with the
search for contact with the super¬
natural.
The rhythms of dance insulate man
from his material and everyday pre¬
occupations. It is through dance and
rhythm that people seeking to enter
into direct contact with the mysterious
spirit world attempt to ward off evil
influences and to create a kind of
safety zone about themselves. This
process plays a fundamental role in
both African cults and Hindu rites.
Dancing to music with a strong rhythm,
such as Rock, can also become a kind
of refuge, the expression ill-directed
perhaps, and at times despairing of a
deep-seated need, that can only find
fulfilment in a return to initiatory rites.
Through their music and dance, these
rites enable the entire being to partake
of an experience in which divine love
finds expression through the words of
human love Itself, as In the mystical
poems of the great Sufi poets, such
as the celebrated Persian classic, the
Mathnavi, from the pen of Jalâl al-Din
Rûmi.
Alain Daniélou
