DOOMSDAY FOR THE
WORLD'S TROPICAL
RAIN FORESTS ?
%ty*:
Today, faced with the pressing needs of a soaring human population,
governments are seeking new frontiers for development, and tropical rain forests
are coming increasingly under the threat of uncontrolled human interference.
Aware of the urgent need for further research on tropical forests Unesco was
responsible for establishing, in 1958, the first international research programme
in this field, the programme of Humid Tropics Research. This programme helped
to alert world opinion to the fragility of the tropical forest ecosystem.
Today, under its Man and the Biosphere Programme, Unesco is leading and
co-ordinating a vast international research effort aimed at reconciling the twin
imperatives of conservation and development.
The first steps in the conservation programme have already been taken under the
Man and the Biosphere project for "biosphere reserves" or protected natural
areas: already in Latin America, for example. Mexico is establishing biosphere
reserves in its tropical lowlands, while Brazil has earmarked large areas of
Amazonian forest in which reserves will be established.
In south-east Asia a typical pilot project on the development of swamp forest is
now starting in the Upang Delta in Indonesia. Scientists are studying the possible
impact of the large scale conversion of swamp forest into agricultural land on
the environment in general, on the nutrient cycling of soil, on flood control,
public health, on the social implications of human resettlement, etc.
In Africa, research workers are examining the possible effects of the development
of the hitherto untouched Tai forest of the western region of the Ivory Coast
In addition, a detailed state-of-knowledge report on tropical forest ecosystems,
now in preparation, will be published by Unesco with financial aid from the U.N.
Environment Programme and in co-operation with other U.N. Specialized
Agencies and several non-governmental organizations.
0fi ''7* <r
**W
Apart from the forests of the Amazon basin (right above) few undisturbed natural
tropical rain forests exist today. Most are subjected to disturbances ranging from
shifting cultivation by forest communities to exploitation of large areas for their
valuable timber. Right, five tropical forest "profiles" showing effects of different
degrees of exploitation. They are taken from a Unesco report on the Increasing
impact of human activities on tropical forests.
1. In this unmanaged forest, gaps between tallest trees are due to natural factors
such as lightning, land-slides and hurricanes etc. (at left) to selective exploitation
followed by natural regeneration (centre) and to shifting cultivation (right).
2. Several management techniques, used in conjunction with exploitation, assist
natural regeneration. New trees grow between surviving tall ones from original
forest.
3. Forest management has used several methods of artificial regeneration, including
the planting of saplings in exploited areas and cultivation of tree crops alongside
farming crops.
4. Intensive management has replaced original trees with conifers or hardwood
timber plantations and trees for crops such as cocoa, palm oil or rubber.
5. Original forest has gone; land is used for settled farming, including crop
growing and livestock raising.
16

Unless present
trends are reversed
virtually all
the world's
rain forests
will disappear
within 20 years
by Paul W. Richards
N OT many years ago the term
"Tropical Rain forest" would
have meant little except to a few
specialists in tropical biology or in
certain sections of the timber industry.
Today the position is quite different:
scientific and popular books and jour¬
nals are full of references to the
forests of the tropics to schemes
for their more intensive exploitation,
concern at the rate at which they are
decreasing and warnings of the poss¬
ible consequences of their disappear¬
ance not only for the world's fauna
and flora but for the earth's atmos¬
phere and climate, and the whole
human environment.
The mounting concern for the
future of tropical forests is now
CONTINUED PAGE 20
PAUL W. RICHARDS is Professor of
Botany at the University College of North
Wales, in Bangor, U.K., and was for some
years chairman of the British Nature
Conservancy's Committee for Wales. He has
worked in many tropical countries, including
Sarawak and Borneo, and is the author of
"The Tropical Rain Forest", an outstanding
general work on the subject. He was a
consultant on tropical forest ecosystems for
Unesco's Man and the Biosphere programme.
xTlarnftiTJat
-* -*"*- ->
17

Photo Yves Billon © Atlas Photo, Paris
The ominous sound
of bulldozers and power-saws
The peoples living in the world's tropical rain forests have learned to
cull from their environment most of their basic needs. Left, an
Amazonian Indian boy steers his canoe between huge leaves of Victoria
amazónica water lilies. Right, an African youngster crosses an
Ivory Coast river spanned by an ingeniously-woven bridge of lianas.
Today the forests increasingly resound with the roar of bulldozers and
the screech of power-saws. Above, a surveyor sets up his theodolite in
a mangled and chewed section of forest marking the advance of Brazil's
Trans-Amazonian Highway. During the construction of the highway,
running 5,400 km from north-east Brazil to the Peruvian frontier, over
130,000 sq. km. of forest (an area four times the size of Belgium) were
cut down and burned. Below, winching out a fallen giant from a
logging site in a Congo forest.
Photo © Atlas Photo, Paris
19

Photo Yves Billon © Atlas Photo, Paris
The ominous sound
of bulldozers and power-saws
The peoples living in the world's tropical rain forests have learned to
cull from their environment most of their basic needs. Left, an
Amazonian Indian boy steers his canoe between huge leaves of Victoria
amazónica water lilies. Right, an African youngster crosses an
Ivory Coast river spanned by an ingeniously-woven bridge of lianas.
Today the forests increasingly resound with the roar of bulldozers and
the screech of power-saws. Above, a surveyor sets up his theodolite in
a mangled and chewed section of forest marking the advance of Brazil's
Trans-Amazonian Highway. During the construction of the highway,
running 5,400 km from north-east Brazil to the Peruvian frontier, over
130,000 sq. km. of forest (an area four times the size of Belgium) were
cut down and burned. Below, winching out a fallen giant from a
logging site in a Congo forest.
Photo © Atlas Photo, Paris
19

W reflected, as It certainly should be, In
~ the agenda of the United Nations'
agencies. Several of them are now
sponsoring programmes intended to
Improve our still regrettably deficient
knowledge of tropical ecology.
They are also aiming to promote
the more efficient utilization of tropical
forests and above all to encourage
their conservation both as a renewable
resource for the peoples of the tropi¬
cal countries and as natural monu¬
ments which should be preserved for
the admiration and study of future
generations.
Tropical forests are an Important
part of the human heritage which
should be the responsibility of all
nations and not solely of the 20 to 30
in whose territory they happen to lie.
To explain why this is so one must first
say something about the biological
characteristics of rain forest eco¬
systems and their significance to man.
Not all tropical forests are tropical
rain forests.
In the lowland tropics, as in other
parts of the world, the natural vege¬
tation depends on the climate: tropical
rain forests tall, dense forests In
which most of the trees are evergreen
are found only in regions where
rainfall is abundant throughout the
year, often falling on the average on
three days out of every five.
Annual totals are high, often over
300 cm. But not all tropical forests
are continually wet: in regions where
four or more consecutive months are
nearly rainless there are large areas of
what are sometimes termed "seasonal
tropical forests" ; in these forests
many of the trees lose their leaves
for shorter or longer periods In the
dry season. In the mountains of the
tropics the type of forest changes
with increasing elevation but usually
up to about 1,000 metres It remains
more or less similar to the lowland
forests.
A survey carried out by the Royal
Swedish College of Forestry estimates
the total area of tropical forests in the
early 1970s at 1,456 million hectares
(equivalent to about half the world's
remaining forests) of which about 560
million are different types of tropical
rain forests.
The largest area of tropical rain
forest still remaining is in Amazonia
and the adjoining territories of South
America but there are also consider¬
able, though fast diminishing, areas in
West and Central Africa, in the island
of New Guinea, in Borneo and else¬
where.
Unique diversity of plant and animal
life. The biological characteristic which
above all others distinguishes tropical
rain forests (and to a smaller extent
seasonal tropical forests) from other
natural ecosystems is the enormous
diversity of species of plants and ani¬
mals. While in temperate forests,
whether broad-leaved or coniferous,
an area of a few hectares seldom
carries more than a dozen different
species of trees, in tropical rain
forests It is not unusual to find over
100 different kinds of trees of 30 cm.
girth or more in an equivalent area.
In the rain forest of the Jengka
Triangle in Malaysia (since destroyed)
375 tree species 91 cm. in girth and
over were found in plots covering
just over 23 hectares.
For animals the contrast between
the tropical rain forest and .other
natural ecosystems is equally femark-
able. An area of forest in Panama has
about twice as many mammal. species
as a similar one in eastern U.S.A.
Elsewhere in Central America the
number of resident bird species can
reach five or six hundred In an area
of 700 sq. km and even the tiny
biological reserve of Finca La Selva in
Costa Rica, only 6 sq. km in extent,
has 221 species. Both these totals
are much greater than are found in the
same area of forest in the temperate
zone. In tropical forests insects exceed
all other animals put together in both
number of species and total numbers.
Why tropical forests, especially rain
forests, are so rich In different kinds
of plants and animals Is not entirely
clear; several factors may be respon¬
sible. One is almost certainly age.
Fossil evidence suggests that forests
not very different from those of today
already existed in the Malayan region
and elsewhere in the tropics far back
in geological time, perhaps as long ago
as 70 million years.
Another factor may be climate:
because the tropical rain forest is
never subject to frost or severe
drought plants and animals can grow
and reproduce all through the year.
Though recent research shows evi¬
dence of quite large variations in temp¬
erature and rainfall in the past cli¬
matic changes as catastrophic as the
Ice Ages which devastated Europe and
North America in the Pleistocene
period seem never to have occurred
near the equator.
The tropical rain forest has thus
been a sort of evolutionary laboratory
in which biological changes have been
proceeding uninterrupted by major cli¬
matic disasters over an enormously
long time.
New drugs and pesticides from
tropical forest plants. For modern man
this great reservoir of species repre¬
sents a potentially valuable pool of
genetic diversity of which only a small
fraction has been utilized so far. Eco¬
nomists, land planners and politicians
in tropical countries frequently regard
tropical forests merely as a reserve
of valuable timber to be exploited
as quickly as possible either to supply
local needs or to be exported to pro¬
vide much needed capital for develop¬
ment.
This point of view is understandable
but unbelievably short-sighted. Our
knowledge of tropical plants and ani¬
mals is still so inadequate that at pre¬
sent their uses are known only to a
very small minority. Even of trees
reaching timber size only a small pro¬
portion of the species are used for
any purpose (except when the entire
forest Is used to provide wood pulp
for papermaking). Yet among the
thousands of species of trees, vines
and other plants in the tropics there
may be many producing chemical
compounds potentially valuable as
drugs or In other ways.
Flying lizards
and 'see through' butterflies
1. The world's rain forests abound with singular creatures, many of
which have developed special abilities for swinging, jumping or gliding
from tree to tree. Here, the Draco or flying lizard in a Borneo forest uses
its wing-like membranes to glide as much as 15 metres between trees.
2. This extraordinary butterfly from Peruvian Amazonia has transparent
"panels" in its wings through which the veins of the leaf behind are
clearly visible. South America has more species of butterflies than any
other continent and thousands more species have still to be identified.
3. The fluffy tarsier from the Philippines has huge goggle eyes which, in
relation to its 1 5 cm. body, are 1 50 times bigger than a man's. A nimble
forest acrobat capable of spectacular leaps, the tarsier can swivel its
head through 180 degrees.



20

A wild dioscorea growing in the
forest provides the steroids used in
manufacturing contraceptive pills and
is in fact one of Mexico's most
valuable exports. L-dopa, a drug used
in controlling Parkinson's disease,
has recently been found In the seeds
of tropical vines of the genus Mu-
cuna. These are only two examples:
how many other chemical treasures lie
hidden in tropical forest plants can
only be guessed.
With tropical forest animals the
position is much the same as for
plants. A few such as apes and
monkeys, some butterflies, parrots
and birds of paradise have a commer¬
cial value and are in fact in urgent
need of protection, but so little is
known about the vast majority that
their possible significance to man is
still totally unrealized.
Perfectly balanced forest ecosys¬
tems. Another biological characteris¬
tic of tropical rain forests which makes
their survival of special importance
to man can be summed up in the
phrase "a stable self-maintaining eco¬
system". In fact many of the world's
other natural ecosystems such as tun¬
dras, steppes and coniferous and
broad-leaved temperate forests are
stable and self-maintaining; in the ab¬
sence of large-scale disturbance by
man or major climatic changes they
would continue to exist much as they
are now for thousands or millions of
years.
In the case of the tropical rain
forest its huge assemblages of plants
and animal species have existed toge¬
ther for so long that an extraordinarily
complex system of adaptations bet¬
ween the organisms and between
them and their environment has deve¬
loped. As a result diseases and pests
never seem to reach epidemic propor¬
tions because there are so many in- .
built checks and balances. r
Drooping fronds of vegetation almost
completely hide the tree trunks in this
forest on one of the 500 islands of Fiji
in the South Pacific.
Photo C. Lenars, © Atlas Photo, Paris

* On the other hand, in artificial eco¬
systems created by man such as gar¬
dens, wheatfields and rubber planta¬
tions, damage from pests is a
continual threat and can be controlled
only by unrelenting warfare with herbi¬
cides, fungicides and pesticides.
Improved methods of managing
artificial ecosystems can undoubtedly
be devised by studying the controls
which exist In natural ones; this has
already been done in some instances,
for example in controlling the insect
pests of cocoa, and of mahogany,
teak and some other tropical trees.
We need to preserve what is still left
of the natural tropical forests because
there are certainly many more such
lessons we could learn from them.
Yet another field in which we may
be able to learn from the delicately
balanced rain forest ecosystems is
that of plant nutrition. The soils on
which tropical forests grow are for
the most part remarkably poor In nitro¬
gen, phosphorus and other elements
necessary for plant growth, a fact
which is concealed by the luxuriant
appearance of the vegetation.
The poverty of the soils is partly
due to the long-continued effects of
heavy rainfall and partly to the geolo¬
gical history. The explanation of the
paradoxical vigour of the vegetation
is that a large part of the nutrient
capital of the ecosystem is contained
in the trees themselves and is rapidly
recycled. When the leaves and dead
wood fall to the ground fungi and
other decomposer organisms quickly
break them down and the nutrients
released in this way are very quickly
absorbed by roots and re-used.
In tropical forests this recycling pro¬
cess seems to be extremely efficient
and so little nutrient is lost in the drain¬
age water that the streams flowing from
undisturbed forest areas, such as parts
of Amazonia, carry water little different
in composition from pure rain water.
Scientists working in Amazonian
forests, where the soil is often un¬
usually poor in nutrients even com¬
pared with other tropical rain forests,
point out that the whole structure of
the forest is a finely adjusted mechan¬
ism for trapping, conserving and recy¬
cling the very small quantities of
nutrient elements available to it in the
rainfall and soil.
Clearly In these days when rising
costs and diminishing supplies of
agricultural fertilisers are restricting
the growth of world food supplies,
we need to learn all we can from the
economical housekeeping of natural
systems such as the tropical rain
forest.
The collecting and conserving of
nutrient elements by tropical rain
forests is only one of the ways in
which they affect the environment.
Others, certainly of great significance,
include the effects which forests, in
common with all other vegetation, have
on the carbon dioxide and oxygen
content of the atmosphere, and their
effects on rainfall, evaporation and the
hydrological cycle generally. On all
these environmental effects there is
a regrettable lack of quantitative data
so that their Importance, great though
it probably is, can be indicated only
in very general terms.
How long can the tropical rain
forest survive? If the rain forest is
a stable self-maintaining ecosystem
which has survived the hazards of
millions of years, why is it now de¬
creasing in area so rapidly that. Its
survival for more than a few more
decades is in doubt?
Clearly the answer is that it cannot
survive the attacks of modern man
equipped with the resources of ad¬
vanced technology. Through its long
evolutionary history natural selection
has provided the forest ecosystem
with mechanisms for withstanding such
natural hazards as invasions of new
species, the evolution of new parasites
and pests, minor climatic fluctuations
and so on but selection has not pro¬
vided it with means to resist large-
scale attacks by powersaws, bulldozers
and herbicides.
To man at lower cultural levels the
forest has been fairly resistant: primi¬
tive hunters and gatherers (a few of
whose descendants still live in the
forest today) made little impression
on it and even agricultural peoples
living by shifting cultivation did not
damage it irretrievably so long as their
numbers were limited. It is the popula¬
tion explosion of the last hundred
years and the extension of advanced
technology to the peoples of the
humid tropics which has made Its sur¬
vival questionable.
At the present time the threats to
the tropical rain forest come from
many directions. The world demand
for timber Is rapidly growing in both
the developed and the developing
countries and as the forest resources
of temperate Eurasia become used up,
the pressure on the forests of the tro¬
pics increases. As a result lumber
companies financed from distant Indus¬
trial countries are clear-felling enor¬
mous areas of rain forest in Indonesia
and elsewhere.
Tropical forests are now being used,
not as hitherto, mainly to supply high-
grade hardwood timber for construc¬
tion, furniture-making and veneers but
also to provide cellulose for paper
making. Already whole tracts of forest
are being felled to" feed mills where
trees of all species are converted
indiscriminately into wood-chips which
are exported overseas to be converted
into paper: such Installations are
already in operation in Colombia and
New Guinea and others are being
planned elsewhere.
The inexorably rising demand for
newsprint is also leading in some
countries to large areas of forest being
cleared to make way for plantations
of fast-growing trees such as pines
and eucalypts which can produce
paper making material faster than the
native forest trees, though whether
their high rate of production can be
maintained through many successive
rotations remains in doubt.
Besides the rapidly increasing use
of tropical forests as a source of
wood, forest land Is increasingly
needed for food production and Indus¬
trial crops such as palm oil, cocoa and
rubber as well as for mining and
urban growth.
Plants that glow in the night
1 . A formidable array of highly-coloured fungi sprouts from the floor of the
tropical forest. Some even glow in the dark, like this Borneo fungus (Mycena
cyanophos) which gives off enough light to be photographed in the dark without
a flash.
2. Another Borneo fungus, known as a maiden's veil from its fine net-like form.
During its mature life of less than a day it gives off a strong smell, attracting
insects which feed on its sticky spore-laden cap. When the insects leave,
the spores stick to them and are carried away to grow into new fungi.
3. This handsome Malaysia forest flower is one of the more than 20.000 species
of orchids that grow throughout the world, mostly in tropical and sub-tropical
lands. The number of wild orchids is being rapidly reduced by intensive collecting.
22

ri
r
- i
V
\* \
».
The construction of air strips and
of road systems such as that now
being completed in Amazonia means
that large areas of forest which were
previously almost inaccessible can now
be easily reached by settlers and this
inevitably leads to much unplanned
and uncontrolled forest clearance.
Though the need for more food
production is evident, it is unfortunate
that much forest is still being cleared
for the production of low-yielding crops
and for non-permanent types of agri¬
culture.
It is often supposed by those not
familiar with the ecology of the tro¬
pical rain forests that they will quickly
regenerate after being cleared, or that
they can be easily replaced by plant¬
ations of useful tree species. Unfor¬
tunately this is not the case.
Land abandoned after cultivation
soon becomes covered with a tangle
of bushes and climbers which after
a few years develops into secondary
forest. But this forest consists mainly
of short-lived soft-wooded trees of
little economic value; only after a long
process of succession does this
second growth become more or less
similar to the primary forest which ori¬
ginally occupied the site.
Such evidence as there is suggests
that a long period, perhaps several
hundred years. Is required for this
process. And If the natural succes¬
sion is to take place, neighbouring
areas of intact forest are required to
provide the seeds and the associated
fauna necessary for colonization.
When forest clearance Is on a very
large scale, as in modern lumber un¬
dertakings, it is often doubtful if
enough forest is left to ensure recolo-
nization, even if this is the intention.
If deforested land is repeatedly dis¬
turbed, and especially when it is also
subject to fires, it is often invaded by
Imperata and other coarse grasses
which convert the forest Into a kind
of savanna. This is of very little eco¬
nomic value and provides a less satis¬
factory protection to the soil than the
former forest cover. Natural forests,
have been replaced by planted mono-p
Above left, a new highway rakes
through the green mass of a South
American forest, first step in a
process that may replace luxuriant
vegetation by logging and
mining sites and pastures
for cattle-raising.
23

. cultures of trees or by mixtures of
several planted species in many places
but on a relatively small scale. The
technical problems of establishing such
artificial forests are considerable and
cannot be said to have been com¬
pletely overcome.
As a result of these relentless
human pressures the tropical rain
forest is everywhere in retreat. It
might be expected that such a drastic
change in one of the world's major
natural features, and one fraught with
such enormous potential consequen¬
ces for human welfare, would have
been carefully recorded and monitored,
but so far this has not been done.
Though it would be relatively easy
to estimate forest areas on air or
satellite photographs taken at inter¬
vals of a few years, hardly any ac¬
curate comparisons of this kind exist.
In Sarawak (Malaysia), a country in
which rain forest covered about 75
per cent of the land surface In 1950,
a comparison of photographs taken in
1946-48 with those taken in 1958-60
showed a decrease of about 2 to 3 per
cent in the area of primary lowland
forest. The conclusion was that all
of this forest will have disappeared in
at most 20 years. Comparable figures
for other parts of the tropics are badly
needed and the recent decision by
the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to
give high priority to systematic moni¬
toring of the area and the rate of
decrease of the world's tropical forests
is very welcome.
Forest clearance, which In many
parts of the tropics had scarcely begun
even 50 years ago, has enormously
increased as a result of the population
growth and technological advances of
the last two decades and it is cer¬
tainly still accelerating. It cannot be
doubted that unless present trends are
changed all the primary lowland tropi¬
cal rain forest in the world will have
disappeared well before the end of the
century, except in remote and inacces¬
sible sites and a few small biological
reserves. Within hardly more than a
generation the landscape of the Malay
Peninsula, the Amazon basin and other
humid tropical countries, will have been
completely changed.
If the vast rain forest areas of the
past were to be replaced by a smiling
landscape of productive farmlands and
plantations, there would be less cause
for concern, but unfortunately It. is
probable that much of the former forest
will be replaced by tracts of derelict
scrub, secondary savannas 'and rela¬
tively unproductive second-growth
forests.
Most people would agree that be¬
cause of their ecological complexity
and their unique wealth In wonderful
and often very beautiful forms of plant
and animal life, tropical rain forests
are a precious part of our human
heritage. The loss to human expe-
24
rience would be irreparable if they
were allowed to disappear. Leaving
aside arguments about the effects of
tropical rain forests on climate and
the atmosphere, there are very solid
economic arguments why it would be
short-sighted, to say the least of it,
to allow a valuable natural resource
to be exhausted in hardly more than
the life time of a single generation.
A large part of what remains of the
tropical rain forest ought to be con¬
served, some for controlled exploita¬
tion and some preserved intact as
natural monuments or biological
reserves.
Yet it must be recognized that there
are formidable economic, political and
practical difficulties in the way of
such a conservation policy.
One of the most Intractable practical
difficulties is that of size. It has long
been realized that unless a rain forest
area is above a certain minimum size
the ecosystem cannot maintain itself
indefinitely. This is obvious in the
case of the larger members of the
forest fauna: mammals such as ele¬
phants and large predatory birds
demand much space if they are to
survive. The same is also true of many
rain forest tree species which nor¬
mally occur in very low densities, in '
some cases less than one per hectare.
It seems probable that reserves
should be measured in thousands of
square kilometres rather than hectares
if they are to be permanently viable.
Some existing reserves such as Barro
Colorado island in Panama are actually
losing species because their area Is
too small. To set aside and police
forest areas of such large size is In
itself a serious problem.
The political difficulties are no less
formidable. Most humid tropical coun¬
tries are poor and in urgent need of
foreign exchange for many social
purposes. Tropical countries, like
others, must also make their contribu¬
tion to the world's insatiable demand
for more food and raw materials. But
since the remaining rain forest areas
have at best rather mediocre agricul¬
tural prospects it would still be possi¬
ble to conserve considerable areas of
forest with little loss to future world
food supplies However, developing
tropical countries cannot be asked to
make sacrifices and shoulder burdens
which wealthier countries are not wil¬
ling to share.
The problem of rain forest conser¬
vation thus becomes one of finding
methods of international co-operation
which are practical and politically
acceptable to the countries where the
forests are found. Here the United
Nations' agencies have a part to play.
U.N. efforts to safeguard the rain
forests. The U.N. agencies most close¬
ly involved in the exploitation and con¬
servation of tropical rain forests are
the Food and Agriculture Organiza¬
tion, Unesco and the U.N. Environ¬
ment Programme. The World Health
Organization Is marginally Involved
CONTINUED PAGE 32

DOOMSDAY FOR THE TROPICAL RAIN FORESTS? (Continuedfrom page 24)
because of its interest in diseases
such as yellow fever and malaria
which are often closely associated
with forest conditions and the World
Meteorological Organization has some
involvement, because of the possible
climatic effects of deforestation.
The Food and Agriculture Organiza¬
tion has long been active In tropical
forestry, in collecting and disseminat¬
ing information, promoting forest edu¬
cation, aiding forest administrators in
tropical countries and In improving
methods of growing, harvesting and
utilizing tropical timbers and other
forest products. FAO Is also con¬
cerned with research on tropical tree
breeding and gene resources, forest
soils and other scientific aspects of
tropical forestry.
FAO activities have thus far been
mainly connected with the more effi¬
cient and economical use of tropical
forests both as producers of timber
and other commercially valuable pro¬
ducts and with the role of forests in
soil conservation and watershed pro¬
tection. More recently however FAO
has also become interested in the
conservation of tropical forests and
the wild life dependent on them. It has
helped to train administrators and
experts in tropical countries in national
park and wild life management.
Investigations sponsored by FAO
into the possible use of derelict land
and second-growth vegetation for
planting pines and other trees for
making paper pulp could give much
indirect help to tropical rain forest
conservation by diverting some of the
pressure from the remaining natural
forests to land at present almost enti¬
rely unproductive.
Unesco's main role In the field of
tropical forest ecology and conserv¬
ation has of course been In education
and research, In promoting contacts
between specialists concerned with
tropical forests and their survival.
Because lack of knowledge was, and
still is, a serious problem in this field,
Unesco's role is an Important one.
Since 1960 Unesco's main efforts
have been concentrated first on the
International Biological Programme
and then on its successor, Man and
the Biosphere. In earlier years however
Unesco was responsible for some
valuable Initiatives, notably the very
useful series of symposia on tropical
ecology beginning with the Kandy
symposium in 1956. These played an
important part in bringing together the
few and scattered experts in the field
and in encouraging further research.
The International Biological Pro¬
gramme was concerned with worldwide
natural resources and it stimulated a
considerable amount of ecological
research in tropical countries. One of
its projects specifically aimed at the
tropical rain forest was the ecological
study of Pasoh forest in Negri
Sembilan (Malaysia), one of the few
remaining accessible areas of lowland
rain forest in the Malay Peninsula.
In this project British, Japanese and
Malaysian research workers collaborat¬
ed and the results presented at the
symposium in Kuala Lumpur in Aug¬
ust 1974 gave an impressive picture
of how much the project had achieved.
The theme of the International Bio¬
logical Programme was the functioning
and productivity of ecosystems such
as tundras, grasslands and forests
under natural conditions. Man and the
Biosphere is focussing attention on the
effects of man on these same systems.
The programme is organized into a
number of projects, the first of which
is the "Ecological effects of increasing
human activities on tropical and sub¬
tropical forest ecosystems".
A panel of experts met in Paris
in May 1972 to draw up plans for this
project and to define Its scope. A
wide range of problems is in urgent
need of investigation such as the
effects of converting tropical forests
into plantations and other forms of
land use and this will involve studying
insect and fungus populations which
are or might become pests, soil chan¬
ges, the loss of species diversity and
many other subjects.
Such research necessarily involves
comparisons between natural ecosys¬
tems and artificial ones derived from
them, so it is essential that undis¬
turbed samples of natural systems
should be available for study and it
is thus vitally important that tropical
forest areas such as Malaysia's Pasoh
forest, which was used in the Inter¬
national Biological Programme, should
continue to be preserved.
The U.N. Environment Programme
has been concerned with the future
of tropical forests since its found¬
ation, and in 1974 prepared a report
for its Governing Council on the pre¬
sent environmental situation in tropical
forests and woodlands as one of the
sectors of the world environment of
critical importance.
Studying this report at its meeting
in Nairobi in April 1975, the Council
passed a number of resolutions, one
of which was to ask for a system of
monitoring the remaining tropical forest
areas and the rate at which they are
diminishing.
Among other objectives supported
by the Nairobi meeting were the en¬
couragement of research on the re¬
lationship between tropical forest
ecosystems and water, air and soil, on
the minimum self-maintaining area for
tropical forest reserves and on agri¬
cultural systems for tropical forest
areas more suitable than those at
present available. It also wished to
develop guidelines for the manage¬
ment of tropical forest ecosystems and
their "wisest use".
The United Nations' agencies can
do much to safeguard the future of
the tropical rain forest but they will
need the support of enlightened public
opinion and the full co-operation of the
tropical countries themselves.
Paul W. Richards
32
