Photo Charles Lenars © Atlas Photo, Paris

ESKIMO TRADITIONAL WAYS
MUST NOT DIE
Victors for thousands of years
over a harsh environment, the Eskimos
today face their greatest challenge :
how to preserve their identity
JEAN MALAURIE, French geographer and
explorer, is professor of Arctic anthropology and
geomorphology at the University of Paris and
professor of Arctic geography at the Ecole
Pratique des Hautes Etudes In Paris, where he
Is also director of the Centre of Arctic Studies.
Secretary-General of the French Foundation of
Nordic Studies, he is the author of over 150
scientific studies. In 1970 he produced and
directed a film version of his best-selling book
on the lile and present-day problems of the
Greenland Eskimos, "The Last Kings of Thule"
(Crowe/I New York, 1956), translated into 15
languages. His "Les Civilisations Esquimaudes"
(Eskimo civilizations) was published last year,
andhis work, "Anthropogéographie Esquimaude "
(Eskimo anthropogeography) , will appear shortly
(Plön Paris). In 1974, the French radio and TV
commissioned Jean Malaurie to make three films
on "The Eskimos Face their Destiny" in co-opera¬
tion with native organizations and the authorities
of Alaska, Canada, Greenland and Siberia.
Shooting on location has been completed in
Alaska and Canada and is under way in Green¬
land and Siberia.
N America it is expected that the
last autonomous groups of native
hunters in the Arctic will disintegrate
if not totally disappear within the next
20 years. The total assimilation of the
native peoples of the North American
Arctic and sub-Arctic during this
period is, however, quite impossible.
But the decline, already dating back
some years and the cause of serious
unrest, will only be hastened by
current mineral and oil prospecting in
northern Alaska (Prudhoe Bay) and
northern Canada, and plans to speed
up the development of Greenland's
codfishing industry.
Is the object to incorporate these
societies in the West's market-oriented
production system and turn them, as
by Jean Malaurie
Text © Copyright
far as their limited local hunting and
fishing resources allow, into consumer
societies? Or is it felt that the com¬
prehensive development of these un¬
der-developed regions presupposes a
respect for local cultures which form
part of our global civilization and
without which the world would be so
much the poorer?
Not long ago Unesco defined this
complex notion of "development" as
"any process aiming to create the
conditions of a given society's eco¬
nomic and social progress with the
help of that society's active partici¬
pation and, if possible, at its own
request."
The French economist Daniel Nat
has made the following excellent ana-
14

MODERN LIFE PLAYS HAVOC WITH ESKIMO EYES AND
TEETH. Eskimos' eyes are very well adapted to the Arctic
climate. The eye fissure is extremely narrow (photo left),
and to protect themselves against snow blindness Eskimos
wear goggles carved of wood, bone, ivory or other materials
which admit light through a narrow slit (below). But changes
in diet brought about by contact with modern civilization
have had deleterious effects on many Eskimos' eyesight.
When they lived in natural conditions on a high-protein diet.
the Eskimos enjoyed good eyesight, often spending long
periods on close work in poor light. Dr Elizabeth Cass, of the
Department of National Health and Welfare, Ottawa, studied
the eyesight of groups of Canadian Eskimos and discovered
that when Eskimo children moved to townships or settlements
where they ate starchy foods, poor in proteins, they began
to develop myopia. Starchy diets have also been found to
ravage the teeth of many young Eskimos, even resulting in
the total loss of teeth at adolescence and digestive disorders.
lysis of these points of view: "Either
we consider that a culture Is sovereign
and unique and that the material and
cultural elements which comprise it
are indivisible; or we consider that
underdevelopment englobes all aspects
of society... A people's underdevelop¬
ment then becomes, and this is the
commonest attitude, a sign of Inferior¬
ity, a sickness inherited from the
past."
The white man's first contacts with
the Eskimos in the 18th century were
sometimes violent. Quite soon, how¬
ever, the native peoples put up only
ä passive resistance, while trying to
absorb into their culture everything
practical and useful the white man
could offer them.
In reality, this superficial passive-
ness showed the immense pragmatism
of this impoverished people, their age-
old patience and their unshakeable
confidence In their destiny. Econo¬
mists have frequently misinterpreted
the Eskimo's mask-like smile. It has
been seen as a sign of eagerness to
receive aid or become assimilated,
whereas it was a manifestation, at
least until recently, of a desire to
co-operate in a spirit of self respect
and dignity.
Given this state of Incomprehension
between the agents of the dominant
society and the native peoples, it Is
hardly surprising that some quite
absurd situations have arisen.
It has actually been suggested that
the inhabitants of Canada's District
of Keewatin and Southampton Island
(In the Hudson Bay) should grow let¬
tuce or eat canned fish, that a timber
industry should be developed in a
treeless tundra, and that workshops
manufacturing felt for hats should be
set up in Cambridge Bay.
Boarding schools in northern Green¬
land provide no instruction in modern
hunting methods for the sons of trap¬
pers. With local facilities offering, for
the moment, no prospect of jobs other
than those they have done for cen¬
turies, one wonders what kind of
future these children are being edu¬
cated for. In the words of one obser¬
ver, the progressive school conceived
according to the assimilative ideas of
the white man will end up by killing
development.
Is it surprising then that the native
peoples, long uncomplaining, are be¬
ginning to grumble about the white
man's inconsistencies? "Send us back
to our lands...", they say. "If we stay
here too long we shall have lost even
the will to live." This at any rate was
the gist of what Garry Lake Eskimos,
in Canada's District of Keewatin, told
government researchers in 1962.
The missionary will probably say
that the Eskimo should be converted
and turned Into a church-goer. The
teacher will argue that everybody,
white or Eskimo, should be given equal
opportunities. He will tell Eskimo
children that they should learn English
or Danish, for every white man is se¬
cretly convinced that bilingualism will
release these people from the strait-
jacket of their traditions, centred on
the family with its intricately woven
texture of kinship and its web of rules.
For planners, the Eskimo needs edu¬
cation, training in the white man's
system and a sense of responsibility.
If current trends are not checked,
whole areas of the Arctic which have
been populated for centuries will soon
be deserted. Idle and bitter, the Eski¬
mos will drift into a few big towns
without an economic future places
like Fairbanks, Anchorage, Nome and
Kotzebue in Alaska ; Fort Chimo, Ran¬
kin Inlet and Frobisher in Canada; and
Godthaab, Godhavn, Angmagssalik
and Thule-Kranak in Greenland. Unrest
will grow among these unemployed
minorities and they will become in¬
creasingly difficult to assimilate.
The deserted plateaux of Keewatin
and New Quebec, considered too poor
in game for Eskimo hunters, will be¬
come a playground for millionaires
from southern Canada and the United
States. This is already happening.
White tourists on hunting and salmon-
fishing trips are beginning to take the
place of the Eskimo, whose status has
been reduced to that of guide. Who
knows, the demand for local colour
may soon lead to the building of Eski¬
mo villages as tourist attractions.
The governments exercising trustee¬
ship over these peoples are no longer
convinced that hunting is an econo¬
mically viable activity, although some
relatively impressive results have been
achieved. Greenland still applies a ^
policy of guaranteed minimum prices to r
15

Snowmobiles, above, are one of many modern innovations in the Far North.
These motor-driven snow scooters mounted on a caterpillar track are widely used
nowadays in parts of the Arctic, but in sub-zero temperatures, breakdowns are frequent
and many Eskimos consider that dogs are more reliable for extended hunting expeditions.
Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho. Paris
its hunting communities in the north¬
west and on the east coast, but neither
Canada nor Alaska subsidize this vital
activity of their Eskimo population.
This refusal to organize an economy
based on contracts is a measure of
the mistrust in which the native peoples
are held. The government reaction is:
"What future can they have as Eskimos
and hunters? Let's civilize them first;
then we'll see."
And yet hunting has brought excel¬
lent returns. In Its time it has made
a fortune for powerful firms like the
Hudson's Bay Company, and together
with other occupations like fishing and
reindeer rearing, It has been organized
on rational modern lines and still pro¬
vides a good income for the inhabi¬
tants of the U.S.S.R.'s Chukotka
region and the autonomous districts of
northern Siberia.
To be profitable, a hunting economy
requires certain specific conditions.
The first requirement is that the area
should be biologically rich. Secondly,
the hunting community Itself must be
tightly-knit if the operation is to be
soundly managed. Thirdly, and this is
especially true today, hunting must be
organized on industrial lines. If the
second two conditions are not met,
and if the native society is not pro¬
tected against itself, even the richest
hunting area will only support an
impoverished community.
Before the Danish State took over
full responsibility for the District of
Thule, this territory provided its Ad¬
ministrator (at the time, Knud Ras-
mussen) and his staff with a relatively
high annual revenue.
The extraordinary cohesiveness of
the Thule community was successfully
preserved by Knud Rasmussen. As
early as 1923, he gave the community
a political form, through a series of
new laws based on old customs. A
"Hunters' Council" with limited powers
but foreshadowing tomorrow's Eskimo
government, was set up to administer
the territory. ; Proud of their privileges,
the people felt that they were working
for themselves. Living in relative
isolation, the community was also
protected from outside diseases and
had no chance to eat unsuitable foods.
After Knud Rasmussen's death, and
especially since 1936, the adminis¬
trative district of Thule was gradually
incorporated into the rest of Greenland,
with the result that this model group of
Eskimos lost its uniqueness and its
privileges.
Since 1950 this decline has followed
a classic course, with the break-up of
the family as a unit of life and pro¬
duction (one woman in four now does
not marry, but instead bears children
to a number of men); abortions; a
growing indifference to group interests;
a weakening of leadership.
Young people are giving up the
kayak, since they are not taught how
to handle kayaks at school and are
afraid of sailing them. Marksman¬
ship is getting worse; the Eskimos are
settling down more and hunting less.
They are increasingly dependent on
manufactured gadgets, investing less
in production, and their traditional
codes are falling Into disuse.
Some Eskimos are leaving their
communities, and educated Eskimos,
scarcely representative of the com¬
munity's confused aspirations, are
betraying their origins and seeking
rapid assimilation into white society.
Drunkenness and tooth decay are
on the increase (few Eskimos do not
need dentures by the age of 40). They
are increasingly subject to eye dis¬
orders and their resistance to cold
has diminished as a result of un¬
suitable foods (flour, jam, sugar, etc.).
This moral crisis and physiological
weakening have reduced productivity.
Once a creditor society, the District
of Thule Is now heavily in debt. This
is particularly alarming because of the
presence of a big military base at
Dundas-Thule.
Drawn by the garbage, large numbers
of foxes, prized by the hunters, con¬
verge on the base (which is out of
bounds to Eskimos), with the result
that the rest of the region is depleted.
The base is also a permanent remin¬
der to the hunters of their impove¬
rishment, for an unskilled Danish or
American worker there makes four
times more than an experienced
Eskimo hunter.
The Thule Air Base at Dundas has
thus become a symbol to the Eskimos,
prompting them to ask questions about
16

the meaning of the historic segregation
which they discover there. "It's too
late," Eskimo hunters of the region
told me again and again In the spring
of 1969. "The young are increasingly
at odds with their elders and lack
confidence in themselves. They no
longer know what they are and some
of them are likely to quit the land in
the near future ... It is the cleverest,
those who have done best at school,
who will go away. Our hunting
economy, which depends on team
effort, will be disrupted and further
impoverished.
"The schools cream off the best of
our hunters. As technicians, they will
only find work away from our territory,
in the south, which is In some ways
a foreign country to them. The less
intelligent ones will stay with us. They
don't learn how to handle a kayak at
boarding school, which also robs them
of the opportunity to get day-in day-
out Instruction in hunting from their
fathers. And so they won't be such
good hunters. They won't be able to
make a living from hunting.
"We only go out hunting regularly
because we love our dogs and have
to feed them. And yet hunting is our
real life, our natural source of satis¬
faction as men. In the south don't
they know that we don't live to
'produce', but to be ourselves, living
together according to our customs?
"We Eskimos don't even own the
land on which we have been living
for centuries. What will it be like
when oil is found beneath our soil?
Whose will it be?"
It is easy enough to criticize, but
these deplorable facts are convincing
proof that it is basic principles that
must be re-examined, not remedies
which are likely to turn out to be
mere palliatives. The Thule hunters
are in fact saying what Jean-Jacques
Rousseau observed two centuries ago:
"The slightest change In customs,
even if it has certain advantages,
always turns out to the detriment of
morals." Rousseau went on to add,
with a wisdom close to that of the Eski¬
mo, "For customs are a people's mora¬
lity. The moment it ceases to respect
them, there is no rule but its passions,
no brake but laws."
The questions that arise today need
to be framed In the context of the
general problem of relations between
co-existing cultures.
On this subject, an editorial which
appeared in the review Inter-Nord
in March 1968 had this to say:
'Until now these relations have
usually been defined by outright
conquest, latent colonization, enforced
integration and by the anthropological
annihilation of the weakest. The
question now is whether the modern
relationship patterns worked out in the
American Arctic in recent years are
radically different from previous
attitudes, and whether they can
eliminate the old ways of thinking, so
long as it is not clearly and expressly
recognized that all cultures are equally
valid, and so long as the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights is not
reinforced by a universal declaration
of the rights of societies as they are
and as they hope to be."
The International Covenant on Econ¬
omic, Social and Cultural Rights
clearly indicates in Article I that "All
peoples have the right of self-deter¬
mination. By virtue of that right they
freely determine their political status
and freely pursue their economic,
social and cultural development."
Article 11 of the Convention con¬
cerning the protection and integration
of indigenous and other tribal popu¬
lations, adopted by the General
Conference of the International Labour
Organization in 1957, is quite explicit:
"The right of ownership, collective or
individual, of the members of the
populations concerned over the lands
by market prices, flying in the face of
any resistance on social or historical
grounds, or to guarantee these minor¬
ity peoples a future within the context
of a policy of overall development?
As long as there is no well-defined
integrated policy of getting the native
people to develop the tundra for their
own use by their own efforts (as in
the U.S.S.R. and Sweden) so that pri¬
ces paid to hunters and fishermen are
guaranteed at a very high level by
royalties from oil and mining industries
developed on their territory, there will
be a strong temptation to drift into
discouragement and pessimism and
encourage the derelicts of Arctic socie¬
ties to emigrate south or to the growing
mining Industries in the north.
An active, vigorous society is also
a productive society. By turning to the
Arctic seas (fisheries, fish breeding,
etc.) and the tundra (traditional and
modern ways of hunting, raising rein-
40 MILLION ACRES FOR NATIVE ALASKANS
On December 18, 1971, the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act was signed by
the President of the United States. This was hailed by the native peoples of
Alaska as the beginning of a new era. The Act invested 12 newly created native
Alaskan "Corporations" with considerable economic and political power.
The Corporations became the full owners of 40 million acres of land and all its
underground resources, which they were free to choose. They also received the
sum of $962.5 million from the U.S. Treasury in compensation for relinquishing
their historic rights to any other territories in Alaska. On December 18, 1974,
the choice of lands by the Corporations was finally completed.
Among the various legal provisions, one specifically authorizes and encourages
bilingualism ¡n all regions where the people still speak their native languages.
The Eskimos and Indians of Alaska representing one-third of the State's population
have displayed outstanding adaptability and political acumen in coping with the
difficult legal and economic problems raised by the Settlement Act
The Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act may well provide a model or indeed
a lesson, if some of its provisions turn out to be negative for any new measures
which might be envisaged for Canada as well as Greenland.
which these populations traditionally
occupy shall be recognized."
The Canadian Prime Minister,
Mr. Pierre Trudeau, has written that
In view of Canada's "polyethnic"
character, "the different regions within
the country must be assured of a wide
range of local autonomy, such that
each national group, with an Increasing
background of experience In self-
government, may be able to develop
the body of laws and institutions essen¬
tial to full expression and development
of its national characteristics."
One could wrangle endlessly over
the meaning of the word national, but
it cannot be denied that the Eskimos
and the Indians are ethnic groups with
a national vocation. There was, one
may recall, a confederation of Five
Iroquois Nations in the 18th century.
Since 1951, administrative changes
have been taking place in Greenland,
and today the Greenland Council, the
"Landsraad", is administratively auton¬
omous within the Danish State. The
changes reflect a trend towards an
increasingly autonomous system.
What kind of development is being
sought in these regions? Is the aim
to create an economy governed solely
deer and musk oxen) the Eskimos will
regain their dignity and their full au¬
thority as a community, through doing
work which is natural and familiar to
them. It Is Important that the life of the
Eskimos as hunters and fishermen
which is a civilization in itself no
longer be a survival from the past but
be recognized as a privilege and
model for others to follow. This can be
brought about through a hunting and
fishing production policy, biologically
planned and economically guaranteed
to provide high remuneration from
local oil revenues.
Endowed with substantial financial
resources, such a community could
become the centre of modern Eskimo
life, a true "national home", where
those Eskimos who are eager to be¬
come involved in the life of the south
(mining, public works, service indus¬
tries) could nevertheless rediscover
their cultural identity.
This is no Utopian idea. Already
Alaskan Trustees and Corporations
are studying revolutionary plans for
Eskimo villages. The Eskimo people,
we can be sure, still have plenty of
surprises in store for us. M
Jean Malaurie
17
