Photo Yves Dejardln © Rapho, Paris
Any sudden break in the
rhythm of daily life produces
stress, often thought of as a
typical 20th-century ailment.
"Sound pollution" the noise
of pneumatic drills, traffic,
aircraft, etc. is only one of
many modern pressures which
inflict strain on the organism,
adding to the tensions which
have always been an inescapable
part of human life.
4

§7¿?£SS
by Ivan S. Khorol
The wear
and tear
of modern life
IVAN SEMYONOVICH KHOROL, Soviet
physician, has devoted many years' research
to the problems of mental fatigue, and is
the author of numerous books on scientific
questions for specialist and general readers.
ODERN man Is almost con-
I stantly under stress. A scien¬
tist solving a complicated mathemat¬
ical problem, a businessman facing
keen competition, a husband watching
his wife dying of some incurable
disease and a sportsman straining
every muscle to the limit are all in
their different ways undergoing stress.
Stress has been defined as the res¬
ponse of the body to any demand
made upon It, whether pleasant or
unpleasant, that requires it to readjust
to an entirely new situation.
As a result of millions of years of
evolution, living organisms can func¬
tion efficiently in their normal environ¬
ment provided that their "internal
environment" remains within the fairly
narrow limits of what, for each or¬
ganism, are ¡deal conditions. The
norms involved differ from one type of
organism to another the temperature
at which fish thrive, for instance, would
be lethal for rabbits.
The ideal conditions of the Internal
environment needed by an organism
if it Is to function normally have been
established by an age-long process
of trial and error. They are recorded
in the organism's gene memory and
passed on from one generation to
another. But since the world In which
all creatures exist is constantly
changing, nature has endowed them
with special mechanisms which enable
them to regulate and maintain their
internal stability.
These self-adjusting systems operate
on the feedback principle, and each
has a different function. The one
responsible for maintaining the body's
equilibrium is known as homeostasis
(from the Greek words homoios,
meaning similar, and stasis, meaning
position). As the American physiol¬
ogist Walter Cannon has put it,
homeostasis is "the co-ordinated
physiological processes which main¬
tain most of the steady states In the
organism." Other systems (uncon¬
ditioned and conditioned reflexes)
help living beings to find the best
possible external environment or to
change it to suit themselves.
The general way in which these two
closely connected mechanisms work
is well known. Unconditioned reflexes
come into operation first. When an
abnormal situation arises, this mech¬
anism sets off a series of reactions
in the organism to restore things to
normal. When an animal gets too close
to a fire it recoils; when it finds there
Is not enough to eat in its usual
feeding grounds, it looks for food
elsewhere.
If unconditioned reflexes are unable
to restore the situation to normal,
another biological mechanism, known
as homeostatic regulation, goes into
action.
An organism deprived of enough
food Is prompted by its built-in control
mechanisms to adopt a pattern of
behaviour that uses up fewer calories.
Its biological mechanisms also com¬
pensate for any excess in the
substances needed to sustain life:
when the blood-sugar level rises, the
pancreas secretes an increased quan¬
tity of insulin, bringing the sugar level
back to normal.
The purpose of these reactions by
the organism is always to preserve
its integrity and a certain degree of
independence in relation to its exter¬
nal environment, and also to enable It
to adjust to changes in that environ¬
ment. Both these processes are called
adaptation.
Hans Selye, a leading Canadian
physiologist, who has studied the
problems of biological adaptation and
stress for many years, has affirmed
that "Adaptability is probably the most
distinctive characteristic of life." In this
article I have drawn extensively on the
results of Selye's research and some
of the basic ideas of his stress
concept.
The processes of adaptation such as
I have described obviously operate in
the human organism: when we are
short of food, for instance, we do
everything possible to procure some,
and when we are cold, our blood
vessels shrink so as to reduce heaK
loss from the body's surface. r
5

W With the emergence of human so¬
ciety, however, another adaptation
mechanism evolved, which might be
termed the system of social adaptation.
The growth of civilization led to the
development of certain values and
standards of social conduct, con¬
sidered to be beneficial to the indi¬
vidual and society as a whole. Among
these values are respect for kinship,
the prohibition of incest, murder, etc.
These rules, which are transmitted
from generation to generation, vary
from one society, State or people to
another, but the important thing is that
every adult is aware of them.
When someone notes a divergence
between what he has come to accept
as normal and what is actually hap¬
pening, he may be impelled by the
mechanism of social adaptation to try
to change the situation. He may do
all he can to protect his family from
danger, to prevent a murder or a theft,
to attain a better place In society
always provided that these forms of
behaviour are part of the rules he has
learned from his parents and teachers.
But if in spite of all his efforts, he is
unable to change the situation in the
way he wishes (if, for Instance, he fails
in his career or loses a close relative)
then he must make the best of it and
adapt to things as they are. He must
change his outlook on the world, and
readjust his habits and his standards
of conduct. In other words he must
reduce or cancel out the difference
between things as he would like them
to be and the real-life situation.
Any discrepancy between the norms
to which the organism's adaptation
systems are attuned and the actual
state of affairs within the organism or
outside it produces stress. These
stress-producing factors (or "stres¬
sors" as they are known) set off first
an alarm signal and then a stress
reaction. At this point biological
mechanisms come into play to enable
the organism to adapt to the demands
being made on it.
One of Selye's most important
achievements has been to show, on the
basis of precise biological experi¬
ments, that the adaptive reactions of
living organisms are powered by what
he calls "adaptation energy", a kind of
"fuel" stored within the organism.
In his book "Stress without Dis¬
tress", he notes that the concept of
stress is very old:
"It must have occurred even to
prehistoric man that the loss of vigour
and the feeling of exhaustion that
overcame him after hard labour, pro¬
longed exposure to cold or heat, loss
of blood, agonizing fear, or any kind
of disease had something in com¬
mon."
According to Selye, adaptation
energy is not merely caloric energy.
For example, during illness, which can
be considered a form of adaptation
whereby the body endeavours either to
eliminate an infection or to live with it,
"Get set... go!"
The athlete who leaps into action at the sound of
the starter's pistol discharges the nervous and
muscular tension that has built up in him before
the race. To cope with "stress situations" of this
kind, the organism mobilizes what has been called
"adaptation energy", although no precise scientific
method exists for measuring it. But scientists have
noted that the organism reacts identically whatever
the cause of the stress (competitive sport, pressures
in professional, social or emotional life, or physical
illness). Exhaustion of adaptation energy through
demands that are prolonged, too frequent or too
intensive leads to "distress", an unpleasant
or damaging form of stress.
the patient may have a normal or even
higher than normal intake of food, i.e.
raw material for the production of
caloric energy. Nevertheless, he con¬
tinues to lose strength.
What can this new physiological
theory of stress and adaptation energy
tell us about the condition of modern
man? What happens when the
businessman, the scientist and the
sportsman have to respond to demands
for increased mental and physical
effort?
According to Selye, the body res¬
ponds in an absolutely stereotyped
manner to the many different demands
made on it. There is, for instance,
increased activity of the cortex (outer
shell) of the adrenal gland, which
secretes hormones into the blood, and
shrinkage of the thymus (an endocrine
gland in the chest).
The body's reaction is always the
same, differing only from one case to
another, if the adaptation system is
functioning normally, according to the
intensity of the stress. The behaviour
of the body can be compared with that
of a crew of oarsmen trying to follow
a course against an adverse wind: the
more the wind and waves tend to drive
the boat off course, the harder the
oarsmen must row to reduce their
effects.
This phenomenon seems at first
sight to be something of a paradox.
One can accept that the processes of
adaptation controlled by the uncon¬
ditioned reflexes (regulating, for
instance, the functioning of the heart
or the tone of the body's vascular
and muscular systems, etc.) have a
common basis and use some sort of
catalytic "adaptation energy" In
addition to caloric energy. Unfor¬
tunately, however, the carrier of this
adaptation energy is still unknown.
But how is it that purely psycholo¬
gical stresses cause the same bio¬
chemical reactions in the body as
those created by physical stresses
such as cold, hunger or exhausting
physical labour?
Everyone, as I have said, carries
around in his memory a set of social
standards. If we accept one of the
most popular current theories of
memory that living organisms retain
information by re-ordering the atoms
of the protein molecules within the
brain cells we can also accept the
argument that any stress reaction
experienced by the organism will also
have its effects at molecular level.
When it is impossible to eliminate
stress by changing our environment,
all we can do is to wipe out the "ideal"
which is recorded in our memories, in
other words, to re-arrange the atoms
in the protein molecules of our brain
cells. To do this we need to expend
a certain amount of energy adap¬
tation energy.
Each of us receives at birth, written
into our genetic make-up, a certain
ration of adaptation "fuel", the size of
which varies from one individual to
another but only within fairly narrow
limits. Nature has provided us with a
special mechanism which strictly
controls the rate at which this fuel Is
fed into the organism.
This mechanism can be compared
to a coalmine. Batches of "fuel" are
brought up regularly to the surface
and distributed to the various homeo-
statlc systems, enabling them to carry
out minor "repairs" and to eliminate
the stresses of everyday life. In this
situation, the body functions like a
motor engine working at cruising
speed. Fuel consumption is low and
there is enough "in the tank" for many
years of normal human life.
This is the ideal, but in the hectic
times in which we live, the reality is
very different. Nowadays, our various
adaptation systems are faced with
cases of extreme stress which demand
considerably more than their normal
ration of adaptation fuel.
In such circumstances, the organism
6

sends out a distress signal and all
available stocks of adaptation energy
are directed towards the disaster area.
This full-scale mobilization enables
people to perform "superhuman" feats:
someone who has never done any
sport in his life manages to jump
over a wide ditch when pursued by a
mad dog, a scientist carried away by
his own enthusiasm solves a problem
which hitherto seemed Insoluble.
Unfortunately, all these "emergency
calls" leave their mark on the organ¬
ism. While all the adaptation energy
is being used in the main theatre of
operations, the adaptation processes
in other parts of the organism are
slowed down through lack of fuel. The
organism's normal functioning is dis¬
rupted and it wears out before its
time. For example, mental fatigue can
lead to nervous disorders of the
myocardium (the muscular part of the
heart), causing biochemical changes
which in turn spark off disruptions In
the control of the blood supply.
"Distress" is simply an aggravation
of this process, which causes
myocardium to age prematurely.
the
Doctors have reported cases where
patients with extensive skin burns
have developed stomach and duodenal
ulcers. These ailments may well be
connected with a shortage of the
adaptation energy required for the
normal operation of the homeostatic
regulation system in the stomach and
intestines, all the available energy
having been mobilized to deal with the
burns.
Both unpleasant stress ("distress",
as Hans Selye calls it) and less
intensive but prolonged stress are
damaging. Distress causes a state of
shock, with the organism, even with
the help of all the available energy,
unable to cope with the imbalance (as
in the case of a man freezing to death).
Prolonged stress causes premature
and irreparable wear and tear on the
organism, as well as functional
disorders.
A person who has suffered a serious
illness or a severe shock will ev¬
entually recover his or her vigour, but
the "scars" left by the period of
extreme stress will never disappear.
Blood pressure, ulcers and diabetes
are all In a sense indelible scars from
wounds caused by distress.
Even more dangerous, however, are
cases when an organism placed in an
extremely critical situation forces the
"mine" to work overtime.
This means that for a while ¡t re¬
ceives extra supplies of life-giving
energy. But alas, there is no fooling
nature: these inherited reserves are
limited, and it is extremely dangerous
to burn them up too fast. The first
warning signs of this impending dan¬
ger are already to be seen in the
present widespread increase of what
Selye calls "diseases of adaptation".
Hans Selye's stress concept gives
a new insight into several alarming
developments in the last two decades, .
such as the sharp rise in cardiovas- ^


Stress without distress
"Contrary to widespread belief, stress is not simply
nervous tension nor the result of damage", writes
the Canadian scientist Hans Selye, internationally
famous for his research into stress. "Anything,
pleasant or unpleasant, that speeds up the intensity
of life causes an increase in stress. A painful blow
and a passionate kiss can be equally stressful.
Stress is not necessarily something to be avoided.
It is associated with the expression of all our
innate drives. Indeed, complete freedom from stress
is death I"
^ cular illnesses and cancer, drug addic¬
tion and suicide, violence and terror¬
ism, and the outbreak of various
mysterious epidemics.
Could these be due to a drastic
reduction in human reserves of adap¬
tation energy ? Are these reserves
being squandered as the result of
disturbances In adaptive systems that
are overloaded by the stresses of
modern life?
It is generally agreed that thé dev¬
eloped countries have been hardest
hit by the ills mentioned above. This
may seem surprising since progress
in industry, science, agriculture and
public health has brought favourable
living conditions to these countries.
However, the apparent paradox is
easily explained when one takes into
account the chain reaction of mount¬
ing pressures in everyday life faced
by people In these countries.
Men and women living in modern
Industrialized societies are subject to
far greater stress than those living in
the developing countries or our prede¬
cessors in the 19th century. As
already noted, each stress reaction
burns up a certain amount of
"adaptation fuel" and in cases of
"distress" all or nearly all of our
"reserve stocks" are summoned up.
As a result, the mechanisms of adapta¬
tion which control and regulate other
vital systems In the body such as the
cardio-vascular and digestive systems
cannot function normally.
It is probably no coincidence that
cancer has become so widespread
since we entered the age of the great¬
est tension and anxiety and most rapid
change that the world has ever known.
Perhaps the growth of cancer cells is
connected with disruptions of the hu¬
man homeostatic mechanism.
A correlation can also be made bet¬
ween the abuse of alcohol and drugs
and the exhaustion of adaptation ener¬
gy: people who are chronically short
of such energy naturally tend to turn
to stimulants. But the use of these
substitutes has much the same effect
as that of a whip on a tired horse.
We have already pointed out that
In order to live a normal life, everyone
needs to be guided by certain stan¬
dards. This ¡deal model of the world
around comes from education and
upbringing, and people try to conform
to such a model from an early age._
Faced with the reality of daily life each'
person is exposed to different forms
of stress "(and sometimes distress), to
which, in practical terms, he or she
can react in one of two ways.
The first way is to try to bring
reality into line with his own standards.
However, transforming society is easier
said than done. The individual who
persists In this course may either try
to revolutionize and improve society
or he may become a social misfit, a
delinquent or criminal, and a danger to
society.
The other alternative is to readjust
his own standards, and this at first
sight seems the easier course. Un¬
fortunately, by choosing to conform,
he has to retreat from one ideal and
moral principle after another, and each
of these readjustments uses up adap¬
tation energy. Should he be unable
to cope with this problem, he turns
to drugs or alcohol in an effort to
deaden his distress.
The chronic shortage of adaptation
energy may have another even more
dangerous consequence for modern
man. In his writings on stress, Hans
Selye links the loss of vigour, the
apathy shown by people who have had
a serious Illness or been under severe
nervous strain with the fact that their
adaptation energy has been used up
In the course of the stress reaction.
It is logical to suppose that "adap¬
tation fuel" supplies energy for the
"reflex of purpose" to which another
great 20th century physiologist, Ivan
Pavlov, accorded such an important
tole in human life. "The reflex of
purpose is the basic form of the Indi¬
vidual's vital energy," wrote Pavlov.
If this is so, another modern phe¬
nomenon can also be attributed to the
over-consumption of adaptation en¬
ergy: the decline, In relative terms, In
the number of men and women of
genius, those in whom the reflex of
purpose Is most strikingly demon¬
strated In the form of extraordinary
intellectual power.
In some developed countries, there
has been a marked increase In the
number of suicides in recent years.
Perhaps this too may result from a
lack of adaptation energy and an over¬
burdening of modern man's adaptation
systems.
Unfortunately, technological pro¬
gress, casting its spell over us, creates
the illusion that the dangers are
exaggerated or unjustified. The facts,
however, leave no room for compla¬
cency. Specialists have reckoned
that although the volume of scientific
research is increasing, the number of
researchers Is mounting even more
steeply. There has been a continuous
decline in recent years in the amount
of new scientific information obtained
per scientist. Successful research
results are increasingly being achieved
by teamwork, not by outstanding
scientists working individually.
Nor should we welcome the world
population explosion. Statistics show
conclusively that the population in¬
crease is due mainly to the decline in
infant mortality and the rising birthrate
in the developing countries.
But coronary thrombosis, strokes,
cancer, mental disorders and suicide
are taking a heavy toll in the indus¬
trially developed countries, especially
among the most highly qualified,
educated and talented all those who
are subject to the greatest stresses of
modern life.
The fact is that, like a boat race
crew, people today are using all their
energy in order to go faster and faster.
But sooner or later they must realize
that although the boat is still moving
forward under its own momentum, the
crew is completely exhausted, having
used up nearly all its adaptation
energy.
I have simply wished to draw atten¬
tion to this global problem, though
without presuming to offer an overall
solution. But It is clear that one must
be found.
Research has hitherto been concen¬
trated on the biological aspects of
adaptation energy, but I would like to
emphasize the Importance of its social
aspect, which has so far not been
adequately studied.
In the final analysis It is society and
the structure of society which deter¬
mine the purposes for which men and
women use their adaptation energy.
And so society should not be indiffer¬
ent to the ways In which this energy
is used.
CONTINUED PAGE 32
9

STRESS (Continued from page 9)
Throughout history, people have
realized that the conflicts which have
plagued human society have often
proved disastrous for civilization. If
we regard mankind as a single living
organism rather than as a number of
warring groups, the very idea that
struggle between members of the same
species can in some way be beneficial
becomes absurd. How could one ima¬
gine a healthy human organism in
which the individual cells or organs
were guided by their own "private"
interests and made war on each other?
A complacent attitude with regard
to the disruption of human adaptation
mechanisms would be nothing less
than criminal. But where does the
solution lie? History may provide the
answer, for experience shows that
when a society has been faced with
a crucial problem, it has mobilized all
its thinking power to solve It.
Until now the urgent need for a so¬
lution to this problem has not been
fully appreciated. But once this need
is felt, the ways and means can be
found. It is more than likely that in
our age of vast scientific knowledge
and capabilities, mankind will succeed
in understanding the nature of the
adaptation mechanism and of how it
is controlled.
The problem can only be solved by
considering all the human aspects
together, including the biological na¬
ture of man and the laws governing
the functioning and inter-actlon of his
various vital physiological systems.
It goes without saying that we shall
meet with difficulties at every step of
the way. But as Einstein said, every¬
thing we know about reality begins
and ends with experience. And ex¬
perience does not appear to contradict
man's eternal optimism.
H Ivan S. Khorol

