Here's
to our health !
Microbes to the rescue
against hordes of dastardly germs
by Oganes V. Baroyan
FEW sciences with so short a his¬
tory have achieved as many
remarkable successes as microbiology.
With its development are associated
such famous names as Louis Pasteur,
llya Mechnikov, Robert Koch, Edward
Jenner, Dmitri Ivanovsky, Daniil Zabo-
lotny, Gaston Ramon, Alexander Fle¬
ming, Nikolai Gamaleya and many
others.
There are good reasons why so
many eminent scientists from different
countries should have been interested
in the study of microscopic organisms.
Since time immemorial certain micro¬
bes have been the deadly enemies of
mankind by virtue of the infectious
diseases which they cause.
The "Black Death" or bubonic pla¬
gue carried off half the population of
Europe in the Middle Ages. Millions
of persons have been made blind by
smallpox and trachoma and hundreds
of thousands of children paralysed by
polio. Yellow fever has struck down
millions of persons and 20 million died
in a single epidemic of Spanish
influenza earlier in the present century.
This is only a small part of the toll
taken by disease-causing microbes.
Even before he understood the
OGANES V. BAROYAN, Sower epidemi¬
ologist, was Assistant Director-General of
the World Health Organization from 1961
to 1964. He is now director of the Gamaleya
Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology
(Soviet Academy of Medical Sciences) and
Head of the Faculty of Epidemiology at the
Central Doctors Advanced Training institute
(Soviet Ministry of Health), both in Moscow.
A member ofthe AcademyofMedicalSciences
of the U.S.S.FI., he is the author of numerous
scientific studies and articles on virus infec¬
tions which have been translated into many
languages. He has been an adviser to the
U.N. and WHO on questions relating to
the banning of bacteriological weapons.
causes of infectious diseases, man
tried to combat them: the first attempts
at inoculation were made 3,000 years
ago. But the fight against microbial
infections began to make headway
only after man had accumulated know¬
ledge based on scientific experiment
and backed up by scientific obser¬
vations.
Scientists have so far identified and
studied more than 2,500 species of
micro-organisms. Some microbiolo¬
gists estimate that this represents only
a tenth of the total "invisible population
of the earth", and the discovery of
new species is constantly being report¬
ed. At the same time, more and
more is being found out about the
structure, properties and behaviour of
micro-organisms.
The world of micro-organisms is one
of extraordinary diversity, but all the
different bacteria, micro-fungi, viruses,
etc., have one thing in common: their
minute size. Even so the population
of this microscopic world ranges from
"dwarfs" no larger than a good-sized
molecule (only in recent years, thanks
to the electron microscope, has it be¬
come possible to examine and take
pictures of them) to "giants" whose
dimensions are measured in microns
(a micron is 1/25,400 of an inch). The
difference between the "dwarfs" and
the "giants" is roughly equivalent to
that between ants and whales.
Research workers have often ob¬
served that microbes are found in
places where one would not suppose
that life could exist: in the upper layers
of the earth's atmosphere, in the
Antarctic ice, in the boiling jets of
geysers, and even in the cooling
systems of nuclear reactors. And
they reproduce at an incredible speed:
a single micro-organism can produce
70 generations in 24 hours (a few
drops of nutrient medium may contain
a population of some 7,000 million
microbes).
Mankind has thus taken on an ener¬
getic, adaptable and extremely tough
foe, one who is invisible to boot, and
yet man has succeeded in winning one
decisive battle after another against
him. Infectious diseases have beaten
a retreat: diphtheria, whooping-cough,
polio, tetanus, smallpox, plague, typhus
and many other illnesses have declined
sharply in all parts of the world, and
have been virtually eliminated in the
economically developed countries.
Cardiovascular ailments have now
replaced infectious diseases as the
main killers of mankind.
However, many infectious diseases
can still reach epidemic proportions.
As many as 1,000 million cases of
respiratory and intestinal infections
are recorded annually. Asia, Africa
and Latin America are still afflicted by
numerous tropical diseases, and a
whole army of scientists is at work
in many different countries on the
prevention of these diseases. More¬
over, effective measures have still to
be discovered for dealing with such
common infections as influenza, infec¬
tious hepatitis, etc.
How does modern medicine measure
up to this challenge?
We should point out to start with
that man has his own natural system of
defence against microbial attack, with¬
out which the battle against disease
would have been lost long ago.
Special cells mount guard in the blood,
in the walls of the blood vessels, in
the lungs, the liver and the subcuta¬
neous connective tissue, in fact
throughout the human organism.
Any microbe which ventures into the
organism is attacked and consumed
by these cells. These guardian cells
were discovered in 1883 by the great
Russian scientist, llya Mechnikov, who
was the first to observe them doing
battle with microbial invaders and who
named them "phagocytes" (from the
Greek "phagein" to eat).
Phagocytes can move around freely
in the blood or the lymph or remain
fixed, "anchored" to the wall of the r
17

r vessels. Accordingly, they may either
rush to counterattack the microbe or
else lie in wait to seize and digest it.
The phagocytes provide the organism
with very powerful defences.
This, however, is not the only line
of defence. When an infection enters
the organism, other defensive weapons
known as antibodies, a special kind
of protein substance, are produced as
a reaction to the invasion of foreign
protein bodies (known as "antigens")
which include microbes. The host
organism has a highly developed
ability to distinguish its own protein
18
bodies from aliens
eliminates the latter.
and ruthlessly
Much has
years about
been learnt in recent
the way in which
these defence mechanisms work. The
foreign proteins entering the organism
are identified by special cells, the
lymphocytes, which are produced in
the bone marrow with the help of the
spleen, the lymph nodes and certain
other organs and tissues, and which
are constantly circulating in the blood.
Under certain conditions, some of
these cells change into what are
known as plasma cells, whose prin¬
cipal property is that they can produce
moleculesof the immunoglobulin pro¬
tein from which antibodies are made
at the rate of several thousands a
second. It is these antibodies which
bear the brunt of the struggle against
microbial -attack.
Having entered the human body, the
microbes attempt first of all to repro¬
duce and to spread, at the same time
giving off strong poisons or toxins.
The different varieties of these toxins
may paralyse the nervous system,
affect the intestines, disturb the blood

or cause convulsions. The toxins
also include a complex type of poison
known as aggressin which has the
special function of destroying the
phagocytes.
The antibodies, of which there are
a number of varieties, engage the
aggressors in combat, following their
every manoeuvre, some immobilizing
the microbes, others dissolving them,
and yet others neutralizing the micro¬
bial toxins.
The issue of the battle depends of
course on many factors, and primarily
on the health of the organism, its
readiness to do battle against infection,
and also on the scale of the infection,
i.e. the number of micro-organisms
involved in the attack, the worst
attacks being the so-called "massive,
generalised" infections, whose name
speaks for itself.
If all goes well, however, and the
sick person recovers, a number of
antibodies corresponding to the infec¬
tion from which he has been suffering
remain within his organism, and these
may survive for varying periods, some¬
times throughout his life. Certain
groups of lymphocytes, reproducing
and undergoing "rejuvenation", con¬
serve their ability to produce the immu¬
noglobulin used in the fight against
the defeated enemy.
In "peacetime" the number of such
lymphocytes is limited but they keep
constant watch; should the previous
infection reappear in the organism,
more recruits join the ranks of the
antibodies and together they form an
invincible army which drives the
disease back. In such cases, micro¬
biologists say the person concerned
is "immune" to the disease.
But if the human organism is so
well defended, how can we explain
the millions of deaths referred to
above?
It is true that man has a highly orga¬
nized and extremely sophisticated
defence system, but only when the
defence mechanisms swing into action
against the invader and full-scale pro¬
duction of antibodies begins to give
the organism its needed immunity.
During the first encounters with a
microbial infection, the organism is
engaged in a race against time with
an enemy which holds many advant¬
ages, including its ability to reproduce
rapidly. It was because of these
advantages that infectious diseases
were once such formidable foes.
And so where there is no natural
immunity, it must be created artificially.
This is the basis of vaccination, a
technique which has more than proved
its worth in dealing with infectious
illness.
In vaccination, killed or weakened
micro-organisms of the same type as
those which cause the illness are intro¬
duced in the form of a vaccine into a
healthy subject. After a short, slight
indisposition (as if the person con¬
cerned were suffering a mild form of
the illness), or in some instances
with no effects at all, immunity is set
up in the organism. Sometimes the
operation has to be repeated in order
to remind the organism of the "codes"
of the necessary antibodies.
Drug treatment has become a
second extremely important way of
combatting infectious diseases. The
great German scientist Paul Ehrlich
aptly described the aims of this branch
of microbiology when he said that the
. medicament to fight infection should
possess the properties of a "magic
bullet" which seeks out and destroys
the bacteria without harming the
human organism.
Let us look at two groups of modern
drugs that have proved highly effec¬
tive.
The first group consists of the sulfa
drugs, which were first discovered in
the 1930s but whose use has been
particularly developed in the last .
twenty years. V
19

k. Sulfa drugs are substances whose
structure is similar to that of certain
nutrients indispensable to bacteria,
but whose composition is somewhat
different. The bacteria swallow these
"tasty" morsels and are killed. (For
the sake of comparison one might
imagine a well-baked bun of appetiz¬
ing appearance but containing large
quantities of sand and sawdust.)
Further improvements are still being
made in sulfa drugs. Their toxicity is
being reduced, their side effects are
being eliminated and new, longer-
acting forms are being developed, so
that users need only take one tablet
daily or even less instead of three
or four.
The second group of drugs, known
as antibiotics, opened a new era in
medicine. The discovery of these
drugs was an extension of the idea
put forward by Pasteur and Mechnikov
of pitting living substances against
living substances, using the substances
produced by certain microbes to kill
others.
With the help of penicillin, the first
of the antibiotics, doctors were able
to overcome meningitis, sepsis, pneu¬
monia and many other ailments. Over
the years, however, an increasing
number of bacteria became resistant
to this antibiotic. New antibiotics
were created, but after a certain time
bacteria which were resistant to these
antibiotics as well appeared.
As the eminent Soviet scientist Boris
Votchal has remarked, a situation has
arisen which recalls that in Jules
Verne's novel "From the Earth to the
Moon" in which one of the characters
(Barbicane) invents increasingly des¬
tructive shells whilst another (Nicholl)
invents stronger and stronger armour
against them.
For a long time, scientists were un¬
able to explain how micro-organisms
became resistant to antibiotics, although
they knew that in general terms resis¬
tance was a temporary or permanent
loss of sensitivity by microbes to the
antibiotics used against them.
Increasing importance in this pro¬
cess is now accorded to the role of
Plasmids (or episomes), genetic ele¬
ments of a particular sort which are
passed on from one generation of
bacteria to another. It is believed that
these plasmids are responsible for the
production by certain micro-organisms
of special enzymes which block the
operation of the antibiotic.
The immediate aim of research is to
devise drugs which act against this
resistance by micro-organisms and
eventually to organize genetic control
in such a way as to neutralize the
factors which lead to resistance.
Many years' experience of mass
vaccination campaigns have shown
their worth in the prevention of nu¬
merous children's and other infections
including parasite-borne forms of
typhus. But there remains the prob¬
lem of side effects and complications
which are no longer admissible given
the present level of medical knowledge.
Among the chief problems here are
allergies hypersensitivity of the orga¬
nism to medicaments, particularly
serums and vaccines and this is why
children are no longer inoculated
during influenza epidemics.
Current progress in science should
make possible the production of im¬
proved chemical vaccines which have
no side effects or complications. A
leading Soviet scientist, Academician
Pavel Zdrodovsky, has developed such
chemical vaccines from "defensive"
antigens to give protection against
typhus and typhoid.
Microbiologists working in many
different countries are now using,
among other things, the cell walls of
microbial cells to make similar vac¬
cines against plague, tularemia, tuber¬
culosis and other diseases.
"Live" vaccines against smallpox,
measles, rabies and certain other
diseases are today being closely
studied by microbiologists. These
vaccines contain additional substances
which play no part in creating immunity.
Recent research has shown, however,
that there is still a possibility that the
micro-organisms used in these vac¬
cines may survive in the organism of
the host, resulting in chronic infection.
Booster doses, although they are
undoubtedly effective in restoring an
immunity that has been reduced, may
possibly affect the organism and hence
should not be administered indiscri¬
minately.
Thus as one problem is solved
another arises. The science of immu¬
nology began with the study of the
living organism's resistance to mi¬
crobes. Charles Nicolle, the famous
French bacteriologist, wrote in the
1930s that future generations would
increasingly be able to defend them¬
selves and their domestic animals
against infectious diseases.
Since that time immunologists have
greatly extended their fields of
research to include problems as vital
to world health as organ and tissue
transplants and the treatment of
cancer.
Oganes V. Baroyan
20
