CELTIC CITADELS
THAT DEFIED
JULIUS CAESAR
by Wolfgang Dehn
WOLFGANG DEHN, German historian and member of the Archaeologi¬
cal Institute of the Fed. Rep. of Germany, is head of the department of
prehistory at Philipps University, Marburg. He was formerly on the stañ
of the Dept. of Prehistory at the Landesmuseum, Trier. A corresponding
member of institutes for prehistoric studies in the UK. and Italy, he has
published many studies on the history of the ancient Celts and notably on
those of the Rhineland.
44

--. z
VHÄ\'
1 /:^»'
m/A» x
"¥,////},-
W//A '
I I X
1
1 1
m
Drawing from "Kölner Römer Illustrierte" - Historische Museen der Stadt, Cologne, Germany (Fed. Rep.)
WHEN Julius Caesar conquered
Gaul between 58 and 51 B.C.
the Roman Empire acquired one of its
richest and most alluring provinces.
Roman Gaul included the territory of
present-day France, Belgium and the
Netherlands up to the Rhine, as well
as all of Switzerland. This region
was occupied by the Celts, whom the
Romans called Gauls. The entire ter¬
ritory of the Celts, however, stretched
far beyond Gaul, reaching deeply into
Eastern Europe.
There had never been a common
Celtic state: the various tribes were
ruled independently by kings, chieftains
or groups of nobles. But the Celts
spoke a common language and were
linked by many similarities in their
daily life and customs, though they
often fought bitterly among themselves.
In his Commentaries on his cam¬
paigns, Caesar repeatedly underlines
the importance, from his viewpoint, of
the "oppida", or towns, of Gaul as
places where he could obtain pro¬
visions, as winter quarters and as
bases where retreating armies could
take refuge. They were also the
points where the local tribes concen¬
trated their resistance, and thus the fall
of these oppida, or of a single central
"oppidum" often decided the fate of
an entire tribe.
Caesar's own remarks show clearly
that these oppida were in fact
the first towns of Gaul. Caesar had
every reason for using this Latin term
which signifies a town and especially
one that is fortified. The oppida were
the seats of government and the
central rallying places for the local
districts and tribes.
The oppida were also centres of
economic life in which craftsmen and
merchants played the leading roles
although a large proportion of the
population consisted of farmers who
worked the nearby land but lived
within the town for reasons of security.
Religion with its priests and temples
was another important aspect of life
in these towns.
According to . ancient tradition,
Caesar conquered several hundred
towns in Gaul.' Even if this figure is
somewhat exaggerated, the actual
number of oppida must have been
considerable.
When the Helvetii, in fear of the
Germanic tribes, abandoned their
territory (present-day Switzerland) in
58 B.C., they burned 12 oppida, 400
villages and many farms (according to
Caesar's own account). They did so
in order to remove any temptation to
return. The Bituriges tribe had at least
20 towns as well as their main centre
of Avaricum (today the French city of
Bourges) said to have been the most
beautiful city in Gaul. These figures
are indeed impressive.
The oppida referred to by Caesar
were for the most part so well sited
that they were enlarged during the
Roman period and many of them,
having survived the disruption of the
early Middle Ages, still play a major
role today. This is certainly true of
Paris, which the Romans called Lutetia
Parisiorum from the name of its
founding tribe the Parisii and their
oppidum on an island of the Seine.
Other examples, among many, are
Geneva (Genava), Orléans (Cenabum)
and Amiens (Samarobriva).
Many other oppida were abandoned
or were moved from their original site
because of changes in communication
and trade during the Roman period.
The best-known example Is Bibracte,
the capital of the Aedui (today Mt.
Beuvray in central France). Its
inhabitants were forcibly transferred
during the reign of the Roman emperor
Augustus to the newly built town oK
Augustodunum (today Autun), further r
45

east in the valley of the river Arroux.
All that remained on the site of the
older town was a temple, still in exist¬
ence today as a Christian chapel, and
a famous market which only ceased to
function a few decades ago.
When the accounts given by Caesar
are confirmed by archaeological re¬
search, our understanding of what the
oppida really were like becomes clear.
One example Is Vesontio (today
Besançon), the capital of the Sequani.
This city was well fortified by nature,
with the river Doubs surrounding it
on three sides and the exposed part
protected by a high mountain encircled
by walls which overlooks the city like
a fortress.
Anyone looking down on Besançon
from one of the later fortifications out
side the city would easily recognize
the place from Caesar's description.
Where excavations have been made
beneath the centre of the present-day
city, traces of the Celtic settlement
have been found in the form of wooden
building beams, fragments of pottery
and other household goods.
Bibracte, mentioned earlier,' is per¬
haps the best-known example of
Caesar's observations being confirmed
by archaeological discoveries. It was
apparently the capital of the Aedui
and was by far the largest arid richest
of the towns in the region controlled by
this tribe.
Its attractions were such that Caesar
himself chose it for his winter quarters
in the last year of his Gallic campaign,
even though it stood ai a height of 800
metres on a windswept plateau. But
it gave Caesar easy access to the river
routes of the Rhône and Saône and
the valley of the Loire.
Excavations in the oppidum of
Bibracte have been carried out since
the 19th century. This mountain for¬
tress covered about 100 hectares of
hills and dales and was watered by
natural springs. It was surrounded by
a stout wall built in Celtic fashion of
stone and wood, and protected by a
deep outer ditch.
There were a number of gates con¬
nected by roadways lined with dwell¬
ings. The settlement itself was divided
into several areas. One street con¬
tained a large number of simple huts
and workshops in which craftsmen
carried on their trades as workers in
bronze, lead or iron or as artisans
of enamelled ware.
46

IRISH CLIFF-HANGER
Left, the huge drystone fort of Dun
Aengus on the island of Inishmore
(Ireland) is dramatically sited on
the edge of a 100-metre cliff
dropping sheer into the sea.
Impregnable from the seaward side,
it was defended against attack
from inland by three rings of walls.
To stop their enemies, the Celts of
Dun Aengus also "sowed" a bristling
"forest" of jagged rocks between
the outer defensive wall (part of
which is visible at bottom left of
photo) and the next ring. These
obstacles show up on photo as a
carpet of tiny dots. This spectacular
cliff-top stronghold enclosed
some 4 hectares within its ramparts.
In another area lay more widely
spaced and larger dwellings, whose
style and form recall the Mediterra¬
nean-type architecture of Greco-Roman
villas. This was the area reserved for
the nobles, the place of residence of
the Equités or knights. In the highest
part of the city and the area around it,
were large wooden buildings used for
markets and trading.
These constructions, along with
others which seem to have been used
for administration, formed a complex
which, according to archaeologists,
may have served as a kind of "forum".
Traces have been found of a Celtic
temple of the Roman period, which
may have replaced earlier ones. After
the abandoning of the city under
Augustus, the holy place and the
market continued to fulfil their tradi¬
tional functions right up to modern
times.
On the whole, the picture of the
oppidum obtained from these exca¬
vations is most impressive, even if
incomplete in many respects. The
remains brought to light mostly date
from the last phase of the city the
period between the end of Caesar's
Gallic campaign and the reorganization
of Gaul under Augustus in the first
years of the Christian era. It was a
period in which the loss of Celtic
independence was offset to some
extent by a time of peace and pros¬
perity in which the Celtic oppida
flourished. But was this only a late
second flowering?
The fate of Vercingetorix, the chief¬
tain of the Arverni, who led a rebellion
against Roman rule in Gaul in 52 B.C.,
is closely linked with the names of
three oppida: Avaricum (today Bour¬
ges) in the territory of the Bituriges;
Gergovia (today Gergovie, not far from
Clermont-Ferrand in Auvergne) in that
of the Arverni; and Alesia (today Alise-
Sainte-Reine) in the district of the
Mandubii, all three in central France.
Archaeological excavations have been
made at the site of each of these
towns.
Avaricum, according to Caesar's
description, was naturally protected by
its position within a swamp, and also
fortified by a wall erected in Gaulish
fashion the "Murus Gallicus" built of
horizontal timber beams faced with
stone without the use of mortar, fur¬
ther strengthened by an earthen ramp
behind. This kind of wall has been
found in many Celtic settlements from
Brittany to Bavaria; in Bourges itself,
later Roman and medieval fortifications
have unfortunately destroyed the Celtic
remains.
Fate was a little kinder in both
Gergovia and Alesia. In Gergovia,
whose inhabitants in Roman times were
forced to move to Augustonemetum
(today Clermont-Ferrand), the difficult
nature of the soil has resulted in only a
modest yield for archaeologists. In
Alesia, famed as the scene of the final
struggle between Caesar and Vercin¬
getorix, the Roman siege constructions .
have been found, together with the r
MYSTERY DISC
The object, right, is a Celtic bronze
disc the purpose and origins of
which remain a mystery. Other
similar discs have been found in
Ireland. Many scholars have seen
in the design a stylized grotesque
face with bulging eyes and gaping
mouth. Now in the British
Museum, the disc is believed to
date from the 1st or 2nd cent. A.D.

, "murus gallicus" of the oppidum, and
many remains from Alesia's Roman
period, such as workshops, temples
and dwellings. But the original Celtic
constructions have been built over and
not much is left.
Alesia's geographical situation was
precisely described by Caesar : "The
town is built on a steep mountain, with
two rivers flowing on either side of
it; a broad plain stretches out before
the town. On all other sides, it is
surrounded by hills of about the same
height as the town itself."
Anyone who stands at the foot of
the great statue of Vercingetorix at this
place and reflects on the role the town
has played in history cannot fail to be
impressed by the accuracy of Caesar's
description.
The Celtic world stretched far
beyond the borders of Caesar's Gaul.
During his expedition to the British
Isles Caesar came up against Celtic
tribes whose oppida were like those
of the continent.
He noted certain differences, how¬
ever. Sites later expanded into
the Roman centres of Camulodunum
(today Colchester) and Verulamium
(today Saint Albans) show in their
traces of pre-Roman development none
of the characteristic lay-outs widely
found in Gaul.
East of the Rhine down as far as
Carinthia in Austria, along the Danube
as far as Budapest and in Bohemia and
Moravia, a large number of fortified
settlements from the late Celtic period
have been identified. By the nature of
their site, appearance and type of
fortification they can readily be classed
with the Gaulish oppida of Caesar's
time.
Since the 1950s striking new evi¬
dence has come to light from the oppi¬
dum of Manching, not far from Ingol¬
stadt in Bavaria. This was probably
the capital of the Vindelikii. It was
abandoned when Roman troops were
carrying out their Alpine campaign
during 16 and 15 B.C. which opened
the Alps as a transit route and brought
under Roman sway their northern ap¬
proaches. The Roman administration
selected another site, Augusta Vindeli-
cum (today Augsburg) as their centre
of government.
The name of the oppidum at
Manching is unknown. Even the
builders of the Roman fort constructed
on the site of the oppidum did not
know its name, and called their fort
after the remains of the wall of the
oppidum "vallatum" (a walled place).
The site of Manching is typical, and
very similar to that of Avaricum. Built
on the south bank of the Danube on
the road that follows the river, and
encircled by small brooks, it thus
enjoyed a certain natural protection
although its main defence was a
circular wall surrounded by a ditch.
It covered some 380 hectares.
It had four gates, two of which
allowed the main highway following
the Danube to pass through the set
tlement, another opening directly on to
the Danube itself, which was certainly
used for river traffic, and a fourth which
served as an access point to the nearby
iron-ore deposit a vital material for
the town's iron-working craftsmen.
Excavations along the wall and an
archaeological survey of one gate
show two and sometimes three building
periods, an indication of the eventful
history of the settlement before it was
abandoned in the second century B.C.
The wall and the gates the latter built
in the characteristic "pincer" form, with
the inner wings of the wall closing in
to trap potential attackers in a narrow
alleyway are built in the customary
Celtic fashion of wood and stone, with
the oldest stretch of wall constructed
in the same way as the "Murus
Gallicus" described by Caesar.
So far the centre of the oppidum has
not been entirely excavated, but
enough work has been done to show
that the whole area was not built up;
enough room was left for the inhabi¬
tants of the neighbouring countryside
to find sanctuary in times of danger
with all their possessions, especially
their livestock.
The dwellings were laid out along
parallel streets and separated from
each other by fences, and their inhabi¬
tants seem to have worked the land.
Nearby other dwellings seem to have
been occupied by craftsmen of various
types, such as leather-workers, glass-
blowers, smiths, wagon-makers and so
on. Craftsmen may well have been
allotted special areas or streets
according to their trades.
The potteries which produced the
ceramic ware that is characteristic of
Manching have not yet been found;
they may have been sited outside the
walls. In the centre of the oppidum
is an open space, which may well have
been a type of "forum" and also the
site of a religious sanctuary.
Comparison of the inner lay-out of
the Manching oppidum with that of
Bibracte reveals certain unmistak¬
able differences. But both places show
an identical effort to plan an orderly
layout for buildings and a division of
the town into specific areas. This type
of early town planning is almost cer¬
tainly characteristic of other large
oppida both within and outside
Caesar's Gaul. This has been borne
out by excavations in the oppidum of
Hrazany (Bohemia) and of Stare
Hradisko (Moravia) both in Czechoslo¬
vakia, whose excavated sections are
similar in every respect to that of
Manching.
The early urban civilization of the
Celtic world in the 2nd and 1st century
B.C. shows an astonishing unity. The
contacts with Mediterranean cultures
encouraged trade, provided new tech¬
niques, and through the adoption of
metal coinage changed the primitive
economy to one based on money.
These developments were closely
linked with the spread of settlements.
Whether these contacts took place
in southern France, or whether they
were transmitted by the Celtic
tribes of northern Italy to the tribes
north of the Alps is still the subject of
much controversy among scholars.
But no one entertains the slightest
doubt that it was the influence of the
Hellenistic-Roman culture that stimul¬
ated the development of the Celtic
oppida.
The late Celtic oppida met varied
fates. Many were abandoned in Gaul,
under the rule of Rome, since the old
sites no longer satisfied the new
trading and travelling conditions; others
survived and flourished long after the
Roman period and the Middle Ages
right up to modern times.
Occasionally the names of today's
towns still commemorate those of the
tribes whose capitals they were: in
Bourges the Bituriges, in Langres the
Lingoni, in Metz the Mediomatrici, in
Amiens the Ambiani, among others.
To the east of the Rhine there are
no examples of oppida surviving
beyond Roman times even into the
Middle Ages. Apparently in this part
of the Celtic world the roots of city
life had not sunk as deeply or as
firmly as they had in Caesar's Gaul.
Wolfgang Dehn
