Youthful Women's Lib
militants on the march
in New York. Since the
mid-1960s the U.S'
women's rights move¬
ment has erupted with
remarkable force in a
spate of demonstra¬
tions, manifestoes,
new feminist organiza¬
tions and publications.
by Isa Kapp
ISA KAPP, U.S.writer and journalist specializ¬
ing In social and cultural questions, is a regular
contributor to American and European maga¬
zines. She Is currently working on a book about
manners and morals in the United States, to be
called "Love among the Middle Classes ".
28

The new feminist
explosion in the U.S.A,
SINCE the mid-1960s, a formidable
conglomeration of organizations,
programmes and manifestoes known
as the Women's Liberation Movement
has erupted in the United States with
extraordinary force. Dedicated to the
assertion of equal rights in all fields
work, education, law the movement
has grown at an astonishing rate, and
by now hundreds of thousands of
women have participated in at least
one of its groups or activities.
There have been mass demon¬
strations and energetic campaigns
directed at opening up a wider range
of life alternatives for women, and an
ardent struggle for the enactment of
the Equal Rights Amendment ("Equality
of rights under the law shall not be
denied or abridged by the United
States or. by any State on account of
sex.")
Finally passed by Congress in 1972,
after being introduced and ignored by
the federal legislature each year since
1923, this constitutional amendment is
still short by four states of the 38 re¬
quired to ratify it, but its progress to
this point represents a considerable
success by the liberationists.
In addition, there has been a flood
of books dealing with women's position
in society, and several new feminist
magazines have been launched. Most
prominent of these is Ms, which has
a circulation of 400,000 and covers the
political, cultural and personal concerns
of women.
The title is pronounced miz, a new
"liberated" form of address which
avoids identifying women on the basis
of their marital status (1). A more
recent entry Into the journalistic com¬
petition is womanSports, published by
tennis star Billie Jean King and her
husband.
The new movement has wielded
enormous political strength it has
intimidated male legislators, changed ^
(J) Editor's note : In English the same
word "Mr" is used to designate an unmarried
and married man. "Ms' is the female equi¬
valent.
29

iW laws, enjoyed increasing access to the
media. But impressive though its
impact has been, it is not really a new
phenomenon in American life.
Despite the feeling of many of its
participants that they are engaged in
a radical contemporary cause, the
feminist movement actually goes far
back in American history, to the early
19th century, when the "woman issue"
was extensively debated in the national
press, in political gatherings and from
church pulpits.
This early wave of feminism also
sprouted in a period of ferment
geographic expansion, industrial devel¬
opment and social reform. Its Initial
efforts were aimed at expanding
women's educational opportunities, and
in 1833 Oberlin (Ohio) became the
first college to open Its doors to both
men and women.
But it was in the abolitionist move¬
ment of the 1830s that the women's
rights movement as such had its
political origins. When women began
working in earnest for the abolition
of slavery, they learned that they could
not function as equals with their
male friends. They were barred from
membership in some organizations and
often forbidden to speak in public.
One hears the stark accents of
today's feminists in the sentiments
voiced by abolitionist Sarah Grimke
in 1837:
"All history attests that man has sub¬
jugated woman to his will as means
to promote his selfish gratification, to
minister to his sensual pleasures, to be
instrumental in promoting his comfort;
but never has he desired to elevate
her to the ranks she was created to
fill. He has done all he could to
debase and enslave her mind; and now
he looks triumphantly on the ruin he
has wrought and says the being he has
thus deeply injured is his inferior."
But while the battle for abolition
succeeded in emancipating the Negro
slaves, the concomitant demand for
women's rights did not have an equal
triumph. Feminist groups remained
active and sometimes militant in the
period following the American Civil
War of 1861-65, but it was not until
1920 that they won the fight for
women's suffrage. With that victory,
the feelings of injury abated, and femin¬
ism lay dormant for some 40 years.
What is it that has just this past
decade brought the vocal minority to
such a crescendo of protest? This is,
after all, the period when women in the
U.S.A. have come to make up more
than 40 per cent of the university
population, when liberalized divorce
laws, varied birth control methods,
and technological improvements have
guaranteed them tremendous personal
freedom, when women on their own
merit have achieved distinction in
politics as members of Congress,
mayors of cities, state legislators, and
when the important New England state
of Connecticut now has a woman
governor.
So why, when women as a whole
exert unprecedented influence both on
family and public policy, have modern
feminists been moved to characterize
the female role in society as being an
outrageously subservient one?
For one thing, they point to what
they see as glaring inequities in the
work world. Of the 35 million women
employed in the United States a third
are secretaries or clerks, and over a
fifth are service workers, such as
waitresses or domestics. They are
poorly represented in the professions
and in management.
The average yearly income of full-
time female workers is less than two-
thirds of the male average. (Of
course, this differentiation is to some
extent one of circumstance rather than
of discrimination: women tend to leave
jobs, for family reasons, before they
reach the highest salary level, and
men in blue-collar jobs tend to belong
to unions that have won high wage
rates.)
Further, when men and women do
equal work, women often get lesser
titles and lower pay. Women who
are full professors earn an average of
ten per cent less than men, and the
disparities are even greater in other
fields.
The women's movement cited ad¬
ditional grievances. Some states still
discriminated against women in in¬
heritance rights and in the control
of their own property in marriage.
Some universities still denied women
equal access to professional schools
or to scholarships. And some state
laws still treated women more harshly
than men for certain types of crimes.
There is no doubt that these are
legitimate areas in which to demand
reforms, but there were also larger
cultural and social forces which ac¬
counted for the urgency and energy
of the Women's Liberation Movement.
In this view, modern woman is at the
mercy, not so much of men, as of rapid
social change urbanization, science
and technology.
In the predominantly rural society
that America was up to around 1900,
a wife and mother was often employed
from early morning until late at night,
baking bread, preparing meals, wash¬
ing, sewing, knitting, and fetching water
from the well. But today small mobile
families have made the home less
central and stable than it once was;
and electric refrigerators, washing
machines and frozen foods have
relegated the female to the most minor
chores of homemaking.
No wonder that she needs to recover
her lost value and self-respect by
seeking new roles in the outside world.
Possessing leisure and often a college
education, caught up in our current
passion for questioning all traditional
values and institutions, she has become
a recruit for the revolution of rising
expectations.
Yet all of these grievances simmered
below the surface until the mid-1960s.
There were hints of restiveness
directly after World War II when
thousands of women who had worked
in defence industries relinquished their
jobs to demobilized veterans, and dis¬
covered that full-time homemaking was
an anticlimax after the status and
excitement of going to work.
ln_ 1952, an English translation of
The "Second Sex, by the French phil¬
osopher Simone de Beauvoir, stoked
the fires of intellectual rebellion. But
despite these provocations, the rumble
of feminism was hardly audible in the
1950s, partly because most women
were deeply relieved to have their men
home from the battlefields.
What brought all these dormant dis¬
satisfactions to consciousness was the
publication in 1963 of Betty Friedan's
The Feminine Mystique. Based mainly
on interviews with her classmates
15 years after graduation from a
women's college, her book formulated
what the author called "the problem
that has no name," an unspoken
discontent that prevailed among thou¬
sands of educated women.
Many of them had eagerly embarked
upon marriage and domesticity in an
effort to compensate for the loneliness
of the war years, yet a decade later
she found them tired and unfulfilled,
victims of "the feminine mystique", the
view which educators, the media and
business conspired to impose: that
motherhood and housekeeping were
the most rewarding occupations for
women.
Against this notion Mrs. Friedan
argued vehemently: "The only way
for a woman, as for a man, to find
herself, to know herself as a person,
is by creative work of her own." The
impact of her book was enormous it
sold one and a half million copies and
the women's liberation movement as it
now exists in America must date itself
from its publication.
In 1966, Betty Friedan formally
launched the National Organization of
Women (NOW), a moderate group that
acted, for the first time in the United
States, as a lobby to press for equality
of women in all spheres. Its member¬
ship was composed mainly of pro¬
fessional women and middle-class
housewives, its language was sober,
and its goals were largely political and
economic.
NOW's strong support was in good
part responsible for the rapid passage
by the U.S. Congress of the Equal
30

Rights Amendment and its subsequent
approval by 34 state legislatures; and
for removing specification as to sex
from the "help wanted" section of
newspapers. It also worked for
vigorous enforcement of the Equal Pay
Act of 1963, and by 1974 more than
$50 million in back wages had been
awarded to over 100,000 female em¬
ployees.
But if it was relatively militant in
terms of practical reforms, NOW did
not seem to meet the emotional re¬
quirements of younger or lower-class
women, who were in search of some
more primary confrontation with men.
A number of splinter groups and new
organizations were formed, many of
them calling for a total revaluation of
male-female relations.
Some questioned such traditional
her widely discussed book, Sexual
Politics, argues that ever since the
establishment of patriarchal society,
the status accorded women has been
a demeaning one, that of chattel and
homemaker.
A very different perspective is pro¬
vided by anthropologist George Mur-
dock who found that even in pre-
patriarchal times, in 224 primitive
societies, war-making has been exclus¬
ively a male function and child-rearing
exclusively female; and that it was
always males who performed the
strenuous, risky tasks, while women
took on the more sedentary, nurturant
ones. In this view, the sexual division
of roles was simply an efficient tech¬
nique for survival, rather than a delib¬
erate male conspiracy.
Another question that has touched
Photo USIS
Contemporary en¬
graving of the first
women's rights con¬
vention in the U.S.,
held at Seneca Falls,
New York State, in
1848. Led by Eliza¬
beth Cady Stanton,
the convention made
the first organized
demand for women's
suffrage in the U.S..
as well as calling for
improvements in
women's economic,
political, social and
domestic status.
institutions as the "nuclear family"
(consisting of only parents and chil¬
dren); others even argued that marriage
must be abolished because "it has the
same effect the institution of slavery
had." (The passionate rhetoric and
often disruptive tactics of these radical
groups were clearly borrowed from the
civil rights movement which reached
its peak of activism and success in
the mid-1960s.)
In my opinion, most American women
still look for emotional security and
gratification in their own families, and
are not aware of any far-reaching
exploitation by men. Indeed a number
of women might admit, if they are
honest, that they themselves are often
In the role of exploiter. And they
might willingly accept the anthropo¬
logical view that the family was created
precisely for the protection of women
and children during the periods of
their helplessness.
Nevertheless, the feminist movement
has acted as an intellectual spur. It
has ensured public debate on a number
of fundamental questions that have not,
until now, received lively consideration.
The question that has aroused most
controversy is: what roles have women
played throughout civilization and
why? Militant feminist Kate Millet, in
off a lively and still ongoing debate is:
how much of the differences between
men and women are biological and
how much cultural? Clearly, men are
generally taller, stronger and more
muscular; while women have their own
special genetic and hormonal makeup,
which is rooted in their capacity for
motherhood.
But do these differences explain
the differences in social attitude and
behaviour e.g., dress and demeanour,
personal adornment, sexual initiative
of male and female? The evidence
so far is inconclusive because it is
hard to isolate specific behaviour from
the larger cultural context. But
some of the traditional notions about
women's inferiority in abstract intel¬
lectual work or in administrative ability
have been placed in doubt as women
have moved in larger numbers into
these fields.
The Women's Liberation Movement
has clearly done an important service
in bringing feminine discontents and
desire for self-improvement into the
arena of public discussion. By doing
so it has changed the emotional ambi¬
ence of male-female relationships and
made them in some ways more resilient
and elastic. The movement can also
take credit for the rapid opening up
of educational and career opportunities
for women. To cite only two examples:
between 1965 and 1973 female enroll¬
ment in medical schools nearly doubled
and in law schools more than tripled.
Many inequalities, of course, still
exist. Women still earn considerably
less than men in all major occupations
at a time when more and more U.S.
families are headed by women, many
without incomes other than their
salaries. While inequities are nar¬
rowing in education, women are not
yet even near parity with men at the
postgraduate level or in professional
schools. Labour unions have been
accused of resisting the admission of
women to full equality in job-training
and apprenticeship programmes.
In the effort to eliminate such griev¬
ances, the Women's Liberation Move¬
ment has been successful in gaining
support from an increasing number of
working-class women, as well as from
a surprisingly large proportion of men
who, in public opinion polls, show a
greater approval of the movement's
goals than women.
Without doubt, the next decade will
see a growing movement of women
into all occupations and areas of
American life: in the professions, in
politics, and in the academic world.
Even today, despite remnants of
discrimination, a woman can choose
how she wishes to order her life. She
can devote herself to marriage, or
pursue a career, or opt for both and
derive considerable satisfaction from
managing the practical difficulties this
may present. She may decide on a
part-time career and deliberately give
precedence to home and motherhood.
Women are not homogeneous. Some
are eager to make their way in the
outside world, and some prefer not to
compete with men. Perhaps for the
first time in history, the variety of
choices open to them will correspond
to the variety of their impulses.
Isa Kapp
31
