$65 million :
one company's penalty
for sexist discrimination
The consequences of an anti-discrimination law
passed by the U.S. Congress in 1964
by Lynn Payer
LYNN PAYER, American medical journalist
now working In Paris, was directly concerned
with the problems of equal working opportunities
for women when she served on the employment
committee of the National Organization of
Women (NOW) in New York.
AN aluminium company in the
United States was recently
ordered to pay $190,000 in back
wages and court costs to 276 women
who alleged that the company had
maintained sex-segregated job classi- .
fications by changing jobs formerly
classified "male" and "female" to
"heavy" and "light".
A U.S. finance corporation paid
more than $125,000 to white-collar
female employees who charged that
they were denied- promotion because
of their sex.
These are just two examples of
what has been made possible by the
Civil Rights Act which was passed by
the United States Congress in 1964.
Although most Americans recognized
that the law would have far-reaching
consequences for Negro rights, few
were aware at the time that it con¬
tained a clause that would provide
much of the muscle behind equal em¬
ployment opportunity for women.
For among the many amendments
to the original act, a Southern Con¬
gressman, anxious to defeat the bill,
slipped the word "sex" into Title VII,
that portion of the Civil Rights Act
aiiuiiiiiiiiiaiiiii-iiiii.ifii
lln»»IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIHI!IMiy|||S
min»
If .- \vM
^H^M^m^m^f^ 6

m ni in m
iti ut mm m
1:1 ii in tn
IV > III in tl
ç.»
00 NOT CROS!
J]
Photo Leonard Freed © Magnum, Paris
Even through a magnifying glass you will find it hard to pick out a single woman
among these assembled white collar workers, left, at a U.S. automobile plant.
On the other hand numerous men supporters have joined in the New York
Women's Lib demonstration above. In its fight to assert equality of rights for
women in all fields, the Women's Liberation movement in the USA has made a
special target of the job discrimination so often practised against women. Under
the Civil Rights Act, many women victims of this discrimination have
successfully taken legal action against offending companies.
pertaining to equal employment oppor¬
tunity. Title VII, as it was finally
voted, therefore, prohibited discrimi¬
nation because of race, colour, religion,
sex, or national origin, in any term,
condition or privilege of employment.
Thus while the U.S. courts have not
consistently interpreted the U.S. Cons¬
titution to mean that U.S. women, as
well as U.S. men, enjoy equal protec¬
tion under the law, and while the Equal
Rights Amendment has not yet been
ratified by a sufficient number of sta¬
tes, women have been given the legal
basis for equal rights in one important
area, that of employment.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act is
administered by the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission and is inter¬
preted by the U.S. courts. Both have
tended to broaden their view of what
constitutes discrimination. When the
equal employment laws were first
enacted, it was generally believed that
discrimination took place primarily
through conscious, overt actions
against individuals. Now, the view is
that discrimination also takes place
through seemingly neutral employment
practices.
The commission and the courts
thus decided that the proof of discri
mination, or lack of it, must lie in the
result. If all executive positions, or
most of them, are filled by men and
all or most secretarial positions are
filled by women, this constitutes strong
evidence that sex-discrimination is
consciously or unconsciously practised
by the company.
The law works this way: If a woman
thinks that she has been discriminated
against in advertising, recruitment,
hiring, firing, salary, promotions, etc.,
she files a complaint with the commis¬
sion or with other agencies at the
local, state, or federal level. (For
example, if the company receives fed¬
eral contracts, she may file her com¬
plaint with the Office of Federal Con¬
tract Compliance).
The Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission or the other agency con¬
cerned then sends investigators into
the named company. These investi¬
gators have the right to question em¬
ployees, including top executives, and'
also have access to company records.
If they find that the proportion of
women in a given job category differs
from the proportion of women in the
labour pool, discrimination is assumed,
unless the company proves otherwise.
Thus, if they find that all telephone
CONTINUED PAGE 68
33

$ 65 million penalty for sexist discrimination
operators are women and all telephone
repair staff are men (usually earning
much higher salaries) this is con¬
sidered proof that the telephone com¬
pany practises discrimination. Sex dis¬
crimination is permitted only in those
positions where sex is a bona fide
occupational qualification; and offi¬
cials have suggested that about the
only positions where sex is such a
bona fide qualification are those of
sperm donor and wet nurse.
If a company is found guilty of dis¬
crimination or if it wishes to avoid
such a possibility, or if it is a federal
contractor, it must draw up an "Affir¬
mative Action Program" showing not
only how discrimination will be elimi¬
nated in the future, but how it intends
to correct the results of past discri¬
mination.
This may mean recruitment of women
machinists in a higher proportion
than the general average, or it may
mean company training programmes
for women so that they may be promo¬
ted " to higher company positions,
rarely occupied by women. The action
programme must include goals and
timetables.
Some companies found guilty of
discrimination have been faced with
expensive payments. For example, in
one key action against a telephone
company, approximately $15 million
back pay was given to women and
minority groups considered to have
suffered from discriminatory employ¬
ment practices; and an additional
$50 million in yearly payments for
promotion and wage adjustments to
minority and female employees was
ordered. Recently the same company
was ordered to pay even more for
failing to comply with earlier agree¬
ments to end employment discrimi¬
nation.
Companies and universities receiving
federal contracts may find their govern¬
ment contracts held up until an appro¬
priate action programme is presented.
Women were perhaps extremely
lucky that the word "sex" was slipped
into the Civil Rights Act; but their
benefits from it would have been
minimal had they relied on luck alone.
When people finally realized that
sex discrimination was prohibited by
Title VII, they first tended to regard it
as a joke, and even the Equal Employ¬
ment Opportunity Commission didn't
take women very seriously in the 1960s,
feeling that its main job was to elimin¬
ate discrimination against minority
groups.
Women, however, began to realize
that they could make Title VII work
for them. An investigation by the
commission cannot be started until a
complaint is filed by someone actually
interested in the job in question. The
women's movement thus set out to
help women file their complaints.
Groups such as the National Organ¬
ization of Women trained members to
act as employment counsellors, to
show more women where and how to
file and to give them moral support
during the long process, particularly
if they faced (illegal) harassment.
Moreover, the commission's tremen¬
dous backlog of complaints often
means a delay of two years or more
between filing a complaint and an
investigation. Employment counsellors
have tried to speed up this process in
individual cases, for example by filing
complaints with the state and local
agencies, which have tended to act
more rapidly.
The women's movement has been
active in other ways, such as organ¬
izing demonstrations against some
companies where discrimination was
most blatant; and it made a cause
célèbre of a Southern woman who
filed a complaint because a telephone
company had denied her a job as a
switchwoman.
The movement has also seen to it
that women are included in other
legislation pertaining to equal employ¬
ment opportunity. The commission is
criticized on the one hand for not doing
enough and on the other for doing too
much. In spite of a significant
(Continued from page 33)
strengthening of the commission in
1972, women's groups still say it
is too weak, and that the backlog of
complaints, with the consequent
delays, is so large as to make it
unworkable.
But universities and businesses don't
like to be told whom they can hire, and
they object to the arbitrariness of some
of the quotas they must fill. Further¬
more, if quotas are set for the
hiring of Negroes, Women, Spanish
Americans, Asians, and American
Indians, other minority groups wonder
why they, too, cannot have a quota.
Women's suffrage had many links
with the emancipation of the Negro in
American history, but Negroes, who
once again find themselves bracketed
with women, feel that women are
reaping greater benefits than they are.
White males just entering the job
market feel that they suffer from
reverse discrimination, as companies
try to meet their quotas of women and
minority groups, although the president
of one American company has said
"what the white male is losing is not
opportunity, but the favoured place he's
held over the years in relation to that
opportunity."
While it is still too early to evaluate
the long-term effects of Title VII and
other acts that prohibit sex discrimi¬
nation in employment, it would seem
that, just as today's women's move¬
ment has pushed for enforcement and
expansion of the law, the law has in
turn benefitted women.
The refusal of federal legislation to
recognize "male" and "female" jobs,
has opened new occupations, with
their promotional and pay benefits, to
women, many of whom would have
never applied for such work because
nothing in their experience or education
suggested that a woman could do it.
And the woman who knows what she
wants is no longer totally powerless
when told "We don't hire women for
this job."
Lynn Payer
68
