Boys come
into the world
Girls come into
a 'Third World'
by
Elena Gianini Belotti
ELENA GIANINI BELOTTI is director of the
Montessori Birth Centre in Rome, which gives
psychological and practical training on the role of
parents to expectant mothers and future fathers.
She is the author of a study on the influence of
social conditioning in developing the feminine
role during the first years of life ("Dalla parte
délie bambine L'influenza dei condizionamenti
sociall nella formazione del ruolo femminile nei
primi annl dl vita") published by Feltrinelli,
Milan in 1973.
IT is obvious that biological differ¬
ences between male and female
exist and are essential to procreation.
But it is not obvious that these biologi¬
cal differences are responsible for
psychological and intellectual differ¬
ences.
It is even less justifiable that bio¬
logical dissimilarities should be trans¬
lated into social differences implying
that men .are superior to women. Such
differences could equally well be seen
as feminine superiority and masculine
inferiority.
A female mammal normally cares for
and protects her young only when they
need her, and not throughout her life,
as does a woman the human female
mammal. On the contrary, the female
animal behaves exactly like the male
of the same species, with the same
independence and aggressivity, except
during the strictly limited period of her
motherhood.
It is clear that women are conditioned
from infancy for their future role^
42


This baby girl chortles happily as she splashes around
in the kitchen sink. Will she still smile in a few
years time when her mother says "Do the washing
up" while her brothers are outside doing more
adventurous things ? But perhaps by then the
traditional idea that only girls should help
with housework will be a thing of the past.
Was mothers and that all aspects of
their lives are marked by this condition¬
ing, even though they may never have
children. Motherhood has thus been
made an Instrument for woman's social
and cultural subjection, through man's
control of her sexual and reproductive
functions.
In other words, the patriarchal
system, a social structure linked to
property and the possession of women,
has made women second class citi¬
zens, with well-defined duties and func¬
tions that are more limited than men's.
But the cultural and social subordi¬
nation of women is only one aspect
though a major one of the "values"
that Western culture fosters in order to
preserve itself. Others are the
"superiority" of the white man, of
capital over labour, of adults over
children and old people, of the healthy
over the sick, of the "normal" over
those who are "different".
Western culture considers efficiency,
competitiveness, success, money and
productivity as desirable and valuable
assets, even if they are detrimental to
the social fabric, to personal fulfilment,
to social solidarity and conviviality.
Education that conditions people to
accept things as they are is typical
' of Western society. It does not wel¬
come those who criticize and disturb it.
It wants consenting individuals who
accept its rules, its values, and its
demands. And the consent of women
to this state of affairs is essential,
since they provide a vast number of
free "services".
Women who rebel against being
a marginal and exploited caste are
a threat to the masculine role and all
its privileges. That is why there is
a widespread effort to contain feminine
revolt.
The preservation of patriarchal
society and of capitalism requires not
only that they should be accepted
by women but also that women should
transmit their values to" oncoming
generations through the early training
that is almost always in women's
hands. So what happens is that
young boys get one kind of education
and young girls another.
An understanding of how this train¬
ing operates calls for a patient and
systematic examination of the relations
between adults and between adults and
children as we see them in everyday
life.
We need to examine the significance
of small actions and apparently trivial
remarks that, having been used so
often, have become mechanical, auto¬
matic reactions which we accept
without analysing their significance
and purpose.
We need to look at disputes,
hardships and sufferings of which we
women are victims when we fail to
conform to majority behaviour; to
examine ideologies that we accept as
absolute and eternal though times
have changed and experience has
shown how many other ideologies have
proved to be neither absolute nor
eternal; and to re-appraise usages and
customs and rigid codes that we dare
not infringe.
This conditioning and these values
are transmitted virtually unchanged
from one generation to the next, at an
age when we accept fully and un¬
critically everything we are taught.
Sometimes as adults we realize
that we have been victims of real
oppression and of manifest injustice.
But the task of regaining our own
proper identity is a daunting one
because it means open contestation
with the consenting majority.
Conditioning starts with parental and
social expectations about the birth of
a child. Attitudes differ for a boy or a
girl, precisely because different social
values are given to the two sexes.
The birth of a boy is clearly preferred;
naturally so in a patriarchal culture.
Opinion polls and cartoons show
that the ideal family consists of two
children, of whom the elder is a boy.
|
.wr -
This pattern is repeated in the vast
majority of children's books.
The masculine-feminine roles are
already established when children are
infants. Girls are passive and in¬
active; they play mainly with dolls and
help their mothers with household
tasks. Boys are active; they study,
they play adventurous games and never
do housework unless there is some
prestige attached to it and a certain
freedom to make independent de¬
cisions.
Parents too are presented as
stereotypes in children's books, as
part of an established hierarchy with
father as the figure of authority at
home and the breadwinner outside,
and mother at home, responsible for
the housework.
If parents expecting the birth of a
child are asked their preferences,
fathers-to-be almost always say they
hope a first-born child will be a boy.
This bears out perfectly what is
expected of a man, who will naturally
want a boy who will perpetuate him
and his privileges.
Women are less . explicit, either
because they are expected to have
less definite opinions, or because their
views are genuinely ambivalent, or
because of idealization of the maternal
44

role (which is another aspect of the
oppression of women) according to
which a mother should have no pref¬
erences but ought to want and love
all her children equally well.
If we analyse these preferences we-
find that the expectations that go with
them are profoundly different for the
two sexes. A boy is wanted because
it is hoped he will succeed in life,
make his mark professionally, acquire
prestige and authority, and "honour"
the family name which he alone will
pass on. A boy therefore is wanted
and awaited for what he will be.
On the other hand, a girl will be
expected to provide "services" that
right from the start will mark her status
as Inferior. What will be expected
from her is gratitude, company,
domestic help, affection, support,
good manners, a pleasing appearance
and psychological dependence on the
family. The girl therefore is wanted
for what she will give.
Clearly, the desire to have children
of different sexes and the marked
preference for boys would lose much
of their importance if parents believed
that both sexes had identical possi¬
bilities of succeeding in life that is,
if they were considered socially equal
and therefore treated as such.
The result is that even before they
are born, girls are prepared for a future
of intellectual and social underdevel¬
opment.
The different training given to
children according to their sex is quite
simply outrageous. Girls are forced
to suppress their innate impulse to
prove themselves as individuals (an
impulse as strong in girls as in boys),
so as to conform to a stereotyped
second-class model, below their poten¬
tialities.
Strong psychological dependence
on the authority of the male is induced
in a girl through education or through
having to model herself on her own
mother, who herself is dependent on
the male figure.
Later this psychological dependence
on a father figure will be extended to
all the men that the girl will meet as
a woman. Her energies will be placed
at the disposal of men, so as to give
them the material support and affection
they need for their own personal
achievement.
Thus the little girl becomes an indi¬
vidual programmed to be at the ser¬
vice of others, and is satisfied to be
so, or is made to feel guilty if she is
dissatisfied.
From infancy little girls learn that
motherhood is their only way to self-
fulfilment. A girl is taught from her
earliest years to regard work which
would give her economic freedom (but
not necessarily psychological freedom
also) as merely a way of filling in the
time before she meets her man and
prepares to play her role as wife-
mother-housekeeper.
So the type of work towards which
a woman's choice is canalized is defi¬
nitely subordinate, with little prestige
or remuneration. Often the job will
be part-time, in order to allow her to
fulfil her principal role in the home.
Careful analysis of the day-to-day
behaviour of parents towards a child
from the time it is born, reveals some
interesting facts especially in the
case of the mother. Though the
mother is the most important person
in the child's life for a long time, she
is not free to act independently. She
reacts to what the cultural and social
environment requires of her; and she
is profoundly influenced, in bringing
up the child, by the authority of the
father.
Even if a man has little to do with
the daily needs of a child still being
breastfed, he is and remains the
authoritarian figure within the family.
The woman depends on him and p
45

"Putthose fists up I Don't be a sissy I
Be a man like daddy I" these are the
kind of exhortations parents often
make to their sons. In the hurly
burly of the boys' playground (right)
toughness is also the order of the day.
For little girls, mummy is the model.
The trio of budding mannequins
dressed up in their mother's clothes
(opposite page) are taking their first
teetering, high-heeled steps to
womanhood. Already in children's
games the barriers between the sexes
are clearly marked out.
jV complies with his wishes and expec¬
tations. After all she has been brought
up to consent to and accept masculine
values.
Daily relations between mother and
child are marked by a series of
repeated rituals: meals, washing, bath¬
ing, hygiene, sleep, bowel movements,
all of which help to "structure" the
child psychologically and can be
carried out in different ways.
A closer look at these seemingly
banal rituals reveals an emotional
atmosphere that differs with each
mother and therefore for each child.
In it the sex of the child plays a
crucial role.
By and large a mother creates a
more tolerant and indulgent atmos¬
phere if the child is a boy, while for
a girl the atmosphere is more rigid
and disciplined, though it is also more
affectionate.
Girls are led towards an early
autonomy in little matters (eating by
themselves, keeping, clean, playing
alone, tidying up after play, etc.), but
all within the restricted family orbit.
Only small choices are allowed to
them, never those that imply a real
psychological autonomy.
A girl's aggressivity is constantly
suppressed, and so is her need to
move about, to explore, to learn. There
is a tendency to make her into an
inactive little creature who has no
other choice than to foster certain
abilities that are typical of sedentary
people, such as manual dexterity.
(Prisoners, deprived of liberty and
movement, also tend to develop
manual skills to compensate for their
lack of freedom.)
Little boys, however, are required
to display a more genuine kind of
independence that leads to wider
choices. They are allowed more time
to play, and more time to be idle.
A recent inquiry into the toys parents
buy for their children showed that
they not only spend more on boys but
buy them a wider range of toys than
they give to girls, who are usually
limited to gifts of dolls, miniature
kitchens and such like.
The restrictions imposed on little
girls are shown more clearly if the girls
are "hypertonic" that is, lively, in¬
quisitive, active and enterprising
qualities that are considered typically
masculine.
"Hypotonic" girls those who are
quiet, passive and sedentary are the
perfect stereotype and correspond to
their parents' expectations. Because
it is easy to see them as "objects",
they are caressed, protected and
indulged; but this helps to accen-
46

tuate their dependence and passivity.
The hypertonic boy also cor¬
responds to a stereotype, and is
accepted as such, while the boy who
is naturally hypotonic is pushed and
stimulated towards action and aggres-
sivity. In this way his natural tem¬
perament too is violated.
Conformity to masculine and femi¬
nine cultural models is not simply
obtained through training, whether
this comes from the family or from the
school. The child himself contributes
In two ways that are natural to very
young children: by imitation and by
identification.
Impelled by the need to identify
with an adult of the same sex, the
child finds such a model and adapts
to it, naturally with personal variations
due to his particular temperament. It
follows that a child will come to
accept a conventional model of men
and women. The little girl will accept
the inferiority of her sex, and the boy
the superiority and the privileges that
go with being a man.
If only the two parents resembled
each other more, filled the same social
roles and had the same level of
education and intellectual develop¬
ment; if they enjoyed the same esteem,
social dignity and economic equality,
then the children's identification
with either father or mother would not
produce such profound differences.
We would reach the point where male
and female roles were obliterated and
individuals would be valued as such
and not, a priori, as belonging to one
sex rather than to the other.
So we should not aim to train little
girls to behave like boys. The mascu¬
line model as it has been seen through
the centuries should be rejected
outright.
If we consider how much masculine
affectivity has been repressed and.
distorted by our Western kind of edu¬
cation, and to what extent competi¬
tiveness has been exalted, together
with aggressivity, hostility towards
others, lack of co-operation and of
social solidarity, and what the results
have been, then it becomes clear that
the objective is much more revolution¬
ary than that of achieving parity be¬
tween the sexes.
Children must be educated as
individuals who have the right to the
same freedom, autonomy and self-
realization irrespective of their sex.
But the values we teach them must
all be re-examined. They must be
taught sociability, co-operation, convi¬
viality; in other words, values that
teach them to live side by side, not
in confrontation.
Elena Gianlnl Belotti
47
