EASTERN EUROPE
DISCOVERS
ITS CELTIC PAST
AS for lobath, after leaving
Ireland with his people after
the conquest before described, they
settled in the northern islands of
Greece. They were there till numerous
were their children and their kindred.
They learned druidry and many various
arts in the islands where they were
until they were knowing, learned, and
very accomplished in the branches
thereof. They were called Tuatha De,
People of the Goddess.
This passage comes from the early
Irish Book of Invasions, a work which
provides an account of all the various
peoples who came and settled in
Ireland. In it is embedded much
mythology and a great deal of historical
material; the association of the Irish
with the east is frequently stressed in
the early tradition, and developments
in archaeology in Ireland are increas
ingly demonstrating the veracity of this
great corpus of archaic literature.
The Celtic controversy is not new.
Scholars have argued about this
complicated subject for generations,
and it has remained unresolved. In
1934 the eminent French archaeologist,
Henri Hubert, wrote:
"It is in the very west of Europe,
in the islands and peninsulas, that
the Celtic languages are still
spoken. Which is the truer
picture? Did Celticism survive in
the western end of its domain
because it was most firmly estab¬
lished there, or because it was
driven there? Is it not in these
parts that we should look for the
main mass of the Celts, their
origin, their purest type? Here, at
the beginning of a story bristling
with contradictions,
conflict."
is first
And the conflict remains unresolved.
Much attention has been paid to the
Celts of the western world, at the
expense of their eastern brothers.
Now a new interest in their origins,
together with improved scientific and
linguistic techniques, are causing the
countries of eastern Europe to study
their Celtic past and to evaluate its
contribution to the formation of their
distinctive cultures.
Conferences such as the inter¬
national Unesco symposium, held in
Hungary in May 1974 for the purpose
of discussing the eastern Celtic World
are invaluable; they bring together
specialists who, by their combined
researches and disciplines, can guide
and inspire each other in this fascinat¬
ing field of study.
Given that there was a fundamental
homogeneity throughout the wider
Celtic world, regional variations and
specialities must be expected. And it
is in the east of Europe that some of
the most exciting discoveries are being
made.
From 400 B.C. the Celts became the
dominant power in the northern Alpine
regions, from France to Hungary. And
it was in the east that some of the
finest metalwork was created, inspired
by the toreutic genius of the Celtic
artists.
One of the most striking ritual
objects ever created by the Celts is
the silver cauldron found in the last
century at Gundestrup, Jutland, Den¬
mark. It had been deliberately dis¬
mantled and laid as a votive offering
in a bog.
The workmanship is remarkable and
the subjects portrayed are all religious.
The outer plates consist of portraits of
various gods and goddesses; the inner
ones show scenes from their cult
legends. The base of the inside of
the bowl depicts the killing of the
divine bull, an important cult animal in
Celtic religion.
The cauldron is dated to somewhere
between 200-100 B.C. All the figures
and attributes portrayed are common
to the wider world of Celtic belief.
The cauldron was believed to have
been manufactured in Gaul and taken
to Denmark for some purpose at which ^
41

The Gundestrup treasure
Celtic legends
on a silver cauldron
Photo National Museum,
Copenhagen
Probably no other surviving relic of protohistoric European
craftsmanship has occasioned so much commentary and
controversy as the famous silver cauldron found in 1891
at Gundestrup in Jutland (Denmark) and now preserved in the
National Museum, Copenhagen (photo 1). For many years,
it was thought to have originated in Gaul, but scholars have
now established that it came from a workshop in Celtic eastern
Europe, possibly in Hungary, early in the 1st century B.C.
The cauldron is believed to be a war trophy brought back to
Denmark and cast as a votive offering into the peat-bog
where it was discovered. Made of elaborately chased silver
plates, the cauldron (diam. 70 cms) illustrates, with its teeming
decorations of human and animal figures and fabulous
42

creatures, a story whose significance is not yet fully
understood. Scholars are still trying to explain the scenes
and to identify characters such as the figure with the horned
helmet (5). Some authorities see in this warrior a portrayal of the
valiant Cu Chulainn, outstanding hero of theancientCelticworld.
On one plate (2) a cross-legged antlered figure (often identified
with the Celtic god "Cernunnos", the horned one) holds a
neck-ring in one hand and a serpent in the other. Among his
attendant creatures is a dolphin ridden by a man. In another
scene (3) a deity plunges a victim into a bucket which has
sometimes been identified as the Celtic "cauldron of plenty".
Another divinity (4) brandishes two animals, probably dragons.
iV we can only guess. But, although
* clearly showing strong Celtic influence,
there is an element in the work that
is foreign to Gaulish tradition.
Scholars have been working on this
superb vessel for many years, and it
has now been finally established that
it belongs, not to western Celtic
Europe, but stems from some dis¬
tinguished atelier in the eastern Celtic
world perhaps Dacia, perhaps Hun¬
gary, but certainly from a country
familiar with the same religious
concepts as the western Celts.
Amongst the treasures that the
eastern confines of the Celtic world
have yielded are the remarkable series
of pottery vessels from burial mounds
at Sopron, Hungary. Dating from the
late 7th century B.C. these vessels are
not remarkable in so far as they are
composed of valuable material, but
because they are decorated with
incised figures which give us a rare
insight into the everyday lives of the
people who lived and worked in this
fascinating region where Celts from
both east and west seem to have met
and developed their own distinctive
art style.
The Sopron pots cast light on the
clothing and activities of the people of
Hallstatt Europe and add a touch of
humanity to the bare bones of archae¬
ology and the confused realms of
mythology. On these vessels we can
see men fighting men, wearing the
trousers which typified the barbarian
world and were to be the typical gar¬
ment, together with the flowing cloak,
of the La Tène Celts of the historical
period. Women wearing patterned bell-
shaped skirts also fight each other,
using the time-honoured weapon of
tearing out one another's hair!
A pair of lover's part reluctantly.
Women with ringleted hair, dressed in
A-line dresses with trousers beneath
like Victorian pantaloons, and adorned
with bells, spin and weave. Others
dance, with arms ecstatically uplifted
like the dancers on the exquisite
Neuvy-en-Sullias bronze figurines from
a Druidlc sanctuary on the banks of
the Loire some 500 years later (see
pages 18-19). One woman plays the
lyre, a favourite Celtic instrument
according to the classics. Yet another,
wearing a waisted, bell-shaped skirt
and tight trousers, straddles a sway-
backed horse. And we can also wit¬
ness a funerary scene, with a four-
wheeled bier.
The value of these pots from Hun¬
gary cannot be overestimated since
they date from a period when the
writings of the classics have not yet
fully begun to augment the archae¬
ological record, and when, apart from
the remarkable finds of clothing and
equipment in the salt mines at Hall-
statt, little in the way of textiles
remains to allow us in imagination to
clothe the skeletons which the earth
yields up reluctantly.
The Celts did not confine their
activities and influence to the western,
borders of the Black Sea. They^
43

, spread into Asia Minor in 278 B.C. and
established the powerful Galatian
confederacy of tribes there. They
consisted of three tribes from northern
Gaul, the Tectosages, the Trocmi and
the Tolistobogii.
They retained their tribal character
and their Celtic language and St. Jer¬
ome, writing in the 4th century A.D.
comments on the purity of their Celtic
speech. The Roman historian Livy
refers to their hill-forts, a very Celtic
feature, and recent excavations have
actually revealed some of these for the
first time. Some of the Galatians rose
to high rank and power, becoming
priests of the Roman Emperor in the
1st century B.C., a position which
required very considerable personal
wealth.
To return to the beginning. The
peoples of Armorica (Brittany) were
known as the Veneti; the name
contains the Irish word fine "tribe,
family". Another mysterious people
inhabited the rich country at the head
of the Adriatic. They were also known
as the Veneti, but the classical writers
described them as being different from
the Continental Celts. They spoke a
different form of language, wore
different clothing and "many wondrous
tales were told of them by the Romantic
poets."
One wonders whether these strange
people could possibly have been
Goidelic Celts, whose origin is a
mystery and who are only known from
Ireland in antiquity. The Irish wore
tunics, not trousers, spoke a form of
Celtic different from, although related
to, Brythonic or Gaulish. They were
famed for their rich repertoire of tales
and legends. And, fortuitous though
it may be, the only other place in the
world that the famous Dublin Bay
prawns are found is in the Bay of
Venice!
The problems facing those who try
to make the early Celtic world yield
up its closely-guarded secrets are
formidable; but they are not insur¬
mountable. We may be confusing the
issue and blinding ourselves to the
true facts by adhering to the term
Celts instead of trying to understand
the early Europeans as a whole.
But one thing is certain. Friendly
and combined work amongst specialists
in every field of the study, together
with a much greater emphasis on the
richness of the material that eastern
Europe has to offer us in our quest,
may result not only in the resolving
of such questions as "Who were the
Celts?" and "When and where did the
two main branches of these people
become differentiated?" It may give
us a much better understanding of
ourselves and our modern closely-knit
community as Europeans.
Photo National Museum, Prague, Czechoslovakia

