48

Girls always play with dolls. They learn to /nof/ier them.
It's just a game but also an unwitting apprenticeship.
Here, a bevy of dolls pose in a Paris arcade.




TEXTBOOKS, STEREOTYPES
AND ANTI-FEMININE PREJUDICES
Conclusions of an inquiry in France
applicable to many other countries
by Renée Miot
FRENCH primary school textbooks
perpetuate stereotyped images
of women and anti-feminine prejudices.
This was revealed by a recent survey
commissioned by Madame Françoise
Giroud, French Secretary of State with
special responsibility for the status of
women, to investigate "questionable
stereotypes which might give an out¬
dated or disparaging image of women
and domestic life."
Impressions and ideas picked up in
childhood can strongly Influence adult
outlook, and textbooks used in primary
schools play no small part in this
process in France and in many other
countries.
French teachers are nowadays urged
to make less use of textbooks, but
there is one subject the French
language, or at least learning to
read where there is no getting away
from them. The French study of the
image of women therefore concen¬
trated primarily on reading, vocabulary
and grammar books.
The study showed that the same
themes and the same texts recur in
various sets of reading and vocabulary
books, at both the "elementary" (six to
eight years) and "intermediate" (nine
to eleven years) levels. The books
highlight some aspects of women's
R E N Ë E M I OT, French teacher andpsychologist,
is currently engaged on educational research at
the Institut National de la Recherche et de la
Documentation Pédagogique, in Paris. She has
devoted many years to the study of learning
problems experienced by teen-agers and students
for the University Statistics Office, in Paris.
status, but leave many others in
obscurity without giving any expla¬
nations.
Women characters figure frequently
in books for six-to-eight-year-olds, but
with wide variations from one set of
textbooks to another. In books for
nine-to-eleven-year-olds, male charac¬
ters predominate. Adults gradually
fade out and their place is taken by
a teen-age society in which young
people act out the roles of adults.
Girls hardly ever figure in these
groups, and when they do they behave
like women, either imitating them in
their games or actually replacing them
(as when the mother of a family is ill,
for example).
Women are described insuch a way
as to show them as always weaker
than men. Little girls are fragile and
sickly. In innumerable fairy stories,
older girls need a fairy's magic wand
or the arrival of a man (prince or
shepherd) to make their dreams come
true.
In a modern setting, women are
shown as being incapable of mastering
mechanical devices, and more than
one textbook makes fun of women
drivers who cause traffic jams and
are accident-prone. Women turn to
men for support and assistance,
without which they would be quite
defenceless.
The few examples of equality be¬
tween the sexes are found only among
children or in teen-age games. In one
instance, a calm, sensible, kindly girl
gives new heart to a boy who has been
left alone to fend for himself.
Women appear in a position of
superiority to children only when they
are depicted as teachers: a firm, com¬
petent schoolmistress, for example,
manages to bring a difficult boy under
her control.
Another point worth noting is that,
with the exception of Marie Curie, very
few famous women are held up as
models for children in the nine to
eleven age group.
Some passages in school textbooks,
mostly taken from nineteenth-century
literature, do however show women
who appear to be impelled by some
inner force which contrasts sharply
with their physical weakness and
vulnerability.
Women in these cases are shown
living in dreadful conditions, beset by
illness and poverty. By hard work,
endless devotion and self-sacrifice
they manage to overcome their
adversities, thus offering an example
to be admired and emulated. In one
case a poor widow wears her fingers
to the bone in order to feed and
clothe her children and in another,
a mother dies to save her daughter.
This moral force enables them to do
unaided what most women are shown
as being able to do only with the help
of men. It is noteworthy, however,
that all these outstanding women are
mothers.
Indeed, in school textbooks women
are above all shown as mothers, and
among humans and animals alike, the
mother is essentially the one who
feeds the young and gives them their
basic education. ^
49

STEREOTYPES
IN SCHOOLBOOKS
Traditional stereotypes which perpetuate the idea of a
rigid distinction between the roles of men and women
in daily life are still found in the texts and images
of school textbooks and continue to influence the
ideas of children from an early age, reports an inquiry
into this question carried out in France. On these
pages we present a few examples of illustrations taken
from schoolbooks in France (1). Turkey (2), USSR (3)
and the German Democratic Republic (4). Women are
almost always shown in their role of mother; daughters
are seen using a vacuum cleaner, serving at table
or helping mother. Boys apparently never do such jobs.
W The ¡mage of the mother feeding her
young comes up again and again,
though rather less often in books for
nine to eleven year-olds: "Mummy
helps baby to eat, takes his plate, cuts
the pieces that are too big, breaks up
the bread..." Even in stories about
shipwrecks, it is still the mother who
sees to the feeding of the family.
Mother animals also teach their
young: "Come along, says Mummy
bear, come and learn to climb the
tree..." and gradually she teaches the
young bear to overcome bigger and
bigger obstacles. Generally speaking,
the mothers portrayed are good at
teaching their children, but they teach
only practical skills and techniques
such as sewing and ironing. They
have difficulty in imposing their auth¬
ority: "Mummy used to tell us off for
misbehaving and often threatened to
tell father what we had done wrong."
Grandmothers are presented in the
same way as mothers; they do the
family cooking, teach their grand
children to read or do the everyday
jobs about the farm. If a mother is
away or has died the eldest daughter
mothers the other children in her place.
Sometimes, particularly when the
mother is a widow, she has to feed
and bring up her children under the
most trying conditions. In such cases,
she is admired and loved even more
by her children.
It is mainly in the older reading
books that children give expression
to their love and gratitude, rather than
in the more recent vocabulary books,
as if this were a literary genre which
is now outdated. In more recent
books, children show their affection on
Mother's Day by offering presents and
flowers.
In nearly all the textbooks, particu¬
larly the more recent ones, the mother's
image is associated in text, illustrations
and exercises with flowers: she buys
them, gives or is given them, grows
them and arranges them. This picture
of the mother surrounded with flowers
has replaced the long-suffering figure
of the older reading books.
But the most significant ideas are
conveyed in an insidious way through
words and pictures. Their impact is
reinforced by the manner in which
teachers use these texts for written
and oral work.
Texts are chosen in accordance
with the interests of children in the
age group concerned, but their setting
is not that of everyday life. Some of
them are stories specially written for
children, some are legends and others
are basically true or realistic, but are
deprived of their realism by being
situated either in the distant past or
a remote country. All of them per¬
petuate the myths which underlie the
status of women.
These myths are transposed into
a world remote from the world of
adults, a kind of wonderland where
they become "disembodied" and thus
readily assimilable by children. Simi¬
larly, the pictures and short texts used
as the basis for exercises of grammar,
vocabulary or oral expression reintro¬
duce these myths into everyday life
when children are required to describe
holidays and various other real life
events.
It is interesting to compare what
appears in the textbooks with the
generally accepted criteria for measur¬
ing the status of women, such as
marriage, family, social facilities, edu¬
cation, employment, social life and
leisure.
All textbooks
passage about
have at least one
marriage. It thus
comes to take a very important place
in children's minds. In reading books,
marriage is placed in the non-realistic
context of animal stories and fairy
tales, and thus becomes a kind of
sacrosanct and universal myth.
50

The study of many examples reveals
a simple pattern: marriage is a kind
of two-way arrangement in which
males are on the lookout for beauty
and youth, and offer in exchange
strength, skill, riches or royalty. The
female is after security and wants to
be provided for, and will accept only
the best, the handsomest, the richest
or the strongest, in any case the one
who will look after her; In exchange,
she offers her beauty and her youth,
which she endeavours to show off to
advantage by means of her finery.
Feelings are not shown as entering
into the choice of partner.
A clear distinction is made between
the rôles of husband and wife. The
most widely used reading system
shows the father and mother engaged
in stereotyped activities, arbitrarily
presented as universal: "In all the
countries of the world, among the
Eskimos and in Japan, in Africa and
India, mother prepares the food and
cares for the children, while father
goes hunting or builds the house."
The same general pattern emerges
from passages by modern authors.
The many illustrations and vocabulary
exercises where the mother is shown
knitting while the father reads and the
children play drive home the point that
a woman's place is in the home, and
that it is men who go out to work and
do the most difficult jobs or those
which have most prestige.
The family, as depicted in French
textbooks, is usually quite a large one.
In school reading books, grandparents
are usually shown as living a long
way away, but in the more recent
vocabulary books they share in the life
of their children and grandchildren.
The overall Impression is one of
a large, united, happy but inward-
looking family with relatives but no
friends.
The whole family gets together for
holiday celebrations, which in France
include New Year's Day, and Cand¬
lemas (February 2) In addition to
Christmas. The success of the fes¬
tivities depends on the womenfolk
mothers and grandmothers who make
splendid meals for these occasions.
Illustrations in more recent textbooks
show comfortably, even richly, ap¬
pointed homes filled with household
appliances such as vacuum cleaners,
refrigerators, washing machines, etc.,
and modern kitchens straight out of
glossy magazines. What we see,
particularly in vocabulary books, is the
¡mage of an urban middle-class society
in which the housewife is surrounded
by every material comfort.
Women are rarely shown doing
professional work, and in one set of
textbooks only 27 women's jobs are
mentioned as against 59 for men.
Women are most often seen working
as schoolteachers, saleswomen or
nurses although all the books contain
a few outstanding examples of women
horse riders or journalists.
An obvious effort is made, however,
to show boys a wide range of
occupations which have a certain
appeal for children, though perhaps
not for adults.
Women are never shown producing
anything. Strangely enough, there
are no women doctors in the more
recent books, even those whose
illustrations show school medical in¬
spections, which are in fact usually
carried out by women doctors.
Women's social life seems to be
restricted to shopping. They are
shown as indefatigable shoppers and
every single vocabulary and grammar
book has at least one section on going
to market and another on shopping in
the big stores.
As for leisure activities, illustrations
show women watching television and
knitting (with their women friends or
in the family circle) while men read the
newspapers or do odd jobs.
On holiday or on weekend excur¬
sions, picnicking or camping, women
still do the cooking, while men go off
hunting and fishing, climbing and
skiing. Women only appear to relax
at the seaside, where they are depicted
in bathing costumes lying on the beach.
In the modern world, whose values
tend to be economic ones, the text¬
book image of woman is one of well-
fed contentment; she receives gifts,
buys clothes and fills shopping bags,
but nowhere is she seen doing
anything productive.
It seems obvious that from an early
age children are being conditioned by
school textbooks to regard people as
falling into two categories: strong and ^
51

weak (men and women) with unequal
status and functions. The former
exercise authority and make decisions,
while the latter are dependent and
submissive, even though their inferi¬
ority is concealed behind the facade
of an affluent consumer society.
This division creates one more ob¬
stacle to the advancement of women,
since- it is unlikely that an adult will
shake off this biased, oversimplified
view of things which has been so
strongly impressed on him in child¬
hood.
The solution can only lie in the
hands of teachers. They need to have
a new and broader concept of their
role, and perhaps all that this new
approach requires is a new way of
using textbooks.
They should use the material in text¬
books, drawn from the literature of the
past, in a free and imaginative way, as
the starting point for a genuine give-
and-take of ideas.
In this way, without any drastic
break with past traditions, there might
be some hope of developing young
people's critical faculties and thereby
an awareness of the reality of human
life in all its diversity and complexity.
Renée Mlot
ASSEMBLY- LI NE MUMS
AND SEAMSTRESS DADS
Illustrations on this page, taken from children's books, present an
unaccustomed image of the traditional masculine and feminine roles.
Above right, dad sews on a button (Norway) ; left, a little boy does the
dishes (Sweden) ; below, sonny boy has mother in a stranglehold (England) ;
bottom, assembly-line mums in an automobile factory (USA).
t. Drawing © Gumllla Wolde,
from Trotle Baker, Almqvist and
Wiksell, Stockholm, 1974
2. Drawing © H. Heisters, from,
Aurora I Blokk Z, Tiden Norsk For-
lag. Oslo, 1974
3. Drawing © Helen Oxenbury,
from Meal One, Wm. Heinemann
Ltd , London, 1971
4. Drawing © Benl Montresor,
from Mommies et Work, Alfred
A. Knopf, New York, 1961
52
