sahel 5. land of
Right, lessons for Sahel refugee
children at an improvised school in a
relief camp near Niamey (Niger).
The refugees spontaneously set up
seven of these schools in the camp
early last year. Now cut off from their
homeland, the vast majority of parents
in the camp see schooling as the key
to a new life for their children. Opposite
page, Tuareg shepherds of Tassili
in southern Algeria, where high cliffs
(background) have been sculpted
into fantastic shapes by wind and rain.
THE exodus suddenly improved
the standing of the few refugee
children who somehow or other had
previously managed to obtain a little
schooling. They came into contact
and began to communicate with
peoples from other ethnic groups.
Above all, they found themselves in
the best position to get the maximum
from those bringing aid, by serving
as interpreters, or most coveted of
tasks acting as go-betweens when
food supplies were being distributed.
The nomads soon realized that these
children stood the best chance of
finding relatively well-paid work and
of fitting into modern life. Some of
the adults too would welcome an
opportunity of learning, like one
Tuareg from Gao, who said, "If I had
the chance to go to school, I'd jump
at it."
This marked desire for education is
borne out by the fact that 96 per cent
of all heads of families say they would
like their children to go to school.
But what kind of schooling should they
have? The refugees themselves firmly
believe that mastery of a widely-spoken
language should be a vital part of this
education.
What do they think about the kind
of values that ought to be passed onto
the rising generations? Some believe
the child himself ought to choose
his future way of life: "Once he's
educated, it's up to the child to
decide which qualities he thinks are
important."
Does' this mean parents are drawing
the logical conclusions from their
present Inability to provide food for
their offspring and to exercise their
authority? Or are they merely becom¬
ing aware that nomad values are going
to be of little use in urban life?
Perhaps both.
So the education being envisaged
for the children thus marks a complete
break with the dreams and hopes of
their elders. In other words, the
Tuareg have given up all thought of
30
transmitting their traditional values
through education. Does this mean
they are going to abandon these values
in other aspects of their lives?
The current attitude of the nomads
towards the marriage of their daughters
is somewhat surprising. One head of
family out of ten demands that the
suitor be Muslim, while one in five
will not consider a blacksmith or a
servant as eligible. Nearly half the
heads of family, however, seem ready
to accept just about anyone as a son-
in-law.
But some consider that "even
poverty cannot justify abandoning
one's principles", like one family from
Gao which Is only prepared to. marry
its children to those descended from
a Marabout (holy man). "Even a rich
man could not marry a daughter of
mine", says the head of this family.
However, this is not a widely held
view. Most of the nomads are per¬
fectly aware of the consequences of
their altered situation upon matrimonial
choices. "Before, I only gave my
daughters in marriage to Muslims.
Now, I would marry my daughter to
anyone who brought us food."
Some heads of family avoid taking
up a stand in the face of this collapse
of traditional Tuareg attitudes to
marriage and leave their daughters
freedom of choice. "The woman must
choose for herself."
There are signs that the Tuareg
have broken with the image they
formerly had of themselves. "Now¬
adays, they are afraid of the bush, and
the townspeople make fun of them."
Many refugees feel that only re¬
ligion now binds them together as a
group, and that through Islam they
have something in common with the
population among which they have
settled.
Subordinate or dependency relation¬
ships have practically collapsed, even
though certain "captives" still cling to
their masters as offering the only hope
of protection; in other cases, however,
servants or craftsmen have taken pity
on their former masters who, to begin
with at least, have been incapable of
any task other than that of herdsman.
In the test of dire need, certain
nobles and freemen have shown their
true worth by sharing scarce water
and food between their children and
their "captives". But many, at the
point where sharing would have meant
certain death for themselves, have
preferred survival.

no return?
Photo Jean-Dominique Lajoux © Rapho, Paris
Life in the camp has brought with
it a mixing of all classes, and the
social hierarchy is tending to be re¬
versed. The markets in the towns
enable cobblers, blacksmiths and
jewellers to sell their wares more
profitably than in the camps. "Cap¬
tives", accustomed to heavy labour,
are better equipped than others to
render services to country or towns¬
folk In the settlement area.
Mutual help among families was a
normal practice in the Sahel; survival
depended on it and it was one of the
rules governing social relations.
At the Lazaret, 44 per cent of the
refugees say that no other family has
helped them in their everyday life,
while 47 per cent also say that they
do not help anyone. In fact, for half
the refugees the rule is now "every
man for himself".
To begin with, families now hide
a good many things from their neigh¬
bours, especially job possibilities,
meetings with people who may be able
to help them, or a little bit of extra
food they may have been able to
scrounge. Often, refugees hide under
a shelter or a tent to secretly eat food
a child or an adult has managed to beg.
A person or family suspected of
having anything more than the rations
distributed is immediately besieged by
relatives, servants or neighbours, who
sit around and demand a few scraps.
The main reason why social links
are broken is that people are no longer
in a position to fulfill their social and
economic obligations. Before the
drought, many heads of family gave
their protection and certain benefits in
exchange for work and respect. Now,
they have no flocks to look after and
they are incapable of protecting and
feeding their family and dependents.
There is no longer any basis for
respect, nor does it have any meaning.
This then is what seems to be
happening to Tuareg society. It has
been driven to disintegration, first by
defeat at the beginning of the century,
then by the introduction of a money-
based economy, and finally by drought
and famine.
Confederations, tribes, groups and
families have been broken up and only
a few vestiges of the old solidarity
remain. The dominant trend at the
present time is for everyone to try to
get by as best they can. Behaviour
born of famine continues to predomi¬
nate even though food supplies are
now reaching the refugees regularly.
As well as being biologically shat¬
tered, Tuareg society has also broken
down socially and culturally. Who is
going to write Tifinar, the alphabet of
Tamasheq, the Berber dialect spoken
by the Tuaregs, in future? And how
many children are going to live (if they
do survive) in a society where
Tamasheq will be understood?
Even so, this collapse is not total.
Some people seem to be showing a
determination to escape their situation ,
as persons dependent on aid. And
not all refugees have thrown their
traditional values overboard.
What is perhaps most important of
all is that the refugees should continue
to think of themselves as a human and
cultural entity not as a nation with
territorial claims.
What has happened In the Sahel has
not passed unnoticed in Africa or in
the world at large. The consequences
of the drought have undoubtedly been
brought home to a section of the élite
in the affected countries, leading them
to examine the human and economic
aspects of the disaster in depth and to
reappraise the policies applied in the
Sahel before the drought as well as
the way In which It was tackled.
31

SAHEL ;
THEXND OT THE ROAD ?
-
