THE ESKIMOS
A people
that refuses
to disappear

Jacques
ROUSSEAU
(Canada)
formerly of the
Centre of
Northern Studies,
Laval University,
Quebec
(now deceased)
We have got into the habit of
judging everything from the West¬
ern viewpoint. History has always
been written by whites and for
whites. We usually talk about the
Europeans discovering Canada.
I am about to publish a history of
Canada in which It is the Indians
who discover the French and the
English. We have to try to take in
both points of view; the natives are
human beings like ourselves and
like the whites they change and
will continue to change.
My European ancestors French and English entered
into an undertaking with my Amerindian ancestors I must
admit I am quite a mixture to respect their rights, to make
life easier for them and to help them to develop.
The whites settled in Canada wjth their own legal system,
their own laws, and from the very outset there was this
failure of comprehension which still prevails in the Far
North. Outsiders move In and take over the land, which
belongs In fact If not by law to group, tribe or community.
The concept of private property does not exist among
the natives, only that of communal ownership. I have
avoided using the term "collective ownership" because the
situation is not quite the same as In a country like the Soviet
Union, for instance, where a system of collective ownership
prevails. Ownership is not individual but concerns the
community, and when the individual ceases to be part of
the community or leaves it, so his participation in communal
ownership ceases as well.
Should these natives have a system of ownership
modelled on the white man's system? I myself do not
think they should. They should be allowed the right of
communal ownership to start with, so that they can organize
their own affairs as they see fit on their own territory.
The natives' ownership should therefore extend not only
to the little area in which they live but to all the land which
provides their only livelihood. The influx of whites from
the south into the Far North Is now happening on a scale
which is gradually becoming a matter for concern. In
certain cases, these new arrivals are being granted exclusive
hunting and fishing rights on the very lands where the
natives depend on hunting and fishing for their livelihood.
This is an intolerable situation. ^
(I) " Le Peuple Esquimau Aujourd'hui et Demain " (The Eskimo People
Today and Tomorrow) 4th International Congress of the French Foun¬
dation of Nordic Studies, edited with a foreword by Jean Malaurie.
Bibliothèque Arctique et Antarctique. Vol. 4. Mouton, Paris - The Hague,
1973, 696 pp. " Développement Economique de l'Arctique et Avenir des
Sociétés Esquimaudes " (Economie Development ol the Arctic and the
Future of Eskimo Societies). Debates of the 4th International Congress
of the French Foundation of Nordic Studies, Rouen, 1972, 370 pp.
4

Jumping across gaps in the ice is a traditional springtime
game for Eskimo children, although dogs harnessed to
sleds usually need to be enticed to join in the fun.
Photo © Fred Bruemmer, Toronto

DOME SHAPED IGLOO, photo right, takes shape as an Eskimo skilfully lays
blocks of firm snow sliced with his long knife. The gap at the top is filled
in with a key-block, which holds the beehive-structura together. From
inside the igloo the builder cuts a door facing away from the prevailing wind,
and a ventilating hole well down the curve of the wall, as seen in igloos of
19th-century snow village on Baffin Island shown below. The igloo today
is mainly used as a temporary shelter on hunting trips, but it is part of a
traditional way of life which many Eskimos are forsaking for new towns like
Holsteinsborg on the west coast of Greenland, far right.
W^^9
Photo Information Canada, Ottawa Photo © Dominique Darbois, Paris
Jean
FOURNIER
(Canada)
Director
Territorial and
Social
Development
Branch,
Department of
Indian Affairs
and Northern
Development,
Ottawa
The density of population In
Canada as a whole is 950 per
hundred square miles while in the
Northwest Territories it is only 8 per
hundred square miles.
This state of affairs, seen in
relation to the question of the
administration of natural resources,
raises the question whether such a
small number of citizens, admin¬
istering such a vast, rich territory,
should take the profits from its
potential mineral, petroleum and
other wealth. The potential is
there; although extraction is not on a very large scale, we
are convinced that the future possibilities for expansion
are considerable.
The Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Devel¬
opment operates on the principle that one of Its main
responsibilities Is the redistribution of the national wealth
and that It can and should use the rich mineral resources
of the Far North of Canada to raise the living standard
of the people in the poorer parts of the country, such as
the maritime regions and part of the province of Quebec.
It is for reasons of fairness that the Federal Government
wishes to maintain its control over the natural resources.
Henning
BROENDSTED
(Denmark)
Judge of the
Greenland High
Court,
Godthaab,
Greenland
One of Greenland's problems is
that the country is, officially, an
integral part of Denmark, although
In Greenland we have our own
different rules and laws concerning
landed property. We have an old
legal tradition whereby land belongs
to the State, to the community. No
private individual is allowed to buy
a plot of land. It is possible to
obtain permission to build a house
on the land or to sell the house, but
the sale of the land on which it is
built is not allowed.
Arthur B.
YATES
(Canada)
Director
Northern Policy
and Program
Planning Branch,
Northern Affairs
Program,
Department of
Indian Affairs
and Northern
Development,
Ottawa
William L.
HENSLEY
(Eskimo, of
Alaska, U.S.A.)
Executive
Director,
Alaska State
Legislature
House of
Representatives.
It seems obvious that the legal
situation concerning property rights
is different in each of the countries
with an Eskimo population. Green¬
land is an extreme case In this
respect, with its legislation for¬
bidding private ownership of the
land occupied by private individuals.
The same applies in the Soviet
Union, while we in Canada and
the United States have very
different legislation.
Some Eskimo groups do have
land, the reservations administered
by the Federal Government of the
United States. If the whole terri¬
tory was made up of reservations
under the trusteeship of the Federal
Government, the Eskimos would get
the benefit from the minerals that
may be there or may subsequently
be discovered. Unfortunately, most
Eskimos have no land which is the
property of the village or held
under trusteeship as in the case of
the reservations. As things stand at
present, villagers cannot work either in the mines or the
oil producing installations on their territories.
The native population does not, in fact, regard compen¬
sation as the ideal solution, particularly cash compensation,
which in many cases seems the easiest and quickest way
of dealing with Eskimo and Indian groups. They are given
money in the hope that this will divert their attention from
their real Interests, but the Eskimos and Indians are fully
aware that Congress has never yet passed any bill actually
abolishing their right of ownership.
We have set up a number of regional organizations in
Alaska grouping several communities together, such as the
6

Photo Erik Betting © Pressehuset, Copenhagen
associations for natives living in the mining region of
Alaska, in the northwest, etc. There are In fact local
organizations of this kind covering the whole State now.
As a result of political pressure by these groups and
of intervention by the Secretary of the Interior, one measure
has been adopted which Is entirely to our satisfaction, an
order "freezing" further acquisition of land either by the
state or by private individuals.
In any case, the natives who are pressing for a speedy
settlement of this problem do not regard this as an
exorbitant demand. They have certainly no Intention of
partitioning the state or stirring up trouble. Considering
the living conditions in the villages, we do not think there
Is anything which runs contrary to the interests of the
Federal Government and the State ¡n our claim that the
resources of "our country" should be placed at the disposal
of the natives so that they can provide for their own
economic development in full freedom of action.
Jean
MALAURIE
(France)
Director, Centre
of Arctic
Studies, École
Pratique des
Hautes Études,
Paris
I should like to ask you to make
a leap In space that would take us
into those Eskimo communities
where hunting is still the main
occupation.
Let us put ourselves in the pos¬
ition of these small communities of
300 to 500 persons, isolated In
the Far North, impoverished and
anxious about their future. They
owe their survival and their conti¬
nuity solely to their intelligence,
their sense of organization and, in
the last three generations, to our
pricing policies. Proud of having shrewdly overcome
the rigours of the climate over the centuries, they feel,
whatever others might think, that these now-coveted ter¬
ritories, frozen and snowbound, are theirs by absolute right.
But what kind of future can there be for hunting com¬
munities In this day and age? We know it will depend
largely on the practical measures that local authorities
and governments will take.
Claus
BORNEMANN
(Denmark)
Head of the
Secretariat,
Ministry for
Greenland,
Copenhagen
As far as Greenland is concerned,
some reports give the impression
that it is official policy to remove
hunters from their areas and transfer
them into cities. This Is Incorrect,
although In the fishing districts,
small groups are indeed migrating
towards urban centres.
But in the hunting districts the
government would like to see the
scattered settlements maintained,
especially in areas where seals
abound. The authorities try to
encourage this by granting housing
loans to small communities and setting up building enter¬
prises in these areas. Hunters are also given loans for
the purchase of motor-boats.
In the schools children who will one day be hunters
receive some instruction in hunting. But I agree that
schools in hunting districts are providing above all a formal,
not a practical, education.
I should like to know whether scientists can carry out
an enquiry to determine in realistic terms whether a district
is overpopulated or not. I should also like to know if
biologists have assessed the possibilities and the cost of
subsidizing hunting.
Some reports I have read claim that an archaic society
which comes in contact with industrial civilization is
Inevitably doomed. What are the grounds for saying so?
Does this mean that hunting as a modern industry is
doomed?
I go along with Mr. Malaurie when he says that school
is the key factor in hunting communities for I feel that,
whatever the school, its impact will be negative. Shouldn't
people be told and taught about what ¡s happening In the
modern world? I think hunting is a very tough way of
making a living, and even if many Eskimos enjoy it, the
younger ones who have been through school will probably,
sooner or later, want to get out of these places where the
only prospect is hunting.

Arthur B.
YATES
Mr. Bornemann asked whether
surveys have been made to find out
how far these hunting districts
could meet the population's require¬
ments. I can tell you such studies
have been carried out in Northern
Canada and that they have shown
that the resources are barely
sufficient to meet the present
population's needs, and hence, will
be even more deficient, in relation
to the needs of the future popu¬
lation.
Mr. Bornemann's second point
raised the question of setting up schools for hunters.
That's another problem with which we in Canada are greatly
concerned. Most of the Eskimos do want hunting tech¬
niques to be incorporated in school programmes; but that's
a tricky thing to arrange, because of the difficulty of
obtaining teachers capable of giving that sort of technical
Instruction and the problem of limited budgets.
Jacques
ROUSSEAU
Whether we like it or not, there'll
always be hunting, though admit¬
tedly it may now be declining.
This is bound to happen with the
appearance of synthetic and ranch-
bred furs. Fur-farming is a prof¬
itable business and a white mono¬
poly today, though I don't see why
the north's traditional hunters
should, not take it up themselvesl
The north produces luxury furs;
if fur-farming caught on in the
north, the native peoples would
put a luxury fur on the market. In
fact, fur-farming must be treated as an extension of hunting,
though fur-bearing animals will continue to be hunted, even
if only by a minority.
There is no magic solution for the American Indians any
more than there is for the white man. No territory can
survive by marketing a single product.
There are all kinds of stock-farming. I should like to
show you an example of what may be done with the
musk-ox. Here's a sweater made of musk-ox wool; it's
the first ever of its kind made in the Province of Quebec.
It's a very light wool, a half or a third as light as sheep's
wool. This sweater is made of thick-knit wool, but this
same wool can be used to produce a cashmere as fine
as any in the world.
Alaska already has a musk-ox wool industry, and Quebec
Is shortly to have one too; it is a highly profitable product.
Trevor
LLOYD
(Canada)
Director, Centre
for Northern
Studies and
Research,
McGill
University.
Montreal
I personally doubt whether there
are any sound economic grounds
for claiming that a good proportion
of the Arctic population of Canada,
Alaska or Greenland could I am
not saying should live off hunting
and fishing, even if these activities
were modernized. I know something
about the musk-ox business, and
I don't think anybody would
question the quality of sweaters
made of musk-ox wool.
But I have real doubts about the
future of proposals for breeding
musk-oxen on a domestic scale. This was first considered
for Canada's northern districts, then in Alaska and now
in New Quebec. Such ideas are to my mind more
glamorous than practical or economically feasible. There
was talk a number of years ago about raising certain
varieties of sheep in the north; all kinds of uses were
to be made of them, and in the most unexpected places.
The author of one study had worked for some time in
Iceland and in southern Greenland. The concepts were
attractive enough but do not stand up in the face of actual
conditions. There is a long-established sheep raising
TOUGH AS NEW BOOTS
Below, Eskimo woman chews on a piece of sealskin,
to soften it for use as the sole of a waterproof boot,
ingeniously sewn so that the needle never completely
pierces the skin. Eskimo women need to be skilled
needlewomen; faulty clothing could lead to their
menfolk dying of exposure. Right, Eskimo hunter
and family from Thule, Greenland, where the pack ice
usually begins to break up only in late July, cross a
stretch of open water using an ice-floe as a raft.
8

Photos Bryan Alexander © Camera Press, London
industry In southern Greenland, but extending it has proved
quite impossible. There were some catastrophic failures.
Even were some of the plans to prove practicable on a
limited scale, they could only have minimal effect on the
daily lives of the Greenlanders even as sources of food.
We are agreed that every effort must be made to protect
the traditional life-style of those who wish to continue
In it. But today many Eskimo children in Canada are
going to high school. Let us hope they go on to higher
education later. It would be absurd to expect these young
people on leaving school to be able to earn a living from
traditional Eskimo occupations of their grandfathers.
William L.
HENSLEY
The Alaskan Eskimos have had to
adapt to a variety of trades to sur¬
vive, for It Is not possible to live
entirely off hunting and fishing.
Additional activities must therefore
be found, and the Eskimos must
learn other skills.
To understand the problems of
the Alaskan Eskimos, as distinct
from those of the Greenland or
Canadian Eskimos. Alaska's geogra¬
phy must be taken into consider¬
ation. Most of the Eskimos live
in some 200 villages scattered
throughout the western and eastern parts of the State and
located fairly close to heavily populated urban centres.
This is not the case in Canada and Greenland.
Even if men are working at various trades, either in their
own villages, or in larger urban centres and in cities, they
must not give up hunting, for they love it. Even those who
work in new industries like petroleum, when they return to
their villages after spending three weeks or so in an oil-
drilling camp, can indulge in a fortnight of hunting and
fishing.
There is still plenty of game in Alaska, even though the
question today is what proportion of the population can live
off it. I know that in the past before the white man settled
down in Alaska there was a big wildlife population. White
civilization has resulted in urban centres springing up
around schools and churches and has had repercussions
on the state's basic ecological resources.
We still have sleds drawn by huskies, but tracked power
sleds are beginning to supplant them nearly everywhere.
And so we must ask ourselves whether the Eskimo who is
doing a regular job in town can afford to be a hunter as well.
Even with plenty of jobs paying reasonable wages, the
fact remains as Mr. Malaurie has pointed out that the
Eskimo workers' basic food, their staple diet, comes from
hunting. We still hunt whales at Point Barrow, and, even
though this is not highly commercialized as it is meant
primarily to meet local demand, whaleskins, for us, are anw
extremely valuable commodity. " r
9

Then, of course, there is reindeer-breeding, which is
closed to the white man by U.S. federal laws which prevent
him from owning reindeer. Herds of these animals about
60,000 head owned by Eskimo herdsmen are to be found
only in the north-western and peninsular parts of Alaska.
Reindeer breeding has an excellent industrial potential
for the future but, unfortunately, the State of Alaska is today
planning to take over this activity.
We Eskimos get the Impression that the idea is to take
away from us an industry we could develop quite well
ourselves! The Japanese, who are already buying reindeer
antlers which they make into a powder, have shown a keen
interest in purchasing reindeer meat.
We have musk-oxen, too, though at the present time this
activity is still only In its early stages. The transplantation
of musk-oxen to parts of northern Alaska ¡s a very
promising development.
I was very glad to hear that
hunting, as an industry, can be
modernized. Oddly enough, though,
it is considered today In Greenland
by both the Danish Government
and the Greenlanders themselves
as an occupation for backward
peoples.
I feel hunting ought to be re¬
garded as a modern and creative
activity. It provides more than half
the food requirements of the
hunting communities and, de¬
pending on market prices, ensures
fairly high incomes. There is an assured market for
wild fox furs but it is up to us to Improve the quality of the
species in order to become competitive in this market.
So far nothing of the sort has been done.
Looking at Greenland as a whole, we need to examine
ways and means of dovetailing this hunting micro-economy
into the full range of Greenlandic activities. We cannot
afford to overlook any resource that may help to reduce
Angmalortok
OLSEN
(Eskimo, of
Greenland,
Denmark)
Chairman,
Greenlanders
Society,
Copenhagen
Greenland's Increasingly heavy burden of consumer imports.
Our goal must be to produce and to diversify our
production. Furs should be exported and the meat of
marine mammals sold all over Greenland, with the hunting
districts sending their produce to the game-poor south.
Another aspect of the problem Is that of increasing the
value of products before exporting them so as to obtain
the best possible return. Greenland regularly exports furs
and pelts, but curiously enough has no tanning industry.
This could become a new industry depending wholly on the
produce of local hunting.
I should also like to speak of the cultural aspects of
hunting. None of you may think there is any relationship
between the economy and culture where hunting is
concerned. I personally maintain that there is a very
close link.
If Greenlanders are to remain a proud people and continue
to be themselves, then they must accept their real national
Identity, based on the centuries-old Eskimo culture, which
is so closely bound up with hunting activities. We should
also adopt a modern and forward-looking attitude and make
every effort to guarantee the continuity of hunting as an
occupation In its own right and, at least in the beginning,
as the framework for a national identity.
We could go on talking about economics for ever. But
if we fail to provide the conditions to enable the Eskimos
of Greenland, Alaska and Canada to take pride in their
national Identity and culture and assert themselves as a
people In their own right, then I am afraid all the wonderful
economic plans made for them will turn out to be mere
operations for propping up the economy of a deprived
people who will be regarded with something like mockery.
The close link existing between the economy and the way
people feel about their work is well known. This, In fact,
is what motivation is all about. There is also a very close
relationship between motivation and the economy.
I myself was born in Thule, in Greenland, in a hunting area.
My father became one of the best hunters in the area.
Both he and my mother used to say it was by coming in
contact with the Thule hunters, who have remained so close
to their natural culture, that they discovered the best In
human nature, as well as the most combative, the most
constructive and the most independent men. So I feel
SEA-BORNE
SAFARI
Walrus hunting is a hazar¬
dous enterprise, calling for
great skill and teamwork,
since adult males, weigh¬
ing over a ton, react
violently if wounded. Not
a scrap of the mammal is
wasted. Reserves of walrus
meat and blubber are hid¬
den in caches beneath
rocks for use during the
long winter months. The
ivory tusks are sold or
carved. Thick walrus hide
covers the open boat, the
umiak, of these Alaskan
Eskimos shown right. Once
the boat in which women
and children moved bet¬
ween hunting areas, in the
Arctic the umiak is now
chiefly used by Bering
Strait Eskimos and east
coast Greenlanders.
10

strongly that there is a very intimate tie binding men, the
culture in which they live and the economic conditions of
their lives as a whole.
Lars
CHEMNITZ
(Eskimo, of
Greenland,
Denmark)
Chairman of the
Provincial
Council
of Greenland
I spent two years in Thule as a
teacher running a school. I often
asked myself whether we should not
instruct young children in hunting
techniques rather than Imparting
rudimentary knowledge.
But having thought it over care¬
fully, and having left Thule, I began
to see Greenland as a whole and
realized that the policy followed in
Thule today reflects the aspirations
of the Eskimos living there: they
want to be integrated into Green¬
land society.
Foxes, once the Eskimo hunter's staple, have declined
considerably, whereas the human population in these
regions has risen. At Angmagssalik, for example, it would
be wrong to disperse the hunters, but it may soon become
necessary to cut back hunting expeditions gradually as
reserves of foxes and other wildlife will not be adequate.
A similar situation prevails in other parts of Greenland.
It has to be accepted then that people who can no
longer hunt must be steered into other activities.
Jean
MALAURIE
I must object once again to the
assertions made by the Canadian
and Greenland authorities that wild¬
life stocks in the present hunting
areas are Insufficient to meet the
needs of today's hunting com¬
munities and that this shortage will
be felt In the foreseeable future (in
one or two generations).
As regards foxes, Thule has
always been, and still is, one of the
world's best-stocked areas. The
potential is still vast. There are
100 hunters in Thule; the territory
is as big as 20 French departments, and it can be easily
extended for seal-hunting ten times further in the north¬
west, which is at present uninhabited.
If there has been a drop in the turnover of fox skins,
it is due to market price levels, and has nothing to do with
biogenetic causes.
No published findings of any properly conducted bio¬
genetic and social and economic survey exist to support
a biogenetic explanation of this drop, and I am not saying
this lightly. It would be surprising if there were, considering
the vastness of territories that all kinds of modern means
place at the disposal of a relatively small hunting population
(5,000 hunters operating all year round in the vast American
and Green'and Arctic). What's more, hunting must be seen
as a modern and highly mobile occupation.
I fear that after the departure of the discouraged Eskimos,
white industrialists may exploit these hunting grounds for
themselves. And I should be surprised if they fail to
obtain the assistance and financial backing which the native
people lack today.
The Arctic is vast, and biologically almost unexplored.
It would be astonishing indeed If so limited an Eskimo
population 80,000 in all, less all those who may not want
to, or cannot, remain in the north failed to obtain the
economic and administrative Independence they need for
pursuing modern occupations. Because of its oil, natural
gas and minerals, the American and Siberian Arctic promises
to be one of the regions with the highest per capita income
in the world. A bold territorial policy would surely enable
native communities to finance their own development.
Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho. Paris
