V
AFTER
THE TRAGEDY
OF MINAMATA
Blind and dumb from birth, Tomoko Uemura (above) is a tragic victim of Minamata Disease,
which struck the inhabitants of a fishing village on Japan's Minamata Bay (below)
in the late 1950s. The disease, which killed 100 persons and poisoned hundreds more,
was caused by eating fish contaminated by mercury waste from the Chisso Corporation's
plant, which had polluted the waters of the bay. Women's organizations have been in
the forefront of campaigns that have won compensation for the victims. Below right, the
acting president of the Chisso Corporation expresses his regrets in the home of
a Minamata Disease victim.

by Matsui Yayori
The crusade
of Japan's women
against the ravages
of pollution
Text © Copyright Reproduction prohibited
MATSUI YAYORI, Japanese writer and jour¬
nalist, ¡s a leading figure in Japan's women's
liberation movement. She currently writes for
the Tokyo daily "Asahi Shimbun." specializing
in the question of women's rights as well as
problems of the environment, social welfare
and the consumer movement. Her article is
adapted from a special study published In
"Japan Quarterly" magazine (January-March
1975).
TO most foreigners, the prevailing
image of the Japanese woman
must be that of a subservient wife and
protective mother, shy and gentle,
wearing her kimono elegantly, and
gracefully enjoying the arts of the tea
ceremony and of flower arrangement.
The role of the Japanese woman has
traditionally been fixed as that of a
housekeeper.
So it is remarkable that an increasing
number of Japanese women have begun
to make efforts to break out of their
traditional life-style of subjugation.
In fact, recent years have witnessed
a powerful explosion of Japanese
women's long pent-up energies, which
has shaken some aspects of Japanese
society. Those newly awakened ener¬
gies have been chiefly directed into
movements either opposing environ¬
mental pollution or supporting the
protection of consumers' rights.
One tragic occurrence, symbolic of
Japan's worsening environmental pol¬
lution, was the outbreak of Minamata
Disease, which claimed a hundred lives
and inflicted organic mercury poisoning
on several hundred (see "Unesco
Courier", July 1971).
The tragedy occurred in a small
fishing village in Minamata Bay,
towards the end of the 1950s.
Japanese scientists discovered that
Minamata Disease was caused by
waste from the Chisso Corporation's
plant, located in Minamata City, which
had polluted not only the coastal
waters but also fish and shellfish.
Women who had eaten the polluted
fish and shellfish gave birth to babies
who were paralyzed or blind and dumb.
Victims of this terrible disease were
poverty-stricken fishermen in no pos¬
ition to press claims against the huge
industrial enterprise that dominated the
Minamata district.
But there was one woman visitor to
this fishing village who called at the
homes of these pitiful victims. She
was Ishimure Michiko, a poet and
housewife. She kept records of all
she saw and heard during her visits.
In a spirit of profound sympathy and
understanding, Ishimure Michiko wrote
a documentary account, entitled "Our
Minamata Disease", in 1969.
This book brought home vividly to
the Japanese people the effects of
industrialization and sparked off an
enormous reaction. The book frankly
and convincingly questioned the "pro¬
ductivity and profit-first" attitude of
industrialized Japan.
Ishimure Michiko herself organized
a civic group to assist victims of
Minamata Disease and launched a
movement to secure adequate com¬
pensation for them from the Chisso
Corporation.
The Kumamoto District Court ruled
in the spring of 1973 that the Chisso
Corporation should pay compensation
to the victims and their families.
In 1964, a disease called the Second
Minamata Disease broke out among
more than 200 persons living along the
banks of the Agano River in Niigata
Prefecture on Honshu, Japan's largest
island. Ten persons died. The dis¬
ease was caused by the waste water
from the Shôwa Denkô K. K. chemical
plant.
But the chemical firm rejected any
responsibility for the organic mercury
poisoning, and so the victims filed a
lawsuit against the firm. The court
finally ruled that Shôwa Denkô K. K.
was responsible for the waste water
which had polluted the river and .
caused the disease.
17

k The
voiced
first accusations had been
by three young women em¬
ployees of Shôwa Denkô, who attacked
their company's irresponsible attitude
toward environmental pollution. At
that time, trade unionists were un¬
critical of the firm's policy and
continued to take what they called
a "neutral" stand in respect of this
Second Minamata Disease.
It had become taboo for company
employees to discuss the problem of
pollution, and the workers pretended
to know nothing about the disease and
its victims. Infuriated by such an
attitude of indifference, three young
girls planned to stage a demonstration
for the victims in front of the firm's
head office.
Finally some ten women workers
carried out their plan. "Don't shut
your eyes to environmental pollution.
Workers and victims should be united",
they declared. Three women who
took part in the demonstration had
their rights as trade unionists sus¬
pended for alleged violation of union
regulations.
They went to Niigata to see the
victims and to find out the truth for
themselves. They returned determined
to win the fight. They reproduced and
distributed pamphlets to inform people
about the pitiful plight of the victims
and to reveal the truth.
It required much courage and deter¬
mination to make such a bold appeal
at that time. The accusation of the
three young women made a strong
impression upon public opinion in
Japan, where employees have seldom
criticized their employers' business
policies.
Since 1972, the emphasis within
movements against environmental pol¬
lution has shifted from efforts to secure
adequate compensation for damage or
injury to campaigns to halt the building
of factories and power plants that could
cause pollution. In this new type of
movement, Japanese women have
played a leading role.
They have also been active in the
consumer movement, with women from
the cities taking the lead. Japanese
women have also taken a significant
part in bringing about changes in Ja¬
pan's politics and society. The popu¬
lar movements led by women are
motivating and directing a new demo¬
cratic trend in Japan.
Japanese women are slowly but
steadily changing, and we may soon
expect that the country will rid itself
of its reputation as a society in which
women are treated as inferior to men.
MatsuI Yayorl

