Microbius, crackerjack
of all trades
Versatile handyman doctor,
gardener, cook, wine grower,
cheese maker and family planner
by Kei Arima
LIKE plants and animals, micro¬
organisms absorb nutrients from
the environment in order to obtain the
energy they need to put together the
thousands of chemical substances
required for cellular structures, propa¬
gation, movement, etc. They must also
take from the environment building
blocks for the substances they syn¬
thesize in this way.
What distinguishes micro-organisms
from plants and animals in these
functions is their extreme versatility
in making use of a wide variety of
substances in various forms to obtain
the nutrients that they need. It is this
versatility of micro-organisms that has
made possible life on earth as we
know it.
However, it is only now that mankind
is beginning to learn how to tap the
vast potential contained in the genes
of micro-organisms. Just as man
successfully domesticated wild animals
and plants in pastures and fields, he
is now taming and improving the wild
micro-organisms in sophisticated lab¬
oratories and modern factories.
Since graduating from Tokyo Univer¬
sity in 1942, I have been engaged in
microbiological research and in these
past 30 years I have seen spectacu¬
lar advances in the use of micro¬
organisms. One could divide these
accomplishments into three distinct
decades, although in fact the develop¬
ments are closely interwoven.
KEI ARIMA is Professor of Applied Micro¬
biology at the University of Tokyo. His
research In microbiology over the last
30 years has led to a number of important
discoveries, including a new milk-clotting
enzyme now used industrially in cheese-
making. Vice-chairman of the Unesco-
ICRO (International Cell Research Orga¬
nization) Panel on Microbiology, he is also
an adviser on Unesco's project on Regional
Co-operation in Basic Sciences in South
East Asia.
"IQAfl "IQRfl Most of the main anti"
lu'rU'ldüU biotics were discovered
in this decade, and they must be con¬
sidered its characteristic achievement.
The discovery of penicillin by Fleming
was followed by those of streptomycin
(1944, Waksman), Chloromycetin (1947,
Ehrlich), chlortetracyline (1948, Dag¬
ger), and erythromycin (1952, McGuire).
Antibiotics are the chemical sub¬
stances produced by micro-organisms
that can, in minute quantities, kill or
repress the growth of other micro¬
organisms.
While the main use for antibiotics
is the treatment of bacterial infections
(see article page 17) the constant
development of new antibiotics has
enlarged this spectrum somewhat to
include diseases caused by moulds,
rickettsias, and large viruses.
Addition of antibiotics to animal feed
improves growth, but the use of
common antibiotics for this purpose
accelerates the appearance of anti¬
biotic-resistant bacteria. Some anti¬
biotics for use exclusively in animals
have been developed to avoid this
problem.
More recently, rifampycine has
completely changed the treatment of
tuberculosis and probably trachoma
for ever. The antibiotic bleomycin has
been used in the treatment of certain
cancers, and one hopes that more
antibiotics active against cancer will
be found in the future.
inen IQCn The representative
IgülrlSOU achievement of this
period was the use of micro-orga¬
nisms to bring about chemical trans¬
formations difficult or impossible to
perform by normal chemical reactions.
In 1950, for example, Philip Hench,
a U.S. physician, reported that the
hormone cortisone had a remarkable
effect when used in the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis, thus creating a
big demand for cortisone.
In the production of cortisone from
progesterone, one particular transform¬
ation required 10 different chemical
reactions, each with a very low yield.
In 1956, Peterson successfully car¬
ried out this transformation by fermen
tation in one step, with nearly 100 per
cent yield, by means of the mould
Rhyzopus nigricans. Since then
microbes have been used in the
production of many other steroid
hormones.
1QRfl 1Q7Í1 Research during this
I aUU- 1 3 f U decade led to the large-
scale production of amino acids and
nucleotides by microbial fermentation.
Amino acids are the building blocks of
protein, and nucleotides are the con¬
stituents of RNA (ribonucleic acid),
which plays a crucial role in trans¬
mitting the genetic messages in living
cells (see article page 5).
Boosting the food value of cereals.
Of the 20 amino acids nine are
essential to man. The reason why
cereal protein is inferior to animal
protein is that it lacks certain of the
essential amino acids. The nutritive
value of a cereal diet can thus be
improved by supplementing it with
these missing amino acids.
Although the essential amino acids
can be synthesized chemically, this
process is wasteful because it pro¬
duces two different forms of each
which are difficult to separate from
each other. Conveniently, micro¬
organisms produce the biologically
active form alone.
The problem with using micro-organ¬
isms to produce amino acids commer¬
cially is that precise control mechan¬
isms stop the micro-organisms from
making more than the organisms need
for themselves. In some cases, when
the concentration of an amino acid
reaches a certain level, this checks
further synthesis, through a process
known as feedback inhibition.
Although we may admire the remark¬
able precision of these natural controls,
we must find ways to avoid, turn aside,
or remove them if we wish to
have the micro-organisms produce
large amounts of amino acids for us.
We must find ways, as it were, to
insert a tiny screwdriver into a pre¬
cision machine only one thousandth of
a millimetre in size, in order to change
the direction of metabolism.
This problem has received particu¬
lar attention from Japanese micro- ^
21

biologists, who have developed many
ingenious methods to do just that.
In 1956, S. Kinoshita, S. Udaka,
K. Tanaka, and K. Nakayama suc¬
ceeded in isolating a bacterium that,
when cultured under the proper con¬
ditions, can produce large quantities
of the well-known flavouring agent,
glutamic acid, from glucose.
Irradiation of this same bacterium
produced a mutant through which it is
possible to obtain large quantities of
a substance known as lysine.
The importance of lysine lies in the
fact that it is one of three essential
amino acids that are absent from
cereals. Addition of .25 per cent of
lysine to wheat or corn flour improves
their biological value, which then
becomes equivalent to that of milk.
The use of lysine as an additive has
proved its worth in animal rearing.
Giving flavour to tasteless foods.
Even in ancient times, seaweed and
dried bonito were used in Japan for
seasoning food. Since the early
1900s, it has been known that the
component responsible for the flavour¬
ing qualities of seaweed is glutamic
acid, and that of bonito is the histidine
salt of inosinic acid.
The production of glutamic acid
became a large industry, but nothing
much was done about inosinic acid
until 1955, when K. Sakaguchi and
A. Kuninaka discovered two strong
flavouring agents that, when mixed
with glutamate, have a more powerful
effect than when either is used alone.
The production of these agents thus
became desirable, and once again it
was a micro-organism, a mould, that
made this possible. This mould uses
one of its enzymes to decompose yeast
RNA (produced from the wastes of the
woodpulp industry) into the desired
flavouring agents. This same enzyme
is also found in snake venom, but it
is of course much more practical to
use the mould.
Thanks to the large-scale production
of these flavouring agents, much
tasteless food can be made more
palatable thus helping to meet the
world's food needs.
Enzymes and a cheese-making revol¬
ution. In living cells, proteins known as
enzymes accelerate or "catalyze"
reactions that lead to the synthesis
of amino acids and nucleotides
("building blocks" of cell molecules).
Some 1,500 different kinds of enzymes
are known and each carries out a
specific job in the processes of
synthesis or breakdown. Some of the
enzymes themselves are produced
commercially for various purposes:
to convert starch into glucose, to
clear apple juice, etc. But recently
enzymes obtained from micro-organ¬
isms have found new uses.
Ten per cent of the world's milk
supply is used for the manufacture of
some five million tons of cheese each
year. The most important step in the
conversion of milk to cheese is coagu¬
lation of the protein, and this step is
traditionally set off by the addition of
rennet, an enzyme obtained from the
stomach of suckling calves.
Formerly, some forty million calves
were slaughtered annually for rennet.
As a consequence of the beef shortage
of the last decade, farmers now prefer
to raise the calves for one or two
years. Since cheese production has
doubled in the past fifteen years, the
industry now faces a shortage of
rennet.
In 1960, S. Iwasaki and I succeeded
in isolating a mould that was able to
produce a powerful rennet-like enzyme
in large quantities. Just one gramme
of the purified preparation is enough to
make 700 kilogrammes of cheese.
A microbe has thus not only helped
to transform the dairy industry, but has
also added to the world supply of beef.
Protein from paraffin. Micro¬
organisms have the ability to multiply
and to synthesize protein from a
number of waste products of industrial
processes. They are also able to
make protein at speeds several
thousand times greater than can plants
and animals.
In 1963, A. Champagnat reported
that a yeast strain could be used for
the industrial production of a protein
known as single-cell protein (SCP)
from oil-paraffin, a waste product of
production from crude oil.
SCP has a good balance of the
essential amino acids, and is rich in
vitamins. It has -^a nutritive value
similar to that of fish meal or beans,
and has been successfully tested for
safety on pigs and chickens.
If all the available paraffin drawn
from current world oil production were
converted to protein, the yield would
be some 700 million tons per year.
Large scale production of SCP would
also occupy considerably less land
area than many other methods envis¬
aged for the solution of the world food
problem. Each year, a population
increase of 70 million requires two
million tons of additional protein. If
this protein were to come from
soybeans, forty million hectares of land
would be necessary just to produce
the extra 2 million tons. With large-
scale use of SCP, two thousand tanks,
each having .a 200 cubic metre ca¬
pacity, would suffice to make the
additional two million tons, and these
would occupy less than one hectare
of land.
Population. One of the most im¬
portant aids in family planning is the
contraceptive pill. Most of such
pills are composed of two steroid
hormones derived from a chemical
substance extracted from a yam that
grows wild in mountainous areas of
Mexico and Central America. An
estimated 700 tons of this sub¬
stance are produced yearly, but its cost
is rising rapidly due to the fact that
the wild plant has been overpicked,
and cultivation is long and difficult.
There are, however, other natural
substances with a steroid structure
that might be converted into the steroid
hormones. Cholesterol is such a sub¬
stance. It is extracted from the fats
of sheep wool in large amounts
(70,000 tons per year).
It is extremely difficult to convert
cholesterol to the desired hormones
by conventional chemical methods.
So ten years ago, M. Nagasawa and
I started to look for micro-organisms
capable of performing this delicate
feat. We eventually succeeded in
isolating a bacterium which was grown
in the presence of chemicals that would
selectively inhibit enzymes responsible
for the splitting of the carbon bonds
of cholesterol.
After screening about 200 chemicals,
we found one chemical whose proper¬
ties made possible the efficient pro¬
duction of androstane. Since andro-
stane can be easily converted into
other steroid hormones, we hope that
the industrialization of this process
will contribute to a more general
availability of:
Oral contraceptives.
Adrenal hormones, used in the treat¬
ment of rheumatoid arthritis as well as
other types of inflammation.
Hormones that accelerate the devel¬
opment of body tissue in man and
animals. In man they are used to
stimulate recovery after tissue damage,
such as that occurring during surgery;
in animals they are used to increase
meat production.
Male and female sex hormones
used for substitution therapy, particu¬
larly in old age.
Microbiology and the environment.
Micro-organisms also have a major
role to play in cleaning up the environ¬
ment. They figure largely in the three
main techniques of sewage treatment:
the active sludge method, filtration,
and fermentation (see article page 29).
In the active sludge method, liquid
wastes are cultured at a temperature
that induces the multiplication of bac¬
teria and protozoa. These micro¬
organisms are then imbedded in slime,
making clumps that absorb organic and
inorganic substances, which, in the
presence of oxygen, are decomposed
to carbon dioxide and water. ' The
greatest defect of this method is that
the large number of microbial cells
produced gives rise to a secondary
pollution.
An alternative is the trickling or
filtration method. Wastes are dis¬
tributed over the surface of stones or
blocks, which rapidly become covered
with a thin film of slime. In this slime
are micro-organisms that provide for
very efficient oxidation. The wastes
are decomposed in the deeper layers
of the stones. This method is similar
to the process that occurs naturally
in rivers. It is simple, inexpensive,
and does not produce excessive
amounts of sludge. It is relatively
slow, however, unless energy is
available for recycling.
22

WE CAN
ALSO BE. USED
AS FOOD BY
HUMANS
<cf=akf=n
	1
lz#j
Drawings Jean-Marie Clément © Unesco Courier
The two types of waste treatment
mentioned above require the presence
of an adequate amount of air. The
third method, methane fermentation,
takes place in a closed tank from
which oxygen is excluded. In this
method, one type of bacteria convert
organic wastes to substances such as
organic acids. Methane bacteria then
convert the organic acids to methane
and carbon dioxide.
The disadvantage of this method is
that it is slow: 10 days are normally
required for the complete breakdown
of wastes. The advantage is that more
than 80 per cent of the energy in the
wastes can be recovered as methane
gas, which can be used as a clean
fuel. We thus come to yet another of
the world's major problems that micro¬
organisms may help to solve.
Energy from microbes. If the
total amount of wastes from human
beings and livestock in the United
States were decomposed by methane
fermentation, an estimated three per
cent of the total current U.S. energy
requirement could be met.
Moreover, it is calculated that if
algae were cultivated expressly for
the purpose of methane fermentation
on five per cent of the U.S. land area,
they would provide enough raw mat¬
erial for methane to satisfy all to the
country's energy needs in the year
2020.
These operations by micro-organ¬
isms depend on their ability to decom¬
pose other substances. But scientists
have tended to concentrate on the
synthetic abilities of micro-organisms
and have done little to improve upon
their natural properties.
For example, when the mould
Pénicillium notatum was first discov¬
ered, it yielded 20 units of penicillin per
millilitre. Subsequent "domestication"
of this mould increased yields a thou¬
sandfold. In the use of micro-organ¬
isms for decomposition processes we
can point to no similar successes.
Microbiologists ought now to attack
such problems as:
The development of efficient meth¬
ods to convert nitrates to atmospheric
nitrogen, as nitrates from sewage
plants and agriculture are overfértil-
izing our rivers and lakes, causing
oxygen deficiency and putrefaction.
The development of an active
sludge method in which the energy
obtained by bacterial decomposition
does not go into the production of
excess sludge.
' Selection of micro-organisms that
are especially adapted to the decompo¬
sition of polymers and toxic sub¬
stances.
Although we have made many ad¬
vances in the domestication of micro¬
organisms, the process has only just
begun. Since their appearance on
earth, four billion years ago, micro¬
organisms have gone through infinite
generations and have adapted to every
conceivable environment on this earth.
As a result, they contain a vast
library of information as to how various
physical and chemical challenges can
best be met. This information is now
within our reach, and should make it
possible to attack many of mankind's
most pressing problems.
Kel Arlma
23
