sahel By Jacques Bugnicourt
and an international research team
The texts published on the
following pages are taken from an
important study on the African
Sahel carried out in Niger as part
of a programme called " Formation
pour l'Environnement " (Training
for the environment) which
concerns Africa as a whole. The
programme was launched jointly
by the African Institute for
Economic Development and
Planning (set up in Dakar, Senegal,
by the United Nations and African
countries), the United Nations
Environment Programme and the
Swedish International Development
Agency. The study on the Sahel,
entitled Un Peuple privé de son
Environnement (A people deprived
of its environment) was carried
out by Professor Jacques
Bugnicourt of the African Institute
for Economic Development and
Planning (Dakar). It is based on
contributions from an international
team drawn from 12 countries of
Africa, Europe and America (*).
The study deals primarily with the
peoples of the Sahel from the
area of the Niger Bend who, driven
by drought and famine from their
traditional nomad trails, found
refuge in a relief camp near
Niamey, capital of Niger. What is
to become of these nomads, up¬
rooted from their homeland and
deprived of the natural environment
in which they have lived for
centuries? Can an exceptional
drought suddenly threaten the
very existence of their traditional
way of life? By interviewing the
refugees from the Sahel, Prof.
Bugnicourt and his team have
sought some tentative answers
to these questions.
* CATO AALL, Norway, doctor.
IBRAHIMA ALI, Niger, researcher at the National
Centre for Research in Human Sciences, Niamey.
MAMANE ANNOU, Niger, Secretary of State,
Ministry of Rural Economy, Climate and National
Aid.
FATHER GEORGES ARNOUX, Switzerland,
Catholic missionary, Niamey.
ALIOUNE BA, Mauritania, student in human
sciences.
CHEICK BOCOUM, Niger, volunteer researcher.
AHMADOU DIALLO, Mali, animal husbandry
specialist.
OUSMANE DIATTA, Senegal, designer.
MARIE-CLAIRE FRENDO, France, geographer.
MOHAMED AL GATRI, Mali, Tuareg interpreter.
LOUISE HARDY, Canada, social worker.
ROBERT HARDY, Canada, architect.
ELISABETH HELSING, Norway, nutritionist.
DIOULDE LAYA, Niger, director of the National
Centre for Research in Human Sciences, Niamey.
ALBERT N'DIAYE, Senegal, United Nations
Economic Commission for Africa.
EMMANUEL NGIRIYE, Burundi,
psycho-sociologist.
DANIEL REELFS, Netherlands,
WHO sanitary engineer.
PATRICE SAWADOGO, Upper Volta.
demographer and statistician.
MOHAMED SGHIR, Morocco, designer.
10

1. nomadsland or nomansland?
THE Sahel is green again, but
along the trails where the cattle
of the Tuareg and Peul died, the grass
still grows thinly. Drought and famine,
aggravating the consequences of a
number of economic innovations and
policies, have left the inhabitants of this
arid zone without the essential means
of coming to terms with their environ¬
ment their camels and their cattle
and forced them into exile from their
homelands.
They are now a people deprived of
its environment. (*)
How did this happen? What can be
done for these people? What future is
there for them? The best place to look
for an answer to these questions is
among the refugees who fled from
disaster. The facts related in the fol¬
lowing texts are based on an inquiry
carried out at the Lazaret camp, 6 km.
from Niamey, capital of Niger, in which
13,000 nomads, nine-tenths of them
Tuareg or Arabs, were crowded to¬
gether in March 1974.
Our primary concern was the fate
of the nomads, mostly from the Niger
Bend area, who had been swept in the
course of the exodus towards town¬
ships in Niger and in particular to the
Lazaret camp. Our particular interest
was concentrated on a people's natu¬
ral environment and what happens to
them when they have been driven out
of that environment.
Recent history has made the Sahel a
threatened area. Previously, hard
though his life was, man lived here in
a kind of symbiosis with his harsh
environment; that symbiosis is now in
peril, to such an extent that it is no
longer sure whether there is any place
for man in it.
North of the 15th parallel, ecological
conditions deteriorated during 1972-
1973 to such an extent that hardly any
livestock survived and agricultural pro¬
duction was non-existent. Famine
drove out the population.
Between the 15th and 13th parallels,
surface water disappeared with the
result that cash crops could no longer
be cultivated and grazing was no long¬
er available, thus depriving the farmer
of his sources of both food and
money.
Between the 13th and 12th parallels,
on the other hand, although rainfall
was low it was still sufficient to ensure
a minimum level of production of cer¬
tain basic crops, mainly food crops,
and to maintain the pastureland.
South of the 12th parallel, where
the crops are more diversified and the
rainfall less scanty, there is reason to
believe that the effects of the drought
on farming were less tragic and that
the results will not be so lasting.
Thus, in the space of about 250 km.,
going from south to north, the situation
changed from a relatively comfortable
one to one of total destitution.
By the end of 1972, it was clear that
throughout the northern Sahel, the
herdsmen living beyond the 13th
parallel had little choice but to move
out or to die.
In Niger, "During the last months of
1972, the situation reached danger
level for the nomad and sedentary
populations of the northernmost re¬
gions, the first to be affected, whose
natural adaptability was already stret¬
ched to the limit. There was nothing
more to be done. They began to drift
slowly down towards the south, to¬
wards the towns." (1)
The situation continued to deterio¬
rate during the following months.
In the autumn of 1973, famine struck
many of the groups living in the Sahel
in all its force. Near Zinder, a herds¬
man is reported to have thrown his
wife and their two children down a
well so as not to have to watch them
die before his eyes. In the abandoned
hamlet of Hakkam, 60 km. or so to the
north of Dakoro, "medical orderlies
found the desiccated body of an old
man in rags, who appeared to have
died of hunger and thirst because the
whole population of the village had
left without his knowing." (2)
"The way things are now, a father
even has to forget his own child", said
the head of one family group from
Agadès.
These nomads who have been forced
into exile have been used to an ex¬
tremely hard life, even at the best of
times. But until famine struck they
had managed to survive, scraping a
bare living from their environment.
What has happened is that the envi¬
ronment has been destroyed, the vege¬
tation and water have disappeared,
flocks and herds have perished and
many human beings along with them.
The nomads fled from this inferno into
the unknown.
So began a pitiful exodus. Food
distribution centres were set up for
those who were strong enough to drag
themselves that far, and the refugees
settled into an environment totally dif-
(*) See also 'Environment in Africa' (envi¬
ronment and regional planning research bul¬
letin) published quarterly in Eng. and French
editions. B.P. 3370, Dakar (Senegal).
(1) Yveline Poncet. "La Sécheresse en Afri¬
que sahélienne, une étude microrégional en
République du Niger; la région des Dallols."
(Drought In the African Sahel, a micro-regional
study in the Republic of Niger ; the Dallols
region). O.E.C.D., Paris, March 1974. 51 pp.
(2) Georges Arnoux (Circular letter), Catho¬
lic Mission, Niamey, September 9, 1973.
ferent from the one to which they were
accustomed.
Successive waves of Tuareg, Arabs,
Peul, Wodaabe, Songhai, Zerma and
Hausa trekked down towards the sou¬
thern Sahel, some of them into Upper
Volta, Dahomey or even the Ivory
Coast, many others in the direction
of Nigeria.
These migrations were by no means
a uniform, constant movement. On
the contrary. The exodus of the Wo¬
daabe and Peul seems, for instance,
to have been quite different in char¬
acter from that of the Tuareg.
In the area stretching from the banks
of the Niger opposite Dahomey as far
as Mali, it is reported that the Peul,
"alert to and observing the warning
signs of famine, began to move to¬
wards the south with their herds much
sooner than the Tuareg. They reduced
their herds of their own accord by
selling off animals cheaply, which
enabled them to stave off disaster.
"The Bororo Peul, of the Tahoua and
Dakoro regions, had already found an
original solution to the problem of
ready cash four years previously, by
sending numerous groups of women
to Ghana and the Ivory Coast to sell
magic recipes.
"Some of the young men went with
them in 1972 and considerably more in
1973. In 1974, husbands and wives,
leaving the children in the care of the
elderly, left together. Many Peul fami¬
lies... managed to keep a few head of
cattle. This enabled them to survive
(a Peul family of four can subsist for
a year with a single cow) and to pre¬
serve, with their animals, the familiar
pattern of their existence, their familiar
surroundings and to some extent their
eating habits. " (1)
Many of the groups split up, hoping
to improve their chances of survival
by going in different directions: the
Tuareg towards Niger and Algeria while
others went elsewhere.
Once the nomads had decided to go
beyond their normal grazing territory,
a decisive step had been taken, but
that step did not necessarily lead in
the direction of Niamey.
None of them had fixed on an ulti¬
mate destination. One route was
chosen in preference to another simply
"because there was grazing". Families
set off without knowing whether they
would be coming back again: "We all
wanted to feed our families... we did
not set out with the intention of going
to Niamey but simply to find grazing
and water". "We left because we
wanted to find grazing. When the
drought hit us and our animals died,
we kept moving, looking for food for^
ourselves." V

K Some families did head straight for
Niamey: "Because it is a town where
we had heard that we might be able
to find food." But this was true of
only one family in four, the other three
families setting out aimlessly, not
knowing whether they would end up in
Niamey or elsewhere.
Uncertainty as to where they were
going explains the often complicated
route they followed. There were many
changes of mind and changes of plan:
some members of one group coming
from Kidal, for example, decided to
turn around and go back, taking with
them four camels, five cows, seven
goats, three donkeys and three sheep.
As long as a few of their livestock'
were still alive, the herdsmen kept on
searching for stubble that had not
completely dried up or for areas where
bushes had not been utterly devas¬
tated.
Some continued on foot after their
animals had died. Others took any
means of transport available, including
boats. "From Mangené we were taken
in vehicles towards Niamey, and we
sold everything tents, mats, silver
earrings, bracelets to pay for this
transport."
Not surprisingly, the time taken on
the journey varied considerably from
one group to another, since none of
them knew too well where they were
going or by what route. It is certain,
however, that most of the groups cov¬
ered more than 500 km.
The southward-moving nomads no
longer had anything much to offer the
villagers, with whom they quarrelled
over the often scarce water and the
scant pasturage. To begin with they
had animals to sell, but the villa¬
gers' herds had also been hard hit and
they were short of money. Later the
Tuareg and Maures bartered or sold
off their tents, jewels and other objects
which they had taken with them.
Finally, the migrants, weak as they
were, had nothing to offer but their
labour. They attempted to win the
acceptance of the local population by
doing odd jobs for them, fetching
water, grinding millet or gathering and
selling brushwood.
Relations between the nomad herds¬
men and the villagers varied, however,
during the various stages of this exo¬
dus and in some places the nomads
met with hostility. "Sometimes we
had to wait until nightfall so that we
could fetch water without being seen."
"Wherever we went the villagers would
give us food and drink, but when we
had animals the villagers would refuse
to let them have any water unless we
paid for it."
Such attitudes, however, by no
means reflect the experience of the
majority of the nomads in the course
of their migration. "They used to give
us water to drink. As to food, the time
came when there were so many people
that the villagers could no longer give
us anything to eat." ... "When some
of our people died and we had no
money left, they gave us cloth to
make shrouds for the dead."
Generally speaking, the villagers
were considered to have been hospi¬
table enough something which cannot
be over-emphasized. Two out of
three families considered that they had
been well received.
Such animals as the nomads still
possessed when they resigned them¬
selves to the idea of leaving were
almost all sold for next to nothing or
killed off by hunger or thirst some¬
where along the trail towards the
south of the Sahel.
It was a sore trial for Tuareg, Maures
or Peul who managed to take a few
animals with them to discover that their
herds, of which they had been so proud
and which they had spent their lives
building up, were no longer worth any¬
thing much. In the regions to which
they had now come, crops had been
poor, so more and more cattle were for
sale and less millet was available.
They would sell off their oldest ani¬
mals first, then their sterile cows, then
the bulls, and lastly cows in calf "for
a few kilos of the farmer's grain".
But selling off animals for grain
or even in exchange for the right to
water the rest of the herd was not
the main reason why the number of
livestock dwindled.
"We lost a camel and a donkey on
the way", said a chief from Agadès,
"and we sold two camels and three
donkeys", but for the most part the
livestock perished during the journey.
Some idea of the losses suffered by
the flocks and herds can be gleaned
by reconstructing the story of the fam¬
ilies who took refuge at the Lazaret
camp: a group of families, who at the
time of leaving numbered slightly less
than 700, lost in the course of their
exodus to the south some 3,500 ani¬
mals, including 330 camels, 690 cows,
1,300 sheep and 900 goats.
One can well imagine how painful it
must have been for people for whom
cattle-raising had been their whole way
of life to watch the slow death of
their beasts before and during the
exodus. It is almost impossible to
imagine or to describe, however, the
miseries of the long march towards
the towns further south.
Famine soon .struck. Families were
reduced to eating berries and seeds.
A few of the animals were killed.
Young children were sent to try and
beg food in the villages.
"If we were near a village and we
heard the sound of grain being ground,
we sent the children to beg for the
bran left behind after the grinding.
The children would eat it on the spot
but had difficulty in digesting it. If
any was left, they would bring it back
to us."
Here is the story of a family from
Bourem: "After we had lost our cattle,
we kept on walking for two months.
A seven-year-old boy called Issa, a
girl of the same age called Raissetou
and a twelve-year-old boy died at Wa-
tagouna, near Ansongo." All three died
of hunger. How many other families
have similar stories to tell?
It was thus not only the animals
which died off one after the other.
The way to the south is marked by the
graves of the Tuareg or Maures who
did not have the strength to continue
as far as the relief centres. They died
either from hunger and fatigue or from
some illness which, in their weakened
state, made short work of them.
Some members of the Kelahara
group from Menaka buried a third of
their number in the course of their
wanderings. A Gao family tells the fol¬
lowing story: "There were eighteen of
us to start with: six died on the way...
they were children who were used to
drinking milk, but while we were tra¬
velling they had nothing to eat but
millet bran and they suffered from sto¬
mach aches which finished them off."
Hama, aged 41, from Timbuktu, is the
head of a family of 13 of which he and
five others have survived a woman of
25 and four children aged from six to
ten. "We set off on foot to escape
from the disaster-stricken area in
March 1973. Two months later, our
little group was completely exhausted.
Two boys Momar and Mohamed
died, followed by five girls Mariama,
Asmao, Aminatou, Aisha and another
Mariama."
The head of one family told the fol¬
lowing story: "The camels became too
weak to carry us. We went on on foot.
Our old father was lagging behind
and slowing us up. Finally he sat down
in the sand and told us he would catch
us up later. That same night, my
younger brother could stand it no
longer and turned back to look for
him. We have not seen my brother
since. He must have got lost as well."
Some families, it is true, survived,
but wherever they came from, all the
groups suffered considerable losses.
Our inquiry suggests that the nomads
who ended up at the Lazaret camp
lost at least a sixth of their number
on the way.
How many died in all? We shall
never know, since some groups and
families disappeared without trace...
The nomads in the camp often do
not know how many of their group
were left behind.
In many cases more people remained
behind than left. Often, too, those
who stayed had no means of subsis¬
tence, and their chances of finding
enough food and water to survive
were very slender.
The situation of many of these peo¬
ple was summed up by Tuareg refu¬
gees from Gao: "We have no way of
getting back to those who were left
behind, and they have no means of
coming here, nor of surviving back
there where there is now no live¬
stock".
The refugees will continue to be
haunted by the thought of those they
left behind.
12

Map, Unesco Courier - Jacques Bugnicourt, Dakar
FLIGHT FROM DROUGHT AND FAMINE. Arrows on map above show the main
routes taken by the nomads of the Sahel in their exodus towards Niamey,
capital of Niger. Between Timbuktu (Mali) and Agadès (Niger) they usually
followed the course of the Niger river or trekked along dried-up river beds.
Fleeing from drought and famine, decimated by thirst, sickness and exhaustion,
they came in waves towards southern Niger. Black rectangle on the outline of Africa
reproduced on the map indicates area over which the exodus took place. Below,
a group of survivors at the Lazaret refugee camp near Niamey. Most of those who
reached it had covered hundreds of kilometres.
Photo, David Burnett © Gamma, Paris
