With food
by Marcel Ganzin
AVAST amount has been
written about famine in devel¬
oping countries such as Ethiopia,
Bangladesh and those of the African
Sahel, and about malnutrition in many
others. A host of statements, resol¬
utions and recommendations was
formulated at the U.N. World Food
Conference held in Rome in November
1974, similar to many others from
earlier conferences and meetings on
the problem of hunger In the world.
In fact, so much has already been
written and said about the world food
crisis and so many measures and
solutions have been proposed, that it
may seem presumptuous, or even un¬
necessary, to broach the subject
yet again.
However, when one tries to look at
the situation about which world opinion
is so deeply concerned, but in clearer
perspective and from a fresh and
objective viewpoint, ways of analyzing
it come readily to mind.
One finds, for example, that history
offers many echoes of what is cur¬
rently claimed to be an exceptional
occurrence. These echoes are all the
more disconcerting since they go back
to the distant past. The story of
mankind has been punctuated by
disastrous and recurrent food short¬
ages, and these have been followed by
vigorous revivals and periods of pros¬
perity. Many invasions, wars and
migrations had no other motive than
the quest for food.
I propose simply to bring out and to
analyze possible similarities between
past situations and what is happening
today. If these similarities turn out to
be purely superficial then history has
nothing to teach us. If on the other
hand we find that major disasters such
as the famines of our own time are not
absolutely exceptional, viewed in an
historical context, then we may have to
revise our thinking on the subject.
In other words, is the current food
crisis the result of exceptional circum-
MARCEL GANZIN is Director of the Food
Policy and Nutrition Division of the Food and
Agriculture Organization, in Rome. A specialist
on problems of malnutrition, he has published
numerous studies on the inter-reactions of
vitamins and on protein changes, and has carried
out pioneer research in the fields of electro¬
phoresis and globulins.
stances, or does it form part of a much
more ancient pattern?
During the past two decades it
seemed as if the industrialized
countries were positively bursting with
"surpluses". One has only to think of
the subsidies paid to farmers to hold
down the production of certain food¬
stuffs, and various projects of the
Common Agricultural Policy in Europe.
Governments had to take major steps
to retrain redundant manpower in the
farming industry and to absorb food
surpluses. In simple economic terms,
supply exceeded demand.
Suddenly, and apparently unexpec¬
tedly, this situation changed in 1970.
Almost overnight, world demand for
cereals the most heavily traded
foodstuffs outstripped supply. Some
people have no hesitation in ascribing
this increase in demand to the popu¬
lation explosion, whose pace has accel¬
erated rapidly in recent years.
Falling death rates due to success¬
ful public health campaigns, mass
education programmes and undeniable
social progress have stimulated rapid
population growth. But there is
another highly important factor which
affects population growth rates, namely
poverty. We all too often forget that
poverty and population increases go
hand in hand, and that poverty itself
is prolific.
But, while 75 "million new mouths to
feed in the world each year admittedly
constitute a major additional pressure
on agriculture, is rapid population
growth really as new as the sudden
interest in it would seem to suggest?
The growing wealth of the already
well-fed industrialized world has also
added considerably to world food
demand and has actually speeded up
the flow from Third World countries of
the foodstuffs they produce.
It becomes easier to understand the
present paradoxical situation, if one
classifies the world's nations under
four headings:
1. Oil and cereal producers;
2. Oil producers-cereal importers;
3. Cereal producers-oil importers;
4. Importers of oil and cereals.
The countries in the first category
are invulnerable; those in the second



Hunger is a curious
thing : at first it is with
you all the time, working
and sleeping and in your
dreams, and your belly
cries out insistently, and
there is a gnawing and
a pain as if your very
vitals were being
devoured, and you must
stop it at any cost ...
Then the pain is no longer
sharp but dull, and this
too is with you always.
Kamala Markandaya
(Indian author)
"Help us I" The pitiful cry of
the starving is vividly portrayed
in this work by a famous Soviet
graphic artist, Dimitri S. Moor
(1883-1946). His poster
(detail shown here) stirred
the world in 1921-22 when
famine followed a disastrous
drought in the Volga region
of the U.S.S.R.
Photo © APN. Perls


k have a means of defence, though they
remain vulnerable with regard to food
supply; as for the countries in the third
category, their economies come under
crushing pressure, but they at least
possess the technological resources to
cope with the situation for a certain
length of time.
Countries in the last category,
however, those with the least re¬
sources, are vulnerable from all sides.
They are suffering most from the new
type of economic warfare which is not
of their seeking and for which most of
them are unarmed. And yet these
countries are sufficiently numerous to
make up an entire "world" of their own,
which one might well term the Fourth
World.
So while the crisis is not in fact too
serious for those countries that have
oil to exchange for cereals, or vice
versa, the situation is tragic for those
that have nothing except perhaps
their membership of the Fourth World
and which are having to suffer the
consequences.
Lester Brown in his excellent book
"By Bread Alone" (1), deals with the
question of individual responsibilities
for the current situation, describes
the development of agriculture from
the earliest times up to the present
day, and gives a brief outline of the
famines that have marked the history
of mankind.
Reading this book made me want to
find the answers to several questions
regarding the current food crisis. Is it
a problem peculiar to this decade or
is it a cyclical occurrence due either to
particularly adverse physical, econ¬
omic and social conditions or to
certain imbalances that have become
especially acute in recent times?
Moreover, is the cereal crisis the
determining factor in the whole human
and animal food supply situation?
The widespread fear today that the
Earth may prove incapable of feeding
a population that is growing faster than
ever before deserves some attention.
So I have made extensive use of Jean
Claudian's interesting study, "La
France et les Français" (2), taking as a
basis for comparison the history of
France's food supply since prehistoric
times, in an attempt to find out
whether the current world food short¬
age is an exceptional or a periodic
occurrence and to establish its causes.
"Western European man's great food
adventure began around the dawn of
the 8th millenium B.C. as the last Ice
Age receded," writes Jean Claudian,
"...it was to draw to a close some
5,000 years later, by which time the
temperate climate and its accompany¬
ing vegetation had replaced the icy
tundra..."
"The 8th and the 7th millenia saw
the gradual disappearance of the big
(1) By Lester Brown and Erik P. Eckholm,
published by the Overseas Development
Council, U.S.A.
(2) "La France et les Français" (France
and the French), published by the Encyclo- ».
pédle de la Pléiade, Paris, 1972. r

Philippines campaigns
for better food
and bigger harvests
The introduction of new high-yield varieties of wheat
and rice and the opening up of new agricultural land
have boosted harvests spectacularly in some
developing countries of Asia. Photo opposite : lush
rice-paddies in the Philippines, where the new rice
grown under irrigation produced yields between two
and three times higher than those of traditional
strains. But since 1972 poor harvests due to appalling
weather, a run-down of grain reserves and staggering
increases in world fertilizer and cereal prices have left
most countries in the developing world hungrier than
ever before. Solutions to the present world food
crisis, with its two faces of famine and malnutrition,
are increasingly seen as being directly linked to other
global problems such as population, development,
trade, resources, land reform and armaments.

Photo © CIRIC, Geneva
Malnutrition claims millions of child-victims
every year. In the Philippines, campaigns
have been launched to teach mothers who are
unaware of their children's special
nutritional needs cheap and simple ways
of providing a balanced diet. Many Philippine
children who suffer from chronic malnutrition
eat enough food, but their diet Is deficient
in proteins. On the island of Cebu,
Dr. Florentino Solon (right). Director of
Health Services, advises mothers to use pots
and cauldrons (left) to grow protein-rich
vegetables for their children and displays
recommended foods such as peanuts, sago,
soy beans and red beans (below) with
information about their nutritional value,
price and the amount necessary for a meal.
Photos © Paul Almasy, Paris

, game adapted to the frozen steppe
(reindeer, wild horses, aurochs, deer),
and signs of a food crisis made their
appearance..."
During the 6th and 5th millenia men
began to develop methods of sup¬
plementing their hunting and fruit-
gathering activities and "implements
found in Mesolithic settlements show
a marked trend towards a production
economy (livestock breeding and crop
cultivation)." The situation improved
noticeably.
The battle against the forest in
order to "clear space required for
cultivation and for grazing land for the
first domestic herbivores" was waged
"with axes in the North, and with fire
in the South." The stone hoe, soon
followed by a primitive sickle, the
millstone and, above all, earthenware
utensils from the Near East, all marked
a distinct progress, crowned by the
advent of the ploughshare.
"The peasant structure, based on
the farm and the village, was firmly
established in the course of the Neo¬
lithic period, and was to survive
without any major changes right
through to the 18th and 19th centuries
of our own era."
The basic diet in Neolithic times
consisted of wheat, millet and barley,
eaten either in the form of gruel or flat
cakes; fruit and vegetables were still
being gathered and were consumed in
considerable quantities. There were
also regional specialities, such as
cheese in the South, and butter in
the North. Generally speaking the
problem of finding food had ceased to
be a constant anxiety for these people.
The coming of the Bronze Age and
the arrival of a number of inventions
from the East made it possible to yoke
oxen for ploughing and also improved
food preservation. As a result, "the
Neo'ithic peasant ploughed land,
reared livestock and ate cereals. He
therefore enjoyed a relatively secure
food supply, something that had been
denied his ancestors" and "this new
situation was to have a major impact
on population biology, and on popu¬
lation growth in particular..."
"The population of what is now
France increased tenfold in the course
of the Mesolithic period, which lasted
2,500 years. It grew by as much
again during the 3rd millenium alone,
by which time the population had fully
mastered the techniques required to
operate the new type of economy . . .
From this we must conclude that the
changes in life-style and diet brought
about by the Neolithic Revolution were
responsible for the most powerful
population spurt in human history.
Another 4,000 years were to pass
before the world's population would
undergo another comparable rate of
increase..."
"The traditional agricultural life of
France reached its zenith during the
early Bronze Age, before suffering a
marked decline as a result of the
invasion of the Gauls, from which it took
a long time to recover..." Gaul, "only
regained a certain prosperity some
centuries later ... its economy flourish¬
ed considerably in the course of the
early centuries of the Roman domin¬
ation (58 B.C. to 480 A.D.)."
We can see from this that technical
progress gave rise to a prosperous
agriculture which, in turn, led to an
enormous increase in population, which
itself further boosted this prosperity.
External factors, however, brought all
this to nought for a period of several
centuries.
In addition, as prosperity declined,
so did the rate of population growth.
The population only began to increase
again some time later, in Gaulish
France, but the colonial-type prosperity
then dominant only benefited a small
fraction of the population, and the
collapse of the social system once
more resulted in a stagnant population
over a long period (see box below).
One should not try to draw any hard
and fast conclusions from these
figures, but they do suggest that
certain regions of the world have, at
widely distant periods in history,
suffered food and population crises,
which, if we allow for differences in
scale, were just as serious as our
present ones. The point is that these
problems were overcome, and that they
subsequently arose afresh. Yet popu¬
lation increase does not appear to have
been responsible for famine.
I certainly have no intention of
making any extrapolations from these
examples, since there is no basis
for comparison with present conditions,
but it is worth noting that the great
famines and periods of dearth recorded
in Medieval France occurred at times
when there was no shortage of food.
Indeed, they occurred at times when
food was being produced in great
quantities and was even being
exported.
The social system was largely to
blame for these shortages. "Even in
the 16th and 17th centuries we can
identify 24 periods of more or less
generalized famine . . .accompanied by
hemeralopia [reduced visual ca¬
pacity in bright light] due to Vitamin A
deficiency, and scurvy." In an age
when the nobles and the rich bour¬
geoisie were discovering the delights
of refined cooking, people were still
dying of hunger in France, although
admittedly this was nothing new.
What was new, however, was that
for the first time, the wretched con¬
dition of the common people aroused
the concern of a few generous-minded
men. "La Bruyère and then Vauban
roundly condemned the misery of the
'poor classes, which are the most
numerous' and 'the most dispossessed
and the most wretched in the king¬
dom'..."
"It was in eighteenth-century France
that, for the first time in history, the
idea of equal rights for all to the
goods of this world and to a decent
diet germinated and became firmly
rooted. This truly revolutionary notion
finally put paid to age-old ideas
according to which unequal nourish¬
ment and social inequality in general
were perfectly normal and part of the
nature of things.
"Forty years before the French
Revolution, the common people in
France were still considered a race
apart, whose coarser palates and more
robust stomachs could be fed with
anything that would serve to keep
their hunger at bay."
Such prejudices disappeared forever
with the upheavals of the Great
Revolution of 1789. But while one
could say that food is equitably shared
in France today though, for economic
reasons, the diet of many aged
persons still leaves much to be desired
one can hardly say the same for
the world as a whole.
France's population expanded rap¬
idly in the course of the 19th century
(21 million inhabitants in 1750,
36 million in 1850), as did the popu¬
lation of Europe as a whole. But now
that the social structure had been
modified, periods of rising food prices
no longer produced famines.
It would seem then that the world
as a whole is now experiencing what
France herself went through in the
course of her own history, though on
a different scale. The speed of
POPULATION
GROWTH
IN FRANCE
FROM
PREHISTORY
TO
MIDDLE AGES
Approximate Dates
35,000-9,000 B.C.
9th - 7th millenium
6th - 5th millenium
4th - 3rd millenium
2nd - 1st millenium
2nd century A.D.
8th century
12th - 13th centuries
Population
50,000
20,000 - 30,000
200 - 300,000
500,000-5 million
6.5 million
8.5 million
8-10 million
16-17 million (popula¬
tion doubles in
5 centuries)
8

Rounded-off plate
Every year hundreds of thousands
of children are blinded by
xerophthalmia, a disease caused by
lack of vitamin A, and countless others
suffer from a deficiency of proteins
and other essential nutrients. In
Northern Thailand many children
suffer from protein deficiencies
because 84 per cent of their calories
come from rice most of whose oil,
minerals and vitamins have been
removed by polishing. Campaigns
have therefore been launched to
improve nutrition by adding high-
protein food manufactured from
locally grown vegetables such as
mung and soy beans to the diets
of young children. Left, a Thai child
at a special nutrition centre about to
tuck into a well-balanced meal of
mung protein, rice and vegetables.
transport and the global diffusion of
information have transformed the scale
of things, and social imbalances are
no longer national but international.
A drop in stock exchange prices in the
industrialized countries, their crises,
their inflation, their unequally dis¬
tributed incomes all have very grave
repercussions on the economies of the
poor countries, especially since the
latters' social and economic structures
are far from developed.
Perhaps the current food crisis is
not basically due to insufficient pro¬
duction as some people claim, or to
the population explosion. There are
certainly other, deeper causes. For
example, the "feudalistic" system
governing the distribution of incomes,
employment, the utilization of fertilizers,
national and international investment
levels, etc., is probably quite as
responsible for the present situation,
if not more so, as climatic or ecological
conditions.
The wheat problem, the cereal prob¬
lem, the whole problem of agriculture
and even demographic equations may
simply disclose what are really social
distortions. The fact that these distor¬
tions are social in character means
they can be rectified, given sufficient
determination.
Once the chain of cause and effect
has been established, perhaps we may
be able to identify those processes
upon which action should be focussed.
A certain number of countries
benefitting from advantageous con¬
ditions and highly advanced tech¬
nology, have accumulated wealth and
food surpluses. They have been
unable to "dispose of" these surpluses
for the simple reason that less privi¬
leged countries lack the funds or the
currency reserves needed to buy even
a fraction of this surplus produce
(which could have eliminated food
deficits).
It has taken 20 years for people to
recognize the paradoxical nature of
the situation and to admit that the term
"excess" food production was highly
inappropriate when millions of human
beings would have been only too
delighted to make use of these costly-
to-store surpluses had they been
allowed to.
Unfortunately, through misuse of
language we have fallen into the habit
of describing food that fails to reach
consumers however needy as "ex
cess" produce. Similarly, when sub¬
sistence farmers are forced to sell food
to acquire a bare minimum of cash and
to maintain their place in the economic
system, we call this produce "market¬
able surplus", even though these
farmers do not have enough food for
themselves.
Of course, the world has not been
entirely deaf to the cries of the hungry.
A variety of food aid programmes
(World Food Programme, projects
under U.S. Public Law 480 [voted in
1956 for U.S. food surpluses to be
used as aid to other countries] and by
various non-governmental organiz¬
ations) have been launched to help the
poor countries, thus improving their
food supply situation and contributing
to their development, while at the same
time using up excess food.
Even so it has taken over twenty
years for people to realize that solvent
demand (demand backed by hard
cash), evolving on classical economic
lines and sometimes conditioned by
supply, serves as the driving force for
our economic system, today raised to
the status of a civilization which is now
increasingly challenged.
Until today, rising population curves,
aroused only very slight interest, r

TRAGEDY IN
k since they were seen as just one
aspect of changing conditions in poor
countries, the majority of whose in¬
habitants are too poor to exercise
much influence on global demand and
thus count for little in terms of inter¬
national trade.
But the operations of international
trade itself are also paradoxical. For
one thing, commodity markets (where
foodstuffs are traded) are almost
entirely governed by the profit motive,
despite the fact that food is ultimately
meant to be consumed. Nutritional
needs are not considered. The market
for animal feed generates more
interest in financial circles than the
market in food for hundreds of millions
of men, women and children. Indus¬
trialized countries can afford to pay for
food for animals; poor countries cannot
afford to pay for food for people.
There is another paradox, namely
that responsibility for maintaining food
reserves has been left to the producer
countries while importer countries
often have no more than a week's
supplies for their populations.
Among the producer countries, the
United States has been responsible for
maintaining the bulk of the world's
cereal reserves; in the 1960s these
stood at 200 million tons, equal to 3 or
4 months' consumption in the importer
countries.
When one considers that the cost
of storing these reserves comes to
around 10 per cent of the total value
of the produce (which means the
United States was spending around
U.S. $1 billion yearly), one can
readily understand why these reserves
declined to less than 100 million tons
in 1970.
The subsequent entry of the Soviet
Union and China into the international
grain market further helped to deplete
reserves, which by 1974 had fallen to
the alarmingly low level of 30 million
tons. This represents roughly ten
days' consumption. As a result of
poor harvests last year, these reserves
are likely to drop to 20 million tons
in 1975.
But that is only one side of the
cereal situation. The picture would be
incomplete if one only looked at the
material aspect and failed to take into
account the evolution of physiological
demand, which is determined basically
by the growing population and its
needs, and not by purchasing power
alone.
Over the last fifty years, the annual
increase in the physiological demand
for cereals has risen from 5 million
tons to around 30 million tons, to feed
the current yearly increase of 75 million
new mouths.
At the same time, annual per capita
consumption of cereals in the indus¬
trialized countries has risen to almost
one ton, of which over 90 per cent goes
to feed meat-producing animals. For
economic development and social
progress in every country in the world
have been marked by a positive
gluttony for meat. Wherever incomes
and purchasing power have risen, both
rich and poor countries alike have
reacted by increasing their meat
consumption.
This is partly because our economic
system places too much importance
on elasticity of demand. When this
elasticity is high, efforts are made to
meet it since it is a solvent demand
(i.e. people can pay cash down for
what they need), and generates profits.
Indeed, efforts are even made to
increase this elasticity of demand, so
that the rich are "obliged" to consume
more and more, while the poor are
forced to eat less, since their low
purchasing power pushes them out
of the market.
Poor harvests due to bad weather
have further complicated the problem,
aggravating the unstable situation
caused by the fall in reserves.
Despite warnings, the cereal short¬
age caught the world unawares. It
disturbed a food market already
rocked by inflation, forcing up prices
and stoking the fires already smoul¬
dering in other sectors of the world
economy. The oil producing countries,
which are major grain importers,
immediately agreed to readjust their
prices in order to bring them into line
with the new cereal prices; to keep in
step, all States possessing non¬
renewable raw material reserves
raised their prices too.
In a chaotic global economic situa¬
tion with one crisis leading to another
and an existing paradox sparking off
10

BANGLADESH
a new one, it soon became clear that
the humble cereal was an instrument
of immense strategic importance. The
wheatsheaf thus is taking on the
aspect of a weapon of economic
warfare. We can only hope it never
comes to be used as such.
Suppose an imaginary futurologist
had tried his hand at forecasting in the
days when men lived by hunting and
food-gathering. His inability to foresee
the birth and expansion of agriculture
would have led him to paint a very
gloomy picture of what lay in store
for predatory man.
He would have been alive to the
dangers inherent in large numbers
from his observation of the ecological
havoc wrought by nomad hordes on
ever larger expanses of land, and he
would have witnessed the tensions
and conflicts caused between neigh¬
bouring tribes because of the growing
numbers of mouths they had to feed.
So he would almost certainly have
predicted (or even recommended) inter¬
tribal warfare, while at the same time
fearing a drift into decadence.
At that time neither observation of
everyday life nor exercise of the
imagination could have led him to take
the more open and flexible view of
things which is now made possible
by sifting through history and com¬
paring various past situations with our
own.
The time is surely ripe for us to lay
the foundations of a genuine science
CONTINUED PAGE 36
The three photos on this double page were taken last year during the
calamitous famine which struck Bangladesh. They can hardly convey
the plight of the people particularly following the no less devastating
floods which inundated, 40,000 sq. km. of land, destroying food crops
and livestock and causing heavy loss of life everywhere. The government
of Bangladesh has been doing everything in its power to alleviate
the situation, often aided by international agencies.
11

WITH FOOD AND JUSTICE FOR ALL
(Continued from page 1 1 )
of population and food supply. One
line of reasoning argues that since
population is rising much faster than
food production, we should curb popu¬
lation growth and boost food out¬
put. But in my opinion this Is too
narrow a basis for a truly responsible
form of political reasoning that res¬
pects the fundamental rights and duties
of individuals and nations. Nor are
extrapolations a valid substitute for
reasoned thinking.
The Earth's population reached one
billion about 1820. Some deduce from
this that, for thousands of years, birth
and death rates just about balanc¬
ed each other out, with a slight advan¬
tage to the former. Then, after 1820
the population doubled during the next
105 years, and only took another
35 years to reach three billion
(by 1960).
A simple calculation shows that it
needs a growth rate of 1 per 1,000 over
a period of 217,300 years for the
world's population to reach its first
billion. But this kind of approach in
no way corresponds to reality, for
periods of expansion and stagnation
have alternated throughout human
history.
One might also note that if this
average growth-rate (1 per 1,000) per
sisted for 10,000 years, the Earth's
population would reach 88 billion. But
one would only need to turn this posi¬
tive rate of 1 per 1,000 to a negative
rate of 1 per 1,000 for the planet to
number only 182,000 inhabitants at the
end of the cycle. Clearly, then, the
manipulation of figures is a dangerous
practice, and demographic problems
are far too complex to be reduced
to mere extrapolation.
In the past, for example, population
growth was subject to the hazards of
epidemics (the Black Death reduced
Europe's population by between 35 per
cent and 50 per cent, between 1346
and 1348), and was stimulated by
technical progress, especially in farm¬
ing, only to slow down again consi¬
derably during a period of prosperity.
So it is difficult to define which cause
produces what effect and which is the
major determining factor.
Are we caught up in a vicious circle
of antagonistic forces or, on the
contrary, is there some harmonious
balance between resources and popu¬
lation growth or vice versa ?
Or should we conclude from what
has been said that poverty is the
mother of all evils, that it is to blame
for insufficient food production, for
runaway population growth and for the
inefficient use of resources? Should
we also consider the possibility that the
real causes of the current situation
are the economic, scientific and
technological inequalities that exist
between certain groups of nations?
The fact is that aid provided by rich
nations to the poor countries is
confined to certain techniques which
have brought about a type of social
progress that has upset the biological
balance In these countries because the
necessary supporting investment and
technical know-how has not been
provided.
Given stable social conditions the
absence of war, serious economic
crises or other major catastrophes
it is possible to predict short-term
population changes with some degree
of accuracy. But longer-range fore¬
casts of rates of change over a given
period may be upset by unforeseen
events.
Since all the right conditions for
making forecasts do not exist, all
projected figures must be considered
as hypothetical, since demographers
seem to have an unfortunate tendency
to dramatize the implications of cur¬
rently observed growth rates and their
consequences.
In view of this we would do far better
to reflect on and try to understand the
36

various factors which, when combined,
could improve things, instead of en¬
deavouring to predict the future popu¬
lation of the world.
I regret that I am unable to propose
a better solution for the moment, but
my main purpose here has been to
stimulate reflexion. My only con¬
clusion will be to say that in dealing
with this highly complex problem,
we should avoid partial solutions,
the piecemeal application of technical
remedies, for these are what have
brought us to the present state of
affairs.
Feeding mankind is a complex activ¬
ity, whose context has varied during
the course of history and has evolved
in response to changing local condi¬
tions. There can be no doubt that
food production must be raised, but as
an integral part of a system leading to
the marketing of produce which itself
is warranted only if food reaches the
consumer. Food consumption is
dependent in turn on purchasing
power, which determines demand, and
purchasing power depends on income
and employment.
In fact the problem is so complex
one may reasonably wonder whether
there is any hope of ever reaching a
satisfactory solution. For though the
above conditions are necessary, they
are not enough. Food production has
its own limitations: the environment,
the availability of land for farming,
soil exhaustion, farming techniques,
water, fertilizers, land ownership sys¬
tems, storage conditions, etc. We
must simplify existing systems and
must never lose sight of the fact that
the ultimate objective is to feed
mankind.
Food supply must be properly
planned and the food situation correctly
analyzed. We are beginning to do
this, and we could do it better
if nations had the political will, to act.
Techniques for evaluating the various
limiting factors would enable us to
define choices, options and policies,
which, when other factors, national
and international, are taken into
account, would enable us to formulate
global policies and priorities.
By adopting this approach we might
hope to «ee the birth of an era of
equitable food distribution, an era of
understanding and control of world
food supply problems.
Failing this, people will continue to
become alarmed, rightly or wrongly,
every time they hear that some coun¬
tries have millions of tons of excess
food, while others have equally mas¬
sive deficits, without it being clear
who is most in need of aid and, above
all, without anything having been done
to tackle the basic causes of this
injustice.
Marcel Gamin
37
