Shy at being "taped", but smiling happily, a
woman from Upper Volta talks about her
life, her ideas and her experiences.
4

'I DIDN'T CHOOSE
MY HUSBAND
MY FATHER
GAVE ME TO
An inquiry by a Brazilian sociologist
on changing and unchanging conditions
of African village women in Upper Volta
by Claudia Fonseca
Debates on the status of women abound, but seldom does one have a chance to hear
directly from a "typical" village woman (if such a person actually exists). Often
illiterate, living beyond the reach of radio or television, she probably knows nothing
of abstract discussions on women's rights.
Yet, as I recently found during several months of interviews and field study in Africa,
the rural dweller, faced with simple but direct questions on the subject, has very
definite opinions.
The six persons five women and one man introduced below belong to the Kassena
people and live in the Pô region of Upper Volta, 150 km south of its capital,
Ouagadougou. The Kassena, numbering around 70,000, occupy an area of wooded
savannah on both sides of the Ghana-Upper Volta border.
A long dry season and mediocre soil severely limit farming in this region, although
over 90 per cent of the population are farmers who eke out a near subsistence level
existence on four kinds of millet and a few vegetables. For the most part, they are
scattered in villages of two to three hundred inhabitants, each composed of several
polygamous households organized on the basis of male descent and inheritance.
Except for a few recently converted Christians and Muslims, the Kassena observe
their traditional religion a mixture of animism, and cults of land and ancestors.
Modern commodities such as electricity and running water exist only in the district
capital, in the homes of a few officials.
None of the people interviewed has ever had such comforts. They are part of the
illiterate and often overlooked rural world that accounts for a large majority of the
country's population.
l/AUrr Kawe, about 35 years old, is the third wife of
IXrlilL Aliru, a small farmer. Her travels have never
carried her beyond this village of 500 inhabitants and her
birthplace, 40 kilometres away. We find her seated on the
patjo in front of her mud and straw hut, bathing her two-
month-old daughter.
How does a girl get a husband?
I didn't choose my husband. My father gave me to
CLAUDIA FONSECA, Brazilian social anthropologist, spent several
months in Upper Volta as adviser to Unesco's experimental project to
promote equal access to education for women and girls In that
country. She has also carried out considerable on-the-spot research
on the role of women in national development in Taiwan, Micronesia and
more recently in Brazil, where she is studying problems of the adaptation
of secondary schooling to rural areas.
him. I'm so old, I can't even remember how long ago
it was. I was very young and only knew that my older
"sister" (1) who was married to Aliru wanted me to come
and live here and help her cook and fetch water. I didn't
know I was to be her co-wife.
Then, when I became a woman, I went home to my
father's house for the excision ceremony. It was only
then that they said I must return and stay always with
Aliru because he was my husband. My sister decided the ^
marriage. I had no choice. Perhaps if I wanted to leave V
(1) Any woman connected by blood or marriage to a household Is
termed "sister".
5

k now, I could, but why should I? My children are here,
and my peanut field.
Why do people divorce ?
If a woman does not like her husband, does not make
his dinner, and is cold towards him, the husband may
send her back to her family. A husband may beat his
wife if she refuses to do the things he tells her. But
a woman had better not hit her husband if she does,
she'll get the worst of it. I cannot even insult Aliru. If
I did, his grown children would take his side against me.
If a woman feels her husband does not want her, if he
doesn't come to her house even to drink water, or eat,
then she may leave him. He must go to her father's house
to get her back. If he doesn't... well... it's like losing
a chicken. If it goes to a neighbour's house, you must go
and get it back. Otherwise it'll belong to the neighbour.
But if a man has already made the ceremonial visits and
paid the bride-price to his wife's parents, he's sure to
insist that she return to him. Besides, the girl's father
wouldn't want to keep her with him, where she might set
a bad example for his own wives.
Who work harder, men or women ?
Ha! Women of course. The men have only their field
of millet to worry about. We must help the men in their
fields and plant our own fields of peanuts, corn, and
condiments too. It's hard to get everything done, especially
in the planting season. And then there .are meals to

Top left, a familiar scene in rural Africa : balancing
calabashes on their heads, women villagers fetch
water from the well for their families a traditional
woman's job. Left, an all-male meeting of villagers
grouped around their chief. But in Africa's develop¬
ing countries today, long-established
ideas about women's role and responsibilities are
changing. Above, an Upper Volta schoolgirl lifts a
questioning finger. She belongs to a generation
in search of new ideas and eager for knowledge.
prepare, flour to grind, and the house to clean, not to
mention looking after the babies. How often do you see
a woman wasting her time drinking in the dolo hut (a bar
selling millet beer) like the husbands? Why do you think
I'm so skinny? I eat plenty, but I have too many worries.
Do you have any money of your own ?
I don't have a very big peanut field, just enough for the
family, so I don't have much to sell. Last week, though,
I had some spare time so I made some shea-butter and
got a good price for it. Normally I might spend the money
on food, maybe onions or tomatoes, or some hot peppers.
But this time, my husband took the money. He needed
it because another wife, the young one, had just had a baby
at the dispensary, and besides the medicine, they made him
buy sheets and some clothes for the baby.
Who decides which children, boys
or girls, will go to school?
None of our children are in school, so I can't really say.
To enroll a child, you need a birth certificate, and only the
men know how to get that, so I guess they would decide.
The children really belong to my husband's family, so the
important thing is what the family wants.
I don't think any of the girls in our village have ever been
to school. It's too far away, and people are afraid the
girls will elope and not come home. I think it is better
perhaps to send a boy to school. After all, the boys will
bring their money back to their parents. A girl keeps
hers for her husband.
What responsibilities do you give
your sons and daughters ?
It's the mother's job to educate a daughter. She teaches
her to crush millet, to make millet cake, and fetch water
from the well. When she is nearly a woman, a daughter
may follow her mother and help her in the fields, or even
have her own field.
A son's education is the father's job. Young boys look
for termites for the chicks, and get water for the animals.
Later, they help their fathers in the fields. A boy obeys
his father more than his mother. If the mother sends her
son on an errand he doesn't want to do, the father may
say, "He's not a girl, so why send him on your business?"
Girls obey their mothers.



PAIII INF Pauline, 25, is her husband's only wife. She
rnULIIIL ¡s a Catholic and goes regularly to mass.
In addition to the traditional tasks of mother, housekeeper,
and farmer, she is a successful market trader.
Who work harder, men or women ?
I suppose men do, but really we each do our part.
Women take care of the home and children, but men do
the harder work in the fields. They clear all the land,
for our crops and theirs, and then they must cultivate the
big fields of millet far out in the bush. We only help
in the planting and, during the harvest, by winnowing
the grain and carrying it home. We only cultivate our
own small fields of condiments, closer to the house, and
even then, a lucky woman will have a few sons-in-law
to help her. So you see men and women both work hard.
Do you have any money of your own ?
Yes! I go to the markets, maybe every three or four
days, if I'm not sick or working in the bush. I sell millet
for my husband, and my own sumbara cheese or shea-
butter. But what brings in the most money is the millet
beer I make and sell on market day here in town. I make
good beer and good talk so I have lots of customers.
The money I get for the millet goes to the chief (her
husband's older brother). I keep some of the beer earnings
to buy condiments for our food, though most of that goes
to the chief too. But I keep all the money I make from ^
7

my butter and cheese. With it, I can afford fine gifts for
the funerals and feasts in my parents' house. I also buy
all my own kitchen equipmentenameled pots and pans,
earthenware jars, some spoons, and even a painted table.




My husband is ignorant of this sort of thing, so I take
care of it all myself.
The chief helps to buy clothes for me and my children.
But when I see something I like, I want to buy it right away,
without asking anyone. Sometimes, when I don't have
enough money, I go to the chief. He may complain that
I spend too much don't all men? but he'll help me get
what I want. The chief pays all our taxes and buys us
medicine when we need it.
What responsibilities do you give
your sons and daughters ?
In general, boys and girls do pretty much the same
work. I have only sons, so they often help me at home.
They never cook millet cake, but they often fetch water
for me, or sweep the house. If they disobey me without
good reason, their father punishes them. Like other boys,
they go hunting for termites and drive the cows home
at night. But in other families there are many girls who
watch the animals, especially when there are no sons.
Al/IIVAM Avuyan is the young, robust chief of a village
Hi U I nil 0f 1400 inhabitants. He has recently taken
a second wife with whom he spends much of his free time.
Although as a teenager he worked in Ghana's plantation
areas, and now is often busy with village responsibilities,
like most men he is basically a farmer. At dusk, we find
him relaxing after a day in the fields, holding his two-year-
old son in his lap.
How does a girl get a husband?
Her father chooses a husband for her but not without
asking his wife. If the wife has a good reason for refusing
the choice, she may do so. Of course, they also ask the
girl what she thinks, but if both parents agree and the
daughter refuses, they will be very upset. When they
see that a girl is growing breasts and that young men are
showing an interest in her, then it's time to find her
a husband. It's not a good idea to promise a girl in
marriage too early, because that gives her several years
to think about her husband and she may decide she doesn't
want him. Then it's a problem to return the dowry and
placate the husband. But, if a woman is already mature
when she is promised to a man, she may have a baby
soon after she marries and then she won't be able to
leave her husband so easily.
Why do people divorce ?
If a man asks his wife to do something for him and she
refuses, he will begin to wonder what's wrong maybe
thinking she has found another man. If she still refuses
the third time he asks her, they will fight, and she will
probably return to her family or go to another man.
If a husband makes his wife do hard work that is not
meant for women, she may protest, but she'll do it. If the
next day, he asks her again, and she's too tired, she may
then go back to her parents who will tell her she has
done right to leave him.
If a man beats his wife a lot, the parents will try to find
out who is in the wrong. If it's the man, the wife will be
taken back by her family. If it's the wife, she will be made
to stay with her husband and be scolded by her own family.
is spending. If there is plenty of millet, she simply says,
"Why do you ask me to sell millet every day? Are you
going to buy something new?" So he tells her, and she
says "fine". If there is not enough millet, she will say,
"How can you sell all this millet to buy a radio (or a
plough)? We won't have enough left to eat at the end
of the year."
Can women have their own money?
A woman who earns money at the market will either keep
it herself or give part of it to her husband for some big
expense. She cannot give it to her parents. But the
husband cannot force her to share it with him unless he
helped to finance her market deals. A rich woman may
buy animals and give them to her sons, but rarely owns
animals herself. If she does, sooner or later she will tend
to lose respect for her husband because she can do
everything he can.
Who decides which children, boys
or girls, will go to school?
Normally the father knows all about these things and
the wife knows nothing. But he will not enroll a child
without telling the mother. If she has a good reason for
not sending the child, she will say so. This year, I took
five children to the school in the district centre. One girl
was too old, but the other four, two girls and two boys,
were accepted. It is good to educate girls because they'll
either become government employees or else they'll marry
one. Either way the girl's family will profit because she
or her husband will be able to bring fine gifts and sometimes
money to her parents.
I/AOOA All* Kassaana, the only wife of a much older
rvnOOnrllln man_ ¡s about 50 years old. She is in her
kitchen hut shelling néré seeds. Her husband is sitting
on the terrace sewing some skins. He listens throughout
the interview but only adds a word here and there.
How does a girl get a husband?
How do they get husbands in your country? It's probably
the same way. My husband had already married twice,
but both wives were gone when I arrived. You can choose
a girl's husband for her if you like, but who's to say that
she'll stay and be happy?
Take my daughter. Didn't you see her dancing last
month at the feast? Well, after that, she left with a
"sister" who's married and living in the next district. That
girl told her she was lonely. She said they would have
more fun if they returned together to her husband's village.
Now we've heard our daughter is living with a younger
brother in the house. My husband sent three times for
her to come home, but she won't. She just called in once
to say she wanted to stay there for a while yet. We can't
order her to come home since she chose herself to go
to this man.
On the other hand, my son, who is older than his sisters,
is looking everywhere for a wife. He has already asked
two girls, but they just laughed at him. I hope it will be
How do you and your wives decide
about big expenses ?
The husband and wife will probably discuss together a big
purchase such as a radio or a plough. The wife always
knows when her husband is planning to buy something,
since she sells his millet and knows how much money he
8

This young woman lives in Pô, the Upper Volta
village 150 km south of Ouagadougou, the capital,
where the interviews with African women published
here took place. Like all the women of her village
she does the housework (top) brushing the floor
of her hut and polishing the calabashes and kitchen
utensils which hang on the wall. Below, standing on
her doorstep she rolls up a strip of matting before
storing it away. Looking after the home is a woman's
work, and one woman interviewed explains that
if she sends her son on an errand he does not wish to
do, her husband may scold her saying, "He's not a girl,
so why send him on your business?"
easier when his sisters marry. Then, we will receive many
animals we can use to buy a wife for our son.
Why do people divorce ?
How can I say? My husband has never mistreated me
and I've never wanted to leave him. How could I leave
him now he is blind and weak? He wasn't like that when
I came to him. Just as a husband would care for his sick
wife, she must care for him.
And what about your daughter?
She's not married yet. The man she's living with hasn't
come to make the traditional salutations, and we don't
mind waiting. Because once he comes, and we accept
his gifts, the girl will no longer be so free to leave him.
As things are now, she can leave whenever she likes,
with no problems.
Is it good to be your husband's
only wife ?
It is not for me to say. Some women think that to be
alone means hard work. But I'm lucky because I have
my "sisters" here and we help each other like co-wives.
We take turns at cooking and we eat together. Sometimes
I eat with my husband, but not when his friends visit him.
They would not be at ease and eat their fill if I were there.
When a man has many wives, he never eats with them.
I think I am happy to be with my husband.
Who work harder, men or women ?
We are old, my husband and me, so neither of us works
so hard any more. To keep busy, he makes ropes or
pretends to sew, washes his clothes or potters about in
my peanut fields close to the house. But mostly he just
stays around here and chats with our friends.
When he was younger, though, he worked very hard, .
and following traditional habit, he didn't want me to work
much in the fields. Some men don't want their wives to
work at all. Why, Avuyan's new wife doesn't even know
how to use a daba (short-handled hoe).
I always insisted on helping. When you see your
husband working so hard to feed his family, how can you
not go too? But there are other activities that women
cannot do, because they are really too weak like making
a lettuce patch or growing tomatoes. For that, you must
dig a well, and water the garden every day. It's the same
for cotton too much work for one woman alone.
Who decides which children, boys or
girls, will go to school?
My children didn't go to school. When they were the
right age to begin, we'd hardly even heard about such
things. But now my husband says it would be fine if
I learned how to read and write just so long as I stayed
at home and took care of him as I always do.
IfAVI DA Kayira, aged about 65, lives in her brother's
IVniirtrt household. While chatting with several older
women visitors, she sews together a sarro (straw mat)
with an iron needle and leather strips. The younger
women show interest in our questions, but maintain a
respectful silence while she answers.
How does a girl get a husband?
My father found me my husband. I was married first
with a man who courted me in a way that wins young girls,
but he was very poor. After I bore him a son, he was
unable to pay my father the bride price, and even his
brothers couldn't help him, so my father took me back.
Later I married again, but my parents kept my son.
My second husband was a good man and I stayed witiV
him a very long time, but he was also very poor. I wasr
9

'TIME-BUDGETS' OF AFRICAN
AND EUROPEAN WOMEN
The strip cartoons at right show how an African woman
(above) and a European woman (below) spend their day,
from getting up in the morning until putting their children
to bed, late in the evening. A comparison of the way
people spend their time (a "time-budget") may reveal more
about their lives than a study of the way they spend their
money. Not every kind of human activity is reflected
in income or expenditure, but everyone has exactly
24 hours or 1440 minutes a day at his or her disposal, and
how he or she uses it can be measured. Drawing on a study,
published by the United Nations Economic Commission for
Africa ("Women of Africa, today and tomorrow," 1975),
cartoonist Alain Roussel has drawn these cartoons specially
for the "Unesco Courier".
5 :30 to 1 5 :00
k his only wife. But now that he is old, he can no longer
farm the land. We have no sons and no sons-in-law
to help us. We had nothing to eat, so I returned to live
here with my father.
Who decides which children, boys
or girls, will go to school?
The husband. It's natural that a woman should follow
her husband in all matters, get his food when he needs it,
bring him water, and always obey him.
Girls don't go to school. They must stay with their
mothers to help prepare the meals and fetch water. Then
they will become wives and mothers. When would they
have time for school? It is much more important that a girl
stay with her children. She's the one who suffers for them
in childbirth, who cleans them, and cares for them when
they are ill. The husband knows nothing of these things.
CATA Sata, about 40, is busy grilling millet. She has
Onln two sons and a daughter, all grown. She has
been to the nation's capital three times, twice with her
husband, and once to visit her brother who is a nurse
there. They are all Muslims.
How does a girl get a husband?
My father chose mine, but it is my husband's sister
Azanga who tells my daughters what to do. It is because
she became a rich merchant in Ghana and could afford
to give many horses and fine clothes to her brothers. She
has no children of her own so she claims all her rightc
in the family.
She took my daughter away when she was just a girl.
That frequently happens here but it's not like getting
married. It just becomes the older "sister's" responsibility
to find the girl a husband later on.
Why do people divorce ?
I have been with my husband since we married many
years ago. But once I went back to my father's house
to stay for a long while during all the growing season.
I was much younger. My husband took a new wife which
is only right, but then he gave her millet to sell for him
in the market the millet I had helped to plant and harvest.
The older women here came to whisper in my ear that
it was unjust, but I couldn't complain, so I simply took my
new-born child and went back to my father's house. My
husband apologised correctly, sending friends with presents
for me and my father. I came back, but you can be sure,
I waited until all the work had been finished for that
season, so that my new co-wife would know what it was
to work hard and alone.
Who decides which children will
go to school?
The man decides. The wife takes no decisions where
the children are concerned. It is easier to send boys to
school than girls because for girls you have to get the
permission of the aunts as well as that of the father. Also,
you can't count on a girl to finish school because as soon
10

16:00
to 17:30
17:30
to 18:30
18:30
to 19:30
15:00 to 16:00
20:30
to 21 :30
19:30 to 20:30 21 :30
13:15
to 16:30
_ÍlT:55
to 1 2 :30 19:30 to 21 :30
as she marries, her husband makes her stop. He knows
an educated woman would not accept to stay with a simple
farmer husband.
CONCLUSION To draw a coherent conclusion from the
ideas of these six people we should
keep two things in mind. Firstly, rural life is based on
traditions that change; and secondly, due to the influence
of traditional ideals, there is often a discrepancy between
what people say happens and what actually occurs.
Kayira gives us a fair picture of the ideas and values
concerning women fifty years ago. A girl first of all
obeyed her father (she married, divorced, and even relin¬
quished her child according to his orders), and then her
husband whom she "followed in all matters". Girls did
not look after animals or have "important" family responsi¬
bilities, nor did they go to school.
Bit by bit, we see these ideas changing: in Kawe who
recognizes that her daughter will probably choose her
own husband, in Pauline who thinks boys and girls do more
or less the same work, and in Avuyan who believes it is
just as good to educate girls as boys.
But if change seems to be working in favour of women
in certain areas, it may not be so positive in terms of
workloads. As Kassaana tells us, women traditionally did
relatively light work in the fields. Recently, however, it
has become accepted for wives to take on more of the
heavy duties in their husbands' fields and some are even
starting their own millet and cotton crops.
Hence, they do all the traditional jobs cooking, fetching
firewood and water, cleaning, caring for the children and
take an increasing part in farming responsibilities. The
traditional masculine realm of duties has not widened in
a corresponding manner.
No woman, not even of the new generation, would ever
say that anyone but her father chose her husband, nor,
in most cases, that she'd been married more than once.
Yet according to our informants, such things happen not
infrequently.
Other traditional values such as "business is for men,"
"girls don't go to school", and "boys don't help their
mothers" are also challenged by particular cases. Yet
most women still believe that men work harder than women,
because that is the accepted theory.
An explanation of these seeming contradictions is that
the interviews encompass not only traditional ideals, but
also the wider spectrum of tacitly accepted behaviour.
The differences between the people interviewed here
point out the difficulty one has in trying to generalize about
any society. The Kassena are only one of nearly a
hundred separate ethnic groups in Upper Volta, each of
which has its own traditions concerning women. Just
where a person fits in on this elastic scale of behaviour
depends very much on individual character and circum¬
stances. So in order to gain some insight about the life
of rural African women, one needs to maintain a completely
open mind, and take into account many different viewpoints.
B Claudia Fonseca
11
