Photo reportage produced
for the Unesco Courier
by Gérard Dufresne
Many old Bulgarian towns, villages
and historic monuments have been
protected and restored as part of
a nation-wide programme to
safeguard the country's cultural
heritage. Below, a street in the
museum-village of Etara (near the
town of Gabrovo, famed as Bulgaria's
capital of humour) where traditional
crafts such as metalwork, pottery and
leatherwork are again being practised
in restored workshops. The village is
now a popular attraction for tourists
from Bulgaria and elsewhere.

BULGARIA
GIVES A FUTURE
TO ITS PAST
A score of ancient towns and villages find new life
through a nationwide restoration programme
Photo Gérard Dufresne - Unesco Courier
by
Magdalina Stancheva
OLD towns, old villages, old
buildings disappear every day.
They are swallowed up by encroaching
concrete, levelled under the macadam
of new highroads, or simply lost
through incompetence and negligence.
Yet in our modern world, with its
insistent demands for roads, factories
and housing, more and more people
deplore this razing of the past and
want to save whatever can still be
rescued.
They are motivated not only by a
respect for the past and a wish to
perpetuate historical, architectural or
aesthetic values, nor merely by a
concern for the economics of the tou¬
rist industry. Above all they realize
that old buildings in towns and coun¬
tryside transmit to us today the irrepla¬
ceable legacy of generations who have
gone before us.
Ancient buildings bring to us an
echo of the spirit of the craftsmen who
built them; we can see the skill of their
hands, the living image even if it is
often broken and fading of the age-
old quest for harmony, stability, and
happiness.
So, we must save what we can. And
to the question, "Is there still time?",
the answer must be "Yes!" Modern
techniques are quick to destroy, but
they can also restore life. Even better,
they can find and unearth treasures
that time has buried and of which our^
own forefathers knew nothing. r
MAGDALINA STANCHEVA is one of
the leading archaeologists and philologists
of Bulgaria. Head of the Archaeological
Department of the Historical Museum in
Sofia for the past 20 years, she has carried
out investigations at all the major archaeolo¬
gical sites in her country. She was awarded
the Sofia Prize for her pioneering work on
Serdica (the ancient name for Sofia).
25

Some countries are favoured in this
way, and Bulgaria is one of them. The
country's history, its political and
social development and natural condi¬
tions have combined to maintain and
preserve ancient settlements and
monuments, dating from the Neolithic
period to the modern age.
After World War II the Bulgarian
state was able to launch a nation¬
wide programme to safeguard its cul¬
tural heritage. Steps were taken to
give historic buildings and old towns
special legal protection. Precise regu¬
lations were laid down for the use of
public buildings and private dwellings,
as well as for the financing of conser¬
vation and restoration work, and of
urban development.
Provision was made for close colla¬
boration between organizations con¬
cerned with the preservation of
historic monuments and those respon¬
sible for planning much-needed urban
expansion and improvement.
A score of towns and villages In
Bulgaria are now protected by the law
on cultural monuments and museums.
Small groups of historic buildings
and some private dwellings in a large
number of Bulgarian towns and
villages also benefit from the pro¬
tection of this law.
Studies on the preservation of these
ancient buildings also try to find a
solution to the fundamental problem
of integrating them into present-day
life. Are they to live at the feverish
pace of modern life or should they
remain peaceful oases, sheltered from
the din and bustle of the 20th century?
As this problem itself changes over
the years, no hard and fast solutions
are possible.
The old Bulgarian towns and villages
which have survived to the present
day are astonishingly varied but they
have a common link: most were built
In the 18th and 19th centuries, although
some Indeed have older buildings
inside their walls generally churches,
fountains and public baths.
But basically they belong to the
period of Bulgarian history known as
the National Revival which lasted from
the middle of the 18th century to 1878,
the date when the Bulgarian people
achieved their independence after five
centuries of foreign domination.
This epoch of major economic and
social change for Bulgaria also saw
a great flowering of intellectual life
and democratic development. Archi¬
tecture, painting, handicrafts, all bore
the imprint of a new national con¬
sciousness.
Most of the builders of this period
were unknown artisans who generally
worked in teams under a master crafts¬
man. Their skills created hundreds of
buildings impressive for their harmo
nious proportions and artistic embel¬
lishments.
Bulgaria is divided up by groups
and chains of mountains into a
number of regions with distinctive cli¬
matic conditions, natural resources
and landscapes. Although all Balkan
architecture of the period has some
common features, building styles, like
the landscapes, vary from region to
region, thus giving rich diversity to the
Bulgarian architectural heritage.
The houses were built to last two
or three centuries, and to provide
homes for several generations. Well-
tried building techniques and good
Photos Gérard Dufresne - Unesco Courier
26

quality materials, together with patient
and careful craftsmanship have enabled
these buildings, whose design is some¬
times fragile and delicate, to survive
to the present day in a relatively good
state. Most preservation work began
before the link between past and pre¬
sent was broken, before life had
completely gone out of the buildings.
Conservation and protection have
been financed by the State, usually
through the People's Councils. The
owners of private houses have retained
the right to own and to continue to
live in their old homes, on condition
that they undertake not to alter the
original appearance of the buildings
in any way.
If an owner wants to sell his house,
the People's Municipal Council buys
It and decides on the best use for it.
All preservation and restoration work
is based on plans drawn up by the
National Institute for Cultural Monu¬
ments. Directed by specialists from
the Institute, the work is carried out
by teams of highly-trained craftsmen.
During the last 15 years this work
has expanded from emergency reno¬
vation of individual buildings to long-
term planning of larger-scale oper¬
ations. Sites for preservation are
sought out and classified. Many of
them are far from the main roads,
isolated in mountain regions where as
groups of buildings they have retained
their original architectural forms intact.
Many different approaches to the
preservation of Bulgaria's architectural
heritage have been adopted, each
tailored to the specific needs of a site.
For instance, within Plovdiv, a city
bustling with economic and cultural
activity, the old town still exists as a
completely independent locality. It is
perched on one of the three rocky,
heights forming the centre of Plovdiv, r
Wooden struts buttress the
overhanging upper storey of a newly-
restored house in the ancient
Bulgarian town of Plovdiv (1).
Characteristic of Bulgarian village
architecture, such wooden supports
are a feature of this former wine-
merchant's house in Melnik, southwest
Bulgaria (4), where extensive
restoration and excavation work has
been carried out with the help of
student volunteers (3). Skill of
Bulgaria's woodworkers stands out
n magnificent ceiling
of this 19th-century craftsman's
house, now a museum, in the
town of Koprivchtitza (2).

. Along the winding precipitous streets
the houses stand on the edge of the
rocks, seeming to make them jut out
further. They are one or two storeys
high on one street and as much as
four or five on another.
Most of these houses are still
inhabited. The biggest and the most
characteristic in style have been turned
into museums. Some have been
converted into centres for artists and
scientists ; others have been made
into restaurants or cafés, without losing
any of their charm. The narrow cob¬
bled streets of old Plovdiv lead directly
into the modern city.
The town of Melnik, situated In
south-west Bulgaria on the slopes of
the Pirin, one of the country's most
beautiful mountains, presents quite
different conservation problems. Sur¬
rounded by remarkable natural pyra¬
mids of sandstone, Melnik is located
away from any main road. The vines
that grow on the mountain slopes give
the famous red Melnik wine, "so thick
you could carry it in a handkerchief",
as the locals say.
In former days the wine was trans¬
ported to other European countries by
camel caravans, which returned laden
with merchandise of every kind. The
townsfolk were extremely prosperous
in the 18th and 19th centuries and built
themselves new houses, summoning
master craftsmen from far and wide
and paying them in gold.
The masons built white houses with
red roofs that contrasted sharply with
the yellow background of the hills.
The different storeys, the glassed-in
balconies and the windows were care¬
fully outlined in wood, like old etchings.
Here the hand of man sought not to
rival nature but to harmonize with it.
But at the beginning of this century
phylloxera ravaged the vineyards, and
today only a few of the famous vines
V
m
A
x
X
'
«*»

remain. Between the first and second
world wars economic depression
forced so many people to leave Melnik
that the population fell from 7,000-
8,000 to its present 500.
Since 1965 a team has worked all
the year round to restore Melnik.
Many houses that were falling into
ruin have been strengthened. An urban
development plan was drawn up
limiting new building to a minimum,
and providing for dilapidated houses
to be rebuilt so as to restore Melnik's
former architectural harmony.
Excavations have also begun on
sites in Melnik, a town with a long
history and an important centre of
medieval Bulgaria from the 10th to the
14th centuries. Every summer now,
student volunteers come to the sites
to dig out the medieval castle, the
town fortress and its churches all
buildings that will be partially restored.
Melnik will continue to be above all a
tourist town, for the mildness of its
climate, the beauty of its surroundings
and the proximity of bathing beaches
guarantee that it will be busy for most
of the year.
Villages sprang up in the surrounding
areas in the 18th and 19th centuries,
when Melnik was at its most prosper
ous. In recent decades young people
have left these villages. Only old men
and women, robust mountain people,
still live there and maintain the tradi¬
tional ways of life.
But things are changing since, one
after the other, the villages have been
accorded cultural protection. At Rojen
for example, some villagers had de¬
cided to sell their houses, but they
have abandoned the idea now that the
State has agreed to restore the
buildings.
On the other side of Bulgaria, the
village of Bojentzi in the hills of
Staraplanina (part of the Balkan chain) r
Timber-framed storeys of finely restored houses rise
step-like above a street in the old town of Plovdiv (1) today
at the heart of a modern city. With their ornamental wooden
shutters and painted columns, almost all of old Plovdiv's
houses overhang the steep streets, standing so close
together that the roofs almost touch. The restorer's hand
has brought new life to this house at Melnik (2) and to
others in the nearby village of Rojen
in the high mountains, where some packhorses are still
used (3). Another view of old Plovdiv reveals asymmetrical
beauty of roof and windows (4).
Photos Gérard Dufresne - Unesco Courier
29

L has been almost completely restored.
At its most prosperous time in the last
century, the village numbered 1 1 0 build¬
ings houses, workshops, a church
and a school. Of these, 99 still remain
and the rest will be restored with the
help of old photographs and docu¬
ments. And new inhabitants are now
moving in to join the 70 or so persons,
most of them old, who form the present
population.
Some houses, abandoned by their
owners, are being bought by artists'
associations for whose members they
provide ideal conditions for work and
leisure. Others are being bought on
their own account by painters and
writers who want to settle in Bojentzi.
Here, as in all towns designated as
historic and cultural monuments, the
sales have to be authorized by the
People's Regional Councils.
At Bojentzi the roofs are covered
with attractive old stone tiles in shades
of grey-green. Against the white¬
washed walls the beams and the wood
frames of the doors and windows
stand out prominently.
The peaceful countryside, the charm
of the narrow streets, the fine old
trees in the courtyards and the gar¬
dens, all provide an ideal atmosphere
for creative work. But artists and
writers are not the only people who
appreciate Bojentzi. Bulgarian and
foreign tourists are also frequent
visitors to the village, bringing an
unaccustomed animation to its pastoral
tranquility.
In many parts of Bulgaria today,
conservation measures and a judicious
policy of protection for the cultural
heritage are restoring the spirit of the
past and giving visitors an opportunity
to enjoy peace and beauty while
learning about Bulgaria's history.
One such place, Koprivchtitza, a
historic town permeated with memories
-^>
3É1
.-
^4^
V*V7\. i
I
B-"
Past masters in the use of simple materials such as wood
and tile, the anonymous builders of Bulgaria's 19th-century
"national revival" left a heritage now being rigorously
protected. Weathered grey sandstone tiles form an
undulating "roofscape" in the mountain village of Bojentzi
(4). Similar tiles crowning simple wooden gate (3) also
at Bojentzi, contrast with the more classic formal tile
pattern on this Plovdiv roof (2). Typical wooden shelter
lines the courtyard of a craftsman's house in Koprivchtitza ;
pillars and frescoed arches lead to a majestic double
staircase (1).
m *
K
30

of heroic struggles, is also a holiday
resort. Here the lay-out of the streets
sets off the richly decorated house
fronts, the sculpted wood and the
painted ornamentation In a striking
harmony of colour.
Two old towns on the Black Sea,
Nessebar and Sozopol, are especially
popular as vacation resorts. In the
modern holiday towns built nearby all
the active working population of these
two old towns finds employment from
early spring to the end of autumn and
even sometimes during winter.
Some historic villages in the Rho-
dopes mountains have become holiday
resorts for the people who live in the
towns of the plains below.
While Bulgarian towns have greatly
expanded because of economic and
industrial development over the last
three decades, the link between town
and village has not been broken. It
has simply changed a little. Town-
dwellers have never really lost contact
with the old village world, and they
want this world to continue. They wish
to preserve old ways of life because
they realize that these traditions still
have living significance.
Of course the preservation of the
towns and villages is not without its
problems. But public opinion in Bul¬
garia is solidly behind the State in its
policy to preserve the cultural heritage.
The authorities can count on the
collaboration of specialists and special¬
ized Institutions, as well as national
organizations, including youth groups.
Through these efforts a new link is
being forged between the past and the
future in Bulgaria which, in its way, is
a new Renaissance that echoes
Bulgaria's national Renaissance in the
19th century.
Magdalina Stancheva
