THE CHANGING
CANADIAN ESKIMO
Photo J.-Ph. Charbonnier © Réalités, Paris
by Alexander Stevenson
12

The development of the North
is a historical process
that cannot be reversed'
TText© Copyright
HE traditional home of the
Canadian Eskimos is over
2.6 million square kilometres of Arctic
Canada. They have occupied this area
since many centuries before Christ,
wresting a precarious living from a
harsh land where only a hardy and
intelligent race could survive. Today
about 15,000 live in Canada, mainly in
coastal settlements of 200 to 500
people, scattered along many 'thou¬
sands of miles of the Arctic mainland
and archipelago.
It is generally agreed by anthropo¬
logists that the ancestors of the first
northern Indians and Eskimos migrat-
ALEXANDER STEVENSON, of Canada, is
director of the Social Development Division of
Canada's Department of Indian Affairs and
Northern Development. Since last year he has
been directing a commission of inquiry into the
Eskimo language for Canada's National Eskimo
Association, and since 1969 he has headed
the consultative committee for the preservation
of the historic heritage of the Far North. The
author has written a more extensive study of
the Canadian Eskimos today, published In "The
Eskimo People Today and Tomorrow", Mouton
and Co., Paris and The Hague, 1973.
ed from Asia across the Bering Strait
or over an isthmus which might have
joined Asia and America much farther
back in time. They came as primitive
hunters seeking game without realiz¬
ing that they had crossed into another
continent.
Over the centuries there were a
series of migrations; probably the
earliest was of Indian people who
almost never settled north of the tree-
line. When the land bridge became
covered with water 11,000 years ago,
new arrivals could have crossed at the
nearest points of headlands between
the continents. The short distance is
90 km. of open or frozen channel
across the Bering Strait to Alaska from
the Asian side.
The sub-Arctic may have been inhab¬
ited for up to 40,000 years, but the
bleak Arctic tundra where the average
temperature for the warmest part of the
year is less than 50°F. seems to have
had a shorter human past. Recent
findings in Alaska, known as the Den¬
bigh Flint complex, contain artifacts
and evidence indicating this culture
goes back to 3500 B.C. and It is
generally accepted as the primary
source from which Eskimo culture
developed.
If the ancestors of the present-day
Canadian Eskimos arrived in North
America over 5,000 years ago, they
had spread across 8,000 km. of
winding coast from Siberia to Green¬
land by 1000 A.D. This is about the
same time that, according to the early
Norse sagas, the Vikings sailed from
Greenland across Davis Strait to
Baffin Island. There they saw or met
people called Skraellngs a Norse
word which seems to describe both
Indians and Eskimos. When the Norse
withdrew, a gap of centuries passed
before explorers and adventurers
again visited the stark, silent shores
of Arctic Canada.
It is difficult to generalize about
Eskimos as a whole because there are
significant regional differences bet¬
ween groups. Generally speaking, the
great majority were coastal dwellers
and most of their food, fuel and
clothing was obtained from the sea
in the form of walrus, whales, seals.
Land animals such as the caribou
and musk ox also contributed to their
way of life. Many generations never
CONTINUED PAGE 30
ESKIMO
HOMELAND
The Eskimos live on the nor¬
thern edge of the world, occu¬
pying a huge area stretching
from eastern Siberia to Green¬
land and covering thousands
of kilometres of coastline. Al¬
together there are some 80,000
Eskimos spread over four ter¬
ritories: Greenland (Denmark)
has around 38,000; Alaska
(U.S.A.) is the home of about
24,000 Eskimos; in Canada
they number almost 1 5,000 and
in Siberia (U.S.S.R.) less than
3,000. At left, an Eskimo
couple in Alaska.
Currently occupied by Eskimos (villages and hunting areas)
Areas formerly inhabited by Eskimos but now abandoned
13

THE CHANGING CANADIAN ESKIMO
Continued from page 13
saw any explorers or whalers and
some had very infrequent association
with the traders. Historically they
firmly believed that theirs and the
animal life of the hunt was the only
world of man.
This is reflected in the name they
called themselves Inult The People
(the real or only people). The word
Eskimo, meaning "Eaters of Raw
Meat", appears to have originated
from the language of the Algonquin
Indians In Eastern Canada. It was
absorbed into French and was first
used in 1611.
Although early explorers of the
Canadian Arctic had met Eskimos from
time to time over a period of 300 years,
they had few dealings with them.
The people lived in a natural economy,
gaining their food and clothing from
the hunt.
They were sheltered through the
long dark winter in an amazing piece
of architecture the igloo or snow
house; In summer they lived in tents
of seal or caribou skin. There was
some sort of balance with nature and
perhaps the population in those days
was about 20,000 to 25,000, or nearly
one-third more than the present figure
of 15,000.
But there Is no point in idealizing.
Their numbers remained small because
death came often. Eskimos starved,
died by violence, died young. Possi¬
bly they had some of the diseases of
our civilization before we came
arthritis, heart disease, pneumonia,
appendicitis. Life was precarious and
life was relatively simple. Eskimos
had learned to conform to the nomadic
hunters' way of life and the climatic
cycle of the seasons.
They were almost imprisoned in
their Arctic environment. The historian
Arnold Toynbee refers to Eskimos as
one of the arrested civilizations whose
"tour de force" was living and hunting
on or around the shores of the Arctic
seas. This demanded so much of their
energy that none was left to apply to
further advances. The climatic cycle
made them captives of their Arctic
environment.
They had no written . literature or
writing of any sort but they had a
strong cultural heritage in the story,
the folk song, the drum dance. They
had ethics, taboos and philosophies of
social relations which were practical
and effective for the good of all. In
some respects their morality shocked
the newcomers from the south, but it
was a morality born of the Arctic
environment and not Europe's.
In time It was we who changed their
philosophy and brought many tensions
and contradictions to these hardy,
resourceful people. They retained
their sense of humour even In the
extreme adversity that they faced
daily. One of their philosophical or
fatalistic phrases passed down by
generations to today is Ayungamut:
it cannot be helped.
Traditionally, the Eskimo believed
that the amount of game which the
hunter secured depended upon his
relations with the spirits who con¬
trolled the supply of animals. He used
harpoons, fish spears, bird darts and
bows and arrows and could usually
obtain enough food to sustain life.
The primitive weapons did not appre¬
ciably affect wildlife resources as a
whole.
The introduction of the rifle made
it much easier for the hunter to pro¬
vide meat for his family, but it also
put modern weapons Into the hands
of men who killed more than they
needed. Resources on which they had
depended for so long were quickly
depleted. Whales were virtually wiped
out; walrus were slaughtered and
became scarce where they had been
plentiful. The musk oxen were elimi¬
nated from the coastal areas.
By the turn of the century, the
bottom had dropped out of the whaling
market and a new influence came with
the arrival of the traders. Hudson's
Bay Company traders turned their
attention to the fur of the Arctic or
white fox; this luxury fur then became
the principal commodity exchanged by
the Eskimos for food, utensils and
equipment from the south.
The trader was a more permanent
fixture than the whaler; he introduced
the idea of bartering white fox furs
for store goods, and in so doing
prevented the Eskimo from ever again
being totally independent. The luxu¬
ries of store supplies became the
necessities of the home.
The development of the white fox
trade, however, has had both good and
bad effects on the Eskimos. Opinions
differ as to which out-balances the
other. The trade had revolutionized
their way of life and disrupted many
of their traditional habits. The white
fox was prime from November to
April the period when most Eskimos
of the past would be hunting seals at
ESKIMO YOUNGSTERS, like all chil¬
dren, love to play and are especially
good at improvising games with the
simplest of materials. Opposite page,
wooden planks on a mound of earth
provide "springboard" see-saws for'
these children at Kotzebue in Alaska.
Below, a Greenland Eskimo family has
hung out its embroidered sealskin
boots on a line to dry in the sun.
30

Photo J.-Ph Charbonnier © Réalités, Paris
their breathing holes, the floe-edge,
or at open water leads. The Eskimos
replaced "bannock" made of flour for
some of their customary foods like
seal meat and developed a taste for
tea, sweets and tobacco.
The white fox, before the advent of
the white man, was perhaps the most
useless animal in the country. The
primitive Eskimo seldom used the pelt
because it was not strong and durable
like the seal, the polar bear or the
caribou. It did not have layers of fat
common to other Arctic animals with
the result that the flesh was seldom
eaten.
The Eskimo did not entirely give up
his seal hunting practices to trap
foxes; he only interrupted them during
the short trapping season. The tran¬
sition from a hunting economy to
trapping and hunting was much the
same as when our ancestors turned
from hunting to agriculture and indus¬
try to obtain a better and easier way
of life with many amenities resulting
from the change.
From roughly the early years of
this century onward to World War II,
the allure of the new goods offered
by the fur trade gradually enmeshed
the Eskimos in a new economy and
with it came the breakdown of a very
ancient way of life. This influence was
widespread in varying degrees over a
million square miles of Arctic territory.
However, until the world conflict
Canadian Eskimos still lived a fairly
primitive nomadic life in a remote,
sparsely populated country.
The war and the rapid development
of long-range air travel broke down
the isolation of the Arctic. Defence,
meteorological and radio stations were
established at a number of places.
The situation of the Eskimo people
became a matter of concern to the
Canadian public.
A high incidence of tuberculosis
was discovered among the Eskimos,
and epidemics of other diseases
followed the greater contact with men
from the south. The white fox market
collapsed in 1949, creating serious
hardship, and brought a rather belated
realization that the Eskimos could no
longer be treated as an isolated group.
Steps would have to be taken to
prepare them to take their place in a
changing Arctic and eventually to be
integrated into the Canadian economy.
With this inevitable change the Eski¬
mos had three great needs health,
education and an economy that would
support them.
One essential fact of the Canadian
Arctic In the mid-twentieth century
was that change had come and come
irrevocably. Another essential fact Is
that the Arctic as it was in the early
1950s had to change again unless
the Eskimos were to be condemned to
slow exinctlon or permanent economic
and social serfdom.
The land would no longer support
them. The caribou had declined alarm¬
ingly from about 600,000 to around
175,000 In the five years from the end
of the war to 1950. The white fox, sole
Eskimo source of income, had dropped
from $30 or more to about $5. The
cost of store goods was rising.
The Eskimos had learned to read
and write using a simple syllabic script,
but their source of reading was mostly
religious material. In the English or
French language they were 95 per cent
illiterate. One in eight had active
tuberculosis. This was the early 1950s
and as the world was becoming more
and more conscious of the needs of
the developing nations, Canada was
becoming equally conscious of the
needs of its first Arctic citizens, the
Eskimos. The jet age broke down
barriers of distance and the isolation
of an almost stone-age people.
In the past decade great progress
has been made in health care and all
Eskimos now have regular medical
examinations. Tuberculosis is a conti¬
nuing problem and although they are
building up an immunity to other
diseases introduced from the south
they are still subject to many of these.
One of the latest efforts made to
raise the standard of living for Eski¬
mos and combat the adversities of a
harsh environment was the federal
government's approval in 1965 of a
five-year rental housing programme.
The aim was to provide suitable living
accommodation to all Eskimos in the
north according to family size and at
a rent based on family economy and
resources. The nomadic igloo-tent life
of the Eskimos is now changing to a
community one.
One of the cornerstones of any
framework of a positive social and
economic structure is, of course, edu¬
cation. At the mid-century mark of
1950, out of an Eskimo population of
approximately 9,000 in the Northwest
Territories, only 120 Eskimo children
went full time to school.
No Eskimos had reached matricu¬
lation, none had received a vocational
training course, none could aspire to
a job higher than trapping for the
white man or being his interpreter. ^
31

LNo intellectual attainment or career
appeared open to the Eskimo people.
Prior to this time many of the
missionaries conducted classes in
association with their missionary acti¬
vities. However, the percentage of
children receiving any formal educa¬
tion was small when the federal
system got underway around 1950.
Additional schools or classrooms were
built in the north each year. Today,
after a short span of 20 years, over
90 per cent of all school-age children
are attending school regularly.
The government is attempting to
provide a system which will give the
Eskimo people equality of educational
opportunities with other Canadians.
The language barrier and the problems
of cultural dissimilarities have made it
difficult to develop satisfactory curri¬
cula.
The language chosen for the me¬
dium of instruction is English. In the
lower grades, Eskimo teacher assistants
ease beginners into school routine and
help bridge the cultural gap.
The development of the north
requires skilled technical labour.
Southern labour has been difficult to
recruit and hold in the remote and
harsh environment. Throughout the
north, Eskimo men are being trained at
various levels as miners, heavy equip¬
ment operators, plumbers, carpenters
and mechanics. They hold positions
as interpreters and clerks in retail and
co-operative stores and in government
offices. The government has set a
desirable objective to fill 75 per cent of
northern government positions with
local residents by 1977.
Young Eskimo girls are learning to
become teachers, hairdressers, nurses'
aides and commercial cooks. They
learn the techniques of homemaking
in modern housing in home economic
laboratories in nine Arctic communi¬
ties. Their classes Include home
management, child care, home nursing,
nutrition and clothing. These courses
are also available to adults with little
or no formal education.
There are many aspects to the
education programme and one of the
most important Is adult education
which, briefly, offers adults regardless
of age or academic qualifications an
opportunity to acquire new skills. It is
also designed to inform the older
generation who may feel themselves
cut off from their children in school.
Eskimos are already involved in the
search for and development of the
mineral and oil wealth of the north,
and a number have completed an oil-
well drilling course in Alberta, and are
now working in the High Arctic, in the
oil Industry. There is no doubt that
the lives of many more Eskimos will
change even more in the years imme¬
diately ahead as the accelerated pace
of mineral development takes place.
But all Eskimos will not be miners.
As Canadians, many will choose to
live in the south. With education
comes mobility and with mobility comes
32
choice. This should be the ultimate
objective of government policy to
provide a framework within which the
Eskimo people may independently
choose for themselves what kind of life
they want to live and where they want
to live It.
For the traditional Eskimo there
was but one choice to live off the
land, to move where the game was.
For the Eskimo of today the options
have increased from living off the land
to accepting wage employment of
some sort at the settlement and
adjusting to the routine of settlement
life. But the options are still limited.
The hunting and trapping economy
or the renewable resources of the
north have always been limited in
relation to outside markets rather than
to the very much smaller local require¬
ments. It would seem that within the
2.6 million square kilometres of the
north and along the thousands of kilo¬
metres of coastline, there are certainly
enough resources and potential re¬
sources to support a larger local
population. This depends largely on
locating the resources and improving
the methods of harvesting them.
One traditional activity that is still
popular is the hunting of seals. This
provides food and cash for the skins
and confers prestige on the hunter,
which Is equally Important at this stage
of cultural change when the dominant
figure in the Eskimo way of life is
being threatened in so many ways.
Associated with seal hunting is the
trapping of the white fox. Although
the number of trappers .will no doubt
decline as more and more turn to
other forms of wage employment,
there will always be those who prefer
to trap as long as there is a demand
for white fox furs. Our estimation is
that there are still about 1,000 families
spread over a vast area who continue
by choice and circumstances to live
by a hunting and trapping economy.
Many of these people derive their
main cash income from the sale of
seal and fox skins.
Hunting, trapping and fishing are
closely related to tourist promotion
programmes Involving Eskimos as
guides and operators of sports lodges.
The scenic and rugged beauty of the
Arctic and the fish and game attract an
increasing number of visitors to nor¬
thern Canada each year.
Probably one of the most demand¬
ing adjustments and changes in the
Eskimo way of life in recent years is
urbanization. Today more and more
families are leaving their small scatter¬
ed family camps and are settling In
concentrated communities designed
on the model of southern Canadian
towns.
The trading post" has become a
general store and isolated settlements
are organized communities in a nor¬
thern setting. This has led to a more
sedentary way of life with all the
amenities of a town such as municipal
services, co-operative stores, schools,
nursing stations or hospitals, churches.

good housing, opportunities of wage
employment and other facilities for an
active social life within the established
town. The growth of these communi¬
ties, although bringing much that is
good, has also meant a radical social
adjustment for the Eskimo nomad now
turned townsman.
Accustomed to the unscheduled and
independent life of the camp, some of
those employed find it difficult to
comply with certain work regulations
and the discipline of a nine to five
day. The head of the family who
continues to hunt and trap may travel
on a skidoo [small motorized sledge]
instead of by the traditional dog team.
He leaves his family in their permanent
home and covers his trapline, ranging
farther afield than in times past.
Many people today still have roman¬
tic ideas about Eskimos: that they
live in snow houses, eat raw meat and
are pleasantly smiling, quaint people.
This view is a particular weakness of
writers prone to sensationalism after a
week-end's visit to the Arctic.
It seems to me that in all the contro¬
versial material written about the
Canadian Eskimo people today (much
of it ill-informed and much overly
sentimental) there is a tendency to
forget that Eskimos are not quaint
curiosities. They are ordinary human
beings living in a special environment.
Even with the transition and cultural
clashes of change they share much of
the same fears and hopes of mankind,
and as Canadians today in democratic
society they are expressing themselves.
There are many people who believe
that the Eskimo should remain in a
primitive state, and government plans
for these people are often questioned.
I think it is obvious, as Knud Ras-
mussen, one of the greatest authorities
on the Eskimos, said, that "when the
hand of civilization touches a primitive
people anywhere there is no turning
back". Therefore the benefits of accu¬
mulated human knowledge should be
made available to all people as widely
as possible.
Another question often raised Is:
are people better off if they have
more material possessions, educa¬
tion, increased life expectancy, better
health, more help in adversity? The
answer can only be yes, because
these things are the material objects
as distinct from the spiritual objects
of human aspiration and these are the
areas in which are framed our con¬
crete concepts of good, of morals and
law.
The core of the problem, however,
lies in the concept of northern dev¬
elopment itself. The development of
the north is a historical process which
began in the past and is continuing
into an unforeseeable future. For eco¬
nomic reasons alone, this process
cannot be reversed. But there is an
equally important aspect the people.
Pockets of human neglect are no more
acceptable than are pockets of econo¬
mic neglect. The responsibility of
society must express itself both in
terms of resources and of people.
In the north, the irony of the situa¬
tion is that resource development is
not only the prerequisite for human
development but also the major threat
to social responsibility. The po¬
tential of the land is being developed
by means of the best that modern
technology has to offer.
Where does this leave the people
directly affected by such develop¬
ment? The concept of social respon¬
sibility precludes leaving the Eskimos
to their traditional pursuits, a very
unromantic life, regardless of the
romantic picture that has been drawn
by those who are blind to its hard¬
ships, its disease, the tragedy of death
at a young age. Such attitudes would
condemn them to nothing more than
gradual extinction in the face of a
technologically superior society from
which they are excluded.
The only course open is one which,
in some way, fulfils the social respon¬
sibility in terms of the hard facts of
economic development. To be a vital
part of society jnvolves more than
becoming a cog in a machine. It invol¬
ves the concept of cultural Identity and
without this identity a large part of
the human value of the nation is lost.
It cannot function if it bears no rela¬
tion to the economic realities of
Canadian life which surround it.
Alexander Stevenson
MISSED ME I (left). The
Eskimo language has
dozens of words to des¬
cribe seals (depending
on their age, size, posi¬
tion on the ice, etc.),
reflecting the major Im¬
portance of seals to the
Eskimos as a source of
food, heating and cloth¬
ing. In winter Eskimos
wait for a chance to
spear seals when they
surface at their breath¬
ing holes in the ice.
Often the quickness of
the seal deceives the
hunter's hand I Right,
Eskimos pierce holes
in the ice and sit patien¬
tly for hours to catch
fish, a valuable item of
fresh food during the
long Arctic winter.
33
