Open letter from Chief Dan George of the Capilano Indians
'I was born 1,000 years ago../
My very good dear friends :
WAS it only yesterday that man
sailed around the moon? You
and I marvel that men should travel so
far and so fast, yet if they have trav¬
elled far then I have travelled farther,
and if they have travelled fast then I
faster, for I was born a thousand years
ago, born in a culture of bows and
arrows. But within the span of half a
lifetime I was flung across the ages to
the culture of the atom bomb and from
bows and arrows to atom bombs is a
distance far beyond the flight to the
moon.
I was born in an age that loved the
things of nature and gave them beauti¬
ful names like "Tessoualouit" instead
of dried up names like "Stanley Park".
I was born when people loved nature
and spoke to it as though it has a
soul: 1 can remember going up Indian
river with my father when I was very
young. I can remember him watching
the sunlight fires on Mount Pé-Né-Né.
I can remember him singing his thanks
to It as he often did, singing the Indian
word "thanks" very very softly.
And the new people came, more and
more people came, like a crushing
rushing wave they came, hurling the
years aside, and suddenly I found
myself a young man in the midst of
the twentieth century.
I found myself and my people adrift
In this new age but not a part of it,
engulfed by its rushing tide but only .
as a captive eddy going round and
round. On little reserves and plots of
land, we floated in a kind of grey
unreality, ashamed of our culture which
you ridiculed, unsure of who we were
and where we were going, uncertain
of our grip on the present, weak in
our hope of the future.
I had a glimpse of something better
than this for a few brief years. I knew
my people when they lived the old life;
I knew them when there was still a
dignity in their lives and a feeling of
worth in their outlook; I knew them
when there was unspoken confidence
in the home and a certain knowledge
of the path they walked upon. But
they were living on the dying energy
of a dying culture, a culture that was
slowly losing its forward thrust.
We did not have time to adjust to
the startling upheaval around us; we
seem to have lost what we had without
a replacement; we did not have time
to take our twentieth-century progress
and eat it little by little and digest it.
Do you know what it is like to be
without moorings? Do you know what
it is like to live In surroundings that
are ugly? It depresses man, for man
must be surrounded by the beautiful
if his soul is to grow.
Do you know what It is like to feel
you are of no value to society and
those around you, to know that people
came to help you but not to work with
you, for you knew that they knew you
had nothing to offer. Do you know
what It is like to have your race
belittled, and have you been made
aware of the fact that you are only
a burden to the country? Maybe we
did not have the skills to make a
meaningful contribution, but no one
would wait for us to catch up. We
were shrugged aside because we were
dumb and could never learn.
What is it like to be without pride
in your race? Pride In your family?
Pride and confidence in yourself?
What is It like? You don't know for
you never tasted its bitterness. I shall
tell you what it is like. It is like not
caring about tomorrow for what does
tomorrow matter! It Is like having a
reserve that looks like a junkyard
because the beauty In the soul Is dead
and why should the soul express an
external beauty that does not match it?
And now, you hold out your hand
and you beckon to me to come over:
"Come and integrate", you say, but
how can I come? I am naked and
ashamed; how can I come in dignity?
I have no presents, I have no gifts.
What is there in my culture you value?
My poor treasure you can only scorn.
Am I then to come as a beggar and
receive all from your omnipotent hand?
Somehow, I must wait, I must delay.
I must find myself, I must find my
treasure. I must wait until you want
something of me, until you need
something that is me. I can raise my
head and say to my wife and family:
"Listen, they are calling, they need me,
I must gol" Then, I can walk across
the street and I will hold my head high
for I will meet you as an equal. I will
not scorn you for your gifts and you
will not receive me in pity. Pity
I can do without. My manhood,
I cannot do without. I shall not come
as a cringing object of your pityl I
shall come in dignity or I shall not
come at all!
You talk big words of integration in
the schools: does it really exist? Can
we talk of Integration until there is
social integration? Until there is
Integration of hearts and minds you
have only a physical presence and the
walls are high as the mountain range.
Come with me to the playground of
an Integrated high school. See how
level and flat and ugly the black top is.
But look, now it is recess time, the
students pour through the doors.
Soon, over there, is a group of white
students and see, over there, near the
fence, a group of native students, and
look again, the black is no longer level:
mountain ranges rising, valleys falling
and a great chasm seems to be
opening up between the two groups,
yours and mine, and no one seems
capable of crossing over. But wait,
soon the bell will ring and the students
will leave the playground.
Integration has moved Indoors.
There is not much room in the class¬
room to dig chasms so there are only
little ones there, only little ones for
we won't allow big ones, at least not
right under our noses.
What do we want? We want first
of all to be respected and to feel we
are people of worth; we want an equal
opportunity to succeed in life. But we
cannot succeed on your terms, we
cannot raise ourselves on your norms,
we need specialized help In education,
specialized help in the formative years,
special courses in English; we need
guidance, counselling; we need equal
job opportunities for our graduates.
Otherwise our students will lose
courage and ask: "Well, what Is the
use of it all?"
Let no one forget it: we are a people
with special rights guaranteed to us
by promises and treaties. We do not
beg for these rights, nor do we thank
you for them because, God help us,
the price we paid was exorbitant. We
paid for them with our culture, our
dignity and our self respect. We paid
and paid and paid until we became a
beaten race, poverty-stricken and
conquered.
I know that in your heart, you wish
you could help. I wonder if there is
much you can do, and yet there ¡s a
lot you can do. When you meet my
children, respect each one for what he
is: a child and your brother. Maybe
It all boils down to just that.
Dan George
This letter from Dan George, chief of the
Capilano Indian tribe In British Columbia,
Canada, was read to a recent symposium on
the economic development of the Arctic and
the future of Eskimo societies (see pages 4-11)
by a missionary. Father André-Pierre Steinmann.
He told the symposium that in his ' view this
eloquent letter could equally well express the
feelings of Eskimos In Greenland and Canada.
Father Steinmann, of Puvirnituq, New Quebec,
has spent over 30 years with the Eskimos and
is a pioneer of their cooperative movement.
20
