\
30

On the road
to development
5Jjg!!!!SWEi?
A UNESCO
NETWORK
APPLIED
MICROBIOLOGY
by Edgar J. DaSilva
and Fabian Fernandes
EDGAR J. DASILVA, Indian microbio¬
logist, is Vice-President of the World Fed¬
eration for Culture Collections. He is cur¬
rently assisting Unesco's Unit of Life
Sciences in developing the Unesco-ICRO
(International Cell Research Organization)
programme in applied microbiology for
developing countries.
FABIAN FERNANDES, Indian microbio¬
logist, is Assistant Secretary-General of the
International Association of Microbiological
Societies and Head of the department of
microbiology at the CIBA-Geigy Research
Centre, Bombay (India). A member of the
Unesco-ICRO Panel on Microbiology, he is
at present promoting new teaching methods
in microbiology for use in the developing
countries.
THE role of applied microbiology
and microbes in development
and technological progress is unique.
Applied microbiology offers the devel¬
oping countries great scope for
progress since many of the resources
and conditions needed for its use are
readily available in these countries.
With its branches in cellular, mol¬
ecular, genetic and radiation biological
research and its uses in agriculture,
industry, engineering and medicine,
microbiology is a field that above all
calls for international co-operation.
For this reason Unesco has set up
a world-wide programme of research
in microbiology as well as in cell and
molecular biology during the past
20 years. In 1962 it helped to establish
the International Cell Research Organ¬
ization (ICRO) with which it has been
co-operating ever since.
These branches of the life sciences
are directly linked to the solution of
three major world problems food
production and distribution, population
growth and the spread and improve¬
ment of science education.
Unesco and the ICRO panel on
microbiology have launched an inter¬
national programme to promote re¬
search on micro-organisms that
operates through training courses, the
exchange of scientists, specialized
symposia and conferences (1).
To promote co-operation between
microbiologists in industrially-devel¬
oped and developing countries, four
major international conferences which
have been given the name Global
Impacts of Applied Microbiology
(GIAMs) have been held during the
past 12 years.
The first of these conferences, held
in Stockholm (Sweden) in 1963, was
attended by scientists, administrators,
government officials and science po¬
licy decision-makers from many coun¬
tries. It focussed on the microbial
production of vitamins, amino acids
and antibiotics for non-medical use
and microbial enzyme production.
The second conference took place at
Addis Ababa (Ethiopia) in 1967. A ^
large number of African microbiologists r
(1) Carried out in co-operation with the
Center for the Application of Science and
Technology in Latin America, the Internatio¬
nal Committee on Economic and Applied Mi¬
crobiology of the International Association
of Microbiological Societies, the Internatio¬
nal Organization for Biotechnology and Bio-
engineering, the Overseas Technical Co¬
operation Agency and the World Federation
for Culture Collections.
31

> took part and the conference ma'de" a
considerable contribution to the dev¬
elopment of microbiology in Africa.
As a result of discussions during the
conference, a research programme on
the large-scale manufacture of the
food-producing alga Splrulina was later
carried out at Osaka University, Japan.
The results of this research and
other experiments were presented at
the third conference, in Bombay (In¬
dia) in 1969. The Bombay conference
led to the setting up of specialized
university departments of microbiology
at Bombay and Goa and the creation
of a biennial fellowship at the Univer¬
sity of Bombay.
The 1969 conference also encouraged
microbiologists from Japan, Mexico,
the Philippines, Czechoslovakia, India,
Israel, the Netherlands, U.S.A. and
U.S.S.R. to study in depth the pro¬
duction of Single-cell protein (SCP)
from carbohydrate wastes and petro¬
leum, a field of research in which
Unesco has collaborated with the
Protein Advisory Group of the U.N.
The future of microbiology in the
developing countries was an impor¬
tant theme of the fourth international
conference, held at Säo Paulo (Brazil)
in 1973. The conference also led to
the organization of several courses
in other parts of Brazil, on which many
conference delegates taught. In addi¬
tion symposia were held on such sub¬
jects as teaching and training in
microbiology and the future of micro¬
biology in the developing world.
These conferences and training
courses have given scientists from
the industrially developed countries
a better understanding of the problems
faced by their colleagues in the dev¬
eloping countries and an awareness of
the existing skills and technologies in
these areas.
The next conference on the global
impacts of applied microbiology is to
be held in 1976 at Kuala Lumpur (Ma¬
laysia). It will focus on problems in
energy and industrial microbiology, the
quality of life, food microbiology, the
conservation of valuable micro-organ¬
isms and basic microbiology.
Already studies are being made on
the nitrogen economy of soils, in Africa
by Prof. Aba Ayanaba (Nigeria) in
Brazil by Prof. Johanna Dobereiner, in
Indonesia by Dr. Susono Saono and at
the Biological Research Centre of the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences by
Dr. Adam Kondorosi and Unesco
consultant Prof. Rollin Hotchkiss.
Under the Unesco-ICRO programme
long-term and short-term training
courses have been organized in the
Arab Republic of Egypt, Brazil, Cze¬
choslovakia, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia,
Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria and
Sri Lanka. These courses have
stressed the importance of microbial
engineering and fermentation tech¬
nology for national development.
Visiting teams of Unesco-ICRO
panel members have lectured in Bra¬
zil, Cuba, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia,
Sri Lanka and Thailand, and at a
32

course on conservation and use of
micro-organisms for waste recovery
and local fermentations, organized in
Bandung (Indonesia) in 1974.
Unesco has played a pioneering
role in several fields of microbiology.
In 1965, the Unesco-ICRO panel on
genetic change and virus-cell inter¬
action, under the chairmanship of Sal¬
vador Luria (USA, Nobel Prize for
Physiology-Medicine, 1969) launched a
survey which led to the compilation of
an International Registry of Microbial
Genetic Stocks. A year later, Unesco
assembled a team of experts to dis¬
cuss problems relating to culture col¬
lections and conservation techniques
of genetical resources.
In collaboration with the Internatio¬
nal Association of Microbiological
Societies (IAMS), Unesco has helped
the World Federation for Culture
Collections to compile a World Di¬
rectory of Collections of Cultures of
Micro-organisms.
Additional help in this project also
came from WHO, the Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Or¬
ganization, based in Australia, and from
the U.N. Environment Programme.
The Directory is based on a compu¬
terized survey of nucleated and non-
nucleated microbes, animal, bacterial
and plant viruses, and animal, human,
insect and plant tissue cultures in
over 350 culture collections in the
developed and developing countries.
Collaboration between Unesco and
the United Nations Environment Pro¬
gramme led to the development of the
World Data Centre on Micro-organisms
at the University of Brisbane, Australia.
In this way Unesco and the United
Nations Environment Programme, in
collaboration with other organizations,
have made available key information
on and ensured the preservation of
valuable culture collections in the
developing countries.
Unesco and the ICRO panel on
microbiology have also launched a
fellowship programme to provide
further specialized training for young
microbiologists in the developing
countries.
This programme has already en¬
abled young microbiologists from
Cuba, Ghana, Guatemala, Ethiopia,
India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nigeria
and Sudan to benefit from studies in
laboratories in Czechoslovakia, Swe¬
den, Malaysia, Netherlands and U.S.A.
Microbiology can help the devel¬
oping nations just as it has contributed
to the technological growth of the
developed nations. By using microbial
fertilizers and insecticides fo boost
crop production and protection and by
harnessing microbial activities for the
recycling of utilisable wastes and the
improvement of traditional food indus¬
tries, the developing countries can and
will benefit immensely in the coming
decades.
Edgar J. DaSilva
and Fabian Fernandes
33
