BARTOLOMÉ DE LAS CASAS
Two inalienable principles:
freedom and
the right to human dignity
JOSE ANTONIO MARAVALL, Spanish his¬
torian, is professor at the Complutense Univer¬
sity, Madrid and has been associate professor
at the Sorbonne, Paris. A member of Spain's
Royal Academy, of History, he is president of
the Spanish Association of Historical Sciences.
Among his many published works, most of
which are devoted to Spanish culture and
political thought from the Middle Ages to the
18th century are "La cultura del Barroco:
Análisis de una estrucutura histórica" (The
culture of the Baroque: analysis of a historical
structure), Madrid, 1975 and his two-volume
"Estudios de historia del pensamiento español"
(Studies in the history of Spanish thought),
Madrid. 1967 and 1975.
by
José Antonio Maravall
LAS Casas" thought and the doc¬
trinal content of his work have a
value which surpasses the simple
events of the situation in America in his
day. Their interest lies in the fact that
they are applicable to the differ¬
ent historical circumstances of other
peoples.
Some historians have pointed out
certain ideological elements in his.
work. In the first place there is the r
11

, prophetic element, which is apparent
when he warns the King of the evil
-which might befall Spain, through the
will of God, for having neglected its
divine task to protect and Christianize
the Indians. Secondly we have the
messianic element: Las Casas consi¬
dered that he had been designated to
fulfill a divine mission in the Indies. In
third place we have the millenial ele¬
ment which inspired Las Casas to await
the coming of the spiritual Jerusalem,
that perfect and definitive society
which stands apart from history and
which in the fullness of time brings it
to an end by divine ordinance.
There is no doubt that there are
elements of all this in Las Casas'
thought but they are a very small part
of his work and are in no way typical
of the whole.
I think that the best word to describe
Las Casas is Utopian. He wanted to
see his reforms put into practice im¬
mediately and without delay, that is,
within the framework of our present
world with human means and for
human ends. To a large extent these
reforms dealt with social and economic
questions and implied a reorganization
of society to achieve the proposed
ends.
Las Casas insisted on presenting the
objectives of his political government
with terms such as "spiritual and
temporal utility", "prosperity", which
he believed he had found among In¬
dians ruled by their original govern¬
ments, "temporal happiness" values
which seem to anticipate the ideas of
18th century Enlightenment.
His aim was to attain a temporal and
reasonable "order" or system of gov¬
ernment. When he states that the
aim to be pursued by any govern¬
ment of the Indians is the "good and
usefulness and prosperity and growth"
of the Indians, he manages to define
the general aim of political society.
There is no doubt that Las Casas
considered evangelization very impor¬
tant, because he knew that when he
used the gospel as the basis for his
arguments it made it very embarrass¬
ing for his opponents to disagree with
him. But Las Casas always sought
the well-being and the preservation and
the enrichment of the Indian. He want¬
ed to see the poor and the modest
gain wealth and the craftsmen and
labourers who came from Spain im¬
prove their lot. Perhaps the prime
objective of his struggles was to at¬
tain a temporal society with earthly
values.
He proposed new models to correct
and improve this society and some of
them, it has been suggested, reflect
the influence of Thomas More. He
was particularly interested in societies
based on farm-workers, societies with
an agricultural economy but which had
a place for craftsmen, merchants,
magistrates and even soldiers. He
paid particular attention to the rela¬
tions between the Indians and the
Spaniards and advocated racial inter¬
mingling which would give rise to a
new type of society.
I think that It would be true to say
that all of the Utopias which came out
of 16th century Europe were influenc¬
ed by the major economic transforma¬
tions which were part of the Renais¬
sance. Las Casas' starting point was
his direct experience of the economic
upheavals that had caused the ruin
and destruction of many nations.
Las Casas was fully aware of the
situation of the small farm-labourers
and day-workers of Castile, deprived
of their land and crushed by heavy
burdens. In his plans for the Indies
these wretched souls would find an
opportunity to own a "more free and
fortunate" piece of land.
Las Casas had an acute social con¬
science, he was distressed by the
destruction of the Indians' ownership
system and was upset by the unjust
payment that they received for their
work: "let the day's wage be according
to the day's work", he reminds us in
his treatise Among the Remedies. He.
was shocked by the harsh treatment
the Indians were subjected to and by
the acts depriving them of their land
which left them on the verge of star¬
vation and extermination. He realized
that there were two major causes for
this state of affairs: the introduction
of money and everything it brought
with it.
Las Casas attributed the actions of
the Spaniards in the Americas to a
large extent to the lust for money
and riches. "Money", he said, "has
become an end in itself". The desire
for wealth and riches had become so
intense that it had led to a degree
of covetousness never known before,
to the point where it was considered
"blessedness and happiness".
For Las Casas it was the root of all
the evil attributed to the Spanish
colonists. In his book Among the
Remedies, he placed the theme of
covetousness far and above all other
reasons for the Spanish colonization
of the Americas. "All those who do
rise and go to the Indies", he wrote,
"are poor and covetous men and are
moved to go there by nought but
covetousness and the yearning not just
to escape poverty but to become rich,
and not just rich but more opulentiy
so with such riches as were in times
past neither thought possible nor
dreamed of..."
It is easy to understand the over¬
all condemnation which, as a moralise
and Utopian, our inflexible friar pro¬
nounces: "for this cause is the whole
of Spain corrupted and infected by
covetousness and avarice."
The Utopians start out by recognizing
the existence of a state of society un¬
favourable for the weak who groan
under the burden of the wealth of the
powerful and the covetousness of
those who wish to rise in the social
scale and ennoble themselves. Las
Casas started from the same point
and made an analysis of the subject
of ownership, at a time when it was
already noted that the possession of
goods was the basis for the develop¬
ment of the person and that the great
divisions of society would be accord¬
ing to the extent of one's possessions.
These Utopian systems combined
certain pre-Socialist notions with a res¬
pect for the property of the small man
and the middle-class man and were
used to defend the idea of bourgeois
property (which, to establish itself,
used arguments very similar to those
which would later be used by the
proletariat in the 19th century) and,
furthermore, the Socialist schools of
thought could point to these Utopians
as antecedents for their own doctrines.
This is what happened with Thomas
More and Rousseau.
Las Casas, who had an obvious sym¬
pathy for common ownership and in
whose organization plans there are
u

Aztec calendar
Aztec calendar for the years 1520,
1530 and 1531, during the period of
Las Casas' work in "New Spain" (present-
day Mexico). Drawings depict the
downfall of Aztec civilization and its gods
at the time of the Spanish conquest.
always elements of a community type,
fought the amassing of riches by the
powerful but defended the holding of
private property by the Indians and
small farm-labourers settled in the new
continent.
For Las Casas, God had created all
things free and without an owner so
that all men could make use of them.
Originally, then, everything belonged
to the community. But if anyone can
make use of a thing, then that implies
that he can appropriate it for his own
use, therefore possession is the legi¬
timate title to ownership.
The Indians who were the first to
settle on American soil were the
rightful owners of the land and not
the lords and masters later Imposed
on them. This right of original owner¬
ship was applicable, Las Casas said,
to all men, be they Christian or not,
for this was one of the aspects of civil
life which religion could in no way
alter. Therefore all grants, gifts, sales,
etc. of Indian property by the Spanish
kings were illegal and ought to be
annulled.
Las Casas did not go so far as to
apply this thesis to the land gifts made
by the kings to the nobles in Spain
but he sought to attract the poor farm-
labourers away from the Peninsula by
offering them prospects of free land
in America and by telling them that
the Indians had occupied vast expanses
of land which they could not work
alone. He indicated that the Indians
would let them have part of these
lands or else would take them as com¬
panions or associates to work the land
jointly.
Las Casas not only laid down rigo¬
rous principles of private property but
also proposed certain forms of col¬
lective exploitation in mining and agri¬
culture. His fondness for the myth
of the "noble savage", which he devel¬
oped long before the philosophers of
the 18th century, led him to view fa¬
vourably a stage of primitive Commu¬
nism, dear to 16th century Utopianism.
But the most important principle for
Las Casas was that of freedom. It
underpinned all his thinking and ideas.
Las Casas saw freedom as the funda¬
mental answer for problems of human
interrelationships and coexistence.
Freedom, Las Casas said, touches on
everything in human life. To be a man
and to be free are complementary con¬
cepts. From his beginnings, by his
very nature man is free. And this,
Las Casas believed, was also applica¬
ble to the Indians.
In his Petition of Remedies (1516),
Las Casas wrote that "those Indians
are men and free and must be treated
as men and free".
Freedom is an essential element of
human nature and cannot be set aside
or abolished, nor can it be lost. No
one can remove it. In truth (save very
exceptionally in cases where an excep¬
tional offence has been committed and
in virtue of the lawful application of
penal justice) there is no power on
earth that can take away the freedom
of free men. By no one, not even
by themselves "can they be deprived
of that freedom which Is theirs by
natural law" (Petition of 1543).
Moreover, no one can renounce free¬
dom even voluntarily since freedom
is an Integral part .of the human condi¬
tion. Though people may resolve of
their own free will to lower their estate
and abandon their condition as free
men "yet would their will be null and
void and impossible to do". In sup¬
port of this thesis, Las Casas clinches
the case with the following argument:
if a group is to form a political com¬
munity, if it is to be a nation, its mem¬
bers must be free people for "if they
are not free they cannot be part of a
nation".
It is interesting to note that this
judgement on the value of freedom is
found in another 16th century "Uto¬
pian" book, Don Quixote, by Miguel
de Cervantes. Las Casas declares
that "since freedom is the most pre¬
cious and supreme of all the goods of
this temporal world and is so loved and
held in esteem by all creatures both
sensitive and insensitive and much
more so by rational ones" (Among the
Remedies) then any attempt to settle
the cruel situation of the Indians must
start by "setting them free for with¬
out freedom no solution is good".
Las Casas was speaking of freedom
as a universal postulate applying to
all mankind. So that when he spoke
CONTINUED PAGE 32
13

Bartolomé de Las Casas
FREEDOM AND THE RIGHT TO HUMAN DIGNITY
(Continued from page 13 )
of tyranny he did so in terms applica¬
ble to any place and time and which
are valid even today.
No government, he maintained, could
be imposed on a group of human
beings against their free will. Nor
could a people be forced to accept a
religion against their will. Here Las
Casas stands out as a champion of
"tolerance" and "freedom of con¬
science" with respect to minority peo¬
ples. He supported the right of Jewish
and Moslem minorities to full co-exis¬
tence alongside other religious com¬
munities. He felt that no community
should be obliged to accept Christian
preaching against its will.
"If the entire republic, by the com¬
mon accord of all of its members", he
wrote, does not wish to hear us, if,
as is the case with the Indians, it
wishes to remain with its own rites on
its own lands where there have never
been any Christians, then we cannot
make war on them."
Las Casas repeatedly maintained
that neither the crime of idolatry (which
he did not consider applicable) nor
abominable or unnatural sins, nor the
practice of human sacrifice were law¬
ful grounds for punishing the Indians,
making war on them or for depriving
them of their lands and freedom.
By the same token, he rejected the
idea that the term "blasphemy" was
applicable to the normal practice of
non-Christian religious rites (here Las
Casas again included not only the
Indians but the Jews and other peo¬
ples).
For Las Casas this principle of free¬
dom finds its application particularly
on the government level. Although we
do not find the term "democracy" in
any of his writings, we do find others
which are equivalent such as "govern¬
ment by common consent", "govern¬
ment by free will", etc. And he assert¬
ed the principle that "power emanates
directly from the people".
Departing from the current of thought
which later evolved toward absolu¬
tism, Las Casas maintained that gov¬
ernment by monarchy was not derived
from the authority of the Pater Fami¬
lias. "Monarchies", he wrote, "are a
more modern phenomenon", meaning
by that that they were not created by
Nature and did not originate at the
beginning of human society. This was
tantamount to maintaining that mon¬
archies were not an obligatory form
of government but depended on the
agreement of men who, indeed, had
invented them. The government of
kings, he wrote, "is based on the
voluntary consent of the subjects and
therefore does not imply either natural
force or absolute necessity".
Therefore, for Las Casas, the full con¬
sent of the members of a community
did not alienate their freedom which
was entrusted into the hands of the
sovereign, but rather implied that the
sovereign's task was to defend and
perfect that freedom. Las Casas
specifically told the King of Castile
that when his rule was accepted by
the Indians, it had to be confirmed In
order to preserve that precious right:
"the Indians do not lose their freedom",
he wrote, "by accepting and having
Your Majesty as universal lord. Rather,
having made good any defects that
they may have had in their republics,
the lordship of Your Majesty shall
clean and purify them and thus shall
they enjoy better freedom." (Among
the Remedies).
But Las Casas went even further.
Even after they had been converted to
Christianity, he said, the Indians re¬
mained free and any government over
them would only be lawful when they
had freely recognized it as their own.
"Should it be that after becoming
Christians they do not wish to receive
and obey such a supreme lord", he
affirmed, "this is no reason for making
war on them so long as they remain
in the faith and show respect for
justice."
This thesis, which may rightly be cal¬
led democratic, is complemented by his
assertion of a right which, under the
absolute monarchies in Europe, is
rarely acknowledged by other authors
in the 16th and 17th centuries: the
"right of resistance". For there are
cases, says Las Casas, where royal
prerogatives and decrees, however
coercive, cannot be received, obeyed
nor carried out, if they are against the
faith, and also "if they run counter
to the service and well-being of the
kingdom and against the common
good."
The defence of the democratic prin¬
ciple required, at that time, a demon¬
stration of the political capacity of the
Indians so Las Casas completed and
reinforced his spirited defence of the
freedom of the Indians with evidence
of their political abilities.
The greater part of his Apologetic
History, many passages of his History
of the Indies, and other writings are
based on the merits and legality of the
systems of government which the
Indians had established when they
were free.
This leads on to the crowning prin¬
ciple of the Las Casas system: the
principle of humanity.
For Las Casas, "all nations of the
world are composed of men and each
and all men have but one definition
and that is that they are rational
beings". All possess the same phys¬
ical and mental faculties; "all have the
natural principles or seeds to under¬
stand and learn and know the sciences
and those things which they do not
know and this is so not only among
those of virtuous disposition, but even
in those marred by moral depravity...";
"all cherish goodness and take plea¬
sure in what is agreeable and joyous
and all reject and hate evil and are
disturbed by what is offensive and
does them harm."
Differences indeed exist, said Las
Casas, since men live in different
places and so are subject to variations
in the conditions influenced by the
"heavens" (understood in its cosmo¬
graphie not its theological sense). And
so it is evident that the result of such
diversification of causes produces dif¬
ferent effects on the human body and
these effects determine the differences
between one man and another.
Yet for Las Casas the homegeneity
of human nature far outweighs individ¬
ual difference and exerts a powerful
Influence on the oneness of mankind.
Thus the Ideas of particularism and
universalism are expressed by Las
Casas in a new way that comes closer
to the thinking of modern man.
The cosmopolitanism he professed
goes far beyond a mere ethical atti¬
tude; it relates directly to everyday
human life and determines the relations
between all men and women on a
planet which, in the words of the great
Spanish humanist Luis Vives, had been
made explicit for the first time.
Las Casas thus depicts for us an
authentic "cosmopolitanism of co¬
existence", in which "all men are united
and linked together by a natural
brotherhood and kinship...", as he
writes in his prologue to History of
the Indies.
And so the human universalism of
Las Casas establishes the most exalted
of all political rights: the right to
human dignity.
José Antonio Maravail
32
