A STONE AGE
ORCHESTRA
The earliest musical instruments
were made from the bones of mammoths
by Sergei N. Bibikov
SERGEI N. BIBIKOV, historian and corresponding
member of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, is a
researcher at the Archaeological Institute of the Aca¬
demy of Sciences of the Ukraine.
28

In this collection of bones are
instruments from one of the world's
oldest orchestras, dating back some
20,000 years. Made from the bones
of mammoths, these percussion
instruments were unearthed at a
Palaeolithic site near the village of
Mezin, Ukraine. The largest include
a shoulder-blade (left), a leg-bone
(below), and a hip-bone (right).
ARCHAEOLOGICAL excavations
carried out at the site of a
Palaeolithic settlement (some 20,000
years old) in the village of Mezin,
near Chernigov in the Ukraine, bet¬
ween 1954 and 1962, brought to light
the remains of a house built of the
bones of a mammoth.
Inside the house, Ukrainian archae-
logists I.G. Pidoplichko and I.G. Shov-
koplyas found some large mammoth
bones decorated with a cut-out geo¬
metrical design and coloured red.
They were in a place apart and ap¬
peared to form a set, although their
purpose was not immediately clear.
The finds included a shoulder blade,
a thigh bone, two jaw bones, a frag¬
ment of pelvis and a portion of a mam¬
moth's skull. Two ivory rattles, a
mallet fashioned from a reindeer's
antler and a large number of sea shells
were also discovered on the floor of
the house, together with a "rattling"
bracelet with a simple but highly artis¬
tic design and consisting of five pieces
of mammoth-tusk ivory with carved
open-work decoration.
Near to the bones were found four
heaps of pure yellow and red mineral
ochre and also eight bone perforators.
The floor of the dwelling bore the
traces of three fireplaces and four
pairs of bone struts for supporting the
wigwam-type poles which had formerly
held up the roof.
Detailed analysis of the finds has
revealed that the history of this Pal¬
aeolithic construction falls neatly into
two periods. At first it was used as a
winter dwelling, but in the course of
time it became unsafe the whole
three-ton edifice was in danger of
collapse and was abandoned by its
inhabitants.
As the settlement grew, the villagers
needed a public building, so they took
over the old house, re-furbishing it,
shoring it up from the inside, cleaning
out the rubbish and using it as a
building for festive occasions and rites.
It was then that the decorated mam¬
moth bones and other objects of a
non-utilitarian nature were brought into
the building. It should be pointed out
that some of the minority peoples in the
north of Russia were still using aban¬
doned houses for similar ceremonial
purposes until fairly recent times.
Examination of the mammoth bones
eventually made it possible, in 1974, ^
29

Cro-Magnon
castanets
Formed of flattened rings of
mammoth-tusk ivory with
carved decoration, this
"castanet bracelet" discovered
at Mezin, in the Ukraine, is
the first Palaeolithic
instrument of its kind ever
found. The rings make a
harmonious sound when
rattled together, and it is
thought that the bracelet
may have been used to
accompany dances, thus
suggesting that dancing was
already practised in
Cro-Magnon times some
20,000 years ago.
to establish that they all formed part
* of a set of percussion instruments.
The reindeer-horn mallet and the rattle
fulfilled similar functions, while the
bracelet undoubtedly has some con¬
nexion with dancing, corresponding
roughly in function to a pair of casta¬
nets. The red dye and the bone per¬
forators were part of the "props".
The purpose of the objects found at
Mezin was established by a team of
archaeologists, palaeontologists, foren¬
sic scientists and medical experts.
The way in which the surface of the
bones is worn in places, the way the
outer part of the bone tissue is com¬
pacted and has flaked away from the
inner, spongy part, the way in which
the deformation of parts of the bone
is strictly localized, and in which cer¬
tain points on the surface have been
polished, as well as a number of other
clues, left the investigators in no doubt
that these were in fact percussion ins¬
truments.
The discovery of such instruments
dating from nearly 20,000 years ago is
of the greatest significance, and is the
first such discovery to have been
made. Previously, only bone flutes,
which incidentally have still not been
scientifically investigated, had been
discovered from Palaeolithic times in
the U.S.S.R., and in Central and
Western Europe.
The "castanet" bracelet is the first
such instrument ever to have been
found, and the only Palaeolithic object
to have been discovered in the
U.S.S.R. which confirms that the art
of dancing was known in Central and
Eastern Europe in Cro-Magnon times.
Although music is generally recog¬
nized to be one of the supreme mani¬
festations of culture, its early history
has not yet been very thoroughly
explored, as Professors Maurice
Freedman and Bruno Nettl made clear
in a "Unesco Courier" article ("Music
of the Centuries", June 1973). Music
has generally been regarded as dating
back to the civilizations of the ancient
Orient and to Antiquity.
As a result of the discovery of these
Palaeolithic instruments, this dating
has now been pushed back by at least
15,000 years, and rhythmic music is
seen to have been already in existence
in Cro-Magnon times. It thus appears
that Cro-Magnon man had already
mastered the elements of musical
rhythm, tone and phrasing and was
aware of the emotional impact of mu¬
sic. Music is thus probably as old as
working skills and crafts and as old
as society itself.
Dancing, which can also express the
whole complexity of human experience
from imitations of the gestures of
workers and craftsmen to the expres¬
sion of the most subtle emotions has
also existed for as long as music.
One of the earliest forms of the com¬
bined musical and choreographic per¬
formance whether of ritual signifi¬
cance or simply dancing for pleasure
was done to the accompaniment of
percussion instruments and also possi¬
bly to a sung accompaniment.
The structure of. music and dancing
is frequently compared with that of
language. This emphasizes the corre
lation between words and sounds,
between speech and music as a vehi¬
cle for the expression of thought and
ideas.
With the help of ethnography and
other specialized fields of study, using
the methods of cultural history and
comparative analysis and even experi¬
mental methods, it should be possible
to find out the basic facts about the
musical culture of Palaeolithic times.
This will give us a deeper insight into
the mentality of homo sapiens, how he
perceived the world, his emotional
make-up, his behaviour and other
aspects of his mental activity.
In order to get a rough Idea of the
sounds produced by the bone instru¬
ments, rather than relying only on the
ethnographic evidence, an experiment
was carried out at the Institute of
Forensic Science, in Kiev (Ukraine).
A musician carefully tapped out a
rhythm on different parts of the
shoulder-blade instrument. Sounds of
various timbres hard, resonant and
musically expressive were obtained.
This experiment was a first step in
the direction of investigating the range
of sounds of Palaeolithic untuned per¬
cussion instruments.
Sergei N. Bibikov
30
