Do we have
the teachers we need
for higher education ?
by Dragoljub Najman
DRAGOLJUB NAJMAN of Yugoslavia is
Director of Unesco's Department of Higher
Education and Training of Educational Personnel.
He has written many articles and has published
two books on educational problems. He exam¬
ines the subject of the present article more
fully in his book " L'enseignement supérieur,
pour quoi faire ? ' (What's the purpose of higher
education?), published by Fayard, Paris. 1974.
His study "Education in Africa What Next?"
was published in English by Editions Maison-
neuve, Paris, in 1972.
ONE may sometimes wonder
what connexion, if any, some
of the people who teach in higher edu¬
cation have with real life and society.
How many of those in faculties of arts
and sciences responsible for training
secondary school teachers have them¬
selves actually taught In secondary
schools? How many of those who
teach economics have played an active
part in the preparation of five-year,
four-year or annual economic develop¬
ment plans?
How many of those who teach in
schools of engineering have ever been
In charge of factory workshops or
building sites? How many of those
who teach law also practise it, albeit
only on a part-time basis?
Text © Copyright
Reproduction prohibited
And yet these are the same
teachers who claim an unchallenged
right to have the final' say on all forms
of higher education. "University
professors constitute a priestly caste
dispensing education like a sacrament.
Few Innovations or changes emanating
from outside the monopoly exercised
by this professional clergy stand much
of a chance of being approved or
adopted..." (1).
It would be a mistake, however, to
put all the blame for this state of
affairs on the shoulders of college and
(1) La Contribution des Universités à l'Edu¬
cation Permanente (The Contribution of
Universities to Lifelong Education), French
National Commission for Unesco, Paris, 1972.
24

A critical look
at conservatism
in the world's
universities
university teachers. We must not
forget that in many institutions of
higher learning their position is far
from clear-cut since they are regularly
called upon to do totally different tasks
at one and the same time: to carry
out research work, deliver their
lectures and teach in class, as well as
act as supervisors and trainers of
future generations of scholars and
scientists.
I believe there can be no real reform
of higher education unless a radical
change is made in the selection and
composition of the teaching staff.
The doors should be Immediately
opened wide to those who, although
they may not possess degrees or
doctorates, nevertheless have vast
experience In their own specialities.
Vigorous action is needed to ensure
that teaching staff are recruited solely
on the basis of competence, even if it
means recruiting part-time staff.
At present it is possible to pass
from nursery to primary school, then
from secondary school to university
and to be awarded a doctorate, and
finally to become a teacher without
ever having had any real contact with
life. If we really wish education,
higher education in particular, to
become something other than a self-
perpetuating process of this kind, it is
essential and urgent that people with
completely different backgrounds and
qualifications should be drawn into the
teaching profession.
Students and student behaviour are
widely criticized. It is claimed that
they are cut off from society and do
nothing but criticize it. Studies and
newspaper articles point out at length
how difficult it is for them to adapt
to the needs of society when they
leave university. At the same time,
the training of men and women who
will have to do important jobs and
shoulder heavy responsibilities is
entrusted to those who are in many
cases out of touch with the economic,
social and political realities of life in
their own countries.
It would be impossible to change the V
On achieving independence
in 1960, Mali faced the urgent
problem of training specialized
personnel needed for its deve¬
lopment. "Not wishing to fol¬
low the example of countries
which set up universities co¬
pied from foreign models",
writes the author of our arti¬
cle, Dragoljub Najman, in his
book "L'Enseignement supé¬
rieur pour quoi faire ?" (What's
the purpose of higher educa¬
tion ?). " Mali decided to set
up a higher education system
fully adapted to existing condi¬
tions and able to meet its im¬
mediate needs for trained
personnel."The first institution
created along these lines was
the Bamako training college
for secondary school teachers
(photos left). In addition to
training secondary teachers
n the arts and sciences, the
college provides courses in
these fields for students en¬
tering other professions.
25

k whole of the teaching staff in all the
world's institutions of higher education
overnight. No one would want to do
this, and I am certainly not suggesting
it. But now it is becoming both
essential and urgent to Include on the
teaching staff people drawn directly
from working life.
I would stress the point that such
persons should only have part-time
teaching jobs, since I consider it
essential for them, for their teaching
and for their students, adolescent or
adult, that they should keep their feet
on the ground and should go on with
their previous jobs in the economic,
social or political life of their respect¬
ive countries.
At the same time, college and univer¬
sity teachers, professors, lecturers,
etc., should participate in the country's
economic and social activities. The
aim should be to reach a situation
where a mathematician or sociologist,
a doctor, a journalist, an artist, an
e'ectronics expert, a local or national
government official, an industrialist
or a civil servant spends a certain
number of hours each week teaching
in higher education while carrying on
his or her regular job.
The sort of arrangement that certain
futurologists foresee for tomorrow,
such as "higher education programmes
that make use of 'mentors' drawn from
the adult population... Accountants,
doctors, engineers, businessmen, car¬
penters, builders and planners might
all become part of an 'outside
faculty' " (1), should become a reality
today.
"People with a creative talent in
literature and the arts will be added
to the list of teachers in spite of the
fact that they have no degrees.
Educated people will also be recruited,
according to needs, from the corn
il) Future Shock, Alvin Toffler, Bantam
Books, New York, 1971.
(2) Relationships between student activism,
student participation and institutional reform:
Five case studies, Joseph Dt Bona, Unesco,
1970.
(3) See note 1 page 24.
(4) A Chacun Selon sa Demande (To each
according to his needs), B. Girod de
l'Ain, in "Le Monde", Paris, 3 July 1973.
(5) The Academic Revolution, Christopher
Jenks and David Riesman, Anchor Books,
Doubleday and Co. Inc., N.Y. 1969.
(6) New Uniyersities in the United King¬
dom:' Case studies on innovation in higher
education, H.J. Perkin, OECD, 1969.
(7) The concept of life-long integrated
learning "education permanente", and some
implications for university adult education,
International Congress of University Adult
Education, 1967.
(8) Learning to Be, Unesco and Harrap,
Paris and London, 1972.
munity, from the worlds of commerce
and industry" (2). But why use the
future tense?
"Non-academics, under certain con¬
ditions at least, have perhaps the same
vocation and the same rights to teach
as academics. They should therefore
be given an opportunity, and no dis¬
crimination, statutory or otherwise,
should be made against them" (3) and
"Every society should include among
its educators its best artists, scientists,
writers, musicians, doctors, lawyers,
priests, engineers, etc." (4).
"The faculty would Include sub¬
stantial numbers of tenured members
who were not scholars but doctors,
lawyers, administrators, and so on.
with practical experience in working
life into teaching.
I think it is up to higher education
to show the way and to set an example
if, instead of tagging along behind the
other forms of education, it wishes to
influence them, not only by the content
of the education which it provides but
also by Its methods and, in the
particular case we are discussing here,
by the composition of its teaching staff.
Only a few years ago, this question
might have seemed incongruous...
During a round table held at Unesco
headquarters on the problems of the
rôle and function of the university in
modern society, the sti.dent participants
agreed to discuss the questions raised
Drawings by Trez Í"'1 Unesco Courier
A.. .MAZING WORLD, ISN'T IT ?
The programme would include not only
regular academic courses in literature,
psychology, and chemistry but clinical
experience and field work of various
kinds" (5). But why use the con¬
ditional in all these cases?
The answer is, alas, only too simple:
the trouble lies in the physical resist¬
ance by institutions of higher education
to such innovations "Scholars and
scientists have not in the past
shown . . . broad-mindedness. When¬
ever they have had power they have
used it to eliminate most non-
academicians from undergraduate
teaching" (5).
This is the key to this problem,
which is political and not technical.
Its solution cannot depend solely on
the goodwill or lack of goodwill of the
teaching profession, and it is up to
society, to the government and the
authorities in general to bring people
by the admission of students to univer¬
sity on condition that the agenda
should also include a discussion on the
admission of teachers to university.
This is not surprising, considering
that in Britain, for instance, "the core
of the problem of improving university
teaching... is that a vast majority of
academic staff receive no training in
how to teach, so that... most teachers
have to learn for themselves the art
of instruction" (6), or that "even more
curious has been the attitude of some
professors to what they call 'pedagogy'
and for which they do not trouble to
hide their scorn" (7).
The question, however, is far from
being one of "pedagogy" alone: "What
once was an art the art of teaching
is now a science, built on firm foun¬
dations, and linked to psychology,
anthropology, cybernetics, linguistics
and many other disciplines. However,
26

the application of pedagogy by teachers
is in many cases more of an art than
a science" (8).
As regards the training of teachers
for higher education, it should be
realized that education at this level is
comparable in certain respects meth¬
odologically and technologically both
with adult education and with the type
of education at present given at
primary and secondary levels.
It thus becomes essential to develop
these methods at the higher level and
these methods are something which
can be learned. Few people are born
with a gift for teaching. Most of those
who are capable of putting over not
only their knowledge but also their
aptitudes and even their attitudes, are
. people who have learnt the technique.
After apprenticeships of varying
lengths, they have acquired the know¬
ledge necessary to teach at a particular
level. There is no reason to think
that teachers in higher education do
not need this special training to
enable them to put across their know¬
ledge much more effectively and
successfully than they do at present.
In the coming years all countries,
large or small, developed or devel¬
oping, will obviously require an in¬
creasing number of teachers for higher
education, and In world terms this
number will be very large indeed.
I think that, in order to meet this
demand, we should see to It that prop¬
erly organized training is given to all
those who will be full-time teachers in
higher education.
In this connexion, an interesting lead
has been given by the Government of
Mali, which has set up a higher edu¬
cation teacher training centre. At the
Centre, prospective teachers for higher
education are trained in their special
subjects and at the same time receive
teacher training so that they will be
able not merely to instruct the
country's future specialized personnel,
but to educate them In the fullest
sense of the word.
Anyone may be required, at some
time in his or her life, to teach others.
All students should therefore be
regarded as potential teachers. This
entails a far-reaching adjustment In
education from the first stages of
higher education onwards, but it does
not involve students alone: "...many
engineers, most librarians, most agri¬
cultural and other fieldmen, most
social workers, and many business
executives also need some preparation
as agents who will assist edu¬
cation" (7).
Seen from the viewpoint of lifelong
education, a viewpoint adopted by
most education systems, "should we *
not deduce from all this that an aptitude r
A TEACHER IS A TEACHER IS A TEACHER IS A TEACHER.
EDUCATION OR ISOLATION?
27

to educate should henceforward form
part of the training of every Individ¬
ual...? More specifically, it would
seem clear that educational theory and
practice have now become an integral
part of the training of any Individual
belonging to a modern society whose
occupation endows him with influence,
authority or responsibility towards
others" (1).
Two conclusions seem to me to
follow from what has been said.
Firstly, if higher education is to give
some training to all students to enable
them to become the teachers of
tomorrow, will they ,be properly
equipped to teach if their own teachers
today have not themselves been
trained? The answer to this question
Is certainly a negative one.
It follows that it is essential to give
pedagogical training to all who are
going to teach in higher education
today and tomorrow, so that they can
themselves produce educators in their
turn. This applies equally to full-time
teachers and to those who, as I
suggested earlier, might be called in to
teach part-time. Here again the re¬
sponsibility lies with higher education:
it has not only to teach the teachers
but also to teach the teachers' teachers.
I believe a first practical step in this
direction should be to change teacher
training institutions into institutions
giving pre-service and in-service
training to all who teach or may be
required to teach full-time or part-time
at any level, including that of higher
education.
These institutions could be used as
a testing ground for an interdisciplinary
form of instruction with education itself
as the main subject on the curriculum.
It would in fact be extremely interesting
to bring together in one place people
with experience in business, industry,
etc., students preparing for various
occupations and professions and uni¬
versity faculty members who have not
studied to be educators, and give them
all a training fully adapted to the tasks
that lie ahead.
Dragoljub Najman
(1) An Introduction to Lifelonq Education,
Paul Lengrand, Unesco, Paris 1970.

