
2. Myths that die hard
HISTORICAL and political factors
have proved to be of critical
importance in changing the status of
women, in particular in countries
which have achieved independence
or undergone a national revolution or
a complete change of political,
economic and social structures. Econ¬
omic factors are also of basic import¬
ance in determining the extent of the
employment opportunities available to
women.
Experience has shown how difficult
it is, at a time of chronic and growing
unemployment and underemployment,
to ensure women's right to work on
a footing of equality with men. In
most cases women workers are seen
as a threat to men, as intruders in a
male domain. And even in many
developed countries women's right to
work is dependent on the buoyancy
of the economy. In periods of econ¬
omic recession it is easy to see how
fragile is their right to equality of
opportunity and treatment.
Almost everywhere there remains
a clear division of labour by sex with
jobs labelled as "men's work" and
"women's work". While the line of
demarcation may vary with time and
place, what is significant is the per¬
sistence of distinctions based on sex
stereotypes.
VOMEN'S YEAR INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR
Photo © Paul Almasy, Paris
JURIST
Above, a judge in a French court. In 1967
less than one French law student in
three was a woman, and in the world's
law schools as a whole the number of
women students is still low. For exam¬
ple, in seven Latin American countries.
(Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Guya¬
na, Mexico, Panama and Peru) women
comprise less than 20 per cent of law
students. In Cuba and Uruguay, how¬
ever, there are almost as many women
studying law as men.
As has often been emphasized, job
labelling of this kind is both dangerous
and discriminatory. It leads to recruit¬
ment based on sex rather than on
capacity, and it perpetuates unproven
beliefs about women's abilities and
inabilities as workers. It places unjust
barriers in the way of opportunities for
advancement.
It creates a situation in which work
traditionally done by men commands
higher pay and prestige while that
traditionally done by women is ac¬
corded lower pay and prestige and is
consistently undervalued. It has no
inherent logic.
The fact that in most countries girls
and women are still to be found
preparing for typically "feminine"
occupations has caused considerable
concern in countries which have been
trying to overcome the division of the
employment market into "women's
work" and "men's work".
It is interesting that the budget
proposals of the Swedish National
Labour Market Board for the financial
year 1974/1975 contained two pro¬
posals aimed at breaking down sex-
linked occupational choice and re¬
cruitment practices.
The Board proposed that a training
grant of 5 Swedish crowns per hour
(approximately $1.00) should be paid
for a maximum period of 6 months,
to employers who train men for
"women's" jobs and vice versa.
This would be for an experimental
period of three years. It also proposed
that, on a two-year experimental basis,
employment subsidies of the same
amount for jobs created under regio¬
nal development schemes should be
conditional upon at least 40 per cent
of the new jobs going to each sex.
These proposals have been approved
by the Swedish Parliament.
In the United Kingdom, the Trades
Union Congress has urged that special
grants be made to firms which train
girls and women for jobs outside the
traditional range of women's work
(especially at technician level).
14


Equal pay for Equal Work. One of
the most blatant forms of discrimina-
ion against women continues to be
unequal payment for work of equal
value. Acceptance of the principle of
equal pay means that minimum wages
must be the same for men and women,
that in the public sector the same sa¬
lary scale must apply to men and wom¬
en without discrimination and that in
the private sector action towards equal
pay, for example by the revision of
collective agreements, must be stimu¬
lated and supported.
The general picture and the trends
are encouraging. But there are still
many practical difficulties to be over¬
come. In many countries employers
are reluctant to apply the principle
fairly even when they accept it, and
reveal a tendency to evade equal pay
by a variety of practices and by
reference to "economic factors" or
the need for "technological inno¬
vation".
Why is it that so often when women
enter an occupation in any large
numbers wages fall or fail to rise?
Why is it that wages are traditionally
low in so-called women's occupa¬
tions? It would appear that in male-
dominated societies women's work is
apt, without reason, to be regarded as
of less value than that of men.
However important it may be to
achieve equal pay for equal work, this
is only one aspect of the broader
question of women's wages. Their
chief characteristic almost everywhere
is their low level as compared with
those of men.
While failure to apply the principle
of equal pay fully and fairly may be
an element in this situation, it is not
the only factor: others include the
heavy concentration of women in bad¬
ly paid industries and occupations,
their often lower level of education,
training and work experience, the han¬
dicaps imposed on them by society as
a result of their responsibilities, and
outright discrimination in employment.
Moreover, women tend to work
shorter hours than men and fewer
bonus hours (e.g. at night or on
Sundays or holidays). And where
wages are determined with regard to
length of service, women's generally
lower seniority may be an additional
factor. ILO studies of the position in
industrialized countries suggest that
women's wages are about 50 to 80 per
cent of men's for the same work time.
Can differences in women's wages
be justified by differences in their
work performance? Are women "re¬
liable" workers?
These questions are often asked
and all too often left unanswered, leav¬
ing the inference that there is little
doubt that women are less steady
workers than men.
A number of myths about women as
workers are crumbling under the
pressure of facts.
Women are often accused of exces¬
sive absenteeism or of having a high
rate of turnover. In the United States,
a Public Health Service survey of
work time lost due to illness or injury
in 1967 showed that women lost on the
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S
CONDUCTOR
Left, Soviet conductor Veronika
Dudarova directs a symphony
orchestra more than 200 strong. In
1970 almost half the students in Soviet
art and music schools were women.
Unesco's international study reveals
that in most countries, however, the
percentage of women students of
fine arts is much lower than that of
men : 15 per cent in Norway in 1970
for example, and 16 per cent in
Sweden. In Japan on the other hand,
where only 28 per cent of those
enrolled in higher education are
women, there is a remarkably high
proportion of women fine arts
students : 67 per cent.
15

average 5.6 days as compared to 5.3
days for men. A number of European
surveys have come to the same gen¬
eral conclusions.
Analyses indicate that the skill level
of the job, the marital status and age
of the workers, length of service and
record of job stability provide better
clues to differences in job perform¬
ance than does the fact that the work¬
er is a man or a woman.
For Women Only. In many countries
industrial and social history has left
a heritage of protective legislation
applying to women only. This legis¬
lation, however well intended, has
sometimes led to discrimination
against them as workers. The prohibi¬
tion of underground work for women is
the most common form of protective
legislation applying to women only.
Most countries also specify a series
of other occupations from which
women are barred on the grounds that
the work is dangerous or unhealthy
for them. In many cases physical
strength was a primary factor in the
prohibitions and restrictions; in other
cases health protection from the
standpoint of women's role as a mo¬
ther was a leading factor. In still other
cases, there appears to have been a
notion of protecting women from work
regarded as "unpleasant" and "un¬
suitable for women". The general
trend today seems to be to attack the
hazards as hazards for all workers
and to improve the standards of pro¬
tection for men as well as women.
On the other hand where women,
because of their biological function of
reproduction, do incur proven special
health risks as new techniques and
substances are introduced, they do
require and should receive special
protection and this should not be
regarded as discriminatory or in
conflict with the principle of equality
of opportunity and treatment. There
will always remain a limited sphere in
which women will need protection:
that of maternity.
Maternity protection. Maternity pro¬
tection is a most important matter for
working mothers and for society as
a whole. Greater responsibility for
maternity protection is being assumed
by the State, on the grounds that
maternity is a clearly recognized so¬
cial function.
Considerable progress towards mat¬
ernity protection has been made
during the last decade. The ILO
standards on this subject have con¬
tinued to provide the framework for
national action. Today, few countries
lack some system of maternity pro¬
tection for women workers.
Nevertheless, even if the essentials
of maternity protection are now being
extended almost everywhere, women
workers still have many practical
problems connected with pregnancy,
childbirth and the care of infants.
One of the more interesting recent
developments in maternity protection
has been the extension of the period
of authorized maternity leave beyond
the normal statutory or prescribed
period, without loss of employment
rights.
This extension of leave is now
common practice in the socialist
countries of Eastern Europe. For
example, in Bulgaria a working mo¬
ther, following obligatory paid leave,
NATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR
ARCHITECT
ENGINEER
Unesco's recent study on higher
education shows that in almost all
countries women engineering students
are few and far between. In most cases
women constitute less than 10 per cent
of trainee engineers, only exceeding
20 per cent in a very few countries such
as the U.S.S.R. and Hungary (35 per
cent). Only one Canadian woman studies
engineering for every 100 men,
whereas women form 35 per cent of the
student population of Canadian
universities. At the world-famous
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
there were 630 women students in 1971
as against 6,670 men. Right, a Canadian
engineer makes an on-site inspection.
Left, a young French architect visiting
a school during construction.
16

may take further leave for between 8
and 12 months at a minimum basic
wage and still further unpaid leave
with employment rights protected until
the child is 3 years old.
In Poland a mother may take leave
until her child is 3 years old, with
guarantee of re-employment and re¬
lated benefits. In Hungary, after
5 months' maternity leave with full pay,
a working mother may choose to
remain at home until her child is
3 years old and during this period,
which is counted as a period of
employment for retirement purposes,
she receives a monthly mother's
allowance and the guarantee of
returning to her former job. In the
German Democratic Republic, a mo¬
ther may take one year's unpaid leave
after paid maternity leave, and during
this extra leave her job is reserved and
she returns to work without loss of
seniority or pension rights.
Certain other European countries
have also introduced somewhat simi¬
lar arrangements. In Spain after the
period of paid maternity leave, a
working mother may take voluntary
unpaid leave for an additional period
of at least one year and not more than
3 years; at any time during this period
she may apply for reinstatement and
the employer is obliged to appoint her
to the first vacancy which occurs in
the same or a similar category. In
Italy a woman may take an optional
extra 6 months' maternity leave after
the statutory compulsory and exten¬
ded period.
On January 1, 1974, Sweden became
the first country to enact legislation
making cash maternity benefits pay¬
able also to the father. Under this law
either working parent may stay at
home to care for a newborn child and
collect the cash benefit. The husband
instead of the wife may opt for the
period of extended leave or the period
may be divided between them, with
the same safeguards relating to re¬
instatement in employment, seniority
and pension entitlements.
Several countries provide for a
period of birth leave for fathers: in
INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR INTERNATI
France paid leave of 3 days is reim¬
bursed to the employer by the family
allowance fund, while in Sweden the
period is 10 days. In Norway it has
been proposed that men workers
whose wives are in gainful employ¬
ment should be entitled to from 2 to
4 weeks' child care leave during the
first year of the baby's life and that
benefits be paid to men workers dur¬
ing such leave.
Child care. Despite the steady
increase in the number of married
women workers with young children,
the child-care services and facilities
have in most countries been slow to
respond to new needs. The time is
past when society can refuse to
provide community child-care services
in the hope of dissuading mothers
from leaving their children and going
to work: this flies in the face of facts.
The trade unions in a great many
countries are giving serious and
continuing attention to the problem of
child care and are putting it forward
as a basic right for workers.
Who Works Longer? International
comparative research carried out un¬
der the auspices of Unesco has shown
that, almost without exception, mar¬
ried women generally work longer
hours at home than their husbands
because of the traditional division of
family chores and concept of sex
roles. On the whole, working mothers
had less than two-thirds of the free
time that their husbands enjoyed.
Their total weekly hours of work
amounted to between 70 and 80
Change in the position of women in
economic life, the family and society
implies change in the role of men in
these spheres. In turn, this implies
change in social attitudes, which
themselves define and confine men's
and women's roles in all walks of life.
Problems may be discussed as
"women's problems" but they must be
considered as problems of men,
women and children, of society as
a whole.
17
