Photo Bibliothèque Nationale. Paris © Snark International
By Angel Losada
ANGEL LOSADA, Spanish historian, is a
specialist in the history of Spanish humanism,
particularly two of its major figures, Bartolomé
de Las Casas and Juan Glnés de Sepúlveda.
He has been a professor at Madrid University
and a researcher with Spain's Higher Council
of Scientific Research. Among his many
publications are "Bartolomé de Las Casas a
la luz de la moderna critica histórica ' (Bartolomé
de Las Casas in the light of modern historical
criticism), Madrid, 1970. and two previously
unpublished manuscripts of Las Casas. 'Los
tesoros del Perú" (the treasures of Peru),
Madrid, 1958 and the 'Apologia" in reply to
Sepúlveda, translated Into Spanish from Latin
(Madrid. 1975).
THERE are few figures in history
as controversial as Father Bar¬
tolomé de Las Casas. For some peo¬
ple he was the "Apostle of the In¬
dians", for others, the author of the
anti-Spanish "black legend", and even
before his death he was the subject
of hostile and embittered opinion.
There is no doubt that these conflict¬
ing views are the result of an imper¬
fect understanding of both the man
and his times.
Father Bartolomé lived for 92 years,
and his long and fruitful lifespan can
be divided into four main periods.
Birth and education (1474-1502).
Although we do not know the exact
date of his birth, it is generally
assumed that Las Casas was born in
Seville in 1474. We do know that his
father was a merchant and that he
was a close friend of Christopher
Columbus whom he accompanied on
his second journey to the New World.
It is very probably this which ex
plains his son's keen interest in the
Indies. Bartolomé received his ele¬
mentary and secondary education in
Seville where he studied the humani¬
ties and obtained his bachelor of arts.
This kind of education, frequent
enough in his day and which did not
require him to go to university, qua¬
lified him to receive the tonsure and
take minor orders. As a priest he
could, and did, apply for a post as
"doctrinero" (1) or "auxiliary" to the
preachers in the recently discovered
Indies and he obtained one.
In this first period of his life, then,
Las Casas can be described as an
average Spaniard, outstanding neither
by birth nor education and so emi¬
nently suitable, like so many of his
contemporaries, for the adventure of
(1) A sort of parish
South American Indians.
priest among the
(2) A person receiving an
grant of land and slaves.
"encomienda" or
4

Bartolomé de Las Casas
champion
of Indian rights in 16th-century
Spanish America
On October 12, 1492, Christopher Columbus and his three tiny ships made landfall
off Guanahani, today one of the Bahama Islands. For Spain this marked the start
of an era of discovery, conquest and colonization of what was then known as the
"Indies" but which was soon to be called "America". Left, Columbus and two
of his Spanish fellow-explorers receiving gifts from American Indians, as depicted
a century later by the Flemish engraver Theodore de Bry. In 1 502, Bartolomé de
Las Casas, a young Spanish priest from Seville, arrived In the Indies. He was
to become famous as a champion of the Indians against the abuses of
colonialism. The engraving of Las Casas shown above is based on his only
surviving portrait (see page 7).
a voyage out to the distant New
World. Such beginnings add to the
merit of Las Casas' subsequent
achievement.
Priest and colonist in Central America
first conversion (1502-1522). In
January 1502 Las Casas sailed for the
Indies in an expedition under Nicolas
de Ovando sent by the Court to put
some order into the governing of the
colony. He was also to ensure that
the Indian enjoyed his freedom like a
normal human being and he was to
free him from the exactions, injustices
and even slavery to which the lack of
experience of the Columbuses had
subjected him. The disciplinary aspect
of the expedition was responsible for
the orientation of Las Casas' future
Indian vocation and explains why he
was to devote his life and soul to the
human problem of the Indian.
Las Casas landed in Santo Domingo
(Hispaniola) on April 15, 1502 and for
the first few years his way of life was
in no way different from that of any
other emigrant colonist. Making full
use of native labour he ran the estate
which his father had left him, took
part in the wars which Ovando waged
against rebellious Indians and like any
other "encomendero" (2) had no scru¬
ples in taking full advantage of Indian
labour, something which he was bitterly
to repent later.
In 1510 there landed in Hispaniola
an expedition of four Dominican mis¬
sionaries from Salamanca, centre of
the School of Theologians and Jurists
who were the founders of modern
international law. The expedition was
led by Friar Pedro de Cordoba and
among its members was the famous
Father Antonio Montesinos. The first
sermons of Father Montesinos made a
deep impression on Las Casas.
The colonists' tendency to blur the
distinction between the freedom and
the slavery of the Indians in their ser¬
vice caused the Dominicans to react
immediately and take up the defence
of the Indians.
The Dominican spokesman was the
fiery Antonio Montesinos who, in a
sermon delivered before Admiral Diego
Columbus, son of the Discoverer, and
a group of Royal officials on November
30, 1511 made the first deliberate ma¬
jor public protest against the treatment
being meted out to the Indians by the
colonists. His call for freedom in the
New World for every non-Christian
man and nation marked a decisive
turning point in the history of America.
The main theme of Montesinos' ser¬
mon was that all the colonists were
living and dying in mortal sin because
they were making slaves of the Indians
and compelling them to work for them
as well as waging unjust wars upon
them, and that furthermore they were
failing to carry out their duty as
evangelists.

Bishop
of the
Indians
w Montesinos' words greatly annoyed
* the colonists and authorities on the
island and were not well received at
the Court either. The result was that
the Dominican friar was obliged to
return to Spain. His sermon, however,
unleashed a pro-Indian campaign which
was to affect both men's thinking and
the more practical domain of govern¬
ment institutions. From that West
Indian environment there arose "a Las
Casas, tireless advocate in the Span¬
ish Court of the cause of the In¬
dians" (1).
The Cuban campaigns in which Las
(1) Silvio Zavala: "La Defensa de los de¬
rechos del hombre en América Latina, Siglos
XVI-XVIII" (The Defence of Human Rights In
Latin America, 16th-18th centuries), Unesco,
Paris, 1964.
Casas served as military chaplain to
the Governor, Diego Velazquez, were
the decisive element leading to his
conversion. Velazquez had rewarded
him with a rich "grant" of Indians but
the scruples which Montesinos' ser¬
mon had caused in Bartolomé's soul
were increasing.
He resolved to give up the estates
which he farmed with the help of the
Indians and dedicate the rest of his
life to the defence of the Indians. He
then decided to return to Spain and
try and convince the Court of the
urgent need to suppress the abuses of
the "encomiendas" and the wars of
conquest in the Indies.
Las Casas returned to Spain in 1515
and devoted his energies to winning
to his cause the new king, Charles I,
who was also to become the Holy
Roman Emperor Charles V. To this
end he had an interview with the
Regent of the Kingdom, Adrian of
Utrecht, to whom he sent a memoran¬
dum on the distressing situation in the
Indies. Adrian passed the memoran¬
dum on to his Co-Regent, Francisco
Ximénez de Cisneros, Cardinal of
Spain and Archbishop of Toledo, who
immediately took Las Casas seriously
and made him his counsellor for Indian
affairs.
Las Casas was appointed Universal
Protector and Procurator of the Indians
with an annual salary of 100 gold
pesos. (This position of "Protector of
the Indians" was a typical and exclu¬
sive institution of the Spanish Crown as
a colonizing power and its duties en-

In 1544, when his persistent efforts
in America had borne fruit. Las Casas,
on the recommendation of Emperor
Charles V, was named by the Pope as
Bishop of Chiapa in what is now the
Mexican state of Chiapas. As bishop
he continued his "great mission", the
peaceful settlement of the region of
Verapaz, a "territory forbidden to the
conquistadores" under the terms of a
concession granted by Charles V.
During his few years as bishop he must
have witnessed scenes similar to those
shown here. Opposite page and
bottom right, descendants of the Indians
evangelized by Las Casas and his
fellow-missionaries celebrate Holy
Week in the township of Chamula,
Chiapas state. Below, street scene in
the little town of San Cristobal de
Las Casas, which probably owes its
name to its 16th century bishop. Right,
the only known surviving portrait of
Las Casas, by Antonio Lara, today
in Seville's Biblioteca Colombina.
tailed defending the rights of the
natives and bringing before the Court
for punishment all abuses of the
Indians by the colonists.)
Las Casas presented Cisneros with
a series of petitions on wrongs, rem¬
edies and accusations in all of which
can be discerned the outlines of a plan
to reform the Indies which implied a
far-reaching revision of the entire
Indian colonization policy. Cisneros
sent a group of three Hieronymite
monks to the Indies to look into the
matter and Las Casas accompanied
them as counsellor.
Right from the start, however, there
was serious dissension between Las
Casas" liberal Indian policy and the
traditional colonizing principles of the.
Hieronymite friars. This soon led to anr
7

k open break and In 1517 Las Casas
* returned to Spain with the intention of
laying his complaints before Cardinal
Cisneros. But the Cardinal had died
on November 8, and Las Casas had
no other course open to him except
: to deal directly with the Spanish king,
: who had just landed in the Peninsula.
A new project to reform the Indies
was prepared and presented to the
Court by Las Casas. Its aim was the
agricultural colonizing of the New
World using skilled farmers recruited
in Castile to teach the Indians the
tried techniques of European farming
(a genuine foretaste of the technical
co-operation projects of our days).
This project completely rejected any
idea of exploiting the Indian and
looked to the consequent Increase in
productivity to supply new sources of
income for the Crown.
The new Las Casas plan advocated,
among other things, the recognition of
equal freedom for the Indian and the
subject from Spain, mixed marriages
between the Spanish colonists and the
Indians (far removed was the mere
thought of racism) and permission for
each family of farmers to take with
them a black slave or a black slave
couple.
This last idea was to become the
first source of scandal for his enemies.
They accuse him of contradiction and
consider him the person responsible
for the implantation of the black slave
market in South America. But the
French historian Marcel Bataillon has
very clearly shown that Las Casas was
not the first person to suggest such a
practice and that, in any case, his
advice had no practical effect. Later,
Las Casas himself, in his "History of
the Indies", bitterly repented of his
idea.
Admission to the' Dominican Order
second conversion (1522-1550). On
May 19, 1520 Las Casas had obtained
from King Charles a settlement of a
strip of coastal land in Venezuela to put
into practice his ideas on peaceful
colonizing with land-workers recruited
in Spain. Unfortunately the experi¬
ment ended in disaster mainly because
of the desertion of many of the farm¬
workers who were ill-prepared for the
venture. Bartolomé was very disap¬
pointed and saddened and decided to
change his way of life and enter the
Dominican Order.
From 1524 to 1530 in the peace and
quiet of his monastery he pursued his
studies in law and theology with great
thoroughness and thought out and
started drafting the originals of his
literary magnum opus. Here we have
the beginnings of the great committed
writer that Las Casas was to become
later in his life.
With this new and enriched stock of
cultural knowledge and the support of
his brothers in religion, Bartolomé
took up the fight once again. He
rightly felt that his way was not that
of the missionary moving among the
pagan Indians, but that made possible
by his access to the Court and even
to the Pope where his ideas on colo¬
nizing and peaceful evangelizing could
be effectively explained. These ideas
can be summarized as follows:
Abolition of the "encomienda"
which would free the Indian from that
state of subjugation to the colonist
which, in Las Casas' opinion, is the
worst form of slavery.
Condemnation of all wars of con¬
quest. The world must be brought to
realize that before the arrival of the
Spaniards the Indians belonged to a
nation as free and sovereign as Spain,
were as intelligent and free as any
other men and, in many ways, were
superior, naturally and morally, to the
colonists. (Rightly may Las Casas be
considered the precursor of the doc¬
trine of the "noble savage".)
The decisive influence of Las Casas
was soon to be felt in the question of
the "encomienda". In 1542 the Crown
promulgated the "New Laws" which
implied purely and simply the abolition
of the "encomienda". Another of the
great ideas advocated by Las Casas
had triumphed.
Consecrated Bishop in Seville in
1544, he was appointed to the, for him,
much desired diocese of Chiapa In
Central America where he was receiv¬
ed in triumph.
Then he immediately began to put
into practice a whole series of mea¬
sures to discipline abuses of the
existing colonial system. He even
brandished the terrible weapon of "re¬
fusal of confession" to any colonist
who had Indians in his service and
went so far as to raise it to the level
of a regulation in a manual of pre¬
cepts entitled Confessionary which he
attempted to circulate as widely as
possible in manuscript form.
This attitude of his naturally brought
him into serious conflict with the
clergy and colonists deeply rooted in
the "Establishment". This, and the
premature repealing of the "New
Laws" in 1545, an indisputable victory
for the colonists, meant a new failure
for his cause. But Las Casas did not
consider his cause to be lost and de¬
cided to leave the New World once
and for all to wage the decisive battle
for the Indian cause in Spain itself.
His campaign in Spain to win
recognition of the Indians' human
rights (1550-1559). The circulating of
the Confessionary was the last straw
for the colonists and aroused their
anger against the Bishop of Chiapa.
They sought a person to defend their
cause at Court and through Hernán
Cortes, among others, they found him
in the person of the new Chronicler
and Confessor of Charles V, the
Cordobán humanist Juan Ginés de
Sepúlveda.
Before the King he denounced the
Confessionary as an attack on Span¬
ish rights in the Indies and in his
Latin treatise, Démocrates the Second
or on the just causes of the war
against the Indians, he defends the
system of "encomiendas" when ap¬
plied without abuse, and the justice of
war against the Indians when they wish
to resist the preaching of the Gospel.
There is no doubt that seen from
our present day viewpoint Las Casas'
refusal to recognize any superiority of
cultures is not only more attractive and
exemplary but is the only just attitude
to take. But even today how far are
we from seeing it effectively accepted
in practice!
What is really surprising is that the
Spain of those days, which allowed a
freedom of speech which even today
arouses our admiration, should remain
divided into two opposing bands; the
supporters of the colonizing policy
advocated by Sepúlveda and the sup¬
porters of the policy favoured by Las
Casas. Between them the Crown
maintained its neutrality.
In view of this state of affairs, Em¬
peror Charles V very prudently decided

to summon a "Council of Theologians
and Jurists" In Valladolid (1550-1551)
to allow the opposing parties to defend
their viewpoints, which was tanta¬
mount to opening a debate on the jus¬
tice of a war which the Emperor
himself was waging in America.
Furthermore, while waiting for the
Council to come to a conclusion the
Crown decided to suspend all wars of
conquest in the New World, and pro¬
ceeded to do so.
To combat the arguments of Sepúl¬
veda (summarized in an Apologia of
his Démocrates the Second) Las Casas
presented and read to the Council a
voluminous treatise also entitled Apo¬
logia. The text of this work lay unpub¬
lished in the National Library In Paris
until we recently sent it to the printer
together with a Spanish translation of
Sepúlveda's Apologia (Editoria Nacio¬
nal, Madrid, 1975).
As for the respect which should be
shown to the pagan religion of the
Indians we can do no better than quote
the following which is a paragraph
from the Apologia:
"Neither cannibalism nor the sacri¬
fice of human victims to the Gods by
the Indians are offences which shall .
justify war being waged against them.
In the first place because such cases
be but rare and in the second place
because the said cannibalism and im¬
molation are an essential part of their
religious rites... A change of religion,
though it be conversion to the true
religion is a matter which shall not be
treated lightly nor in any way be im¬
posed by force, for there is no matter
whatsoever more arduous and impor¬
tant for a man than to abandon his
first religion, even though its rites
include the sacrifice of human vic¬
tims..." (We could almost be reading
a page of Rousseau or Voltaire!)
Las Casas, then, Is proposing a for¬
mula for peaceful co-existence in poli¬
tical and religious matters between all
peoples. He calls for mutual respect
of race, religion and culture as a fore¬
runner of the modern concept of
racial, cultural, political and religious
pluralism.
It is certain that as far as Las Casas
was concerned there was only one true
religion and that was Catholicism, and
yet he maintains his principle that
rather than make war on a nation in
order to convert it to the true religion,
the pagan religion of that nation should
be respected. He goes on to say that
it would be better for the nation to
keep its original religion than be
obliged to adopt another by force.
Here we have the essential differ¬
ence between the doctrine of Las
Casas and that of Sepúlveda and Fran- ,
cisco de Vitoria. The latter claimed I
Revolt against oppression
Las Casas fought unceasingly to bring about the abolition
of the oppressive "encomienda" system, under which the
Spanish Crown "granted" a number of Indians as workers
to Spanish settlers known as "encomenderos". Las Casas'
efforts were crowned with success in 1542 with the
promulgation by the Spanish Crown of the so-called
New Laws, described by American historian Lewis Hanke as
representing "as revolutionary a change in the administration
of Spain's great empire overseas as Las Casas' contemporary,
Nicholas Copernicus, had achieved in astronomical circles."
Above, detail from a Mexican manuscript of the period depicting
an Indian uprising against an "encomendero" and the latter's trial.

^that the sacrifice of innocent victims
by the Indians was sufficient justifi¬
cation for the armed intervention of
Spain in the Indies. For Las Casas
such armed intervention was a greater
violation of natural law than the sacri¬
fice of innocent victims.
Although the Valladolid Council rea¬
ched no definitive decision, it is true,
nevertheless, that the subject and the
opposing positions adopted on it have
had an influence which has lasted to
the present day.
Las Casas' intervention in the affairs
of Peru (writing of "De Thesauris") and
his death (1559-1566). From 1559
onwards Las Casas took a special
interest in the affairs of Peru and
in its colonial system which post¬
dated that of Central America and
which was the prey of civil wars for
a long time. Thus, in 1561 he came
out very strongly in support of the
position adopted by the Bishop of
Charcas, Provincial of the Dominicans
in Peru, Father Domingo de Santo
Tomas, against the perpetuating of the
"encomienda".
He was a nonagenarian when, in
reply to a consultation requested by
the missionaries in Peru, he wrote two
fundamental works. One was written
in Spanish, Las Doce Dudas or Doce
Cuestiones Peruanas (The Twelve
Doubts or Twelve Peruvian Questions,
published in Paris in 1882 by José
Antonio Llórente). The other, in Latin,
De Thesauris, had remained unpub¬
lished until we found the original
manuscript in the Biblioteca de
Palacio, In Madrid, and published it
with a Spanish translation under
the title, Los Tesores del Peru (The
Treasures of Peru; Consejo Superior
de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid,
1958). Here, Las Casas replies in
detail to the consultation on "the
colonists' right to possess those goods
proceeding from the ransom of Ata-
hualpa (1) and the treasures from the
sepulchres of the Incas".
Las Casas appears here as one of
the first and most ardent defenders of
the notion that each nation has its
own cultural identity. The archaeolo¬
gical and artistic treasures of a nation
are the inalienable property of the
people and if even the prince cannot
(1) Last ruler of the Inca Empire, taken pri¬
soner by the Spanish conquistador Pizarro.
Although a ransom of a roomful of gold and
silver was paid by the Incas, Atahualpa was
executed in 1533.
(2) Unesco's 1975-76 programme of aid to
Member States "for the preservation and
presentation of the cultural and natural heri¬
tage" includes a special programme for Peru:
"Restoration of historical monuments in the
Cuzco-Machu Picchu area...". Las Casas with
his work "The Treasures of Peru" may well
be considered the first advocate of this well
justified campaign.
dispose of them how much less can
they be seized by strangers.
From speaking of artistic treasures
Las Casas passes naturally and imme¬
diately to the subject of human trea¬
sure and for him the greatest treasure
in South America is the Indian who has
to be defended. De Thesauris, the
most perfect work of literature written
by Las Casas in our opinion, can be
considered up-to-date even at the
present time (2). This book, which he
considered to be his last will and
testament and which he presented as
such to King Philip II, marks the end
of Las Casas' literary activity.
Las Casas died on July 17 (or per¬
haps July 18) 1566 in the Convent of
Our Lady of Atocha in Madrid. He
was 92 years of age. According to the
Chronicler Father Gabriel de Cepeda,
being on the point of departing this
world, with the candle in his hand,
Las Casas begged everyone not to
cease to protect the Indians and,
repenting that he himself had not done
for them everything that was necess¬
ary, he implored them to help rectify
this omission.
Shortly afterwards (May 6, 1567) the
Council of the Indies solemnly granted
their freedom to the Indians at Coban,
the first posthumous victory of the
"Apostle of the Indians" and one which
was to be followed by so many others
right up to the present day.
Angel Losada
Las Casas vigorously denounced the
cruelty and injustice which the greed of
the conquistadores had brought to
America, (as depicted in engraving by
Theodore de Bry, opposite page)
and used every possible argument
to support his fight for justice.
But alongside these injustices and this
cruelty, inherent in all forms of colonialism,
positive developments were taking place,
due in many cases to the efforts of
Spanish missionaries. Colleges
and universities were founded
(the university of Mexico City was set
up on Las Casas' initiative in 1533, four
years after the end of the Spanish
conquest) ; printing was introduced,
along with European farming and
industrial techniques; towns were built,
etc. In the words of the Mexican
historian Ramon Xirau, "in the conquest
of America were intermingled utopia
and "encomienda", deeds and laws, wars
and missionary work, aggression and the
desire to build a new City of God."
Las Casas, and other Spaniards who
defended the rights of the Indians,
symbolize this positive aspect of the
Spanish colonization of America. Above,
forced labour depicted in engravings from
a manuscript of Huaman Poma de Ayala,
one of the first Indo-Hispanic writers
of Spanish America. Top, an Indian
woman works at her loom. Bottom, a
"choleric and arrogant" Dominican forces
"spinsters and widows" to work for him.
10
