Photo Unations
The 39-storey U.N. secretariat building towering more than 150 metres above the
East River, New York. Designed by an international team of 10 noted architects, the
U.N. complex was completed in 1952.

THE UNITED NATIONS
AT AGE 30
The difficult path
of international co-operation
by Kurt Herndl
THIRTY years ago, on 24 October
1945, the United Nations came
into being. The signature of Its Charter
in San Francisco on 26 June 1945
marked the end of a war that had en¬
gulfed the whole world and brought
death to millions of human beings. To
the representatives of the 51 states
who affixed their signatures to
the Charter, the birth of a new Inter¬
national organization not only closed
a tragic chapter in mankind's history
but also opened a new era which would
"save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war".
In preparing the Charter of the
United Nations, every effort was made
to avoid the shortcomings and pitfalls
that had been observed in the Cov¬
enant of the League of Nations. In
place of the rule of unanimity, the
parliamentary principle of majority
rule was introduced; the role of the
Assembly was enlarged; an Economic
and Social Council was introduced as
KURT HERNDL, Austrian jurist is director
of the Security Council and Political Com¬
mittee Division of the United Nations
Secretariat. From 1962 to 1965 he was a
member of the Legal Department of the
Austrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
was closely associated with the work of the
United Nations as a delegate to meetings of
the General Assembly and other U.N. bodies.
Between 1965 and 1969 he was Deputy
Permanent Representative of Austria to the
U.N. Office in Geneva.
a principal organ; special emphasis
was placed on the necessity to respect
human rights and fundamental free¬
doms for all human beings without dis¬
tinction; a trusteeship system was
established to advance the indepen¬
dence of the mandated and colonial
territories.
However, it was decided to main¬
tain the requirement of unanimity
among the five major powers, perma¬
nent members of the Security Council,
in exercising responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and
security.
1945
1955
During the first ten
years of its existence,
the United Nations
created appropriate
machinery to deal with
the vast array of
economic and socialworld political,
problems.
As early as 1946, the Economic and
Social Council established the Com¬
mission on Human Rights, which in
turn started elaborating a body of
rules designed to ensure that states
respect the human rights and funda¬
mental freedoms of all individuals.
In view of the special political powers
entrusted to him by the Charter, the
Secretary-General began to play an
active political role on the world scene.
In the political field, the U.N.'s acti¬
vities were somewhat hampered by the
antagonism which in the meantime
had developed between certain major
powers. Nevertheless, the U.N. was
able to contribute effectively to the
restoration of peace in several areas
where conflict had broken out. It
achieved the first armistice agreements
in the Middle East. An armistice was
also negotiated in the Korean penin¬
sula. Due not least to United Nations
efforts, other dangerous situations
such as those which arose in Indo¬
nesia, Greece, Iran and Kashmir were
brought under control and stabilized.
Further, the United Nations embarked
immediately on a programme promoting
the attainment of independence for
people hitherto administered by
foreign powers. The Trusteeship
Council, which has now become almost
obsolete, developed into a powerful
organ, which not only supervised the
administration of trust territories but
also played a direct role, together
with the Assembly, in the attainment of
independence of those and other non-
self-governing territories.
Activities of the U.N. in the field of
disarmament did not yield immediate
results. However, at the end of the
first decade they led to the establish¬
ment of the International Atomic Energy
Agency.
One of the major achievements of the
first decade was the adoption, without
a dissenting vote, of the Universal
Declaration on Human Rights, on 8
December 1948. This Declaration
continues to be universally accepted as
a standard in the field of human rights.
In order to provide international pro¬
tection to refugees and seek perma-:
nent solutions for their problems, ther
13

k General Assembly In 1950 establish¬
ed the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR).
The United Nations, from its earliest
days, focussed its attention on econo¬
mic questions. It set up regional eco¬
nomic commissions. In the summer of
1949, the U.N. Economic and Social
Council worked out the first compre¬
hensive plan for an "expanded pro¬
gramme of technical assistance". Up
to 1955, technical assistance had been
given to more than 100 countries and
territories under that programme.
1955
1965
mediate result
decolonization.
During the second
decade of its exist¬
ence, the most dra¬
matic change was the
rapid increase in mem¬
bership, as an im-
of the process of
While the U.N. started
out with 51 founding members, it had
77 at the end of 1955 and 118 by the
end of 1965. Most of the new mem¬
bers admitted in the 1960s were former
colonial or trust territories, mainly
African.
In fact, United Nations efforts were
Instrumental in bringing about the
independence of millions of people.
To this day, the famous Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, adopt¬
ed by the General Assembly in 1960,
is commonly regarded as "the Magna
Carta" of dependent countries.
The influx of new members had a
far-reaching impact on the Organ¬
ization. The power relationships which
had existed within the U.N. up to that
time began to change.
The emergence of new nations led
not only to greater attention being paid
by the U.N. to those political issues
which were of greatest concern to the
new members that is, African prob¬
lems, and in particular the situation in
southern Africa but also to increased
emphasis on the problems of develop¬
ment, which were of vital interest to
the new states.
Accordingly, this period saw the
establishment of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD), which was designed to
promote international trade in order
to accelerate economic development,
particularly trade between countries at
different stages of development.
In 1961, the General Assembly
launched the First Development
Decade. Its chief goals were the
attainment of a five per cent increase
in the growth rate of the Gross National
Product of developing countries and
a gradual Increase in the flow of aid
from the developed to developing
countries.
The establishment of UNCTAD and
the launching of the First Development
Decade are illustrative of a shift in
priority which was later to become
even more marked. Realizing the
interdependence of the modern world,
the United Nations began to place
more and more emphasis on economic
development and related matters.
In the political field also, several
very significant developments occurred
during the middle years. In 1956, for
the first time, the General Assembly
established a United Nations Emerg¬
ency Force in the Middle East, designed
to separate the armed forces of Egypt
and Israel. This represented a sig¬
nificant step forward as the United
Nations had hitherto resorted to a
purely supervisory machinery for
observing compliance with truces (such
as the military observers In Greece,
Indonesia, Kashmir and Palestine).
The way was thus paved for the
establishment of similar operations of
a quasi-military nature in other areas
of the globe.
When the Congo crisis erupted in
1960, the United Nations again
mounted a large-scale peace-keeping
operation and dispatched United
Nations troops to the area. At the
height of the Congo operation some
20,000 troops from more than a dozen
Member States were deployed in the
Congo. In the course of this operation
the United Nations suffered the loss
of its second Secretary-General, Dag
Hammarskjöld, who perished while
engaged in the search for peace in
the area.
Once again, in 1964, the United
Nations dispatched peace-keeping
forces this time to Cyprus to preserve
international peace and prevent a
recurrence of fighting between the two
communities of that island. The
Organization also achieved a cease¬
fire in the armed conflict which
broke out between India and Pakistan
in September 1965. These examples
demonstrated that the Organization
was able to cope with direct threats
to international peace and security in
a dramatic way, although, admittedly,
not all such situations were brought
before the United Nations.
The U.N. meanwhile continued its
efforts in the field of human rights,
adopting two international covenants
on human rights one on economic,
social and cultural rights, the other on
civil and political rights together with
a number of measures to combat
racism and racial discrimination.
The United Nations also ventured
into a hitherto unknown field: that of
outer space. Once it became clear
that major powers were about to launch
important space programmes, the U.N.
immediately set up machinery to follow
the scientific developments and ensure
that future scientific, technological and
Informational benefits would accrue
not only to space powers but to all
states. The U.N. also elaborated a
legal framework under which outer
space activities would thenceforth be
carried out for the benefit of all
mankind.
Important principles which would
govern the activities of states in space
were laid down in the Declaration of
Legal Principles Governing the Activi¬
ties of States in the Exploration and
Use of Outer Space, adopted by the
General Assembly in 1963. This dec¬
laration later became, with minor
changes, what is commonly referred
to as "the Outer Space Treaty".
During this time United Nations
efforts in the field of disarmament
continued, the main objective at this
stage being the prevention of the
spread of nuclear weapons. One step
on that path was the conclusion of
the 1963 Test Ban Treaty (although
that Treaty was not concluded under
United Nations auspices).
1965
1975
from the
situation.
During the third dec¬
ade of its existence
the United Nations
was confronted with
a series of new chal-
' lenges which arose
rapidly changing world
In the political field the
effects of détente were being increas¬
ingly felt, so that the issues brought
before the United Nations were more
and more of an economic and related
nature.
In view of the growing awareness
of mankind of the innumerable prob¬
lems created by overpopulation, in¬
sufficient food supplies, pollution,
over-urbanization and increasing crime
rates, the United Nations became a
forum for discussion of these questions
and for efforts to take collective
corrective action.
It is generally recognized that the
U.N. achieved a high measure of
success with the world-wide confer¬
ences which it organized from 1972
onwards on these problems. The
United Nations Conference on the
Problems of the Human Environment
(1972) approved a Declaration of
principles on the responsibilities of
states with regard to the environment
which led to the establishment of the
United Nations Environment Pro¬
gramme (UNEP). The World Popu-
14

lation Conference (1974) adopted the
World Population Plan of Action. The
World Food Conference (1974), pre¬
occupied with a shrinking world food
supply, set up the World Food
Council. In 1976, the United Nations
will hold a Conference-Exposition on
Human Settlements (Habitat) in order
to tackle the problems of urbanization.
The United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) set up in 1965, has
over the years carried out numerous
large-scale investment projects to aid
the development of many countries.
UNDP's annual budget is now normally
larger than that of the United Nations
itself.
In 1966, the General Assembly estab¬
lished the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization (UNIDO),
to promote the Industrialization of
developing countries. In 1970, the
Second Development Decade was
proclaimed and in the spring of 1974
the sixth special session of the General
Assembly adopted the Declaration and
Programme of Action on the Establish¬
ment of a New International Economic
Order.
Realizing the interrelationship of the
problems of trade, development,
development finance and international
monetary transactions, the General
Assembly drafted the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States,
which it solemnly proclaimed on
12 December 1974. This Charter is of
particular importance and will have a
considerable impact on the future
economic relations of states.
It is obvious that the transformation
of the world's economic relations into
a system based exclusively on econ¬
omic co-operation and precluding any
economic domination will require
adjustment and accommodation even
sacrifice by all states. In any event,
to the credit of the United Nations it
has been able to set in motion a
'process of reappraisal in all circles.
The measures taken by the General
Assembly in this field were comp¬
lemented by action taken by UNIDO,
particularly by the Declaration on
Industrial Development and Co-oper¬
ation, adopted in March 1975, and a
Plan of Action, which urged that the
share in total world production of
the developing countries which have
70 per cent of the world's population
be increased from its present 7 per
cent to 25 per cent by the end of
this century.
Besides these new activities, the
United Nations has not neglected
other political areas during the last
decade. It has continued its work in
the field of outer space and has
elaborated several important conven¬
tions, such as the Outer Space Treaty
(already mentioned) the Agreement on
the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return
of Astronauts and the Return of
Objects Launched into Outer Space,
the Convention on International Liab¬
ility for Damage Caused by Space
Objects, and the Convention on Regis¬
tration of Objects Launched into Outer
Space.
Of particular interest is the work of
the U.N. in the field of communications
by direct broadcast from satellites.
In 1968 a world-wide Conference on
Outer Space Questions was held, at
which the practical benefits to be
derived by non-space powers, particu¬
larly the developing countries, from
space research and exploration were
examined.
Concern for problems of the peace¬
ful uses of the sea-bed and the ocean
floor led to the adoption of a Declar¬
ation of Principles on this question in
1970. United Nations efforts in this
field proved the need for a general
overhauling of the law of the sea, and
to that end the General Assembly
convened the Third Conference on the
Law of the Sea, which has met in
New York (1973), Caracas (1974) and
Geneva (1975), and which is expected
to conclude its work in 1976.
In the field of disarmament, the U.N.
has been instrumental in the drafting
and adoption in 1968 of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons.
Additional conventions adopted con¬
cern the prohibition of the emplacement
of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction on the sea-bed
and the ocean floor and its subsoil,
and the prohibition of developing,
producing and stockpiling bacterio¬
logical (biological) weapons.
Admittedly, the United Nations
during its third decade failed to
prevent renewed armed conflict in the
Middle East, in the India-Pakistan sub¬
continent, and in Cyprus. In all three
cases, however, the U.N. became
deeply involved in the direct aftermath
of the conflict. In the Middle East a
new peace-keeping operation was
launched which succeeded in main¬
taining calm in the area. In Bangladesh,
the United Nations undertook an im¬
mense relief operation. In Cyprus, the
U.N. presence was an important factor
in containing the scope of the conflict.
The problems of southern Africa are
still with the U.N. So far, United
Nations efforts to bring about the
necessary changes in that part of the
world, including the application of
economic sanctions to Southern Rho¬
desia, have not been crowned with
success although almost all the former
Portuguese territories in Africa have at
last attained independence. One can
say, however, that the prospects for
change in that area have improved,
due not least to the endeavours of the
United Nations.
The status of women, for which a
specific subsidiary body was created
as early as 1946, has received
increasing attention. As part of
"International Women's Year" a World
Conference was held this year, at
which a World Plan of Action was
adopted.
At the end of the third decade,
United Nations' activities are universal
in the proper sense of the word.
The Organization itself with 138
Member States has achieved near-
universality in its membership, es¬
pecially since the question of the
representation of China was settled
in 1971 with the admission of the
People's Republic of China into the
U.N.
What then
are the overall
achievements
of the United
Nations during
the past three
decades and what are the perspec¬
tives for the future? Clearly, the
United Nations has not met all the
hopes which the peoples of the world
had placed in it, but neither has it
failed them all.
In respect of the main political goal
for which the U.N. was established
the maintenance of peace in the
world the Organization has been
more or less successful. It cannot be
denied that the United Nations has
contributed actively and effectively to
the prevention of a new world-wide
conflagration. It has also succeeded
in preventing a number of local
conflicts and in limiting the spread of
others, thus avoiding their turning into
wider confrontations.
By its mere existence the United
Nations has a persistent effect on the
relations between states, lessening
tensions and helping to discourage the
tendencies to resort to violent action.
To that end, the United Nations has
CONTINUED PAGE 32
15

THE UNITED NATIONS AT AGE 30
(Continued from page 15)
developed a range of political and
operational methods.
Among these, we note the important
role which the quiet diplomacy of the
successive Secretaries-General has
played in promoting the peaceful
settlement of disputes among states.
The United Nations has also succeeded
in imposing some restrictions in the
field of nuclear and other sophisticated
weaponry and in slowing down the
unlimited armaments race. Still, it is a
fact to be regretted that sums in excess
of $200 billion are spent every year
on armaments (see article page 17).
Certainly more remains to be done,
but in the political field one cannot
reasonably accuse the United Nations
of inertia or of not responding with all
means at its disposal to situations
constituting threats to international
peace. Apart from that, we are more
and more aware today that a lasting
peace in this world can be built only
if conditions of social and economic
stability and justice prevail.
International peace ¡s impossible
without social peace. In this respect
the United Nations has an ever
increasing role to play, its endeavours
being supported by the specialized
agencies which are part of the growing
United Nations family.
The United Nations has already gone
a long way towards addressing the
new phenomena affecting mankind In
the present period. Reflecting the
conscience of mankind, it perseveres
in the search for a just order and more
balanced economic relations in the
world of today. It has never ceased
to foster universal respect for human
rights and to condemn discrimination
of every kind.
The fundamental issue with which
the United Nations, and for that matter
any international organization, is con¬
fronted, remains that of the willingness
of its members to implement its
collective decisions. This fundamental
issue will determine in the long run
the success or failure of the United
Nations or of any other international
organization composed of states. Ulti¬
mately, it is all members which share
the blame for the weaknesses or
failures of the United Nations; it is all
members which can claim credit for
its strengths and successes.
Former SecretaryrGeneral U Thant,
when addressing the commemorative
session of the General Assembly held
on the occasion of the 25th anniver¬
sary of the United Nations, declared:
"There are two alternatives before
this Organization: one is that there will
be no moral force in this world, there
will be no declaration of intent to
abide by the Charter nor profession
32

of faith and commitment to its prin¬
ciples and purposes . . . The other
alternative is for the Organization to
receive stronger and heartier support
from all its Member States, especially
from the mightier ones . . . and for its
Member Governments to act and
behave in such a way as to make
steady progress towards a just, peace¬
ful and prosperous human community
so that this planet may be a safe
place to live in."
And Secretary-General Waldheim, at
a ceremony celebrating the 30th anni¬
versary of the signing of the United
Nations Charter, had this to say:
"We have a clear choice before us
between searching for genuine inter¬
national co-operation to meet our
common problems, or returning to the
narrow nationalism which has brought
so much tragedy and misery to
mankind in this century.
"Today, let us resolve that we shall
take the road of international co-oper¬
ation. If we do, I am confident that
we shall overcome our difficulties and
that this Organization will grow in
strength and authority. For I am
convinced that the United Nations is
still the world's best hope for peace."
This year, on the occasion of the
Organization's 30th anniversary, one
can expect that there will be many
laudatory statements paying tribute to
the United Nations. However, it is not
words but actions that count, and what
is necessary is the political will of
states to support the United Nations
and work together through the world
organization in order to solve the
common problems of mankind.
The question is whether the com¬
munity of nation states has sufficient
courage and determination to make the
United Nations more effective. Much
remains to be done in the world of
today, much can be achieved through
international co-operation by using the
United Nations as an instrument, and
Indeed certain issues can only be
solved with the help of the Organ¬
ization. Perhaps the stringent demands
of an interdependent world will con¬
vince nation states to proceed with
renewed vigour and confidence along
the path which they opened at the
end of the Second World War when
they created the United Nations organ¬
ization.
M Kurt Herndl
33
