AN
INTERNATIONAL
CULTURAL
CENTRE
IN THE HILLS
OF BURGUNDY
by Philippe Ouannès
IN January 1975, the people of the
French town of Avallon, on the
edge of the Morvan hills, the gateway
to Burgundy, witnessed the arrival of
a number of earth-moving machines
which set about levelling off the top
of a small mound close to the town
centre. Some months later they were
intrigued to see taking shape a weird
piece of futuristic architecture with
roofs which also served as porches
and with doors set into the roofs.
This was the International Docu¬
mentation and Cultural Activities Cen¬
tre (Centre International de Documen¬
tation et d'Animation Culturelle)
which opened ¡n June 1975. It got
into its stride almost at once by hold¬
ing, in turn, an exhibition of "One
hundred drawings by Japanese chil¬
dren" and a Unesco philatelic exhi¬
bition and by hosting in October a
travelling exhibition on the art of T. , * ». , ». . ,
n^ani, Am<,ni,»HL The International Documentation and Cultural
Oceania, organized by Unesco. Activities Centre in Avallon is designed on avant
However, events such as these are V garde lines. Inside the buildings mobile partitions
enable rooms to be adapted for different uses,
		 including exhibitions, conferences and film shows.
The section of Avallon
lying between the
Clock Tower and the
Square of St. Lazare is
one of the most
ancient parts of this
small town in
Burgundy. The house
at the corner of the
square dates from the
15th century.
PHILIPPE S. OUANNES, of Iran, is Assis¬
tant Editor of the French-language edition
of the "Unesco Courier".
31

, only part of the many activities under¬
taken by the Centre, which was de¬
signed ' to cater for the varied and
complementary requirements of its
sponsors: the French National Com¬
mission for Unesco, the municipal
authorities of Avallon and the Asso¬
ciation Culturelle de l'Avallonnais, a
regional cultural association of inter¬
national scope.
Their alms were of two kinds: first¬
ly to provide the French public with
information about Unesco's ideals
and programme and also about the
activities of organizations in the Uni¬
ted Nations family, and secondly to
arrange meetings, symposia and var¬
ious other events embodying these
ideals and enabling Avallon to play a
full part as a host town and a meeting
place.
But there was also another aim,
namely to create, somewhere other
than in a capital city or large town,
an international centre for documen¬
tation and cultural life and bring in¬
formation closer to those for whom it
is Intended. In this respect the Cen¬
tre is an outstanding example of its
kind. As an attempt at decentraliza¬
tion it has proved a big success.
The "weird building" was to be¬
come a hive of activity and between
June 1975, when it opened, and June
1976, ¡t was visited by almost 10,000
persons. School groups, cultural so¬
cieties and passing visitors were thus
enabled to attend various events such
as exhibitions (for example an exhi¬
bition of African art, accompanied by
film shows) audio-visual montages
(such as one organized to mark Inter¬
national Women's Year, using mate¬
rial supplied by Unesco) and so on.
Not only is the Centre a focal point
of regional activities but it has also
become widely used for meetings and
receptions. Seminars and training
courses on integrated environmental
planning have also been held there
for specialists from Algeria, Benin,
Brazil, Canada, Ivory Coast, Japan,
Laos, Lebanon, Madagascar and
Venezuela.
In March 1976, the Centre was visit¬
ed, at the invitation of the French
National Commission for Unesco, by
the Secretaries-General and repre
sentatives of the National Commis¬
sions for Unesco of Algeria, the Cen¬
tral African Republic, Chad, the Arab
Republic of Egypt, Iran, Lebanon, Mo¬
rocco, Nigeria, Switzerland, Tunisia
and Zaire.
Among the topics discussed by the
Secretaries-General at one of their
working sessions was the role of the
National Commissions with regard to
Information and liaison between Na¬
tional Commissions, and between the
Commissions and Unesco.
One of the principal responsibilities
of these Commissions is to make
Unesco's projects more widely known
and to set them more firmly into the
cultural context of each of the Orga¬
nization's Member States. This is
also one of the objectives of the Do¬
cumentation and Cultural Activities
Centre. As Mr. Yves Brunsvick, Se¬
cretary-General of the French Natio¬
nal Commission, pointed out, "What
is needed is to draw on the fund of
ideas in Unesco and put them into
wide circulation through the agency
of the National Commissions. "
In addition, the Centre arranges
visits and study sessions for promi¬
nent figures from abroad who are in
France under the auspices of Unesco.
The co-operation and hospitality of
various sectors of the local commu¬
nity and the municipal authorities
have enabled all these guests to find
out about the everyday life and attrac¬
tions of a French town of some
10,000 inhabitants with a rich histori¬
cal and artistic past, situated in' one
of the most beautiful regions of
France.
The location of the building and its
low profile were dictated by a speci¬
fic concern to respect the urban envi¬
ronment. Indeed, only a few hundred
yards away, as the crow flies, is the
clock tower, one of the town's most
ancient monuments. Stretching away
from the tower is the "Terreaux", a
terraced walk providing a vantage
point from which one can see a pa¬
norama of the town and its surround¬
ings, the magnificent Burgundian val¬
leys steeped in a singularly intense
light.
The Centre is built in a fold in the
ground so that it in no way obstructs
or spoils the view of the surrounding
countryside in which the golden corn
alternates with "the lush green pas¬
ture ¡n which herds of sleek white
cattle peacefully graze", and in which
the ochre tiled roofs typical of Bur¬
gundy and steeples and turrets faced
with slates nestle among clumps of
trees.
The Centre thus fulfils several func¬
tions both nationally and internatio¬
nally. The building also had to be
sufficiently versatile to fulfil a number
of functions with rooms of various
sizes tailored to meet different re¬
quirements: exhibition and projection
rooms, working and meeting rooms,
space for filing and storing documen¬
tation, reproduction and information
material as well as audio-visual
equipment (magnetic tapes, films,
slides, etc.).
For in addition to Unesco docu¬
ments, the Centre also distributes
material produced by the United Na¬
tions and its principal specialized
agencies including the World Health
Organization, the International Labour
Office and the Food and Agriculture
Organization.
Two figures alone are enough to
illustrate this intensive flow of infor¬
mation ¡n all the fields in which inter¬
national organizations are involved.
In 1968 more than 7,500 documents
concerning the United Nations were
circulated (periodicals, brochures,
audio-visual material, etc.) as against
more than 75,000 in 1975. Growth on
this scale speaks for itself. And one
might add that the periodical most in
demand at the Centre is... the "Unesco
Courier".
Finally, the Centre is also a perma¬
nent focus for local cultural activities.
The mass of Unesco documentation
and audio-visual material available
for on-the-spot use by the people of
Avallon, as well as the opportunities
to exchange views and make perso¬
nal contacts, provide a basis for
continuous activity, unique of its
kind, to promote international under¬
standing and co-operation. The ex¬
pression coined in Avallon itself,
"Unesco ¡n the community" has now
become a firm reality.
Philippe Ouannès
On the ancient ramparts of
Avallon, the Chapter Tower
looks out over the wooded hills
close to this part of the town.
32
