
Photo © Christian Dobbelaere, Brussels

EXPLORING
THE NEW
SOUNDSCAPE
Pioneer research into the global
acoustic environment
by R. Murray Schäfer
R. MURRAY SCHÄFER, internationally known Canadian composer, is founder and
director of the World Soundscape Project in Vancouver. Until 1975 he was professor
of Communication Studies at Simon Fraser University, British Columbia (Canada).
A complete treatment of the subject of this anide is presented in his book The Tuning
of the World, a study dealing with all aspects of the world soundscape which will be
published shortly by Alfred A. Knopf In New York and McLelland and Stewart in
Toronto, Canada.
OST Europeans and North
Americans still believe
that the eye is the most important
receiver of information. I have heard
psychologists say that as much as
80 per cent of our vital information
comes through this receiver. Very
few people stop to consider that this
may not have been true in the past,
or that it may not be true in the future,
and that it may not even be true for
much of the world's population at
present.
We are coming to believe that
dependence on the. eye as the
gatherer and orderer of environmen¬
tal information is directly related to
literacy and is therefore a habit that
has been learned by Westerners as
far back as late Greek civilization, but
that as the West begins to enter its
post-literate phase, the ear will return
as a primary sensing instrument, just
as it still is in many parts of the world.
The fact that the Western World has
a noise pollution problem today and
that increasing numbers of people
are aware of it is one clear sign that
we have reached this change-point.

Technological civilization has
brought sweeping changes
to our acoustic environment
the "soundscape". Today the
"harmonies of nature" are
seldom heard except in places
far from the hubbub of modern
life: leaves rustle and water laps
beneath the paddle (opposite
page) as a boat glides over the
tranquil waters of a canal in
Kerala (India). But in most
cases "background noise" now
tends to be an all-pervasive
cacophonous din. The roar of
jet engines inflicts intense strain
on the nerves and eardrums of
people living near large airports
(photo left).
The ears are crying out for greater
respect. We can recognize what
they are telling us or we can give up
and resign ourselves to inevitable
deafness as the hurricane of noise
increases.
Soundscape is the term we use to
describe the acoustic environment.
You will not find it in any dictionary.
We have derived it from landscape
but its properties are different. Consi¬
der the number of people who have
helped to define the meaning of land¬
scape for us: geologists have studied
its structures, geographers its surface
formations, painters and poets have
described it, gardeners and engineers
have shaped it, architects and plan¬
ners have embellished it. As for the
soundscape, who has studied that?
It is a discipline we must now learn,
or rather relearn.
It is to this end that, a few years
ago, we set up the World Soundscape
Project. Perhaps the best I can do in
this short article is to describe some
of the approaches of our work and
hope that they will suggest fresh or
related studies elsewhere in the world.
To effectively know about the sound¬
scape we must consider the past as
well as the present in order to make
intelligent recommendations for the
future. How can we do this? We
can tape record and analyse sound-
scapes of the present and we can talk
to people who inhabit them to find
out what they think. Still we can't
delve into history with our micro¬
phones and our analytical equipment.
Here history becomes geography.
We can, for instance, study wilder¬
ness environments . in northern
Canada or the deserts of Australia.
Or we can get some impression of the
past acoustic environments of a com¬
plicated continent such as Europe by
selecting and comparing remote
villages in different countries.
The first thing we notice when
we study a wilderness soundscape or
even a rural or village soundscape is
that it is quieter than that of the
modern city. Yet this is not because
of the absence of life there. Rather
it seems that whatever sounds that
are present are subject to cycles of
activity and rest. The sound pro
ducers seem to know when to speak
up and when to shut up.
Different species of insects, animals
and birds complement each other in
daily and seasonal rhythms of syn¬
chronized beauty. For instance,
during the months of June in British
Columbia, frogs will leave off chirping
at precisely the moment when birds
begin their dawn chorus and will only
return as the last bird is fading at
sunset. Geese will be heard only
a few days each year in Ontario as
they streak north in May and return in
huge honking flocks on their way
south in October.
Such environments, uncluttered
by an overpopulation of competing
sounds we call hi-fi. That is to say,
the signal-to-noise ratio is favourable.
Every sound is newsworthy. Each is
made for a purpose and is comple¬
mentary to the others, like a good
conversation or a good orchestration
in music.
One learns to read such signs for
vital clues about the environment, i
For instance, on my farm we know f

Photo c Kosidowski, Moscow
HORSE-POWER
WITHOUT THE HORSE
In a square of Ulan Bator, capital of Mongolia (above) a horse left
fettered by its rider gives vent to its indignation with an outburst
of bucking and neighing. Such a scene is uncommon in cities
today, where the neighing of horses and clop-clop of their hooves
have been replaced by the din of motor traffic: horse-power without
the horse. From the start of the Industrial Revolution
in the 19th century workers in the metal industries had to put up
with a bedlam of noise (see engraving below) and in spite
of preventive measures taken in recent decades, deafness from
excessive noise can still be an occupational hazard.
Engraving from Das Buch der Erfindungen. Gewerbe und Industrien
(Discovery of Tools and Industries). Berlin 1874
,the ground has thawed in spring and
is ready for ploughing when, lying in
bed at night, we can hear animals
burrowing beneath the surface.
The same is true of village life.
When we studied the mountain village
of Cembra in Northern Italy we found
that life centred on^ annual and sea¬
sonal cycles of festivals and special
events, each with its prominent acou¬
stic soundmark.
Church bells were rung in different
ways on different occasions, small
cannons or mortaretti were fired on
fixed days; there were certain days
when the goatherd's horn conducted
the sheep to summer pasture; there
were special days for folk songs and
special horns that were blown when
youths and girls were courting.
The whole village was enfolded in
periodic sound cycles that only began
to disintegrate when a new road
brought mountain buses up to
connect the village with the cities in
the valley below.
The transition from rural to urban
life can be characterized generally as
a passage from the hi-fi to the lo-fi
soundscape. A lo-fi soundscape is
one in which trivial or conflicting
acoustic information masks the sounds
we want or need to hear. For a
sound to catch one's attention at
all it must be monstrously loud or
insistent. Radios, the birdsong of
modern life, do not go south in winter;
bulldozers do not hibernate and traffic
does not sleep at night. . Everything
operates simultaneously with much
wasted acoustic energy and attendant
destruction of nerves and eardrums.
The study of the natural sound¬
scape suggests not only that the
total volume of sound needs to be
reduced in order that diminutive or
message-bearing sounds can again
be clearly heard, but it also gives us
the clue as to how this might be
achieved by the restoration of clearer
rhythmic patterning.
Curfews on jet flights at night is
one possibility, but this needs to
be augmented in other ways, for
instance by restrictions on construc¬
tion equipment or loudspeakers in
public places. Where they are a
nuisance, a neighbourhood might
even consider restricting the opera¬
tion of power lawnmowers to one or,
two evenings a week.
Another difference between the
urban and rural environment is that
in the urban environment most sounds
are close by while in the natural en¬
vironment many are distant. The
urban soundscape possesses pre¬
sence while the natural soundscape
possesses both presence and an

CITY TUMULT
AND FOREST MURMURS
Like natural and man-made shapes such as the palm tree and the city
of Dakar, in Senegal (above), sounds have their own architecture,
also modulated spontaneously by nature or drawn from the myriad
noises of human origin. Today research teams are analysing and
measuring the volume of the innumerable noises forming
the "soundscape" in many parts of the world, under a project
directed by the Canadian composer R. Murray Schafer.
Diagram below pictures the cycle of the sounds of nature
on Canada's Pacific coast.
CYCLES OF THE NATURAL SOUNDSCAPE OF THE WEST COAST
OF BRITISH COLUMBIA BY RELATIVE VOLUME OF SOUNDS
**«<*"*
JAN ' EB ' MAR ' APR ' MAY ' JUNE ' JULY ' AUG ' SEPT ' OCT ' NOV ' DEC
lllllllll*t*t**t*t*** I
Till
e#* Yv.1	,
1 ',' Rain and Snow 	 p	j '7^1 Fl
Water and Ice jimmmtimim
^<m£k Grasshoppers
ioeo»e «ooû«e» "^3 Bees
Mosquitos + o i + ff + a
íes
Bird-song
Frog-song
Wolves
Elk
Diagram © R. Murray Schäfer, Vancouver
Photos © Hoa-Qui, Paris
acoustic horizon. Then news of in¬
vasion into the area is picked up by
the ear. A. dog on a distant farm
signals the arrival of a strange animal
or a visitor to the neighbourhood.
Dependence on the ear was espe¬
cially strong in the early days in North
America as Fenimore Cooper's novels
show. Danger was then signalled
by the snapping of a twig. In a deep
forest vision is useless; one sees at
best a few metres in any direction.
The ear is alert like that of an animal.
Curiously, the same dependence on
the ear is evident in the treeless
deserts of Australia today, where an
aborigine can, by pressing his ear
to the ground, pick up footsteps as
distant vibrations. A car, for ins¬
tance, can be heard 20 kilometres
away, first as a ground vibration.
Sometimes hearing at a distance is
vital to the survival of a community.
In the Breton fishing village of Les-
conil we conducted a study which
illustrates this clearly. A daily on¬
shore-offshore wind cycle carries a
complete circumference of distant
sounds to the village, some as far
away as 12 kilometres. Bells from
distant villages are heard, sounds
from inland fields, buoys in different
locations at sea, each appears at its
aopointed time. Any change in the
accustomed pattern indicates a
change in the weather, a matter
which each fisherman and fisher¬
man's wife picks up immediately i
with practiced ear. I

y Acoustic space is not visual or
physical space. It cannot be owned
or delimited on a map. It is shared
space, a mutual possession from
which all inhabitants receive vital
signals. It can easily be destroyed
by thoughtless soundmaking or im¬
perialistic noises.
The modern world shows us many
examples of mismanaged acoustic
space. For instance, without expan¬
ding its physical premises an airport
may require more and more acoustic
space to accommodate increased
flights or newer and noisier aircraft.
A citizen may then discover that he
is sharing his bedroom or his garden
with the international aviation in¬
dustry and yet he will get little relief
in modern law, which defines pro¬
perty exclusively as a visual holding.
As we move into an acoustic era
such attitudes will change and even¬
tually they must be expressed in new
legal conceptions also. Sound im¬
perialism will then be considered as
much an offence as breaking and
entering.
Another way to learn about the
changing soundscape is through ear-
witness accounts of people who have
described the sounds of their own
time and place; and so we have been
compiling a large catalogue of such
descriptions from writers of all peri¬
ods and nationalities with the hope
that it will enable us to discover more
about soundscape morphology and
also will tell us something about the
changing attitudes of listeners over
the centuries. ,': , .
We have cross-indexed this cata¬
logue by time, place and the sound
objects described, and an accompany¬
ing computer programme enables us
to make statistical comparisons
concerning the appearance. and dis¬
appearance of the different sounds
in our index. It will be a long time
before we have enough references to
make reliable deductions for all parts
of the world, but we do have a large
sampling of sounds from European
and American sources and we can
draw some interesting conclusions
from them.
For instance, we note that of all
sound quotes from 19th century
European literature 43 % referred to
natural sounds, while during the
20th century mentions of natural
sounds had slipped to 20 %. Inter¬
estingly enough this decline is not
observed in North America, where
just over 50 % of all quotes for both
centuries refer to natural sounds! One
might assume that North Americans
are still closer to the natural envi¬
ronment, or at least that they have
easier access to it than Europeans,
for whom it definitely seems to be
disappearing.
We notice a decline also in the
number of times quiet and silence
are evoked in earwitness descriptions.
Of all descriptions in our file for the
decades 1810-1830, 19% mention
quiet or silence; by 1870-1890 men¬
tions had dropped to 14% and by
1940-1 960 to 9%.
In going through the catalogue
I am struck by the negative way in
which silence is described by modern
writers. Here are some of the modi¬
fiers employed by the most recent
generation: solemn, oppressive,
deathlike, numb, weird, awful,
gloomy, brooding, eternal, painful,
lonely, heavy, despairing, stark, sus-
penseful, aching, alarming...
The quiet and silence evoked by
these worlds is rarely positive. It is
not the quiet of a contemplative walk
in the countryside, it is not the quiet
one observes when listening to music,
it is not the silence of fascination or
meditation, or even the silence of
sleep.
Does this mean that such qualities
are going to disappear from our planet
forever, or does it mean rather that
our attitude towards them needs to
be revalued ?
The loudest and most continuous
sounds in the world today are those
of modern technology. It is these
sounds which are destroying our hear¬
ing, disrupting the natural rhythms
of our lives and pulverising the word
tranquility in every language. If we
are to recover elegance and balance
in the soundscape, it is machinery,
that will have to be brought under
control first.
This is not a matter of passing the
responsibility over to acoustical
engineers, whose livelihood, after all,
is dependent on a perpetuation and
even an augmentation of the problem.
It is rather a matter of larger groups
of citizens everywhere beginning to
study all aspects of the soundscape,
beginning to assess and criticize it,
and ultimately beginning to think of
ways to render it more beautiful.
I have often likened the soundscape
to a huge musical composition that
is unfolding around us ceaselessly.
The question is: how can we improve
its orchestration? The analogy of
the acoustic environment to music
may seem strange to some but I have
a special reason for suggesting it.
In music .sounds matter; the
musician doesn't fumble with them or
throw them about aimlessly. The
object of music is to achieve balance
and harmony; the enemy of music is
waste energy, noise. It is important.
I feel, to keep the model of music in
mind as we begin to design the world
soundscape, for it reminds us that our
task will be one of uniting science
and art in the service of society.
Redesign the acousticenvironments
of the world? What an arrogant
and preposterous idea this will seem
to some. All I can say is that it is
already being done, though often
thoughtlessly or by people whose
motives are unaesthetic and anti¬
social.
Purveyors of background music are
creating sound walls which nobody
asked for in the interests of inducing
workers to produce more or consu¬
mers to spend more. Generators for
producing white noise (a background
sound that is a blend of audible fre¬
quencies over a wide range) are now
being installed in modern office build¬
ings in North America in order to
prevent office workers from talking so
that they can type more letters for
their bureaucratic bosses.
In Sweden the ringing of tele¬
phones, nicely paced at ten-second
intervals, was sharply sped up to five-
second intervals in 1975 in order to
.. force people to answer their receivers
more promptly. For a telephone
company the less time a line is tied up,
the more money that can be saved.
Thus, for the saving of a few crowns a
whole nation is going to be made
more jumpy.'
Examples of bad acoustic design
could be multiplied endlessly. We
can only improve them when we be¬
gin to consider other motives than
profit and power in the .shaping of
sonic artifacts, when we learn how
to control loud or irritating sounds,
when we learn how to reclaim quiet
groves and times in our lives, when
we learn that there is a time to make
every sound and a time not to.
R. Murray Schäfer
8
