THE COMING EARTHQUAKE
IN SAN FRANCISCO
Scientists are certain that a major earthquake
will occur in the San Francisco Bay area
The only question is when will it happen
by Karl V. Steinbrugge
A major earthquake will strike
the San Francisco Bay Area.
The only question is when will it
strike. But if disaster is thereby im¬
plied, then why is the San Francisco
area allowed to grow? The answer lies
in the plans and actions which have
and are being taken to reduce the
seismic hazards to acceptable levels
of risk.
Earthquakes cannot yet be predic¬
ted with accuracy as to time, place,
and severity but progress is being
KARL V. STEINBRUGGE is perhaps
America's leading expert on designing earth¬
quake-resistant buildings. He is chairman of
the U.S. National Committee of the inter¬
national Association of Earthquake Engi¬
neering and chairman of the Seismic Safety
Commission ol the State ol California. Since
1950 he has been professor of structural
design at the Department of Architecture,
University of California, Berkeley.
made in this direction (see article
page 11). The San Francisco Bay Area
has been chosen as a major study for
experimenting with earthquake predic¬
tion techniques for several reasons,
including its potential for having many
earthquakes in the near future and
thereby allowing the testing of theories.
A glance at the comparatively brief
historic record of this region of Cali¬
fornia shows that destructive earth¬
quakes have been frequent. Five major
earthquakes have struck the area
in the two centuries which comprise
its historic record. The great 1906 San
Francisco earthquake had surface
faulting [fractures in the earth's crust]
which extended for over 400 kilometres
apart as much as 7 metres.
However, the other four earlier
earthquakes were also very strong.
These five major earthquakes have
occurred on two well-known geo¬
logically active faults. The greater of
these two faults (the San Andreas)
goes through the San Francisco area
and runs very close to Los Angeles; it
has often been termed California's
"Master Fault".
Geologic studies show that many
major earthquakes have occurred on
this fault over the past millions of
years, and there is no reason to
believe that earthquakes on it will
suddenly cease now. Indeed, precise
surveys conducted for over a century
across the San Andreas fault show
that the islands offshore from San
Francisco are moving northwesterly at
the rate of 5 centimetres per year with
respect to the continent. This consti¬
tutes substantive evidence that strains
are increasing in the earth's crust and
are leading to an earthquake.
A second line of evidence is the
fact that the San Andreas fault is
slowly "creeping". By creeping is
meant that the land masses on one .
side of the fault are moving with r
Photo © The New York Times, U.S.A.
CALIFORNIA SPLIT. Right, the San Andreas Fault, a major fracture of the earth's crust, comprising
a system of faults extending northwestwards from the Gulf of California for nearly 1,000
kilometres. The break separates a northward moving wedge of California from the rest of North
America. It goes through the San Francisco area and is very close to Los Angeles. Its movement
has been responsible for frequent earthquakes, including the great 1906 San Francisco quake
(see photo page 22). Above, outline of the Fault is clearly visible in this high altitude view of
area near San Francisco. Numbers on photo indicate, from left to right San Francisco (1) on its
peninsula, between the Pacific Ocean (2) and San Francisco Bay(3) city's airport (4) U.S. National
Center for Earthquake Research (5) and site of Stanford University nuclear research accelerator (6).
20

«X.

Photo © Arnold Genthe, U.S.A.
CITY IN FLAMES. This striking viewof San Francisco in flames was taken
five hours after the great earthquake of 18 April 1906. Fires raged for
three days because water mains had been destroyed and many buildings which survived
the quake were gutted as flames swept through nearly 500 city blocks.
Towns and villages along a 300 kilometre section of the earthquake-prone
San Andreas fault also suffered heavily from the same quake.
respect to the other side, but moving
so slowly that only instruments can
record these displacements.
This creep is not associated with
recorded earthquakes, but is an evi¬
dence of strains within the earth's
crust. The most prominent example
is a winery south of San Francisco
and on the San Andreas fault which
has been in the process of being torn
apart at the rate of over 1 centimetre
per year for at least the past 50 years.
Certainly, the historic record plus
the geologic settings are strong indi¬
cations that the San Francisco area
will experience a major earthquake
from the notorious San Andreas fault.
On the other hand, there exists the
potentially more dangerous Hayward
fault which goes through major popu¬
lation areas within the suburbs of
San Francisco. The Hayward fault has
had major earthquakes on it and fault
creep is taking place on it.
It is easy to conclude, therefore,
that a major earthquake is a reason¬
able probability in the foreseeable fu¬
ture. It is understandable why scien¬
tists are using this area as the first
major testing ground for earthquake
prediction research.
Earthquakes, in themselves, are not
a significant hazard. The documented
cases of a fault opening up and en¬
compassing people and then burying
them can, perhaps, be counted on
one's fingers. Landslides can, and
do, take a very significant toll of lives,
but in most cases these hazards are
relatively self-evident before the earth¬
quake and do not need an earthquake
to trigger them. The major life
hazard in the usual earthquake is from
the collapse of man-made structures
such as buildings and dams. This is
certainly true for all of California as
well as San Francisco.
The solution to seismic hazards is
to design and construct buildings in
such a manner that they will remain
safe during and after an earthquake,
with damage limited to acceptable
economic and functional levels. Idea¬
lly, then, an earthquake would become
an exciting experience, but not a
hazardous adventure.
However, tearing down all existing
construction and replacing it with
earthquake resistant construction has
overwhelming limitations. Financial and
material resources simply do not exist,
technologies are inadequate for some
cases, and only over time can these
hazardous buildings be replaced.
As a result, disaster response offi¬
cials in government and in the private
sector must evaluate what can be
reasonably expected to occur since
the hazards will remain. The United
States government has completed four
such studies for areas in which earth
quakes are likely to occur and where
their occurrence would be disastrous.
Earthquake loss studies for disas¬
ter preparedness should consider the
problems from three standpoints:
Effects on local medical resources:
This includes damage to hospitals,
medical supplies at hospitals and else¬
where, bloodbanks, structures housing
ambulances, and the like.
Demands on local medical resour¬
ces: Planners must know what to ex¬
pect as a reasonable upper limit to
the number of deaths and injured,
weigh these figures against the losses
to medical resources, and plan for the
needs that must be supplied from dis¬
tant sources.
Effects on immediate and vital pub¬
lic needs: Estimates must be made
of probable damage and its location
in relation to water supplies and sys¬
tems, electric power, transportation,
and the other items which constitute
a community's "lifelines". Provision
must be made to care for those made
homeless from damage to dwellings,
from fire following earthquake, from
evacuation due to damage to or failure
of dams, etc.
Time of day may be important in
evaluating hazard. In California, for
example, most persons will be in their
quite safe wood frame dwellings at
2:30 a.m., but many of these persons
22

will be in significantly more hazardous
structures during the working day.
The season of the year is also impor¬
tant, since landsliding is much more
likely during the wet season than du¬
ring the dry season, while conflagra¬




tion is much more likely in the reverse
order.
The San Andreas fault is associa¬
ted with the largest potential life loss.
However, the nearby Hayward fault
has the largest potential to disrupt
disaster recovery, since many of San
Francisco Bay Area's "lifelines" must
cross this fault and thereby be expo¬
sed to rupture.
For example, major water aqueducts
cross the Hayward fault in deep tu'n-
, neis which cannot. be. readily. repaired,,
and the water distribution system
-4'criss-crosses-the: fault.- Highway-and-
/freeway bridges are located in the
' fault zone. Oil lines,' natural gas lines,
' underground telephone cables, etc.
frequently cross the fault.
A total of 10,000 deaths in the San
Francisco area has been established
as an upper limit for disaster planning
purposes. This possible loss of life
is horrendous, but it represents less
than 1/4 of one per cent of the affec¬
ted population. Fortunately, steps have
been and are being taken to reduce
this potential loss of life.
The 1971 San Fernando, California
earthquake showed the need for Fe¬
deral Government studies. Currently,
active and detailed disaster response
planning to these Federal studies is
proceeding at all governmental levels
and in the private sector. This planning
will substantially reduce the time need
ed to restore the cities to normal,
will minimize suffering, and will reduce
most of the adverse effects of a great
earthquake.
. Response to seismic hazards and to
disaster may be post-disaster oriented
as mentioned above but it may also
be pre-disaster oriented. While post-
disaster response is absolutely vital,
it is pre-disaster response which has
the greatest promise.
At local government level, the city
of San Francisco is emulating the long
established Los Angeles policy of
removing or bracing all hazardous
non-reinforced brick parapets and
appendages. Worldwide earthquake
experience clearly shows that these
hazards are serious even Jn moderate .
shocks.
At California state level, numerous
legislative matters were acted..upon
and became' law after the 1971 San
Fernando earthquake. The details of
these laws need not be reviewed here,
but the following are, in the author's
view, the most significant changes ¡n
public policy at California state level:
The concept that certain facilities
vital to the public must remain func¬
tional in addition to being safe. Re¬
cently enacted law is concerned with
new hospitals, and other legislation is
being considered for other types of
installations. Certainly, damage control
is a new dimension insofar as Califor¬
nia earthquake building regulations
are concerned.
The implication in law that perfect
seismic safety does not exist. The
mandatory preparation of inundation
maps of areas' below dams clearly
implies that risk exists, but also im¬
plies that public policy deems the areas
to be within acceptable risk levels.
Construction in earthquake geolo¬
gically-hazardous areas is acceptable,
provided sufficient engineering design
and construction precautions are taken
to reduce the hazards to acceptable
risk levels. Thus, one may build
within fault zones under specified cir¬
cumstances which largely eliminate
the hazards to life.
Seismic safety public policy is great¬
ly influenced by events over which
people have no control. The 1971 San
Fernando earthquake stimulated exis¬
ting programmes and led to new and
improved policies. But from past
experience/only too often the rate of
-hazard, reduction, de£ceajses~wit!i..t[me_
after the disaster.
. On the £>ther hand, the State of Cali¬
fornia created a Seismic Safety Com¬
mission which is to study public
policy and to report directly to the
Legislature and to the Governor. This
Commission, therefore, has the poten¬
tial to insure continued progress. It
has been in existence for less than a
year and understandably there exist
no major accomplishments to measure
its success. But it could be followed
with careful attention as a possible
model to be used elsewhere.
The remaining earthquake hazards
in the San Francisco Bay Area will,
in time, be reduced to acceptable risk
levels, but not until the numerous older
non-earthquake resistant buildings are
removed.
Karl V. Steinbrugge
DAMS THAT TRIGGER OFF
EARTHQUAKES
Lakes used as reservoirs seen in this
photo of a section of the U.S. Pacific
coastline, are formed by subsidences
along the San Andreas Fault in Cali¬
fornia. Here seismic activity has helped
man to solve the problem of water
storage. Elsewhere many cases are
known where dam construction and
other engineering works have actu¬
ally triggered off earthquakes. Such
"induced seismicity", also caused by
mining and the injection of water and
liquid wastes deep underground, was
studied at the first international sym¬
posium to be held on this problem, in
Banff (Canada) in September 1975.
More recently (at Unesco's February
1976 conference on the assessment and
mitigation of earthquake risk) a Cana¬
dian geophysicist, D.I. Gough, reported
that 20 cases are known of increases in
seismic activity related to the filling
of large reservoirs. These range from
micro-earthquakes, detectable only
with sensitive seismographs, to a
major quake which would have dlused
heavy casualties if it had occurred in a
denselypopulated area. "Known cases"
he stated, "suggest that significant
seismic activity may occur near a
reservoir if the dam height is more
than 100 metres and the water volume
more than 1 billion cubic metres... As
there are now more than 275 reservoirs
with dam heights of over 100 M, the
probability that a given projected
reservoir will cause earthquakes is at
least 1 in 14... As some 135 large
reservoirs are now under construction
or proposed, 10 to 15 new cases of
reservoir-induced seismicity may be
expected in the next few years."
23
