by Vasily
Ivanovich Abaev



THE OSSETES .SCYTHIANS
OF THE 20TH CENTURY
THE Scythian people did not disap¬
pear from the face of the earth
without leaving a trace. If we look at an
ethnographic map of the Caucasus,
which is a patchwork of more than
forty different nationalities, we find in
the" central part a small group of people,
known as the Ossetes, whose popula¬
tion numbers 400,000.
It was established long ago that the
Ossetes are in no way related to their
Caucasian neighbours. Immigrants from
the steppes of south Russia, they are
descendants of the Alani who, according
to Josephusa Jewish scholar and his¬
torian of the first century A.D.were a
Scythian tribe living in the vicinity of the
Don and the Sea of Azov.
During the great migrations of the
fourth and fifth centuries A.D., some
of the Alani moved across Europe as
far as France and Spain. The French
name Alain and the English Alan date
from that period.
The remaining Alani made their way
from Eastern Europe to the foothills of
VASILY IVANOVICH ABAEV, a well-
known Soviet scholar and orientalist, is a spe¬
cialist in Iranian civilization and in the lan¬
guage and folklore of the Ossetes. He is
scientific adviser to the Institute of Linguistic
Studies of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences
and is the author of 250 studies Including a
monograph on Scytho-European linguistic
geography.
the Caucasus, where they established
what was for the times a powerful
feudal state. They were converted
to Christianity in the tenth century, and
during the Middle Ages they main¬
tained active relations with Byzantium,
Georgia and Russia.
The Mongol invasion and the cam¬
paigns of Tamerlane were a disaster for
the Alani: one part of the population
was annihilated in the incessant wars;
another fled to Hungary, where they
were known as the 'As" and retained
their ethnic individuality for another
several hundred years. A third part
joined in the expeditions of the maraud¬
ing Mongolians and was dispersed in
foreign lands.
The Alani who remained in the Cau¬
casus took refuge in the narrow passes
of the central regions.
One cannot help comparing the vast
territory between the Altai in the east
and the Danube in the west, which
had been the home of the Scytho-
Sarmatian tribes during the last millen¬
nium of the pre-Christian period, with
the handful of narrow ravines which
was all that was left to the Ossetes
in the 18th century A.D.
Here, indeed is food for thought
about the reverses of fortune ! At
Pitsunda, on the Black Sea coast, a
little grove of pine trees is all that
remains of a once-enormous forest.
Fate dealt similarly with the ancient
Scythian world, which is now reduced
to a tiny group of Ossetes, lost in the
Caucasian "mountains.
Two priceless treasures of their remote
past have, nevertheless, survivedtheir
language and their folklore.
The Scythians themselves left no
written texts.' But Greek epigraphic
inscriptions dating from the period
when the Scythians occupied the lands
north of the Black Sea contain hun¬
dreds of Scythian and Sarmatian com¬
mon nouns.
As eminent an authority as the Russian
philologist Vsevolod Miller and also spe¬
cialists from other countries have convin¬
cingly demonstrated that knowledge of
the Ossetic tongue makes interpretation
of these inscriptions easier and that
they can in fact be considered as
examples of the language of the ancient
Ossetes.
A number of words still used by the
Ossetes, such as "farn" (paradise), "hsar"
(military prowess), "andon" (iron), "aldar"
or "ardar" (master), "liman" (friend),
^'furt" (son), "fida" (father), "sag" (stag)
"sar" (head), "stur" (big), are easily
recognized in these inscriptions.
Modern Ossetic also provides the
key to the meaning of many names on
the map of the region between the
Black Sea and the Sea of Azov. The
names of the Don, the Dnieper and
the Dniester are easier to understand,
for example, when we know that in
Osseticand in this language alonethe
word for "river" is "don".
Traces of the Scythian world as evident


THE MOUNTAIN REMEMBERS
THE STEPPE
Much of the folklore and tales of the
Ossetes, a small group of mountain
people in the Caucasus, originates in
the epics of the ancient Scythians of
the steppes. Here, Dris Tautiev, an
honoured bard of the Northern Osse¬
tian Republic (U.S.S.R.) and one of the
400,000 descendants of the Scythians,
sings to the strains of the "kiatmancha".
as those found in the language of the
Ossetes are also to be found in their
folklore, and more particularly in the
heroic epics which, like other peoples
of the Caucasus, they still relate. The
heroes of these epics are a race of
warriors known as the Narts.
Vsevolod Miller and the French
scholar Georges Dumézil have con¬
cluded after careful comparative ana¬
lysis that much of what happens in the
tales of their adventures corresponds
very closely to the Scythian customs
and way of life described by Herodotus
and other ancient authors. All these
sources mention, for example, an
enchanted cup from which only the
most valiant warriors may drink, sword-
worship, and very similar burial cere¬
monies.
Comparison of the Epic of the Narts
with similar narratives from other cul¬
tures immediately reveals one salient
featurethe central character is a
woman. It would be difficult to find in
other epic poems of the world a female
personality of such stature and strength.
Satána, as she is called, is the essence,
the centre through whom all things
flow. She is the mother of the people,
the provider and mentor of the principal
heroes, Soslan and Batradz. She is the
wise counsellor, the omnipotent sorceress
and the guiding force without whose
intervention nothing worthy of mention
can be accomplished. None of the
heroes is indispensable to the Epic of
the Narts. Without Satána, there is
no Epic.
Obviously so imposing a figure could
only emerge from a society where
women occupied a dominant position.
And such, according to the unanimous
testimony of ancient authors, was the
society of the Sarmatians and the Mas¬
sagètes. "The Sarmatians are governed
by their women", one of these authors
tells us. Satána thus joins the ranks of
the Scythian, Saka and Massagete
queens and warrior-maidens, to stand
beside Zarina, Amaga and Tomiris,
whose names have also been handed
down by tradition. She is a product of
the steppe and not of the Caucasus.
Nor do the natural surroundings in
which the Epic of the Narts unfolds bear
any resemblance to the mountainfastness
of present-day Ossetia. Broad expanses
of sea and steppe are the usual setting
for the adventures of the Narts. The
wind of the steppes lashes through the
narrative. We feel the endlessness of
the Scythian plains and hear the
stampeding of horses, as a herd of
stags appears, pursued by tireless
hunters.
The Narts had the closest of rela¬
tionships with the watery element.
The founder of their people was a
daughter of Don Bettyr, the ruler of
the depths. Here, the similarity with
ancient Scythia is remarkable. The
favourite animal of Narts and Scythians
alike was the stag. In the Epic the
stag is often referred to as "Astassion"
(the Eighteen Horned One). Curiously
enough, the famous golden stags of
the Scythian animal style have exactly
eighteen branches on their horns.
In the absence of chronicles or docu¬
ments, the language and folklore of a
small settlement in the Caucasus have
bridged the gap of over 2,000 years,
bringing to us the sounds and images
of the inimitably individualistic world
of the ancient Scythians and Sarmatians.
Vasily I. Abaev
