THE POLITICAL
AND SATIRICAL CARTOON
stepping in where angels
dread to fear
by Ivan Tubau
û̂
B ARDLY anybody in this exciting and
I I contradictory century would deny the
importance of the cartoons that appear in
the press. The cartoon is Important as a
historical document, as an x-ray of society
and politics and as a form of artistic and
literary expression.
What essential differences are there
between cartoon humour and oral or literary
humour?
According to Freud, humour is a first
step to liberation. "It is a triumph of
gaiety, and represents the victory of the
pleasure principle". But this victory must be
considered as resulting from frustration:
"Dreams become ingenious and amusing
because more direct and comfortable chan¬
nels for the expression of our feelings are
blocked". In the same way, we crack
jokes when other, more directly aggressive
forms of activity are denied us.
In line with this reasoning, it is sometimes
argued that a joke involves at least three
persons: the author, the reader (or listener)
and the "victim". This proposition may be
more or less valid for oral or written jokes,
but does not seem to apply to cartoons
and humorous drawings. Some of the best
cartoons produced this century and here
one inevitably thinks of the brilliant Saul
Steinberg have no victim.
A much more acceptable definition of
most of today's cartoon humour is this
one of Kuno Fischer's describing humour
in general: "Humour Is an unbiased judge¬
ment". According to Fischer, "Aesthetic
freedom is the detached observation of
things". "It may be", he adds, "that
this aesthetic freedom gives rise to a dis¬
tinctive type of judgement., which because
of its origin we will call detached judge¬
ment". And he affirms: "Freedom pro¬
duces humour and humour is simply a game
with ideas".
One could apply this definition to the
cartoon and call It a game with ideas,
IVAN TU BAU, Spanish cartoonist well known
by the pseudonym oí "Pastecca ", is an authority
on the graphic techniques of the mass media.
A journalist and writer, he has published many
studies on popular art and culture. The present
article is adapted from his book De Tono a
Perich. El chiste gráfico en la prensa española
de la posguerra (From Tono to Perich. The
Cartoon in the post-war Spanish Press) published
In Madrid (1973).
Drawing by Vazquez de Sola Spain Taken from
"Caricatures", © Editions Albin Michel, Paris, 1975
expressed in a drawing with or without the
assistance of words. However, the con¬
cept of "detached judgement" does not
apply to the majority of cartoons appear¬
ing in the press. On the contrary, the
most effective of them imply a definite
and categorical judgement based on a
real situation.
I have already used the word "freedom"
several times, and with good reason.
Without a certain degree of freedom, the
political cartoon and the social caricature
could not exist at least not in a legally
authorized publication.
And yet the cartoon often emerges from
conditions of "relative freedom", as a subs¬
titute for more direct forms of expression
which cannot be used openly. On this score
the Spanish essayist Carlos Castilla del Pino
has written: "The distinctive characteristic
of a joke is that by laughing at a problem,
one avoids the opposite down-to-earth and
serious approach. Thus, for instance, the
political joke shows critical awareness, but
it cannot replace active, direct criticism,
which is ruled out by either external or
self-imposed censorship.
The cartoon requires of its creator a i
minimum of dexterity in drawing and a I
25

, minimum of aesthetic judgement, two cha¬
racteristics which can only exist when a
certain level of culture has been reached.
An illiterate person may be able to draw
because he has inherited a natural cultural
. sensibility.
However, the cartoon in the opinion
of the Spanish humorist Maximo, which
I share is a literary form. Although
expressed fundamentally through drawing,
it is much closer to the narrative form of
expression than the plastic arts. One might
say (even of work like Steinberg's which
would seem to suggest the contrary) that
in humorous drawings the aesthetic treat¬
ment always takes second place and the
idea is always of primary importance.
ONCE we accept the status of the car¬
toon as a literary form, it seems lo¬
gical to point out that the development of
the cartoon is closely linked to the develop¬
ment of printing techniques. Even if some
scholars claim to have found traces of gra¬
phic humour in the contexts of prehistoric
times, Ancient Egypt, Classical Greece and
the Middle Ages, the cartoon as such was
born when printing allowed it to be widely
circulated.
Vases have been found in Apulia, Cam¬
pania and Sicily which, like the paintings
of Cranach, Breughel, Bosch or Teniers,
provide examples of a caricaturist's outlook
on the world, bordering on the humorous.
Other artists, such as the English painter
Hogarth or the Spaniard Goya, can be
seen as genuine humorists.
But the development of the cartoon went
hand in hand with the rise of periodical
publications: in Germany and the Nether¬
lands during the religious wars; in England
with the growth of journals of opinion;
and in France under the Bourbon monar¬
chy and during the Revolution, until Napo¬
leon and his rigid censorship of the press
cut short its development.
The spread of lithography brought the
cartoon a wider audience during the 19th
century. This was particularly striking in
France in publications like La Caricature
(1825) and Le Journal pour Rire (1848) both
founded by Charles Philipon, and in Chari¬
vari (1832). This last magazine numbered
among its contributors the great caricatu¬
rist Honoré Daumier. Almost every great
French caricaturist of the age appeared in
Philipon's magazines: Paul Gavarni, Gus¬
tave Doré, Grandville, Bertall and André
Gill.
In Spain, however, few printed cartoons
were produced during the religious wars
in Europe. "Spain itself was a caricature",
commented the 19th-century thinker Jacinto
Octavio Picon. Then during the war of
independence the country found an effec¬
tive pioneer in Leonardo Alenza.
In the mid-1 9th century, satirical publi¬
cations began to proliferate in Spain: Gil
Bias (1864), El Fisgón (1865), Doña Ma¬
nuela (1865), El Saínete (1867), La Gorda
(1868), Jeremías (1869), La Flaca (1871).
In the majority of them we find the work
of the prolific Francisco Ortego, the most
important cartoonist of 19th-century Spain,
whose work was to some extent carried on
by José Luis Pellicer (El Cohete, 1872).
In Spain, as elsewhere in the world, the
history of graphic humour, which began
about 150 years ago, has been a check¬
ered one. But in general terms we can
follow the evolution of cartoon humour from
the viewpoints of aesthetics, expression,
content and diffusion.
From an aesthetic viewpoint, the general
tendency in cartoon-drawing has been
towards progressive economy of line. Even
though the immense amount of detail shown
by contemporary cartoonists such as Topor
rivals the work of Bertall, in the 19th
century, the majority of today's cartoonists
have opted for a simplification of forms, a
rigorous visual synthesis and an economy
of detail which in the last century already
characterized the work of French illustra¬
tors such as Doré and Caran d'Ache.
If attempts to separate content and
form are regarded today as arbitrary and
controversial, then to try to separate the
purely aesthetic aspect of a cartoon from
the idea it seeks to express would be the
very height of absurdity.
The aesthetic evolution of the cartoon has
therefore been accompanied by changes in
its form of expression, which have also be¬
come more simplified. Texts or captions,
where present, have become shorter and
more cryptic, the drawings less concerned
with detail except where necessary.
Most important of all, however, is the
fact that the drawing has thus gained
complete autonomy and its own power as a
means of expression. Even the best humor¬
ous drawings of the last century were
almost always illustrations often excellent,
but ultimately no more than illustrations
of a given text which was often a play
on words or a literary joke; a text, in short,
which could have stood alone without the
image.
But although cartoons of this type are
still published today, they are no longer
considered to qualify as genuine graphic
humour if the drawing can be suppressed
leaving the words on their own. Only when
the text, title or caption have no meaning
without the image are we looking at a
genuine cartoon. Purists go even further:
only the "mute" joke, the cartoon with
no words, is for them the genuine article.
However, even without making this sort
of demand for absolute purity almost im¬
possible in political or topical cartoons a
close interdependence between text and
image is today considered indispensable
in graphic humour. And if we are now
thoroughly aware of this new dimension of
humour, it is very largely due to the car¬
toonists and humorists of North America:
they "invented" modern cartoons, as they
"invented" the silent movie comedies. This
conclusion in no way detracts from the
merit of their European forerunners, such
as Méliès or Max Linder in the cinema,
and Caran d'Ache in cartoons.
It is almost axiomatic that in talking about
American influence, we tend to consider
as American both the Rumanian Saul Stein¬
berg the greatest cartoonist of all time
and Charles Chaplin, who is an English¬
man. But in addition to Steinberg other art¬
ists working in America have had a strong
influence at a number of different levels:
Peter Arno, James Thurber, Charles Ad-
dams, among others. The New Yorker and
Britain's Punch, with its extraordinary Ron¬
ald Searle, have incubated the best of
modern humour.
Yet Spain too has made its own very
important contribution to graphic humour in
the form of "gratuitous humour" or what
I have called "Codornicesco" (1). It has
sometimes been suggested erroneously
that this is an imitation of the humour that
in Italy under Mussolini appeared in publi¬
cations such as Bertoldo. The simple fact
is that Spaniards and Italians made similar
discoveries at about the same time. It is
inevitable that periods of censorship which
prohibit critical humour foster development
of cartoonists specializing in allusive hu¬
mour, particularly in the field of the verbally
absurd, where both the Spanish and the
Italians have reached standards that are
difficult to match.
When it comes to the problem of content,
evolution has been much more blurred and
contradictory. One widespread idea is that
humour (critical humour, since drawings
such as Steinberg's by their nature lie on
the periphery of this argument) has mainly
concentrated, during the last century and
a good part of the present one, on poking
fun at anything new, from new means of
transport to political theories.
This idea demands a closer look. In gen¬
eral terms, one can say that cartoons have
been moving from "right" to "left" nobody
would consider the French cartoonist Sine
as a conservative, for example though ft
is equally true that progressive tendencies
were also expressed1 during the last century.
Even if it is true that Cham, Bertall and
Doré were clearly reactionaries (Doré took
refuge in Versailles when the Commune
took over Paris during the Franco-Prussian
war), and that Forain and Caran d'Ache
were violently anti-semitic, it is no less true
that Daumier (who refused the Legion
of Honour offered him by the Second Em¬
pire) displayed a distinctly critical and pro¬
gressive attitude in his work.
AT an international level, the fact that
some critical humour seems to have
moved towards non-conservative and some¬
times even revolutionary standpoints is due
to its circulation among a much wider and
more varied public.
This brings us to consider the dissemi¬
nation of humour generally. It Is obvious
that the number and circulation of humorous
publications have continued to Increase,
even if their growth has been uneven.
Cartoons have also. moved successfully
into the general information field after a
long period of finding the door shut in their
face and have won a better-placed and
wider showing in the daily press.
Most significant of all, the importance of
the cartoon is now almost universally recog¬
nized. Today cartoons are not used sim¬
ply to fill up space. They occupy a privi¬
leged place ¡n the best pages, next to
the main editorial or the articles of leading
contributors.
Ivan Tubau
1) Codornicesco: form of humour found in the
Spanish satirical weekly La Codorniz.
26

k_ ;,-" -
i»*
a^L." M'iMi<itTn3írilli'-?¿:.'<" ..7 ~
' x 1
W '*m
1 1 C1 3 3
CIBID«
suais
oip non
. : :
auras
G : : 3 :
r ; m c
hiDJKBC
ce m e me
DODII
IBDBfl
;: C G B Si
il man
in
c c :
í
