14

TUNING IN TO THE PAST
Can we recapture soundscapes of bygone days?
The Western world of the Middle
Ages readily believed that the peoples
of distant and little-known lands
possessed strange characteristics,
including oversized physical features.
One example was the "Panotii ', people
with enormous ears who were thought
to live "somewhere in the Indies
beyond the Ganges". In the 12th
century, images of three "Panotii"
man, woman and childwere
carved above the portal of the church
of Vézelay, in France (photo right). For
Christians of medieval times the ear
symbolized in particular the hearing
of the divine word. Left, a massive
bell about to be tolled in one of the
many temples in the town of
Bhadgaon (Nepal).
by David Lowenthal
DAVID LOWENTHAL, Professor of Geo¬
graphy at University College London, has
written extensively on environmental per¬
ception and is currently concerned with
values attached to relics from the past. A
former Secretary of the American Geogra¬
phical Society and an associate editor of the
interdisciplinary quarterly Environment and
Behavior, he has published a number of
books including George Perkins Marsh, a bio¬
graphy of a pioneer American conservationist.
WHAT becomes of music,
speech, and other sounds-,
natural and man-made, when they
cease reverberating ? How far do
previous sounds differ from those of
today ? How much do we remember
of what we hear? What meanings
and emotions attach to sounds from
the past? Why do familiar sounds
often trigger nostalgic yearning?
What sounds do we regard as anti¬
quated, and why?
On these topics little is known and
less has been written. For each
of us the answers depend, in part,
on our age, our cultural heritage, and
our musical and other auditory ex¬
periences. This article is a first ex¬
ploration into past sounds and our
feelings about them.
The world we live in is a product
of the past; the very familiarity of
its features implies the memory of
previous experience. Awareness of
the past through mementoes and
monuments is essential to individuals
and to nations; the recognition of
continuity gives meaning to the
present and hope to the future.
Vision is the main sensory mode
through which we apprehend the past,
but it is not the only one. We are
aware of the passage of time and the
endurance of things through other
senses too.
This assertion may seem hardest
to demonstrate with respect to sound.
No noise that human beings are
capable of hearing is really old. Radio
signals from the stars, to be sure,
have taken many light years to reach
the earth, but these play an inconspi¬
cuous role in our acoustical land¬
scape. No sound that we actually
hear is more than a few moments
old; the rapid decay of sound energy
coupled with our limited capacity for
hearing makes even the loudest noise
undetectable soon after its inception.
In one sense, however, sound
seems the essence of time. Aural
impulses have long been the main
way of marking off years, seasons,
weeks, days, hours, and minutes:
bells, chimes, and other clock mecha¬
nisms provide a man-made counter¬
point to ' the natural periodicity of
pulse and heartbeat, and enhance our
awareness of connexions between
past and present.
Yet to recover the sounds of the
past is an infinitely more difficult
enterprise than to restore the visual
images of previous landscapes.
Countless visible relics, however
eroded, decayed, or selectively pre¬
served they may be, nonetheless
survive to ' tell us much about the
bygone material world and its spatial
organization.
But of sounds from the past, save
for a small and relatively recent
repertory, recorded for the most part
under laboratory or studio conditions, k
not a trace remains. No recording*
15

> exists of the loudest known noise in
world history, the explosion of Kra-
katoa volcano on 26-28 August 1 883,
which was heard 3,000 miles away,
and it is probable that no one now
alive would remember hearing it.
Of sounds before the phonograph,
we know only what can be surmised
from indirect evidence: the noises of
presumably unchanging natural or
human activities; the sounds pro¬
duced by ancient musical instruments;
the performance of music preserved
in notational form; the written ac¬
counts of those who heard and
reacted to the noises and music of
their times.
"We know how Chopin played,"
as Gerald Abraham puts it in The
Tradition of Western Music, "only
through the playing of the pupils of
the pupils of his pupils." And their
memory, like all of ours, is a notor¬
iously fallible guide. Earwitnesses
are to be trusted even less than
eyewitnesses. "Long term memory
tends to 'idealize' and isolate sounds,"
notes Barry Truax in an aural history
interview, which is one reason why
the tape-recorded past seems quite
unlike the sounds we imagine we
remember.
But however deficient these indirect
modes of historical reconstruction
may be, they are often invaluable.
The timbre, tone, and rhythm of a
clap of thunder, the beating of surf
against the shore, have probably
varied little over many millennia; the
ancient flute sounds today much as
it did when first made; the clash of
spear against shield, the ring of the
hammer at the forge, the sizzle of
meat on a Neolithic spit can be fairly
accurately reproduced by reactivating
their constituent parts.
Other features of past soundscapes,
however, are now unrecoverable: the
utterances . of extinct species, the
clangour of early metallurgy, the
intonations of ancient languages,
the distinctive susurrus of obsolete
domestic crafts. Not least, the words
spoken on any particular occasion
throughout history are gone beyond
recall.
For most of this we lack even indi¬
rect evidence. Least accessible is
the total ensemble of sounds that
characterized past epochs, the inter¬
play of background and foreground
noises that made up the daily sound¬
scape heard in each community and
locale.
We do have some clues to these
things, for we know that the, sounds
of nature antedate those of man, and
that machine noise follows the man-
made sounds of pre-industrial times.
16
Photo © from Aberrations, by Jurgis Baltrusaïtis.
Olivier Perrin publishers, Paris 1957.
Nostalgia for past sounds indeed cen¬
tres on our efforts to recapture, or
re-experience, the soundscape pat¬
terns that we associate with earlier,
simpler, more natural epochs.
Particularly do we sometimes long
for silence, that interval between
sounds so seldom present in the
interstices of our electronic age.
Nostalgia sometimes deceives us
about the past; not even screeching
jets and thundering subway trains
could be much worse than the
wheeled traffic of late 19th century
London, as recalled in 1958 by the
architect H. B. Creswell:
The noise... was a thing beyond
all imaginings.... The hammering
of a multitude of iron-shod hairy heels
upon [the granite 'sets' of the streets],
the deafening, side-drum tattoo of
^^

DESIGNED WITH EAR AND EYE
In religious buildings, certain architectural forms tend to promote the kind of
audio-visual balance required for religious worship. Such buildings have a vitally
important acoustic function: singing, prayers and instrumental music establish a
link with the spiritual world. In Gothic cathedrals the lightness of the arches and
the rhythmic repetition of the lofty stained-glass windows help sound waves
to disperse. Like the vaulting branches of trees in a forest, the arching pillars
act as distributors of sound, an analogy strikingly illustrated in photo montage,
left, of a Gothic nave giving on to a forest path. Below, entrance to the Shah
Abbas, or Blue Mosque, at Isfahan (Iran) where the acoustics are so sensitive
that a snap of the fingers directly beneath the cupola echoes no less than seven '
times. Bottom, 13th-century minaret in Turkmenistan (U.S.S.R.): from its tip
the voice of the muezzin echoes as far as the horizon. Minaret's spiralled
structure recalls that of the famous ziggurat-shaped minaret of Samarra (Iraq).
tyred wheels jarring from the apex of
one set to the next like sticks drag¬
ging along a fence; the creaking and
groaning and chirping and rattling of
vehicles... the jangling of chain har¬
ness and the clanging or jingling of
every other conceivable thing else,
augmented by the shriekings and
bellowings... raised a din that... is
beyond all conception. It was not
any such paltry thing as noise. It
was an immensity of sound.
The everyday sounds of the past
were different, yes, but not necessa-
rily preferable, as we are often
tempted to suppose, to those of today.
Nevertheless, the city dweller who
retreats to the rural countryside, or
anyone who sojourns for a time in
the wilderness, rightly supposes that
the change of locale brings him in
contact with earlier or previous
soundscapes. It is difficult wholly
to escape the everyday sounds of
modern life, for the internal combu¬
stion engine and long-distance com¬
munications are almost omnipresent.
But today's natural and rural envi¬
ronments bear at least some resem¬
blance to those of earlier epochs, and
by listening to what happens there we
can partly recapture the soundscapes
of the past. Just how much today's
natural or rural sounds replicate
yesterday's can not be determined,
however. A desire for both authen¬
ticity and specificity animates our
continuing search for ways to recover
the actual sounds of the past.
THE capacity or ability to recap¬
ture such sounds is a recurrent
theme of imaginative literature. Ba¬
ron Munchausen describes a winter so
cold that a hunter's tune froze in his
bugle, emerging as audible notes only
the following spring. Rabelais's Pan¬
tagruel, sailing on the confines of the
Frozen Sea, is amazed, while seeing
nothing, to hear a great dinthe
booming of cannon, the whistling of
bullets, the shouts and groans of
men, the jostling of armour, the
clashing of battle axes, the neighing
of horses; all these sounds of a great
battle, fought there the previous
winter, had frozen in the air and
were only now tumbling down and
melting into audibility.
The "Journeyers to the East" in
Hermann Hesse's The Glass Bead
Game include itinerant instrumen¬
talists and minstrels whose "mystic
identification with remote ages and
cultural conditions" enabled them "to
perform the music of earlier epochs^
with perfect ancient purity... exactly F
CONTINUED PAGE 20
17

Photo © Studio Natiris, Cébazat,. France.
GRASSHOPPER VIRTUOSO. Like a violonist using his bow,
the grasshopper rubs its thigh, equipped with a toothlike ridge (above) against
the sides of its abdomen, thus producing its characteristic "song".
On insect
wings of song'
BATS, MOTHS AND ULTRASOUND. Bats find their prey while flying at night
by emitting ultrasonic cries and locating the source of echoes.
Some moths can detect the cries and then take evasive action.
Photo below shows oscilloscope tracing of a bat's cry and a moth's response to it.
Pattern at left of top trace shows bat's cry.
Reaction of the moth's acoustic cells produced row of spikes at bottom.
Photo © Scientific Mmerican.
18

CRICKET'S MUSICAL 'FILE'.
Only the male cricket produces sound.
It chirps by rubbing an upturned "scraper"
on one fore-wing along a "file" or thickened
vein with crossridges on the underside
of the other fore-wing. Photo above, taken
through a microscope, shows a cricket's
musical "file".
SPIDER'S LYRE. Is the spider deaf?
It was always thought that the spider
had no hearing organ, but then tiny slits
stretched from a fine membrane linked
to sensory cells were discovered
on the insect's feet. Some scientists
believe that these lyre-shaped organs,
sensitive to vibrations, may be a kind
of foot-mounted ear.
BUG'S BREASTPLATE. The bug stings its
victims with its rostruma kind of beak.
This instrument also, amazingly enough,
enables it to "sing". The bug scrapes
it against minute grooves on its thorax
(below) to produce its "stridulation".
Photos © Studio Natiris, Cébazat, France.
19

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 17
as if all the subsequent modes,
refinements, and virtuoso achieve¬
ments were still unknown."
One archaeological dreamer sur¬
mises that, by analogy with the
sound that needles re-evoke in record
grooves, the voices of plasterers of
past millennia may be caught in the
masonry of ancient walls and temples,
awaiting only the proper stylus to
come to life once more.
The desire to regain audible his¬
tory bespeaks the power of sound
to transport us back to the past. To
hear, or even just to remember, a
familiar tune, can instantly call to
mind long-vanished scenes and
events.
The playing of childhood melodies
was said to have triggered fatal out¬
breaks of nostalgia among Swiss sol¬
diers serving in France and Belgium
during the 17th and 18th centuries.
The Kühe-Reihen or ranz-des-vaches,
rustic tunes to which herds were
driven to Alpine pastures, revived
Swiss recollections of their homeland.
The tune, "a fragment of the past,"
as the Swiss essayist Jean Staro-
binski puts it, "revives in the imagi¬
nation all our former life ...". ;
Music is not the only'sound to
arouse such memories; the bubbling
of springs and the murmuring of
streams, even certain vocal inflec¬
tions, can also be evocative.1 Indeed
the 19th-century French novelist,
Etienne Pivert de Sénancour, felt that
"the sounds emanating from sublime
places make a deeper, more lasting,
impression than do their visual fea¬
tures."' The significance ï óf £ sound
dominates the inhabitants of Ameri¬
can author John Updike's imaginary
planet, Minerva: "an elderly Minervan
wishing to memorialize his life, would
remember it almost exclusively in
terms of music he had heard, or had
made."
Any sound, if memory is vivid,
evokes the past. But certain sounds
in particular induce us to sense them
as old, stemming from antiquity or.
surviving from a remote past.
Real or fancied similarity to some
known work persuades us to link
new music to some past epoch. Even
the use of a particular key may evoke
the musical past.
Thus long accumulated associa¬
tions with major and minor modes
make it difficult for some cognoscenti,
according to Gerald Abraham, to
"hear B minor without our sub¬
conscious being stirred by memories
of the Kyrie of Bach's Mass, the
first movement of the Unfinished
Symphony, and Tchaikovsky's Pathé¬
tique."
The timbre as well as the structure
of music may suggest the past.
Certain instruments, whatever their
actual age, produce tones that are
generally recognized as archaic. The
recognition stems from our expecta¬
tion, based on a mixture of experience
and belief, that early musical instru¬
ments were characteristically thin,
reedy, quavering, or nasal; from the
absence of a well-tempered pitch; or
from certain acoustic propertiesthe
castrato voice, for examplethat are
no longer to be found.
THE presumption of antiquity
may be mistaken: not many
early instruments have the archaeolo¬
gical authenticity of the Ukrainian
mammoth bones, so cut and shaped
that Soviet scholars could deduce
that Cro-Magnon man 20,000 years
ago used them as percussion instru¬
ments; modern tests on them, as Ser¬
gei Bibikov describes in the "Unesco
Courier" (June 1975), yield "hard,
resonant, and musically expressive"
sounds.
But many so-called early instru¬
ments are in fact copies or recon¬
structions of originals; we have
little firm evidence about how early
music sounded; some modern music
is intentionally written for antique
instruments or set to deliberately
anachronistic language, like Stra¬
vinsky's Lyke-Wake Cantata.
A presumption of antiquity also
attaches to sounds that seem worn,
flawed, or partly obliterated. Such
tones strike the ear as being either
products of ancient forces or end
results of processes öf decay. . A
scratched record, a muffled church
bell, and a wheezy car engine give
the illusion of having come from long
ago because their tones suggest
much prior use. A cracked or qua¬
vering voice conveys a sense of time
past because we may assume it be¬
longs to an old man or woman.
= Words sung or spoken may be ano¬
ther high road to antiquity. Songs,
chants, and other vocalizations
connote age when they employ anti¬
quated language or refer to historical
personages or epochs. References
to bygone persons and places, obso¬
lete vocabulary, and archaic musical
style and instrumentation converge
to create compelling illusions of anti¬
quity, as in Gregorian chants.
Words or eroded sounds often
combine with aural memories to
conjure up past images. Philip Lar-
kin's novel Girl in Winter describes
how recorded music can evoke a
vanished scene:
The record was old-fashioned, and
had a tinny quality only partly due to
the needle. The tune it played had
been popular for perhaps a week or
two, or perhaps even for as long as
a musical comedy had run in London,
but was now quite forgotten. The
orchestra that played it did so in
what had been the fashion of the
moment, with little empty tricks
of syncopation that recalled the out¬
moded dresses of the girls that had
danced to it. It was strange to
think it had once sounded modern.
Now it was like an awning propped in
the sun, nearly white, that years ago
had been striped bright red and
yellow.
The content and condition of the
musical reproduction together sug¬
gest outworn tastes, frayed and faded
fabrics, evanescent popularity. -
Auditory like visual experience
often makes natural things seem pre¬
vious to man-made ones. Rocks,
trees, lichen may look older than
houses or highways because we
assume that nature generally ante-,
dates artifice. The sounds of nature
may similarly suggest a primeval -
scene.
For Larkin's antagonist, "as far as
age was concerned, sheer age that
was almost timelessness, the sound
of trees was more impressive" than
an ancient Oxford church. "The
surrounding treetops settling and
unsettling with an endless sifting of
leaves ... filled the air with the
whispering of eternity, ... making
this place, famous as it was, like all
other places."
But the rustle of wind in trees,
like the atavistic charm of breaking
waves, is not so much ancient as it is
eternal. Such sounds betoken not
the historical past but the primordial
scene, a time previous to history.
The sounds of decay, like its
visual images, also evoke a feeling of
desuetude. A crumbling stone wall.
20

an ivy-covered building, a mossy roof
are felt to be old because they are
apparently weathering back to age-
old nature. Similarly, tunes, speech,
and other man-made noises patterned
after the sounds of nature or decaying
so as to resemble them impress
hearers as akin to primeval.
We tend to assume that sounds dis¬
tant in space are also remote in time;
far away and long ago seem intima¬
tely interwoven. The experience of
echoes bears this out in paradoxical
fashion. As reverberations in ampli¬
fied space they echo sounds further
away but after the original sound.
The growth of interest in sounds
stemming both from nature and from
the human past mirrors increasing
disenchantment with the noises felt
to be most characteristic of the pre¬
sent day.
And a preference for. the aural
past goes beyond music; it questions
the quality of the whole modern
soundscape. The broad-gauge blur
of the machine-dominated environ¬
ment creates sounds that are in¬
herently boring. "In the past the
trains either whistled more or we
heard them better," reminisced one
old lady about the 1920s. "They
had more personality."
This is the quality that makes so
many sounds of the past a precious
legacy, now in danger of being lost
through obsolescence, and that gives
purpose to the World Soundscape
Project's effort to record certain
sounds before they vanish (see
page 4).
Such sounds include the ringing of
old cash registers, washing clothes
on a washboard, churning butter, a
razor being stropped, a kerosene
lamp, the squeak of leather saddle
bags, hand coffee grinders, milk cans
rattling on horse-drawn vehicles,
heavy doors being clanked shut and
bolted, school hand bells, wooden
rocking chairs on wooden floors,
the quilt explosion of old cameras
and hand-operated water pumps.
A special auditory quality often
associated with the past is silence.
We are so accustomed today to per¬
vasive background noise that when
it is absent we feel transported into
another time, the past if we were
accustomed long ago to the absence
of noise, the future if we have never
experienced certain surroundings
without it.
Critical reactions to the present
soundscape help to make us aware
that the ¡ audible environment has a
temporal character. Just as concert
audiences have grown used to hear¬
ing chronologically sequential pro
grammes, so does the whole sonic
world begin to acquire historical
markers.
We tend more and more to date the
distinctive elements of the sound¬
scape medley: the crash of waves
and the wind in the trees seem eter¬
nal; bird-song is both seasonal and
cyclical; voices seem either old or
new depending on "their age and
familiarity; traffic sounds are placed
in time because we have experienced,
or heard recordings of, trains and
cars and planes of various vintages;
music and Muzak have temporal con¬
notations that differ depending on
where and how we hear them.
Even when we do not consciously
attend to these sounds their tempora¬
lity affects us. As we keep incorpor¬
ating past sounds into our present
lives, the auditory medley takes on
an increasingly diachronic character.
We hear in the present but simultane¬
ously recognize elements, tonalities,
and themes from many pasts.
What can be concluded from all
this? Given our present level of
technology, past sounds, strictly
speaking, appear to be irrecoverable.
Sounds persist only in memory, often
evoked by associations, and in their
influence on imagination.
What we can reconstruct from indi¬
rect evidence, however, suggests
that in many important respects past
soundscapes differed substantially
from those of today. It is partly
because of these differences that we
remain so strongly attached to sounds
that we consider to be antiquated,
whether or not they are truly old.
David Lowenthal
