AMERICA'S
SPIRIT OF 1776
by Henry Steele Commager
HENRY STEELE COMMAGER is one ol the most distinguished scholars on American
history at work today. Since 1930 when he published his first major work The Growth of the
American Republic (written in collaboration with the late Samuel Eliot Morison) he has produced
a regular flow of major contributions to the literature of American history. Notable among his
publications are a monumental source book Documents of American History (1934) which he
edited (also with S.E. Morison) and the classic America : Story of a Free People (1942) written
with Allan Nevlns. Professor of American History at Amherst College (Mass.) since 1956. he
has held many academic posts at universities ¡n the United States and elsewhere. This article
has been condensed from "The Revolution as a World Ideal", first published In Saturday Review
of 13 December 1975.

SKYSCRAPERS OF YESTERDAY AND TODAY. Left, "Historical Monument
of the American Republic", painted about 1876 by Erastus Salisbury Field to
celebrate the first centenary of the United States. In this huge canvas
(4 m. x 3 m.) the artist filled almost every inch of each of its ten towers
with dazzling representations of the important figures, events and texts of
American history from the earliest periods onwards. On the second tower
from the right. Field depicted historic incidents in the American Revolution.
Linking the tops of the 150-metre "skyscrapers" is a steam railway on which
a half dozen steam engines are merrily puffing away. Field began his
monumental work in réponse to a competition for the design of the central
building at the Philadelphia Centennial Exposition of 1876. He hoped that his
monument would one day be constructed. Below, towers of 1976
60-story office and residential blocks in Marina City, Chicago.
THE men who fought the Revo¬
lution and created the new
American nation were children of the
Enlightenment. They shared the En¬
lightenment conviction that mankind
was one, that men were everywhere
alike subject to the same laws, res¬
ponding to the same impulses, animat¬
ed by the same passions, and enti¬
tled to the same rights.
They believed in the sovereignty of
reason and in the universality of
those laws which reason could com¬
mand and in the ability to achieve
those ends which reason dictated as
just and sound. When they set up their
own commonwealths, they based
these on laws they thought universal
and permanent; and they took it for,
granted that men and nations every¬
where must eventually follow where
they led.
With Patrick Henry they were con¬
fident that America had "lighted the
candle to all the world." With John
Adams they rejoiced that the Revolu¬
tion was fought "for future millions,
and millions of millions," and that it
would "spread Liberty and Enlight¬
enment everywhere in the world".
No one else proclaimed this gospel
more insistently than Thomas Jeffer¬
son. "We feel," he wrote to his friend
Joseph Priestley, "that we are acting
under obligations not confined to the
limits of our own society. It is impos¬
sible not to be sensible that we are
acting for all mankind."
And he struck that note again in his
last letter: it was his salute to the "Ar¬
gonauts" who had launched the Dec¬
laration and the nation: "May it be to
the world... the signal of arousing men
to burst the chains under which mon
kish ignorance and superstition had
persuaded them to bind themselves,
and to assume the blessings and
security of self-government... All eyes
are opened, or opening, to the rights
of man.
"The general spread of the light
of science has already laid open to
every view the palpable truth that the
mass of mankind has not been born
with saddles on their backs, nor a
favoured few booted and spurred,
ready to ride them legitimately, by the
grace of God."
It is sobering to reflect that in cele¬
brating both the Centennial and the
Bicentennial of the Revolution, Am¬
ericans have been content to substi¬
tute rhetoric for policy and have even
been willing to permit the. policy to
betray the rhetoric. The Revolutionary ^
generation translated its rhetoric ther
UÑáSc<J>
5

^term is inadequate not only into
policy but also into institutions.
Nothing, indeed, was more impres¬
sive in that generation than its ability
"to realize the writings of the wisest
writers" that is, to take ideas and
principles to which philosophers had
subscribed for centuries and institu¬
tionalize them.
As the Founding Fathers drew upon
the great heritage of the past, from
Greece to 17th century England, for
their inspiration, so they contrived
institutions that were valid everywhere
and that spread over the globe.
First they created a nation some¬
thing no other people had ever done
before, for heretofore nations had
simply grown. And they did so with¬
out benefit of all the insignia and stig¬
mata of Old World nationalism a
monarch, a ruling class, an establish¬
ed church, an army and navy, and even
a historical past. What is more, they
cast the nation into Republican form
something Montesquieu had assert¬
ed was impossible except in a small
territory or a city-state.
They solved, almost overnight, two
of the most intractable problems in
the history of government: colonialism
and federalism. No Old World nation
had known what to do with colonies
except to exploit them for the benefit
of the mother country. The new Uni¬
ted States was born the largest nation
in the Western world and was, from
the beginning and throughout the 19th
century, a great colonizing power with
a hinterland that stretched westward
to the Mississippi and, eventually, to
the Pacific.
BY the simple device of trans¬
forming "colonies" into states,
and admitting these states into the
union on the basis of absolute equa¬
lity with the original states, the Found¬
ing Fathers taught the world a lesson
which it has learned only slowly and
painfully down to our own day.
' That generation solved, too, the
problem of federalism a problem that
had baffled statesmen in the ancient
Greek confederacies, in medieval Ita¬
ly of the Lombard League, in the con¬
federations of Helvetica and of the
Low Countries, in the Holy Roman
Empire, and in the British Empire. In
little more than a decade, Americans
worked out the proper principles of
federalism and welded together a fed¬
eral union which is today the oldest
and the most successful in history.
They had declared that all govern¬
ment derives its powers from the con¬
sent of the governed a principle an-
'cient in history but never before trans
lated into practice and one which,
even today, is not generally conceded.
How were the governed to give their
"consent": how were they to "alter
or abolish" government and "insti¬
tute" new government?
Nowhere else on the globe except
perhaps in some of the Swiss cantons
had the principle of democracy been
institutionalized. The Founding Fathers
invented the constitutional convention
as the appropriate instrument for mak¬
ing, altering, abolishing, and remaking
government; that is, they legalized
revolution. And, like federalism, the
constitutional convention has spread
throughout the globe.
For the first time, too, the Americans
institutionalized the familiar principle
that government was limited. As late
as 1766 the British Parliament had pro¬
claimed the right to bind the colonies
"in all cases whatsoever", and it was
a commonplace of history that kings
and princes had the right to bind their
subjects.
But the Founding Fathers insisted
that no government had all power, and
they proceeded, then, to place on
government such checks, balances, li¬
mits, restrictions, and prohibitions as
would make sure that government could
not indeed exercise any powers but
those assigned to it by the people.
What a congeries of inventions and
devices to achieve this end: written
constitutions, the federal system, the
separation of powers, bicameral legis¬
latures, annual elections, and, to top
them all, bills of rights that were part
of fundamental law and that protected
men in their freedom of religion, of
speech, of the press, and of assembly
something not even the English Bills
of Rights attempted to do.
This principle, too that government
was limited spread into every conti¬
nent. It has not conquered the globe,
and it is competing, even now, for the
allegiance of men everywhere. But
that the area of freedom is larger to¬
day than it was in 1776 owes some¬
thing to the American demonstration
that men can make and that men can
limit government.
Thus this generation incomparably
the most creative in American history
was responsible for launching the
most important political institutions of
modern history: the constitutional con¬
vention, the written constitution, fed¬
eralism, the co-ordinate state, limited
government, substantive bills of rights,
judicial review, and even the political
party (for the parties that emerged in
the 1790s have some claim to be the
first modern parties in history). Equal¬
ly significant and equally influential
were the innovations in the realm of
social institutions.
Thus for the first time, Americans of
the Revolutionary generation not only
established complete religious tolera¬
tion but also separated church and
state with its corollary principle of
voluntarism in religion.
Thus for the first time in modern
history they formally subordinated
the military to the civilian authority.
They realized the principle that men
were "created equal" in a larger mea¬
sure than did any other Western so¬
ciety, though they failed, tragically, to
extend that principle to blacks: their
failure here was a failure not so much
of leadership as of following.
It is sobering to reflect that their
successors did not solve this prob¬
lem until almost a century later, and
then by violence, and that another
century was to elapse before Ameri¬
cans were prepared to concede even
formal equality to the black race.
IT was good fortune rather than
principle which accounted for a
greater degree of material well-being
in the early Republic than could be
found elsewhere on the globe, but it
was principle that made that good
fortune available to almost all who
were white and that kept open the
doors for the peoples of the Old
World.
And, to assure the continuation of
all this, Americans embarked upon
what we may call, for want of a better
name, the Jeffersonian programme of
the conquest of ignorance by provid¬
ing schools and colleges on a lavish
scale open to'all. Americans encour¬
aged learning and science by estab¬
lishing freedom of the press; they
were even so romantic as to write
guarantees of happiness into their
Constitution.
In all this the Founding Fathers
were animated by a sense of obliga¬
tion, and of mission, not only to the
peoples of the world but also to pos¬
terity. It was for posterity that they
fought and planned and built; it was
the needs of posterity that were cons¬
tantly uppermost in their minds. This
concern was sometimes exaggerated
as it was in Jefferson's "land
enough for our descendants to the
thousandth and ten-thousandth gen¬
eration," but it was never merely
rhetorical.
Nowhere else is the contrast bet¬
ween the Revolutionary generation
and our own non-revolutionary (or
counter-revolutionary) generation more
conspicuous than in the. passing, of
the sense of fiduciary obligation. We
give lip service to posterity, but by
plundering the natural resources of
land and water, recklessly polluting
the environment, building immense
6

Giant heads of four American presidents gaze out over the peaks and valleys in
the Black Hills region of South Dakota (U.S.A.). Carved from the granite cliff face
of the Mount Rushmore National Memorial, they portray, from left to right,
George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Theodore Roosevelt and Abraham .
Lincoln. Each is about the height of a five-storey building. An American
sculptor, Gutzon Borglum, designed and supervised the work on the memorial
a monument to the building of the United States for 14 years until his death
in 1941, and it was completed by his son.
nuclear armaments, fostering racial
and national animosities, and piling
up almost limitless debts, we systema¬
tically betray it.
The American Revolution was a
catalytic agent everywhere in the
Western world. "All Europe is on our
side," wrote Franklin with pardon¬
able exaggeration from Paris. Cer¬
tainly, all the European liberals were
on the American side even in Brit¬
ain, even in British Hanover. The war
divided British opinion as sharply as
the Vietnam War divided American,
but its opponents were more outspo
ken and more courageous than were
the opponents of the destruction of
Vietnam and Cambodia.
English philosophes like Dr. Price
and Dr.. Priestley openly championed
the American cause; statesmen like
Chatham and Shelburne, Rockingham
and Grafton, warned that Britain going
to war was folly.
The war, the American victory, and
the American example immensely sti¬
mulated popular efforts to reform the
British political system to broaden
the suffrage, end the scandal of rotten
boroughs, and encourage annual meet
ings of Parliament: all in vain, for the
almost paranoid reaction against the
French Revolution, which found classic
expression in Edmund Burke's "Re¬
flections", inaugurated something like
a reign of terror in Britain.
Elsewhere, too, the American exam¬
ple was infectious: in France, where
Jefferson helped draft the Declaration
of the Rights of Man and where Tom
Paine served in the constituent assem¬
bly; in Italy, where the fiery Alfieri
celebrated the American cause in five
odes to liberty and countless dramas;
in the Netherlands, where stout revo¬
lutionaries like van der Capellen and
van der Kemp fought again in vain
to reconstruct the aristocratic govern¬
ment of those provinces; in the Ger-
manies, where Christoph Ebeling was
certain that "America must give an
example to the world"; even in des¬
potic Denmark, where, as Henrik Stef¬
fens remembered, "all the ships flew
flags and pennants and every ship
with cannon saluted the new nation."
Nor was the influence of the Revo¬
lution confined to the Old World. The
struggle for the independence of Latin
America derived more from the French
than from the American Revolution,
but the Latin Americans knew, after
all, that the French Revolution had
ended in the despotism of a Napoleon
and the American in the birth of a free
republic, and it was the American
example they sought to emulate.
And the power of that example was
to emerge again and again on the
stage of history, even into our own
time, when both Rhodesia and North
Vietnam borrowed the language, if not
the spirit, of the Declaration of Inde¬
pendence, to justify their own revo¬
lutions.
Revolution, independence, nation-
making, new political institutions all
these set examples and standards
which excited and encouraged imita¬
tion around the globe. More impor¬
tant, however, was the impact of what
was going on in the great social and
economic laboratory of America the
spectacle not only of successful self-
government but also of economic op¬
portunity and social equality and reli¬
gious liberty and the potentialities of
private voluntary associations, all
available to ordinary men and women.
What excited Europeans in the 19th
century was what had excited the
Founding Fathers in the 18th the
chance to escape from Europe and to
create a new order of society.
. The American farmer, Hector St.
John de Crèvec saw this at the
very outset of the American experi¬
ment. The European, he said, be¬
comes an American "by being receiv-r
7

Led in the broad lap of our great Alma
Mater. Here individuals of all nations
are melted into a new race of men,
whose labours and posterity will one
day cause great changes in the world.
Americans are the Western pilgrims
who are carrying along with them that
great mass of arts, sciences, vigour,
and industry which began long since
in the east; they will finish the great
circle."
And he added what was to be of
crucial importance in transforming the
European into the American, that
"Europe contains hardly any other
distinctions but lords and tenants;
this fair country alone is settled by
freeholders, the possessors of the soil
they cultivate, members of the govern¬
ment they obey, and framers of their
own laws... There is room for every¬
body in America... Instead of starv¬
ing he will be fed; instead of being
idle he will have employment; and
these are riches enough for such men
as come over."
What Crèvecaur described became
the stuff of Tocqueville's philosophy:
that equalityhe used the term demo¬
cracy the distinguishing fea¬
ture of American life and that it was,
if not precisely the mission, then the
destiny of America, by her example
and by her attraction, to spread
equality throughout the Old World.
In these analyses both Crèvec
and Tocqueville left out slavery (they
were to recognize and lament that
curse elsewhere in their writings), but
in their recognition that the American
Revolution meantwhat its motto pro¬
claimed a new order of the ages
(novus ordo saeclorum) socially and
morally as well as politically, they
were one with the Americans who had
carried through both revolutions.
There is an elegiac quality about all
this. We are no longer a revolutionary
people. We are no longer creative in
politics and government; every major
political institution that we have today
was invented before 1800; none has
been invented since then.
We no longer open our doors to
the poor and the oppressed of the
world. We no longer think of our
mission as primarily that of lifting the
burdens from the shoulders of men,
and when we undertake to spread
our way of life, it is through force, not
through moral example.
Perhaps a realization of what we
once stood for, what we once accom¬
plished, and what we once meant to
mankind may yet lead us back to
those paths which we were the first
to tread. Listen to Tom Paine, as he
rejoices in the triumph of "the great-
Photo Abigail Heyman © Magnum, Pans
A strong emphasis on all kinds or sports and athletics and an easy informality in
student-teacher relations are characteristic features of university and college life
in the United States. Above, this teenage college girl is an enthusiastic football
player. Opposite page, student meeting at an American university. The subject
may be serious but the atmosphere is casual and relaxed. The 2,800 U.S. universities
and other centres of higher education have a total enrollment of 10 million
students of whom almost half are women. About 45% of the 20 to 24 age group in
the U.S.A. are today taking higher education courses which offer some 1,600
types of degrees. .
est and completest revolution the
world ever knew, gloriously and hap¬
pily accomplished":
"Never had a country so many
openings to happiness as this. Her
setting out in life, like the rising of a
fair morning, was unclouded and pro¬
mising. Her cause was good. Her
principles just and liberal. Her temper
serene and firm. Her conduct regulat¬
ed by the nicest steps, and everything
about her wore the mark of honour.
It is not every country that can boast
so fair an origin."
Henry Steele Commager
8
