the Chinese
have a word
for (w) it HSIAO-hua
by Kristofer M. Schipper
A seventy-year-old scholar
became the father of a
son, and he proudly decided to call
the child 'Age'. The following year,
another son was born and, since the
new-born baby looked intelligent, the
father decided to call him 'Study'. A
year passed, and yet a third son came
into the world. The old scholar laugh¬
ed and said, 'Three sons, at my agel,
This is getting to be funnyl" So he
called his last-born 'Humour' (Hsiao-
hua).
"The children grew up, and one day
they went up into the mountains to
gather wood for their father. On their
return, the old scholar. asked his wife,
'Which of my three sons has brought
back the most wood?' His wife re¬
plied, "Age gathered a handful; Study
nothing at all; but Humour has brought
home a whole pilel'"
This ancient tale is a good illustra¬
tion of popular Chinese wisdom, which
holds that a little humour in life can
be more profitable than either exper¬
ience or education. The philosophers
of ancient China were well aware of
this, for they often quoted witty stories
in support of their theories. Mencius,
the ancient sage-philosopher, writing
in the 4th century B.C., tells the story
of a villager who, distressed to see that
his crops were not growing, tugged on
the stalks with his hands so as to
coax them into growing more rapidly.
He returned home at the end of the
day sighing, "I'm worn out; I've spent
the whole day helping the crops to
KRISTOFER M. SCHIPPER, born in Sweden,
Is Professor of Chinese Studies at the Ecole
Pratique des Hautes Etudes (Sciences of
Religion Section), University of Paris. He is
also Secretary of the newly-founded European
Association of Chinese Studies. He is an
authority on Taoist traditions of China and the
author of L'Empereur Wou des Han dans la
Légende Taoiste (Emperor Wu of the Han
Dynasty in Taoist Legend) 1965, and Le Feng-
teng, Rituel Taoiste (Feng-teng, Taoist Ritual)
1975. both published by l'Ecole Française
d'Extrême-Orient, Paris. He has published many
reference works as research aids in the little
explored field of Chinese Taoist ritual on which
he is at present preparing a long monograph.
Professor Schipper is currently also at work on
a new French translation of the writings of the
Chinese Taoist philosopher, Chuang-tzu.
28

>;>
KU*
The Chinese ideogram reproduced above says hsiao-hua,
meaning "joke" or "funny story". A literary genre in its
own right, the hsiao-hua has enjoyed wide popularity since
ancient times in China, where the God of Joy (Hsi-shen)
here depicted on a 19th-century engraving (left) was traditionally
revered. Right, watercolour by Li-Ts'an (17th century)
shows the Immortal, Chung-li Ch'iian, riding his donkey
backwards, like Nasrudin Hodja (see page 16). The other
figure is the famed Taoist philosopher Chuang-Tzu
floating (frontwards!) on a huge gourd.
growl" His sons ran to the field to
see what he had done, only to find
that the stalks had already dried up...
The moral of the story lent added point
to Mencius' belief that we should
cultivate ourselves with care and
patience.
The Chinese call this kind of anec¬
dote hsiao-hua which literally means
"Laugh-talk" or "stories to make you
laugh". The example just quoted is
one of. the oldest examples of this
kind of humour in the world.
Though laughter is as old as huma¬
nity, or perhaps even older, the rôle
of humour changes from one culture
to the next. What is characteristic of
China's own particular brand of hu¬
mour is that the hsiao-hua, whose
origins were undoubtedly popular, was
incorporated into the classical written
tradition at a very early date.
Another very ancient form of hu¬
mour in China is known as ku-chi
which literally means "a side-swipe,"
and is now used for sarcastic and
satirical humour. Significantly, the first
examples of this were handed down
by a Taoist author named Chuang-tzu
(who lived in the 4th century B.C.).
As opposed to Confucianism, Taoism
embodied the Individual's aspirations
to freedom and the throwing-off of
social, pojitical and ideological cons¬
traints.
Chuang-tzu uses humour to fight
prejudice and dogmatism. For ins¬
tance, he shows us Confucius acting
as a sort of Chinese Don Quixote,
attempting to teach his moral precepts
to a highwayman known as Ch'i-the-
bandit. But the brigand turns out to
be just as eloquent as the Master,
and even manages to tie the latter
up in knots with his own arguments,
concluding with the parting shot,
"Since people call me Ch'i-the-bandit,
why don't they call you (who are
only a hypocrite after all) Confucius-
the-bandit?" 	
We later come across specialists
in this kind of satirical repartee at
the court of the emperors, and they
were referred to by this same term,
ku-chi. Tung-fang Shuo was one cele¬
brated ku-chi ; he was a courtier of
the Emperor Wu, during the Han dy¬
nasty (141-187 A.D.). One day, Tung-
fang Shuo drank a magic potion in¬
tended for the Emperor, and which
was supposed to make the latter im¬
mortal. The emperor was furious when
he found out, and decided to execute
the impertinent courtier forthwith.
But the latter argued, "Your majesty,
if the elixir works, then I am immortal
and you cannot put me to death. If,
on the other hand, the potion does
not work, then what crime have I com¬
mitted?" The emperor had to laugh,
and he pardoned the ku-chi.
Tung-fang Shuo subsequently be¬
came one of the patron saints of
laughter in Chinese .folklore. Other
clowns later came to be canonized
in China, such as the two Buddhist
monks Han Shan and Shih Te (8th cen¬
tury), so frequently represented ¡n
popular art The figure of the laugh¬
ing sage, perfectly conscious of the
truth, meanwhile became a familiar one
in Taoism. It is thought that it was
this Taoist tradition that influenced Chi¬
nese sculptors when carving their
first representations of the Buddha.
In the Buddhist grottoes at Yun-k'ang
the late fifth-century Buddhas wear
a mystical smile to be found neither
in Indian nor in Central Asian art.
The fondness of the Chinese for
laughter meant that the hsiao-hua very
soon became a literary genre in their
own right, and more than 70 antho¬
logies of anecdotes of all kinds have
been compiled over the centuries. The
oldest of these is called the Hsiao-lin
(The Forest of Laughter). Written by
a scholar named Han-t'an Ch'un
(c. 132-222), the Hsiao-lin's amusing
tales are perfectly harmless. They
are Innocent jests told in a gently
mocking tone. Here is an example:
"In the course of a dispute, a man
bit off his adversary's nose. The
judge wanted to condemn the man,
despite the accused's claim that the
victim himself had bitten his nose
off. The judge tried to reason with
him, 'But the nose is placed higher
than the mouth, so how could he pos
sibly have got up there to bite ¡t
off?' 'He stood on his bed' came the
prompt retort."
As we said earlier, the hsiao-hua
were popular in origin, and yet they
were mostly written down in classical
language. This anomaly can be ac¬
counted for by the fact that the highly
concentrated style of classical Chi¬
nese is ideally suited to sketching
a situation with a few light touches
and to rendering swift repartee.
Where we possess two versions of
an anecdote in Chinese literature, one
written in classical Chinese, the other
in spoken Chinese, the latter often
turns out to be two or three times
as long as the former.
But the scholars did not confine
themselves merely to transcribing
popular anecdotes. They also made
up their own hsiao-hua. One of the
more noteworthy features of these last
is their "historical" character, in that
they refer to named people, usually
famous scholars, situated in their
appropriate historical period.
This genre first made its appearance
at about the same time as the Hsiao-
lin quoted above, among a group of
cultivated and eccentric aristocrats,
the best known of whom have gone
down in history as the "Seven Sages
of the Bamboo Forest". These sages
enjoyed thinking up fresh witticisms
to pin down a person or a situation.
Their behaviour was often eccentric
and openly defiant of etiquette. Their
witticisms and jests were written down
in a famous anthology entitled Shlh-
shuo Hsin-Yü (Contemporary Short
Stories).
But, as was to be expected, only
people of their own time and milieu
could hope to understand fully the
sense of humour of these eccentric
scholars. Their jokes have lost all
meaning for us, though some acade¬
mics are striving obstinately to fathom
them out an activity that might have
brought a smile to the lips of the sages
themselves I
A good many other anthologies in
a similar vein have made their appea- »
ranee since. Some of the anecdotes (T
29

FROM
MAGISTRATE
PAO'S
CASEBOOK
Nineteenth-century Chinese polychrome engraving of an episode from a 16th-century comic novel entitled
Five Rats up to No Good in the Eastern Capital. It depicts the marriage of a rat which is later eaten by the
watchful cat In the novel, Pao Kung, a character based on a famous 11th-century magistrate-detective of
the same name, unravels a tangled web of criminal intrigue. The detective story as a literary genre was
actually born in China. A collection of detection tales (The Strange Cases of Magistrate Pao) was pu¬
blished by Panther Books, London, in 1970.
, have retained their meaning, but they
are too deeply rooted in the rather
special milieu that gave birth to them
to be translatable without pages and
pages of explanatory footnotes.
Humour of this sort really cannot
be said to cross all frontiers. In this
respect, though, the frontiers were not
only national ones, for even inside
China a deep gulf came to divide-
scholars from the .ordinary people over
the centuries. The coming of the mod¬
ern era and the arrival of Western
civilization did little to attenuate this
lack of communication.
Around the 1920s and 1930s one
came across Chinese writers so igno¬
rant of their own popular traditions
they even claimed the Chinese had
never had a sense of humour. Eager
to introduce this wonderful Western
discovery into their own country, they
invented a new Chinese word for it,
"Yu-mou" , which is simply a transli¬
teration of the English word "humour",
using two monosyllabic Chinese cha¬
racters which, taken separately, mean
"dark" and "silent" !
Fortunately, scholarly culture not¬
withstanding, popular humour has
come down through the ages and
across frontiers unscathed. A great
popular story-teller and poet, long
unknown to scholars, Feng Meng-lung
(1574-1645) was also the author of an
anthology of genuine hsiao-hua enti¬
tled Hsiao-fu (Thesaurus of Laughter).
This collection of stories enjoyed
tremendous success not only in China,
but also in other Far-Eastern coun¬
tries, and especially in Japan. Some
of the anecdotes in Hsiao-fu directly
influenced seventeenth-century Japa¬
nese burlesque theatre (Kyôgen).
The original edition of Hsiao-fu
contained 722 anecdotes, classified
according to theme. The kind of sub¬
ject that amused the ordinary folk of
China three hundred years ago inclu¬
ded: "Ancient luxury" (the rich); "Dil¬
apidated elegance" (Confucian scho¬
lars); "Not to be mentioned" (the
poor); "Eccentrics and misers"; "The
height of vulgarity" (debauchees and
sharp-tongued women); "Inside the
women's quarters" (naughty stories).
As one can see from these themes,
the Chinese used humouras do
others as a critical means of expres¬
sion in a world of exploitation and op¬
pression. Rich persons and officials
were favourite targets. For example:
"A freshly qualified mandarin arri¬
ved to take up his first post. He asked
his subordinates how things were
done in the place. The answer came,
'In the first year, you're supposed
to stay honest; in the second, half
honest; but in the third year you can
really go to with a will I' 'Shall I ever
have the patience to wait three
years?' sighed the mandarin. "
"The mandarin's birthday was due
soon. On hearing that he was born
in the year of the mouse, one of his
subordinates made a gold collection
and offered him a model of the animal
made from this precious metal. The
mandarin was delighted with the pre¬
sent and added, 'Did you know it'll
soon be my wife's birthday? She was
born in the year of the cow...'"
The Japanese have a modified ver¬
sion of this last story: "A samurai,
accompanied by his servant, spied a
dead mouse lying in the road. 'Pick
it up for me!' 'But it's dead.' 'I can
see that, but you know perfectly well
I was born in the year of the mouse!'
'Yes, my lord, and I'm glad it wasn't
the year of the cow.'"
Professor André Levy, who transla¬
ted these three last stories, shows how
the Japanese adaptations of Chinese
hsiao-hua tended to bowdlerize the
sarcastic tone of the original Chinese.
According to R.H. Blyth, in his book
Oriental Humour, the difference bet¬
ween Chinese humour and Japanese
humour can be compared to the dif¬
ference between the music of Handel
and Mozart.
In traditional China, amusing stories
often served to enliven the atmosphere
at gatherings and especially banquets.
It was considered bad manners to em¬
bark upon long discussions at a ban¬
quet; the conversation was supposed
to be light-hearted and gay, and to
avoid distracting the guests from their
main occupation, namely eating. So,
to pass the time, guests would play
games, make up verses or tell hsiao-
hua.
Even today, on the occasion of
feasts, each person is expected to do
a little act, sing a song or tell a story.
30

Certain authors of anthologies made
allowance for this kind of usage and
included instructions as to how the
stories should be told so as to be
sure of making a successful impact.
Here is an example:
" A father was out walking with his
son. A stranger noticed the son
and asked, 'Who is he?' The father
answered, 'this is the son-in-law
of the granddaughter nine generations
removed of the direct grandson by
marriage of a president of the Chan¬
cellery, who was a great favourite of
'one of the emperors of the present
dynasty; in other words, my son!' Shih
Ch'eng-chün, the author of the collec¬
tion of stories entitled A Good Laugh
(Hsiao-ti-hao) published in 1739, in
which this story figures, adds, "One
. should assume the air of a man
obsessed with his own self-impor¬
tance, and the answer should be blurt¬
ed out in one breath."
But the author of this collection was
not merely concerned to make his
public laugh; he also regarded humour
as a means to educate the masses.
His attitude is summed up in a brief
poem published as a frontispiece to
his book:
"People want hsiao-hua so as to
[have a good laugh,
But I use hsiao-hua so as to wake
[them up...
One can jest about the mysteries of
[religion,
But laughter is still a sure road to
[salvation!"
Consequently, the stories contained
in the Hsiao-Ti-hao are less satirical
than those to be found in the Hsiao-
fu. Most of them, moreover, are drawn
from the everyday life of the people.
"A master of the ch'in (classical
Chinese lute) was playing in the mar¬
ket (in the hope of attracting a few
pupils). The people in the market¬
place at first thought he was playing
a p'i-pa or a samisen (instruments for
light music) and crowded round to lis¬
ten to him. But when they heard the
calm, pure sounds of the ch'in they
were disappointed and little by little
the crowd drifted away. Finally, only
one listener remained. The master of
the ch'in was delighted and exclaimed,
'Well, at least one connoisseur appre¬
ciates good ch'in playing.' The man
answered him, 'If the table your ch'in
¡s standing on didn't belong to
me, and if I didn't have to wait for you
to finish your performance to get it
back, I'd have been gone ages ago.'"
"Two brothers bought a pair of
shoes, saying they'd take turns to
wear them. But when they got home,
the younger brother wore them all
day long. The older brother was most
unhappy, as the only chance he got
to wear them was at night, when at
last he could go out for a walk. The
result was that he never got any sleep.
The shoes were soon worn out, and
the younger brother said to the older
brother, 'Let's go and buy a new pair.'
The older brother frowned and said,
'Let's not buy any more shoes; I'd
rather get some sleep at night.'"
"A half-witted constable was ord¬
ered to bring a monk who had com¬
mitted a crime to the court for trial.
Afraid of forgetting something, he drew
up a precise list before setting out,
'Baggage, umbrella, cangue [large
wooden collar worn by prisoners]
documents, monk and me.' All along
the road he kept on muttering these
two phrases. The monk rapidly gather¬
ed the constable was stupid. So one
night he got his gaoler drunk, shaved
his head, and locked the cangue about
his neck before making off. When
the constable awoke, he said to him¬
self, 'Let's see now: baggage, um¬
brella... yes, they're here.' Then he felt
about his neck and said, 'Here's the
cangue.' Then the documents, 'Ah,
here they are.' Then, all of a sudden,
he grew frightened, 'Ayeee! But
where's the monk got to?' He stroked
his skull with his hand, 'Thank heaven,
the monk's still here! But in that
case, where am I?'"
In this last example, in particular,
the naively amusing surface conceals
a much deeper meaning. It shows
us man caught in the tangle of obliga¬
tions and possessions to the point
where he loses his own identity. This
story is familiar beyond the confines
of China, though, for we come across
it in a slightly different form in Cen¬
tral Europe. Which just goes to
show that, cultural differences notwith¬
standing, man's condition is universal.
Kristofer M. Schipper
HENPECKED
BUT HAPPY
This 19th-century engraving presents ten scenes of husbands being tormented in various
ways by their cantankerous wives. According to Chinese tradition few men boasted
that they were not afraid of their wives. There is a Chinese saying that to succeed in life
and become rich, a man must fear his wife.
31
