In 1946, before Unesco was officially
constituted, Julian Huxley drafted a long
paper entitled"Unesco, its Purpose and its
Philosophy."This document became the
subject of much controversy for its so-called
"anti-religious bias"with the result that the
Unesco Preparatory Commission and the
first General Conference of Unesco withheld
official sponsorship of the text. Below, we
publish salient passages from Huxley's
"Philosophy"which has remained virtually
unknown for the past thirty years. Photo Unesco
t t NESCO-the United NationsEducational, Scientific and Cul-
tural Organization-is by its title
committed to two sets of aims. In the
first place, it is international, and must
serve the ends and objects of the
United Nations, which in the long
perspective are world ends, ends for
humanity as a whole. And secondly it
must foster and promote all aspects of
education, science, and culture, in the
widest sense of those words.
Its Constitution defines these aims
more fully. The preamble begins with
Mr. Attlee's noble words-"since wars
begin in the minds of men, it is in the
minds of men that the defences of
peace must be constructed.'
It continues by stressing the dan-
gers of ignorance-"ignorance of each
other's ways and ! ives has been a
common cause, throughout the his-
tory of mankind, of that suspicion and
mistrust between the peoples of the
world through which their differences
have all too often broken into war."
It then proceeds to point out that the
late war was made possible by the
denial of certain basic principles-"the
democratic principles of the dignity,
equality and mutual respect of men"-
and by the substitution for them of
"the doctrine of the inequality of men
and races."
From these premises it proceeds to
point out that"the wide diffusion of
14
A
PHILOSOPHY
FOR
UNESCO
Selections from
a forgotten
historic document
by Julian Huxley

HISTORY IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE, The publication of
a six-volume history of the cultural and scientific
development of mankind, produced under Unesco's auspices,
was an unparalleled international achievement. Begun
in 1950, the enterprise took almost 20 years to complete.
Some 1, 000 historians and scientists from many countries
collaborated on this unique collective work which traced
for the first time the evolution of man's
cultural and scientific developments from prehistory to the
present age. This global history stresses advances in culture,
the arts, science, technology and philosophy rather than
political and military history. The History of
Mankind : Cultural and Scientific Development has so far
appeared in English, French, Greek, Serbo-Croat, Slovenian
and Spanish language editions. Photo shows on left,
cover of the Greek edition and on right cover of
Serbo-Croat edition, against the background of the
Unesco Secretariat building in Paris.
culture, and the education of humanity
for justice and liberty and peace, are
indispensable to the dignity of man and
constitute a sacred duty which all the
nations must fulfil in a spirit of mutual
assistance and concern" : and draws
the notable conclusion, never before
embodied in an official document, that
a peace"based exclusively upon the
political and economic arrangements of
governments"would be inadequate,
since it could not"secure the unani-
mous, lasting and sincere support of
the peoples of the world,"and that
"the peace must therefore be founded,
if it is not to fail, upon the intellectual
and moral solidarity of mankind."
And finally, the States which are
parties to the Constitution assert their
belief"in full and equal opportunities
of education for all, in the unrestricted
pursuit of objective truth, and in
the free exchange of ideas and
know ! edge."
They agree"to develop and increase
the means of communication between
their peoples and to employ these
means for the purposes of mutual
understanding and a truer. and more
perfect knowledge of their livens. : and
they"hereby create the United Nations
Education. al, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,"whose purpose is then
specifically laid down as that of"ad-
vancing, through the educational and
scientific and cultural relations of the 
15

'people of the world, the objectives ofinternational peace and of the common
welfare of mankind, for which the
United Nations Organization was
established and which its charter
proclaims."
But in order to carry out its work, an
organization such as Unesco needs
not only a set of general aims and
objects for itself, but also a working
philosophy,. a working hypothesis
concerning human existence and its
aims and objects, which nrill dictate, or
at least indicate, a definite line of
approach to its problems.
From acceptance of certain prin-
ciples or philosophies, Unesco is
obviously debarred. Thus, while fully
recognizing the contribution made to
thought by many of their thinkers, it
cannot base its outlook on one of the
competing theologies of the world...
Neither can it espouse one of the
politico-economic doctrines competing
in the world today to the exclusion of
the others-the present versions of
capitalistic free enterprise, Marxist
communism, semi-socialist p ! anninc,.
and so on.
It cannot do so, partly because it is
contrary to its charter and essence to
be sectarian, partly for the very prac-
tical reason that any such attempt
woutd immediately incur the active
hostility of large and influential groups,
and the non co-operation or even with-
drawal of. a number of nations.
For somewhat similar reasons it
cannot base itself exclusively on any
specia or p. articular philosophy or
outlook. Nor, with its stress on dem-
ocracy and the principles of human
dignity, equality and mutual respect,
can it adopt the view that the State is
a higher or more important end than
the individual ; or any rigid class
theory of society. And in the preamble
to its Constitution it expressly repudi-
ates racialism and any belief in
superior or inferior"races,"nations,
or ethnic groups.
And finally, with its stress on the
concrete tasks of education, science
and culture, on the need for mutual
understanding by the peoples of the
world, and on the objectives of peace
and human welfare on this planet, it
would seem debarred from an exclus-
ively or primarily other-worldly outlook.
Unesco's main concern is with
peace and security and with human
welfare, in so far as they can be
subserved by the educational and
scientific and cultural relations of the
peoples of the world. Accordingly its
outlook must, it seems, be based on
some form of humanism. Further, that
humanism must clearly be a world
humanism, both in the sense of seeking
to bring in all the peoples of the world,
16
and of treating all peoples and all
individuals within each people as
equals in terms of human dignity.
mutual respect, and educational
opportunity.
It must also be a scientific human-
ism, in the sense that the application
of science provides most of the
material basis for human culture, and
also that the practise and the under-
standing of science need to be
integrated with that of other human
activities. It cannot, however, be ma-
terialistic, but must embrace the spiri-
tual and mental as well as the material
aspects of existence, and must attempt
to do so on a truly monistic, unitary
philosophic basis.
Finally it must be an evolutionary as
opposed to a static or ideal humanism.
It is essential for Unesco to adopt an
evolutionary approach. of it does not
do so, its philosophy twill be a false
one, its humanism at best partial, at
worst misleading.
An evolutionary approach provides
the link between natural science and
human history ; it teaches us the need
to think in the dynamic terms of speed
and direction rather than in the static
ones of momentary position or quanti-
tative achievement : it not only shows
us the origin and biological roots of
our human values, but gives us some
basis and external standards for them
among the apparently neutra ! mass of
natural phenomena ; and it is indis-
pensable in enabling us to pick out,
among the chaotic welter of conflicting
tendencies today, those trends and
activities and methods which Unesco
should emphasize and facilitate.
Thus the general philosophy of
Unesco should, it seems, be a scien-
tific world humanism, global in extent
and evolutionary in background.
Evolution in the broad sense de-
notes all the historical processes of
change and development at work in
the universe. It is divisible into three
very different sectors-the inorganic
or lifeless, the organic or biological,
and the social or human. The inorganic
sector is by far the greatest in extent,
comprising the overwhelming bulk of
the cosmos, both of interstellar space
and of the material aggregates we call
stars.
The biological sector is very much
limited in extent, being confined to the
outer surface of the single small planet
Earth, and perhaps to the very few
similar situations in the universe. On
the other hand, with the emergence of
the two basic properties of living
matter-self-reproduction and variation
(mutation)-a quite new and much
more potent method of change became
available to life, in the shape of Natural
Selection. And as a result the possibly 1
The new 3 R's :
schools,
satellites. skills
Unesco has a direct stake in the
use of space communication for
education, science and culture and
has co-operated closely in studies
or planning for broadcasting
satellites in Asia, Africa, the Arab
States and Latin America. In India,
Unesco helped train programme
producers for the experimental
project SITE, whereby educational TV
programmes are beamed via
a satellite directly to community
receivers in some 2400 villagers In
six india states. Special school
programmes are atso telecast.
Below, villages in Rat..
State watch programme
picked up by a roof antenna.
Photo E. Ueyd Sommerlad.

Unesco has helped many countries in the
battle to eradicate illiteracy and was a
pioneer in developing"functional
! iteracy" teaching that aims to
improve technical skills and know ! edge.
Right, electricians at work on a high
tension line in Mali, where a Unesco-
aided pilot project in functional literacy,
launched in 1966. reached 83, 000 workers.
Unesco is aiding literacy campaigns
in African countries, in the Arab States,
and in Asia and Latin America.
Beiow right, schoolgirls in Quito
(Ecuador) team how rain is formed from
an experiment on water condensation,
part of a Unesco project to give greater
depth to primary school programmes in
Ecuador. Within the framework of a
major project to develop primary
education in Latin America, launched
by Unesco in 1957, Latin American
countries created within ten years over
2, 000 teacher-training schools, and
enrollments of primary school-age
children rose from less than 50 per cent
to between 87 and 95 per cent.
..c
. !
..
z
""
'Cc
: J
0
Õ. c
Photo J.-C. Boils. unesco

 rate of evolution was enormously
speeded up.
Finally there is the human sector.
This is still further restricted in extent,
being confined to the single species,
man. But once more a new and more
efficient method of change is available.
It becomes available to man through
his distinctively human properties of
speech and conceptual thought, just as
Natural Selection became available to
life as a result of its distinctive pro-
perties of reproduction and variation.
Objectively speaking, the new
method consists of cumulative tra-
dition, which forms the basis of that
social heredity by means of which
human societies change and develop.
But the new method also has a sub-
jective aspect of great importance.
Cumulative tradition, like all other
distinctively human activities, is largely
based on conscious processes-on
knowledge, on purpose, on conscious
feeling, and on conscious choice. Thus
the struggle for existence that under-
lies natural selection is increasingly
replaced by conscious selection, a
struggle between ideas and values in
consciousness.
Through these new agencies, the
possible rate of evolution is now once
more enormously speeded up. What
is more, there has so far been a steady
acceleration of the new rate.
Whereas as in lower palaeolithic times,
major change required something of
the order of 106 years, by the late
upper palaeolithic the unit was nearer
104 yearns, and in historic times soon
came down to the century or 1 () 2 years.
During the last hundred years each
decade has seen at least one major
change-if we are to choose ten such,
let us select photography, the theory
of evolution, electro-magnetic theory
with its application in the shape of
electric light and power, the germ
theory of disease, the cinema, radio-
activity and the new theories of matter
and energy, wireless and television,
the internal combustion engine, chemi-
cal synthetics, and atomic fission.
Today, indeed, even the most mo-
mentous changes, such as the disco-
very and practical application of atomic
fission, may take only half a decade,
and there is as yet no sign of the rate
of acceleration slowing down.
Evolution in the human sector
consists mainly of changes in the form
of society, in tools and machines, in
new ways of utilizing the old innate
potentialities, instead of in the nature
of these potentialities, as in the
biological sector.
Man's inherited mental powers
cannot have changed appreciably since
the time of the Aurignacian cave-
dwellers : what have changed are the
ways in which those powers are used,
and the social framework which condi-
tions their use. This is not to say that
what has happened since the Aurign. a-
cian period or since the time of ancient
Greece, is not evolution : it is a very
astonishing bit of evolution.
Nor does it mean that man's innate
mental powers could not be improved.
They certainly were improved (presum-
ably by natural selection) in the
earliest stages of his career, from
Pekin man through the Neanderthalers
to our own species ; and they could
certainly be improved further by delib-
erate eugenic measures, if we con.
sciously set ourselves to improve
them. Meanwhile, however, it is in
social organization, in machines, and
in ideas that human evolution is mostly
made manifest.
But it is not only complexity which
increases with time. In the biological
sector, evolution has led to greater
control over the environment and
greater independence of the changes
and chances of the environment. It
has also promoted a higher degree of
individuality. And this trend is con-
nected with another which has led to
increase of mental powers-greater
capacities for acquiring and organizing
knowledge, for experiencing emotion,
and for exerting purpose.
This last trend, towards fuller knowl-
CONTINUED PAGE 23
During the past 30 years
U nesco has developed far-
reaching programmes to
promote and improve li-
brary services. It has
provided training fellow-
ships for librarians, orga-
nized seminars and cour-
ses on library develop-
ment and helped set up
librarians'training cen-
tres in several parts of the
world. One pilot project
led to the creation in 1951
of an experimental public
library in Delhi (India).
Open 11 hours a day,
every day of the week,
the library soon became
one of the busiest in
Asia. Here, Indian girls
browse in the library's
children's room.
18

A PHILOSOPHY FOR UNESCO (Continued from page 18)
edge, richer emotion, and more
embracing purpose, is continued
(though by different methods) in the
human sector, and is continued at a
much increased rate. But to it is
superadded another trend-an increase
in the capacity to appreciate va ! ues. to
appreciate experiences that are of
value in their own right and for their
own sake, to build on knowledge, to
work through purpose, and to inject
ethical values into the process of
social evolution itself.
woe now know much about themeth d of biological evol-
ution : the existence of several quite
different types of selection ; the con-
ditions which promote or retard change ;
the subordinate position of mutation as
against selection in directing the
course of evolution ; the evolutionary
roles of the degree of specialization
and of progress shown by an organism,
of its biological environment, and of its
physical environment respectively, and
the interaction between them ; the
evolutionary conflict between the limi-
tations set by an organism's nature and
past history and the requirements of
the present, and its solution by means
of some new adjustment-or its lack
of solution, followed by extinction.
This last point immediately recalls
the thesis, antithesis, and synthesis of
Hegelian philosophy, and the Marxist
'reconciliation of opposites"b, ased
upon it. Indeed, dialectical materialism
was the first radical attempt at an
evolutionary philosophy. Unfortunately
it was based too exclusively upon
principles of social as against bio-
logical evolution, and in any case was
undertaken too pearly. before either the
facts or their analysis were able to sup-
port any such vast superstructure.
Today it is possible, at least to begin
the construction of a comprehensive
philosophy of evolution ; and many of
its conclusions will be of value in
formulating details of Unesco's own
philosophy.
For it is of major importance that
biology has enabled us to detect a
direction in evolution as a whole, and
not merely within the small domain of
human life, to which the term progress
can properly be applied.
This evolutionary progress, we find,
is directed towards an increase of the
following characteristics : throughout
evolution, an increase in complexity of
organization ; on this, in the biological
and human sectors, is superposed a
more important trend towards greater
control over and greater independence
of the environment, and, in later
phases, one towards an increase of
mental capacities ; and finally, in the
human sector alone, an increase in
the understanding and attainment of
intrinsic values, which now in its turn
becomes the most important charac-
teristic of progress. Throughout, prog-
ress has the further characteristic of
always permitting further progress,
never shutting the door on later
advance.
Of special importance in man's
evaluation of his own position in the
cosmic scheme and of his further
destiny is the fact that he is the heir,
and indeed the sole heir, of evolution-
ary progress to date. When he asserts
that he is the highest type of organism,
he is not being guilty of anthropo-
centric vanity, but is enunciating a
biological fact.
Furthermore, he is not merely the
sole heir of past evolutionary progress,
but the sole trustee for any that may
be achieved in the future. From the
evolutionary point of view, the destiny
of man may be summed up very
simply : it is to realize the maximum
progress in the minimum time. That
is why the philosophy of Unesco must
have an evolutionary background, and
why the concept of progress cannot
but occupy a central position in that
philosophy.
The analysis of evolutionary prog-
ress gives us certain criteria for
judging the rightness or wrongness of
our aims and activities, and the desir-
ability or otherwise of the tendencies
to be noted in contemporary history-
tendencies of which Unesco must take
account.
Thus mere increase of our control
over nature is not to be valued for
itself, yet appears to be a necessary
foundation for future progress. Put
in a way more closely affecting
Unesco's programme, research may be
perverted, and its material applications
may be over-valued ; yet without them
we shall not advance. This conclusion
applies a fortiori to mere complexity
of social organization.
Again, even knowledge that appears
to be wholly beneficent can be applied
in such a way that it does not promote
progress. Thus, the application of
medical science may increase the
number of human beings in a given
area but lower their quality or their
opportunities for enjoyment of life ;
and if so, in the light of our basic
criterion of evolutionary direction, it
is wrong.
We are brought by a new route to
realize once more the need for a
Unesco policy balanced between many
fields-in this instance, Unesco policy
would have to include, besides
the application of medical science,
studies on agricultural productivity
(soil erosion, mechanization, etc.) and
on social welfare, and also the pro-
vision of birth-control facilities.
In general, Unesco must constantly
be testing its policies against the
touchstone of evolutionary progress.
A central conflict of our times is that
between nationalism and international-
ism, between the concept of many
national sovereignties and one world
sovereignty. Here the evolutionary
touchstone gives an unequivocal ans-
wer. The key to man's advance, the
distinctive method which has made
evolutionary progress in the human
sector so much more rapid than
in the biological and has given it
higher and more satisfying goals, is
the fact of cumulative tradition, the
existence of a common pool of ideas
which is self-perpetuating and itself
capable of evolving. And this fact has
had the immediate consequence of
making the type of social organization
the main factor in human progress or
at least its limiting framework.
Two obvious corollaries follow.
First, that the more united man's tra-
dition becomes, the more rapid will
be the possibility of progress : several
separate or competing or even mutually
hostile pools of tradition cannot poss-
ibly be so efficient as a single pool
common to all mankind. And secondly,
that the best and only certain way of
securing this will be through political
unification.
As history shows, unifying ideas
can exert an effect across national
boundaries. But, as history makes
equally evident, that effect is a partial
one and never wholly offsets the
opportunities for conflict provided by
the existence of separate sovereign
political units,
THE moral for Unesco is clear.The task laid upon it of promot-
ing peace and security can never be
wholly realized through the means
assigned to it-education, science and
culture. It must envisage some form
of world political unity, whether through
a single world government or other-
wise, as the only certain means for
avoiding war.
However, world political unity is,
unfortunately, a remote ideal, and in
any case does not fall within the fief. : J
of Unesco's competence. This does
not mean that Unesco cannot do a
great deal towards promoting peace
and security. Specifically, in its
educational programme it can stress
the ultimate need for world political
unity and familiarize all peoples with
the implications of the transfer of full
sovereignty from separate nations to
a world organization.
But, more generally, it can do a great
deal to lay the foundations on which
CONTINUED PAGE 30
23

A PH ! LOSOPHY FOR UNESCO
(Contlflllt'd from page 23)
world po'itical unity can ate''bebui ! t
It can help the peoples of the doric
to mutua ! understanding and to a
res ! ! zation of the common humarlty
and common tasks which they share
as opposed to the nationalisms which
too often tend to isolate and separate
them.
It can promote enterprises which. by
being fully international from the out-
set, demonstrate that nationality and
nationalism can be transcended In
shared activity.
With all this Unesco must face the
fact that nationalism is still the basis
of the political structure of the world,
and must be prepared for the possibility
that the forces of disruption and con-
flict may score a temporary victory.
But even if this should occur, Unesco
must strain every nerve to give a
demonstration of the benefits, spiritual
as well as material, to be obtained
through a common pool of tradition,
and specifically by international co-
operation in education, science, and
culture, so that even should another
war break out, Unesco may survive it,
and in any case so that the world will
not forget.
Our evolutionary analysis shows
clearly enough that a well-developed
human individual is the highest product
of evolution to date. This provides
external and scientific support for the
democratic principle of the dignity of
men, to which by its Constitution
Unesco is committed.
it also constitutes a complete dib'
proof of all theses (...) which maintain
that the State is in some way higher
than the individual, and that the indi-
vidual exists only or primarily for the
State.
The human individual is, quite
strictly, meaningless in isolation ; he
only acquires significance in relation
to some form of society. His develop-
ment is conditioned by the society
into which he is born and the social
traditions which he inherits ; and the
value of the work he does in life
depends on the social framework
which benefits by it or transmits it to
! atertime.
Thus Unesco's activities, while con-
cerned primarily with providing richer
development and fuller satisfactions
for the individual, must always be
undertaken in a social context ; and
many of its specific tasks will be
concerned with the social means
towards this general end-the improve-
ment of social mechanisms or agencies
such as educationa systems, research
organizations, art centres, the press
and so forth.
The unifying of traditions in a single
common pool of experience, aware-
CONTINUED PAGE 33
30
The struggle to save Venice

A PHILOSOPHY FOR UNESCO (Continued from page 30)
ness, and purpose is the necessary
prerequisite for further major progress
in human evolution. Accordingly,
although political unification in some
sort of world government will be
required for the definitive attainment
of this stage, unification in the things
of the mind is not only also necessary
but can pave the way for other types
of unification.
Thus in the past the great religions
unified the thoughts and attitudes of
large regions of the earth's surface ;
and in recent times science, both
directly through its ideas and indirectly
through its applications in shrinking
the globe, has been a powerful factor
in directing men's thoughts to the
possibilities of, and the need for, futt
world unity,
ESPECIAL attention should conse-quently be given by Unesco to
the problem of constructing a unified
pool of tradition for the human species
as a whole. This, as indicated else-
where, must include the unity-in-variety
of the world's art and culture as well
as the promotion of one single pool of
scientific knowledge.
But it must also eventually include
a unified common outlook and a com-
mon set of purposes. This will be the
tartest part of the task of unifying the
world mind ; but Unesco must not
neglect it while engaged on the easier
jobs, like that of promoting a single
pool of scientific knowledge and effort.
From this global aim, another prin-
ciple immediately follows. It is that
Unesco should devote special attention
to the levelling up of educational,
scientific and cultural facilities in all
backward sectors where these are
below the average, whether these be
geographical regions, or under-privi-
leged sections of a population. To
use another metaphor, it must attempt
to let in light on the world's dark areas.
The reason for this is plain. For
one thing it will be impossible for
humanity to acquire a common outlook
if large sections of it are the illiterate
inhabitants of a mental world entirely
different from that in which a fully
educated man can have his being, a
world of superstition and petty tribalism
in place of one of scientific advance
and possible unity.
Thus mass campaigns against illit-
eracy and for a common fundamental
education must form part of Unesco's
programme. Further, a satisfactory
common scale of values can obviously
not be attained so long as large
sections of mankind are preoccupied
with the bare material and physiologi-
cal needs of food, shelter, and health.
Again, science will not achieve its
optimum rate of advance, either in
research or in its application, until its
light is more evenly shed over the dark
surface of the world's ignorance, so
as to provide a more equable distri-
bution of scientists, of apparatus, and
(equally important in the long run) of
popular understanding of science.
With art and the appreciation of
beauty, much of the"dark area"is
differently situated-in the centres of
industry and among the proletariat of
industrially advanced sections. But
the task of lightening the dark spots
in this field is no less urgent than in
education or in science.
Furthermore, social mechanisms
must be constructed in the right way
if they are to provide the basis for
realizing the right values and for
providing individuals with the fullest
opportunities and satisfactions.
An educational system, for instance,
can just as readily be made to promote
the idea of a chosen race or of a
privi : eged caste as it can that of the
dignity of men and the equality of
their opportunity.
A scientific system can be based on
secrecy and focussed on war or on
economic rivalry ; or it can be focussed
on increasing human knowledge and
human welfare, and founded on
freedom.
A mass-production system can
indirectly destroy creative initiative
and aesthetic appreciation, and lead to
apathy or escapism, as readily as it
can be made to function directly to
produce for real human needs.
Thus broad studies of various social
mechanisms and their effects, conduc-
ted in the light of some general
philosophy, will necessarily form part
of Unesco's programme.
F FINALLY we come to a difficultproblem-that of discovering
how we can reconcile our principle of
human equality with the biological fact
of human inequality. Perhaps the
problem is not so difficult as it appears
when stated in this paradoxical form ;
for the contradiction largely disap-
pears as soon as it is realized that
equality is used in two very different
senses.
The democratic principle of equality,
which is also Unesco's, is a principle
of equality of opportunity-that human
beings should be equal before the
law, should have equal opportunities
for education, for making a living, for
freedom of expression and movement
and thought. The biological absence
of equality, on the other hand, con-
cerns the natural endowments of man
and the fact of genetic difference in
regard to them.
Concretely, genetic human inequality
is of two types. First, there is the
inequality of mere difference. Some
people are fair, others dark ; some are
tall and thin, others short and stocky ;
some have a natural gift for music,
others for athletics ; some are intro-
spective, others practical and extrovert.
Indeed, we can now definitely state
that no two human beings, with the
single exception of the members of
pairs of identical twins, are biologically
equal in the sense of possessing the
same genetic constitution, so that
biological difference is, for all practical
purposes, universal.
Furthermore, the range and degree
of genetic variety in man is greater
than that to be found in any other
animal species. This is largely due to
one of man's biological peculiarities,
namely that his local differentiation
into races is not continued to the stage
of separate and intersterile species,
as in almost all other organisms, but
has always been followed by migration
and interbreeding. But whatever its
cause, the resultant high degree of
variability is a fact, and one of con-
siderable evolutionary importance.
Secondly, there is difference in qual-
ity or level. Human beings are not
equal in respect of various desirable
qualities. Some are strong, others
weak ; some healthy, others chronic
invalids ; some long-lived, others short-
lived ; some bright, others dull ; some
of high, others of low intelligence ;
some mathematically gifted, others
very much the reverse ; some kind and
good, others cruel and selfish.
It is usually not so easy to say how
much of this second sort of inequality
is due to heredity and therefore
relevant for our purpose ; how much
only to the effects of physical or social
environment. But in most cases we
now know, and in almost all can be
reasonably sure, that some at least of
the difference is genetic.
This is certain, for instance, of length
of life, physical strength, and, most
important for our purpose, for intellec-
tual gifts-both special ones like math-
ematical aptitude and general ones like
intelligence ; while it is highly probable
for some aspects of moral qualities,
though the situation here is more
complex.
It is therefore of the greatest import-
ance to preserve human variety ; all
attempts at reducing it, whether by
attempting to obtain greater"purity"
and therefore uniformity within a
so-called race or a national group, or
by attempting to exterminate any of
the broad racial groups which give
our species its major variety, are
scientifically incorrect and opposed to
long-run human progress. On the
contrary, Unesco should aim at sec-
uring the fullest contribution to the 
33

 common pool from racial groups which,
owing to their remoteness or their
backwardness, have so far had little
share in it.
To adjust the principle of democratic
equality to the fact of biological in-
equality is a major task for the world,
and one which will grow increasingly
more urgent as we make progress
towards realizing equa ality of oppor-
tunity. To promote this adjustment, a
great deal of education of the general
public will be needed as well as much
new research ; and in both these tasks
Unesco can and should co-operate.
The task before Unesco is necess-
ary, is opportune, and, in spite of all
multiplicity of detail, is single.
That task is to help the emergence
of a single world culture, with its own
philosophy and background of ideas,
and with its own broad purpose. This
is opportune, since this is the first time
in history that the scaffolding and the
mechanisms for world unification have
become available, and also the first
time that man has had the means (in
the shape of scientific discovery and
its applications) of laying a world-wide
foundation for the minimum physical
welfare of the entire human species.
And it is necessary, for at the
moment two opposing philosophies of
life confront each other from the West
and from the East, and not only impede
the achievement of unity but threaten
to become the foci of actual conflict.
You may categorize the two philos-
ophies as two supernationahsms ; or
as individualism versus collectivism ;
or as the American versus the Russian
way of life ; or as capitalism versus
communism ; or as Christianity versus
Marxism ; or in half a dozen other
ways. The fact of their opposition
remains and the further fact that round
each of them are crystallizing the
lives and thoughts and political aspir-
ations of hundreds of millions of
human beings.
Can this conflict be avoided, these
opposites be reconciled, this antithesis
be resolved in a higher synthesis ?
I believe not only that this can happen,
34

As part of its programme on the study and prevention of natural disasters, Unesco
has organized many emergency scientific missions to disaster-hit areas. Following
the devastating earthquake in Guatemaia in February 1976, Unesco immediately
sent a team of experts in engineering, school building, seismology and monument
restoration to study the earthquake's causes, assess the damage and advise
on earthquake-resistant reconstruction. Photo left shows Unesco seismologists
studying the after-shocks of a major earthquake in Khorassan province, Iran, in 1968.
Promoting international co-operation in oceanographic studies, the
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of Unesco co-ordinates major
marine research programmes in a number of ocean regions. Amongst other
projects, the Commission is developing an integrated global ocean station system
for monitoring the world's oceans and a comprehensive plan for global investigation
of pollution in the marine environment. Below, the German (Fed. Rep.) ocean
research vessel"Anton Dohrn", veteran of many international expeditions.
. r ..
_. .....-
_ _
--
----
--"--
J'_.."-"-""- : '".. ..-- j-
t6k
- _r L r
,,".'_4 c#,,,""'_ : ,'-,.,. -- ; ,,/"t.-.,,"'"
t
J
, : i. · _-_-.  . 7`.., r. y_ ,-
. 1 T_p
 `..  :. : r,
",'. V l..  ·
U'-,'"""..-",..., .
-. '-" :
. <3' J'"`y_ ; _.-",",,,', .,",,'-,,, .,'A !' !"". J',"þ','"--.
, _. f""""" :',.--'.. oi !. í"-'Â
"1. S.. : : ï (' ; , \. :,  ;., . J
,-.. ; , -r  ·.
:,. /"  : .','., :....-.'-.'".  .,-.'
",',, '"-_.--........ ø -.'
".....,.",,'-.-. '.,..."..,,-
.,.... 4, 4 Jíl", þ''"""",.") >. ,'"i- ;, ',' ;,.-. #--.... J.-
but that, through the inexorable dia-
lectic of evolution, it must happen-
only I do not know whether it will
happen before or after another war.
Since another war would be so
appalling as to set back the march of
human progress by centuries, I am
convinced that the task of achieving
this synthesis in time to forestall open
conflict must be the overriding aim of
Unesco.
In pursuing this aim we must eschew
dogma-whether it be theological
dogma or Marxist dogma or philo-
sophical or any other form of dogma.
East and West will not agree on a
basis for the future if they merely hurl
at each other the fixed ideas of the
past. For that is what dogmas are-
the crystallizations of some dominant
system of thought of a particular
epoch.
A dogma may, of course, crystallize
tried and valid experience ; but if it be
dogma, it does so in a way which is
rigid, uncompromising and intolerant.
What, for wanting a better term, I have
called doctrine may also embody valid
experience ; but it may be flexible, may
be capable of growth and development
and adjustment.
Some dogmas may represent a more
recent past than others ; but that does
not render them any the less rigid and
accordingly any less dangerously out
of date, any less incapable of reconcili-
ation with opposing systems. If we
are to achieve progress, we must learn
to uncrystallize our dogmas.
The two opposing philosophies of
today differ essentially on one point-
the relation between the individual and
the community. But this one central
difference provides differences in every
field with which Unesco has to deal,
as well as in many others.
It engenders different moralities and
systems of ethics ; different methods
of education ; different conceptions of
the role of art in society ; different
economic systems ; different ways of
integrating science with national life ;
different interpretations of the funda-
mental human freedoms ; different con-
35
ou...c
: : >
.
ø0.
E..
: !
o
Õ. s=n.

Article 27 of the U. N. Declaration of Human Rights says that"everyone has the right freely to
participate in the cultural life of the community". Unesco has been trying to make this principle
a living reality by encouraging a broad programme of educational and cultural development and an
awareness, particularly amongst the world's newer nations, of cultural identity. In Africa and
elsewhere Unesco is engaged on a long-term programme for the preservation of oral traditions.
The preparation of a General History of Africa, at present under way, is part of this overall
approach. Above, visitors admire works of African art during the 1966 Festival of Negro Art in
Dakar (Senegal) organized with Unesco's heap,
 ceptions of the possibilities and limits
of international co-operation.
I believe that these differences,
though they will undoubtedly become
irreconcilable without armed conflict if
they are permitted to express them-
selves as dogmas, to embody them-
selves in rigid social systems, and to
become translated into terms of politics
and power, can in principle be rec-
onciled. They can be reconciled along
the lines of some such evolutionary
humanism as I have sketched in my
opening sections, in which, though the
full development of the individual is
recognized as the central aim and
criterion of further evolutionary prog-
ress, the proper organization of society
is recognized as the indispensable
mechanism of that progress.
Put in another way, society as such
embodies no values comparable to
36
those embodied in individuals. But
individuals are meaningless except in
relation to the community (though that
community transcends the nation both
in space and in time), and can only
achieve fullest self-development by
self-transcendence, by interpenetration
of the self with other reality, including
other selves.
The problem is thus not one of
metaphysics or dogma, but essentially
practical-how best to adjust or still
better to reconcile the claims of two
concrete sets of realities-individual
human beings, and human social
organizations.
Accordingly, I believe that this
reconciliation can be approached from
two directions. It can be approached
from above and from outside, as an
intellectual problem, a question of
agreement in principle ; and it can also
be approached from below and from
within, as a practical problem, a
question of agreement through action.
The world is potentially one, and
human needs are the same in every
part of it-to understand it, to control
it, and to enjoy it. Anything that
Unesco can do to satisfy these needs
through promoting education, science
and culture, will be a step towards a
unified way of life and of looking at
life, a contribution to a foundation for
the unified philosophy we require.
And finally, I believe that a body
such as Unesco, which is charged with
promoting both the higher activities of
man and their practical application, and
of doing so on an international scale,
is the most likely agency to make this
dual approach and so to speed up this
necessary process of reconciliation.
N Julian Huxley
o
ii'""
: z'"(Cu'"
ro
o
õ'Sa.
