AFRICAN ARTS
TAKE THE HIGH ROAD
AWAY FROM WESTERN ART
by Magdi Wahba
THREE general features appear
to be common to all the indepen¬
dent African countries: their shared
experience of European colonization,
the social mobility of their new élites
and the absorption of their cultures-
into the wider context of politics,
religion or social institutions. If
necessity be the mother of invention
she is also the stepmother of a mono¬
lithic philosophy of social organization.
The poor, the weak, the hungry can
ill afford variety of experience and
expression, nor can they indulge in the
luxuries of disputation. Their lives are
haunted by the spectres of starvation,
poverty, despair and the gruel kitchen.
Nothing else really matters, and it is
against such a background that cul¬
ture must struggle to obtain a precar¬
ious foothold.
Ministries and Departments of Cul¬
ture have sprung up in most African
countries whose aim is to embody
the national ideals and culture in ac¬
tivities, academies and museums, but
the most widespread means of dif¬
fusion is still the radio and, to a lesser
extent, television. The purveyors of
culture find very soon that their best
chance of success is in reducing their
message to an oral one, fitting into
the broadcasting system.
The cosy, ubiquitous transistor has
the virtue of cheapness coupled with
the freedom of privacy. Besides it
fits into the general spirit of oral
tradition which has been the main
transmitter of most of African culture
since time immemorial. The radio is
also the most important means of
dissemination in the Islamo-Arab
MAGDI WAHBA of the Arab Republic of
Egypt is an authority on problems of culture
and education in Africa. A member of the
department of English at Cairo University, he
was Irom 1966 to 1970 an Under-Secretary in
Egypt's Ministry of Culture. He is the author of
Cultural Policy in Egypt, published in 1972 in
Unesco's "Studies and Documents on Cultural
Policies' series.
countries of Africa, where the spoken
word and the traditions of chant,
recitation and song are truly historical
and dominant.
Yet the question may be asked, can
culture be limited to the broadcasting
of words, images or music? Is not the
true repository of culture the printed
word? Roger Caillois, French phil¬
osopher and writer, in a thoughtful
introduction to a Unesco meeting of
cultural policy experts in Dakar in
1969, raised this question with regard
to African culture.
In substance, his words were a cry
of alarm with regard to developing
countries. There was, he felt, a terrible
temptation to skip the stages of
development and to go directly to
television and the tape-recorder,
without passing by reading and
writing. And yet, he maintained, there
is no true substitute for reading and
writing as stimuli for critical thought.
He was convinced that cultural de¬
velopment was closely linked with
schools and universities, with reading
and writing. Is culture, in its broadest,
universal sense not primarily the cul¬
ture of the book?
If such is the case, then there is
little choice, especially against a
background of almost universal pov¬
erty, but to link cultural dissemination
and the preservation of cultural values
with the educational systems of Africa.
Here also may be posed the problem
of the visual arts.
In the European context, after the
age of the great cathedrals, art
certainly became an expression of
individual, identifiable talent. The
artist bore a name and his name was
transmitted down to posterity by
means of a culture based on accumul¬
ated book-learning. In most of Africa,
art has always been functional, deeply
involved in the material, social and
religious needs of the community. But
it is also anonymous.
In North Africa, of the ancient arts
of mosaic, copper beating, marquetry,
and calligraphy, it is the latter only
which has some claim to indi¬
vidualization. In Africa south of the
Sahara the traditional arts are becom¬
ing more and more part of a museum
of folk-arts preserved with some effort
for the benefit of the tourist trade and
the research of the ethnologist.
Oral tradition, also anonymous,
nevertheless survives with much more
vigour, becoming adapted to the
various modern literary forms with
remarkable ease, and thus entering,
as it were, the limelight of an individu¬
ated author.
Again, in North Africa, the romances
of the Arabian Nights and the epic
chronicles of the Hilaliya and the tales
of Antarah have obtained literary
passports to modern respectability
in a variety of literary and dramatic
adaptations, which have lifted them
from the trough of anonymity, but also
cut them off from their social origins.
How many graduates from the edu¬
cational systems in Africa wish to
explore their community and find ways
and means by which they can be
active in enhancing the quality of the
society to which they belong? How ,
many schools or universities for that
matter would happily abandon didac¬
tic for non-didactic methods of ins¬
truction in order to produce a new
generation with an intellectual curiosity
whetted instead of stifled?
One of the causes of the medio¬
crity perpetuated in many African
educational systems is the almost
blind insistence on the transmission of
certitude to wavering consciences.
How can culture, local or universal,
flourish in such a wilderness of
certitudes?
Further questions we might ask are:
What culture? Whose culture?
In the Islamo-Arab North there is a
common language which for historical
and religious reasons subtends a
20

common world outlook. There is a
classical heritage in that language,
which can supply the people with
common literary memories.
If a certain amount of generalization
may be allowed, this is a condition not
to be found easily in other African
languages, with the possible exception
of Swahili in the east and Wollof in the
west. English and French will remain,
for a long time to come, the main
organs of cultural and instructional
transmission in many parts of Africa.
There is something dramatic about
the way in which a civilization of
"orality", based on the perpetuations
of memory, is having to come to terms
with the written word, in English or
French or in the transcription of the
various national languages.
Inevitably, the epic chants and
rhythmic encomia of the "griots" lose
their immediacy when written down or
broadcast on the radio. Anthologies
with introductions by learned anthro¬
pologists are saving oral tradition, but
they are also freezing it in time. Never
has it been more true than now that "an
old man dying is a library going up in
flames", to quote a Malian sociologist
and historian, Amadou Hampâté Bâ
(author of our article on page 12). The
problem of music and the visual arts
is no less dramatic.
In modern Arabic music, before the
revival of the classical heritage, it has
been possible to trace influences as
varied as the rhumbas and tangos of
the 1930s together with the odd bar
here and there from Tchaikovsky or
Beethoven or even Bach. These have
been added, together with such exotic
instruments as the accordion and the
electric guitar, to the classical rhythms
and melodies of traditional Arabic
music without any sense of incompa¬
tibility or strangeness.
And yet Arabic music is not a folk
music in the accepted sense of the
term, nor is it strictly "pop" music.
Its classical repertoire is held as much
in reverence by one hundred million
Arabs as, say, Beethoven's later
quartets are by music-lovers the world
over.
As for the music of Black Africa its
close association of the human voice
with percussion instruments places it
well within that civilization of "orality"
mentioned above. The roots of this
music are in ritual and in folk memory,
and their various attempts to come to
terms with Afro-Cuban, Afro-American
or even plainly Western European
rhythms and instruments have created
what may be regarded as a very
confused mixture of modern dance
music and ritual rhythms.
The integration of the artist into
society cannot be the result of any
special sort of legislation. Artists are
not artificially induced phenomena.
They are often "made", but generally
they are "born", they are there, and
something has to be done about
them.
Neither prophet nor legislator, ack- w
nowledged or unacknowledged, the r
When Ramses Wissa Wassef, an Egyptian architect, set up a weaving
workshop for teenagers near Cairo, his aim was to integrate art into
everyday life and to improve the status of the craftsman, too often
considered as a manual worker rather than as an artist. (See Unesco
Courier, July-August 1965). Spontaneously and without the help of
preparatory sketches, the young weavers create remarkable tapestries.
Below, detail from a tapestry depicting a traditional circumcision
ceremony, by a girl artist, Rawhia Ali.
21

Il
1
Photo © Abdel Fattah Eld, Cairo
artist is often tempted to withdraw
from the traffic of an acquisitive or
an ideology-ridden society. He lays
himself open to the charge of isolation
and sterility, and his work may be
regarded as no more than a creation
of private fancy. This is not a pleasant
situation for the artist, since one of
his main motives is to communicate
and to be appreciated.
The educational systems have to
ascertain, first of all, the ultimate des¬
tination of the artist in African society
before they can be expected to plan
the manner of his training. Almost
inevitably, the artist is to become a
public servant, a teacher or a state-
supported artist.
Perhaps that is why most of the
African educational systems concen¬
trate on the technical training of
schoolchildren in the rudiments of
draughtsmanship, mechanical drawing
and those crayon or water-colour
sketches of themes which inculcate
national pride at an early age and
which grace the walls of so many
exhibitions of schoolchildren's art all
over the world.
Naturally this remark may be re¬
garded as unfairly sarcastic, but the
fact remains nevertheless that these
various practices do not properly
constitute an initiation into the world
of art. They are more in the nature
of tedious exercises akin to the
drawing of maps by young children.
In Egypt, the late Ramses Wissa
Wassef had to face this problem when
he started the weaving centre at Har-
rania outside Cairo, where he en¬
couraged young peasant children to
develop their own artistic gifts. His
first inspiration came from reflection
on the question of the artist and the
craftsman. (See "Unesco Courier"
article, July-August 1965.)
"By defining one as a creator, and
the other as a manual worker", he has
written, "our civilization, with its
conventional classifications, routines
and ill-considered generalizations, has
sundered art and craftsmanship, and
is threatening to strangle both of
them" (1).
The great interest of Ramses Wissa
Wassef's educational experiment is
that it is applicable with slight modi¬
fications anywhere in Africa. Highly
successful and, one might add, ex¬
tremely lucrative for the young wea¬
vers' co-operative, it is also an impor¬
tant contribution to modern philoso¬
phies of artistic education. Easily inte¬
grated into the environment, whether
rural or urban, this experiment pro¬
vides the key for combining the vir-
(1) Ramses Wissa Wassef, Woven by Hand.
Translated from the French by Denis Mahaffey.
Hamlyn, London, New York, Sydney and
Toronto, 1972.
tues of teaching and play without any
artificiality or concession to outside
influences.
This integration of the arts into what
can loosely be called "life", is very
much part of the general philosophy
of the arts which has flourished in,
Egypt over the last thirty years or so.
Hassan Fathy's world-famous experi¬
ment in building the village of Gourna
in Upper Egypt is another illustration
of the desire to return to the roots
of a culture without sinking into the
pitfalls of folklore.
Here the problem is not strictly the
teaching of an art of self-expression,
but rather the teaching of a craft which
is essential for the welfare of a rural
community the craft of building. Let
me be allowed to describe the problem,
in the author's own words:
"If a village is to be built by its own
future inhabitants, then we must give
them the necessary skills. However
much enthusiasm the co-operative
system may engender, it will do little
good if the people don't know how
to lay bricks. . . We need a method
of teaching the peasant the elements
of practical building so that he can
contribute usefully to the building of
his village, but we don't want to turn
him from a productive farmer into a
skilled but unemployable mason . . .
"By training the . villagers on the
public buildings, which will be erected
22

NILE VALLEY
FARMERS
WHO BUILT
THEIR
OWN VILLAGE
An Egyptian architect, Hassan Fathy, has shown how a community can affirm and
enrich its cultural identity by using ancient skills and materials and adapting them
to modern uses and needs. He did so by teaching the villagers of Gourna in
Upper Egypt to build the houses they badly needed, using mud bricks, a cheap,
locally available material. Using designs which in some cases were inspired by
traditional Egyptian architecture, the villagers were able to construct a beautiful
village whose cool, hygienic and comfortable dwellings combine modernity with
real character. Opposite page, facades of farmers' houses in one of thevillagestreets.
Above, vaults under construction in the training centre where farmers learn to
become masons. Top, village craftsmen's school nears completion.
first as the core of the village, we
can make use of the architects and
máster-craftsmen engaged by the
building authority, and they can pass
on their skills to the people. Then,
even if the authority cannot afford to
build many private houses, the skills
will have been implanted, the vil¬
lage centre will be there, and the
inhabitants will be able to go on
for themselves. . . The maturing of
skill is an experience of considerable
spiritual value to the craftsman,
and a man who acquires the solid
mastery of any skill grows in self-
respect and moral stature. In fact
the transformation brought about in
the personalities of the peasants when
Photos © Hassan Fathy, Cairo
they build their own village is of
greater value than the transformation
in their material condition" (1).
Both Hassan Fathy and the late
Ramses Wissa Wassef had to come to
terms with the problem of integrating
the arts and crafts into a society where
the pressures of sheer survival might
have monopolized the attention of most
people.
This Integration is second nature,
however, In such ritualistic societies
as that of the Mambila on the high
plateau in the province of Sarduana in
Northern Nigeria. For the Mambila
there has never been relief from a
subsistence economy and yet the
arts are lively because of their in¬
tegration into the tribal initiations
which constitute the spontaneous
education of the Mambilas.
The men learn to work on jron,
wood, bamboo and cotton fabrics,
while the women specialize In the most
elaborate basketwork from childhood.
Artistic work is associated with the
social expression of changes in sta¬
tus, such as engagement and acces¬
sion to adulthood. Art becomes
therefore a linguistic system of sym¬
bols which Is not perfected for its own ^
sake or for the sake of entertainment, r
(1) Hassan Fathy, Gourna, A Tale of Two
Villages. Ministry of Culture, Cairo, 1969.
23

kHairdressing, sculpture and painting
^become so many media for expressing
highly emotional "language" ritualis-
tically.
The techniques and materials of art
are determined by the uses to which
their products will be destined.
There is no pottery or sculpture
among the Peuls of the southern
Sahara, for example, because their
nomadic lives do not permit of such
luxuries, but the rich ornamentation
of their dress makes up for this, pro¬
viding an avenue for extremely com¬
plex artistic inventiveness.
Different environments and social
customs have emphasized certain
purely functional or ritualistic forms
of art, such as mask-painting among
the Chokwes of Angola, and tattooing
in countless hunting communities all
over Africa. Carving In wood or other
materials is also tied up with the ritual
significance of the work of art.
The initiation of the tribal artist is
generally undertaken by the black¬
smith of the village, whose position
is regarded as something between
teacher, technocrat and maker of tools
which he will then use himself in
carving. This Is the case among the
Bambara of Mali, the Baoule of the
Ivory Coast and the Kongo of Zaire.
In the Musée de l'Homme in Paris
there is a great statue of the god
Gu, god of war and patron of all
blacksmiths, which was brought over
from Dahomey during the latter half
of the 19th century. Made of bits of
scrap iron, chain and railway girders
from Europe, it is none the less an
African representation of a dominant
god, whose province is both destruc¬
tion and the making of llfe-perpetu-
ating works of art.
It Is from this foundation of absolute
social integration without any pretence
of exhibitionistic Individualization or
academic drawing, that education
in the arts must begin if it is not to
contribute to a pale parody of western
European art.
Basically, the problem in Africa is
one of coming to terms with the
outside world. It is no use pretending
that nationalism Is enough, or that
cultural resistance can find a modus
vivendi with technological progress.
Nationhood ¡s a fact, not an angry
argument, and the so-called African
"personality" is nothing if it is not the
aggregate of millions of individually
unique personalities.
The true challenge lies, therefore,
In the response to that very simple,
that poignantly simple, Article 1 of
the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights: "All human beings are born
free and equal in dignity and rights.
They are endowed with reason and
conscience and should act towards
one another in a spirit of brother¬
hood." In the last analysis, is anything
else either verifiable or true ?
Magdl Wahba

