mKÊKKKKKmmKKM
DD
g 0)
3 =
II
f:
8*
¿i
5|
Ihe
14O0V1 RUNNER'S
digest
FIFTEENTH ¿NNIVERS/lftY ISSUE
Vol. XVI. Ho. 2
December, 1974
12.50 per copy
Mo> Mi oS'lt
Á0OlOHO/8d
"îiioiora
p|DUjnoíai||
Shown above are two title pages belonging to the 15th anniversary Issue of one
periodical it all depends which half of it you're reading: The Worm Runner's
Digest or The Journal of Biological Psychology. The Worm Runner's Digest
was started by American biologist James V. McConnell and a small team of
colleagues as a scientific joke. It became an immediate success and was
even taken seriously in some scientific circles. Later serious articles were
mixed in with the spoofs and the magazine then split in two, one half upside
down. Photo right is a drawing of planaria by the Dutch artist M.C. Escher.
It is shown upside down in The Journal of Biological Psychology, above.



WORM - BREEDING
WITH TONGUE IN CHEEK
or the confessions of a scientist
hoist by his own petard
by
James V. McConnell
JAMES V. McCONNELL, founder-editor of
the satirical magazine The Worm Runner's
Digest and later The Journal of Biological
Psychology, is Professor of Psychology at the
Mental Health Research Institute, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor (U.S.A.). The author of
numerous papers and articles on planarian
worms and the biochemistry of learning, he has
edited the volume The Worm Re-Turns: The
Best from the Worm Runner's Digest (1965).
A longer version of this article originally appeared
in Unesco's quarterly Impact of Science on
Society (July-September 1969). It has been
very slightly amended to bring it up to date.
FOR sixteen years now, I've pub¬
lished a somewhat humorous
semi-scientific journal called Worm
Runner's Digest. Herewith begins my
confession. . For the Digest started as
my own personal little joke on the
Scientific Establishment but has turned
out to be more of a joke on me.
I've lost grants because of the Di¬
gest, had my laboratory experiments
questioned not because of their content
but because of the Digest, had articles
I submitted to other journals turned
down because I dared to cite studies
published in the Digest. It would seem
that a little humour goes a very long
way towards excommunication!
This scurrilous journal will seem
humorous to you only if you happen
to know a great deal about flatworms.
On the off chance that some of the
finer planarian points are lacking from
your store-house of knowledge, 1 will
duly explain a bit about the psychology
of worms so that you will gain some
insight into the psychology of worm
runners. It's a strange tail, I assure you.
The planarian, or common flatworm,
is a small aquatic animal that seldom
grows to more than three centimetres
12

r
in length and is found in ponds, streams
and rivers throughout the world, I got
interested in the beast because it's
the simplest animal on the phylo-
genetic tree that has a true brain
and a human-type nervous system.
But the planarian is famous for many
reasons beyond its brain. For instance,
it is the simplest form of life to have
true bilateral symmetry which means
that you can cut it in half from head to
tail and the left half will be a mirror
image of the right. And it has about
the most mixed-up sex life of any
animal going.
Let's face it: the planarian is that
psychological anomaly, an anti-Freu¬
dian animal. To begin with, it is an
hermaphrodite, having a complete set
of both male and female sex organs.
The flatworm lacks a mouth; instead,
it has a pharynx in the middle of its
body that it extrudes when it comes in
contact with food. The pharynx latches
on to whatever is to be the meal and
the worm sucks the juices up through
it as through a drinking .straw.
As a graduate student at the Uni¬
versity of. Texas, I had undertaken a
project with another student, Robert
Thompson, to see if the planarian could
be trained. Presumably, since it is the
simplest animal to possess a true brain,
it should be the simplest animal capable
of showing true learning (or so the
psychological theories of the day
insisted).
So Thompson and I set up an exper¬
iment in which we demonstrated at
least to our own satisfaction that the
flatworm could be taught the type of
lesson that Professor Pavlov called the
conditioned response. Later, when I
went to the University of Michigan at
Ann Arbor as a struggling young
instructor, the head of the Psychology
Department called me into his office
for a friendly little chat.
"Jim", he told me, "you may have
heard a nasty rumour that to survive
in the academic world, you must
'publish or perish'. I just want you to
know that the rumour is true. I'm sure
you know what is expected of you, but
I have a favour to ask. If at all poss¬
ible, will you please try to do good
research. But if you can't, for God's
sake, publish a lot of bad research,
for the Dean won't know the difference
anyhow."
I got the message and right away
set up the first "worm lab." at the
University of Michigan.
I was given a tiny little basement
room and enough funds to purchase
a very modest amount of equipment
and a few worms. Like all eager
young instructors, I was wise enough
to talk two very bright young students
(Daniel Kimble and Allan Jacobson)
into doing all the actual work for me.
But I had a problem; we had
demonstrated that worms could learn,
so what were we to do next? For
a long time 1 puzzled over this problem,
then recalled that one day when
Thompson and I were working at the
University of Texas, we had had a
wild idea.
Planarians not only reproduce
sexually, but asexually as well (one
might say they have by far the best
of both worlds). When a worm is first
hatched from its egg, it is fully equipped
to do everything but reproduce. After
a few months of fattening up, it
reaches puberty and begins mating.
Sexual activity continues for three to
four years, after which the animal
seems to go into a senile decline,
becomes all lumpy and misshapen and
then a miracle often occurs.
One day as the animal is crawling
along the bottom of some pond, the
tail develops a will of its own and
grabs hold of a rock and refuses to be
budged. The head struggles to get
things going again, but no matter how
hard the head pulls, the tail remains
obstinately clinging to the rock.
Not able to convince the tail to get r
13

> on with it, the head does the next
best thing: it pulls so hard that the
whole animal comes apart at the
middle. The head then wanders off,
leaving the tail to manage as best
it can.
Now, if you cut a human being in
half across the waist, he has a
tendency not to survive the operation.
But if you do this to a flatworm, you
merely trigger off asexual reproduction
in the same way that the animal
occasionally does itself. For the head
will grow a new tail in a matter of five
or six days, and the tail, clinging
gallantly to its rock, will regenerate an
entire new head (complete with brain,
eyes and full sensory apparatus) in a
matter of a week or two.
Furthermore, each of the regenerated
portions of the beast will soon grow
up to the same size as the original
animal and, being rejuvenated as well
as regenerated, will begin sexual
mating again. (Now there's a topic
that needs further research if ever
I saw one!)
Thompson and I, knowing this odd
habit of the flatworm, thought it might
be clever if we trained a worm, then
cut it in half, let the head grow a new
tail and the tail grow a new head, and
then tested both halves to see which
half remembered the original training.
Thompson and I never had the time to
do that experiment at the University
of Texas, but at Michigan I had
students, worms and apparatus, so we
set out to see what would happen.
To our great surprise, we found that
the heads remembered (a month after
original training) just as much as did
worms that had been trained but not
cut in half at all. Apparently, if you
are a worm, losing your tail does not
affect your memory. To our greater
surprise, we found that the tails
remembered even better than did the
heads. Obviously, for worms, losing
your head actually improves your
memory!
These odd results suggested to us
that, in the planarian at least, memories
might not be stored just in the head
section. Our next experiment con¬
sisted of chopping a trained animal
in several pieces and letting all of them
regenerate. As we half expected,
each regenerate showed memory of
what the original animal had been
taught.
Slowly it began to dawn on us that
the usual theories of memory storage
just didn't hold, for these all insisted
that memories were stored neuro-
physiologically in the brain. Since our
regenerated worms had to re-grow an
entire new brain, it seemed to us that
they must be storing their lessons
chemically.
In other words, whenever the worm
learned something, there had to be
some corresponding change in the
molecules in their bodies Qust as there
must be an electrical or mechanical
change in a computer each time it
stores a bit of data). Our chemical
theory of memory was interesting, but
how to go about proving it?
People have personalities and, after
you've studied them a while, it becomes
apparent that planarians do, too. That
is, each organism reacts slightly dif¬
ferently from its cousins and brothers.
But chemical molecules are all sup¬
posed to be the same. So, when one
worm learned his lesson in our training
apparatus, we assumed that the chemi¬
cal changes inside his body were more
or less the same as those that would
take place in any other worm's body
when it learned the same lesson. Now,
that's a perfectly tenable hypothesis if
you don't "happen to know much about
zoology or biochemistry so, blessed
with a most enthusiastic ignorance of
such arcane topics, we ploughed
ahead.
Here was our reasoning. Worms
are rather special. Not only can you
cut them in half, and each piece will
regenerate into an intact organism,
but you can also play all sorts of
sadistic games with them.
If you slice the head in half, from
the tip of the snout down to where
the worm's Adam's apple would be
(if it had one, which it doesn't), and
then you keep the two sections of
the head separated for 24 hours, each
section will regenerate separately.
You'll end up with a two-headed worm.
Interestingly enough, a chap at Wash¬
ington University in St.Louis worked
with two-headed planarians later on
and found, to our delight, that these
animals learn significantly faster than
Photo of the common flatworm or planarian,
the origin of the humorous scientific
magazine The Worm Runner's Digest.
do normal beasts. So, as far as the
worm is concerned, two heads are
indeed better than one!
And if two heads aren't enough for
you, split each of them again, and
you'll have four heads on the same
body. You can get up to twelve heads
at once, if you and the worm are
interested in such things. More than
that, you can take the head from one
animal and graft it on to another
planarians don't reject tissue grafts
the way that most higher organisms do.
Well, if the memory molecules were
the same from one worm to another,
why couldn't we train one worm,
extract the chemicals from it, inject
them somehow into another, and thus
transfer the "memory" from one beast
to another?
itf A LANp of Trte WrtP,
lite ccoz-eyev arb K1M45.
14

For several months we tried to do
just that, but we failed, simply because
we were rather stupid about it all.
Our hypodermic needles were far too
large and we tried to inject far too
much material. The poor little worms
swelled up like balloons; a few popped.
Eventually, though, a brainstorm hit us.
Hungry planarians are cannibalistic.
If we couldn't make the "transfer"
using our crude injection techniques,
perhaps we could induce the worms to
do the. work for us.
So, in our next experiment, we
trained a group of "victim" worms and
then chopped them in pieces and fed
them to an unsuspecting group of
hungry cannibals. After the cannibals
had had a chance to digest their meal,
we promptly gave them the same sort
of training we had given the victims.
To our delight, the cannibals that had
eaten educated victims did significantly
better (right from the very first trial)
than did cannibals that had eaten
untrained victims. We had achieved
the first inter-animal transfer of
information.
After we had repeated this exper¬
iment successfully several times, we
went on to show that the chemical
involved in the transfer was RNA
(ribonucleic acid), a giant molecule
found in almost all living cells. For
we showed that we could achieve this
type of "memory transfer" using a
crude extract of RNA taken from the
bodies of trained planarians and in¬
jected into untrained worms (using, I
may say, a very, very small needle).
In recent years, a considerable
controversy has cropped up concern¬
ing a whole series of similar exper¬
iments using rats and mice as subjects
rather than worms. And, despite the
outcries of the orthodox, it does now
seem as if chemicals extracted from
the brains of trained rats and injected
into their untrained brethren does
cause much the same sort of "memory
transfer" as we had originally dis¬
covered in flatworms.
But I stray from the point. We
published our original regeneration
results in 1959 and at once found our¬
selves mentioned in several national
publications. Of course, none of the
journalists . took our work at all
seriously but, unfortunately for us,
there were hundreds of high-school
students around the country who did.
Many of the brighter students in the
biological sciences saw immediately
that the worm could make an intriguing
and most inexpensive substitute for the
rat. So in 1959 we were inundated
with letters from these bright young¬
sters asking us to tell them all about
the care and training of worms. (A
few more aggressive souls wrote us
demanding that we send them a few
hundred trained animals "at once",
because they needed them instantly
and didn't have time to mess around
doing the work themselves.)
I answered the first few letters per¬
sonally at great length, but when
several hundred arrived, it became
clear that some more efficient means
of communication would have to be
arrived at. So my students and I sat
down and wrote what was really a
manual describing how to repeat the
sorts of experiments we had been
working on.
It took us all of fourteen pages to
pour out our complete knowledge of
planarianology. We typed the material
up and reproduced it on "ditto" paper
(using purple ink guaranteed to fade
rapidly so that years later we wouldn't
be embarrassed by residual displays
of our youthful ignorance).
Now, I had always been noted for
the oddness of my sense of humour,
and the planarian research greatly
enhanced this reputation. Thus none
of my students considered it strange
that we should try to make a joke out
of this little manual, so joke it became.
First of all, it had to have a name.
In psychological jargon, a person who
trains rats is called a "rat runner",
because, presumably, his task is to
get the rats to run through a maze or
some other piece of apparatus. A
man who trains insects is a "bug
runner", and someone who works
with humans is, quite seriously, called
a "people runner". Obviously we were
"worm runners", and so the title of
our manual simply had to be Worm
Runner's Digest.
One of the girls designed a crest that
appeared on the cover, with a rampant
two-headed worm, a coronet of con¬
nected nerve cells at the top, a Latin
motto (which Arthur Koestler translates
as "When I get through explaining this
to you, you will know even less -than
before I started"), an S and R for
"stimulus-response", a 4> for psycho¬
logy, and a pair of diagonal stripes
painted the maize-and-blue colours of
the University of Michigan. (It wasn't
until years later that we learned that
in the language of heraldry, diagonal
stripes across your escutcheon mean
that you're descended from a bastard;
as I like to say, there's been a good
deal of serendipity in pur research.)
To top the manual off, we called it
"Volume I, No. 1", the joke being that
we had no intention of continuing its
publication. Little did we appreciate
the strength of the publish-or-perish
syndrome. Academic scientists are so
desperate that they will publish any¬
where (for the Dean really doesn't
know the difference), so to our utter
amazement, we began getting contri¬
butions for the next issue. Hoist with
our own petard, there was nothing we
CONTINUED PAGE 32
i!
oi
à
DC «
.o e
S a>
« O)
15

WORM-BREEDING
WITH TONGUE IN CHEEK (Continued from page 15)
could do but put out a next issue, and
a next, and a next...
And now, here we are, a journal
with 16 years behind us, an inter¬
national circulation that today is
numbered in the thousands. One of
our crowning achievements, inciden¬
tally, was the receipt of a letter from
the Library of the Academy of Sciences
of the U.S.S.R. offering an official
exchange of journals. We wonder still
if they quite knew what they were
getting. -
Of course, even as our circulation
increased, we remained unique. We
decided that most scientific journals
are deadly dull, and ours would be
different. To pep things up a bit, we
included poems, joke's, satires, car¬
toons, spoofs and short stories
scattered more or less randomly
among the more serious articles.
People seemed to like this melange;
or at least, some of them did. A few
people complained that they didn't
have time to waste on the (admittedly)
sophomoric humour they wanted the
"truth" and nothing else. Their trouble
was that they often found themselves
getting halfway through a satire before
they realized (dimly) that their leg was
being pulled.
WE would have ignored such
complaints had they not come
from some of the most famous and
influential members of the scientific
community. (Any conclusions you wish
to draw about the qualities necessary
to gather fame in the scientific com¬
munity are made on your own time.)
To help these poor souls out, we
resorted to a propagation device much
like the worm's namely, we split in
two. We gathered all of the so-called
funny stuff and banished it to the back
of the journal, printing it upside down
to make sure that no one wouíd
confuse the fact with the fancy.
The Digest inched along this way for
several years, until we faced another
crisis. The authors of our serious
articles complained that they weren't
getting adequate coverage. When an
article is published in most scientific
journals, it is picked up by one of the
abstracting services for dissemination
in abstract form.
Despite the fact that the serious
side of the Digest contained some
pretty meaty stuff, .none of the ab¬
stracting services would touch anything
that came from a journal with such
an odd name as ours. Eventually, as
a kind of last-ditch compromise, we
changed the name of the front half of
the Digest, calling ¡t The Journal of
Biological Psychology.
Nothing else was changed but the
name, but what a difference it made!
Within two months we received letters
from Psychological Abstracts, Biologi¬
cal Abstracts and Chemical Abstracts
asking that we send them this "new"
journal for abstracting. Naturally, we
obliged.
AS I look back at the past 16
years or so, it becomes apparent
to me that life would have been a lot
easier had the Digest suffered a still¬
birth. Much of the controversy sur¬
rounding the work on "memory
transfer" stems in no small part from
the fact that it received its first publi¬
cation in what some of my colleagues
still refer to as "the Playboy of the
scientific world".
I can recall attending a meeting at
Cambridge (the one in England) in
1964 at which I presented what seemed
to me to be rather conclusive evidence
that memories could be transferred
chemically from one planarian to
another. Afterwards, over the inevi¬
table soggy cookies and warm, flavour¬
ed water (the British national drink
just isn't my cup of tea), I was taken
to task by a noted Scientist who
informed me flatly that he would
refuse to consider seriously anything
published in a "scientific cartoonbook".
When I asked him which of the British
journals he had reference to, he almost
dropped his cookie.
I can also remember when a good
friend of mine took me aside one day
to tell me how much damage I was
doing to my reputation by printing the
Digest. He was really quite worried
about the matter. "My God", he said,,
"if you keep publishing articles in that
thing, people may actually want to cite
them some time, and then where will
you be? You ought to change the
name, throw out all that so-called funny
stuff, and make it a respectable
journal."
I also treasure a letter I received
from a world-famous zoologist who
demanded that we remove her name
from our subscription list because
we were "misleading students" into
thinking that Science could be fiinl
Now, in all these cases, the person
doing the criticizing was a bona fide,
expert scientist as well as Scientist.
They were quite sincere ¡n their
comments, offered them up for my own
betterment. I respect their scientific
work, but I do feel rather sorry that
so much of what is great and glorious
and meaningful about science seems
to have slipped through their fingers.
The kind of intropunitive wit that is
the hallmark of the Digest can thrive
only when its author is fairly secure
emotionally and intellectually. People
who neither understand nor appreciate
humour are probably threatened by
those of us who do. We speak a
language they don't understand, we
react to the world around us in ways
that are foreign and disturbing to them.
Most of them have based their entire
approach to life on the premise that
seriousness is next to godliness.
Those of us who see the occasional
folly and ignorance of most of our (and
their) behaviour often react by cracking
a joke. Humour, particularly that
directed against ourselves, keeps us
humble in the face of our own too-well-
perceived incompetence. The totally
serious person fears this kind of
insightful perception into his own
behaviour patterns and fears humour
because he cannot afford to be humble.,
NOW perhaps you see the Digest
for what it really is: the house
organ of an anti-Scientific movement.
It is my firm conviction that.; most of
what is wrong with Science these days
can be traced to the fact that Scien¬
tists are willing to make objective and
dispassionate studies of any natural
phenomena at all except their own
scientific behaviour. We know consi¬
derably more about flatworms than we
do about people who study flatworms.
The Establishment never questions its
own motives; the true humorist always
does. '
It is my strong hope that if we can
get the younger generation to the point
of being able to laugh at itself, then
and only then can we hope to. turn
Science back Into science.
H James V. McConnell
32
