René Maheu, at the age of 63, visits the reconstruction site of
the temples of Abu Simbel, in Egypt, in 1968. The small trees were
planted for landscape restoration around the temples.



« LA CIVILISATION
DE L'UNIVERSEL»
Beyond national sovereignty
I am deeply convinced that in the
world of today, true independence of
nations goes beyond the classic attri¬
butes of sovereignty and derives es¬
sentially from autonomy in national
development. However, since dev¬
elopment can only take place from
within; and as education, science and
culture are without a doubt vital fac¬
tors in any such development, ¡t fol¬
lows that the part played by Unesco
in these domains which constitute its
field of operations are a factor of true
independence.
Development as we understand it
today means the development of man
by man and for man. What the 20th
century, making use of socio-econo¬
mic terminology, describes as dev¬
elopment, is the same thing that the
18th century, in more strictly poli¬
tical terms, called freedom.
The dawn of a planetary
civilization
... Mankind is moving towards a
planetary civilization. It is being mov¬
ed ¡n this direction by a twofold im¬
pulsion, firstly the unceasing advance
of technology, and secondly oy a
moral aspiration just as ineluctable,
namely man's desire to attain humani¬
ty. For Unesco there is no nobler task
and none more. in keeping with its
mission than to work for the
achievement of a united mankind, ¡n
control of itself and of the universe.
Unesco, Paris, 22 October 1964 (13th
Session of Unesco's General Conference).
24

Development
and human dignity
The transformation of the world and
its economic and technological pro¬
gress would be meaningless if man,
as a physical being possessing a
body and a mind, who is both the gen¬
erator and beneficiary of all these
necessary changes, were not the ul¬
timate goal of progress. Development
is no more than a tool to be used for
creating a final product. This product
is human dignity.
Paris, 20 November 1963. Reopening of
j, the Institut Français de Presse.
Man : the alpha and omega
of development
Man does not only constitute the
resources and materials of develop¬
ment, nor is he simply its agent; he is
its true purpose. After all, who and
what are being developed, and for
whom? The answer is man; for his
own sake. Of course it is a fine thing
that human beings and the activities
of society are nowadays looked upon
as means of production, so to speak,
rather than mere consumer goods.
However, we should not be content
to let matters rest here nor congra¬
tulate ourselves too readily; for an
economy which makes use of man to
increase productivity cannot be des
cribed as humanist. In fact the only
kind of economy which can be quali¬
fied as humanist is one which consi¬
ders man to be both the alpha and
omega of development.
Paris, 22 April 1964. Lecture given at the
Sorbonne on the Invitation of the Univer¬
sity of Paris and the French Institute of
Economic and Social Development.
Education and human change
Nothing at the present time is as
important as education. I am not just
speaking from an ethical or moral
point of view, but rather from a realist
and even political one; for educational
problems have now acquired political
dimensions.
The times have passed when minis¬
tries of education were concerned
solely with technicalities. In all coun¬
tries, whether they are already deve¬
loped or are still developing and as
far as education is concerned every
country is still developing a mutation
is taking place in mankind, and it is
precisely in education that it is
revealed.
We are Indeed witnessing a real
mutation of mankind, which involves
profound and radical changes in edu¬
cation. When these changes fail to
take place, educational problems take
on a political aspect and reveal them¬
selves in disturbances which can
affect the stability of governments
and sometimes even whole regimes.
Unesco, Paris, 26 August 1965. Report to
Unesco's Executive Board.
The art of learning
The continual evolution of our civi¬
lization, together with the constant
growth and renewal of human know¬
ledge, make it imperative for every
man and woman to keep up-to-date
what he or she learnt earlier in life.
Thus the purpose of education is not
so much to provide once and for all
a fixed sum of knowledge as to teach
the art of learning: and to make learn¬
ing a lifelong process.
Bangkok, 22 November 1965. Conference k
of Ministers of Education ¡n Asia. r
"Scientific progress merely encircles
the globe from one industrialized
country to the next, leaving
enormous areas in darkness and
ignorance."
René Maheu, Paris 1963.
15th anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
ÍÍ::::::;::
.	
!:;:::::;
«S:
-.
^wí:
Passas*
¿ääasaa l^f»*>*»*»* *»»««!
¡¡«HMIlill
^¿i-iààâaÈÈàààààâààMâàaààààààiààààààà, 		

Calligraphy lesson in a Japanese
school. This youngster's brush
strokes are forming the word
"peace" in Japanese.
LWar on illiteracy
I believe the fight against illiteracy
to be the most urgent and exciting
task facing our generation.
In order to eliminate illiteracy we
need to fight simultaneously on two
fronts. First and foremost we must
make sure that there is compulsory
primary education everywhere, since
otherwise legions of new Illiterates
will incessantly be joining the ranks
of those bequeathed by the past. At
the same time we must redouble our
efforts to reduce the huge existing
backlog of adult illiterates.
In this age when science is opening
up the way to the stars, it is totally
inacceptable for two-fifths of mankind
to remain the prisoners of ancient
deprivations. Do we really want man¬
kind to be divided, with one half
reaching the stars and the other left
behind in caves? No peace could
possibly be lasting in the face of this
terrible injustice whereby the benefits
of progress are so unequally distri¬
buted.
Copenhagen, 26 August 1964. Conference
of the Interparliamentary Union.
The educational values
of sport
Sport is an order of chivalry, an
honour, a code of ethics and aesthe¬
tics, whose members are recruited
from all peoples and social classes
and intermingled ¡n a worldwide fra¬
ternity. Sport represents a truce.
In our technological societies,
where we are subject to the merciless
law of work, being judged by what
we have and having only what we
earn, it provides a free and sublime
enrichment of our leisure hours. In
"We need to take a fresh look at
out-of-school education for young
people and adults, particularly in
terms of training illiterate adults for
more productive jobs, expanding
workers' education facilities, linking
functional literacy to agricultural
development, and thereby enabling
millions of men and women to
participate in the life of the
community."
René Maheu, Bangkok, 1965.
Conference of Ministers of
Education In Asia.
26

this era beset by antagonism and
conflict, ruled by the lust for power
and pride, sport is a sublime respite
in which fair competition ends in
mutual respect and friendship...
... Sport is education, of the truest
and most positive variety, that is to
say education of the character. It
¡s a science, because a sportsman
must have patiently acquired self-
knowledge in order to attain perfec¬
tion.
Sport is culture, because the ephe¬
meral movements with which it embel¬
lishes space and time highlight, by
giving them a dramatic form, some
of the most fundamental and thus
the most profound and far-reaching
values of nations or indeed of the
entire human race. Sport is also
culture in that it creates beauty, espe¬
cially for those who have least
opportunity to enjoy aesthetic
pleasures...
What could be more barbaric than
this public identification with cham¬
pions, this national appropriation of
an individual's or a team's victory?
These flags and anthems, these ban¬
ner headlines in the newspapers
screaming "We won" or "National
defeat" do you not agree that they
are an odious exaggeration of the
spontaneous reactions of a crowd,
and also a shameless exploitation of
its most generous impulses? At all
events it is the direct opposite of a
catharsis: it is a regression to a
primitive mentality.
Unesco, Paris, 28 October 1963. Address
on the centenary of the birth of Pierre de
Coubertin.
Sport and individual
self-expression
Sport ought to play the same for¬
mative part in adult leisure as it does
in young people's education. How¬
ever, if adults are to use their leisure
hours for sport, they will require faci¬
lities of a standard equal or superior
to that usually found in schools and
universities. It must be admitted that
in many countries these facilities are
rudimentary, and where they exist,
they are not always of a purely edu¬
cational nature, aimed solely at giving
an individual the opportunity for free
self-expression.
Tokyo, March 1965. Message presenting
the "Manifesto on Sport" published by
the International Council of Sport and
Physical Education.
Universities in
an age of change
Nothing is of greater importance
for a university than to apprehend
the significance of this vital moment
which heralds a new age. If univer¬
sities should fail to achieve self-
renewal they would disappear, at any
rate in the form that we know and
value, together with their wealth of
humanism bequeathed by ancient
traditions.
"Sport is probably the aspect
of modern life which is most
widely encountered through¬
out the worldthe only one,
perhaps, which is common
to both industrialized com¬
munities and developing
countries. It is also, in a
steadily increasing degree,
one of the most vigorous
forces in international rela¬
tions. There are few inter¬
national exchanges, encoun¬
ters or contacts which arouse
so much mass feeling as
sports events."
René Maheu, Unesco,
28 October 1963.
1 - Smilingly to school in
Lagos (Nigeria).
2 - Stocking up for a snowball
battle at a heated open-air
swimming pool in Moscow
(U.S.S.R.).
3 - Ball game on the sports
ground of the University of
Amman (Jordan).
27

"Unless it has its own scientists and technicians, no country can call
itself free. This involves the whole problem of scientific and technical
training from secondary education to fundamental research..."
René Maheu, Geneva, 1965, addressing the U.N. Economic and
Social Council.
Above, distinctively styled campus building at the University
of Ibadan (Nigeria)
, I am sure that universities will again
prove able to accomplish this self-
renewal in order to meet the needs
of a world in the throes of revolution,
and will be able to bring about the
changes which are essential if they
are to recruit their members and
achieve intellectual excellence on the
widest possible basis of social
justice.
Tokyo, 31 August 1965. Opening of the
4th Conference of the International Asso¬
ciation of Universities.
The search for cultural
identity
Every struggle for freedom involves
a fundamental need for a renewed
awareness of the nation's cultural
Identity. Because of this, the first
steps to be taken on gaining Inde¬
pendence consist in re-establishing
the national culture which has be¬
come estranged and in creating new
conditions for its existence so that
it can be master of its own destiny.
Algiers, 12 November 1963 at the ceremony
when René Maheu was awarded the de¬
gree of Doctor honoris causa of the Uni¬
versity of Algiers.
Towards a new
humanism
We need to evolve a new form of
humanism which will strike a balance
between science and culture, between
science and technology, and within
the confines of science itself bet¬
ween the natural and human sciences.
In an age when man's domination of
realms once unheard-of, such as
atoms or the stars, is continually
being extended, he needs to keep a
tight grip on himself and his percep¬
tions, not only because he ¡s the
measure of all things, but much more
because he chooses the path of his
own history and is the sum of all his
endeavours. Man's existence only has
meaning as a total concept.
At the present time there is no task
more urgent than to provide modern
man with a new meaning embracing
the whole range of his ideals. I be¬
lieve universities are the best place
for working out this humanist synthe¬
sis with all the necessary freedom
and discipline of thought.
Cracow, 31 January 1964. Address at the
Jagiellonian University of Cracow (Poland).
The nature and meaning
of science
"Knowledge is power", said Fran¬
cis Bacon. True enough the whole
of our technological civilization is
based on this fact. But knowledge
implies, first and foremost, thinking
conceiving naure in a certain way.
Knowledge ¡s scientific only by and
through the mind that produces it
and which alone gives it meaning
for man and relevance to things.
Science is not just a collection of
facts and formulae which can confer
power on man without more ado. To
think along these lines is to regard
knowledge as magic. But science is
the opposite of magic. Scientific
knowledge is simply the crystalliza¬
tion of certain acts of the mind. It is
above all this mind this scientific
spirit without which knowledge could
not bear fruit or even have meaning,
that must be Implanted and developed
at every level of intelligence and
activity.
Geneva, 4 February 1963. Opening of
U.N. Conference on the Applications of
Science and Technology for the Benefit of
the Less Developed Areas.
Science and intellectual
liberation
The acquiring of knowledge, espe¬
cially practical knowledge, takes far
too great a precedence over the
acquiring of the scientific spirit. This
spirit is Inadequately instilled into the
minds of middle and lower grade
officials, who usually concentrate on
remembering the facts and formulae
of science which they then apply
mechanically.
Teaching of this sort, where mem¬
orizing is given priority over the fos¬
tering of intelligence, has more to do
with training than with education in
the true sense. It leads right away
from science, which is essentially a
principle of intellectual liberation and
the mastery of nature. It also leads
right away, from what developing
countries most need ¡f they are to .
regain control of their history.
There is much discussion of stres¬
ses and lack of balance caused by
the opposition between an imported
scientific and technological civiliza¬
tion and traditional national cultures
¡n developing countries. Of course
this problem does exist, just as ¡n
every case where a society is subject¬
ed to a process of rapid evolution
under the influence of external fac¬
tors. But this opposition and the
resulting stresses really occur be¬
cause the countries concerned are
not presented with the true face of
science.
For science constitutes a civiliza¬
tion or rather it is the only potentially
universal civilization. But to these
countries it seems more like a sort
of magic from abroad which gives
them sudden power. And if this
civilizing factor is not apparent to
28

those who only extract from science
its practical technological advantages,
this is mainly because science teach¬
ing is neglecting the vital point,
namely, the scientific spirit and the
methodology of science.
Geneva, 8 February 1963. Address to the
U.N. Conference on the Applications of
Science and Technology.
A universal cultural heritage
The notion of a universal cultural
heritage, which belongs to mankind
as a whole and must be preserved
in the interests of the world commu¬
nity, ¡s a characteristic feature of our
age. It is quite different from the
purely national, not to say nationalist,
concept of culture, which in the past
often gave rise to incomprehension
or even contempt towards other civi¬
lizations...
... The works which are today des¬
cribed as monuments differ widely in
their character and appearance, but
they have one thing in common; they
form an integral part of the environ¬
ment which man has created in which
to live, devised by him with regard
both for spiritual values and for the
material needs of his life. Hence
beneath their purely decorative as¬
pect, these monuments express what
¡s most primal and most meaningful
in man's being, namely his roots in .
history. Monuments are that history
turned to stone.
They may be the humble remains
of prehistoric dwellings or sumptuous
palaces from the great classic ages,
temples once devoted to religions
which are now dead or holy places to
which worshippers still flock, complex
edifices which we owe to the subtle
skill of great artists or unpretentious
examples of traditional architectural
craftsmanship. But each of them
bears witness to a particular way of
life and expresses the aspirations,
tastes and beliefs of the men who
built it.
Unesco, Paris, 2 June 1964. Opening of
the International Campaign for Monuments.
Continuing its major international
campaign launched ten years ago for
the preservation of Venice, Unesco
organized a World Week in the city
in September 1976. The participation
of internationally famous artists
(musicians, actors, dancers, singers
and comedians) from different parts
of the world gave the gala week a
brilliance appropriate to the
renowned city of the Doges. Left,
detail of the colossal bronze horses
on the facade of St Mark's
Cathedral in Venice.
Unesco's humanist mission
It has often been said but it can¬
not be said too often that Unesco
is an organization concerned with
man and his destiny.
All its undertakings are based on
a particular conception of mankind
which it is continually trying to pro¬
mote and put into effect on a univer¬
sal scale. In all Unesco's work,
however technical or specialized it
may be, there is always a purpose,
a meaning, a dimension which bring
out the totality of man that is in each
of us and the oneness of humanity
that is in all of us.
Unesco is thus, by Its very nature,
committed to the spirit of synthesis,
and we must make sure that neither
the lure of erudition, nor any demand
for efficiency, draws it so far into
specialization that ¡t loses sight of
the humanistic vocation which is
Inseparable from its ethical mission.
Unesco, Paris, 13 December 1965. Sym¬
posium on Science and Synthesis.
The spirit of justice
and tolerance
Unesco is founded on the belief
that in the long run it is the freedom
of man which decides the path of
history, and ¡n particular which makes
the choice between war and peace
"wars are born in the minds of men"
so that there can only be true peace
as long as the mind abides by an
order which it respects.
What is this order? It ¡s that of
the dignity of man, which finds its
expression as specified in the various
human rights; whose authority in
society is called justice; and whose
prevalence in people's hearts is
called love, or at least tolerance.
This is the reason why the founders
of Unesco stated that "it is in the
minds of men that the defences of
peace must be constructed".
Education, science and culture are
the great disciplines which shape and
inspire the mind; and Unesco's mis¬
sion, Its ultimate reason for existing,
is to use these disciplines and I ^
stress the word usein order to instil r
29

as deeply as possible in the cons¬
ciences of people and nations this
desire for justice and tolerance which
I mentioned earlier and which in the
last analysis decides between free¬
dom and slavery, life and death.
Geneva, 7 July 1966. Address to the U.N.
Economic and Social Council for Unesco's
20th anniversary.
Human rights,
justice and peace
It ¡s Human Rights, as defined in
the Universal Declaration of 1948,
which inspire the whole of Unesco's
Work, and give it its meaning; Its work
for the establishment of standards,
the aid it furnishes to development,
Its promotion of intellectual effort,
in fact all its activities are designed
to facilitate the advent of a civilization
of the universal.
Peace itself has no value and,
strictly speaking, no reality for Unes¬
co unless it is founded on justice,
which is nothing other than human
rights in action. Peace, for Unesco,
is not the illusory security or transient
stability represented by the domin¬
ance of one power or even a balance
of power, the goal pursued so despe¬
rately in an armaments race that is
as vain as it is exhausting.
Peace is justice acknowledged and
this, we know full well, can be attained
only by radical changes in the struc¬
ture of societies and the organization
of the world. From Unesco's point of
view, in which the static has no place,
the cause of peace and the cause of
progress coincide.
The unity of mankind
... Beyond the relative effectiveness
of its work, Unesco's greatest triumph
is that it perhaps more than any
other organization has enabled the
men and women of today, despite
the diversity of their cultures, interests
and regimes, to show, at least poten¬
tially, the universality of their convic¬
tion that mankind is one, sharing a
common nature and ¡deal. And it is
in this way, paradoxically, that Unesco
is coming to represent a force with
which the political realists will have
to reckon.
"Serving the Mind as a Force in history"
Part 5 of "In the Minds of Men", a work
published by Unesco for Its 25th anniver¬
sary, Unesco 1972.
Towards human
brotherhood
International co-operation is both
a necessity and an ideal.
It is a necessity for modern civili¬
zation, because the opportunities for
development which this civilization
offers can only be exploited, the pro¬
blems of development which it pre¬
sents can only be resolved, by orga-
AGAINST RACISM AND APARTHEID. During a quarter of a century Unesco has
sought to combat the injustices and iniquities for which racism and the policy of
apartheid are responsible in the world. "We shall have to struggle for many more
years, "declared René Maheu, at Unesco's H.Q., in 1963, "before education at
every level and in all subjects can free the rising generations from the distorting
influence of stereotypes and prejudices."
nlzing the communication of know¬
ledge, the confrontation of ideas,
the pooling of resources and the
conjunction of efforts within Increas¬
ingly extensive and complex systems
which transcend the boundaries of
nations, however vast and powerful
these may be.
It is also an ideal and by that I
do not mean a dream, but a moral
imperative for men are coming to
realize more and more that they are
morally as well as physically inter¬
dependent.
Each of us is increasingly aware
that he cannot be completely happy
if others are destitute or live under
bondage, that he cannot be really at
peace with himself if others are
waging war against one another in
short, that he cannot attain his full
stature as a man if injustice and
want are preventing other men all
of them from attaining that stature,
like him and with him. I say all of
them, for, once we admit in our
thoughts or in our deeds, that some
shall be excluded from humanity's
family, we lose a part of our own
individual humanity.
Such is the twofold justification
for International co-operation, which
institutions like Unesco are designed
to serve, and I call upon you to de¬
dicate yourselves to it from now
onwards, with all the enthusiasm and
generosity of your youth.
For, although international co-ope¬
ration needs sound organization and
technique if it is to be effective, it
cannot be achieved by those means
alone. Even more, it needs a certain
openness of mind, a certain warmth
of heart, ¡n short a readiness to serve,
which itself Implies a conversion to
human brotherhood.
It is to this great cause that I call
upon you to dedicate yourselves.
Please do not misunderstand me.
I do not ask you to abandon those
tasks which you are to undertake
within the context of your family, your
career, your country. I only ask you
to remember, when carrying out these
tasks, that you also belong to a lar¬
ger family, a broader life and a vaster
community, which is mankind.
I ask you to realize that the mean¬
ing and value of your existence go
beyond the immediate confines of
your own personal destiny and that'
you are taking part ¡n the same
splendid adventure as the rest of
mankind, an adventure which calls
for understanding and effort from all.
Lastly I ask you to regard every man
you meet as a brother, that is, as
your equal ¡n dignity, with the same
needs and the same hopes, regard¬
less of his race, country, language,
social status or beliefs.
You are growing up in a period of
technological miracles. Your genera¬
tion will reach the stars, but ¡t is
Man that I should like you, above all,
to reach, to respect and cherish, in
yourselves and in others.
New Year's message to the young people
of the world. 31 December 1964.
The texts published here are taken from speeches and writings by René Maheu, published
in French in an anthology entitled La Civilisation de l'Universel, inventaire de l'Avenir, in 1966,
by Editions Laffont, Paris and Gonthier, Geneva.
30
