TWO ARCHITECTS
OF INDEPENDENCE
The photo on right is a detail of a
famous painting showing the sign¬
ing of the Declaration of Indepen¬
dence, in Independence Hall, Phila¬
delphia, in 1776. Painted by the
American artist John Trumbull, it
shows some of the most distin¬
guished figures in the American
struggle for independence. The de¬
tail now figures on five U.S. Bicen¬
tennial commemoration stamps pre¬
sented on a single sheet. Above, one
of these stamps depicting two
giants of American independence,
Thomas Jefferson (left) and Benja¬
min Frank/in. Thomas Jefferson was
chiefly responsible for the drafting
of the Declaration. A brief pen por¬
trait of his life and works is given
below and that of Franklin on p. 19.
1. Thomas Jefferson
Thomas Jefferson of Virginia, author of the
Declaration of Independence and third President
of the United States, is a remarkable example of
a man of action whose talents were also medita¬
tive and philosophical. Two modern historians
have called him "the special symbol of the Ame¬
rican Revolution" because "His was a perpetual
revolt, an eternal declaration of independence,
against the forces which sought, and seek, to
bind the spirits of men".
He was a universal man on the Renaissance
model, the immense range of his activities encom¬
passing mathematics, music (he was an accom¬
plished violinist), architecture, astronomy, meteo¬
rology, the natural sciences, linguistics (he knew
half a dozen languages and wrote vocabularies of
Indian languages) and scientific farming. All this
in addition to history, politics and education about
which he wrote with originality and insight.
Writer and political philosopher
All his life Jefferson fought with his pen against
"every tyranny over the mind of man". With his
first published work, A Summary View ot the
Rights ol British America (1774) a pamphlet
attacking British intransigence toward the Colo¬
nies, he earned a reputation for phrase-making
and polished writing.
Two years later, although only 33 years of age,
he was entrusted by the Continental Congress of
the American colonies with the task of drafting
the Declaration of Independence because of his
gifts for expressing lucidly and vividly the
thoughts of everyone.
He wrote many state papers of the first impor¬
tance, such as his Wofes on the Establishment of
a Money Unit, successfully advocating the adop¬
tion of the system of dollars and cents. His
Wofes on Virginia (1782) contain a mass of original
natural observations as well as a statement of his
beliefs and ¡deals.
The statesman
Jefferson's long life of public service as re¬
forming Virginia lawmaker, Governor of Virginia,
Congressman, U.S. Minister in France, Secretary
of State, and Vice-President was crowned by
two terms as President (1801-1809). His great
aim throughout this career was to give individual
men a wider liberty. To this end he (and James
Madison) successfully urged that a Bill of Rights
guaranteeing fundamental freedoms for every citi¬
zen be added to the Constitution.
These are the first ten amendments to the
Constitution, which guarantee freedom of religion,
freedom of speech and press, freedom of assem¬
bly, freedom from self-incrimination, trial by jury,
and other rights.
He was a major architect of American expan¬
sion to the west. In 1784 he wrote a report on
the government of the land west of the Appala-
c 5<
o-SS
Engraving of a lost portrait of Jefferson
by his friend Thaddeus Kosciuszko,
painted from life in Philadelphia in 1798.
Kosciuszko (1746-1817) was a Polish
army officer and statesman who served
with great distinction as a volunteer in
the War of Independence.
A few volumes in Jefferson's collection
of over 6,400 books. Sold to Congress in
1815, his library became the nucleus of
the Library of Congress.
chian mountains which has been ranked second
only to the Declaration of Independence in his
writings. Had it been adopted as he presented
it, slavery would have been forbidden in all those
lands after 1800. But it is to be noted that
Jefferson accepted slavery in the original colonies,
and his plan for "general enlightenment" exclud¬
ed girls.
As President in 1803 he approved the purchase
from France of the Louisiana Territory. The ac¬
quisition of this vast region between the Missi¬
ssippi and the Rocky Mountains nearly doubled
the size of the United States. He initiated and
planned Meriwether Lewis and William Clark's
pioneering overland expedition (1804-1806) to the
Pacific coast and back which helped pave the
way for the settlement of the west.
Scientist, architect and inventor
Modern scholars have recognized Jefferson as
an American pioneer in many branches of science,
notably paleontology, ethnology, geography and
botany. He was President of the American Philo¬
sophical Society from 1797 to 1815 and corres¬
ponded throughout his life with an extraordinary
number of scientists and philosophers.
He was also the foremost American architect
of his time. Monticello, the mansion he built on
his Virginia estate between 1768 and 1809 contains
an array of ingenious gadgets invented by
Jefferson: an improved copying device called a
"polygraph"; a weathervane connected to a dial
on the ceiling beneath; the swivel chair; a system
of pulleys and an enclosure in the ceiling into
which he could hoist his bed after he got up; a
seven-day clock. His invention of an improved
plough won wide recognition.
Crusader for education
Jefferson's passionate commitment to intellec¬
tual freedom also stands out in his fight for
education and in the Statute of Virginia (1786)
which he drafted. The Statute forbade all reli¬
gious discrimination in Virginia and formed part
of a broad-ranging plan of reforms proposed by
Jefferson for his home state. Part of his plan
was a comprehensive system of free public edu¬
cation, but his fellow Virginians accepted only
his proposal for a university.
After retiring from the presidency In 1809
Jefferson devoted the rest of his public life to
creating the new university. He designed the
buildings and supervised their construction in
minute detail, as well as planning the courses,
recruiting the teachers and choosing the books
for the library. The University of Virginia opened
in 1825. Jefferson died on 4 July 1826the fiftieth
anniversary of the Declaration of Independence.
14 CONTINUED PAGE 19

TWO ARCHITECTS OF INDEPENDENCE (continued from page 14)
WäSm
2. Benjamin Franklin
Ranking among the great men of American
history, Benjamin Franklin was gifted with many-
sided genius and sound common sense. He
concerned himself, during a long and fruitful life
(1706-1790), with such different matters as states¬
manship and soapmaking, book-printing and cab¬
bage growing, and the rise of tides and fall of
empires. As a scientist he was a pioneer in the
study of electricity; as an inventor he was un¬
equalled in America until the second half of the
19th century.
Photo Erich Lessing © Magnum, Paris
Printer, publisher and man of letters
In 1718, at the age of 12, Franklin became an
apprentice printer under his elder brother James.
At 24 he founded and edited his own newspaper,
making it one of the most successful in the
colonies. He is believed to be first editor In
America to publish a newspaper cartoon. In 1732
he launched his famous "Poor Richard's Alma-
nach" (written and published by him until 1757),
noted for its wise and witty aphorisms on the
value of thrift, hard work and the simple life.
He taught himself French, Italian, Spanish and
Latin, and helped to found the American Philo¬
sophical Society which brought scientists and
scholars together. Long after he had won world¬
wide fame, he continued to call himself with
characteristic lack of pretension "Benjamin Fran¬
klin, Printer".
Social reformer and civic leader
Franklin launched many projects for social re¬
form and for fostering a community spirit. An
' enemy of slavery he became president of the
first anti-shivery society in America and his last
public act was to sign an appeal to Congress
calling for the speedy abolition of Negro slavery.
In 1737, as Philadelphia's postmaster, he trans¬
formed and speeded up its postal services (as he
did for all the colonies when he later became
deputy postmaster general).
He set up America's first subscription library In
Philadelphia. He organized a fire department and
reformed the city police. He also helped to
found an academy that grew Into the University
of Pennsylvania. Shocked by the general lack of
concern for the sick, he raised money to build a
city hospital the first in America and to care for
the mentally ill.
Inventor and scientist j
Franklin was one of the first scientists to expe¬
riment with electricity, proving in 1752 that
lightning is actually electricity (see photo this
Right, portrait of
Benjamin Franklin by
the Scottish painter
David Martin. It was
commissioned by
Franklin in London, in
1767, for his family,
and bequeathed by him
to the Executive
Council of
Pennsylvania.
Photo © Lt. Col. M.W. Arps Jr.,
Roloo Transparency, Box 1715,
Washington D.C. 20013, U.S.A.
In 1752, Franklin
conducted his
famous experiment of
flying a kite in a
thunderstorm to prove
lightning is electricity.
He then tamed this
phenomenon of nature
by inventing the
lightning rod. Left,
models used by
Franklin in his
lightning rod
experiments. Below, an
artist's impression of a
possiblebut not very
practical application
of Franklin's invention,
drawn in 1778.
Photo Boyer © Roger-Viollet. Paris
page). He became famous for his wide-ranging
scientific achievements: inventions such as the
lightning rod and bifocal eyeglasses, the "Fran¬
klin Stove" which gave more warmth than open
fireplaces and used less fuel, methods of soil
improvement, use of oil to calm rough seas etc.
The Royal Society of London honoured his
entire scientific work by making him a member
in 1756, as did the French Académie des
Sciences 16 years later. He was eventually a
member of every learned society in Europe.
Statesman and diplomat
As a statesman, Franklin stood in the front
rank of the men who built the United States.
As a delegate to the Continental Congress he was
one of the chief drafters of the Declaration of
Independence (see painting page 14). He alone
signed all four of the key documents in the early
history of the United States: the Declaration of
Independence, the Treaty of Alliance with France,
the Treaty of Peace with Great Britain and the
Constitution of the United States.
Franklin's services as minister to France
helped greatly in winning the Revolutionary War.
He received a tremendous welcome In Paris.
The French were charmed by his wise and witty
sayings and his tact and courtesy. Crowds ran
after him in the streets and poets wrote verses
in his honour. Many historians consider him the
ablest and most successful diplomat that America
has ever sent abroad. As early as 1754 he had
proposed his "Plan of Union" to bring the
13 American colonies together in "one general
government", a plan that contained germs of
ideas later Incorporated in the U.S. Constitution.
Between 1757 and 1775 he was unofficial ambas¬
sador of the colonies to Britain and joined In
the struggle against the Stamp Act by which the
British Parliament sought to tax citizens of the
American colonies, and lie stoutly defended
American interests until the Act was repealed
in 1766.
Sage and humanist, Franklin displayed a life¬
long concern for the happiness, well-being and
dignity of mankind. "God grant", he wrote in
one of his last letters, "that not only the love of
liberty but a thorough knowledge of the rights of
;nan may pervade all the nations of the earth,
so that a philosopher may set his foot anywhere
on its surface and say 'This is my country'."
