ROCK...POP...
AND RISING DECIBELS
by Irmgard Bontinck
and Desmond Mark
Young lovers of yesteryear (see medieval engraving below)
could meet in gardens orchestrated by birdsong and water
fountains. Today's Romeo and Juliet (above) must try
to whisper sweet nothings against the babel of the modern city.
TRY to imagine yourselves in the
quiet countryside somewhere,
making your way towards a town.
In order to get a better idea of the
changes in your acoustic environment,
you close your eyes, and put your ears
to work more sensitively. If we regu¬
larly put our aural impressions down
on paper at specific points in this
sound-walk, then we shall have pro¬
duced a kind of acoustic map which
would ultimately allow us to recog¬
nize by its typical features many
individual parts of the globe.
Naturally enough, it is a much more
difficult business to prepare a map of
a soundscape than a geographical
map, even more so since the methods
and terminology are only in the first
stages of development. Sonography
and geography are still a very long
way apart. The Canadian composer
and music educator R. Murray Schäfer
has become particularly fascinated by
this problem, and in the "World
Soundscape Project" which he con¬
ceived, he is setting out to research the
multifaceted links which exist between
Man, the sound environment, and
music itself. (See article page 4)
How would the map of our sound¬
scape look? In the rural, unurbanized
world of sound, noises present them¬
selves mainly one at a time, springing
out of a deep surrounding silence, k
Even the smallest sounds can ber
IRMGARD BONTINCK of Austria is
Assistant Director of Research at Mediacult
in Vienna (Austria) an international institute
founded with Unesco support to study
cultural development with special regard to
the audio-visual media. Formerly known as
the International Institute for Music, Dance
and Theatre in the Audio-visual Media,
Mediacult is directed by Kurt Blaukopf, a
member of the Executive Board of Unesco.
Irmgard Bontinck is the author of La Cri¬
tique de la Culture Établie (Critique of Esta¬
blished Culture) a study prepared for Unesco,
and editor of New Patterns of Musical Beha¬
viour of the Young Generation in Industrial
Societies (Vienna, 1974).
DESMOND MARK of Austria is in charge
of research in acoustic sociology at the
Institute for Music Sociology (Vienna). He
has published a number of papers on the
acoustic environment and the modern sound¬
scape and is co-editor of a collection of
studies, The Cultural Behaviour of Youth,
Vienna 1976.

SOUND AND SUPERSOUND
Fascinated American audience listening through ear tubes to phonograph playing popular
tune's in the 1880s (below) is a far cry from mass events such as the Woodstock
rock music festival in 1969 (far right) attended by 300,000 young spectators in Bethel,
New York. The breakthrough in electro-acoustical devices has made mastery
of the technology as important as mastery of the musical -instrument (right).
Fears that mechanization of music might induce a passive musical attitude in young people
are not borne out by a recent study on urbanization, modernity and musical behaviour
of Indian youth by Dr. Manas Raychaudhuri, of Rabindra Bharati University, Calcutta.
"The transistor radio", he reports, "has stimulated an active interest in traditional
and non-traditional music among young people in rural and semi-urban areas of India."
^ picked up, and tell their own clear
story to the countryman. From the
low tinkle of cow-bells, he can tell
where his cattle are, for example.
Birdsong, the rush of a brook, human
voicesall these aural events can be
told apart, clear one from another,
and free of distortions and background
noise.
The nearer we come to the town,
the heavier becomes the noise of
cars, trains, aeroplanes, construction
machinery, and so on, overlaying the
natural world of sound until it is
completely drowned out by the noise
of machines and traffic.
In this industrial sound-world single
acoustical signals are buried in a
broad and deep bed of background
noise; in order to make an individual
signal capable of being picked out, it
must be enormously amplifiedand
that also includes human forms of
communication, such as speech and
music.
If we examine the development of
this industrial sound-world in historical
terms, we arrive at much the same
conclusion as we did following our
earlier sound-walk. For many thou¬
sands of years our ancestors lived as
hunters and" foragers in the context
of an acoustic landscape overwhelm¬
ingly composed of the sounds of
the natural environment, with human
sounds reduced to a very minor ele¬
ment, and the noise of tools and man-
made instruments very rarely falling
on the ear.
It was only in the industrial epoch,
which began in Europe during the
first half of the 19th century, that the
soundscape underwent a radical
alteration. Today we live in industrial
centres producing a tidal wave of
noise unthinkable in earlier times,
and whose power steadily exceeds
the power of the human organism to
withstand it.
The human ear is a highly sensi¬
tive instrument, able to measure
sound intensities ranging from the
smallest perceptible physical intensity
to an intensity a million times greater.
The measurement of the strength of
sounds, however, is calculated accord¬
ing to the logarithmic decibels scale.
Each addition of 10 decibels (dB) in
intensity denotes about a doubling of
subjectively received sound. Bet¬
ween the auditory threshold and the
roar of a jet engine, which can cause
actual physical pain, lies a range of
some 120-1 30 decibels.
Jazz as seen by an American artist.
Bob Gill (1963).
10

.2. O
=> S
CE
a» »
3 C
.9" o
(/).' ,
Eu
The increasing noise of the environ¬
ment must obviously have an effect
on men and their music. In the
industrialized world people have
become quite used to the fact that as
one's age increases, the inevitable
consequence is a growing loss of
hearing. But studies carried out in
the area inhabited by the Mabaan
tribe in Sudan have turned up the
surprising fact that the tribe, living in
a peaceful acoustic environment, has
almost'no experience of hearing-loss
connected with increasing age.
A comparative study carried out
with the inhabitants of a Western in¬
dustrial country showed that the
hearing capacity of an 80-year-old
Central African was still as great as
that of an 18-year-old New Yorker.
The obvious conclusion is that any
natural hearing-loss in the aged is
radically modified by environmen¬
tal factors.
Even more dramatic is the effect of
the new sound-world on the countries
of the developing world, where the
transition to the age of technology
and its accompanying acoustic inferno
is not reached in a steady, step-by-
step, upward climb, but in one abrupt
burst.
the effects of this tidal wave of
noise can also be severely increased
by the climatic conditions; in areas
where the ambient heat makes it ne¬
cessary, and part of the local custom,
to keep doors and windows open for
most of the yearsuch as the cities of
India, which have provided the basis for
a report on the problemthe level of
noise inside the dwelling can be as
great as the level outside.
In the industrialized world, at least
it is not only the noise of machinery
which is omnipresent; music can also
be made available on a mass scale,
thanks to the existence of loudspeak¬
ers. One can hardly imagine a situa¬
tion in which loudspeaker music is not
readily available: in supermarkets,
aeroplanes, restaurants, cinemas,
banks and in the homewe can hear
music everywhere.
This again is quite unknown to
previous generations in human history.
While before, music and speech were
inextricably MnkeÖ to the physical
source of the sound, whether instru¬
ment or speaker, today any desirable
sounds can be separated from their
source by electro-acoustical means,
and reproduced on records or tapes, to
be put out with the aid of loudspeak
ers at any time and in any place.
The significance of electro-acousti¬
cal techniques, in fact, goes much
further than a simple reproduction
and instant availability of music; it
also allows a range of ways in which
original live music can be altered
in terms of intensity, sound-tone,
acoustic characteristics and so on.
It is in no way surprising that the
attitude to music shown by young
peopleparticularly open to change
and innovationhas been deeply
affected by the new sound-world
around them, or that they have
become very accustomed to the idea
of music linked with technology.
With the breakthrough in" electro-
acoustical devices (loudspeakers, am¬
plifiers, mixers, and so on), the music
of young people is a completely new
approach. The use of technological
machinery has now been integrated
into the making of music, and the
mastery of the technology is now as
important as the mastery of the musi¬
cal instrument for performers. Never
before in the entire history of music
has the average musical performance
been so dependent on technical .
means as it is now. f
11

, The most striking technical mani¬
pulation of music for young people
lies in the area of musical dynamics:
amplification. The level of amplifi¬
cation to be experienced in pop or
beat concerts, in discothèque or beat
cellars is one of the most character¬
istic signs of the changed acoustic-
musical environment. Some exact
measurements have been taken in a
number of countries of this particular
relationship of youth to music, one in
particular from Switzerland.
During a pop concert in Lausanne
a technician checked the amplifica¬
tion in various parts of the concert
hall, and later described the possible
consequences of the level of sound
received by the audience: "Measure¬
ments with the sonometer taken
during the Mahavishnu Orchestra
concert showed sound levels of
125 dB at a distance of three metres ¡
from the loudspeakers, 110 dB in
the back stalls, and 118 dB in the >
front row of the balcony. It is per¬
fectly possible that 100-200 people-
that is, some 10 per cent of the total
audiencewould have sustained irre¬
versible damage to their eardrums;
in other words, nerve-endings would
have been destroyed that cannot be
regenerated."
For all that, there is no point in
wringing one's hands over the entry
of electro-acoustic devices into the
development of music and the exper¬
ience of young people, or indeed
as is often the caseshutting one's
ears to. any discussion of such "deplor¬
able" phenomena. To identify youth
with noise is hardly helpful to an
understanding of the many-sided
problems of where man and music
stand in the acoustical environment
of today; this is an area in which it
seems particularly easy to confuse
cause and effect.
One must look deeper into this spe¬
cific acoustical relationship, in the
context of the general environment,
in order to arrive at an understanding
and so make it more possible for
alternative measures to be taken
successfully. Musicians, teachers,
technicians and sociologists have all
arrived at explanations for the strik¬
ingly high sound-levels of music for
young peopleeach of them in some
ORCHESTRA OF BUZZERS AND HOWLERS
As early as 1913 the Italian futurist painter Luigi Russolo (1885-1947) had
the revolutionary idea of using the everyday noises of the industrial age to
create a truly modern form of music. Above, Russolo with some of the
"buzzers and howlers" he invented to represent the sounds of industry,
technology and urban life. Russolo compositions, bearing such titles as
"Awakening of a Capital" and "Meeting of Automobiles and Airplanes", were
produced on these devices and presented to Italian audiences in 1914. In the
early 1920s "noise instruments" imitating sounds from industry were also
constructed in the U.S.S.R. and used to perform "noise symphonies" and
"operas". About the same time experimental symphonies of factory whistles
were held in several Soviet cities, partly due to the efforts of the great
Russian poet Mayakovsky.
way linked with the modern human
environment.
The first argument is that the
phenomenon stems from an inten¬
tional break with the adult world.
Young people demand their own
areas of freedom, and achieve them
in this sensethrough the erection of
a "sound barrier". This acoustic wall
protects their area of autonomy from
those grown-ups who refuse to cross
this sound threshold. Within the
barrier, youth can operate freely and
undisturbed.
The second thesis treats this erec¬
tion of a wall of sound in terms of
the sound-level of the environment.
In order to make themselves audible,
and to allow their own musicians a
proper hearing, it is necessary to be
louder than the ambient sound-level.
Some thought-provoking material
has been produced on the links bet¬
ween the general environmental level
of sound and the sound-levels of
30,000 SINGERS
ON STAGE
Below, mammoth annual song festival
at Tallinn (Soviet Estonia).
During the two-day event open-air concerts
attended by over 200,000 spectators are
held in the "Field of Song", whose
immense shell-shaped stage has room for
30,000 singers and 20,000 dancers.
<
O
r*£ Wk
.>TAi^

SOUNDMARK OF VANCOUVER
One of the prominent soundmarks of Vancouver (Canada) is this set of air horns on top
of one of the city's higher buildings. It plays the opening of Canada's national anthem each day
at noon. It has been doing so since 1967 when a local engineer, Robert Swanson, thought
up the idea as a way of celebrating Canada's Centennial that year. Two other
Vancouver soundmarks are the bells of Holy Rosary Cathedral and the nightly
boom of the Nine O'Clock Gun.
music, not only in the realm of beat
and rock concerts, but also where
contemporary "serious" music is
concerned: in a historical perspective,
the growth in the size of orchestras
between Haydn and Mahler is also
not without interest.
- The next argument is closely con¬
nected with the preceding two, but is
based not on an attempt to over¬
power and drown out ambient sound-
levels, but to imitate them.
Here a number of acoustic factors
play a part, all of which can be found
in current music. The level of sound
is the most apparent characteristic,
but there are also special reverbera-
tive notes, continuous droning, or
clearly recognized rhythmical patterns
which match entirely the modern
sound environment.
If one now compares the unchang¬
ing broad spectrum of background
sound to the low drumming of a beat
band, the sharp wailing of a synthe¬
sizer, and the clumped notes (cluster
effect) of modern music, the argu¬
ment that the music is a mirroring
of our technical modern world of
sound becomes at least plausible.
Yet another thesis looks at the
effect of over-loud music on the
human organism. Thanks to a num¬
ber of scientific experiments in the
area of music therapy we now know
that music has a very powerful effect
on the autonomous nervous system
in -man, particularly where the action
of the heart, the biood circulation,
and breathing rhythms are concerned.
These physiological reactions allow
one to argue that beat music, for
example, is not merely experienced
through the auditory system, but is
felt on the pulses, on the skin, in
breathing and in the heart itself;
the whole physical body is affected
by music.
When listening to musical perfor¬
mances amplified to abnormal levels,
more hormones are released and
a state of excitement is induced in
the listener. The over-amplified
sound has the effect on the organism
of an alarm signal, forcing the release
of more adrenalinthe "fight or flight"
hormonefrom the body's chemical
system.
This physical stress situation can be
stimulating; it can also lead to acts of
aggression, e.g., the destruction of
seats at the end of a concert. The
flight reaction of the body moves
completely beyond conscious control,
and can lead, in the extreme, to
fainting fits.
Even more important are the most
recent studies on the effect of over-
amplified sound on the body. These
studies see the consequences reach¬
ing much further than their initial
effect on the nervous system, and
actually affecting the substance of
the brain.
As a result of acoustic shock, the
engramsthe delicate pathways
traced in the brain which produce
memoriescan be erased. Memory
gaps can be induced. This finding is
even more alarming when considering
the position of people forced to live
in an industrial soundscape.
Thus, today, we find ourselves in
a situation of acoustical crisis. We
will have to re-think the entire rela¬
tionship of men to their acoustical
environment, as well as the increase
in noise-producing potential in our
technical . tools. The conscious
control of our acoustical and musical
environment seems yet more neces¬
sary when we remember that the
same technology which has expanded
the sound range and repertory of
contemporary music to such a fasci¬
nating extent is also threatening our
very capacity to hear, to remain
sensitive to sound.
The time has come for a campaign
for the acoustical quality of life, for
an ecology of sound.
Irmgard Bontinck
and Desmond Mark
13
