Photo ©Terje Gustavsen, Norway. International Photo Competition, U.N.-FIAP
by Georges Fradier
GEORGES FRADIER/j Acting Director of
Unesco's Division of Human Settlements
and Socio-Cultural Environment. A member
of Unesco's staff since 1949, he was head
of the Press Division and chief of Unesco
missions to Mali and Sierra Leone before
becoming director of the project for the
safeguard and development of the Tunis-
Carthage region carried out by the Tunisian
Government and Unesco with financial aid
from the U.N. Development Programme
Special Fund. Novelist and essayist, he Is
the author of "Encounters and Celebrations",
on the mutual appreciation of Eastern and
Western cultural values (1963), "East
and West, towards mutual understanding?"
(1959), and "About the Quality ol Lite"
(1976) allpublished by Unesco. He has been a
Irequent contributor to the "Unesco Courier".



HABITAT
AND THE QUALITY
OF LIFE
DESIRES create their ownspace:
a musician sees a concert hall;
a pilot dreams of a clear sky and a
ballerina of a spotlight; the aspiring
teacher visualizes a school in keeping
with his ambitions.
The quest for happiness almost al¬
ways carries with it an ¡deal lands¬
cape, village, house, garden or city.
Rare are the human beings who can
find an environment which reflects this
¡deal, and still rarer are those who are
able to live in it.
Those who have either money or
power or both are quite happy to be
privileged; they enjoy their spacious
apartments in the best parts of town,
their country houses and seaside
villas.
But as nothing In this world is per¬
fect, the best parts of town are some¬
times too close to other less desirable

Photo Unesco Courier
Above, colourful townscape in Sanaa, capital of the Arab Republic of Yemen. This ancient city has
many striking examples of traditional Yemeni architecture: tall flat-roofed houses with
multi-coloured stained-glass windows on the upper storeys and façades decorated in white, brown
and green. Opposite page: dwarfed by a blank wall, a youngster strolls amid the "machines for
living" in a modern city.
ones and are beset by drawbacks ;
mechanized agriculture and develop¬
ment spoil the beauty of the fields;
beaches may be polluted by oil or the
hotel trade. The struggle to preserve
values Is a hard one, and it Is becom¬
ing increasingly difficult to reign
over one's environment while recalling
the famous lines from Baudelaire's
L'Invitation au Voyage:
Là, tout n'est qu'ordre et beauté,
luxe, calme et volupté (1).
Yet this ¡s precisely what the quality
of the environment ought to mean.
Most people are not so demanding,
even If they consider, not unreason¬
ably, that they too deserve their share
of ordre and beauté. They are housed,
whether well or badly, they have a
job and play their part in production
and society. On the subject of their
(1) There, all Is order and beauty,
Abundance, peace and pleasure.
place of work, their small towns, fac¬
tories, suburbs, shops, offices, their
"machines for living", that is, their
residences, they are far from reticent.
All of these, they complain, mean
Inequality and exploitation, almost In¬
variably segregation and sometimes
alienation, with men and women work¬
ing solely in order to live and living In
a place only because they work there.
They are dependent on the tyranny of
industry, exposed to various kinds of
pollution, fragmented like the times
they live in.
Now some are beginning to ques¬
tion the political and economic struc¬
tures of the system which Is respon¬
sible for the lives they are forced to
lead, but more often they simply ac¬
cept them without imagining that there
could be an alternative. Some people
are used to living where they were
born; others, who form the majority,
are resigned to living where they can;
few believe there is any choice. It
seems that for centuries most human
beings, have ceased to choose their
environment.
Even so, those who work, drive, eat
and sleep In an environment which
may be dilapidated or pleasant, dull
or dangerous, but Is nonetheless a
recognized, legal and permanent dwel¬
ling-place, are the fortunate ones;
for there are people who do not have
regular work or "decent" housing or
Indeed any sort of job or shelter at all.
These are the people who are pitied
for being undernourished, inadequat¬
ely clothed and poorly educated, and
accused of having too many children.
They are described as living on the
margin of world economy and pro¬
gress enormous margins growing
ever wider on the supposedly proud
pages of history.
The population of rural and urban .
slums, together with that of areas of r
5

Planned urban
development with
functional and
geometrical high-rise
blocks (right) is today
replacing the kind of
chaotic city growth that
produced decrepit slums
(opposite page). But in
which of these two homes
do people feel happier
and less oppressed by
solitude?
Photo © Arn. Aartsen, Netherlands. International Photo Competition, U.N.-FIAP
w spontaneous settlement known var-
¡ously as bidonvilles, gourbivilles, fav-
ellas, squatters' encampments, bus-
tees or barriadas, probably numbers
two thousand million today. At least
one-third and In many cases a half of
the Inhabitants of the great cities of
Asia, Latin America and Africa live In
huts without light, situated in shameful
fringe areas without water or sanita¬
tion, and places of almost comparable
squalor can be found In North America
and Europe.
When we talk about improving hu¬
man settlements like this, we see that
their occupants are seeking to pro¬
tect themselves from cold, heat, hun¬
ger, disease and dirt; In short they are
struggling to exist. What they want Is
an environment which will not harm
either their, lives or their dignity; and
the latter consideration Is sometimes
more Important to these people than
to the relatively privileged. It explains
to a certain extent why people migrate
to cities.
To sum up, the occupants of human
settlements can be divided into three
main categories: those who can select
the best possible environment; those
who are housed without having much
choice; and those who Inhabit fringe
areas. It is true that all human beings
have the same fundamental needs; but
It Is only true In theory. If these three
categories have any practical prob¬
lems In common, they are those of
freedom, the right to speak, and the
right to act.
Members of the ruling classes auto¬
matically possess these rights. The
essential thing is to belong, either
directly or at second-hand, and money
Is less Important than friendship with
those who count. But even if people
from the same milieu have no commu¬
nication difficulties, this still does not
solve all problems. For instance there
Is hardly a city In the world capable
of controlling Its own growth: when
centres decay and suburbs sprawl, all
the Inhabitants suffer together.
Forthe majority, communication with
the authorities Is difficult, and indeed
until recently people did not even
know how to single them out, and
merely Indicated them collectively as
"they". "They" built expressways,
created or transposed industries, re¬
grouped and redistributed land; by a
stroke of then pen "they" increased
land prices tenfold, demolished sound
houses and erected high-rise office
blocks: and all thes were so many
events to be endured, for both town
and country were governed by fate.
Today however, fate, that far-off
galaxy In charge of planning and
development, Is emerging from its
anonymity. The promoters^ econo¬
mists, civil servants, engineers and
towr planners are acquiring an Iden¬
tity and thus losing some of the magic
powers which admittedly not all of
them were so anxious to possess in
the first place. Now they are coming
forward as technicians of goodwill.
They are by no means Infallible, this
they concede, and do so more fre¬
quently now that their decisions are
being challenged; for they are begin¬
ning to see the public manifesting Its
rebellion on all sides. Those concern¬
ed are demanc"ng to be informed of
urban planning and development pro¬
jects, so that they can have a chance
to discuss, modify or reject them.
6

ï^fi
Photo© Gerhard Neisins, Germany (Fed. Rep.) - International Photo Competition, U.N.-FIAP
This movement is almost universal,
and Is seen particularly in efforts to
prevent destruction, protect areas
threatened by pollution, whether
visual, chemical, "nuclear or military,
and to preserve ancient parts of towns
and with them ways of life.
Some observers deplore the move¬
ment as representing a negative atti¬
tude aimed only at obstructing dev¬
elopment or delaying worthwhile pro¬
jects and making them too expensive.
In fact the desire to protect country¬
sides, rivers or human settlements is
never negative; it Is proof of a definite
choice.
The rejection of so-called renewal
schemes which kill urban life and
drive out local inhabitants is not nega¬
tive: It represents a perfectly lucid
judgment on the kind of town planning
which has, unfortunately, been leaving
its traces all over our planet for the
last thirty years.
Yet it is just those citizens who only
become militant In a crisis situation
who would much prefer participation
to confrontation. Instead of opposing
projects which have been made known
to them at the last minute, they would
be quite happy to take part In discus¬
sions of plans which concern them, If
they could first have the chance of
approving the objectives and knowing
the facts.
Those in charge of development and
administration have everything to gain
by obtaining co-operation from local
Inhabitants rather than Imposing ready-
made solutions on them supposedly
for their own good. This fact has been
appreciated by many town planners
and architects, and it Is they who are
today seeking out the most efficient
channels for participation.
They have also realized that this
new form of democracy, perhaps the
only one capable of revitalizing poli¬
tical life in more than one country,
requires first and foremost a complete
knowledge of the facts; and that It is
their job to make these facts known to
the people concerned.
Everyone knows that nowadays to
possess information is to possess
power. But power is empty unless
there Is the will to exercise it, and
when It comes to guiding or control
ling the course of human settlements,
there is a need for civic awareness,
energy and tenacity to which we
ordinary peace-loving citizens of the
seventies are not accustomed.
The sub-privileged, sub-rural and
sub-proletarian in their sub-urbaniza¬
tion are also beset with problems,
albeit different ones, of freedom and
participation. When peasants who
own no land make their way towards
the cities, escaping from isolation,
they are exercising a choice: they are
leaving one kind of poverty for another
which may be more squalid but Is not
quite as hopeless.
To them the city represents an infi¬
nity of opportunities, a horizon of
liberty. There is no need to ask them
to take part in reconstructing the envi¬
ronment; they will dig, shape, build
and try to renovate come what may;
that is what they have come for. As
for a dialogue with officialdom, they
would be quite willing, but too often
the dialogue turns sour and official¬
dom listens to them with deaf and
authoritarian ears. Sometimes archi-.
tects work with them, acting as then r
7

k Interpreters or advocates; and they
understand.
It Is the authorities, finally, who are
now being invited to play their part In
the efforts being made by society's
fringe-dwellers. The invitation is being
Issued with growing urgency, whether
in the name of justice, solidarity, or
even quite simply of realistic com¬
mon sense, as is being done by the
Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Human Settle¬
ments, Enrique Peñalosa. It does no
good to say that government must
provide housing If In fact government
cannot provide...
"The houses of the poor will be
built by the poor, as they always have
been. The great majority of all dwel¬
lings in the world today were built by
the people who lived in them. Beyond
the provision of land, the role of
government in the actual construction
In poor countries will be catalytic..."
(Speech at the American University,
Washington D.C, 10 November 1975).
These principies, still considered in
some quarters as revolutionary, were
debated at Habitat, the United Nations
conference on Human Settlements
HOG HEAVEN AND LOVERS PARADISE. These farmland vistas with pigs grazing
and gambolling across the fields (above) painted on the walls of a pork processing
plant in California, are eye-catching and amusing. Begun in 1957 when the
factory commissioned an artist. Les Grimes, to decorate its exterior walls they
are also the work of another painter, Arno Jordan. Today known as
"Hog Heaven : Farmland Vista", they foreshadowed the current U.S. trend in
B

Photo from "Currant Art Magazine", June-July 1975 © 1975 KORE Enterprises Inc., Los Angeles, U.S.A
outdoor wall decoration which began in California about 1967 when young
artists sought a new outlet for their talents. As one artist has put it : "We
wanted to take paintings off collectors' walls, out of the museum and the studio
and into the streets where everyone can see them." Below, "Lovers Paradise"
a Philippines entry in an international photo competition held in connexion with
the United Nations "Habitat" conference (see also box page 32).
which brought together over 3,000
delegates from 140 governments In
Vancouver (Canada) from 31 May to
11 June 1976.
In other words governments are
being asked to gain control over the
land in order to entrust it to those who
need It, and to ensure essential ser¬
vices such as transport and sanitation.
Apart from this, let them collaborate
with those who are doing the building.
These then are the objectives of
free participation In the development
of human settlements: on one hand to
give a rudimentary habitat the status
it deserves ("Sub-standard is still bet¬
ter than sub-human" as Peñalosa has
also said) and on the other to create
the social conditions necessary for an
acceptable environment.
At all events, however, men and
women will enjoy a more harmonious
and dignified relationship with their
environment when they realize that
they bear the responsibility for it.
Georges Fradier
Photo© Ang Kim-Shing, Philippines. International Photo Competition, U.N.-FIAP
9
