On 8 July 1975 the ancient city of Pagan in Burma was
rocked by an earthquake. Of all the great centres of
Buddhism in Asia few boast such a concentration of
religious edifices as Pagan with its forest of pagodas
and stupas. All told some 5,000 monuments extend
across a site covering over 70 sq. km. In Pagan's
fantastic landscape some stand out glistening white
against their red-brown weatherbeaten neighbours.
A Unesco mission was sent to Pagan in November
1975 to assess the damage to the temples and advise
on urgent restoration work.




PAGAN
'BURMA'S'
ANCIENT CITY
OF 2,000 PAGODAS
DAMAGED BY
A VIOLENT
EARTHQUAKE
by Pierre Pichará
IMAGINE one of the great religious
capitals of the world Rome, Cairo
or Kyoto, for example deserted by
its inhabitants. Imagine that all 'its
dwellings the palaces of the mighty,
the villas of the rich and the homes
of the poorer neighbourhoods had
today completely disappeared, but that
its countless religious edifices were
still standing, with churches, mosques
or temples set in open country,
monasteries encircled by ploughed
PIERRE PICHARD, French architect, was
sent to Burma by Unesco in 1975 to assess
the damage caused by the earthquake in the
ancient city of Pagan and to report on the
restoration needs of its monuments. Bet¬
ween 1969 and 1971 he taught at the
School of Architecture at Nantes (France).
He has also carried out restoration missions
for Unesco at Panom Rung (Thai/and) and
Paharpur (Bangladesh).
fields, and minarets or bell-towers
looking down on farming villages.
This astonishing spectacle you have
conjured up is exactly what we find
today at the site of Pagan, capital of
the first Burmese royal dynasty, a city
which stood on a vast cultivated plain
of the Irrawaddy river, surrounded
with fields of sesame, peanuts and
corn, and villages set among clusters
of trees.
Dwellings, markets and palaces,
built of wood and bamboo, have been
effaced by the centuries. The only
remaining trace of secular architecture
is the wall around the ancient city,
said to have been erected by King
Pyinbya in the ninth century A.D.
Here are more than 2,500 religious
edifices of all shapes and sizes, some
assembled in great constellations,
others in small groups and others
again standing in isolation. All these
monuments within an area just under
80 square km are cared for by Burma's
Department of Archaeology which has
carried out an inventory of all the
remains. Monuments at Pagan total
some 5,000 if all the archaeological
vestiges are included.
Pagan has two main types of
monument:
Stupas or pagodas, masonry con¬
structions enclosing some venerated
relic. They frequently stand upon
several terraces arranged in tiers, and
are reached by flights of steps on
each facade. The main structure,
generally circular in plan, suggests an
enormous bell surmounted by a deli¬
cately wrought flower-shaped metal
ornament.
The Shwezigon pagoda is the most
famous and attracts numerous pilgrims,
especially during festivals, occasions
when traditional theatrical perform-
14

anees, music and dancing take place,
and great» markets are held. The
offerings of the pilgrims help to
maintain the gold-leaf coating, period¬
ically renewed over the entire surface
of the edifice.
Temples, known in Burmese as
gu or "grottoes" are the second type
of monument. The name is clearly an
allusion to the ancient temple-caves
of Buddhist India, but also indicates
how they differ from the stupas, for
what counts here is the space left
inside for people to walk around the
statues of Buddha.
The main structure is usually shaped
like a cube surmounted by tiered
terraces, crowned either with a tower
known as a "sikhara" or with a
masonry bell resembling a stupa.
Rising overhead is the summit orna¬
ment with its slender spire. At the
terrace corners,' where the steps lead
off, there are turrets, urns or small
stupas.
The tallest temple in Pagan, the
Thatbyinnyu, is 64 metres high, the
height of a 20-storey building, and
comprises corridors on four levels, a
wide vestibule, a vast sanctuary, and
terraces.
In addition to the temples and
stupas, there exist numerous mon¬
asteries, other partly underground
edifices (temples or monasteries),
vaulted rectangular rooms known as
"ordination halls", subsidiary structures
such as walled enclosures and gate-
lodges, and some ornamental pools,
reservoirs and canals.
! The decoration inside the temples is
mostly the work of painters. The
paintings, in vivid colours (often dulled
by time but which careful cleaning
restores) cover the walls and the
vaults, either as great panels in broad
compositions featuring numbers of
human figures, or as small groups
of individual scenes, frequently ac¬
companied by inscriptions not unlike
modern comic strips.
These scenes illustrate the ¡atakas,
tales of the former lives of Buddha.
Colour is enhanced by outline drawing
felicitously emphasizing expressions
on faces, details of clothing or
objects, attitudes of animals, as well
as depicting decorative plant motifs.
Sculptors have also left their mark:
imposing statues of Buddha, smaller
statues placed in the many niches, or,
at the Nanpaya temple, four stone
pillars decorated with extremely beauti¬
ful sculpture carved in low relief.
Although numerous legends attribute
very great antiquity to the city of
Pagan and suggest that the royal
dynasty was founded about 108 A.D.,
inscriptions and other historical evi-
15

, dence provide a more scientific basis
for a history of Pagan beginning
with the reign of Anawrahta (1044-
1077 A.D.). And although several
archaeological finds have revealed that
the site has been occupied since
neolithic times, the oldest monuments
of Pagan would appear to date from no
earlier than the eleventh century A.D.
Anawrahta is said to have conquered
the Mon kingdom of Thaton (in the
south-central part of present-day
Burma) in 1057, and to have brought
to Pagan Thaton's captive king, arti¬
sans, workmen, architects and scholars,
as well as the sacred texts of Thera-
vada Buddhism, the religion of Burma
down to the present day.
The kingdom of Pagan extended
almost to the frontiers of modern
Burma, and was to last for two
hundred and fifty years: it collapsed
before the Mongol armies of Kublai
Khan, then master of China, which
took Pagan in 1287 A.D. The Peking
court thereupon broke up the kingdom
into small rival principalities, and the
last kings of Pagan were rulers in
name only. It was from other capitals
such as Toungoo, Ava, Pegu and
Mandalay, that later Burmese dynasties
succeeded in restoring the unity of
the kingdom.
However, the city was never com¬
pletely abandoned. Paintings in the
underground temple of Kyanzittha
Umin feature Mongol soldiers, showing
that work continued under their
occupation. Even later, a few monu¬
ments were constructed, and others
decorated, right down to the eighteenth
century. The most celebrated sanc¬
tuaries have been cared for by monks
from neighbouring monasteries until
our own times.
ON 8 July 1975, this unique site
was rocked by an earthquake.
An initial series of vertical tremors at
6:35 in the evening was followed by a
few seconds of calm, and then
horizontal movements in a northeast-
southwest direction. Amid the din of
collapsing masonry, monuments dis¬
appeared in enormous . red clouds
which slowly deposited the dust of
crushed mortar and bricks.
Staff from the Department of
Archaeology set out as night was
falling to assess the damage and for
several days despatched to the capital
a growing list of damaged monuments.
Fortunately, however, the earthquake
had claimed no victims.
The tremor reached an intensity of
8 on the international scale (graduated
from 1 to 12), and its magnitude on
the Richter scale was estimated at 5.6.
The epicentre seems to have been
quite close. The tremor was more
intense around the modern village of
Pagan and along the river, where
numerous monuments were heavily
damaged, and less so towards the
southeast.
The extent of the damage thus varies
widely from one monument to another.
Several factors may have either
produced a combined effect or can¬
celled one another out. These include
the site of the building, its mass, its
architecture, the details of its con¬
struction and its state of preservation.
Although several monuments col¬
lapsed entirely, it was generally only
the upper parts which suffered, in
varying degrees. The vaults of the
temples of Manuha and Mimalaung
Kyaung, the upper storey of Guni
North and of several other temples,
collapsed into the halls or corridors.
Elsewhere, damage was limited to the
superstructures: steeples of stupas and
sikharas, turrets, terrace walls, etc.
In general, and though spectacular,
this damage has not jeopardized the
stability of these monuments, and
except in rare cases the work of
restoration can be progressively under¬
taken without any difficult problems.
More serious is the structural
damage affecting the upper part of
the walls and the vaults which they
support. Deep crevices reveal move¬
ments of inclination and subsidence
which may be intensified by the thrust
of the vaults.
These shaken monuments have been
more or less stabilized for the time
being, but are still in a dangerous
condition, and major work will be
required to ensure their survival:
insertion of reinforced-concrete ties
and countervaults, interior lining of
terrace walls, etc.
The only irreparable damage was to
the decorations: sculptured plaster that
fell from outside surfaces and painted
plaster fallen from the inside. In most
cases, the fragments shattered upon
striking the ground and cannot be
pieced together. A few monuments
lost half of their paintings in this way,
but more frequently the loss amounts
to 10 to 20 per cent of what existed
before the earthquake. Parts still in
place, but in some cases loosened,
could fall at any moment.
Pagan had already experienced
several earthquakes: Burma is situated
in the so-called "trans-Asiatic" seismic
zone extending from the Mediterranean
to Indonesia. More than 400 earth¬
quakes were recorded in Burma
between 1904 and 1975, including 32
of a magnitude greater than 6. Though
Pagan is located west of the most
exposed region (the north-south Pegu-
Mandalay fault) it suffered shocks and
damage in 1948, 1965 and 1967, and
five slight tremors were reported
between 1968 and 1975.
Several ancient inscriptions found
on monuments refer to restorations
following a seismic disturbance, and
a history of Burma, written by a
minister, Twin Thin, relates that under
the reign of Narapatisithu (1174-1211),
an earthquake "ravaged the temples,
monasteries and pagodas, from the
southwest corner of the royal palace
to the jetty of Let-Pan, and covered the
ground with a network of crevices."
Hence the earthquake occurred
during construction of the monuments,
and was doubtless not the only one.
This explains the great care taken with
the foundations (which have never
budged down to present times) and
with the construction in general: well-
baked bricks scrupulously assembled
(at least on the facings), thick walls
reinforced at critical points with cross-
pieces or foundations of stone, vaults
of carefully bonded brick, all of which
prevented much more serious damage
and make it possible to undertake the
work of restoration under the most
favourable conditions.
However, the job is sure to be long,
tricky and costly. In particular, earth¬
quakes must be regarded as a per¬
manent threat, and the work must be
capable of safeguarding structures
from at least force-8 tremors on the
international scale.
The great number of badly shaken
monuments will require several work¬
sites to be operating at the same time
and an order of priority to be estab¬
lished for restoration work. The
Burmese authorities and people realize
the size of the job and are resolved
to devote a major effort to it.
IMMEDIATELY after the catastro¬
phe, effective temporary measures
were taken: tarpaulins were installed
on frames and terraces repaired to
protect the monuments during the rainy
season, and in numerous cases this
preserved interior paintings and pre¬
vented further collapsing: scaffoldings
have been erected and damage surveys
prepared. Removal of debris and
cleaning up were quickly done, with
the aid of numerous youth movement
volunteers from all over Burma.
Collections among the Burmese
people have raised three million kyatts
(approximately U.S. $480,000), and this
sum is still intact, since the initial
work was financed out of government
emergency funds. An Advisory Board
was set up to co-ordinate the action
of several government departments
and of engineers from the Rangoon
Institute of Technology.
However, a job of such magnitude
and urgency is an enormous one for
a country to undertake alone, and it
is to be hoped that international aid
will be organized. The qualified work¬
force already available at Pagan and
Rangoon will have to be increased
and trained in new techniques of
restoration and consolidation.
But the lack of foreign currency
makes it very difficult for Burma to
purchase the minimum equipment
required to cope with this urgent task.
An initial calculation has estimated the
cost of needed equipment (cranes,
trucks, concrete-mixers, drawing, sur¬
veying and worksite equipment, etc.)
at around U.S. $900,000. Numerous
countries and cultural institutions
should be ready to share in such
a worthwhile enterprise.
Pierre Pichará
16

ANANDA
garbed in white
and capped
with gold
Glittering against the skyline, Ananda pagoda is one of the most famous and
best-preserved of the temples of Pagan (above). Completed in the 11th century, its
plan may have been inspired by the great cave-temples of India. Damaged in the .
earthquake of July 1975, Ananda figured on the list of monuments for priority
restoration drawn up by the Burmese authorities. Photos below show aspects of
restoration work being carried out on Pagan's major edifices. Note the dense
framework of bamboo scaffolding. It provides a solid structuré which enables
craftsmen to reach the highest and least accessible parts of damaged temples.

rOr%ftx: «* IN írpy?-%mcrPLa<r «Q»VjyÄi*»)^»TMrj^ci|Bog'if < J»fp£ï' ^«
Photos © J. -A. Lavaud, Paris
FRAGILE TREASURES FROM
THE TEMPLES OF P/ûJGAN
Photos on this double page show wall paintings and carvings from Pagan
temples that were hit by a violent earthquake last year.
1 Carved in the 11th century on a wall of Nanpaya temple at Pagan (Burma)
this low-relief sculpture shows Brahma holding lotus flowers. Head of Brahma
here has three faces. Only one of them can be seen on photo, hence the apparent
disproportion between Brahma's arm and face.
2 Many of the inner walls of Pagan's temples are decorated with paintings
executed on dry chalk plaster. Paintings such as this one, depicting figures holding
lotus flowers, were gracefully executed in bright colours though some are now
faded with age. The lotus is often associated with the Buddha. Like the lotus,
which germinates under the water and rises to the surface to unfold, the Buddha
is born in this world and rises above it.
3 Animated scene thronged with figures is part of a large 18th-century wall
painting in the little monastery of Ananda-Okkyaung, near the great temple of
Ananda. Detail shows everyday scenes from the lives of Burmese princes,
including their construction of a temple as a votive offering.
4 Sikharas, graceful brick towers covered with carved plaster, crown most of
the temples of Pagan. Fragile and delicate, they suffered severe damage in the
earthquake of 8 July 1975. Photo shows remarkable example of plaster carving
on the tip of a sikhara.
18 19

rOr%ftx: «* IN írpy?-%mcrPLa<r «Q»VjyÄi*»)^»TMrj^ci|Bog'if < J»fp£ï' ^«
Photos © J. -A. Lavaud, Paris
FRAGILE TREASURES FROM
THE TEMPLES OF P/ûJGAN
Photos on this double page show wall paintings and carvings from Pagan
temples that were hit by a violent earthquake last year.
1 Carved in the 11th century on a wall of Nanpaya temple at Pagan (Burma)
this low-relief sculpture shows Brahma holding lotus flowers. Head of Brahma
here has three faces. Only one of them can be seen on photo, hence the apparent
disproportion between Brahma's arm and face.
2 Many of the inner walls of Pagan's temples are decorated with paintings
executed on dry chalk plaster. Paintings such as this one, depicting figures holding
lotus flowers, were gracefully executed in bright colours though some are now
faded with age. The lotus is often associated with the Buddha. Like the lotus,
which germinates under the water and rises to the surface to unfold, the Buddha
is born in this world and rises above it.
3 Animated scene thronged with figures is part of a large 18th-century wall
painting in the little monastery of Ananda-Okkyaung, near the great temple of
Ananda. Detail shows everyday scenes from the lives of Burmese princes,
including their construction of a temple as a votive offering.
4 Sikharas, graceful brick towers covered with carved plaster, crown most of
the temples of Pagan. Fragile and delicate, they suffered severe damage in the
earthquake of 8 July 1975. Photo shows remarkable example of plaster carving
on the tip of a sikhara.
18 19
