WE all live in an environment
of acoustical vibrations from
which we take what is useful, infor¬
mative, and enjoyable for human
existence and into which we broad¬
cast a variety of sounds that others
may hear and make use of. From
the standpoint of the behavioural
sciences, the phenomena we call
sounds can be divided into three
basic categories, the first called
noise, the second music, and the
third speech. I will try to explore
these three realms of sonic expe¬
rience here from the somewhat
specialized perspective of psychiatry.
NOISE. Physically, all acoustical
phenomena share certain properties.
Sounds are produced by movements
and transmitted centrifugally in the
form of pressure waves through
various media. When such vibra¬
tory events impinge on pressure-
sensitive receivers called ears, they
Call forth a variety of perceptions.
As human beings, we are in pos¬
session of a remarkably capable
auditory system, and while our ears
do not react to vibrations much
above 20,000 cycles per second as
do those of bats, certain insects,
and other members of nonhuman
species, what we do with the limited
band of frequencies that we perceive
is truly remarkable.
The three categories of human
soundsnoise, music, and speech-
represent not only spheres of differ¬
entiation in our perception of sonic
events but also point to different
groups of specialists who deal with
unique aspects of the world of
sounds.
Noise is generally thought to be
that category of sound which has an
intrusive or disturbing effect. It tends
to make people wince and complain.
They can only tolerate a certain
amount of noise before feeling
PETER OSTWALD, American psychiatrist
and educator, is an authority on acoustics and
linguistics especially as related to problems
of mental health and disease. Professor of
Psychiatry at the School of Medicine, Uni¬
versity of California in San Francisco, he is
particularly interested in the psychiatric pro¬
blems of refugees, displaced persons and
victims of disaster. His latest book. Commu¬
nication and Human Interaction, will be
published in 1977.


PSYCHOANALYSIS
OF SOUND
by Peter Ostwa/d
tense, irritable, annoyed or actually
in pain.
This does not mean that all noise
should be controlled or eliminated.
One of the great advantages of the
Soundscape Project inaugurated by
Murray Schäfer and his colleagues
in Vancouver is that it shows the
sorts of noises people become adap¬
ted to and learn to live with (see
article page 4). A certain amount
of discomfort can also result when
we are suddenly deprived of the
customary environmental noises.
Physiologists used to think of the
ear as having a fairly fixed "threshold, "
and that a sound could not be per¬
ceived until it achieved an intensity
capable of crossing this threshold for
hearing. We now know this to be
an overly simple idea, one which
may be true for a very small set of
relatively pure sounds presented
under controlled conditions in a
laboratory, but is not applicable to
the majority of noises.
Indeed, every sound of nature is
a relatively complex physical event,
one which must be considered in.
terms of the duration of time from
the onset of vibrations to their cessa¬
tion, plus the exact waveforms,
frequencies, and intensities of vibra¬
tory components. Not only may the
auditory threshold shift in the course
of listening, but even before a sound
actually begins, different listeners
can have different threshold levels
depending on their state of arousal
and their expectations.
One reason why noises differ in
their effects is that as we focus to
listen, our eardrums may tighten up,
requiring less acoustical energy to
set the auditory system in motion
than when the drums are relaxed.
Under the condition of auditory
attentiveness our ears are maximally
receptive, and sounds that are ordi¬
narily ignored may then come into
awareness and be labelled as noise.
One can easily observe this reaction
in the concert hall when a slight
whisper by someone in the audience
can be distracting and unpleas¬
ant to the attentive music-lover.
Acoustical scientists who use
instruments to measure sound have
discovered that what we call noise
tends to have a high intensitywhen
reaching about 120 decibels a sound
actually starts to produce painand
that in terms of vibration pattern,
noise tends to be spread in a fairly
dense and irregular way across the
frequency spectrum, with a time
distribution that is not very predictable.
Science also is able to make some
fairly reliable statements about how
much noise is potentially damaging
to the ear as well as to the rest of
the human body.
But can the physical study of
sound waves totally define what a
noise is? No! Some human fac¬
tors play a very important role in
this. For instance, a listener's age
seems to determine how much and
what kind of sound can be tolerated.
Youngsters in general tolerate much
more noise than do oldsters, and a
cymbal crash or vocal shriekenjoyable
for a teenager can drive a middle-
aged person quite frantic.
Tastes and styles in listening
change from generation to genera¬
tion. Thus, the engineer with his
battery of measuring devices capable
of giving objective definitions to
various noises, is still left in the end
with a subjective definition: noise is
unwanted sound.
30

With this definition in mind, we
can turn to some observations about
noise which are of psychiatric interest.
First of all, there appears to be a
strong association between noise
and fear. Throughout the course of
human history noise has been dreaded
as a source of evil power. The
ancients thought that noise has
death-dealing properties and .one
finds the idea in primitive folkiore,
for example, that it is the noise of a
spear's impact which kills its victim.
The Assyrians believed in evil deities
capable of producing noises that
cause earthquakes and storms.
Frightful creatures are often por¬
trayed as noisy. One sees this
characterization not only on the
stage where villains shriek and dan¬
gerous beasts roar, but also in the
behaviour of people who are on the
attack.
Noise has been a tool of warfare
for centuries. Trumpet blasts and
drumbeats incite men to action. The
Romans employed a special cadre of
troops to make noises capable of
frightening and confusing the enemy.
The invention of chemical explosives
for warfare strengthened this con¬
nexion between noise and offen-
siveness, and during the two world
wars, systematic efforts were made
to find sounds that can kill.
Gala concert!
The technology of destructive
sound is paradoxically silent ! Ultra¬
sonic beams which can burn and
destroy tissue actually are inaudible
to the human ear. Used mostly for
medical work in ultrasound diagnosis
and surgery, this form of acoustical
energy does not at the present time
pose much of a threat to humankind.
Noise has often been used for
therapeutic purposes. Defective or
damaged organs give off tell-tale
noises, and clinicians must know
how to recognize them. Scraping
joints, heart murmurs, harsh noises
in the chest, gurgling of the intes¬
tines and many other body
noises have been diagnostic signs
for centuries, detected first by the
clinicians' unaided ears and later by
technical means, such as percussion
of the chest and auscultation with a
stethoscope. Today's specialized
methods of phonocardiography can
give useful information about heart
disease.
Currently, doctors do not believe
that excessive noise is particularly
good for patients. But it should be
mentioned before we go on to the
two other categories of sound that
there have been therapists who
firmly believed in the curative pro¬
perties of violent acoustical stimuli,
mostly in the days when illness was
thought to be caused by evil spirits
"taking possession" of the body.
To aid in exorcising these invaders,
healers would scream and yell at
patients, or use instruments to make
terrifying noises. The influence of
Mesmer, a doctor of the 1 8th century
who believed in animal magnetism
rather than evil spirits (and, inciden¬
tally, was a practising music thera¬
pist) has promoted a much quieter
and restrained form of psychotherapy.
Yet even today, mostly in nonmedical
circles, a so-called "primal scream"
therapy is being promoted. It calls
for noise as part of the healing
process.
MUSIC. I now want to comment
on music as a distinctive experience
in the world of sound, one that is
more pleasurable than noise but
unlike speech conveys no precise or
linguistic meanings. The highly emo¬
tional and desirable connotations of
music probably stem from childhood,
before communication with words,
when an ebb and flow of rhythms
and vocalizations bound the infant to
his or her mother and song-and-
dance was part of socialization
through play.
Every human being has a residue
of ecstatic feelings tied up in memory
with blissful emotions. It can be
tapped when the individual is appro¬
priately stimulated, through singing,
playing, listening, and participating
in music.
Subsequent life experiences have a
tendency to emphasize the importance
of music for emotional well-being or,
on the contrary, to squelch the child's
involvement in this form of sonic
hedonism. Some children develop a
special relationship to music, an art
form available in every human cul¬
ture which offers unique opportunities
for imagination and self-expression.
Like mathematics, the other great
nonverbal form of thinking that
interests many children, music occa¬
sionally produces a marvel of nature.
This is the child prodigyWolfgang
Amadeus Mozart or Yehudi Menuhin
for examplewho can set the world
on fire with his extraordinary abilities
even before reaching adolescence.
Other musically gifted personalities
emerge into the spotlight of public
acclaim only when they are big
enough and sufficiently independent
to forge a career without parental
guidancethe Beatles, for example,
whose musical taste and even general
bearing and behaviour have influenced
an entire generation of people in
many countries of the world. Devoid
of semantics, music is the only lan¬
guage that approaches true univer¬
sality.
Music-making is a skill that involves
specific vocal and/or manual move¬
ments, and for this reason is much
easier to acquire during the firsts
decade of life. Our mental and*
31

^emotional openness to the learning
of new complex acts tends to fade
after puberty, and this limits the
number of people who can excel in
musical behaviour.
The psychiatrist thus encounters
two kinds of problems around music.
One has to do with musicians who
cannot tolerate their minority status
and who may suffer from the social
isolation which results from speciali¬
zation and excellence. The other
problem has to do with non-musicians
who for various internal and external
reasons cannot participate in this
foremost emotional experience and
thus are cut off from one of the richest
sources of human culture.
It is interesting from a historical
perspective that Sigmund Freud, the
psychiatrist whose ideas have had
such a strong influence during the
past eighty years as a result of his
extraordinary literary skill and force
of character, was in significant ways
unmusical.
This may have stemmed in part
from his early childhood. Freud
became upset when his little sister
started playing the piano and in a
rather tyrannical way he demanded
that the offending instrument be
removed from the house. Later,
when the world-famous psychoanalyst
was consulted by musicians, including
Gustav Mahler and Bruno Walter, he
spent very little time with these men
in contrast to the much greater atten¬
tion he gave to other patients.
Nor did Freud's most creative
disciple, the psychiatrist O G. Jung,
have much understanding for music,
as he regretfully confessed in personal
correspondence. Part of the problem
may stem from the intense curiosity
both of these men of genius displayed
towards dreaming as a means of
psychological insight.
Not only are dreams mostly visual,
but the sound-effects that accom¬
pany them tend to be difficult to
remember and even more difficult
to talk about. During sleep, hearing
tends to be directed outward into the
external environment, whereas the
eyes are closed and able to scan the
inner, psychic milieu. Hervey de
Saint-Denis, whose dream studies
were published several decades
before Freud's, found that different
tunes played while he was asleep
caused him to dream about women
he had danced with to these tunes.
The composer Igor Stravinsky was
able to observe how dreaming helped
his creativity. One night before
going to bed he was disturbed by a
certain tonal interval which kept
coming to mind, and he dreamt about
it as an elastic substance stretched
between two notes. Along with the
notes he visualized testicle-like eggs,
warm and protected by nests. This
vision apparently reassured the com¬
poser, and after waking up he felt'
more comfortable about his musical
ideas and whatever else had been
troubling him.
I once treated a patient who, after
dreaming about a theme from Bach's
Saint Matthew Passion, suddenly
came to the realization that he felt
jealous enough to "crucify" his best
friend.
SPEECH. Finally we turn to speech,
the third major component of man's
world of sound, one we value most
for reasoning and for the communi¬
cation of explicit, factual meanings.
Like music, speech begins in
infancy. The mother orfather fol¬
lows the child's gaze to what interests
him or her and teaches the child what
to pay attention to and what to ignore.
Objects of focussed attention are
given namese.g., Mama, milk.
Daddy, toy, bed, etc.and as the
baby grows older he or she repeats
the names, or verbal labels, with
increasing exactness.
Connectives, adjectives, action-
words, and adverbs that the child
hears in the environment of speech
sounds also become part of his or
her verbal repertoire, partly due to
an innate or biological propensity
which the human brain has for making
sense, and partly because the child
wants to share the communicative
network of a family and society.
Most children achieve considerable
facility in understanding and using'
speech before they are ten years old.
A secondary process of literaliza-
tion takes place during this first
decade of living in most societies,
especially those which consider
schools to be essential for the educa¬
tion of children and where high value
is placed on reading and writing.
Unfortunately the acquisition of
literary skills creates conflicts between
the ear and the eye. No sound is
ever heard or spoken in exactly the
same way twice, and during the
years that the child masters language,
he or she also comes to enjoy the
marvellously dynamic and flowing
quality of speech and learns to
depend on the ever-changing nuances
and emotional inflections of the voice.
The speech medium consists of
hisses and buzzes articulated quite
rapidly, in clusters of about five mor¬
phemes per second. To represent
this information nonacoustically with
visual symbols requires an alphabet,
and no alphabet has yet been devised
that accurately and reliably translates
all speech sounds.
Thus school-children are made to
learn a fairly arbitrary system of let¬
ters, so arbitrary in fact that as
George Bernard Shaw pointed out,
the word "fish" could also be spelled
"ghoti" (gh as in laugh, o as in women,
and ti as in nation).
In psychiatry, we see many casual¬
ties of this kind of education. First
of all there are "dyslexic" children
whose brains simply rebel at the
basic notions of written language so
that while they speak perfectly well,
they write in reverse or in typically
disorganized ways, and have trouble
reading.
Another group of children shows
undue concern for verbal disconti¬
nuities (e.g., spaces between words
play a significant role in writing but
don't exist in speech). Some begin
to stammer or stutter over words that
ordinarily pose no problems. Dys-
fluent youngsters are often singled
out for ridicule, punishment, or extra
schoolwork. Finally there are chil¬
dren who withdraw from speech
situations because of a sense of
frustration or the fear of humiliation.
I have tried to set down a few
observations about the role of sound
in human affairs, dividing the acou¬
stical world roughly ¡ntc three com¬
ponents music, and speech.
There is, of course, a considerable
overlap. Thus certain musical com¬
positions when heard for the first
time may seem noisy, and speech
can enter the realm of music through
song.
Electronics has given science the
tools to study acoustical behaviour
directly, by recording sound so it
can be repeated over and over, and
by video-recording the body move¬
ments and facial expressions during
sound-making and silent behaviour.
Much of the knowledge gained from
today's research probably cannot be
preserved in books and journals, as
was done in past centuries, but has
to be transmitted through direct
experience.
I have been impressed in my acti¬
vities as a psychotherapist with the
extraordinary versatility that patients
at all agesnot only children and
adolescentsdisplay in their use and
abuse of sound. Therapeutic com¬
munication consists in many ways of
attempts to clarify meaning and
reduce anxiety through the analysis
of what people say, how they feel
themselves to be in an environment
of social rhythms, and what they do
to each other.
Whether such knowledge will affect
the search for truth and how it can
influence belief is impossible to pre¬
dict, but my hope is that the human
ear will continue to become increa¬
singly sophisticated in perceiving the
warnings of noise, the beauty of
music, and the meaningfulness of
speech.
Peter Ostwald
32
