THE STATE AS A PATRON
OF THE ARTS
created a decade ago by the U.S. Congress
the National Endowment for the Arts
today operates with an annual budget of $82 million
and occupies a significant place in the cultural life of America
by Nancy Hanks
LIFE is what goes on while
we're making other plans."
So goes an adage that's as true for
nations as it is for individuals.
When thirteen colonies declared
their independence from the distant
British crown 200 years ago, the found¬
ing fathers laid great plans indeed to
guarantee "life, liberty and the pursuit
of happiness." They achieved some
goals almost immediately, like the
establishment of a representative
government. But they deferred other
ideal aims, such as the nurturing of
the arts, which was put off for 190
years.
Many of the founding fathers had
the highest regard for the fine arts
and believed that the government
should actively encourage them. I
have always believed that the oppor¬
tunity to engage in cultural activities
was one of the things Thomas Jeffer¬
son meant by "the pursuit of hap¬
piness." But there were more press¬
ing, practical problems to solve during
the nation's infancy.
Benjamin Franklin, a clever diplo¬
mat and eminently practical scientist,
put it most simply: "All things have
their season, and with young coun¬
tries as with young men, you must
curb their fancy to strengthen their
judgment... To America, one school¬
master is worth a dozen poets, and
NANCY HANKS is Chairman of the U.S.
National Endowment for ' the Arts and
National Council on the Arts. She was
formerly Assistant to the Undersecretary
of the U.S. Department of Health, Education
and Welfare and later Special Assistant,
Special Projects Office, at the White House.
She was a member of the U.S. National
Commission for Unesco from 1970 to 1975.
the invention of a machine or the
improvement of an implement is of
more importance than a masterpiece
of Raphael."
In 1789, the year the Constitution
came into effect to "secure the Bles¬
sings of Liberty to ourselves and our
posterity", George Washington recog¬
nized the importance of the arts and
learning. He wrote that members of
Congress should use their "best
endeavors to improve the education
and manners of a people; to accele¬
rate progress of art and science: to
patronize works of genius... to cherish
institutions favorable to humanity."
Elsewhere he urged the creation of a
national university in order to foster
"a flourishing state of the arts and
sciences."
John Adams, our second President,
explained in a letter to his wife, Abi¬
gail, "I must study politics and war
that my sons may have liberty to study
mathematics and philosophy In order
to give their children a right to study
painting, poetry, music, architecture."
His priorities were sound for the
time. Physical and political security
came first on the list of Federal busi¬
ness; trade and economy came
second. The arts would just have to
wait. (If Adams' vision was noble, his
timetable was too optimistic by half.
His son, John Quincy Adams, studied
politics too and became the nation's
sixth President.)
The practical bent of the new gov¬
ernment marked a pendulum's swing
away from official support of the arts,
which had been actively encouraged
by the very first European colonizers.
In the first half of the 16th century the
Spanish built mission schools in the
present-day southwest. Modelled after
medieval cathedral schools, they
stressed music education in particular
and taught students not only how to
perform, but how to build instruments
and compose as well. Unfortunately
that tradition languished. Many feel
that the arts are still largely ignored
in public education.
The federal government's first invol¬
vement with the arts centred on
architectural plans for the capital city
of Washington, D.C. At that time,
urban planning was a respected tra¬
dition. Early New England towns, for
example, were meticulously designed
around central greens or "commons,"
open spaces jointly owned by all citi¬
zens. The new capital, built from
scratch above the marshy banks of
the Potomac, was envisioned as a
monumental city of public buildings ,
that would reflect the ideals of the
republic.
Native-born talent being scarce, the
city was designed by Pierre L'Enfant,
a gifted if temperamental French en¬
gineer who had distinguished himself
in the Continental Army. The Capito|
building was designed by William
Thornton, a physician born in the Vir¬
gin Islands and educated in Scotland.
Thornton and Etienne Hallett, a
French-born architect, were responsi¬
ble for much of the early construction,
built with European artisans and slave
labour. But the work was largely obli¬
terated when the British burned the
city during the War of 1812.
Following the Treaty of Ghent,
which ended the war in 1814, the
Capitol and the White House were
rebuilt and the first serious debates
over Federal arts patronage began.
At issue, initially, were decorations for
the Capitol. A bill was introduced to
commission "four paintings of the
principal events of the Revolution" for
the Rotunda.
40

Government support has done much in America to make the arts more accessible to more people.
This is particularly true of the past decade, since the foundation of the U.S. National Endowment
for the Arts which stimulates and supports a wide spectrum of cultural activities.
The Arts Endowment, for instance, helps neighbourhood and ethnic groups launch cultural
community programmes and it enabled 5,000 schools to bring in professional artists to hold
workshops with students. Photo shows a group of American musicians rehearsing in New York.
Some national legislators doubted
that it was "just or proper for the
Government of the United States to
become a patron of the fine arts."
But other voices prevailed and John
Trumbull was appointed to do the
work.
A Revolutionary hero and gifted ar¬
tist in his younger years, Trumbull
may have passed his prime when he
did these canvases. Even some of his
Congressional supporters expressed
great disappointment, while original
opponents decried the waste of public
money.
Meanwhile, in 1832 a commemora¬
tive sculpture of George Washington
had been warmly debated. "Every
wise nation has paid honours to the
memory of men who have been the
saviours of their country," said one
supporter of the colossal marble por¬
trait that would cost $20,000.
"We will keep Washington's monu¬
ment in our bosoms," answered ano¬
ther. " We will not commit it to
perishable stone. " Though heroic
portraits were criticized as relics of
an era "before the lights of reason
penetrated the darkness of society,"
the motion passed. The commission
was awarded to the pre-eminent Am¬
erican sculptor of the time, Horatio
Greenough, who lived in Italy.
Conceiving his subject in a neo¬
classical pose, Greenough draped
"the father of his country" in apparel
that some called a toga, others a
bath towel. Supporters said the pose
was timeless; detractors were scan¬
dalized because Washington was
naked from the waist up.
Furor followed. As late as 1876 this
sculpture was still "the grandest and
most-criticized work of art about the
Capitol" in one visitor's eyes.
Elsewhere in the Capitol conces¬
sions were made to domestic tastes.
Columns were adorned with tobacco
leaves and corn husks instead of
Corinthian fronds. The interior was
decorated by Constantino Burmindi,
an Italian fresco painter whose ornate
work and foreign style offended
some Congressmen and native
artists alike.
To be sure, American painters in
particular lacked the training and
experience to decorate public build¬
ings in a classical style; here a steady
market existed only for portraits,
genre painting and easel art. In 1858
a committee of artists protested and
President Buchanan appointed an
Arts Commission: But it was so inef¬
fective, a critic concluded ten years
later that "since that time, art has, in
a measure, been left to take care of
itself."
Historian Lillian B. Miller says the
preoccupation with issues leading to
the Civil War eclipsed, for a time, any
further consideration of federal art
patronage. As a result, any progress
in cultural affairs was due to the
initiative of individual artists and the
support of private patrons.
In 1877 a bill was introduced to
establish a national council on art
matters. It failed. In 1891 President
Harrison designated a New York
music school as the National Conser¬
vatory of Music and Antonin Dvorak ^
became its artistic director for three*
41

~ years. But no pUblic money was
appropriated for the institution, which
ultimately closed (though its charter
remains in effect). In 1910 a Com­
mission of Fine Arts was established
by President Taft to advise the White
House and Congress, but it limited its
attentions to the capital city.
It wasn't until the 1930s that the
federal government got involved in
the arts on a national scale-and then
it was for economic rather than cultu­
ral reasons. President Franklin Roo­
sevelt created the Works Progress
Administration (WPA) as one of many
emergency agencies initiated to deal
with that domestic crisis, the Great
Depression.
Millions were unemployed. The
WPA put many of them to work build­
ing roads, bridges, schools, libraries,
hospitals, parks and other pUblic
works projects. But WPA adminis­
trator Harry Hopkins said that artists
"have to eat too." So painters, wri­
ters, actors and musicians were also
employed in a series of innovative
pUblic projects.
P RIMARILY, the goal was to give
every able American a paying
job that would, hopefully, preserve his
or her skills through the crisis. Con­
sequently, the specific nature of the
work was of negligible importance. It
is surprising then, just how valuable
much of the work turned out to be.
Arts critics today credit New York
City's pre-eminence as an art capital
to the WPA, which paid painters to
paint whatever they chose and often
sold the canvases by the square yard
or pound to junk dealers. The artists
produced 18,000 sculptures; 108,000
easel paintings; 239,727 prints; 500,000
photographs and 2,500 murals. Among
those who survived the Depression
as practising artists under the WPA
programme were Jackson Pollock,
Willem de Kooning and Mark Rothko,
three giants of modern painting.
One of the most ambitious and suc­
cessful efforts was the Federal Wri­
ters' Project, which published the
American Guide Series of historical
Baedekers for each of the states.
Federal administrators hired both
proven professional writers and hope­
less amateurs to compile these local
histories, which were then pUblished
by commercial houses and sold to
the pUblic.
Among the young writers taking on
this herculean task were Richard
Wright, Conrad Aiken, Saul Bellow,
Ralph Ellison, John Cheever, Frank
Yerby and Kenneth Rexroth. Perhaps
because the writers' work was chan-
42
nelled in a specific, conventional
direction, the Guides escaped con­
troversy.
On the other hand, the Federal
Theater was attacked from several
sides almost as soon as it began.
First, it presented contemporary plays
that offended the moral and political
sensitivities of some Congressmen
who found them easy targets of
scathing criticism. Also, commercial
interests objected that federal sup­
port constituted an unfair subsidy of
their competition.
The fact seems to have been that
WPA theatre was daring and enter­
taining while Broadway was stale.
Critics applauded and audiences
flocked to the nonprofit productions
of Shakespeare and Gilbert & Sullivan
as well as the" Living Newspapers"
that addressed contemporary issues.
With people like arson Welles and
John Houseman inVOlved, 158 compa­
nies played to more than 25 million
people in what many hoped was the
beginning of a diverse, touring "na­
tional theater." But controversy killed
the programme.
Elsewhere, WPA-supported orches­
tras reached an audience of 150 mil­
lion through live concerts and radio.
The Index of American Design cata­
logued and preserved the history of
the decorative arts in the United
States. Professional artists of all
media taught their crafts in new
community centres.
In all, the WPA ultimately employed
8.5 million persons with 30 million
dependents. Though some of the art
was trash, an entire generation of
American creators survived the De­
pression practising their artistic skills.
As President Roosevelt said, "Bet­
ter the occasional faults of a govern­
ment that lives in a spirit of charity
than the consistent omissions of a
government frozen in the ice of its
own indifference." With the end of
the Depression, the federal program­
me was disbanded, and with it federal
support of the arts and artists. But
a precedent of sorts had been set.
In 1951 President Harry Truman
asked the old Fine Arts Commission
to study ways that government could
again help the arts on a national
scale. It reported to President
Dwight D. Eisenhower, who in 1958
signed a law establishing a National
Cultural Center for Washington.
That facility was ultimately named
The John F. Kennedy Center for the
Performing Arts in honour of Eisen­
hower's m"artyred successor who paid
unprecedented attention-for a mod­
ern president-to cultural matters.
Kennedy intended to appoint a full
time cultural affairs assistant and
name a national arts council, but
with his assassination these tasks fell
to Lyndon Johnson.
To make a long story short, Presi­
dent Johnson was personally respon­
sible for convincing Congress to pass
the bill in 1965 that created the Na­
tional Endowment for the Arts and
its companion agency, the National
Endowment for the Humanities.
Before signing the law, the PreSI­
dent said, "In the long history of
man, countless empires and nations
have come and gone. Those which
created no lasting works of art are
reduced today to short footnotes in
history's catalogue. Art is a nation's
most precious heritage. For it is in
our works of art that we reveal to
ourselves, and to others, the inner
vision which guides us as a nation.
And where there is no vision, the
people perish...
"To produce true and lasting
results, our states and our municipa­
lities, our schools and our great
private foundations must join forces
with us. It is in the neighbourhoods of
each community that a nation's art is
born. In countless American towns
there live thousands of obscure and
unknown talents. What this bill really
.does is to bring active support to this
great national asset, to make fresher
the winds of art in this great land of
ours. "
The two agencies have grown
significantly in a decade. During its
first year, the Arts Endowment had a
programme budget of $2.5 million.
This year its programme budget is
$82 million. While the growth factor is
enormous, it still represents an expen­
diture of less than 40 cents per capita,
or the price of mailing three ordinary
letters.
T HE Endowment's mandate is to
stimulate and support the wid­
est possible spectrum of cultural ac­
tivities throughout the nation. Both
individual professional artists and arts
organizations apply to the Endowment
for funds. Needless to say, we receive
far more applications than we can
support with our "modest budget. So
choices must be made-but not by
federal bureaucrats or politicians.
. The artistic decisions are made by
revolving panels of professional ex­
perts in each programme area: music,
dance, theatre and the public media
of film, television and radio, literature,
museums, visual arts, and architec­
ture. (In addition to nine disciplinary
programmes, there are three inter­
disciplinary ones focusing on matters
like bloc grants to state arts agencies
and support of neighbourhood, ethnic,
and folk arts.)

The p'anels' decisions are reviewed
by the Endowment's advisory body,
the National Council on the Arts. Its
roster has included many world fa¬
mous actors, including James Earl
Jones, Helen Hayes, Charlton Heston,
Sidney Poitier, Gregory Peck and
Clint Eastwood; legendary musicians
such as Marian Anderson, Rudolph
Serkln, Duke Ellington, Beverly Sills,
Billy Taylor, Van Cliburn, Isaac Stern,
Leonard Bernstein and Richard Rod-
gers; dancers such as Agnes de Mille,
Edward Villella and Judith Jamison;
painters and sculptors such as James
Wyeth and David Smith; writers like
John Steinbeck, Eudora Welty and
Ralph Ellison.
bach project, artist or presenting
organization receives only a relatively
modest amount of money. But these
small federal stipends have often
enabled a struggling writer or painter
to complete the project that earned
him a measure of public recognition.
They have assisted nonprofit thea¬
tres and orchestras to fill the gap bet¬
ween earned Income and spiralling
costs for another year. They have
enabled 5,000 schools across the land
to bring in professional artists to hold
workshops with students. They have
helped neighbourhood and ethnic
groups launch cultural community
projects. They have brought major
dance and opera companies into
small cities and towns.
In summary, this decade-old agency
has helped Americans everywhere
artists and audiences alike to more
fully realize the 200-year-old dream
of "life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness" through cultural oppor¬
tunity and artistic activity.
Life goes on while we consider
future plans. In the meantime, the
lives of millions have been enriched
at home while the works of American
creators have won gratifying recogni¬
tion throughout the world.
Nancy Hanks
43
