A THIRD
OF THE WORLD
IN
SHANTYTOWNS
seen to be as high as 90 per cent.
Precise data Is available for only 6
of the 15 cities in Latin America with
more than one million inhabitants. Of
these, 3 each have more than one
million slum and squatter dwellers.
In Asia, 7 cities with a population sur¬
passing one million each have squat¬
ter populations exceeding one million
Inhabitants. Three of these cities are
found In India where 70 per cent of
all families live in one room or less.
Until recently most governments
considered the urban squatter com¬
munities as temporary in nature, a
phenomenon that could be easily
weeded out some day along the cities'
road to progress. But despite the
efforts made by governments to get
rid of this problem, squatter settle¬
ments have proved to be surprisingly
persistent, continually increasing in
by Samuel Chamecki
AS incredible as it may seem,
more than half the population
of the globe will be city dwellers by
the year 2000. According to a study
just published by the United Nations
entitled "World Housing Survey", 51
per cent of the world's population will
be living in urban areas within the next
two decades as opposed to 49 per
cent living In rural areas.
Today, 39 per cent of the world's
population live In towns and cities
while In 1920 only 19 per cent lived in
urban areas as compared to 81 per
cent In rural zones.,
More than "one billion people, or
nearly one third of the world popula¬
tion, now live In substandard housing
conditions, and this situation is likely
to worsen in the years to come. The
problem has become increasingly
acute In cities In the developing
world, particularly capital cities,
where slums and squatter settlements
account for one third to half of the
population.
Overcrowding and lack of basic
sanitary facilities are the two most
striking features of poor housing.
These dwellings lack a water supply
or a public service for waste collec¬
tion. Already we find three and more
SAMUEL CHAMECKI of Brazil is chief
of the Section of Research in the Engineering
Sciences In Unesco's Division of Technologic¬
al Research and Higher Education. A member
of Unesco's headquarters staff since 1964,
he was a Unesco expert on structural and
foundation' engineering at the Middle East
Technical University (Turkey) in 1963-64.
A former professor of Structura/ and Foun¬
dation Engineering at the University of
Paraná (Brazil) he has published more than
30 books and research papers on housing
problems, engineering education and struc¬
tural and foundation engineering.
persons to a room In many countries.
In 1920 large cities were still a rari¬
ty; in developing regions, only 20
per ,cent of the urban population
was concentrated in cities of half a
million or more inhabitants, and In the
more developed regions the corres¬
ponding percentage was then 47..
In 1950, In the more developed re¬
gions, over 50 "million-population-
cities" accounted for about 130 mil¬
lion people and, In the less developed
regions, about 25 cities comprised
some 50 million Inhabitants. In 1985
there will be 126 "million population
cities" with some 340 million inhabi¬
tants In the more developed regions,
and In the less developed regions
147 "milllon-populatlon-clties" with
465 million people.
During the present decade, for the
first time, the "million-population-
cities" located In developing coun¬
tries will outnumber those of develop¬
ing countries.
Migration from rural to urban areas
accounts for most of the growth of
cities, being responsible In many cities
for more than 90 per cent of the total
population Increase.
Slums and squatter settlements
bear the brunt of the accelerating
rural-urban migration and city growth.
In most cities of the developing world,
slums and squatter settlements
account for one third to a half of the
population.
Africa has 44 cities with populations
ranging between 100,000 and 500,000
Inhabitants. Studies of 15 of these
cities show that they have a consls-
. tently.hlgh percentage of slums and
squatter settlements. In only two of
the cities does the percentage of slums
and squatter areas fall below 48 per
cent and in one case It is actually
10

size and number. The question is:
will the squatter settlements of our
cities be assimilated through the nor¬
mal "urban metabolism" or have they
reached such a magnitude that they
are an "urban cancerous process"?
In fact slums and squatter settle¬
ments form only part of the desperate
world housing situation. Deteriorating
dwellings which are overcrowded and
lacking In basic amenities produce
squalid living conditions for another



large portion of the world's popula¬
tion. Nor are these slums restricted to
developing countries; they are tradi¬
tional living quarters for the urban
poor In many industrialized nations
as well.
Over 730 million dwelling units need
to be constructed by the end of the
century In Africa, Asia and Latin Am¬
erica as compared to the 200 million
dwelling units required In North Am¬
erica, Europe, the Soviet Union and
Oceania.
Many countries are building only
two or four dwelling units per one
thousand population per year,
whereas about eight to ten units per
one thousand population per year are
required to meet total housing needs.
This target, according to available
Information for the year 1970, is.attain-
ed in most developed countries such
as France with 9.3 units, Denmark,
Finland and Switzerland 10.4 units,
Japan 14.3, Czechoslovakia, Romania,
Federal Republic of Germany 8.0,
Spain 9.0, Sweden 13.6, Australia 11.3,
and the Soviet Union 9.4.
However, enormous gaps between
the mass housing needs and supply
are to be found In most of the dev¬
eloping countries, a few examples on
the poorer side being In Africa: Alge¬
ria 1.0 housing units, Egypt 1.5, Tuni¬
sia 1.5. In Latin America: Columbia
1.2, Dominican Republic 0.6, Trinidad
and Tobago 2.0. In Asia: Iraq 1.8,
Ceylon 0.8, Yemen 0.1.
As we have seen, one-third of the
world's population Is currently home¬
less or living in sub-standard housing.
It has been estimated that with the
present demographic growth, and
doubling of the population every 30
years, the total number of people liv¬
ing today is greater than all the peo¬
ple who have lived and died in our
entire past. Consequently, humanity
has to build, in less than 25 years,
more dwelling units than mankind has
produced until now, the developing
countries bearing nearly 80 per cent
of this immeasurable burden.
Samuel Chamecki
Below, two examples of communities living "in the round". Left, a farming village on
the high plateaux of Ethiopia. Right, a modern town in Arizona (U.S.A.) where homes
and districts are directly linked to a big central square, the heart of the community.
The symbolism of the circle, which signifies harmony, is universal.
HHHHaHMHBUiai
--5*v^r'
