South Africa's
captive
work-force
IN South Africa, access to education,
vocational training and jobs are deter¬
mined by the racial group to which a
person belongs: apartheid affects every
aspect of economic life.
Millions of Africans live permanently in
"white areas", where they are deprived of
the most fundamental rights and are reduc¬
ed to the status of foreigners within their
own country.
And yet the rapidly expanding South
African economy is becoming increasingly
dependent on African labour, and the num¬
ber of Africans in the white areas is mount¬
ing steadily. Such a growing interdepen¬
dence between blacks and whites in econo¬
mic activities could lead to a form of racial
integration. To stop this from happening,
the South African government has built as
many barriers as possible between the
races.
The working conditions of the Africans
l have been denounced many times. Each
year the International Labour Organization
(ILO) carries out a survey of developments
in the labour situation in South Africa. An
ILO study published in May 1977 draws
attention to the many ways in which black
African workers are deprived of their free¬
dom and of any hope of improving their
conditions. A Nationalist Party Member of
Parliament stated the official position in
unequivocal terms: "...The Bantu labourer
is supplying a commodity to us... it is
labour we are importing and not labourers
as individuals."
No African may remain in a white area
for more than 72 hours without permission,
unless he qualifies to be there because he
has lived or worked there over a long
period. He may be granted a permit to stay
in the area to look for work, but the permit
will stipulate the class of work he may
accept and the length of time he may work
in the area.
All male Africans over the age of 15 who
are either unemployed or not lawfully
employed must register with a labour
bureau, and, as a general rule, employers
can only hire Africans registered at these
bureaux. Every African aged 16 or over
must be in possession of a reference book
containing a record of his work contracts
and when they ended.
In practice, the Africans have no free¬
dom to choose their employment, since
they can only accept work to which they
have been directed by a labour bureau and
cannot freely change jobs. An African who
refuses on three consecutive occasions to
accept a job offered him by a labour bureau
may be defined as "idle". Such "idle per-,
This article is based on information drawn from
"The ILO and Apartheid", a study published
by the International Labour Organization,
Geneva, May 1977.
Throughout southern Africa black
workers are poor in the midst of plenty.
Whites monopolize skilled trades and
professions, while blacks who form
the mainstay of the economy are
subject to restrictive legislation.
African trade unions are not
recognized by South African
law and black strikers are dismissed
and often fined and imprisoned.
14

sons" may be sent back to their home area,
placed in -a work colony or a rehabilitation
centre, or, subject to their agreement, be
ordered to take up employment with an
employer for an officially approved period.
An African worker can only be accompa¬
nied by his wife if she is entitled to reside in
the same area as her husband. Otherwise,
she cannot visit her husband for more than
72 hours at a time, and if she fails to report
her arrival or overstays the authorized
period, may be summarily deported from
the area.
Another prominent feature of the South
African labour system is the "colour bar"
whereby skilled occupations are reserved
for whites. This is backed up by a battery
of laws. Under the Industrial Conciliation
Act, the Minister of Labour can prohibit the
replacement of white employees by per¬
sons of another race, or reserve certain
jobs or classes of work wholly or partly to
persons of a specified race. Up to the end
of 1975, 26 of these "job reservations" had
been proclaimed. Special measures have
been taken to "protect" work in the mines,
the building trades, public transport and
nursing.
Legislation has become even stricter
since 1970. The Minister of Bantu Admi¬
nistration has announced his intention of
prohibiting the employment of Africans in a
number of occupations (including those of
shop assistant, receptionist, typist, clerk
and cashier) except in African townships
and areas.
There is also a traditional colour bar pre¬
venting non-whites from carrying out work
above a certain level of skill or
responsibility.
The question of the colour bar in educa¬
tion is closely interwoven with that in
employment. In this respect, non-whites in
South Africa are handicapped from birth,
since their racial category determines the
educational system they will find them¬
selves in. The same is true of vocational
training.
Africans do have some opportunities to
acquire technical and professional training,
but these are almost exclusively in the
Bantu territories. In practice, states the
ILO report, it is "almost impossible for
significant numbers of Africans to qualify
for admission to apprenticeship and
advanced training".
African salaries and working conditions
are determined by a board of government-
appointed white officials.
There is a wide gap between the earn¬
ings of Africans and those of whites. In
mining, the average monthly wage is 79
rands for Africans and 590 rands for
whites. (The rand is worth about U.S.
$1.15). It is a fact that in mining African
workers get free board and lodging, but in
the manufacturing industries, where they
do not, the disparity is still enormous:
R 117 on average for Africans, R 550 for
whites. According to unofficial surveys,
the average monthly income of African
households is still much lower than the
minimum subsistence level. In almost all
sectors of the economy, the wage-gap be¬
tween whites and blacks is still growing.
The Industrial Conciliation Act grants
legal existence to registered trade unions,
but expressly excludes Africans from its
definition of what constitutes an
"employee". And so the Africans cannot
belong to registered trade unions. Of
course, they are not prohibited from form¬
ing their own unions, but such legally
unrecognized bodies enjoy no legal protec¬
tion for their activities, and can play no
effective part in industrial relations.
It comes as no surprise, then, that the
right to strike is strictly curtailed for Afri¬
cans in a way which does not apply to
other workers. The Bantu Labour (Settle¬
ment of Disputes) Act provides penalties of
up to three years' imprisonment for Afri¬
cans who go on strike. Furthermore, since
African trade unions do not enjoy legal
recognition, they are not exempted from
repressive legislation. Strikers run the risk
of harsh penalties, including the death
penalty.
Strikes still take place: there were 169
between January 1975 and June 1976. In
many cases they were followed by waves
of arrests and other police action. And yet
, African unions continue to exist and to
grow.
í . i
15
