by Taha Hussein
Schooldays in Cairo
A great Egyptian writer
looks back on his childhood
Taha Hussein, who died in 1973, was one of the
greatest Arab writers of modern times. Born in
Egypt in 1889, he became blind at the age of three
but nonetheless pursued his schooling in Cairo, first
at the famous Muslim university of Al-Azhar and
then at the newly-founded Egyptian university.
Later he continued his studies in Paris, where he
obtained his doctorate at the Sorbonne. In his
masterpiece. Stream of Days, Taha Hussein retraced
his childhood and adolescence through the
experience of a hero who is simply referred to as
"the child". His account of his student days in
Cairo in the early years of the 20th century is both
poetic and accurate.
The following extracts from Stream of Days show
that the teaching methods then used at Al-Azhar
were strikingly similar to those current in the Arab-
Islarr.ic world ten centuries earlier. However,
reforms carried out shortly after the period Taha
Hussein describes brought profound changes and a
degree of modernization to Al-Azhar.
Text © Copyright. Reproduction prohibited '
WALKING beside his companion, the child crossed the
courtyard. As his foot touched the low step marking
the entrance to Al-Azhar, the University, his heart grew
heavy with modesty and humility; his spirit soared with pride. Step
by step he advanced, across matting so worn that the floor appear¬
ed in places as if offering to the feet of the visitors the blessing of
its touch, of contact with holy ground.
The child loved Al-Azhar at this moment of dawn as the wor¬
shippers finished their morning prayers and gathered their eyes
still heavy with sleep in circles around the columns of the mos¬
que, to await the teacher who would give a lesson on the hadith,
or traditions, or on dogma or theology.
Here and there, a teacher was beginning his lecture in the weary
tones of one who has awakened early to say his prayers, who has
not yet breakfasted, and whose body is still drained of strength
and energy. The voice was tranquil, gentle, slightly wavering.
"In the name of Allah, the Merciful! Glory to Allah, the All-
Powerfull May His blessing and salvation lie upon our Lord
Muhammad, the noblest of the Prophets, on His family and His
Companions! This is what the author tells us, may Allah preserve
his soul and enlighten us with his wisdom, amen!"
...At dawn, the voices were supplicant, rising like an appeal to
the benevolence of the ancient authors. At midday, they were
militant, launched like an army against its enemies. This contrast
both amazed and amused the child. Staying close to his compan¬
ion, he negotiated the two steps leading to the ¡wan, the portico
surrounding the main courtyard of the mosque.
His companion settled him beside the teacher's stall, which was
linked by a heavy chain to one of the sacred columns.
"Sit here. You will hear a hadith lesson. When my own lecture
is over, I will come and fetch you."
The subject of the lesson was the basis of Law, and the teacher
was sheikh Radi, may Allah preserve his soul. The text was taken
from the Tahrir, by the 15th-century author Kamal ibn Humam.
The child listened in fascination to the words, with feelings in
which panic, ardour, respect and veneration were inextricably
intermingled. The basis of Law! What could that possibly mean?
Who was the sheikh Radi? Tahrir? What a strange word! Kamal
Ibn Humam! Could any names be more magnificent? Knowledge
was indeed like a boundless ocean, and an intelligent man could do
nothing better than plunge into its waves...
...For the moment, however, he must listen. Understanding
would come later. How many times did he turn the same phrase
over and over in his mind before it began to make sense! He had
learned little, but he had gained respect for knowledge, a profound
feeling of deference towards scholars, an awareness of his own
ignorance, and the determination to work as hard as he could!
Sitting there beside the column and playing with the chain, the
child listened as the sheikh went through the hadith lesson. Oh,
he understood the lesson perfectly. His only objection was to the
avalanche of names and prepositions which the teacher poured
over the heads of his pupils. "So-and-so said, according to so-
and-so, as it is related by so-and-so..."
What was the point of jumbling all those names together, of
piling up all those prepositions? The child waited impatiently for
the sheikh to get to the text of the hadith. The text was what mat¬
tered; the commentary could be set aside...
...The child wondered when he would become a full member of
the university. For the moment, he was just a child, listening
carefully and conscientiously to two lessons...
At last, the great day arrived. At the end of a Law lesson, the
child was told to present himself for the test in recitation from the
Quran which served as the entrance examination.
The news that he was to be examined in an hour's time dismay¬
ed him. Uncertain, anxious even, he hurried to the Chapel of the
Blind, where the examination was to take place. But as he ap¬
proached the examiners, his fear vanished. He sat down to wait
patiently until they had finished with the previous candidate, and
then, suddenly, one of the examiners called his name. He took his
place in front of the jury. They asked him to recite the Sura of
"the Cave", but he had scarcely begun when they asked him to
recite the Sura of "the Spider". After a few verses, they interrupt¬
ed him again.
"That's enough, blind boy," said one of the examiners. "You
have passed!"
The child was shocked. The examination had been meaningless,
and in no way a test of recitation. He had expected them to
demand a recitation at least as long as those his father asked of
him. He went away, delighted with his success but furious with
the examiners and scornful of their methods. Before they left the
Chapel of the Blind, his brother drew him aside, and one of the ser¬
vants circled his wrist with a string, sealing the ends with lead.
"It's all over," said the servant. "Congratulations!"
The child could not understand the meaning of the curious
bracelet. His brother explained that he must wear it for a week,
until the medical examination, when his health would be checked,
his age estimated, and he would be vaccinated against smallpox.
But he remained fascinated by the bracelet... It was the symbol
of his success in the examination. He had taken the first step...
I Taha Hussein
37
