Unesco's role
in alerting world opinion
IN 1955, the Union of South Africa with¬
drew from Unesco. The reason given
was "interference in South African
racial problems" by means of Unesco publi¬
cations and studies being distributed in
South Africa.
These studies proved that the theory of
racial inequality- had no scientific founda¬
tion, that intermarriage between individuals
of differing "racial" groups was not
harmful, and that racial separation was not
"natural" to the human species but was
often imposed by discriminatory practices.
In view of this South Africa decided to leave
Unesco.
By 1955, the system of apartheid was
already firmly established in South Africa.
The Population Registration Act of 1950 had
divided the population into three main
groups: the Africans (called Bantu); the
coloureds (persons of mixed European and
African or Asian origins); and the whites.
Since 1952, the movement and residence of
Africans had been more tightly controlled.
The first major application of apartheid to
education dated from 1953.
Unesco has always sought to keep world
opinion informed about these questions. In
1965, the United Nations Special Committee
on the Policies of Apartheid of the Republic
of South Africa requested Unesco to pre¬
pare a study on "the effects of apartheid in
the fields of education, science and
culture". Unesco's Executive Board accept¬
ed this task and added another field of
research: information.
The report appeared in 1967. A second
revised, and enlarged edition was published
in 1972, and the report was further updated
in 1975. It concluded that " 'separate deve¬
lopment'... is a policy of deliberate inequa
lity built into the educational system,
expressed in scientific and cultural activi¬
ties, and underlined in the regulations-
governing access to information."
In 1973-1974, again at the request of the
United Nations, Unesco sponsored a twin
study: Racism and Apartheid in Southern
Africa. Part I, South Africa and Namibia,
appeared in 1974 and Part II, Rhodesia, by
Reginald Austin, came out in the following
year. In 1974, Unesco also published Portu¬
guese Colonialism: the End of an Era.
In 1976 came a study on the African town¬
ship of Mucheke, which is located at the
edge of the white town of Fort Victoria in
Southern Rhodesia. The study analyzes the
living conditions of Africans and whites in
each of these communities, and their inter¬
relations.
In 1977, Unesco published Southern Rho¬
desia: The effects ofa Conquest Society on
Education, Culture and Information, by
Marion O'Callaghan with an introduction by
Reginald Austin. (See inside back cover.)
This study shows the degree to which the
education provided for Africans is inferior
to white education, as well as giving a list of
banned books and describing how the radio
and press are controlled. A further contribu¬
tion to this series of works, Namibia: the
Effects of Apartheid on the Economy and
on Education, is to appear at the end of
1977.
Unesco is thus actively pursuing its task
of informing the public. This was stressed
by the Director-General of Unesco,
Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, in his opening
address to the World Conference for Action
against Apartheid, held in Lagos (Nigeria) in
August 1977. Mr. M'Bow drew attention to
certain facts concerning South Africa: that
most newspapers published for the blacks
are in the hands of white financial groups;
that most African writers are in exile; and
that in 1974-1975 expenditure on education
totalled 131 million rands for Africans (71
per cent of the population) as against
435 million rands for whites (17 per cent of
the population).
Further research is in progress, including
a study on the way in which the internatio¬
nal press has presented the situation in
South Africa over a ten-year period. A spe¬
cial effort will also be made to analyze ob¬
stacles to the circulation of anti-apartheid
information.
Another study will examine the effect of
apartheid and racism on the situation of
women in South Africa, Namibia and
Zimbabwe.
Unesco has not, however, confined itself
solely to informing the public. In 1971, it
organized a meeting at Dar-es-Salaam (Tan¬
zania) on "the influence of colonialism on
the artist, his milieu and his public in deve¬
loping countries". In 1976, Unesco con¬
vened a conference at Maputo (Mozambi¬
que) on "Social Structure, Revolutionary
Change and Culture in Southern Africa".
This meeting brought together for the first
time an international group of social scien¬
tists and members of the liberation move¬
ments of Zimbabwe, Namibia and South
Africa. Unesco also contributed to the
Dakar International Conference (January
1976) devoted to the violation of human
rights in Namibia.
Finally, Unesco has given direct assis¬
tance for education to several liberation
movements recognized by the Organization
of African Unity. Aid totalled $ 2 million in
1975-1976.' This cooperation will be
strengthened in the near future.
