The mass media and society
A SOVIET
VIEWPOINT
The transmitting
antenna of the
533-metre-high
Ostankinskaya
television tower in
Moscow broadcasts
directly to receivers
within a 120 km radius.
Equipped for
meteorological
observations and the
transmission of weather
reports, it also handles
radio communications
for ambulances, fire
brigades, radio
taxis, etc. in the
Moscow area.
by Yassen N. Zasursky
and Yuri I. Kashlev
INFORMATION media play an im¬
portant role in a socialist society.
They promote economic and cul¬
tural progress, strengthen friendship
between peoples and inculcate the
highest moral values in the individual.
After the Revolution of October
191?, private ownership of the press
and other information media was
abolished in the Soviet Union and
these media became social property.
The Constitution of the U.S.S.R.
provides for both freedom of speech
and freedom of the press, which are
ensured in practice by putting the
workers and their organizations in
charge not only of the supply of
paper and the use of printing plant,
but of publishing works, news¬
papers, periodicals, radio stations
and television transmitters.
Newspapers, periodicals and other
publications in the U.S.S.R. are
produced by organizations of the
Communist Party, trade unions,
women and young people, and by
artists' societies, collectives formed
by academic institutions, factories
and State farms. Thus we have in
the Soviet Union a press which
serves the workers and we can there¬
fore say that the mass information
media are at the service of the
entire people.
YASSEN N. ZASURSKY. Dean of the
Faculty of Journalism at Moscow University,
has participated in a number of International
meetings sponsored by Unesco and other
international organizations in the field of
mass communication.
YURI I. KASHLEV, Sower journalist and
historian, was a member of the U.S.S.R.
delegation at the nineteenth session of Unes¬
co's General Conference at Nairobi (Kenya)
in 1976.

In this way, genuine freedom of
the pressfreedom for the working
massesis achieved, a situation quite
different, of course, from that which
existed in Tsarist Russia and about
which Lenin wrote as follows:
"Freedom of the press in the capita¬
list world amounts to freedom of
buying newspapers, buying writers,
bribing and 'fabricating' public opi¬
nion in favour of the bourgeoisie.
This is a fact no one will ever be able
to deny."
The October Revolution provided
the masses with wide access at first
to newspapers and periodicals, and
later to radio and television broad¬
casting. Every Soviet citizen has
the chance to express his views in a
newspaper or periodical, or to parti¬
cipate in radio and television broad¬
casts.
Half the space in every newspaper
is devoted to contributions from
workers in industry and agriculture
and all letters received by the edi¬
tors are carefully considered. More¬
over, it is now true that any Soviet
citizen, of whatever nationality he
may be, can write a letter or send
information to a newspaper, because
he is literate, educated and possesses
a broad outlook enabling him to make
his own judgements about life.
All this is despite the fact that
only 60 years ago there were vast
regions of almost complete illiteracy
in Russia, particularly in its remoter
areas.
This is how a socialist society esta¬
blishes and safeguards the right of
every individual to participate in the
activity of the mass media.
It would be no exaggeration to say
that millions of Soviet citizens have
been able to express their views in
newspapers and periodicals, on radio
and television, thus helping to lay
the foundations of the policies which
were adopted and approved by the
recent 25th Congress of the Commu¬
nist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU).
Thus, the broad masses of the
workers are involved not only in the
social and cultural life of the country
but also in the creation of public
opinion, which is the affair of each
and every individual.
When discussing this involvement.
one must bear in mind the scale on
which mass information has deve¬
loped in the Soviet Union in the
space of a few decades. Today in
the U.S.S.R. there are almost 8,000
newspapers with a total circulation of
more than 168 million copies per
issue, together with 4,726 periodicals
and magazines, which have a total
annual circulation of almost 4,000
million.
The circulation of such leading
newspapers as Pravda (the organ of
the Communist Party) or Komsomol-
skaya Pravda (the organ of the
Communist Youth League) exceeds
10 million copies. For every Soviet
family there are on average more
than four periodicals and one out
of every four books in the world is
published in the Soviet Union.
In addition, the U.S.S.R. pos¬
sesses 370 long-range and 1,400
other television relay stations, to¬
gether with more than 60 reception
stations linked to the "Orbita" space
communication system. Finally, the
population owns more than 60 mil¬
lion televisions and more than 110 k
million radio sets. And these num- r
Mass media in the U.S.S.R. have been entrusted with great responsibilities in the educational process,
which combines specialized with all-round training. During their time at university, many Soviet
students travel vast distances across the country to participate in major industrial, hydroelectric and
railway construction projects. Here, young people from many regions meet in a Central Asian Republic.

bers have certainly not yet reached
their maximum.
Soviet journalists consequently
have at their disposal an instrument
of enormous social, cultural and
psychological potential; people and
society have a right to demand from
them a high degree of responsibility,
especially during the present period
of "information explosion".
The distinguishing feature of jour¬
nalism in a socialist society is its
humanist attitude, displayed in its
concern with the inculcation in
people of the highest and noblest
human qualities. Soviet journalism
constantly devotes itself to the
aesthetic, ethical and artistic educa¬
tion of Soviet people, and to prepar¬
ing them for practical daily tasks.
At the same time, it is concerned to
criticize greed, selfish individualism,
proprietary instincts, and so on.
Journalism in a socialist society
also pays particular attention to the
consolidation of international friend¬
ship. Newspapers in the Soviet
Union, for example, are published in
the 56 languages of the peoples of
the U.S.S.R., including some which
were not available in written form to
their peoples during the Tsarist era,
and in nine foreign languages.
In a socialist society, the dissemi¬
nation of ideas which instigate ra¬
cism, war or racial division between
peoples is forbidden and is specifi¬
cally prohibited by legislation.
" We must also remember that jour¬
nalism in a socialist society is not
subject to commercial pressures;
sensationalism is therefore quite
foreign to it. Socialist journalism is
not a means of enriching some
publisher or journalist, it is not an
object of commercial transaction and
is in no way dependent on sponsors.
Soviet journalists, while enjoying
the freedom of the press set forth in
the Constitution, are conscious of their
responsibility to the people. They
realize that the words they usetruth,
progress, humanismshould contri¬
bute positively to the struggle for
peace and mutual understanding bet¬
ween peoples. In socialist societies,
the notions of freedom and responsi¬
bility are inseparable.
Now let us look at the internatio¬
nal aspect of the problem of the
dissemination of information.
The statistical yearbooks of Unesco
reveal that in the world today there
are in total about 922 million radio
receivers and 350 million televisions,
while many thousands of news¬
papers, together with about 1,500
new books, appear every 24 hours.
Through these channels, hundreds of
millions of people daily learn about
international politics and the life and
culture of other peoples.
But precisely what do they learn ?
And who decides what they are to
learn? Here again, we are dealing
with a problem of fundamental im
portance, which has several aspects.
Firstly, in the developed countries
of the West, the overwhelming majo¬
rity of the means by which informa¬
tion is collected, formulated and
transmitted belong, as everyone
knows, to a comparatively small sec¬
tion of the population. Obviously,
therefore, it would be naive to main¬
tain that these people are concerned
only with the dissemination of infor¬
mation and make no attempt to in¬
fluence its content.
Internationally as well, the infor¬
mation media are dominated by a
handful of giant news agencies and
radio and television companies. A
specific category of people in Wes¬
tern society thus exerts a dispropor¬
tionate influence on the content and
the tendency of the information
distributed throughout the world,
while the benefit or the harm which
this influence may bring to the cause
of peace and mutual understanding
depends on the political stance of
this minority.
Secondly, one must face up to
another regrettable fact of the mo¬
dern world, namely the existence of
so-called "psychological warfare"
and all its trappings. The world in¬
formation media are littered with the
remnants of the "Cold War", in the
form of various radio stations, organs
of the press and publishing houses,
which interfere in the internal affairs
of other peoples. These constitute
an obstacle to the development of
good international relations in the
field of information.
Thirdly and finally, there is an enor¬
mous imbalance in the distribution of
information and of the mass media
themselves throughout the world.
This is a relic of colonialism: informa¬
tion media are overwhelmingly con¬
centrated in highly developed States,
while the majority of developing
countries, which do not even possess
modern systems of communication of
their own, can make only a meagre
contribution to the international flow
of information.
Unesco experts have calculated
that the Third World, in which the
majority of mankind lives, receives
100 times more information than it
transmits to the Western countries.
With increasing frequency, the lea¬
ders of the developing countries are
calling attention to this dangerous
anomaly, which has been described
as "information imperialism". At the
Fifth Summit Conference of Non-
Aligned Countries in Colombo (1 976),
the participants noted that the esta¬
blishment of a new international order
in information was no less urgent
a task than the establishment of a
new international economic order.
So, on the one hand we are faced
with serious problems relating to the
dimensions of the international spread
of information while, on the other
hand, there is a clearly increasing
demand for the exchange of informa
tion. This demand stems not only
from scientific and technical progress,
but also from the growth of economic
and cultural ties between different
peoples in the period of détente. It
is against this background that we
must ask how the links between
States can and must be developed in
such a complex and sensitive area.
Clearly, the concept of a "free flow
of information", in the one-sided way
in which it is so often treated, cannot
serve as the basis for such internatio¬
nal development.
As is well known, the freedom of
one individual ends where the free¬
dom of another begins. The concept
of an unconditional "free flow" disre¬
gards the national sovereignty of
States by implying that they are
obliged to open all their doors to any
information from abroad, even that
which is unfriendly or hostile and has
a harmful influence on young people.
The "free flow" concept is also at
variance with the legislation of coun¬
tries such as the U.S.S.R. whose
laws prohibit propaganda for war and
racial or national strife, and attacks
on the dignity of peoples.
Furthermore, many international
documents, (including the Internatio¬
nal Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, Articles 19 and 20), provide
for restriction of the free dissemina¬
tion of information when the latter
constitutes a threat to national secu-
26

The Soviet satellite
Molniya-1 forms part
of the "Orbita" space
communication system
which covers the
territory of the U.S.S.R.
and serves in the
exchange of telephone
and telegraph
communications, as
well as television
programmes, with
systems operated by
other countries.
rity or to public health or morals,
when it consists of propaganda for'
war or when it advocates national or
racial hatred.
Freedom of the press at the inter¬
national level must therefore take into
account two important factors.
The first of these concerns the res¬
ponsibility of the mass information
media and those engaged in com¬
munication. The information disse¬
minated must not provoke hosti¬
lity between peoples, nor must it
provoke war or colonialism. It
should help to create mutual under¬
standing between peoples and the
spiritual growth of the personality.
The second consideration is that,
in order to achieve a truly free flow of
information, all peoples must have
the opportunity to make their voices
heard.
Both these problemsthe respon¬
sibility of the media themselves and
the correction of the existing disequi¬
librium in the circulation' of informa¬
tion now central to the preoc¬
cupations of society, journalists and
international organizations. Indeed,
matters related to the dissemination
of information have already been
discussed at a number of top-level
international conferences.
At the Conference on Security
and Co-operation in Europe, held in
Helsinki in 1975, the heads of
35 States reached agreement on co
operation in the sphere of informa¬
tion with a view to furthering the
cause of peace, mutual understanding
and the enrichment of the human
spirit. It was also agreed that this
co-operative effort would be based
on the fundamental principles of
equality, respect for sovereignty,
non-interference in the internal affairs
of other peoples, and respect for
human rights and basic freedoms.,
Implementation of the relevant
provisions of the Final Act signed at
Helsinki has already led to an increa¬
singly wide dissemination of informa¬
tion in the signatory States and to
the improvement of professional
conditions for journalists.
The principles of the international
dissemination of information, toge¬
ther with the problems of responsibi¬
lity for the mass media, have recently
been discussed at conferences of
developing countriesin Tunis, Costa
Rica, New Delhi and Colombo.
Unesco's extensive work in the
information field is most valuable.
For several years now, the Organi¬
zation has been working on a draft
"Declaration on fundamental prin¬
ciples governing the use of the mass
media in strengthening peace and
international understanding and in
combating war propaganda, racism
and apartheid".
y This draft not only establishes that
"freedom of expression, information
and opinion are fundamental human
rights" and that "States should
encourage the freer and wider dis¬
semination of information", but
refers also to the particular respon¬
sibility borne by the mass media in
promoting mutual understanding
between peoples. Finally, it points
to the necessity of supporting the
establishment of national mass media
in the developing countries and the
training of their personnel.
The document sparked off lively
discussions at Unesco's recent Gene¬
ral Conference in Nairobi. The press
of certain countries distorted its
contents, claiming that it proposed
State control over the mass media.
Many other interesting projects
are included in Unesco's plans for the
next few years, including some
concerned with assistance to the
developing countries and research
into the concepts of balance and
responsibility in the media.
In conclusion, we must recognize
that life itself compels us to take a
fresh look at the problems involved
in the international circulation of
information, the relationship between
freedom and responsibility, content
and balance, and all other aspects
of this twentieth-century pheno¬
menon, the mass media.
Yassen N. Zasursky
Yuri I. Kashlev.
27
