Left, the Acropolis as it might
have looked to an Athenian 2,400
years ago from the steps of the
Propylaea (foreground). Between
the Erechtheum (left background)
and the Parthenon stands a
colossal bronze statue of Athena.
According to Pausanias, a Greek
traveller and writer of Antiquity,
its gleaming helmet and spear-
point could be seen by mariners
off Cape Sunium 50 km away.
Long before Pericles built or
inspired these great monuments
in the 5th century B.C., the
Acropolis was already a centre of
worship. Carving of a three-
headed monster (right) is from a
6th-century-B.C. temple known as
the Hecatompedon, which may
have stood on the site of the
Parthenon.



PUTTING
THE CLOCK BACK
24 CENTURIES
An archeologist evokes the Acropolis
as ¡t was ¡n Antiquity
by John Travlos
THE Holy Rock known to history as
the Acropolis is a massive limestone
hill, 330 metres long and 170 metres
wide at its base, which rises to a height of
just over 156 metres above sea-level,
although no more than 50 metres above the
surrounding plain.
Its steep, almost vertical sides (except
in the west, where it slopes more gently),
its springs of water, and the large number
JOHN TRAVLOS, noted Greek architect and archeo¬
logist, is an authority on ancient Athens and its monu¬
ments. As architect to the American School of Classic¬
al Studies in Athens ( 1935- 1973) he was closely involved
in excavating the city's ancient Agora, supervising
the restoration of two of its monuments. He has
published many studies in archeological journals, and a
number ofbooks on Athenian history, including (as edi¬
tor) a Pictorial Dictionary of Ancient Athens (Thames
and Hudson, London, 1971).
of caves in its flanks offered a safe refuge
to its earliest inhabitants, who settled there
during the Neolithic period, about 3500
B.C.
In order to form a clear picture of the
topography of the Acropolis in the 5th
century B.C., one must first be familiar
with the monuments and other remains
discovered during excavations. These
make it possible to reconstruct the history
of the Holy Rock from Neolithic times until
the period when the artists of the classical
age created a vast new overall design.
The Parthenon, the Erechtheum, the
Propylaea and the temple of Athena Nike
(giver of victory) form an architectural
ensemble that gives expression to the
classical spirit and the perfection achieved
by the creative artists of the 5th century
B.C. However, they are usually examined
by archeologists and architects as separate
monuments.
Until now there has been no systematic
attempt to establish the topography of the
Acropolis, or to map out and restore the
ancient pathways and open spaces, so that
the modern visitor may stroll about and
admire the monuments, like the worshipper
in ancient times.
The destruction of these monuments,
which drastically altered the appearance of
the Acropolis, began in the 17th century
and continued until the Greek War of Inde¬
pendence, which broke out in 1821. The
Propylaea was seriously damaged as the
result of a gunpowder explosion in the
middle of the 17th century, while the
temple of Athena Nike was dismantled by
the Turks shortly before a Venetian attack
in 1687, and its masonry used to construct
a great bastion in front of the Propylaea.
The Parthenon was blown up by the
Venetian Francesco Morosini in 1687, and
the Erechtheum reduced to ruins. The
work of destruction was completed later by
the systematic pillaging of the sculptures
that decorated the temples.
With the aid of descriptions by 18th and
19th century travellers, and old pictures
and drawings, it is possible to imagine
what the Acropolis looked like during the
early years of Greek independence.
The Holy Rock was enclosed on all sides
by towering defensive walls of great thick¬
ness, which were particularly strong on the
west side, in front of the Propylaea, so as
to protect the entrance. A series of three
bastions mounted with cannons formed a
12

ri
^*<f<
^k
t^> t^m
Photo © Deutsches Archäologisches Institut, Athens
redoubtable fortification at this point. To
reach the Acropolis from the outer wall, it
was necessary to pass through these
bastions and through six well-protected
gates.
Inside the fortifications, the lower parts
of the monuments were covered by mas¬
sive marble blocks from the damaged
temples. About 300 small houses, in which
the soldiers of the Turkish garrison lived
with their families, were built on this layer
of debris.
The task of uncovering the ancient
monuments of the Acropolis began in April
1833, immediately after the liberation of
Athens and the departure of the Turkish
garrison. In August 1834, the Acropolis
ceased, by royal decree, to serve as a
fortress. The work was then placed on a
systematic basis, and the first excavations
took place. Demolition of the medieval
buildings (dating from the Byzantine,
Frankish and Turkish periods), many of
which had been built over the ancient
monuments, began in 1835.
The same period saw the demolition of
the great bastion in front of the Propylaea
and the initial restoration of the temple of
Athena Nike, using elements of the original
structure discovered in the walls of the
bastion. During major excavations on the
Acropolis between 1885 and 1890, all the
ancient monuments were uncovered and
the site assumed the form we know today.
The Acropolis Museum was enriched by
the addition of many ancient sculptures,
the famous statues of maidens called the
Korai, the pedimental sculptures and a
large number of architectural fragments,
all discovered in the rubble. When the
excavations were completed, work began
on the restoration of the Parthenon, the
Erechtheum and the Propylaea, while the
second restoration of the temple of Athena
Nike was finished just before the Second
World War.
The site of the Acropolis was thus inha¬
bited in Neolithic times. However, the ear¬
liest temples were erected during the so-
called geometric period, which lasted from
c. 900 until c. 700 B.C. and takes its name
from the geometric motifs which decorated
Greek pottery produced at that time.
By the 6th century B.C., there were two
large temples dedicated to Athena: the
Hecatompedon, which was 100 Attic feet
long and stood on the site subsequently
occupied by the Parthenon, and an ancient
temple whose foundations are preserved
to the south of the Erechtheum. The
Acropolis was covered with other, smaller
buildings, altars and votive monuments,
and it was still encircled by the so-called
Cyclopean wall which had once protected
the palace of the Mycenean king, although
by now it had ceased to serve as a for¬
tification.
In 556 B.C., the highest part of the
Mycenean tower that guarded the entrance
to the citadel was demolished, and the
first altar in honour of Athena Nike was
built on this conspicuous site. The occa¬
sion for this was the consecration of the
Panathenaea, the festival of Athens (1).
(1) The Panathenaea was an annual summer festival
celebrated by the Athenians on the birthday of Athena.
It was eventually held every four years with special
splendour. The celebrations at the quadrennial Great
Panathenaea consisted of athletic, musical and orato¬
rical contests, and culminated in the Panathenaic
Procession along the Sacred Way up to the Parthenon k
to present the goddess with a new robe or peplos. Y
13

The earlier, winding road which began
in front of the tower of Nike and led to the
Acropolis could no longer cater for the
crowds that followed the Panathenaic
Procession, and a straight ramp, 10 metres
wide and 80 metres long, was now cons¬
tructed. The fine retaining wall (mid-6th
century B.C.) which has survived along the
axis of the Propylaea formed part of this
ramp.
After the Athenian victory at Marathon
in 490 B.C., the Hecatompedon was demo¬
lished, and work began on the construction
of the first marble Parthenon. At the same
time, a monumental propylon (entrance)
with several doors was built on the site of
the ancient Mycenean fortified gateway.
It was later replaced by the Propylaea that
can be seen today.
Such was the appearance of tne Acro¬
polis until 480 B.C., when it was captured
and razed by the Persians, who caused
terrible damage to the temples, shrines and
votive monuments. Their fate was shared
by public buildings, houses and sanctuaries
throughout the city, whose walls were
systematically destroyed by the invader.
In 479 B.C., after their brilliant victories
at Salamis and Plataea, the Athenians
made it their first concern to build a new
wall to protect their city and to reconstruct
the monuments that had been destroyed.
This building programme was brought to
completion in the second half of the 5th
century, under the guidance of Pericles,
who succeeded, with the aid of inspired
architects, sculptors and painters in pro¬
ducing the matchless masterpieces that
still arouse our admiration today.
Majestic temples and altars arose on the
Acropolis to replace those destroyed by the
Persians. The new defensive walls also ser¬
ved as retaining walls to contain the mass
of rubble deposited on the Rock to increase
its area and to level its surface.
The architects who set out to rebuild the
monuments on the Acropolis were able to
approach the various problems confront¬
ing them with much greater freedom than
in the lower city, where their activities
were limited to the Agora, "the Place of
Gathering."
The work which began on the Acropolis
was based on a new architectural design:
the Propylaea were aligned differently, a
number of ancient shrines and altars were
buried when the rock was levelled, and
new pathways and open spaces were
created.
The Parthenon, the new temple in
honour of Athena Parthenos (Athena the
Virgin), was built between 447 and 432 B.C.
Its plans were drawn up by Ictinos and
Callicratès, and its decorative sculptures
were produced by Phidias, working in
collaboration with other talented artists.
The Erechtheum, an elegant Ionic temple
smaller than the Parthenon, was erected to
replace the Old Temple of Athena at a later
date, though still in accordance with the
initial plans. The expressiveness and
delicacy of its Ionic style contrast sharply
with the austere Doric style of the Par¬
thenon.
New Propylaea (437-432 B.C.) were built
by the architect Mnesicles on the western
side of the Acropolis on the site of the
earlier propylon but facing in a different
direction. This change was made so that
the worshipper arriving at the Acropolis
would be awed by the sight of the colossal
statue of Athena Promachos (Athena the
Warrior) standing precisely on the axis of
the Propylaea, framed by the Parthenon to
the right and the Erechtheum to the left.
The Propylaea, in the austere Doric style,
form a monumental entrance and façade to
the sanctuary of the Acropolis. The vast
central part, which constitutes the
entrance, is framed by two smaller.wings.
The south wing was taken up by a sanc¬
tuary, the elegant Ionic temple of Athena
Nike. The decision to build it was taken in
448 B.C., but construction began only in
427 B.C., based on plans by Callicratès,
and the temple was completed a few years
later. The fine marble parapet decorated
with figures of Nike (the Giver of Victory)
was set in place around the top of the
tower in 410 B.C.
Inside the Acropolis, just beyond the
Propylaea, is a large esplanade 50 metres
long and 43 metres wide and bounded on
each side by shrines. To the south stood
the shrine of Artemis Brauronia (the bear
goddess) and the Chalcothek, a long rec¬
tangular building where bronze weapons
were housed. To the north there was a
small building, the rampart, and the house
of the Arrephoroi, the maidens who were
cloistered on the Acropolis for almost a
year in order to weave the peplos of Athe¬
na. On the eastern side, the square ends at
the retaining wall of the terrace of the Old
Temple of Athena, where stood the colos¬
sal statue of Athena Promachos.
This point marked the beginning of two
passageways, one leading to the Par¬
thenon and the other to the Erechtheum.
The passage that led to the Parthenon,
known as the Sacred Way, is today cover¬
ed along its entire length by ancient blocks
of marble and other pieces of masonry.
Both the site and the width (6 to 7 metres)
can be determined with great accuracy,
however, from the cuttings in the rock for
the foundations of the two retaining walls
on either side. One of these walls supports
the terrace of the Parthenon and the other
the Old Temple of Athena.
The American architect G.P. Stevens
has advanced the theory that the retaining
wall of the Parthenon terrace reached
almost to the east end of the temple and
that the Sacred Way must thus have been
86 metres long. My own latest investiga¬
tions have shown, however, that the
cuttings which have been preserved were
not designed for the construction of a
continuous retaining wall but for a series
of dedications, which in my view formed
the southern edge of a large sacred area.
It is thus possible to demonstrate that
the Sacred Way was only 54 metres long,
and ended at the point where the inscrip¬
tion of Ge Kourotrophos ("Mother Earth of
Youths") was incised. It is at this point
that another large square begins, the
i precise limits of which can be determined
with precision. It was bounded on the
south by the Parthenon and the row of
votive monuments, on the north by the
Erechtheum, on the east by the shrine of
Zeus Polieus, and on the west, at least
until the middle of the 4th century B.C., by
the Opisthodomus (rear part) of the Old
Temple of Athena.
In the centre of this vast esplanade,
which measured 60 metres by 60 metres,
stood the great altar of Athena. I believe
that this was the sacred courtyard needed
to hold the immense crowds participating
in the Panathenaic Procession, which, as
we know, ended at the great altar of
Athena.
Such in all essentials was the appearance
of the Acropolis until the end of Antiquity.
Later additions were few, the most impor¬
tant being the circular temple of Rome and
Augustus which stands in front of the
east side of the Parthenon. In the middle
of the Ist century A.D., the ramp which led
to the entrance to the Propylaea was also
replaced by a monumental marble staircase.
Thus the information recorded by the
Greek geographer and historian Pausanias,
who visited Athens sometime in the middle
of the 2nd century A.D., constitutes the
most complete and reliable source concer¬
ning the appearance of the Acropolis in
the 5th century B.C. In his Guide to Greece
he provides a detailed description of the
monuments, statues and shrines which in
his time still existed on the Holy Rock.
Travlos
14
