Scholars
whose learning
In the silence of a
mosque at Mecca, a
pilgrim studies a
sacred text. The
mosque has always
been a centre of
learning as well as a
place of worship.
18

knew no bounds
by MohammedArkoun
HISTORY offers no example of a
dynamic, innovative system of
thought that has emerged and
flourished in the absence of a number of
favourable conditions.
Territorial expansion is one such condi¬
tion. The possession of mineral, agricul¬
tural and industrial resources is another.
Other important factors include financial
power, the mastery of technical and trad¬
ing skills, a high quality of urban life and
the development of favourable relations
between cities and their surrounding
countryside.
Most of these conditions were met, to
varying degrees, in the Muslim empire
which extended from Iran to Spain bet¬
ween the 7th and 12th centuries A.D.
Discussing the position of "Islam confront¬
ed with barbarian Europe" in this classical
period of Arab-Islamic civilization, the
French historian Maurice Lombard lays
particular emphasis on the extraordinary
nature of developments and accomplish¬
ments in the years 800-1000.
"As the result of the territorial expansion
which followed the wave of conquests,
the Muslim world encompassed... those
countries whose soil was most' fertile:
Mesopotamia, which owed its wealth to
MOHAMMED ARKOUN, of Algerian origin, is I
Director of the Institute of Islamic Studies at the
, University of Paris. A noted authority on Arab intel¬
lectual history, he has lectured widely in American and
European universities. He is the author of many
studies on Arab civilization and thought, including La
Pensée Arabe ("The Arab Mind") published by Presses
Universitaires de France, Paris 1975.
its remarkable system of irrigation; Egypt,
the granary of the ancient world; and the
vast plains of North Africa and Andalusia,
which provided abundant supplies of
wheat and oil for the Roman world."
The Muslim empire also included the
"major mining areas in the Caucasus,
North Africa and Spain. More specifically,
it took in all of the world's known gold
minesthose of East Africa, the Urals,
the Siberian Altai, India and, above all,
those of the Sudan, whose outflow sup¬
plied the Mediterranean world until the era
of the great discoveries".
Within its confines fell "the main centres
of industrial production such as the cities
of Mesopotamia, of Syria and of Egypt, as
well as the world's great ports, with their
vessels, shipyards and mariners: the ports
of the Red Sea and the Gulf, the Syrian
halts, Alexandria, and the cities of the
Straits of Messina and Gibraltar."
As Lombard points out, the Muslim
world held "the monopoly of the rich
transit routes of the Far East, of Central
Asia, of the Indian Ocean and those runn¬
ing from the African hinterland to the
Mediterranean... In fact, it commanded
access to the entire network of interna¬
tional trade routes, whether continental,
spanning Asia, maritime (the Persian Gulf
and the Red Sea), the caravan routes
through the Sahara to the Sudan, or the
Russian rivers flowing into the Baltic from
the Caspian Sea.
"Finally, and perhaps most important of
all, within the frontiers of the Muslim
empire lived the world's most seasoned
traders, with their age-old techniques and
ancient commercial traditions." (1)
An awareness of the material conditions
in which a system of thought can develop
and flourish does not necessarily imply a
belief that intellectual life is subordinate to
and dependent on those conditions. The
extent to which cultural activity influences
and transforms the material aspects of
civilization, and vice versa, must be re¬
examined in each social and cultural con¬
text and in each historical setting.
Hence it is imperative to seek new
perspectives and to reinterpret classical
Arabic thought in the light of modern
knowledge. - -
The appearance of the Quran was an
historic event of supreme importance
because it signalled the advent of a religion
of universal dimensions. Taking this as a
"starting point, it is possible to trace several
major periods in the development of Arabic,
thought. - ' '
(1) Espace et Réseaux du Haut Moyen Age, Mouton
Publishers, Paris-The Hague, 1972.
The classical period, which lasted from
the early 10th century to around 1300,
may be seen as a kind of summit, and its
formative period, stretching from 632 to
900-950, as the road leading up to it. Then
came a period of relative decline (from
1300 to 1800): an era of innovation in
some parts of the Muslim world, but in
others an age of conservatism. This phase
was in turn followed by what has been
called the "Arab Renaissance", which
roughly covers the period from 1800 to the
present day.
Classical Arabic thought explored a
multitude of subjects. With varying
degrees of emphasis, it examined matters
of strictly religious concern, ethics, juris¬
prudence, politics, social and economic
questions, theology and philosophy.
Linguistics, aesthetics (literature, music,
painting and architecture), science and
technology, as well as history, geography
and cosmogony were other fields of
inquiry.
; This multiplicity of interests points to an
extraordinary degree of intellectual curiosi¬
ty. Specialization, however, never over¬
rode the desire to relate the various disci¬
plines to each other and to weld the dif¬
ferent branches of knowledge into a
coherent whole.
Motivated by a strong desire to resemble
God, Who "embraces all things in His
wisdom," as the Quran expresses it," the
intellectual of the classical period was a
humanist open to knowledge in all its
forms. The excessively rigid, modern
lines of demarcation between law, ethics,
aesthetics, history and the natural sciences
were virtually non-existent at this time!
: The word adab, which today signifies
"literature", in the classical age referred to
a general intellectual attitude towards the
world-at-large, knowledge, private and
public behaviour, a literate humanism, and
the special form of civilization which
developed in Islamic cities between the
7th and 13th centuries A.D. '
i The various branches of knowledge
explored during this period at first overlap¬
ped and ¡nterreacted. Little by little,
however, they , were to become distinct
entities, as social. and cultural conflicts
developed. ,
All types of knowledge and all disciplines
recognized by classical Arabic thought
were encompassed in the religious : per¬
spective opened up by the Quran. For the
Quran did more than talk about a unitary
God, Judge, and Creator, as revealed to
Muhammad." Not only did reestablish a
religious relationship between the believer w
and his Creator-Benefactor, it provoked Y
19

, an unquenchable intellectual curiosity
which extended to all areas of knowledge.
Insofar as ethics and law were concern¬
ed, the development of a code of religious
law had to take account of social relations,
trade and production, property, and
personal status in public and private life.
However, the norms of religious law had to
be based on the precepts of God as record¬
ed in the Quran or on those of the Prophet
expressed in the hadith, and not on the
arbitrary judgement of the human law¬
maker.
Since men could not interpret these
divine precepts properly without reference
to the testimony of successive generations
of Muslims following the initial Revelation,
history, theology and the study of lan¬
guages came into the picture. Philosophy
too had a place in this scheme of things
to the extent that it provided methodolo¬
gical and conceptual tools.
. A striking illustration of the correlation
of all these intellectual disciplines was the
great Quranic commentary of Fakhr al-Din
al-Razi (d. 1209), in which the full range of
human knowledge was brought to bear on
the exegesis of the sacred text.
The same interdependence of intellectu¬
al disciplines was found in philosophy,
which was clearly distinct from the strictly
religious facet of classical Islam, even to
the point of apparent contradiction. This
is amply demonstrated in the running
controversies over the respective roles of
reason and faith, the dichotomy between
rational and religious knowledge, between
rational judgements and those of religious
Jaw.
But the fact remains that philosophy
and theology overlapped whenever ethics,
politics and metaphysics came into play,
just as religious law made use of logic,
mathematics, rhetoric and the natural
sciences branches of knowledge studied
by the philosophers.
The interpénétration of philosophy and
theology -can be seen in the work of the.
Mu'tazilites, advocates of rationalism
applied to all fields, not least to religion,
and in that of humanists such as Jahiz.
The tendency to synthesize became even
more marked in the 10th century, with the
grammarians, the juridical theologians,
men of letters, medical doctors, and the
encyclopaedists, such as the Brothers of
Purity. To put the matter in a nutshell, at
this stage, the intellectual climate was
exceedingly dynamic and open-minded.
History and geography, as they were
understood at the time, provide further
evidence of the tendency towards uni-
versalism and the empirical verification of
data. A spate of universal histories
appeared in which the chronological re¬
cording of events (especially after the
coming of Islam) superseded mythical
references to prophets, ancient Persian
kings, and the sages of Antiquity. Trav¬
ellers, missionaries and merchants, wander¬
ing the length and breadth of the Islamic
empire, added their own observations to a
geographical corpus already rich in informa¬
tion and descriptions of prevailing
conditions.
The tale of Ajib and Gharib in the
Thousand and One Nights (2) provides a
significant example of the intermingling of
history, geography and literature. In it,
specific historical events became the plot
of a splendid tale in which the collective
mind projected and rediscovered its desires,
beliefs and symbols.
This link between the humanities and
literature can be found in the work of
several writers, notably that of the great
scholar Al-Biruni (d. 1048), whose thinking
was in many respects astonishingly
"modern". (See Unesco. Courier, June
1974).	
(2) Un conte des Mille et Une Nuits, Ajib et Gharib,
translated into French with a commentary by André
Miguel, Editions Flammarion, Paris, 1977.
20

In Seville, the Giralda ^^
(or "weathervane") was
built in 1171. Within, ramps
allowed two horsemen
abreast to reach the top
without dismounting.
Photo G. Martin © Rapho, Paris.
Trio of towers
Along a virtually straight line,
three holy places of Islam were
built in the 12th century by the
Almoravid dynasty, the rulers
of Morocco and Muslim Spain.
Their minarets were all fashioned
along the same lines.
/ RABAT
MARRAKESH
The Hassan Tower in
Rabat, begun in 1196, was
never completed.
Surrounding it are hundreds
of truncated columns, which
once supported the roof
of the mosque.
Photo Jean Mazenod, Paris.
The minaret of the
Kutubiyya in Marrakesh.
The original building, begun
in 1140, faced in the wrong
direction and was replaced
in 1195.
Photo © Almasy, Paris.
The intercontinental trade routes traced
by the Arabs were also the arteries along
which their culture spread through the
medieval world. Left, a bridge built
by Arab engineers across the Nahr
al-Kalb or "River of the Dog" in Syria.
Broadly speaking, the period was cha¬
racterized by a running confrontation bet¬
ween two basic approaches, the one
rationalist, following lines traced by the
Greeks, the other traditionalist, concerned
with the direct meaning and implications
of the sacred texts (the Quran and the
hadith).
Nonetheless, many thinkers chose to
ignore this distinction. They were often
men of great stature, such as Ibn Sina
(Avicenna, d. 1037), Ibn Rushd (Averroes,
d. 1198), and Ibn Khaldun (d. 1406).
Although there existed an intellectual
meeting ground for the various social
groups within the Islamic empire which
were gradually exposed to the life and
culture of the cities, rivalries arose between
different schools and "sects", sometimes
even leading to street brawls.
Dissident groups and movements arose
in reaction, to forms of. orthodoxy
supposedly accessible to everyone, but in
fact reserved to "official" Islam, whether
Sunnite, Shiite or Kharijite, depending on
time and place.
The tendency to see these scissions as
purely religious still prevails in the Muslim
world. But in the light of modern histori¬
cal sociology, it becomes clear that they
were closely linked to the social and cul¬
tural conflicts of the period. The demands
of newly-Arabicized converts for equality
and access to positions of responsibility
may be taken as a case in point. In the
political context of the Abbasid Caliphate,
for example, these demands could only be
formulated in religious terms.
The Kharijite movement is another
example: strictly religious by definition, it
arose out of the nomads' opposition to an
authoritarian, centralized state.
.In yet another setting, Shiite Islam's k
following expanded significantly with the Y
21

The scholars of the order known as the Brothers of Purity (Ikhwan as-Safa)
held a distinguished place in 10th-century Arab cultural life because of their
vast scientific, philosophical and religious knowledge. Above, an illustration
from their encyclopaedic work "The Epistles of the Brothers of Purity."
Two of the authors are shown with a scribe and servants.
conversion of non-Arabs (mawali), who
were for the most part former client-
peoples'^ craftsmen and merchants in the
new urban centres which were created or
revitalized by the Arab conquest (Basra
and Kufa in particular, as well as Baghdad
and the Iranian cities).
By the same token, social and economic
changes in the 8th and 9th centuries gave
rise to new groups of dissidents: the urban
poor, the dispossessed Arab tribes, and
the peasants, among others. . Their
discontent found expression in the various
Shiite factions opposed to the existing
power structure.
It becomes clear, then, that these social
and economic conflicts were at the root of
the controversies among the various
schools of theorists, theologians, mystics
and jurists who were responsible for the
maintenance of doctrinal orthodoxy and
official Islam.
Islam is characterized by a long-standing
conflict between personal questioning, on
the one hand, and obedience to tradition,
on the other. This conflict evolved out of
the social divisions and tensions generated
by rival groups in the cities. It should be
noted that the return to tradition became
more pronounced as the rivalry between
Sunnites and Shiites abated, or as one or
the other acquired the status of official
religion.
It was in the 11th century that the edu¬
cational system and institutions which
would ensure continuity in religious life
and its expressions came into being.
Till then, adabculture understood in
the broadest sensedeveloped and was
passed on in "scientific circles", which
attracted large numbers of disciples, and
were maintained by thé viziers, princes,
rich merchants and humbler men devoted
to the pursuit of knowledge. Then too,
there were the bookshops, where men of
every rank and station met to exchange
ideas, a tradition which still lives on in the
Arab world today.
Theology was taught in the mosques,
which were the centres of intense social
and cultural activity, as well as being
houses of prayer.
In the 11th century, a succession of
events began to shake the power of the
Muslim world and to threaten its prosperity.
Surging out of Central Asia, the Seljuq
Turks settled in Mesopotamia and took
power in Baghdad, encouraging the resto¬
ration of Sunnite Islam and ending the
Shiite domination of the preceding century.
Even as Muslim Spain was in the throes of
political fragmentation, waves of Egyptian
nomads swept across North Africa and
destroyed the existing power structures.
Arab Islam stood at the threshold of a
period fraught with danger, under the
double threat of internal disintegration and
destruction by external forces the Cru¬
sades of the 12th and 13th centuries, the
Mongol invasion of the 1200s, and the
Spanish Reconquest, which was to last
until the 16th century.
Arab Islam withstood all these dangers,
developing a cultural heritage transmitted
through the madrasahs (see - article
page 35), and through educational institu¬
tions for mystics and (from the 13th
century onwards) for members of the
religious brotherhoods. Philosophy,
inseparable from medical science and
practice, was "dispensed" in the hospitals.
But the most salient factor was the
evolution of the madrasah, from the 11th
century on. Originally an intellectual
training ground where ideas were freely
discussed and exchanged, it gradually
became a centre of scholasticism. Once
it acquired official status, the madrasah
was transformed into an institution for
teaching the precepts of a given school or
brotherhood to the exclusion of all others.
Divergent views were presented, explicitly
or implicitly, as deviationist, if not plainly
heretical.
The madrasah was an institution of
learning with a single chair occupied by a
master recognized by a given school of
religious law. Sunnite Islam alone had four
such schools (Malikite, Hanbalite, Shafii
and Hanafite), each with its own madrasahs.
Specialized institutions modelled on the
madrasahs, known as Houses of the Quran
or the hadith also proliferated. Their
masters awarded diplomas only when the
student correctly repeated a number of
formulae, logical exercises, and solutions
which corresponded to the traditions of
his school.
Learning was transmitted by recitation
before the master and by the diligent
study of manuals, bibliographies and
anthologies.
The weight of this medieval scholasticism
increased as Western Europe tightened its
economic grip on Mediterranean Islam.
In this way an idealized and constricted
vision of an "orthodox" Islam gradually
emerged. This image, forged under the
defensive imperatives of a community
threatened from within and without, is
still very much alive today.
Thus, contemporary struggles for na¬
tional liberation and the Palestinian tragedy,
for example, have only served to consoli¬
date the ideological role of Islam and of
the Golden Age of Arabic thought.
The redefinition of philosophical and
historical perspectives is today a matter of
the utmost importance. It is common
knowledge that Arab intellectuals are
engaged in the urgent tasks of economic
and social development. Consequently,
such urgent and relatively simple tasks as
the preparation of new, critical versions of
the great classical texts are either postpon¬
ed or carried out imperfectly.
There is much talk about economic
development, much less about cultural
underdevelopment. One consequence of
this is the existence of vast gaps in our
knowledge of societies with particularly
impressive pasts. This is true of the entire
field of Arabic studies.
To my mind, we should be thinking in
terms of a new world cultural order closely
related to the new world economic order
towards which we are working for the first
time in history.
Mohammed Arkoun
22
