by Jorge Enrique Adoum
I
JTJTHN Latin America, anyone who
isn't descended from the Indians
or the blacks just came off the
ship." This saying, popularized despite
its non-popular origins, exactly describes
the state of ethnic and cultural intermixing
in the continent today. But a devil's ad¬
vocate looking back 400 years could argue
that the Indians, the only natives on Latin
American soil, saw both white and black
men descend from the shipsthe former
from the bridge and the latter out of the
bilges.
Intermingling began almost immedi¬
ately, since the conquistadors brought no
women with them. It has continued to
such a degree that it provokes astonish¬
ment, perhaps because it is unique to Latin
America (unlike the superimposition of
cultures produced by conquest or colonial¬
ism in other parts of the world) and also
because its ethnic components were more
strongly different than those which formed
the basis of racial intermingling in Europe
or North America.
But one must specify the regions in
which this racial and cultural fusion has
occurred and define the levels it has reach¬
ed. The situation in the Antilles, the Carib¬
bean, Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina and
Chile where the Amerindians have disap¬
peared or survive only as small minori¬
ties quite unlike that of countries with
large indigenous populations like Ecuador,
Peru, Bolivia and parts of Central America
and of Mexico.
Whatever the level of cultural or ethnic
intermingling in the latter regions, the
phenomenon of acculturation has also
occurred to some degree the word accul¬
turation being understood as "the transfer
of cultural elements from one social group
or people to another".
Cultural intermingling, like ethnic inter¬
mingling, presupposes equal participation
in the mixing process: an enriching exchan¬
ge produced by the addition of cultural and
other values. Acculturation, on the other
hand, entails a loss. Certain cultural ele¬
ments always necessarily valuable or
valid may be imposed, directly or indirect¬
ly, on the original culture, or be adopted by
it, to the detriment of its values.
When one hears talk of "incorporating
the Indians into civilization" or of "inte- k
grating them into the life of the nation" in Y
JORGE ENRIQUE ADOUM, Ecuadorian poet and
writer, has published several volumes of poetry,
including an anthology. Informe Personal Sobre La
Situación (Personal Report on the Situation, Madrid,
1973). His play about the Spanish conquest of the
Inca empire, published in English as The Sun Trampled
Beneath the Horses' Hooves (The Massachusetts
Review, Winter-Spring 1974) has also been translated
into French, Swedish and Polish and performed in
several countries of Europe and Latin America. He
has taken part in Unesco's programme of studies on
Latin American cultures, and is now a member of the
editorial staff of the Unesco Courier.
46

COMMUNITIES IN CRISIS
The modern world is bringing mixed blessings
to the Indians of the cordilleras
How can a people
preserve its cultural
identity when
confronted with ways of
life far different from its
own? This is a very real
problem in Latin
America today, where
increasing numbers of
persons from isolated
rural areas are coming
into contact with city
life for the first time.
Even in once
inaccessible villages like
this one in the High
Andes (right), improved
transport and
communications are
making many changes
in the traditional pattern
of life.
47

, countries where Amerindians constitute
between 40 and 80 per cent of the popu¬
lation and are the major source of the
nation's wealth as miners or farm workers,
it is clear that "civilization" and "the
nation" are white and mestizo, and not
Amerindian.
But the curious fact is that in Latin Amer¬
ica this discrimination is not racial but
social and cultural. In nearly all Latin Amer¬
ican countries where they constitute a
large part of the population, the Amerin¬
dians have access, although sometimes
only exceptionally, to higher education, to
economic and even to political power.
Indeed, there are men and women in the
professions, landowners, civil servants and
politicians who are more Amerindian than
mestizo.
But in order to aspire to such high status,
these people have had to renounce their
culture, beliefs, customs, clothes and lan¬
guage. The official language, which peo¬
ple must learn in order to exercise their
civic rights, is Spanish, which is also the
language in which business is done.
It may be that Spanish has already
absorbed all the words that it needs from
the languages of the Quechua Indians; but
the assimilated Indian learning Spanish
renounces his own language, first for
reasons of prestige, and secondly because
it will be of no use to him in the new circles
he will move in and because he will no
longer need it to talk to his erstwhile fellow
Amerindians. It sometimes even happens
that Indian children in cities will not answer
when addressed in Quechua.
The assimilation of isolated Indian
groups goes hand in hand with a transition
from a subsistence economy to a market
economy. This determines intercultural
contacts, be they sporadic or permanent.
When Indians remain in a state of isola¬
tion, they can only conceive of themselves
in relation to their own community, which
has a system of authority but no social
classes. As the Peruvian writer José
Carlos Mariategui has noted, the Amerin¬
dian "is never less free than when he is
alone". He only acquires our notion of
individual liberty when he comes into
contact with the dominant culture...
perhaps because it is at that moment that
he loses his liberty.
This sense of community is traditionally
expressed in institutions like the prestama-
nos (or "helping hand": unpaid collective
help in roofing a neighbour's house) or the
minga (collective work in communal fields
or digging irrigation ditches). But the
other, official, culture exploits this tra¬
dition of community life and work to pro¬
vide unpaid labour, with fines for absen¬
teeism, for road and railway construction
and for building schools and churches.
And although the Indians thus come into
contact with new cultural forms new
tools, new architectural ideas it would be
a euphemism to speak of cultural inter¬
mingling.
Isolated groups of Indians in the High
Andes speak of "we" much more than of
"I", and are unlikely to use the words "I
have" except when answering a specific
question. This may be because they
possess little; but more important than this,
they have no notion of personal "posses¬
sion".
Members of the community acquire this
notion, together with the idea of individu
alism, when they come into contact with
the villages or cities of the whites and
mestizos. Here they also acquire such
hitherto unknown values as adultery, pros¬
titution, exploitation of women or the very
notion of exploitation.
In the cities, the man from the High
Andes can buy "modern" sandals, which
are reproductions of his traditional foot¬
wear except that the cord soles have been
replaced by ones cut from car tyres which
last longer. But if he buys a bicycle and
he will now utter the words "I have" he
will go back to the countryside much faster
but much more wearily than on his donkey,
with his wife in front and child behind and a
sheep slung across his shoulders. It is
interesting to ask at what point he begins
to feel different from his fellows, and who
benefits from the time he saves especially
if he is working for someone else.
When the Indians drift to the towns.
Three generations
of cordillerans
Photo Hans Silvester ©Rapho, Paris
48

which they are doing with increasing
frequency as mechanization reduces the
need for farm labourers, they generally
become part of a subproletariat of drop¬
outs.
When one of them succeeds in becoming
relatively well-off, he may command the
moderate amount of respect accorded to
mestizos. If he becomes more prosperous,
he may win the consideration reserved for
whites. His "rise" is reflected in a changed
legal status: he has more rights and influ¬
ence and, no matter how Amerindian his
facial features may be, he automatically
acquires a passport inscribed "White
Race" without even asking for it.
These are the extreme cases of isolation
and integration. But one can discern
between the two a series of stages which
for the moment appear to be irreversible.
Without falling back into the white-mestizo
paternalism which long predominated in
literature, anthropology and sociology, and
without wishing to idealize Amerindian
society, it seems necessary to examine
each individual case to see whether there
has been any mutual enrichment or real
intermingling of two or more cultures.
It was the haute couture fashion de¬
signers who introduced the vogue for pon¬
chos and Andean zoomorphic textile
designs to America and Europe. But when
the Indians themselves weave their carpets,
and replace these traditional designs by
floral or Persian patterns glimpsed in some
foreign catalogue, this is not a personal
decision but a result of imposed urban
tastes the effect of market demand.
Similarly, in Guatemala, the lovely highland
Indian pitchers of traditional shapes and
styles are nowadays made of plastic.
It is true that in the museums of Europe
hundreds of thousands of people enrich
their own culture by visiting exhibitions of
pre-Hispanic Indian art. But the inhabitants
of the High Andes have no inkling of such
events and sometimes know nothing of
such art forms. Far from continuing the
artistic traditions of even their recent
forebears, they are now producing pottery
adorned with Walt Disney figures.
It may be objected that the other side of
this cultural "enrichment" lies in tourist
consumption of work produced by authen¬
tic local craftsmen. But the basic and
immense difference is that the tourist
acquires a decorative object at no loss to
himself, whereas the Amerindians' acqui¬
sition of plastic articles reflects a confused
urge to be "modern" and "be like" some¬
one else the first stages of his incorpo¬
ration into a "superior" culture. The same
outlook is found in young villagers who
dress up in city clothes on Sundays or,
worse still, when they proudly don Batman i
or Tarzan T-shirts like some city youngsters. I
Once totally cut off from the outside world, the Indians living
in the Andes of Peru and Bolivia proudly keep up the cultural
traditions which colour so many aspects of their lives, from
everyday tasks to dress and jewellery. Their sense of belonging
to a community is so strong that the idea of loneliness is
totally alien to them. Shown here, three generations of
Indians of the High Andes.
Photo Hans Silvester ©Rapho, Paris
Photo © Gaillarde, Paris
49

, In a small Ecuadorian village on the
threshold of the Amazonian jungle, the
local schoolgirls recently took part in the
fiesta dressed in crêpe-paper costumes and
posing like ballerinas in Swan Lake, on a
float decorated like a gondola. This was
probably not a unique event. It would be
highly interesting to know by what myste¬
rious ways this Venetian art form had pene¬
trated into the jungle. It would be less
disturbing if one could be sure that these
girls had been taught something about
Italian culture and, more important, about
their own. (I have no idea whether they
parade canoes full of Amazonian "Indians"
in festivals in Nice or Venice, but I doubt
whether anyone would consider such
pathetic imitations of the "exotic" as a
cultural enrichment.)
Serious Latin American, and sometimes
European, music is often based on Indian
rhythms but does not use its instruments.
The Indians do, in fact, continue to play
their own music. But in addition to the
traditional flute and drum they play the
Spanish guitar now so popular that it has
become Latin American par excellence
as well as violins, harps, harmoniums and
accordions.
These are what they take to their fiestas,
which usually coincide with those of the
Catholic saints. But after the mass or the
procession (during which the Virgin has
been wearing a cloak encrusted with bank¬
notes, coins, dried corn ears and bits of
newspapers- and old mirrors) the Indians
celebrate their own ancient rite, of whose
profound mythological content the other,
official culture knows nothing.
During these fiestas, beer is drunk as
well as the traditional chicha, or corn liquor,
and although at fiesta-time the Indians get
their only opportunity to eat meat, they do
not drink milk (the word does not even
exist in Quechua) or eat eggs, because
these products must be sold on the "other
culture's" market. Thus, some Indians
have become so conditioned that they
would never dream of eating eggs, even if
they were given some as a present. In this
way, the inadequacies of a meagre diet
imposed by poverty, deficient in proteins
and excessive in carbohydrates are exacer¬
bated by taboos of economic origin.
Although the Indians do not know it,
their only compensation has been that two
of their indigenous products potatoes
and tobacco have conquered the world,
and that city fare including business
lunches and receptions for VIPs is often
graced by "typical native dishes" of the
sort which most Indians can never afford.
And often they are not typical at all.
It is becoming harder every day for
Amerindians to live in complete isolation.
The Cuna Indians of Panama, who inhabit
the San Bias archipelago (said. to have as
many islands as-there are days in the year)
have traditionally preserved their culture by
avoiding contact with the continent.
However, one of their nele-kantules or
medicine-men has complained that "Be¬
fore, it was easy to fight against this so-
called civilization because it was men.
Now it's worse, because it's machines".
He was talking about television. Because
of civilization, Indians do not have to go
anywhere to make cultural contact, since
concept-carrying machines come right into
their homes and stay there.
Transistor radios have invaded the whole
Andes region. But between the life of the
Indian communities and the idealized
image of urban life, there is such a brutal
contradiction that it must produce many
psychological tensions.
Indeed, radio and television may create a
feeling among the Indians that their 'life¬
style is old-fashioned and their houses ugly
and unhygienic. This is creating a depen¬
dence on luxury products which are alien to
their way of life, together with a depen¬
dence on the people who produce them. It
also produces a sense of frustration as they
realize that their own cultural values are
despised.
It now seems impossible to preserve
cultures intact. Each one must assimilate
the elements it considers most useful and
appropriate and not those imposed by any
kind of power structure.
In defining and preserving their cultural
identity, our peoples must first recognize
themselves in a mirror. But the mirror must
be neither convex nor concave, for if it is,
they will find a distorted image, of the face
they are trying to identify.
Jorge Enrique Adoum
ROVING CULTURE. Radio, television and cinema can be invaluable teaching aids but can
also be a vehicle for mediocrity. If children like these Indians (above) peering at "moving
pictures" on a square in La Paz (Bolivia) are fed a diet of poor-quality films, what opinion
will they form of "civilization" and "progress", not to mention their own cultures?
Moreover, when Indians leave their mountain villages to seek work in the towns (below),
the blandishments and benefits of urban life often lead them to turn their backs on their
own cultural traditions.
50
