AN EQUAL CHANCE
FOR EVERYONE
SOME groups of people, such as
the illiterate, rural communities,
women and girls, the young
and the elderly, have fewer opportu¬
nities than others for expressing them¬
selves fully, as individuals or as mem¬
bers of society.
Taken as a whole throughout the
world, these groups are chronically
short of basic necessities, and take,
little or no part in the life of the
community.
This state of affairs cannot be
remedied from outside, through
international action alone. Primary
responsibility for defining suitable
policies must rest with Member
States themselves.
Illiteracy cannot be eradicated
without a concerted effort by the
populations concerned.
The integrated development of ru¬
ral areas can only be planned in the
context of regional and national de¬
velopment, including that of towns
and cities.
The status of women cannot be
changed without changing the factors
responsible for their status.
Lastly, these disparities cannot be
eliminated on a global scale unless
young people are directly involved in
social, educational and cultural
action.
Illiteracy and poverty go hand in
hand. In the 25 least developed
countries, where the average annual
income is less than ij> 100, over 80
per cent of the population are illiterate.
What is more, the total illiterate popu¬
lation includes a steadily increasing
number of women: 58 per cent in
1960, 60 per cent in 1970.
If the trends of the last two decades
continue, fewer than 30 per cent of
children aged between 6 and 1 1 in
the 25 least developed countries will
be attending school in 1 985.
The problem of illiteracy has ano¬
ther aspect: a consequence of politi¬
cal and social inequalities, illiteracy
itself can make for inequality. From
the inequities of the colonial system,
there emerged, and still persist, social
and economic systems, certain
features of which (subsistence or
barter economies, social ostracism,
and so on) are no incentive to literacy.
Delays in the adoption or applica¬
tion of agrarian reforms have
weakened the motivation of adult
literates. At times, literacy cam¬
paigns seem hardly capable of ad¬
vancing beyond the experimental or
even symbolic stage.
Furthermore, some literacy pro¬
grammes, although reaching large
numbers of illiterate persons, appear
to have been conceived in response to
immediate requirements for training
semi-skilled labour rather than with
regard to social factors.
Even where literacy programmes
exist, the obstacles encountered often
appear to be insurmountable: lack of
human and material resources; elitist
social structures favouring minorities;
inadequate communications and
transport; multilingualism; lack of
written material, and so on. But the
main obstruction is probably the
absence of a "literate environment".
Literacy work is based on the fact
that exclusively oral communication
is not a sufficient basis for the changes
brought about by any development
process. But literacy training is only
one stage in education and literacy is
pointless unless it leads to further
activities which correspond to the
principles of life-long education.
Unesco's own activities should be
planned and conducted in full aware¬
ness of these ethical, social, economic
and educational considerations.
Most of the 130 million children
between the ages of 6 and 1 1 who do
not attend school and most of the
800 million illiterate adults live in
rural areas. The low level of their
training all too often prevents them
from enjoying the benefits of progress
in science and technology.
This state of affairs has two equally
unacceptable results. On the one
hand, since they lack the guidance
of even the most rudimentary scien¬
tific information, farmers often make
irrational use of soil, water and
vegetation, which may lead to the
collapse of ecosystems, reduced pro¬
ductivity and the exhaustion and
possible abandonment of the land.
On the other hand, the introduc¬
tion of advanced technologies that
are unsuited to local conditions may
also contribute to undermining the
physical foundations of rural life.
The isolation which distance and
the lack of transport facilities inflict on
rural communities is aggravated by
the relative absence of the informa¬
tion media. In the 25 least deve¬
loped countries, for example, where
90 per cent of the population lives
in rural areas, annual newsprint
consumption does not exceed 0.1 kg
per person; in two-thirds of these
countries there is not even one radio
receiver for every 40 persons.
Frequently illiterate, unorganized,
impoverished and sometimes igno¬
rant of the language used for adminis¬
trative purposes, the people of rural
areas are handicapped in coping
with social structures which they do
not understand or which may even
reject them. This being the case,
rural society may become introverted
and in some cases actively resist
change.
Experience has shown, however,
that rural populations can mobilize
their productive capacities for the
sake of their own development, espe¬
cially when it is clear that they
themselves will reap the benefits of
doing so.
The priorities of rural development
include research in agriculture, eco¬
logy and hydrology, together with
the elaboration of techniques suited
to the implantation of small industries
in rural areas.
The expansion of out-of-school
education, including the training of
farm workers and craftsmen, out-of-
school programmes for women and
young people and educational televi¬
sion and radio broadcasts is necessary
to overcome the backwardness of
rural areas and to meet their develop¬
ment needs. Non-academic me¬
thods are particularly suited to the
training of agricultural workers, as
experience shows that such training
is not effective unless it is based on
practice.
Efforts to increase the participation
of women in education and training
must, to be effective, be accompanied
by action affecting certain aspects of
education itself. Educational stan¬
dards and programmes must be freed
from all distinctions based on discri-
26

Painting © Heather Cooper, Toronto
PARADISE REGAINED Once upon a time, the story goes, on the banks of a clear pool, the lion saw himself
reflected as a lamb, and the lamb as a lion... If the social and economic inequalities
provoked by poverty disappeared, men might at last see each other as brothers.
mination between the sexes. Simi¬
larly, if the stereotypes and precon¬
ceptions which are largely to blame
for the inequality of women are to be
eliminated, textbooks and other teach¬
ing materials must present a positive
image of women and their role in
society.
Least favoured among young people
are those who live in rural areas. In
most cases, the opportunities open
to them (training possibilities, em¬
ployment and living conditions in
general) are much more limited than
in urban areas, which are the focal
points for industrial development.
Young people in rural areas conse¬
quently suffer from a feeling of iso¬
lation and frustration and are tempted
to leave the countryside for the towns.
In countries currently facing eco¬
nomic difficulties, the growth of un¬
employment, which particularly af¬
fects young people who are looking
for a first job, or who have only
recently started work, combines with
social or psychological difficulties due
to prolonged insecurity (relegation
to the fringes of society, delinquency'
and a sense of futility) to heighten
the traditional tensions between
youth, eager for change, and the older
generation, more anxious for stability.
Young people are, however, ex¬
pressing opinions and convictions on
world issues such as peace, interna¬
tional understanding, human rights
and the struggle against colonialism
and racism which show a common
concern among groups belonging to
different countries and different social
and cultural backgrounds. In many
respects, these preoccupations echo
the efforts currently being made by
the international community to
establish a new world economic and
social order.
Through their willingness to com¬
mit themselves on such matters, and
through the ideas and activities of the
organizations to which they belong,
young people show that their role in
the community must be more than a
passive one: they want their voice to
be heard in decision-making itself.
In the developing countries, the
action taken by public authorities
reflects society's increasingly broad
recognition of the role of young
people in development. The mobili¬
zation of young people has often
been a corner-stone in nation-build¬
ing. In a great many countries,
young people have taken a major part
in the struggle for decolonization,
and their participation in development
is a natural and indispensable conse¬
quence of such involvement.
In a number of industrialized
countries, young people's participa¬
tion in social and cultural life has
increased appreciably in the past few
years. This is borne out notably by
the change in their social and legal
statusin particular the lowering of
the voting age.
Unesco can and should play an
important part in eliminating all
these inequalities which, provoking
tension and social unrest, place the
groups that gain from development
in conflict with those which, irrespec¬
tive of their size, derive little or no
benefit from the process.
In this connexion, Unesco proposes:
1 to adapt literacy programmes to
local conditions, rendering literacy
"functional" in the widest possible
sense of the term, and to encourage
the active, constant involvement of
society in this task;
O to devise rural development pro¬
grammes based on the principle
of. integration and aimed at reducing
existing inequalities;
Q to reveal all the_discriminatory
practices to which women are
subjected in education, science, cul¬
ture and communication and to
encourage women themselves to
work to improve their situation;
4 to encourage young people's
involvement in development stra¬
tegies and to enable them to express
their point of view on society and on
themselves.
From Unesco's Medium-Term Plan (1977-
1982), Chapter VI: Improvement in the
Opportunities for Certain Groups
27
