Africans from neighbouring countries such as Lesotho, Botswana and Malawi come to
work in South African and Rhodesian mines in the absence of employment at home. This
inflow ties white southern Africa's neighbours to the industrial nexus of apartheid and
keeps them in a state of economic dependence. Above, black mine-workers are
numbered and referred to by their number.
28

THE United Nations system is in a
sense based on a paradox. A group
of Organizations, comprised exclu¬
sively of States, has as one of its
tasks the defence of human rights
vis-a-vis the governments of these
very same States.
Does this not imply that the
ultimate goal of those who wield political
power should always be the protection of
every individual and group, without any
form of discrimination?
P At the end of World War II the. United
Nations set itself a three-fold task in the
field of human rights:
the proclamation of a Universal Declara¬
tion of Human Rights that was to be taken
"as a common standard of achievement for
all peoples and all nations";
the elaboration of one or several interna¬
tional covenants on human rights having
the force of law in all the ratifying states;
the setting up of bodies to supervise the
observance of the covenants.
with the optional protocol, on 23 March
1976(1).
The rights proclaimed in the Universal
Declaration fall into two categories: on the
one hand, civil and political rights and, on
the other hand, economic, social and cultu¬
ral rights. Because of the changing patterns
of society in recent years, it has become
imperative to formulate what the Director
General of Unesco has termed "the third
generation of human rights".
The first generation concerns "negative"
rights, in the sense that their respect
requires that the state do nothing to inter¬
fere with individual liberties, and corres¬
pond roughly to the civil and political rights.
The second generation, on the other
hand, requires positive action by the state
to be implemented, as is the case with
most social, economic and cultural rights.
The international community is now em¬
barking upon a third generation of human
rights which may be called "rights of
solidarity".



A 30-year
struggle
The sustained efforts to give force of law
to the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights
by Karel Vasak
The first part of this task was completed
on 10 December 1948 with the proclama¬
tion by the General Assembly of the United
Nations of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
The second and third parts were only
accomplished 18 years later, with the adop¬
tion on 16 December 1966 of two cove¬
nants on human rights. One dealt with
economic, social and cultural rights; the
other, completed by an optional protocol
providing machinery for complaints by in¬
dividuals, dealt with civil and political
rights. The first covenant came into effect
on 3 January 1976. The second, along
KAREL VASAK, French jurist, is Director of Unesco's
Division of Human Rights and Peace. He has collabo¬
rated with the principal authors of the Universal Decla¬
ration of Human Rights, including the late René Cassin
with whom he was a co-founder of Revue des Droits de
l'Homme: Human Rights Journal, an international quar¬
terly on the theory and evolution of human rights in
international law. He has taught at The Hague Aca¬
demy of International Law, the school of law of the uni¬
versity of California at Berkeley and at other universities
(Singapore, Bangkok, Besançon, Nairobi, etc.). His La
Convention Européenne des Droits de l'Homme ("The
European Convention on Human Rights"), published in
1964, was awarded a prize by the Paris Academy of
Moral and Political Sciences.
Such rights include the right to develop¬
ment, the right to a healthy and ecologi¬
cally balanced environment, the right to
peace, and the right to ownership of the
common heritage of mankind. Since these .
rights reflect a certain conception of
community life, they can only be imple¬
mented by the combined efforts of every¬
one: individuals, states and other bodies,
as well as public and private institutions.
The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, like the French Declaration of the
Rights of Man and of the Citizen in 1789,
has had an immense impact throughout the
world. It has been called a modern addition
to the New Testament, and the Magna
Carta of humanity, and has become a cons¬
tant source of inspiration for governments,
for judges and for national and interna¬
tional legislators.
The constitutions of many states express
the ¡deals enshrined in the Declaration, and
(1) As of October 1977, the number of Member States
that have ratified or acceded to these covenants is 69 .
for the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, and 68 for the Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights.
in some cases even incorporate its provi¬
sions verbatim. Laws without number
have been drawn up or modified to tie in
with specific clauses or to reflect the spirit
of the Declaration,
Time and again judges have used it to
buttress their most convincing arguments.
Countless men and women have fought
and suffered in its name.
On the international level, the Declara¬
tion has become so widely accepted as the
basis for universal and regional norms in
the defence of human rights that one may
ask what its legal force is. For since it is not
a treaty and therefore not a compulsory
legal instrument the Declaration may ini¬
tially seem to have no more binding force
than any other strong recommendation of
the General Assembly.
However, in recent years, there has been
a tendency, insofar as the Declaration is
concerned, to look further than the distinc¬
tion between mandatory and non-manda¬
tory texts. Some specialists today consider
that the Universal Declaration is binding on
Member States; others feel it has become
part of customary law; still others see it as a
kind of "common law" for all mankind.
In all probability, none of these views is
entirely correct. But by recognizing the
Universal Declaration as a living document
and leaving the jurists to argue among
themselves, one can proclaim one's faith in
the future of mankind.
The adoption of the Universal Declara¬
tion in 1948 opened the way for the drafting
of a "network" of texts of unequal juridical
value. Today the corpus of international
law governing human rights is comprised
of some 15 declarations, the most import¬
ant being the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, adopted by the U.N. on 14
December 1960.
In addition, some 50 treaties can be con¬
sidered as offshoots of the principles laid
down in the Universal Declaration. Some,
were drawn up within the framework or
under the auspices of the U.N. or its Spe¬
cialized Agencies, notably the International
Labour Organization and Unesco. Others,
like the European Convention on Human
Rights of 4 November 1950 and the Ameri¬
can Convention on Human Rights of 22
November 1969, are limited geographically
to such regional organizations as the Coun¬
cil of Europe or the Organization of Ameri¬
can States.
The task now facing human rights orga¬
nizations, which have grown in number
over the years, is not so much to draft
new texts as to see that existing texts are
applied and respected.
The work of the U.N. Commission of
Human Rights, which is made up of repre¬
sentatives of Member States, has. been
fairly successful as regards the definition of
international norms concerning human
rights. With the entry into force of the
International Covenants on Human Rights,
the U.N. added a new human rights body
to its structure which may help it achieve
one of its original goals. The Human
Rights Committee, established in accor¬
dance with the Covenant on Civil and Poli¬
tical Rights, will play a more or less impor-
CONTINUED PAGE 32
29

A 30-year struggle
tant role depending on the number of
states ratifying the Optional Protocol which
provides for individual petitions (2).
The activities of the Specialized Agen¬
cies of the United Nations such as the ILO
and Unesco are, broadly speaking, concen¬
trated on the promotion and protection of a
limited range of human rights.
The International Labour Organization,
concerned entirely with the protection of
social rights, has drafted some of the most
important human rights conventions. They
deal with such matters as forced labour,
and the right to organize and to participate
in collective bargaining. Above all, the ILO
has developed a number of procedures to
ensure that its Member States respect
human rights. The most important of these
concerns the international safeguarding of
trade union rights through the Committee
on Freedom of Association of the ILO
Governing Body, which has received over
1,000 complaints from trade unions.
Unesco seeks to promote education,
science, culture and information as rights
and fundamental freedoms. Thus it has
given priority to the fight against discrimi¬
nation in education and has drawn up a
convention to this effect. The right of
everyone to education is reaffirmed in ar¬
ticle 13 of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Unesco has further elaborated this right .
in a series of conventions and recommen¬
dations, including the Recommendation
concerning Education for International
Understanding, Cooperation and Peace
and Education relating to Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms (1974).
In the major international documents on
human rights, cultural rights have a rather
curious status:
They are associated either with civil and
political rights (and thus, as we have seen,
are considered as "negative") or with
economic and social rights (and are consi¬
dered as "positive"). They sometimes
appear in both categories of human rights
(2) As of October 1977, the following 28 countries have
ratified or acceded to the Optional Protocol: Austria,
Barbados, Canada, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cyprus, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland, Gui¬
nea, Honduras, Italy, Jamaica, Madagascar, Mauritius,
Netherlands, Norway, Panama, Peru, Philippines,
Senegal, Surinam, Sweden, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Zaire.
in documents produced by the same Orga¬
nization.
They are always defined juridically as
individual rights, whereas culture is essen¬
tially collective in nature, since it should be
available to the whole community.
In view of the uncertain status of cultural
rights, they should be recognized as having
a specific nature, since they are at once
individual and collective. Unesco has been
and still is working along these lines.
ARTICLE 27 of the Uni¬
versal Declaration refers
to the right of everyone
freely to participate in
the cultural life of the
community. It is only
recently, however, that action has been
taken to define how this right should be
exercised and to give the individual the
opportunity to express his cultural identity.
Intergovernmental conferences conven¬
ed by Unesco in Venice (1970), Helsinki
(1972) and Yogyakarta (1973) led to the
adoption by the General Conference at its
19th session in Nairobi on 26 November
1976 of the Recommendation on Participa¬
tion by the People at Large in Cultural Life
and their Contribution to It.
The protection of copyright and the
preservation of the cultural heritage are
indispensable if people are to participate
fully in cultural life. The moral and material
interests of all forms of intellectual output
are protected by a number of international
agreements, including the Universal Copy¬
right Convention of 1952, which was revis¬
ed in Paris in 1971.
As far as the protection of cultural pro¬
perty is concerned, Unesco has paid spe¬
cial attention to the preservation of certain
monuments, sites, manuscripts, collec¬
tions of books and archives from destruc¬
tion or damage in the event of armed
conflict, as well as from theft, pillage or
vandalism.
Freedom of expression as defined in
Article 19 of the Universal Declaration and
in the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights includes freedom to seek,
receive and impart by any means informa¬
tion and ideas of all kinds regardless of
frontiers. ,
The free flow of information has always
played an important role in Unesco's work.
But to meet the challenge of the vastly
increased volume of international com¬
munication and exchange of information
in a world in which facilities for the trans¬
mission and reception of information and
ideas are unevenly distributed, the Organi¬
zation has progressively broadened its
approach.
It has adopted a number of international
agreements in this field, beginning with the
Agreement Facilitating the International
Circulation of Visual and Auditory Materials
of an Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Character of 10 December 1948.
More recently, on 15 November 1972,
the General Conference proclaimed the
Declaration of Guiding Principles on the
. Use of Satellite Broadcasting for the Free
Flow of Information, the Spread of Educa¬
tion and Greater Cultural Exchange.
This brief survey of Unesco's activities
in the field of human rights, placed in the
legal perspective of the Universal Declara¬
tion, would be incomplete without a refer¬
ence to the sensitive issue of the action
which is or should be taken when private
individuals or non-governmental organiza¬
tions write to the Organization, claiming to
be the victims of violations of human rights
that fall within Unesco's competence.
The United Nations, which receives tens
of thousands of such complaints each year,
is faced with the same problem. The issue
has provoked many and often heated
debates.
At Unesco, it was decided in 1967 that a
committee of the Executive Board should
examine such complaints which fall within
Unesco's competence.
At its Nairobi session, the General
Conference requested that this procedure
should be made "more effective", and it is
currently being re-examined by the Execu¬
tive Board. In seeking a more effective way
of safeguarding the rights of individuals
and groups, Unesco intends to remain
faithful to its mission to serve mankind.
Karel Vasak
32
