by
Solomon Mbabi-Katana 



A song
for every season
Music in African life
from the cradle
to the grave
SOLOMON MBABI-KATANA, Ugandan mu¬
sicologist, is head of music In the department
of music, dance and drama at Makerere Uni¬
versity, Kampala (Uganda). He is a former
member of the Uganda National Commission
for Unesco.
The panther dence of the Senufo people of the Ivory Coast marks the funeral ceremony
of a dignitary oftthe "Poro" society, whose members formerly played a major role in
the religious life of the community. The masked dancer gyrates to the sound of drums.
26

MUSIC to an African is not a
luxury but a way of living.
It expresses his happiness
and jubilation at weddings and festivals,
his pride and sophistication on cere¬
monial occasions, his loneliness and
devotion at religious rituals, his inten¬
sity in love, his might at work, his
simplicity and humility by his fireside
and his courage in war.
African folk music is thus a living
example of the African cultural heri¬
tage. It has matured over thousands
of years and is based on beliefs es¬
tablished by ancient customs and
practices. Though mostly unexpres¬
sed in words, these beliefs are known
and understood by every member of
the culture to which the artist belongs.
But although music is intricately
woven into the fabric of African social
and spiritual life, its significance has,
unfortunately, so far only been dimly
realized.
Western musicians, unlike their
African counterparts, inherit a long
tradition of musical literacy. They
can experience their art with detach¬
ment and objectivity. They can re¬
move music from its context and treat
it as something that exists of itself.
The Western concept that musical
sound creates emotion is due to this
long-established musical literacy. Con¬
sequently, ideas such as that whereby
a minor key is "sad" are established
aesthetics of Western musical art.
African music, on the other hand,
has a set of social and cultural asso¬
ciations and cannot be abstracted
from its context. It is difficult to
dissociate the impact of musical sound
from the effects of such associations
on the emotions.
I once played a tape of their peo¬
ple's songs and epic recitations to a
group of herdsmen living around the
lakes of western Uganda. The songs
and recitations touched on the life of
one of their legendary heroes. Only
two listeners were moved to tears.
The rest remained unmoved because
the music was being played outside
its ritual context.
African music uses strictly regulated
and stylized sounds to express
thoughts and perceptions related to a
particular ritual or function, thus
transforming it to a new plane of
experience and heightening our en¬
joyment and perception of it.
Through the invocation of ancestral
spirits it provides a medium between
the living and the dead, but it is also
used to accompany oral history, story¬
telling, speech-making and various
forms of poetic recitations. Genealo¬
gies, proverbs and legends are also
portrayed through music, which ¡s a
vehicle for the preservation and disse¬
mination of knowledge and thus for
education.
The significance of music in African
life is further illustrated by the role it
plays in traditional occupations and
activities. Music is present at every
stage of the farmer's year, from the
bush clearing which precedes plough¬
ing and planting to harvest time,
threshing and the carrying of the

crops. Work and leisure activities
such as fishing, hunting, brewing and
cultivating, often take place to the
accompaniment of music.
In Africa there is music for every
season of a man's life. There is music
for birth, for infancy and puberty, for
adulthood and weddings, for funerals
and for succession after death. The
traditions surrounding the birth of a
child, which begin before the actual
delivery with the seeking of a diviner's
message regarding the baby's safe
arrival, are communicated through
music and dance.
Thus, the Banyoro people of Uganda
have a special three-part ritual dedi¬
cated to Rubanga, the god of twins,
in which the birth is celebrated by
singing and dancing in which the
parents themselves take part.
African childhood is accompanied
by a wealth of dance songs, play
songs, story songs and musical k
games of all kinds. Before the advent f
A man of many parts, the "griot" in West
African society is troubadour, story-teller
and genealogist. He is a repository of his
people's traditions, steeped in their
history and imbued with their wisdom,
moral code and sense of humour. His
performances hold listeners spellbound:
it is said that when he sings even the sun
stops in its course to listen. Above,
recording traditional music in the north of
Cameroon. The griot is playing a pluriarc,
one of the oldest African instruments.
27

of modern schooling, children were
mostly left to themselves, and these
musical pastimes had their own in¬
herent educational values and creati-
veness. Through songs such as the
"counting out" song performed by
Banyankole children, infants learn not
only how to count but also train their
ear to listen to the accents of musical
beats.
Puberty, among several African
ethnic groups, is a momentous occa¬
sion marked by circumcision music,
dancing and visual art in the form of
masques and body painting. It is
through the initiation rites performed
at puberty that systematic instruction
is given to the young, designed to
help them to pass from childhood to
manhood and to transmit to them the
customs and ideals which are consi¬
dered important for the continued
welfare of their community.
Among several ethnic groups of
East Africa, wedding ceremonies are
rituals which amount to folk operas of
immense variety and intense dramatic
and musical content.
A typical wedding ceremony of the
Bantu-speaking Bahaya people of
Tanzania is a highly structured per¬
formance which begins with motherly
advice to the bride presented in ope¬
ratic style with recitatives interspersed
with arias. The beauty of the bride,
her wedding dress and the institution
of marriage itself are praised, the per¬
formance being punctuated with reci¬
tations of her genealogy.
The ceremony ends with a tri¬
umphant procession in which men
sent by the bridegroom's parents
carry her to her new home. Here the
celebrations reach their climax in exu¬
berant scenes of music and dancing,
while love poems are declaimed inside
the bridegroom's house to the ac¬
companiment of soft music played on
a zither.
Death in African society is the oc¬
casion for music of poignancy and
sadness which accompanies the fune¬
ral rites. In contrast to this are the
joyful musical and dance-rituals with
which some African peoples celebrate
the succession of an heir. In one
such ceremony practised by the Ba-
ganda people of Uganda, the sad and
contemplative music of a ritual known
as the "Okabya Olumbe" (literally,
the "destruction of death") is follow¬
ed by a joyful ceremony of welcome
to the heir or successor, against a
background of drum beats which
identify the clan and symbolize its
continuity.
Thus folk music is present in Afri¬
can life from the cradle to the grave,
a living part of a culture which trans¬
cends and transforms everyday expe¬
rience.
Solomon Mbabi-Katana
Swinging saxophonists in
Guinea. Members of an
all-female jazz band called
the "Amazons" they are
swaying to the rhythm of
the music as they play.
28
