LATIN
AMERICA
The long journey
to self-discovery
by Leopoldo Zea
OUR position as Latin Americans is,
as the Liberator Simon Bolivar
(1783-1830) put it, a most extra¬
ordinary and complicated one: "We are
neither Europeans nor Indians, but a spe¬
cies midway between the native inhabi¬
tants and the Spaniards."
Such is the uniqueness and complexity
of Latin America and its culture. It is a
culture which arose from the coming
LEOPOLDO ZEA, Mexican philosopher and writer, is
professor of the philosophy of history and the history
of ideas in America at the Autonomous National Uni¬
versity, Mexico City. He also heads the Centre for
Latin American Studies at the university's faculty of
philosophy and letters. Among his works published
in English are: The Latin American Mind (1963) and
Latin America and the World (1969), both published
by the University of Oklahoma Press.
together, without mutual assimilation, of
separate cultures. Instead of merging,
they' opposed one another, and what was
supposedly superior was juxtaposed with
what was considered inferior. The relation¬
ship that was perpetuated between Euro¬
peans and Americans was that of lords
and serfs, conquerors and conquered,
colonizers and colonized.
For the mestizothe person of mixed
bloodthis cultural and racial relationship
was interiorized, and resulted in inner con¬
flict conflict of a man whose blood
and culture flowed from both the con¬
queror and the bastard offspring. He was
looked upon as a bastard not just because
of his blood but also because of his cul¬
ture, or simply because he was born in
America and not in Europe.
Indeed, for the Spaniard born in Spain,
there was no difference between the ere- ,
ole, the legitimate son of the colonizer,
and the mestizo born of European father '
and Indian mother. The person born in
Latin America knew that Europeans con¬
sidered him an inferior, while the Indians
saw him as an exploiter, a henchman of the
colonizer.
"Americans by birth and Europeans by
right", Bolivar added, "we find ourselves
caught up in a conflict: we contest the
natives' rights of possession and defend
our position in the country where we were
born against the invaders... Though we
were all born of the same Mother, our
fathers are foreigners, by blood and by
origin, and the colour of their skin is dif¬
ferent. This dissimilarity has very serious
consequences, for we are made to do j
continual penance for it." I

An intermingling of cultures or a juxtaposition of cultures? These
are the terms of the dilemma confronting Latin Americans as they
seek to define their cultural identity. Ever since the Spanish
conquest, different cultures those of the conquistador, the
defeated and exploited indigenous population, and the African
slave have met, juxtaposed and interpenetrated one another.
The result has been the gradual development of forms of
cultural expression which are complex and sometimes
contradictory, but authentic and vigorous, as can be seen in
countless works of art scattered throughout the length and
breadth of the continent. Yet even today the Indians are not
totally integrated into this culture which they have helped to
create. Below, Indian women wait patiently in front of San
Francisco de la Paz Cathedral (Bolivia). On the wall behind
them, Indian motifs blend harmoniously with the Spanish
colonial-style architecture.
m
C

Plaza of Three Cultures
. Such was the position of the Latin
American: this perpetual inner conflict led
to a sense of uneasiness, which he felt just
as much towards his father's people as
towards his mother's. Rejected by the
one, he was ashamed to belong to the
other. He began by accepting the atti¬
tudes of the colonizer towards his maternal
American culture and looked on his own
mixed race as a mark of inferiority, which
prevented him from feeling that he legiti¬
mately belonged to the paternal culture.
His mixed heritage, instead of being a
positive factor, became the source of all
the ambiguity and ambivalence which
permeate the history of his culture. He
oscillated between what he was and what
he would like to belong to.
The attempt to impose a highly admired
but alien model on a past felt to be un¬
worthy gave rise to a philosophy of histo¬
ry which is the opposite of the European
philosophy of history. It is a philosophy
based on a juxtaposition and not an assi¬
milation of cultures.
But it was this very juxtaposition that
eventually made Latin Americans realize
the inevitability of the cultural fusion that
came to be the basis of Latin America's
cultural identity. In other words the men
who formed Latin American culture had
to assimilate different cultures, creating,
as Bolivar put it, a culture that is both
extraordinary and complex".
The source of this extraordinary cultural
complexity can thus be traced to a history
of colonial domination. Whether we like
it or not, this past must be taken into
account if the much-needed change we
desire is to be brought about.
For what we need is to change the
relation of dependency which has been
the root cause of all our problemsa pat¬
tern of colonial domination which, contra- .
ry to what happened in Europe, made
genuine cultural integration impossible.
For European culture grew out of a
process of exchange, as multifarious
peoples moved back and forth across the
various regions that came to be Europe.
Greco-Roman culture was one product of
this process, later being assimilated by
Christianity, which in turn culminated in
the European or Western culture which,
from the 16th century onwards, spread to
America and the rest of the world.
The European colonizers tried to prevent
any further transculturation (even though
their own culture was the result of this
process), for they felt themselves superior
to other peoples.
But European and Western imperialism
was very different from that of the Greeks
and Romans, who assimilated cultures
just as they annexed the gods of other
peoples to their pantheon.
When the Spanish conquistadors arrived
in the 16th century, they were prepared
to take over the inhabitants of the newly-
discovered lands provided they gave up
their own culture.
The evangelizers were willing to assimi¬
late these creaturesor homunculi (little
men), as Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda called
them in his polemic with Bartolomé de Las
Casas (see Unesco Courier, June 1975)
provided that they would relinquish for¬
ever a past which had more to do with the
devil than with God. They must let them¬
selves be cleansed of their sins, stripped
of a false history and culture and led to
the culture that God Himself had created.
In this way, the culture of the conquer¬
or and colonizer was superimposed on
the "devilish" indigenous cultures. Chris¬
tian churches were raised on the sites of
ancient temples, and the old idols were
replaced by the cross, statues of the Virgin
or of a Christian saint.
The same thing happened during the
second wave of conquest and colonization
in the 17th century, this time from all of
Western Europe. These men likewise
ruled out any form of assimilation, al¬
though their own culture was the result of
an extraordinary degree of assimilation.
Like their predecessors, their attitude was
one of domination: to assimilate without
being assimilated. Their mission was to
bring civilization to the barbarians.
But this time, the barbarians were not
only the original inhabitants and the mes¬
tizos but also the very same European
settlers who had made racial intermingling
possible and whose culture was consider¬
ed outdated in relation to the new Western
culture that was rapidly expanding.
The new representatives of Western
culture would have nothing to do with
racial intermingling, for to mix was to
debase, to contaminate. That is why the
so-called inferior cultures, such as those
found in North America, were simply
wiped off the map and their members
exterminated or rounded up. And what
could not be stamped out because of the
sheer size of the population, as in South
America, Asia and Africa, was belittled so
as to make any contamination or assimi¬
lation impossible.
And the "natives" were not incorpor¬
ated into civilization as human beings
but, as Arnold Toynbee pointed out, as
part of the flora and fauna of the land.
They were called naturales in Spanish,
because they were considered to be part
of a nature that had to be subdued and
utilized for the sake of civilization.
Bolivar clearly expressed the relation
between Latin America and Western Euro¬
pean culture when he said: "Let us be
aware that our people are not European,
nor North American, but a mixture of Afri¬
ca and America rather than a product of
Europe; for even Spain itselfwith its
African blood, its institutions and its cha¬
racter not European. It is impossible
to properly define to what human family
we belong."
And yet the particular character of Latin
America did begin to express itself despite
the pattern of imposed cultural norms and
the servile imitation of outside models.
In the Christian churches built on the
sites of native temples, the devil, who was
to be extirpated, popped up in forms
created by Indian artists following the
instructions of the conquistadors and
evangelizers. The Indians danced in front
of the crosses. Virgins and Christian saints
just as they had once danced for their
own gods.
In the baroque art that still adorns the
churches, one can see the faces of the
native artists and admire their feeling for
colour. Even though the pantheon of
Maya, Aztec, Inca and various other gods
had officially disappeared, their spirit is
nonetheless evident in the various cultural
forms of the colonial period.
The year 1810 marked the beginning of
the struggle for the liberation of Latin
America and it symbolizes the Latin Amer¬
icans' inability to keep faith with their
Iberian cultural and historical past. Though
they considered that past as their own,
the arrogance and intolerance of the Por¬
tuguese and Spanish, and especially the
latter, vetoed any pretension to political or
cultural equality between Americans and
Europeans.
As far as the metropolitan Spaniards
were concerned, everyone born in America
was racially and culturally inferior. The
people of America were seen not as the
children of the Spanish conquest but as
its bastards and, therefore, as men with¬
out rights.
The Americans could elude but not
change this distinction, which was rigor¬
ously enforced. And so they were forced
to draw away from Spain. They had no
option but to renounce a culture which
prepared men only for servitude.
Again, Simón Bolívar expressed the
feeling of rejection experienced by Latin
Americans: "Within the Spanish system,
the Americans have no place in society
other than as servants or at best as con¬
sumers." The only culture available to
these men was one designed to make
them into efficient servants.
When the Spaniards rejected their de¬
mands for equality, these men had to

History is telescoped in the "Square of Three Cultures"
in Mexico City: foreground, remains of an Aztec
pyramid; centre, a 17th-century Spanish church in the
Jesuit style; background, modern apartment blocks.
improvise as "legislators, magistrates,
treasury administrators, diplomats, gener¬
als and the whole gamut of authorities,
from the highest to the lowest, which
make up the hierarchy of a properly orga¬
nized state."
But there were two mutually exclusive
ways of improvising, and it was the con¬
flict between them that lay at the root of
the long struggle which ravaged the whole
of Spanish America after its emancipation
from colonialism.
One way was to preserve the same
political and cultural order that had allow¬
ed Spain to keep its control for three cen¬
turies, by simply placing it in the service
of those who considered themselves its
heirs: the creóles, the land barons. They
who had once governed in the name of
metropolitan Spain would now exercise
authority in their own name. This meant
perpetuating what the Chilean Diego Por¬
tales (1793-1827) called the long "weight
of the night": that is, the long colonial
night with all its customs, institutions and
culture.
For, culturally speaking, there was a
Spanish past as well as a colonial past to
be assimilated. Spanish culture, like
Spanish history, was also that of the
Spaniards in America. This was the view
of the Venezuelan writer and statesman
Andrés Bello (1781-1865) who showed
that the drive for emancipation on the part
of the Spanish-Americans was actually a
genuinely Spanish response. Those who
had confronted the French troops at Sara¬
gossa were the same men who had fought
against the metropolitan Spanish troops
at Cartagena, in Colombia. The metropol¬
itan Spanish troops had been defeated in
various places in Latin America by insur¬
gent armies who were equally Spanish.
To appropriate Hispanic culture and
keep it alive would be to keep alive. the
very being of Latin America. Spain, in
spite of itself, had left expressions of its
culture which the Latin Americans could
make their own. There was no need, in
that case, to improvise: it was merely a
question of assimilating, learning and put¬
ting into practice. These were the major
concerns of the conservative programme.
In opposition stood those who chose
the second way: they wanted nothing
more to do with a past and a culture that
had made them subservient either to
metropolitan Spain or to those who pre¬
sented themselves in America as its legi¬
timate heirs. If they had to improvise,
then they preferred to improvise some¬
thing different. If knowledge and expe¬
rience were required, then they could be
sought in other experiences and other
cultures. Bolivar himself demanded a total
break with a social, political and cultural
order within which the Americans could
only have the role of servants.
Since they had nothing to call their
own, the Latin Americans could turn to
more relevant cultural models and expe¬
riences and make them their own. And
what could be more relevant than the
experiences of the men who had created
the nations which were now showing the
way to the rest of the world. These were
the very nations which had relegated the
Iberian world and its culture to a back¬
water and disputed its conquests. And so
the long colonial past was false and had
to be got rid of.
There was nothing for it but to start
again from scratch, making up for lack
of experience by taking over foreign
models. The supporters of this project
saw the Indian, Spanish and mestizo past
as the expression of a barbarism which
civilization would have to tame.
And just as the Iberian conquistadors
and colonizers tried to bury the old Indian
cultures and replace them with their own,
so the Latin-American civilizers tried to
bury the colonial past, both Spanish and
Indian, as well as the racial intermixing of
the colonial period.
They decided to imitate the cultural
models of Western Europe: the political
institutions of Britain and the literary and
philosophical movements of France. The
democratic institutions of the United
States which had so surprised de Tocque¬
ville were also to be adopted.
The goal of the civilization programme
was to be like England, France and the
United States and to eradicate the Latin
American past because it was considered
to be alien. The political emancipation
achieved by the liberators was to be fol¬
lowed by what the civilizers called "mental
emancipation".
To stop being what one is in order to
become something differentsuch was
the major preoccupation of this new cul¬
tural movement in Latin America. "Let us
recognize the tree by its fruits", the Ar¬
gentinian writer Domingo F. Sarmiento
(1811-1888) declared: "South America will
be left behind and will lose its providen¬
tial mission as a branch of modern civili¬
zation. Let us not stand in the way of
the forward advance of the United
States... Let us catch up with the United
States. Let us be America as the sea is
the ocean. Let us be United States...
Call yourselves the United States of South
America, and a sense of human dignity
and a noble desire for emulation will make
you worthy of that great name."
How was this to be achieved? Through
education and through massive immigra¬
tion. Brainwashing and bloodwashing.
This was the aim of an education which
took its inspiration from French positi¬
vism, English utilitarianism and North
American pragmatism. Justo Sierra (1848-
1912) believed that the Mexicans should
become the yankees of South America.
Juan Bautista Alberdi (1810-1884) also
spoke of Spanish-American yankees. The
civilizers would have no truck with the
past, with boorish Spain, the servile negro
or the savage Indian. They had an even
CONTINUED PAGE 69

LATIN AMERICA'S JOURNEY TO SELF-DISCOVERY
(continued from page 7)
lower opinion of the mestizo: "In America
everything which is not European is bar¬
baric", Alberdi wrote^
To "educate for civilization", as it were,
and to bring in men who would do for
Latin America what they had already done
in Europe and the United States amounted
to joining up with those who were already
far advanced along the path of progress
and civilization. Sarmiento warned that if
Latin America did not take this course, it
might lose its chance to become an out¬
post of modern civilization.
Without experience, the Latin Ameri¬
cans were obliged to ask for guidance
from those who were turther ahead along
the same pathWestern Europe and the
United States. If Latin America could not
be a centre of civilization, then let it at
least be an outpost. If it could not be the
locomotive, it could at least be the
caboose.
Europe, however, was engaged in
brutal imperialism at the time and the
United States was in an expansionist
phase that began with the 1847 war
against Mexico and continued in 1898
with its ouster of Iberian imperialism from
the Caribbean. These events made Latin
Americans conscious of their cultural con¬
flicts and of the need to surmount them.
They also became aware of their inferi¬
ority complex, which had facilitated the
shift from an imposed dependency to a
freely accepted one.
The Uruguayan essayist José Enrique
Rodé (1871-1917) was one of the first to
decry the errors of the civilization policy.
He exposed the tendency to "de-latinize"
and the mania for imitating all things
northern. In his book Ariel, he wrote;
"One imitates the people in whom one
sees superiority and prestige." And that
is why the United States, he added, is
"conquering us morally".
Imitate, yes, but invent as well, urged
the Mexican Antonio Caso (1883-1946).
Latin America, "our America", as it was
called by the Cuban writer and patriot
José Marti (1853-1895), is not a vacuum
which has to be filled over and over again.
Latin America is a reality: it has a culture
and a long history.
America is the Indians, and also their
conquerors, the liberators struggling to
put an end to the conquest as well as the
conservatives seeking to preserve the
established order and the civilizers trying
to jump ahead of their own experience.
Latin American culture has overcome the
supposed superiority of all the cultures
which different people had tried to impose
on it. Each of these cultures was absorbed
and mixed in the melting pot.
This attempt to produce an assimilated
culture also made Latin Americans aware
of the errors of previous generations.
These errors had been made at the very
moment when the continent achieved its
political emancipation.
It was a mistake to assume that Latin
Americans were incapable of acquiring
their own form of culture and civilization.
"Incapacity", José Marti wrote, "does not
lie with new-born nations which need
reforms tailored to their needs and a bene¬
ficial greatness, but in those who want to
rule genuinely original nations, whose de
velopment has been unusual and violent,
with laws that were forged over four cen¬
turies of freedom in the United States...
The spirit of government must be adjusted
to the particular constitution of the coun¬
try. Government is nothing more than the
equilibrium of the natural elements of a
country". The path of genius would have
been to bring together what had seemed
to be separate. "The problem of inde¬
pendence", Marti added, "was not to
change the form but to change the spirit".
This is what Latin Americans have
sought to achieve throughout this century:
a change of spirit in terms of their own
past and their own culture. One of the
leading proponents of this movement, the
Mexican political thinker José Vasconcelos
(1882-1959), spoke of a Cosmic Race. By
this he meant a Latin American melting
pot which would produce its own forms
of culture and its own specific identity.
It was a painfully earned identity, but
one which its heirs could be proud of.:
"What fatherland", wrote Marti, "can a
man have more pride in than these Amer¬
ican republics born of travail, raised up
among the silent masses of Indians, amid
the noise of battle and of the book and
candle held in the bloody hands of a hun¬
dred apostles? Never have such compact
and advanced nations been created in so
brief a historical time out of such disor¬
dered factors".
A complex cultural identity and by the
same token an original one. The expe¬
rience of men in extraordinary and complex
situations: this explains their original con¬
tribution to history and to human culture
in short, to mankind. Leopoldo Zea
69
