DEBUNKING
THE < BLACK LEGEND'
A hard look at the historical role
of Spain in Latin America
by Roberto
Fernandez Retamar
ROBERTO FERNANDEZ RETAMAR, Cuban poet
and essayist, is a professor at Havana university and
director of the magazine Casa de las Americas. His
essays and anthologies of his poems have been trans¬
lated into a number of languages.
54

IN recent years, the debate about Latin
American culture has become increas¬
ingly lively. Emphasis has been put
on the indigenous Amerindian and Afric¬
an heritage, while the differences or, as
some would have it, the affinitieswhich
characterize Latin America's relationship
with the West have been pointed up.
But there is another heritage, which one
might call "intermediate", neither indige¬
nous nor strictly speaking Western: the
Iberian heritage.
It is obvious that much of Latin American
culture comes from Spain. But although
this Spanish influence should not be exag¬
gerated, it should neither be minimized
nor dismissed.
Latin Americans received much more
than their language from Spain, but lan¬
guage indicates the special way in which
the Iberian heritage was transmitted.
Referring to the unity of the Spanish
language, the Spanish historian Ramón
Menéndez Pidal said, "One can say that
there are two types of educated Spanish,
just as there are American and British
versions of English, primarily distinguished
by peculiarities of pronunciation."
This obvious phonetic difference can be
considered a sign of richness, and fortu¬
nately it has not endangered the unity of
our language, since "the peoples who
emerged from the former Spanish Empire
communicate much more with one another
today than when they belonged to a single
state". The unity of the Spanish language
has thus been preserved, enriched by the
contributions of the various regions in
which it is spoken.
In other respects, the situation is much
more complex. We Spanish Americans
like to say that we descend not from those
who stayed behind in Spain but from those
who came to America and whose children
stopped being Spanish, becoming first
creóles, and later, intermingling with other
ethnic groups, Latin Americans.
Spanish America began breaking its ties
with the battered and decadent Spanish
Empire more than 150 years ago; and Spain
was to lose its last American possession,
Cuba, in 1898. Spanish America, mean¬
while, was trying to define its own identity
by making a sharp distinction between the
old and the new continent. It was a com¬
plex task to determine what differentiated
it from the mother country, but it proved
even more difficult to propose distinctively
Latin American solutions. As a result, many
were lured into the arms of other greedy
powers: as if, as the Cuban writer José
Marti (1853-1895) exclaimed, changing
masters amounted to being free.
A readiness to accept "Western" solu¬
tions was typical of certain Spanish-Amer¬
ican groups who were avid supporters of
CONTINUED PAGE 58
A particularly rich form of art and architecture developed in Latin America during the late
17th century and the 18th century (see following double page) with the intermingling of
Iberian and indigenous cultures. Left, an example of this "colonial style" art: a late 18th-
century rococo portrait of a Viceroy of New Spain (Mexico). Equally striking is the church*
at Ouro Preto (below) in the Province of Minas Gerais (Brazil) where the churches are
notable for their flamboyant motifs of garlands and scrolls and eloquent sculpture.
55

INCA ARABESQUES. The dome of the church of Santiago de Pomata is
one of the most remarkable examples of the mestizo style of architectural-
decoration in the Andes. Between each ornamental "spoke" of the radial
design, which follows Andalusian tradition, whorls and arabesques form
Indian motifs (detail below).
; modernization. It was encouraged by the
pitiful state into which Spain had fallen and
its iniquitous exploitation of the new
nations. But it was also encouraged by the
fact that, since the 16th century, Spain and
all things Spanish had come under the
stigma of the "Black Legend", which made
the word "Spanish" synonymous with
purblind reactionary cruelty. Many Spanish
Americans rejected their Hispanic heritage
as a result.
The Black Legend was apparently the
product of an understandable revulsion
against the monstrous crimes committed
in the Americas by the Spanish conquis¬
tadors. But even a minimal respect for
historical truth shows that this is simply
false. Of course there were crimes, and
monstrous crimes at that. But when
compared with others committed in follow¬
ing centuries, they were no more mon¬
strous than those of the metropolitan
powers that followed the Spanish imperial
example, sowing death and destruction
throughout the world.
PLUMED PROFILE. Head topped
with a crest of feathers is carved on
the door of the church of
Paucarpata, near Arequipa (Peru).
This product of Spanish colonial art
recalls the forms on certain pieces
of pre-Columbian pottery.
58

The conquests carried out by the other
Western powers were not lacking in mur¬
ders and acts of destruction. What they
did lack, however, were scrupulous men
like Bartolomé de Las Casas, who cham¬
pioned Indian rights (see Unesco Courier,
June 1975), and such debates about the
legitimacy of the conquest as the one
launched by the Dominicans, which shook
the Spanish Empire.
This does not mean that dissenters, who
represented a small minority, managed to
make their views prevail; but they did
manage to defend them before the highest
authorities. They were heard and their
ideas were to some extent acted on.
According to the Chilean scholar Ale¬
jandro Lipschutz, "the Black Legend is
worse than simplistic: it is malicious pro¬
paganda. It is simplistic because all im¬
perialist conquests have taken an equally
traumatic form and continue to do so".
Laurette Séjourné, the Mexican archeo-
logist, admits that "It is now clear that
systematic condemnation of the Spaniards
has played a pernicious role in this vast
drama, because it takes the occupation of
Latin America out of its world context.
Colonialism is the mortal sin of the whole
of Europe... No other nation would have
behaved better... On the contrary, Spain
boasts one important distinction here: it is
the only country to date in which powerful
voices were raised against the act of im¬
perial conquest". -
The Black Legend was concocted with
one aim in view: to discredit Spain, the
leading European power in the 16th cen¬
tury. Other powers of the time were con¬
spiring to usurp its place, and eventually
they succeeded. Thus it was the bour¬
geoisie of the other colonial powers which
invented the Black Legend.
The Legend was a skilful ideological
weapon in the inter-colonial power struggle
which accompanied the rise of capitalism
and was to last several centuries (although
by the end of the 17th century the outcome
was virtually decided in favour of the new
colonial powers).
In any case, it is important to remember
that there were not one but two cultures in
Spain, as in any other country: a ruling-
class culture and a popular one; a culture of
the oppressors and of the oppressed. The
latter culture was the living and authentic
one, and it is this which we Spanish Amer¬
icans stand for.
Few countries, moreover, were so fully
conscious of this duality ás Spain. The
idea of an external duality (Europe/Spain)
was to become a constant theme of Span¬
ish thought and literature from the onset
of the country's decline. It ño doubt
sprang from the fact that Spain was first
in the forefront of capitalist development
and European expansion, and that it was to
be outdistanced and finally left behind by
the capitalist movement it had contributed
to.
The Spanish writer Mariona José de
Larra's famous epitaph is revealing. In
his All Souls' Day 1836 he noted: "Here
lies half of Spain, it was killed by the other
half".
It is no wonder then that the anti-
Spanish Black Legend reflects one of the
various and intolerable forms of racism.
One need only recall the classic remark
that "Africa begins at the Pyrenees",
which expresses the West's distaste for
everything different from itself, a difference
epitomized in this case by Africa. Here
again traditionalist Spain went hopelessly
wrong in being offended by this assess¬
ment.
There is a ridiculous notion that because
"Eternal Spain" was occupied for centuries
by Arab infidels whom it finally succeeded
in expelling, it consequently preserved
Catholic purity and eliminated the "Islam¬
ic barbarian threat" from Europe. This
can be countered by pointing to a far fnore
potent truth: Spanish Christians, Arabs
and Jews lived together in Spain for
centuries and influenced one another
fruitfully.
But Spain was not only to be a link
between Christianity and Islam. It also
served as a bridge between Europe and
the vast Islamic world, where Greek, Indian
and Persian influences had been assimilat¬
ed by the Arabs.
It is thus correct to state that not only
Africa but Asia as well begins at the Pyr¬
enees; among other factors, this helped
to resuscitate the languishing culture of
Europe.
Alejo Carpentier is fond of reflecting on
the sad fate of the Caribe Indians, a proud
and combative people who came from the
Orinoco Basin to the shores of the sea to
which they gave their name. Their battle
cry was "Only the Caribes are men", but
when they came into contact with the
proud and warlike Spaniards in their expan¬
sion across the seas, they met a people
with a similar battle cry.
But the sails, swords and crosses of
Spain were as puny as the Caribes' canoes,
arrowheads and war cries, and they went
down before the inexorable development
of capitalism. Spain and her history were
cast aside, with all the philosophical,
artistic, scientific, legal and technical
contributions she had made. Even Spain's
introduction of the Europeans into the
Americas was forgotten, together with the
gold and silver she had brought from the
New World, wealth which ended in the
greedy hands of German and Genoese
bankers who sarcastically referred to the
proud nobles of Spain as "our Indians".
"Despite all this", the French historian
Pierre Vilar says, "Velazquez's Spain was
still prestigious. It inspired the classical
French 17th century." Centuries were to
pass before the new European powers
would pardon Spain for this superiority.
The Black Legend was to be the form their
"pardon" took.
There is no need to insist on the close¬
ness we Spanish Americans feel to that
other, democratic Spain, the Spain of Las
Casas and the great Dominicans of the
16th century who defended the Amerin¬
dians: the Spain of thinkers like Vives and
the 16th-century Erasmians like Servet,
Suárez, Feijoo, Jovellanos and Blanco
White even if some of them had to do
their work in exile. The Spain of those
writers who began producing after most of
Latin America had achieved independence:
Larra, Pi y Margall, Costa Iglesias, Cajal
and, above all, Antonio Machado. The
Spain whose people gave birth to an off¬
spring of American rebels.
This Spain opens our eyes to a complex
and fascinating constellation of great men
and works: Hispa no-Arabic art, El Cid and
the picaresque novel, Garcilaso, St. Teresa,
Cervantes, St. John of the Cross, Gongo-
ra, Quevado, Calderón, El Greco, Velaz¬
quez, Goya, Unamuno, Valle-lnclán,
Machado, Picasso, De Falla, Lorca, Bunuel.
So what on earth is the point of the
defenders of the Black Legend telling us
that the horrors of Spanish reaction should
make us forget this other inheritance?
What point is there in rejecting a cultural
tradition because of the momentary aberra¬
tions of certain groups in that country?
Does colonialism stop us admiring Shake¬
speare or Virginia Woolf or Bernard Shaw?
Rabelais or Malraux? Pushkin, Tolstoy or
Dostoyevski? Goethe or Brecht? Dante or
Pavese?
The truth is that we feel proud that this
other Spain is also ours, and that we would
be impoverished if we rejected it.
Roberto Fernández Retamar
MYSTERIOUS STATUE carved on the
facade of the Casa de las Recogidas
(House of the Repentant) at Potosí in
Bolivia bears a surprising resemblance to
the high-relief sculptures in such Hindu
temples as those at Elephanta Island and
Konarak (India). It is not known how this
"exotic" figure came to adorn a baroque
building in the Andean highlands.
59
