4,000 years ago
discovered
in Syria
by Paolo Matthiae
PAOLO MATTHIAE, Italian archaeologist, is director of the Insti¬
tute of Near Eastern studies and professor of Near Eastern
archaeology and art history at the university of Rome. Since 1964
he has directed the work of the Italian archaeological mission to
Syria whose excavations led to the discovery of the city of Ebla.
This research was carried out in collaboration with the Syrian Arab
Republic's department ofantiquities (Damascus). The author ofmany
studies on art and archaeology, he is currently working on a critical
revision of the history of art in the ancient Near East in the light
of his discoveries at Ebla.

Photo O Paolo Matthiae, Italv
This ceremonial limestone vessel with a double basin was recently unearthed
in a temple at Ebla, capital of a powerful kingdom in Syria 4,000 years ago.
A lustral bowl used in religious ceremonies, it held purifying water offered
to the faithful. The two friezes embellishing the bowl depict, at top,
bearded figures wearing fringed skirts and below them the heads of crouching lions.
Dating from 1900 B.C. the bowl is one of the oldest examples of Syrian
sculptural art. (See also page 12).
THE recent discovery in Syria,
not far from Aleppo, of the
4,000-year-old royal archives
of the kingdom of Ebla is an event
that could revolutionize historical
studies of the ancient Near East.
The remains of Ebla were brought to
light by the Italian Archaeological
Mission of the University of Rome.
It will require several decades to
evaluate the full significance of the
finds made in this Mesopotamian
metropolis of Antiquity. This is
because the texts inscribed on the
clay tablets unearthed by the Italian
archaeologists concern many sectors
of the social and cultural life of the
Near East during a period of great
splendour (2300-2000 B.C.) about
which only tenuous and fragmentary
evidence has so far been available.
The value of the Ebla discovery
extends far beyond the horizons of
northern Syria and opens a window
on the world of the Near East as a
whole in ancient times.
Urban civilization began to develop
during the later centuries of the
fourth millennium B.C. in southern
Mesopotamia where the number of
cities progressively increased. Uruk,
on the left bank of the Euphrates, was
one remarkable example.
But the way in which this urban
civilization spread through the Near
East during the 3rd millennium B.C.
is still shrouded in mystery, and parti
cularly so' in the region of Syria.
The evidence for the sequence of
cultures comes from secondary
sources such as archaeological
remains unearthed around Antakya
in Turkey or at Hamma in northern
Syria.
Written records, in Mesopotamian,
Sumerian and Akkadian texts are
limited to the mention of a few cities
conquered by the great kings of the
dynasty of Akkad (2340-2220 B.C.),
or tributaries of the kings of the third
dynasty of Ur (circa 2120-2000 B.C.).
In the absence of any detailed
archaeological or written evidence,
historians have believed that the i
great Mesopotamian urban culture f !

(of the third millennium B.C., located
in the region of the lower Euphrates
and the Tigris, had provided a model
from which all the forms of urban cul¬
ture in the Near East were derived.
Research by the Italian Archaeolo¬
gical Mission of Rome University,
begun in Syria in 1964, aimed to
throw some light on the origins and
the development of Syrian urban cul¬
ture in relation to the Mesopotamian
world.
The Italian Mission, under my
direction, therefore planned a syste¬
matic archaeological excavation of
Tell Mardikh, a large man-made
mound lying about 60 kilometres
south of Aleppo in Northern Syria.
The mound was thought to cover the
vestiges of an important urban centre.
Permission to excavate was granted
by the Syrian Arab Republic's Depart¬
ment of Antiquities, which gave the
Italian mission constant support and
close collaboration.
Excavations carried out between
1964 and 1972 on the uppermost
part of the mound and at its centre
revealed the existence of a major city.
This metropolis is believed to have
flourished between 2000 and 1700
to 1600 B.C., during the period of
the Amorite dynasty in Mesopotamia,
to which the great king Hammurabi
of Babylon belonged.
Extending over 56 hectares and
dominated by the acropolis built at
the summit of the site, the city was
protected by strong ramparts raised
on earth platforms 60 metres thick.
Along the line of the ramparts were
four monumental gates each defen¬
ded by jutting fortifications and
flanked by wide bastions topped by
towers. Each gateway had two or
three adjoining entrances spanned
by an arch and supported by piers
covered with plaques of limestone
and of basalt.
From these gateways radiated the
streets which divided the lower city
into quarters where the private
dwellings were built. Around the
acropolis (whose slopes must have
been terraced) stood the administra¬
tive and religious buildings.
Each temple was dedicated to a
different divinity and in most cases
consisted of a single central hall
whose massive towering walls domi¬
nated the city's single storey dwel¬
lings made of sun-dried brick.
On the acropolis stood the royal
palace. It was unearthed in a badly
damaged state, owing to repeated
sackings over the centuries and to the
fact that its stones, perfectly squared
and smoothed, had been used for the
construction of later buildings.
Near to the palace stood the
Great Temple which, unlike the
smaller temples, had a series of
rooms: a long chamber ending in a
deep niche for the worship of the
god, a small ante-chamber and an
open frontal vestibule at the opposite
end, approached by a short staircase.
A decisive discovery made during
the 1968 excavations finally revealed
the name of the city as Ebla. A
statue found in one of the temples
bore an Akkadian cuneiform inscrip¬
tion on its torso with the name of
a prince, Ibbit-Lim, son of a king,
Igrish-Khep, who proclaimed him¬
self lord of Ebla. The statue dated
from about 2000 B.C.
Ebla had been mentioned in
earlier Sumerian and Akkadian
inscriptions of the 3rd millennium
B.C. as a powerful city that submit¬
ted to the great Sargon of Akkad
around 2340-2300 B.C. and sub¬
sequently fell into the hands of this
monarch's grandson, Naram-Sin
of Akkad, between 2250 and 2225
B.C. Later the city regained its
independence and between 2120
and 2000 B.C. rose again to major
importance.
After 2000 B.C., few texts men¬
tioned Ebla, although according to
one text there was a king of Ebla
around 1700 B.C. After 1600 B.C.
the city had probably become a
heap of ruins. That is what it must
have seemed around 1500 B.C. to
the great Pharaoh Thutmoses III,
who recorded on a monument at
Karnak that Ebla was one of the
places through which the Egyptian
army passed on its victorious march
to the Euphrates.
After this Ebla became a forgotten
city. The Italian excavations re
vealed, however, that during the 9th
and 8th centuries B.C., a small
Aramaic fortification stood on the
acropolis of Ebla. One or two
centuries later, in the Achaemenid
period, there was a modest village
there.
Then even these traces of set¬
tlement disappeared from Tell
Mardikh. The mound was complete¬
ly abandoned and its surface became
ploughed land. Only for a short
whileperhaps just one seasonwas
the acropolis used as a military camp
site, possibly in the campaigns that
devastated the region during the
Crusades.
The picture of Ebla, as reconsti¬
tuted by the excavations of the Italian
Mission, makes a major contribution
to the history of ancient Syria. Ebla
is seen to have been a leading poli¬
tical centre of northern Syria between
2000 B.C. and 1850 to 1700 B.C.
After the later date the city must
have become a vassal of Aleppo,
one of the leading states at the time
of Hammurabi of Babylon.
The Italian archaeologists estimate
that at its most flourishing period
Ebla had between 20,000 and
30,000 inhabitants (an extremely
large population for that time).
Ebla remained a vassal of Aleppo
until about 1600 B.C., when it must
certainly have fallen to the Hittite
invaders who under Khattushili I and
Murshili I overcame' first Aleppo
and then Babylon.
8

Our discovery of Ebla as it was at
its zenith, and in particular the disco¬
very of artistic and architectural fea¬
tures of the period between 2000 B.C.
and 1700 B.C., give an entirely new
historical valuation to Syria, greater
than the one usually accepted in
historiography.
Syria, a land with an ethnically
diverse population, often subjected
to outside domination and varied
cultural influences, had hitherto
seemed to be a meeting ground for
other peoples rather than the centre
of an autonomous cultural develop¬
ment.
The systematic exploration of Ebla
as it existed ' from 2000 to 1 600
B.C. during the Amorite dynasties has
produced evidence to refute the
traditional interpretation. For the
period of the Amorite dynasties, or
more correctly the paleo-Syrian
period, saw the formation of a speci¬
fically Syrian culture, with an urban
organization, architecture and artistic
vision of striking originality.
Moreover, the most fruitful aspects
of this paleo-Syrian culture are to be
found in other centres of Northern
Syria even as late as the first millen¬
nium B.C. They testify very clearly
to the continuity of the tradition,
showing that the originality of Ebla
was no mere transitory process.
However, the very originality of the
paleo-Syrian culture shown at Tell-
Mardikh raised the problem of the
historical roots of this culture, and it
was on this question that the Italian
Archaeological Museum focussed its
research from 1973.
Its studies were concentrated on
the remains of Ebla dating from the
third millennium B.C. to find evidence
of the city destroyed by Sargon and
by Naram-Sin of Akkad. Ebla was
mentioned by Gudea, governor of
the Sumerian city of Lagash, as a
source of timber, and documents of
the great kings of the third dynasty of
Ur describe Ebla as a centre produ¬
cing highly prized textiles.
So in 1973 our mission began the
systematic exploration of the western
slope of Tell Mardikh, hoping to
discover traces of an important
settlement dating from the third
millennium B.C.
After three years of excavation, we
have brought to light part of the royal
palace whose period of greatest splen¬
dour must have been between 2400
and 2250 B.C. Archaeological and
epigraphic evidence indicate that this
was indeed the palace destroyed by
Naram-Sin of Akkad in 2225 B.C.
The section of the palace now
unearthed has proved to be a striking
monumental achievement of proto-
Syrian architecture. So far the only
part explored is the monumental
audience court surrounded by
porticoes with tall wooden columns.
On one side of the court lay a
raised podium where the king satk
during official audiences. On ano-r
Excavation of the remains of the city
of Ebla, at Tell Mardikh near Aleppo,
has revealed striking monumental
architecture of ancient Syria.
Opposite page, ruins of the "celia"
(the sanctuary enshrining the statue
of a god) in the great temple which
dominated the city in the 19th
and 18th centuries B. C. Sturdy
walls of sun-dried brick (left) are
vestiges of single-storey houses in a
residential quarter of the lower city.
They date from the period
(1700-1650 B. C.) when Ebla was a
wealthy settlement of some
30,000 inhabitants. Wooden figurine
above came to light in Ebla's royal
palace. The statuette (20 cm high),
which may depict a king of Ebla. is
in a remarkable state of preservation
although carved some 4,300 years ago.

An archaeological
triumph: the discovery
of an unknown language
In 1968 Italian archaeologists made a decisive discovery which proved
that the mound of Tell Mardikh hid the vanished city of Ebla,
a major commercial centre of Antiquity whose location was completely
unknown. They unearthed the broken torso of a 2000 B.C. basalt statue
(above) which bore among its cuneiform inscriptions in the Akkadian
language the word "Ebla". A few years later came one of the most amazing
archaeological finds of modern times, the discovery of thousands of baked
clay tablets (right) on which the royal archives of Ebla were inscribed.
Many of the tablets, dating from 2350 to 2250 B.C. had survived intact (below).
They were scratched with notches in cuneiform writing in a hitherto unknown
language, since renamed Eblaite. Scholars are now deciphering the Eblaite
inscriptions, since in addition to accounts, inventories and price-lists the texts
contain some equivalent expressions in Eblaite and Sumerjan, a Near Eastern
language of Antiquity.
Photos © Paolo Matthiae, Italy
10

-
i r*
^\ '
, ther was a great doorway giving
access to the palace. Of the palace
itself only two rooms have so far
been excavated, plus a great ceremo¬
nial staircase with four ramps. The
steps were decorated with jewelled
incrustations now lost. Apart from
this a few smaller spaces have been
cleared, including some used as small
storerooms.
With walls sometimes reaching
2.80 metres thick, the structure has
a very impressive appearance. This
and the refinement of certain
building details express an original
architectural concept, some of
whose characteristics were handed
down and later influenced the Ara¬
maic palaces of northern Syria of the
first millennium B.C.
But the most astounding find at
Ebla is undoubtedly that of the palace
archives, inscribed with cuneiform
writings on clay tablets. The tablets
were arranged in two small closed
rooms, in corners of the court of
audience. The smaller room contain¬
ed a collection of about 1,000 clay
tablets or fragments of tablets. In
the bigger room we discovered about
1 5,000 tablets or fragments of
tablets.
These two sets of archives escaped
destruction by Naram-Sin's soldiers
because they were not considered of
any value. The smaller collection
(about 1,000 tablets) was strewn in
heaps between the ruins- of the col¬
lapsed ceiling and of the masonry.
In the larger collection, the thou¬
sands of tablets must have been
stored on wooden shelves running
along the walls and held by vertical
wooden poles fixed to the floor. The
tablets were found piled up still more
or .less in order on the floor where
they had fallen when the shelving
burned.
The cuneiform tablets are written
in Sumerian and in the Eblaite
tongue, a Semitic language that
shows strong resemblancesthough
it is older by more than a thousand
yearsto the Semitic languages of
the "Canaanite" group of the first
millennium B.C., and especially to
Phoenician.
Professor Giovanni Pettinato, the
epigraphist of the Italian Mission
and professor of Assyriology of the
University of Rome, has studied the
Eblaite tongue in the Tell Mardikh
texts. He had already succeeded in
identifying a Semitic language, which
he defined as "Paleo-Canaanite", by i
studying the few tablets already*
11

, discovered in one of the rooms of the
palace in 1974 before the great col¬
lection of archives was brought to
light.
An examination of the huge mass
of texts discovered in the palace in
September and October 1975 has
fully confirmed his interpretation.
The Eblaite texts of the royal archives
of Ebla thus represent extraordinarily
rich documentation that will advance
the deciphering of the texts and the
reconstruction of this language,
along with the study of Semitic
languages in general.
The majority of the Eblan texts are
bookkeeping statements concerning
an international trade in textiles and
metals. Ebla was famous for both
these items of merchandise in the
Mesopotamian world of that time.
The palace itself kept the files on
what we would call registers of con¬
signments.
An interesting detail is that the
texts mention, among the various
qualities of cloth, some which were
"lined with gold". These must have
been high quality textiles which even
today are known as "damask" (from
the Syrian city of Damascus where
they were first produced.).
The tablets provide detailed infor¬
mation on trade in the Near East in
the third millennium B.C. and also
much data on the historical geography
of that period. They name many
cities to which goods were sent.
They show that this trade had very
wide horizons, because it extended
from the Mediterranean coast to the
east of Mesopotamia, and from Ana¬
tolia to Palestine.
The archives also contain many
texts made up of lists of Sumerian
words and phrases, and of bilingual
vocabularies with indications of the
Sumerian pronunciation.
In addition to giving linguistic
information of the greatest impor¬
tance, the tablets also provide valuable
information on the organization of
education at that time. They show
that all instruction was strictly con¬
trolled by the state, (as in Mesopo¬
tamia during the same period) and
was designed to train students to
become state administrators. The
archives contain school exercises
written by students whose names
appear in later official documents as
leading civil servants.
The archives also contain adminis¬
trative, legal and diplomatic docu¬
ments. Some deal with budgetary
aspects of the administration and
throw light on the internal organiza¬
tion of the state, at the "ministerial
level", on the organization and govern¬
ment of the provinces and on the
financial structures of the state, inclu¬
ding the collection of taxes.
There are also facts on the popula¬
tion of Ebla, on administrative and
juridical problems, such as questions
of inheritance or the dividing up of
booty. Diplomatic documents in¬
clude three international treaties, one
of them being a pact between Ebla
and Assur, of particular interest
because of the complexity of its
clauses and the political relation¬
ships it reveals.
A certain number of literary texts
are of exceptional value. One seems
to be an Eblaite version of a passage
from the Mesopotamian saga of
Gilgamesh, the great Assyrian hero
who according to legend was king
of Uruk.
Other literary texts include myths,
hymns and exorcist spells and are
most probably translations into the
Eblaite tongue of Sumerian works
whose originals have previously
reached us only in relatively late
Mesopotamian versions, written
down about 1800 B.C. when Sume¬
rian was no longer a spoken language.
From this rich harvest, one more
example can well illustrate the revolu¬
tionary character of the discoveries.
The texts tell us about a complete
dynasty of at least five kings of Ebla
who appear to be contemporaries of
the kings of Akkad, from Sargon to
Naram-Sin.
This Eblan dynasty, of which writ¬
ten tradition had lost the record,
appears to have dominated the Near
East from Northern Mesopotamia to
the Mediterranean, and to have been
inspired by a universalist ideology.
It is now almost certain that in
order to express the Eblaite language
in writing, the royal chancery of Ebla
successfully undertook the complex
adaptation of the cuneiform syllabic
script (invented in Mesopotamia to
write Sumerian).
With the findings at Ebla, Syria
has rediscovered one of the most bril¬
liant pages of its long history, and
thus takes its place alongside Meso¬
potamia and Egypt in the early pro¬
gress of mankind towards civilization.
Paolo Matthiae
TEMPLE TREASURES. Until the discovery
of Ebla, nothing was known of Syrian art before
1750 B.C. Excavation of the Ebla temples has
revealed striking decorative stone sculpture of earlier
times including several lustral bowls, the oldest
of which date back to 2000 B.C. (see page 7).
Below, two lustral bowls (carved about 1900 B.C.)
incorporating the two-tier decoration characteristic
of early Syrian art. Friezes at right depict (top)
a ritual banquet with the king and queen attended
by a retinue of servants, and (bottom) a string of goats.
Left, mythological scene featuring a fabulous animal
surmounts a realistic portrayal of a hunter in pursuit
of a lion attacking a bull.
12
