Finally, the cultural heritage of northern Africa will be evoked at the end of the year in an issue
which will present a broad picture of the great Islamic cultures which have left a profound
imprint on a vast region of the world stretching across north Africa to the Middle East.
Africa
rediscovers
its cultural
roots
THE African peoples have for¬
mulated, in the course of
their long history, their visions
of man and the world. They have
created their values and assigned an
order of importance to these values,
accordance with their own inspi¬
ration. There is no African culture,
whether sacred or profane, that has
not assimilated the highest values of
the human speciesreligious, moral,
social, aesthetic, economic, theore¬
tical and technical.
The assertion of cultural identity
in Africa is not a reflection of a need
to vaunt a sense of individuality. It
is neither a mere affirmation of the
right to be different, nor a sign of
political crisis or economic disarray.
Nor, again, is it a pathological reaction
to the traumatic experience of colo¬
nialism.
It is neither a self-defensive reflex
in the face of assaults by technolo¬
gically-inspired culture, nor an attempt
at self-purification through the des¬
truction of the bacteria of ideological
This article reflects the conclusions of the
Intergovernmental Conference on Cultural
Policies in Africa. It has been adapted
from "Problems and Prospects", a Unesco
document relating to the Conference.
Organized by Unesco with the co-operation
of the Ghanaian Government and the Orga¬
nization of African Unity, the Conference
was held in Accra (Ghana) from 27 October
to 6 November 1975. It was attended by
delegates from 30 African countries and
representatives and observers from many
parts of the world.
pollution. Lastly, it is in no way
the expression of an embittered,
chauvinistic nationalism adopting
for its own purposes the style and
methods of the cultural imperialism
of the former colonizers.
If the assertion of cultural identity
in Africa were rooted in such consi¬
derations, it would forfeit its validity.
It would even be reprehensible if it
were prompted by hatred or racism
and nourished by resentment.
By tracing the most characteristic
features of the African personality
we shall see that the assertion of
cultural identity in Africa has an infi¬
nitely more authentic and healthier
basis.
There is ample evidence to show
that the circulation of ideas and
objects between African cultures and
between Africa and other parts of
the world is an age-old process.
Limited at the outset to the coasts
and great natural waterways such
as the Senegal, the Niger, the Zam¬
besi and the Nile, it subsequently
reached out in all directions.
The Sahara itself, reputed to con¬
stitute a natural obstacle to exchan¬
ges, served in fact as a link between
different regionsas the magnificent
stone engravings of Tassili and Ténéré
reveal.
An immense and virtually unexplor¬
ed field of research exists here, and
investigation would throw light on
the reciprocal contributions of those k
culturesArab-Berber and Negro- f


^fricanwhose union and interpéné¬
tration constitute the basis of African
identity.
It is among the people living in
rural communities whose history
stretches back to the earliest times
that the distinctive signs of African
identity can still be found. The
similarities which exist between these
signs reflect the richness and cre¬
ativity of this essential "Africanness".
The fact that these ancient so¬
cieties, often living in virtual isola¬
tion, remained to all intents and pur¬
poses outside the reach of colonization
has meant that mother tongues are
the only languages used. This has
resulted in the creation of an oral
literature which is as imaginative as
it is varied.
The family is the essential frame¬
work of these age-old cultures. It
is the custodian of tradition, in whose
transmission it plays a vital part,
owing to the fact that several gen¬
erations live together.
Since time immemorial, tradition
has affected every aspect of human
activity. It provides each person
with the necessary rules for personal
conduct and for coping with everyday
life. Spirituality surrounds and
imbues men and women, objects and
the world of nature. It constitutes
a code whose application is super¬
vised by the very old, whose role
it is to serve as a living library,
accessible to everyone and at all
times.
One of the original features of the
African identity is rooted in a complex
series of circumstances which date
from the beginning of the 19th cen¬
tury and which affected most African
societies at the same time and in a
similar way. This was the colonial
expansionism which subjected them
to occupation and exploitation.
African cultures were destined to
be geographically fragmented and
isolated from each other. A single
cultural area might be arbitrarily
split up, resulting not only in the
rupture of age-old links but in disin¬
tegration and in the breakdown of
structures.
Certain cultural areas were deli¬
berately favoured at the expense of
others, seriously upsetting social,
economic and political balances.
From then onwards, there was a
steadily widening gap between town
and country, between the coast and
the hinterland, between "pacified"
and "unsubdued" regions.
Geographic fragmentation was
combined with a break in time. Co¬
lonialism sought to sever the Afri¬
can's links with his past, his tradi¬
tions and his culture. Traditional
schools were closed down, places
and objects of worship were des¬
troyed, and a campaign was waged
against indigenous teachers.
In the cultural vacuum thus cre¬
ated, Africans were to be trained
albeit to a very limited extent in a
new language and according to new
patterns of thought. Colonial edu¬
cation was, first and foremost, a
means of conquest, submission and
alienation.
The safeguarding of values, the
restoration of languages, the asser¬
tion of identitythese are the causes

in whose name resistance was orga¬
nized and the struggle for liberation
waged. African cultures pointed
the way to individual self-rediscovery
and national restoration, reconstruc¬
tion and mobilization.
It is particularly significant that the
quest for freedom has coincided,
throughout the whole of Africa, with
the quest for cultural identity: to
assert one's personality is to perform
an act of liberation.
The struggle for independence thus
reflects not only a political but also
a cultural demand. This cultural
aspect takes the form of an enthu¬
siastic rediscovery of ancestral cul¬
ture, a renewed awareness of the
past, and a denial of the colonizer's
insistence on setting up his own
civilization as a universal model.
In challenging the cultural supre¬
macy of the West, the African peoples
have rediscovered their own civili¬
zation. Africa was not a complete
blank before colonial invasion; it
had produced knowledge and skills
as well as works of great value in
such fields as architecture, sculpture,
music, dance, poetry and oral
literature.
Africans were well aware of the
existence of these expressions of
their tradition, which they continued
to produce themselves and which
formed part of their everyday life.
But what has changed is their way
of regarding them. These works
are now seen as the meaningful
products of an authentic cultural
creativity.
In rediscovering their own civili¬
zation, the African peoples are be¬
coming aware, at the same time,
that the values of Western civilization
are relative. They now realize that
the scientific and technological de¬
velopment of a society does not invest
it with any moral or aesthetic
superiority.
They are discovering that history
is still an unfinished process, that it
is not merely the product of the West,
and that the African peoples them¬
selves also have a part in making it.
They are regaining confidence in
their future.
In other words, cultural nationalism
is the assertion of a collective per¬
sonality. It must, however, take
care to avoid impoverishing the cul¬
tural heritage which it claims to de¬
fend, by reducing it to a mere anti¬
thesis of cultures that are alien. To
do so would be to strip African cul¬
tures of their own rich, colourful
and complex heritage.
For African traditions, like those
of Europe or China, have been handed
down from generation to generation
Two scenes of life in Africa today. Above, budding navigators
learn how to use a sextant at a training centre for sailors. Opposite
page, a fisherman on Lake Rudolph with the traditional cone-shaped
basket used for trapping fish. Located in the plains of northern
Kenya, Lake Rudolph covers an area of 8,600 sq km.
throughout an eventful history which
came to an end neither with colo¬
nization nor even with decolonization,
but is still a continuing and unfore¬
seeable process.
In most African countries, the mo¬
del of Western development exercises
an undeniable fascination. In the
economic field, the very existence of
some African countries still seems to
depend on the former colonial powers.
Large-scale, uncontrolled transfers
of manufactured goods and mani¬
pulation of all kinds have enslaved
the imagination and created artificial
needs. This process can only per¬
petuate the myths and glamour of
the consumer society and aggravate
the errors that are due to colonial
domination.
The imitation of foreign modes of
life can only destroy the environment
necessary to the resurgence and de¬
velopment of African cultures, by
depriving it of its social, religious and
economic significance.
The social and cultural history of
Africa and of its relations with the
West thus reveals the unreliability
of the theory of cultural interpéné¬
trationthat is, the idea that societies
have a fruitful and constructive in¬
fluence upon each other.
There can, of course, be no question
of advocating some sort of economic
or cultural isolationism for Africa.
But an outward-looking attitude
towards the rest of the world should
not imply the indiscriminate adoption
of a form of modernity which would
cut off a people from its past and
make it lose its personality; nor
should it mean imitating models of
growth whose inegalitarian nature is
fundamentally opposed to the highest
African traditions. . For while Africa
intends to develop, she also intends
to preserve her personality.
It has been claimed that if the
developing countries have failed to
achieve their economic "take-off",
this is essentially because of cultural
factors. It would appear that resis¬
tance to change stems in particular
from the non-competitive nature of
traditional societies, from a social
organization based on solidarity, and
also from certain religious rules.
Competition, as it is defined and
valued in the West, probably does not
exist in traditional societies. Would
it not, however, be more accurate to
describe such competition, not as a
cause of development or underdeve¬
lopment, but as an inherent charac¬
teristic of the Western economic^
system? ' f

, The motive force of African society
is basically the development of the
collective personality, rather than
individual success or profit. Simi¬
larly, African culture is essentially
popular and democratic in nature.
Another type of resistance to the
frantic desire for development that
is exclusively economic can be seen
in the relationship these traditional
societies have with the land. The
overriding importance they attach to
nature can indeed sometimes lead
to a rejection of certain techniques.
However, instead of indicating a kind
of irrationality, this attitude reveals
a rationality of a kind that differs from
Western economic rationality.
In addition, the idea of transferable
property hardly . existshence the
refusal to surrender collectively-
owned land. This characteristic of
African societies and cultures should
be seen as a useful factor in any
agrarian reforms that may be carried
out, rather than as a brake on deve¬
lopment.
Traditional economies ensure the
subsistence of all the members of a
community, whatever the nature of
its structure. Contrary to the norms
of the consumer, society, all these
societies work on the principle that
only commodities necessary to meet
vital needs should be produced.
The lesson these societies can give
to the West is a philosophical one
that nature is neither a reservoir from
which one can draw indefinitely and
with impunity, nor a collection of
potential goods of which one has
only to become "lord and master".
To destroy the overall equilibrium is
to destroy oneself as well.
If development is not to be syno¬
nymous with rejection of the past
and to lead to new forms. of aliena¬
tion, it must further the full expression
of the most authentic African cultural
values, and in particular the oral tra¬
ditions and national languages.
The very quest for authenticity
implies its absence: the loss of one's
own personality. Thus one may
well ask whether this is a problem
for those who have never been cut
off from the living popular culture of
their community. The term "authen
ticity" does not have the same mean¬
ing for the African peasant as for
the African intellectual indeed for
the peasant it has perhaps no mean¬
ing at all.
If we take oral expression as an
example, we must recognize that this
social and cultural form, so wides¬
pread in Africa, probably does not
have the same significance for the
literate as for those who have never
even seen a transcription of their
language. How does this difference
arise?
Oral expression, of whose immense
riches we are still. only dimly aware,
is not by any means a sign of social
backwardness. The appearance of
writing does not necessarily reflect
a transition to a "higher" level of
culture.
Oral tradition, as the means of
expression of a civilization, is always
closely bound up with the different
aspects of social life. Among its
many and varied functions, it acts
as the "memory" of society and trans¬
mits codes of behaviour and aesthe¬
tic expression. Deeply rooted in
society, it describes and explains a
vast range of phenomena: history,
ritual, the natural environment, the
organization of society, technical
skills, human relations, and relation¬
ships with neighbouring . ethnic
groups.
In other words, oral tradition is a
form of instruction which is handed
down from generation to generation.
Far from being confined to a single
family or village, it is common to an
entire ethnic group and often to seve¬
ral such groups.
As a form of instruction about the
past, it provides people with a frame
of reference concerning their society
and the world.
As a form of instruction about the
present, it teaches children the beha¬
viour, attitudes and beliefs they will
have to adopt, familiarizing them with
the rules and standards of conduct
which custom demands and encou¬
raging them to develop their per¬
sonality within the framework of
their society.
The particular nature of oral com¬
munication has a decisive influence
both on the content of a culture and
on its transmission. The transmission
of language is a direct process carried
out among the members of the group,
who have no dictionaries or word-
lists to refer to. The relationship
between the spoken word and what
it denotes is direct and straight¬
forward.
The accumulation of references, on
which civilizations based on written
traditions so much depend, is less
important in civilizations which ex¬
press themselves for the most part
orally. In the latter, the meanings
of words are understood by refe-
8

Medicine old and new
Left, pensive and sagacious portrait of a traditional
healer fashioned in polychrome ebony by an
anonymous Mozambique sculptor.. A venerated
figure, with a vast knowledge of medicinal plants
and acute powers of observation, the healer is
sometimes also a priest. Opposite page, two
young doctors examine the blood-proteins of tse-tse
flies in a biology laboratory at University College,
Nairobi (Kenya).
rence to practical situations which
members of the group have expe¬
rienced.
Traditions are "stored" in the mem¬
ory of society. The memory of the
individual acts as a filter for the
collective memory, which is enlarged
and enriched by successive genera¬
tions in a constant process of inter¬
pretation and assimilation of new
experience. Memory is, indeed,
knowledge, but knowledge of a
constantly changing kind. It has
no fixed point, although certain fac¬
tors confer on it a large measure of
permanence.
The first and perhaps the most
effective of these factors lies in the
particular manner in which human
beings relate to their environment.
It has been observed that the des¬
truction or loss of this environment
deprives the individual of a source of
information whose absence leads to
a steep decline in his capacities of
.memory and knowledge. In African
history this occurred notably with the
transportation of African tribes to
America in colonial times.
The second factor making for per¬
manence is the institutionalization of
knowledge. In many societies the
transmission of the cultural heritage
through historical anecdotes or le¬
gends is the responsibility of specially
selected persons such as the griots
(story-tellers) or simply of the older
people in the village who are ex¬
tremely well-versed in genealogy.
The third factor in ensuring perma¬
nence is rhythmic utterance, the lan¬
guage of the drum.
Powerful though they are, these
factors do not offset the corrosive
effect of fading memory. It is as if
the social functions of memory for¬
med part of a complex process whose
aim is to maintain and reproduce the
conditions of social life.
Hence the importance of genea¬
logies, which define the rights and
duties of each member of the group,,
who can thereby claim a place to live,
defend himself in litigation, conduct
a ceremony or resolve a conflict.
Since the political structure is some¬
times based on kinship, genealogies
also play an essential part in the
maintenance., of order.
Shifting and changeable, they are
reformulated on the occasion of a
death, a birth, or migration. This
constant rectification is accompanied
by what has been termed "structural
amnesia".
One of the dangers of written
expression is to treat the social order
as an abstraction and to present it
in the false colours of permanence.
The alphabet introduces a form of
universality that transcends the clan,
the tribe or the nation, though it also
implies greater rigour and sometimes
even rigidity.
Writing also introduces social stra¬
tification, creating a division between
two main groups: the literate élite
and the illiterate masses. Here,
since we are- dealing with the safe¬
guarding of cultural authenticity, one
is tempted to point out that, however
pernicious illiteracy may be else¬
where, in traditional societies it can
never have been synonymous with
cultural impoverishment; on the other
hand, it is through education that
the élite has often been cut off from
its roots and traditions. All educa¬
tional systems should bear this in
mind.
African oral literature is highly
imaginative both in form and in
content. Levels of interpretation
vary within the group according to
the listener's degree of initiation. It
is a total art, based on the effective
participation of each and everyone.
The verbal message is interwoven
with messages conveyed by gesture,
music and rhythm with a freedom of
expression and improvisation which
permit its value and meaning to sur¬
vive the passage of time.
The vast wealth of oral tradition,
which embraces legend, history and
initiatory rituals, as well as stories of
mythical heroes, human beings and
animals, poetry and song, proverbs
and riddles, offers virtually limitless
possibilities for research. .
Among the many studies dealing f

Photo © Monique Maneval, Paris
A living tradition
in architecture
Africa has an extraordinary wealth
of architectural styles, which, in spite
of their many differences, are all
highly functional as well as being
adapted to climatic conditions, ways
of life and work, and economic
means. Right, two
professors at Ahmadu Bello University
(Nigeria) examine the model of a
dwelling designed for a family of
the Hausa people (farmers and
craftsmen). The design incorporates
modern amenities with a respect for
the traditional character of Hausa
architecture. In 1971, students of
tropical architecture from the Pratt
Institute in New York visited the
university to study under Nigerian
teachers who were later invited to
lecture in New York on traditional
African architecture and
town-planning. Above, roof of
the mosque at Djenné (Mali), a
dried-mud structure dating from
1 905. Standing on a tributary of the
Niger, Djenné was in the 13th century
a major trading centre
of the Muslim civilization in West
Africa. Above right, modern buildings
in Abidjan (Ivory Coast), a great
modern port serving a rich
agricultural hinterland.
10

Photo Fulvio Roiter, Italy
, with the African continent, Unesco
is currently engaged on a ten-year
plan for the study of oral tradition
and the promotion of African lan¬
guages as a medium of culture and
instrument of life-long education, and
in the preparation of a "General His¬
tory of Africa".
The investigation, preservation and
promotion of oral traditions lead quite
naturally to recognition of the over¬
riding and irreplaceable role of African
languages as a source, medium and
vehicle for African thinking and cul¬
tures, and as an instrument of social
communication for the immense ma¬
jority of the population. Hence, any
cultural renaissance in Africa and
the safeguarding of cultural authen¬
ticity must depend on the protection
and promotion of national languages.
Colonial policy failed to grasp that
African languages were "real" lan¬
guages, that is to say, media for the
transmission of knowledge and cul¬
ture. They were regarded by the
colonists as "primitive" languages,
representing a stage in evolution that
had long been superseded by Euro¬
pean languages and thus incapable
of expressing scientific thought.
What is required today is a reva¬
luation of African languages, no long¬
er for ideological purposes, but so
that the greatest possible number
maythrough these languages-
accede to knowledge of the most
up-to-date kind. National languages
must be treated as unrivalled media
of communication, whose effective¬
ness in the African milieu is un¬
matched.
African cultures are on the thresh¬
old of a decisive period during which
their custodians will seek, first and
foremost, to turn to the Africans
themselves, whose personality these
cultures will help to affirm. It will
no longer be sufficient to study these
languages as objects. It is in the
languages themselves that such
studies must be conducted.
Adult literacy campaigns will be
insufficient as long as we fail to go
to the root of the matter by basing
these techniques on the reaNties of
African life, of which the national
languages are an essential aspect.
Only through an awareness of the
fundamental role of mother tongues
in the whole range of psychological,
cognitive and social processes will
it be possible to overcome resistance
of every kind to the systematic use
of African languages in education
and training.
What is required, therefore, is a
radical overhaul of the educational
systems inherited from the past,
which must be transformed to match
the practical conditions of African
social and cultural life, involving the
active participation of the community
and meeting the needs and aspira¬
tions of the greatest possible number.
This brings us to the heavy respon¬
sibility resting on African universities,
as keystones of the educational sys¬
tem. To what extent can these uni¬
versities foresee and pave the way
for the necessary transformations,
question their own role and struc¬
tures, and further the development
process?
The future of education, science
and culture in Africa depends,
perhaps more than anything else,
on relations which have yet to be
established between the public at
large and the universities.
11
