Should man be blamed for the expanding deserts? In many cases, the answer, is "yes". Because of his activities,
man often aggravates an already serious situation stemming from natural causes. In Africa, for example, the Sahara
is slowly expanding and now constitutes a threat to the economies of several countries. Shown below: the
Tibesti desert region that straddles the borders of Chad and Niger. At right: the Fezzan, in Libya.



Are deserts
man-made?
by
Mohammed El-Kassas
MOHAMMED EL-KASSAS, Egyptian botanist, pro¬
fessor of applied botany at the University of Cairo, is
director of the Egyptian National Committee for the
Unesco Man and Biosphere (MAB) programme. From
1970 to 1974, he was vice-president of the Interna¬
tional Coordinating Committee for this programme
and, from 1972 to 1976, assistant director general of
the Arab Organization for Education, Science and Cul¬
ture. A member of the Club of Rome, he is on the
board of several international scientific publications.
DESERTS are part of the arid and
semi-arid zones that cover one-
third of the earth's land area and
fall within the boundaries of some 60 coun¬
tries. They include:
rainless deserts, where it does not even
rain once a year (the Central Sahara in
North Africa, the Rub-al-Khali in Arabia,
the Takla Makam Desert in Central Asia
and the Atacama Desert in South
America);
run-off deserts, where annual rainfall is
less than 100 mm. and perennial plant
life is confined to run-off collecting ba¬
sins such as desert wadis, those rivers
that flow only after rain;
rainfall deserts, with between 100 and
200 mm. a year of rain. While there is
not enough rain to sustain crop produc¬
tion, perennial plants are found just
about everywhere.
These limits of 100 and 200 mm. a year

are only approximate. In the coastal
desert of Chile and Peru in South America
or Namibia in southern Africa, the lower
figure may drop to 50 mm. of rain a year
because the ocean keeps the atmosphere
humid at least part of the year. In tropical
deserts where rain is steamed off by sum¬
mer heat, the limit can be 150 mm. a year.
As for desertification, it may be defined
as retrogressive ecological changes in vege¬
tation, soil or water regime that reduce
productivity, lower the carrying capacity
of the land and make it more vulnerable/
to soil erosion. Temporary desertification
can occur during the rainless season, in a
year of below-average rainfall or in a spell
of a few years, such as the Sahel drought
from 1969 to 1973. However, the ecosys¬
tem, as we shall see, may eventually set
matters right again.
For plants, animals and man manage
to survive within deserts. Populations
may be sparse and only temporary (such
as nomads and ephemeral plants) or clus¬
tered around oases, but they are not
altogether absent.
Organisms strike a precarious balance
between their ability to survive and the
austere resources of their arid habitat.
Under such conditions, physical environ¬
ment and plant life are in a state of dyna¬
mic equilibrium on the razor's edge: a
small change in the former has a dramatic
effect on the latter.
Next to the arid zones are areas where
the rainfall runs between 200 and 400 mm.
a year. Man uses land in a variety of ways
here, but these are not divorced from land-
use practices in rainfall or even drier
deserts. Grazing extends over all three
categories of land.
Run-off horticulture dating back to
Greco-Roman days still thrives in central
and southern Tunisia around Sousse,
Matmata and Gafsa where 10 million olive
trees are cultivated and in southwestern
Libya at Beni Ulid where olive groves are
maintained though rainfall averages but
70 mm. a year.
Comparable run-off farming without
irrigation was formerly practised in Pales¬
tine during the Nabatean period from
600 B.C. to 200 A.D. Experiments in the
northern Negev, where rainfall is 80 mm.
a year, have shown it can still be done.
A principal characteristic shared by arid
and semi-arid areas is their fragile ecolo¬
gical situation. Rainfall or the lack of it-
is the crucial climatic element:
It is deficient throughout all or most of
the year. By this we mean that it is less
than potential évapotranspiration the
water lost by evaporation from the sur¬
face of the land and transpiration by
plants. Life, therefore, is under the
stress of a shortage of moisture.
It is seasonal. The year consists of a
rainy season and a rainless season.
During the often long dry period, the
ground may be totally or partially strip¬
ped of plant cover.
It is variable. Figures describing average
annual rainfall hardly correspond to
reality. At Agadès, in Niger, the mean
annual rainfall from 1922 to 1972 was
159 mm. but 288 mm. fell in 1958 and
only 40 mm. in 1970. Comparable year-
to-year differences are found everywhere
in arid and semi-arid zones. Plant
growth responds to these variations. It
may fail during dry years, with the result
that there are no crops, little or no pas¬
ture and not enough cover to protect
soil from erosion.
It falls in short cloudbursts concentrated
over small areas. If the ground is not
protected by plant cover, these torren¬
tial downpours may do serious damage
by washing away surface soil.
Under natural conditions and without
destructive interference by man and his
domestic animals, ecological systems may
keep their balance even under such con¬
ditions. Wet years enable plants to make
up growth lost during a dry spell. Peren¬
nial and woody plants survive during dry
seasons and dry years, thus maintaining
at least a skeletal plant cover on the earth.
True, cloudbursts are destructive but
they enable water to penetrate under¬
ground and provide the deep roots of arid
land shrubs with a year-round supply of
moisture. In other words, natural proces¬
ses can correct ecological imbalance in the
long run, and the land will regain its nor- k
mal appearance. f


But when the hazard of erratic rainfall
is coupled with pressure brought to bear
on the land by man, then the damage may
be irreversible: desertification.
Traditional land uses in arid and semi-
arid zones provided their inhabitants with
a life basis for generations. In low rain¬
fall areas, subsistence farming is carried
out whenever rainfall is above average.
Land is cleared and crops (barley in
winter rainfall areas and sorghum or millet
where the rain comes in summer) are cul¬
tured by hoe. If the rains come two years
in a row, an adjoining area is farmed.
Under this system, there are long fallow
periods before the same piece of land is
worked twice. Where rainfall amounts to
more than 400 mm., shifting cultivation of
larger tracts is carried out. Often, fire is
used to clear the ground and control
weeds.
The cycle of shifting cultivation in the
so-called Gum-Arabic belt of the Sudan,
which lies in an area where rainfall runs
from 250 to 450 mm. a year, is a fine
example of how integrated land use can
be maintained for centuries.
First, there is a cultivation period. Aca¬
cia scrub is cleared, then dukho (Penni-
seteum typhoideum) and dura (Sorghum
vulgare) are grown four to ten years run¬
ning, watered by rain. When the soil
becomes exhausted and parasite-infested,
it is allowed to lie fallow.
Next comes the colonization period.
Acacia Senegal, Acacia seyal and associate
grasses invade the abandoned field. In
about eight or ten years, the acacias are
ready for gum tapping.
During the orchard period, lasting from
six to ten years, the acacias are tapped for
a cash crop.
Finally, deterioration begins. The Aca¬
cia Senegal trees start do die, but their
fallen trunks are thorny and keep grazing
animals away. This allows tall dense grass
to flourish until the land is ready once
more to be cleared by burning so another
crop can be planted.
Such cycles prevailed throughout semi-
arid zones, though in some places char¬
coal-making may have replaced gum-
tapping as a cash source. These cycles
replaced the natural Acacia-grass cycle of
Africa or Prosopis-grass cycle of the
Americas that characterize the vegetation
of semi-arid zones.
However, the cycles have not been
maintained under the accelerated pace of
land use in recent decades. Acacia sene-
gal, the main gum-arabic producer, no
longer regenerates effectively. Nor do the
grasses, and crop failures are common.
Here we have an aspect of desertification.
Inhabitants with their traditional land-
use practices move south to areas of
higher rainfall between 500 and 800 mm.
a year. As a result, the savanna belt of
parkland is gradually replaced by the
plants and the land-use practices pre¬
viously found in the semi-arid belt. This
is part of the shift from forest-to-savanna-
to-steppe-to-desert that occurs in the
broad framework of desertification and
other forms of ecological degradation.
This form of desertification cannot,
therefore, be remedied by natural pro¬
cesses. It is primarily man-made, trigger¬
ed by the pressures of land use that are
beyond the carrying capacity of the eco¬
system and its ability to recover from
degradation.
Among these pressures are over-grazing,
over-cultivation, over-cutting of woody
plants for fuel, and uncontrolled use of
fire. When plants are destroyed or criti¬
cally thinned, the soil loses its protective
cover and is laid open to rapid erosion by
wind and water.
The causes of the over-exploitation of
the resources of these fragile nabitats are
mainly socio-political. They are related
to the increase in population and the
changes in society that have appeared in
recent years. As the human population
grows, so does the number of livestock
(there were 4 million cattle in Nigeria in
1925 and 10 million in 1970) while farming
must become more extensive or more
intensive to feed new mouths.
As national governments set their devel¬
opment plans, the subsistence livestock
economy gradually gives way to -a com¬
mercial livestock economy. Livestock
becomes a major export. The develop¬
ment of agriculture heightens the conflict
between the farmer and the herdsman
with one inevitable result: still more pres¬
sure on land.
The appearance of cities as political and
administrative centres gradually breaks
down the old mechanisms of social inter¬
dependence within networks of kinship
bonds. And this reduces the ability of
herdsman-farmer societies to respond
flexibly to environmental fluctuations.
Without a doubt, desertification is but
the end result of ecological, economic and
political pressures.
Mohammed El-Kassas
