The Acropolis of Athens, site of one of the world's
most famous groups of ancient monuments, rises
up in the midst of modern buildings in the Greek
capital. Also known as the Holy Rock, the
Acropolis takes its name from the Greek words
akros (upper) and polis (city). It was already a
centuries-old sanctuary in the 5th century B.C.,
when the great Athenian statesman Pericles
launched the grandiose building programme whose
remains are still admired today. Easily identifiable
in this rare aerial view (see also page 18) are the
Parthenon (large rectangular building in centre); the
Erechtheum (left of Parthenon); and the Propylaea
and the Temple of Athena Nike (group of buildings
at left of photo). Clearly visible at foot of hill are
two ancient theatres: the Odeon (left) and the
Theatre of Dionysus (right).

by
Charalambos Bouras
CHARALAMBOS BOURAS, Professor of the His¬
tory of Architecture at the National Technical Univer¬
sity of Athens, is a member of the Greek government's
working group on the preservation of the Acropolis
monuments. A former architect of the Greek Archeo-
logical Service, he has published many articles and
books on ancient and medieval Greek monuments.



How the Acropolis
can be saved

THE 40 years which have elapsed
between the eve of World War II
and the present day constitute a
very short period of time in comparison
with the age of Athens, but one which has
been of great significance for the develop¬
ment and appearance of the city.
As far as the Acropolis itself is concern¬
ed, these four decades have passed
without any major changes (the large-
scale works of restoration undertaken by
Nicolas Balanos were completed by 1933),
but they have quietly and relentlessly creat
ed a series of new problems that confront
us today.
These problems, moreover, are so seri¬
ous that there are those who are now
talking of the destruction of the Acropolis,
or at least of serious and irreparable deter¬
ioration of its masterpieces of classical
architecture and sculpture.
The problems are in fact directly related
to the rapid and uncontrolled change in
the environment surrounding the monu¬
ments. The last 40 years have seen enor¬
mous economic, demographic and social
changes in Athens, converting it from a
small peaceful city, full of reminders of its
historical past and well-proportioned neo¬
classical buildings, into a great capital.
In addition to 2 million inhabitants, it has
acquired important industries, tall apart¬
ment blocks, international ports and air¬
ports, together with an increasing amount
of environmental disturbance and pollu¬
tion. Each day increases the alienation of
the urban landscape from the natural ter¬
rain, the landmarks of classical topogra- k
phy, and the remnants of the buildings of Y
5

^É®r
*-*¡S$t
2Sr
.<& - 1
antiquity. The famous crystal-clear atmos¬
phere of Attica is covered with a pall of
fumes; while a flood of tourists inundates
the city, and the Acropolis in particular.
The Greek Archeological Service has
always worked, on a limited scale, to pre¬
serve the temples of the Acropolis, but it
was only about 10 years ago that specialists
became fully aware of the new conditions
and problems.
In June 1968, an article in the Unesco
Courier by Georges Dontas, the Director
responsible for the Acropolis, brought the
disquiet felt by Greek archeologists to the
attention of a wider public. Unesco sent
two scientific missions to Athens: a group
of three specialists in 1969, and a photo-
grammetry team from the French National
Geographic Institute in the spring of 1971.
The real work of studying and solving
the problems of the Acropolis, however,
only began in February 1975, with the for¬
mation of a committee and a working
group of specialists, archeologists and
technical experts, and with a generous
allocation of funds for the whole operation!
From the outset there has been lively
public interest in the fate of the monu¬
ments on the Acropolis. The Greeks today
look on these buildings as the most pre¬
cious part of their architectural heritage,
while people the world over consider them
as the finest expression of the classical
spirit of the ancient world.
Both the Greek Government and the
authorities responsible for the Acropolis,
aware of this general interest and of the
responsibility of the scientific community
towards the monuments, began to take
action in earnest two years ago. At the
international level, they appealed for funds
to finance the rescue work, while at the
national level they organized a thorough¬
going study of the dangers threatening
the monuments, in order to eradicate their
causes. Here, too, international help was
sought, and Unesco sent another team of
experts in October 1975.
The problems involved in preserving the
Acropolis and its monuments must be
exhaustively studied before even the small¬
est stone is moved from its place. Further¬
more, any action must respect three basic
principles: the external appearance of the
monuments should be changed as little as
possible; the internationally recognized
provisions of the Charter of Venice should
be fully observed (1); and whatever steps
are taken should not be irreversible.
The Acropolis rock as a whole was inves¬
tigated first by geologists and engineers.
After exhaustive research, they were able
to allay earlier fears that it was unstable or
was being eroded by underground water.
They also showed that both the natural
bedrock and the foundations of the monu¬
ments, with the exception of the Pinako¬
thek (the north wing of the Propylaea) and
the base of the statue of Agrippa, are in a
good state of preservation.
Investigation of the stability of the super¬
structure of the monuments is now in pro¬
gress. All these buildings were constructed
of blocks of white Pentelic marble, so per¬
fectly hewn and fitted together that no
mortar was needed to bind them. Each
building is therefore first examined as a
whole, to detect fatigue as a result of earth¬
quakes and wind pressure, and secondly in
detail, to establish the extent to which its
various components (columns, capitals and
beams) are capable of supporting a wide
range of stresses.
The overall examination of the monu¬
ments includes an experimental study of
the phenomena affecting the Parthenon,
using the modern technique of photoelasti-
city: a 1:100 scale model made of epoxy
resin is subjected to stresses proportionate k
to those affecting the monument itself. Y
(1) International Charter for the Conservation and
Restoration of Monuments and Sites, adopted at the
Second International Congress of Architects and
Technicians of Historic Monuments, Venice, 25
31 May 1964.

Ballooning
to
the rescue
Balloon approaches the Acropolis
(right) on a picture-taking mission.
The photos are to help identify the
hundreds of pieces of masonry
scattered over the site so that
those belonging to the surviving
monuments may be restored to
their original place. Specialists
are also studying the surface rock
itself, which repeated excavations
have deprived of its protective
layer of soil, as can be seen
around the Parthenon (left). The
marble statues of the Acropolis
(below right) have been eroded by
wind and rain for 24 centuries and
in recent years this process has
been greatly accelerated by air
pollution. Sulphur dioxide
spewed out by factories and
central heating systems produces
sooty crusts on the statues (below
left, face of horseman on the
West frieze of the Parthenon) that
subsequently crack the marble.
The Greek government has
clamped down on pollution in the
area surrounding the Acropolis.
Photo © Antiquities Department of the Acropolis, Athens
\
v% '
: , t \ . &
' SÊfc«* J
./S àftïi s
$Mm?*\
¥? %£* RrT*
mt .^*»*" vw. ' ?.
,i(JjP&
«JKJjr tí®
.-jEf^
4
H
i *
\
Photos © Deutsches Archäologisches Institut, Athens

k Detailed investigation includes exami¬
nation of the cracks and internal hollows
in the marble caused by earlier fires and
explosions, by means of such modern tech¬
niques as ultrasonic measurements and
gammagraphy.
Both these techniques make it possible
to measure the strength of the structure
without taking samples of the building
material itself. The first involves measuring
the speed at which ultrasonic waves travel
through the marble, and has already been
used on the elements supporting the cof¬
fered ceiling of the west part of the Par¬
thenon.
Gammagraphy, which is being applied to
marble for the first time, involves taking
photographs with gamma rays from a
cobalt source. These rays are capable of
penetrating the marble architectural struc¬
ture and producing a film similar to an
X-ray. These photographs reveal any
cracks and internal fissures in the marble,
and thus allow a diagnosis of the causes of
its weakness to be made.
The most serious cause for concern
about the monuments on the Acropolis is
not, however, connected with their general
stability, but with the cracks which have
been and which are still being caused by
the oxidation of the iron inside the marble
structures.
The ancient Greeks used small iron bolts
and clamps in their architecture, but made
them almost rustproof by coating them
with lead. Nicolas Balanos failed to take
similar precautions with the steel elements
used in his extensive restoration between
1896 and 1933, possibly because he over¬
estimated the properties of steel. Thus,
almost all the buildings on the Acropolis
had bolts inserted into them to join broken
pieces, while steel girders were used, as in
the porch of the Caryatids on the Erech-
theum, to reinforce architraves and ancient
beams.
All these metal parts rust because of the
humidity of Athens and its proximity to the
sea. Rusting not only lowers their resis¬
tance, but also causes the metal to swell
and crack the marble into which it is em¬
bedded. A large number of fissures exist
already, and in some places there is an
immediate danger of collapse.
Thorough investigation has demonstrat¬
ed that the only solution to this exception¬
ally serious problem is to remove all the
steel elements and replace them with bolts
of titanium, a metal that will not rust under
any natural conditions.
Where the plans left by Balanos provide
inadequate information concerning the
position of the steel elements embedded
in the marble, they can be located by
means of gammagraphy.
The steel bolts and beams cannot be
replaced without dismantling and reassem¬
bling all those parts of the monuments on
the Acropolis which have been restored
in the 19th and 20th centuries. A pro¬
gramme as extensive as this, which must
conform with the principles noted above,
requires many years' work, exceptional
organization, and most important of all,
exhaustive preliminary study.
In addition to the compilation of all
available information from bibliographies,
archives and earlier reports on the build-
ings of the Acropolis, minute documen¬
tation of these buildings began two years
ago, including the preparation of photo¬
graphs and detailed drawings of their pre¬
sent form. In the case of the Erechtheum,
this task is approaching completion and
detailed proposals of the measures needed
for the building have almost been finalized.
In producing measured architectural
drawings of the temples on the Acropolis,
the technique of photogrammetry has been
used on a limited scale. More traditional
methods have been preferred which permit
a diagnosis of the state of decay of each
piece of marble, at the same time as the
measurements are taken.
Another cause for alarm is the deterio¬
ration of the marble surfaces and espe-
Decline
and fall
of a
mythical
king
Two legendary figures from Athenian
history, Cecrops and his daughter
Pandrosos, are depicted in this piece of
sculpture from the western pediment of
the Parthenon. According to ancient
myths Cecrops was the first king of
Athens, around the 16th century B.C.
Over the centuries this major work of '
Classical Greek art has suffered extensive
erosion and by 1976 its condition was so
serious that it was lowered from the
pediment (left) and removed to the
Acropolis Museum.
8

Testing time
for the
Parthenon
Experimental model of the Parthenon (above) was made of
synthetic resin to a scale of 1:100. Its designers hope to
evaluate the stability of the monument and its capacity to
resist wind pressure and possible seismic disturbances.
Specially designed equipment is used to show the simulated
stress patterns in visual form. Below, simulated stresses on
the west façade of the monument.
cially the sculpture of almost all the monu¬
ments of the Acropolis. The surface of the
Pentelic marble, a building material of
splendid appearance and great strength, is
becoming corroded and is disintegrating.
The main cause of the trouble is the
sulphur dioxide contained in industrial
fumes and in smoke from central heating
systems. The smallest degree of humidity
is. enough to let this sulphur dioxide attack
the marble surfaces, turning them into
gypsum. This plaster-like substance either
dissolves in the rain and is washed away or
else retains the soot and dust of the city to
form an ugly crust that subsequently
cracks.
If one adds to this the continuous natural
decay of the marble over a period of 24
centuries as a result of rain, hail, wind and
above all frost, it may easily be appreciat¬
ed why the Athenian masterpieces have for
the past few years been facing an unprece¬
dented danger.
The problem is obviously particularly
acute in the case of the sculptures: the
Caryatids of the Erechtheum, and the
frieze and pedimental statues that are still
on the Parthenon.
To remedy these ills, some temporary
measures have been proposed in addition
to a longterm clampdown on pollution. The
Parthenon frieze and the Caryatids are
already protected from rain and frost by
relatively unobtrusive temporary wooden
shelters, and the two statues from the west
pediment have been replaced by copies
and temporarily housed in the Acropolis
Museum.
One proposal under consideration is that
the Caryatids be completely enclosed in a
transparent air-conditioned box, until the
unavoidable task begins of dismantling
the south portico of the Erechtheum in
order to replace the steel reinforcements in
its beams.
It has also been proposed (though the
final decision has not been taken) to trans¬
fer the Caryatids to air-conditioned rooms
in the Museum, so that they may be res
tored to their proper position as soon as
environmental conditions permit. The
copies which would take their place are
already being cast (see back cover). Finally
the possibility of protecting the marble by
treating it locally remains under consider¬
ation; in this connexion the Second Inter¬
national Symposium on the deterioration of
building stones was held in Athens in
September 1976.
However, the requirement that any
operation performed on the ancient struc¬
tures should not be irreversible has
ruled out the use of almost all the materials
currently employed .in building for the
purposes of on-the-spot protection.
The Greek Government is actively seek¬
ing a radical solution to the problem of
the polluted atmosphere of Athens. A
zone has been defined around the Acropo¬
lis within which it is forbidden to burn oil,
which is rich in sulphur, in the central
heating systems of apartment blocks.
Meanwhile, a study has been made of
the technical and economic problems in¬
volved in replacing oil on a wider scale by
some other source of energy, such as
diesel, gas or electricity. The high cost of
this operation, which involves 5 million
cubic metres of dwelling space, and the
length of time required to implement the
change, are now being examined by the
city authorities.
The feeling of space on the Acropolis has
changed considerably since antiquity. This
is due in great measure to the archeological
excavations of the 19th century (mainly
after 1885), which exposed the bedrock at
almost every point. These excavations
uncovered the foundations of the buildings
which had not been visible during the
classical period, and made it difficult to
walk on the surface of the rock.
The general disorder is increased by the
hundreds of large and small pieces of
stonework from buildings of different
periods, which occupy a large area of
space and obstruct the visitor's passage.
Finally, irreparable damage is caused by
the feet of the visitors themselves. The
destruction has reached alarming propor¬
tions both on the floors of the monuments
and on the rock itself, that is, on the sur¬
faces that were visible during antiquity.
Ancient carvings, cavities to hold the >
bases of statues or the foundations of f

^buildings, and the layout of the ancient
pathways all features of great interest
are in danger of disappearing.
The attempt to solve this problem began
with a careful analysis of the present situa¬
tion. Detailed topographical plans were
prepared on a scale of 1:100, and photo¬
graphs were taken of the surface of the
rock from a small balloon. An inventory
of the scattered pieces of masonry is plan¬
ned, as well as a methodical system of
indexing them before they are moved, so
that they may easily be recognized and
classified before they are put in their final
place.
A study has also been made of the
possibility of covering a large area of the
rock with soil, so as to create easy access
to the monuments, as well as an esplanade
to the east of the Erechtheum.
Also being considered is the feasibility
of moving the pieces of masonry and
arranging them in such a way as to make
the archeology of the Acropolis more
readily comprehensible and to facilitate
future research. A new ramp leading to
the Propylaea, similar to that of ancient
times, has also been proposed.
Finally, a decision has been taken to
build a large new Acropolis Museum near¬
by, with modern facilities, to exhibit all
the finds from the Acropolis, some of
which are at present hidden away in store¬
rooms. An architectural competition has
been announced for the plans of this new
museum.
As far as the urban landscape of Athens
and its relation to the Acropolis are concer¬
ned, some improvements can be made.
A number of town-planning provisions
have been put into effect: tall buildings
can no longer be put up close to the Acro¬
polis and the neighbouring archeological
sites. Measures have also been proposed
for the preservation of Plaka, the old quar¬
ter that clusters around the lower northern
slopes of the rock. Finally, expropriations
of property have made it possible to re¬
open the Peripatos, a pathway for pedes¬
trians that encircled the Acropolis in
antiquity.
The Acropolis and its monuments have
passed through difficult times before,
during the course of their long history,
and have survived to the present day with
their ageless beauty, as a unique testimony
to a great age in the history of Western
civilization. In the attempt to hand on this
cultural heritage intact to future genera¬
tions, no effort can be considered too great.
Charalambos Bouras
Caryatids
in need
of care
10

The Porch of the Caryatids (right) was one of
three entrances to the Erechtheum, a temple
built to house a number of ancient
sanctuaries. The serious problems posed by
its conservation are now being examined by a
team of leading Greek specialists (see also
front and back covers). Of the six
Caryatids the maidens that support the
roofone (second from right on the façade)
got a face-lift in 1968-1969 (below right, before
and after restoration). Another (photo left) is
in fact a copy of a Caryatid which has been in
the British Museum, London, since 1816.
This is the second time that a major
conservation project has been undertaken on
the Acropolis in the 20th century: in unusual
photo taken in 1902 (below left), the roof of
the Porch has been dismantled to allow steel
girders to be inserted. Not knowing that the
steel would eventually rust and swell, causing
structural damage, the architect in charge
used the same technique elsewhere on the
Acropolis, thereby creating one of the most
arduous problems that specialists face today.
: Luckily, more sophisticated techniques
are now available. One of them,
photogrammetry, enables technicians to plot
the precise contours of sculptures or
monuments down to the last millimetre and
later to reconstitute their every feature.
Below, photogrammetric representation of
Caryatid at southwest corner of Porch.
¿£3¿
P
Photos © Acropolis Museum, Athens
11
