by John A. Willings
CROSS-CULTURAL
COMMUNICATION:
POSSIBILITY
OR PIPE-DREAM?
EVER since the mythical tower
of Babel, communication bet¬
ween peoples of different lan¬
guages and cultures has been seen
as an eminently desirable ideal but
very difficult to achieve.
Barriers to the universal flow of
thought and ideas have always
existed. Today, voices and ¡mages
can be transmitted over great dis¬
tances and vast areas of the world's
surface. But is this communication
if there is no comprehension ?
Modern communication media
recognize no frontiers. New techno¬
logies have extended the possibilities
of distributing radio and television
programmes on a world-wide basis,
broadcasting information, education,
culture and entertainment to numbers
of sovereign States and peoples of
different cultures and languages.
Many years ago it was pointed -
out that the transnational develop¬
ment of information flow would raise
problems of programme content and
format as well as legal and political
questions.
In 1969 Unesco began to support
a multidisciplinary research pro¬
gramme on the international flow of
communication. This involved long-
term studies of the traffic in tele¬
vision programmes; the content and
effects of short-wave broadcasting
between nations; the structure of
international news agencies; and the
potentialities of satellite-based sys¬
tems for communication between
people and between nations.
JOHN A. WILLINGS, theatre, film and
television designer and director, is currently
in charge of Unesco's programme related
to communication policies. Before joining
Unesco's Headquarters Staff in 1970, he
carried out a number of missions for Unesco
in developing countries of Africa and Asia,
where he helped to design broadcasting
systems and to establish communication
research and training institutions.
This accent on research into cross-
cultural communication was promp¬
ted by the imminent possibility of
direct broadcasting by communica¬
tion satellite to community radio and
television receivers, and eventually
to home receivers.
At the same time concern was
expressed regarding the need for
international agreements in this field.
The Declaration of guiding principles
on the use of satellite broadcasting
was adopted by the General Confe¬
rence of Unesco in 1972.
In the early 1970s, one specialist,
referring to the role of satellite com¬
munication in socio-cultural develop¬
ment, observed: "they tell us that
these problems are all technical, not
political. But this is not socom¬
pounding this situation is the tremen¬
dous inequality between the 'haves'
and the 'have nots' in the domain of
communication."
During the Development Decade
launched in 1960 by the United
Nations, much importance had been
attached to the potential of the new
media for disseminating intercultural
understanding. - At that time, the
expanding commercial broadcasters
seemed to have had great confidence
in this potential.
However, subsequent research has
shown that if, within nations and
within local cultures, the nature,
the process and the effects of com¬
munication are not yet fully under¬
stood, then this is even more true
in the complex field of international
cross-cultural communication. So,
in 1974, Unesco asked a team of
research workers to list and analyze
existing studies of cross-cultural
broadcasting (1).
(1 ) Cross-Cultural Broadcasting by Eduardo
Contreras, James Larson, John K. Mayo
and Peter Spain, Institute for Communi¬
cation Research, Stanford University, U.S.A.
Unesco Reports and Papers on Mass Commu¬
nication No. 77 (1976).
Their first discovery was the
extreme paucity of relevant material.
Secondly, they noted a number of
barriers to cross-cultural communica¬
tion:
cultural differences;
psychological blocks to under¬
standing;
lack of a common language;
lack of the necessary infrastructure
for the production, distribution and
reception of messages and for a multi-
way flow of information;
political and economic considera¬
tions applying to all attempts to
achieve a "free and balanced flow"
of information, both within and
between nations.
It is fairly obvious that in inter¬
national communication, language
is a key factor, determining the
impact of messages and their com¬
prehension. For example, in short¬
wave broadcasting between nations,
reception and understanding are still
largely limited by the ability of listen¬
ers to understand the languages
employed.
Most multi-lingual Third World
countries face two major problems
when dealing with a language policy
for communication. The first con¬
cerns the propagation of a national
language within the country. The
second concerns the languages to
be used in wider, international
communication.
The choice of languages for com¬
munication, especially in broad¬
casting, almost always poses an addi¬
tional political problem.
In Africa, for example, governments
face a dilemma. Are they to allow
broadcast languages to proliferate
for the sake of preserving traditional
cultures, winning the loyalty of mino¬
rity groups and reaching a maximum k
audience? Or are they to standardize f
12

Y
Si
m '
Audio-visual techniques offer a wide range of possibilities for transmitting information as well as
educational and cultural programmes. Satellite broadcasting can aid international communication,
although many problems in this field are still unsolved. It is not easy to reconcile two fundamental
principles of communication between peoples: the free flow of information, and the sovereign rights
of States concerning the flow of information across their frontiers. Unesco is thus launching a
far-reaching programme of research into the concept of "a free and balanced flow of information".
Above, a "box" arrives in a Middle-Eastern town.
13

that once a language has established
itself as predominant in the world it
will eventually fall from that perch. " (2)
How will international communi¬
cation, taking account of linguistic
diversity, be accommodated in the
future ?
While linguistic differences bet¬
ween peoples and between nations
have long been recognized as a major
barrier to communication, it was
suggested two decades ago that
visual means might provide the
breakthrough in cross-cultural under¬
standing. But how far do different
people see and perceive things in
the same way? Is there something
culturally distinct about the way
people interpret a visual ¡mage?
Many stories illustrate the diffi¬
culties of achieving visual communi¬
cation through the media. For
example, there are the early tales
of missiles being thrown at cinema
screens because people were insulted
by the ¡mage of Donald Duck engaged
in human actions and speech.
There are innumerable apocryphal
stories of the rejection by audiences
of blown-up ¡mages of mosquitos
and lice because in close-up they
appeared bigger than the local cows.
In many developing societies, real
difficulties of interpreting still pictures
have been experienced where linear
perspective was employed as a way
of showing shape and distance: these
pictures have often proved to be
incomprehensible to rural people
unfamiliar with urban geometry.
(2) Richard Noss, "Language Policy and
Higher Education." In Higher Education
and Development in Southeast Asia. Unesco
(1967).
}a single broadcast language for the
sake of emphasizing nationhood,
albeit at the risk of hastening the
disappearance of local cultures,
alienating minority groups, and failing
to communicate with the very people
in whom they most need to inculcate
an understanding of their intentions?
Perhaps there are four related expla¬
nations why, until now, people wishing
to communicate through international
communication media have been
unable to pierce the language barrier.
To take broadcasting as an example,
there is firstly the fact that too many
languages are used; secondly, each
additional language broadcast in¬
volves increased costs; thirdly, it is
difficult to find personnel to produce
programmes in some languages even
if funds are available to do so; finally,
there is a lack of sufficient wave¬
length space to provide a minimum
of programmes in each desired lan¬
guage in order to attract and hold an
audience. Thus, the linguistic pro¬
blem is also related to economic,
manpower, and technical questions.
On the other side of the coin, we
see that one of the most important
influences of cross-cultural communi¬
cation has been to encourage the
adoption of dominant languages as
linguae-francae. Today, English is
the principal language of communica¬
tion in international broadcasting,
not necessarily because of the num¬
ber of speakers, but because, in the
past, the United Kingdom, the United
States and Australia dominated inter¬
national communication by radio.
Nevertheless, if English remains the
principal language of international
communication, it is only the latest
of a series of languages to hold that
position. French, Spanish, Latin,
Greek, Arabic and Chinese have all
enjoyed a comparable position during
the past.
As one specialist has pointed out:
"if anything is clear from the history
of international communication, it is
14

All over the world, people who see
films for the first time rarely under¬
stand the "grammar" of film pro¬
duction. For example, the "cut", the
"fade", the "dissolve", which are the
punctuation of films, only have
meaning to those who have acquired
that grammar. At the same time
it has been discovered that this
specialized "media literacy" can be
taught very quickly.
Questions pertaining to the effects
of cross-cultural communication are
much more pronounced in the poli¬
tical arena since it is here that many
international relations based upon
communication are defined.
In recent years, the temper of the
debate has intensified as the possi¬
bilities for direct broadcasting across
frontiers have come nearer to reality.
At its heart is the realization that
communication is power: that control
over the mechanisms and content of
a nation's communication system
could enable various vested interests
to control important aspects of a
society's decision-making process as
well as the cultural and political
values which bind it together.
There exists at the present time a
conflict between two essential prin¬
ciples: the sovereign rights of States
in matters pertaining to communica¬
tion across national frontiers; and
the free flow of information. Most
countries pay homage to both, but
"many are now beginning to recognize
the difficulty of reconciling them
within a coherent communication
policy.
It has been observed that the inter¬
national media systems at present
reflect disproportionately the values
and the priorities of certain societies,
with the dominant countries acting
as the "gate-keepers" for communi¬
cation in and between the poorer
developing nations.
Such a state of affairs, the critics
argue, will in the future only enhance
the monopoly power of the present
programme exporters and will pro¬
bably erode even further the freedom
of the importing countries to develop
self-reliant systems capable of
expressing their own cultural values.
Over the years, many pennants
have been flown championing the
causes of "universal cultural exchange"
and "the rights of cultures to resist
dilution by alien values". Achieving
the best balance between these two
extreme positions is one of the most
thorny problems discussed in recent
international conferences on both cul¬
tural and communication policies. .
During the 19th General Confe- r
Far into the small hours, this outdoor television
set (left) in the Sultanate of Oman holds its
audience spellbound. Below, news reaches the
desert in southern Mauritania where the
transistor has become part of the equipment
of nomad herdsmen.
15

^rence of Unesco, the sense of inter¬
national responsibility for the estab¬
lishment of . true communication
systems based upon equal partner¬
ship was seen to be as important to
the developed as to the developing
countries.
It was also recognized that such a
co-operative approach to the deve¬
lopment of cross-cultural communica¬
tion systems for the future could no
longer be based on paternalistic or
"neo-colonial" approaches to the
problem. It had to be a process of
active give-and-take in collaboration,
involving the quest for that "unity"
which can only be achieved by rec¬
ognizing and respecting cultural
differences.
Thus after the Nairobi Conference,
Unesco will, during the next two
years, begin a further research pro¬
gramme on cross-cultural commu¬
nication involving studies:
on what people of various cultures
understand by the concept of "free
and balanced flow of information";
on the possible future structures of
the international news agency net¬
works;
on international film and television
distribution patterns and the influence
of multinational companies on commun¬
ication flow;
on the ¡mages of foreign countries
representing different social systems
and stages of development as they
are portrayed by the international
mass media.
In addition there will be further
work on the laws relating to the inter¬
national exchange of audiovisual
media and ways of facilitating the
transmission of press dispatches and
the exchange of programmes bet¬
ween countries. The present criteria
for "news values" will be further
examined.
All these studies will be important
in any possible future attempts to
define a "right to communicate".
They will also be necessary before the
ideal of cross-cultural communication
becomes more than an idle dream.
John A. Willings

