'J
20
The strains of solitude
"All men are born disinherited and their true condition is orphanhood, but this is
particularly true of the Indians and the poor in Mexico", Octavio Paz has written.
The art of the Mexican Indians is imbued with this intense feeling of solitude, which
can be traced back to their Aztec past.

Aztec myths and Christian beliefs in Mexico
A MATTER OF LIFE
AND DEATH
by Octavio Paz
Text © Copyright. Reproduction prohibited
ANY contact with the Mexican peo¬
ple, however brief, reveals that
ancient beliefs and customs are
still in existence beneath Western forms.
These still-living remains testify to the
vitality of the cultures that existed before
the Spanish conquest.
And after the discoveries of archeolo-
gists and historians, it is no longer possi¬
ble to refer to those societies as savage or
primitive tribes. Over and above the fasci¬
nation or horror they inspire in us, we
must admit that when the Spaniards arriv¬
ed in Mexico they found complete and
refined civilizations.
Meso-America that is, the nucleus of
what was later to be New Spainwas a
territory that included the central and
southern parts of present-day Mexico and
a portion of Central America.
The last centuries of Meso-American
history can be summed up as the history
of repeated encounters between waves of
northern huntersalmost all of them be¬
longing to the Náhuatl familyand the
settled populations.
The Aztecs were the last to enter the
Valley of Mexico. The previous work of
erosion by their predecessors, and the
wasting away of the springs of the ancient
local cultures, made it possible for them
to accomplish the extraordinary task of
founding what Arnold Toynbee calls a
Universal Empire, based on the remains of
older societies.
According to Toynbee, the Spaniards
did nothing except act as substitutes, re¬
solving through political synthesis the ten¬
dency towards dispersal that threatened
the Meso-American world.
OCTAVIO PAZ, Mexican poet and essayist, is one of
the most outstanding writers in the Spanish language
today. He has been Mexico's ambassador to India
and has taught at several universities, including Cam¬
bridge (U.K. I where he was Simon Bolivar Professor
of Latin American studies. He has published several
volumes of poetry, including Libertad bajo Palabra
("Liberty on Parole"). English translations of his es¬
says include Claude Lévi-Strauss: An Introduction
( 1972) and Alternating Current (1973). The article pub¬
lished here is taken from his classic analysis of the
Mexican mind. The Labyrinth of Solitude, published
by Grove Press Inc., New York. 1961.
Meso-America has been described as a
uniform historical area characterized by
the constant presence of certain elements
common to all its cultures: an agriculture
based on maize, a ritual calendar, a ritual
ball-game, human sacrifices, solar and
vegetation myths, and so on. It is said
that all of these elements originated in the
south and were assimilated at various
times by the immigrants from the, north.
If this were true, Meso-American culture
would be the result of various southern
creations that were adopted, developed
and systematized by nomadic groups.
But, apart from the particular originality
of each culture, it is evident that all of
them, because of decadence or debilita¬
tion, were on the point of being absorbed
into the Aztec Empire, which was heir to
the civilizations of the Central Plateau.
Those societies were impregnated with
religion. The Aztec state was both mili¬
tary and theocratic. Therefore, political
unification was preceded or completed by
religious unification, or corresponded to it
in one way or another.
Before the Conquest, each city worship¬
ped gods who steadily became more alike:
their names were different but the cere¬
monies honouring them were similar.
The agrarian deities the gods of the
earth, of vegetation and fertility, like Tlá-
loc, and celestial warriors like Tezcatlipoca,
Huitzilopochtli and Mixcóatl belonged to
a single cult;
The most outstanding characteristic of
Aztec religion at the time of the Conquest
was the incessant theological speculation
that reformed, systematized and unified
diverse beliefs, both its own and others.
The systematizations, adaptations and
reforms undertaken by the priestly caste
show that the process was one of super-
imposition, which was also characteristic
of religious architecture. Just as an Aztec
pyramid often covers an older structuré,
so this theological unification affected only
the surface of the Aztec consciousness,
leaving the original beliefs intact.
The situation prefigured the introduction
of Catholicism, which is also a religion
superimposed upon an original and still-
living religious base. Everything was pre¬
pared for Spanish domination.
The conquest of Mexico would be inex¬
plicable without these antecedents. The
arrival of the Spaniards seemed a libera¬
tion to the people under Aztec rule. The
various city-states allied themselves with
the conquistadors or watched with indif¬
ference not with pleasure the fall of
each of their rivals, especially that of the
most powerful, Tenochtitlan.
But the political genius of the Spanish
conqueror Cortés, the superior techniques
of the Spaniards, and the defection of
vassals and allies, could not have brought
about the ruin of the Aztec Empire if it
had not suddenly felt a sense of weak¬
ness, a deep-rooted doubt that caused it
to vacillate and surrender.
When the Aztec emperor Montezuma
opened the gates of Tenochtitlan to the
Spaniards and welcomed Cortés with
gifts, the Aztecs lost the encounter. Their
final struggle was a form of suicide, as we
can gather from all tfie existing accounts
of that grandiose and astounding event.
Why did Montezuma give up? Why
was he so fascinated by the Spaniards
that he experienced a vertigo which it is
no exaggeration to call sacredthe lucid
vertigo of the suicide on the brink of the
abyss? The gods had abandoned him.
The great betrayal with which the his¬
tory of Mexico begins was not committed
by the Tlaxcalan Indians or by Montezuma
and his group: it was committed by the
gods. No other people has ever felt so
completely helpless as the Aztec nation
felt at the appearance of the omens, pro¬
phecies and warnings that announced its
fall.
We are unlikely to understand the mean¬
ing of these signs and predictions for the
Indians if we forget their cyclical concep¬
tion of time. As with many other peoples
and civilizations, time was not an empty,
abstract measurement to the Aztecs, but
rather something concrete, a force or sub¬
stance or fluid perpetually being used up.
Hence the necessity of rites and sacrifices
to reinvigorate the year or the century.
CONTINUED PAGE 24
21

In Mexico, Spanish Catholicism and
indigenous beliefs have become so
inextricably mixed that it is sometimes
difficult to distinguish pagan gods from
Christian saints, pre-Columbian rites
from Catholic ritual. Mexican
representations of Christ (photo 4) resemble
certain Aztec gods as well as the suffering
Christs of Spanish religious art. The same
intermixture of Christian and pagan
elements is found in religious festivals such
as those of the Yaqui Indians of northwest
Mexico, whose history can be traced back to
pre-Columbian times. During Holy Week
the Yaquis re-enact scenes from the Passion
and perform rites harking back to their
distant past. A curious feature of the
ceremonies is the worship of Judas by
masked Yaquis known as "Chapayecas" (the
long-nosed ones). On this double page are
shown scenes from Yaqui Holy Week: (1)
Christ's litter, decked with flowers, is borne
through the village; inside it are wooden
fetishes and stuffed animals; (2) Long-nosed
ritual masks of the Chapayecas, mounted on
wooden swords; (3) Two Yaqui archers
reverently guard the statue of.Christ; (5) The
"march of the warriors" outside the church
recalls the Yaquis' long and sometimes
fierce struggle to preserve their
independence.
22

The Passion according
to the Yaquis
Photos © Marino Benzi-Editions du Chêne, Paris

k, But timeor, more precisely, each
period of timewas not only something
living that was born, grew up, decayed
and was reborn. It was also a succession
that returned: one period of time ended
and another came back.
The arrival of the Spaniards was inter¬
preted by Montezuma, at least at the be¬
ginning, not so much as a threat from
outside than as the internal conclusion of
one cosmic period and the commence¬
ment of another. The gods departed be¬
cause their period of time was at an end,
but another period returned and with it,
other gods and another era.
The conquest of Mexico is an historical
event made up of many very different
circumstances, but what seems to me the
most significant the suicide of the Aztec
people is often forgotten.
One part of the Aztec people lost heart
and sought out the invader. The other,
betrayed on all sides and without hope of
salvation, chose death. The mere pre¬
sence of the Spaniards caused a split in
Aztec society, a split corresponding to the
dualism of their gods, their religious sys¬
tem and their higher castes.
Aztec religion, like that of all conquer¬
ing people, was a solar religion. The Az¬
tecs concentrated all their aspirations and
warlike aims in the sun, the god who is
the source of life, the bird-god who breaks
through the mists and establishes himself
in the centre of the sky like a conquering
army in the centre of a battle-field.
But the gods were not mere represen¬
tations of nature. They also embodied
the will and desire of society, which made
itself divine in them.
The victory of the death-wish shows
that the Aztecs suddenly lost sight of their
destiny. Cuauhtemoc, the last Aztec em¬
peror, fought in the knowledge that he
would be defeated. The tragic nature of
his struggle lies in this bold and intimate
acceptance of defeat.
The drama of a consciousness that sees
everything around it destroyedeven the
gods appears to preside over Mexican
history. Cuauhtemoc and his people died
alone, abandoned by their friends, their
allies, their vassals and their gods. They
died as orphans.
The fall of Aztec society precipitated
that of the rest of the Indian world. All
the nations that composed it were over¬
whelmed by the same horror, which almost
always expressed itself as a fascinated
acceptance of death. Few documents are
as impressive as the remaining handful
that describe this catastrophe. Here is an
expression of the suffering of the Mayas,
as recorded in their holy book, Chi/am
Balam de Chumayel:
"II Akan Katun: the blond-bearded
strangers arrived, the sons of the sun, the
pale-coloured men. Ah, how sad we were
when they arrived!... The white man's
stick will fall, will descend from on high,
will strike everywhere... The words of
Hunab-Ku, our one god, will be words of
sorrow when the words of the God of
Heaven spread out over the earth... [And
later:] The hangings will begin, and light¬
ning will flash from the white man's
hands... The hardships of battle will fall
upon the Brothers, and tribute will be
demanded after the grand entrance of
Christianity, and the Seven Sacraments
will be established, and travail and misery
will rule this land."
The Mexican is a religious being and his
experience of the divine is completely
genuine. But who is his god? The ancient
earth-gods or Christ?
In many instances Catholicism only cov¬
ers over the ancient cosmogonie beliefs.
In the following passage, Juan Pérez Jolo¬
te, a Chamula Indian of southern Mexico,
describes the ¡mage of Christ in a church
in his village and explains what it means
to him and his people:
"This is Señor San Manuel here in this
The hero's
tomb is the
cradle of the
people'
coffin; he is also called Señor San Salva¬
dor or Señor San Mateo. He watches
over the people and the animals. We pray
to him to watch over us at home, on the
road, in the fields. This other figure on
the cross is also Señor San Mateo; he is
showing us how he died on the cross, to
teach us respect... Before San Manuel
was born, the sun was as cold as the
moon, and the pukujes, who ate people,
lived on the earth. The sun began to grow
warm after the birth of the Child-God,
Señor San Salvador, who is the son of
the Virgin."
In this account (recorded in Juan Pérez
Jo/ote, the Autobiography of a Chamula,
as told to the anthropologist Ricardo
Pozas) we can see both the superimposed
religion and the ineradicable presence of
the indigenous myths. Before the birth of
Christ,, the sunthe eye of Goddid not
give warmth. The sun is an attribute of
divinity.
The persistence of the pre-Cortesian
myth underlies the difference between the
Christian and indigenous conceptions.
Christ saved the world because He re¬
deemed the Mexicans and washed away
the stain of Original Sin, but the Aztec
god Quetzalcóatl was not so much a re¬
deemer as a re-creator.
Among the Indians the idea of sin is
still bound to the idea of health and sick¬
ness, personal, social and cosmic. The
Christian attempts to save the individual
soul, disconnected from the group and
the body. Christianity condemns the world,
while the Indian conceives of personal
salvation only as a part of the salvation of
society and the cosmos.
In modern Mexico, there is no especial
veneration for God the Father in the Trini¬
ty. He is a dim figure at best. On the
other hand, there is profound devotion to
Christ as the Son of God, as the youthful
God, above all as the victimized Redeemer.
The village churches have a great many
images of Jesuson the cross, or covered
with thorns and wounds in which the
insolent realism of the Spaniards is mingled
with the tragic symbolism of the Indians.
On the one hand, the wounds are flowers,
pledges of resurrection; on the other, they
are a reiteration that life is the sorrowful
mask of death.
The fervour of the cult of God the Son
would seem to be explained, at first
glance, as an inheritance from the pre-
Hispanic religions.
When the Spaniards arrived, almost all
of the great masculine divinitieswith the
exception of Tláloc, a child and an old man
at the same time, and a deity of greater
antiquity were sons of gods like Xipe, god
of the young corn, and Huitzilopochtli, the
"Warrior of the South".
Perhaps it is not idle to recall that the
birth of Huitzilopochtli offers more than
one analogy with that of Christ: he too
was conceived without carnal contact; the
divine messenger was likewise a bird (it
dropped a feather into the lap of the earth-
goddess Coatlicue); and finally, the infant
Huitzilopochtli also had to escape the per¬
secution of a mythical Herod.
Nevertheless, it would be a mistake to
use these analogies to explain the Mexi¬
can's devotion to Christ, just as it would
be to attribute that devotion to a mere
survival of the cult of the sons of gods.
The Mexican venerates a bleeding and
humiliated Christ, a Christ who has been
beaten by the soldiers and condemned by
the judges, because he sees in him a trans¬
figured image of his own identity., And
this brings to mind Cuauhtemoc, the young
Aztec emperor who was dethroned, tor¬
tured and murdered by Cortés.
Cuauhtemoc means "Falling Eagle".
The Mexican chieftain rose to power at
the beginning of the siege of México-
Tenochtitlán, when the Aztecs had been
abandoned by their gods, their vassals
and their allies.
Even his relationship with a woman fits
the archetype of the young hero, at one
and the same time the lover and the son
of the goddess. Thus López Velarde wrote
that Cuauhtemoc went out to meet Cortés
is, to the final sacrifice"separated
from the curved breast of the Empress".
He is a warrior but he is also a child.
The exception is that the heroic cycle does
not end with his death: the fallen hero
awaits resurrection. It is not surprising
that for the majority of Mexicans Cuauh¬
temoc should be the "young grandfather",
the origin of Mexico: the hero's tomb is
the cradle of the people. This is the dia¬
lectic of myth, and Cuauhtemoc is more i
a myth than an historical figure. I
24

- ->*
'V '
Photo © Gisèle Freund, Paris
The steps of time
Imposing pyramid at Teotihuacán, north of Mexico City, was
until recently covered by a mass of rubble, earth and vegetation.
A major religious centre of ancient Mexico, Teotihuacán went into
decline long before the conquistadors arrived.
25

Doña Malinche
Doña Malinche (or Doña Marina), the Indian woman who became the mistress of the
Spanish general Cortés, is often taken as a symbol of Mexico's violation by the
conquistadors. In the drawing below, from the Codex Azcatitlán, a manuscript dating
from the beginning of the Spanish conquest, she can be seen (far right) beside Cortés,
escorted by a group of Spanish soldiers and Indian porters.
Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
k Another element enters here, an analo¬
gy that makes this history a true poem in
search of fulfilment: the location of Cuauh-
témoc's tomb is not known. The mystery
of his burial place is one of our obsessions-
as Mexicans. To discover it would mean
nothing less than to return to our origins,
to reunite ourselves with our ancestry, to
break out of our solitude. It would be a
resurrection.
If we ask about the third figure of the
triad, the Mother, we hear a double ans¬
wer. It is no secret to anyone that Mexi¬
can Catholicism is centred on the cult of
the Virgin of Guadalupe. In the first place,
she is an Indian Virgin; in the second
place, the scene of her appearance to the
Indian Juan Diego was a hill that formerly
contained a sanctuary dedicated to To-
nantzin, "Our Mother", the Aztec god¬
dess of fertility.
We know that the Conquest coincided
with the apogee of the cult of two mascu¬
line divinities: Quetzalcóatl, the self-sacri¬
ficing god, and Huitzilopochtli, the young
warrior-god. The defeat of these gods
which is what the Conquest meant to the
Indian world, because it was the end of a
cosmic cycle and the inauguration of a
new divine kingdom caused the faithful
to return to the ancient feminine deities.
This phenomenon of a return to the
maternal womb, so well known to the
psychologist, is without doubt one of the
determining causes of the swift popularity,
of the cult of the Virgin. The Indian god¬
desses were goddesses of fecundity, link¬
ed to the cosmic rhythms, the vegetative
processes and agrarian rites. The Catholic
Virgin is also the Mother (some Indian
pilgrims still call her Guadalupe-Tonantzin),
but her principal attribute is not to watch
over the fertility of the earth but to provide
refuge for the unfortunate.
The situation has changed: the wor¬
shippers do not try to make sure of their
harvests but to find a mother's lap. The
Virgin is the consolation of the poor, the
shield of the weak, the help of the oppress¬
ed. In sum, she is the Mother of orphans.
All men are born disinherited and their true
condition is orphanhood, but this is parti
cularly true of the Indians and the poor in
Mexico.
The image of the Chingada, the violated
mother, may be used to evoke the Span¬
ish conquest, which was also a violation,
not only in the historical sense but also in
the very flesh of Indian women.
The symbol of this violation is Doña
Malinche, the mistress of Cortés. It is
true that she gave herself voluntarily to
the conquistador, but he forgot her as
soon as her usefulness was over. Doña
Marina, as she was called by the Span¬
iards, came to represent the Indian women
who were fascinated, violated or seduced
by the Spaniards. And as a small boy will
not forgive his mother if she abandons
him to search for his father, the Mexican
people have not forgiven "La Malinche"
for her betrayal. She embodies the open,
the chingado, to our closed, stoic, impas¬
sive Indians.
Cuauhtemoc and Doña Marina are thus
two antagonistic and complementary fig¬
ures. There is nothing surprising about our
cult of the young emperor, an image of
26

...and Our Lady of Guadalupe
The cult of Our Lady of Guadalupe, practised throughout Mexico, incorporates survivals from
pre-Hispanic times. The Virgin appeared to an Indian, Juan Diego, on a hill near Mexico City
where the Aztec fertility goddess Tonantzin was once worshipped, and some Indians still refer
to her as "Guadalupe-Tonantzin". Below, Mexican Indians pray at a portable shrine
dedicated to Our Lady of Guadalupe.
Photo © Marino Benzi-Editions du Chêne, Paris
the sacrificed sonand there is also no¬
thing surprising about the curse that
weighs on La Malinche. This explains the
success of the contemptuous adjective
ma/inchista to denounce all those who
have been corrupted by foreign influences.
When we shout "Viva México, hijos de
la chingada!" (Long live Mexico, children
of the chingada!), we express our desire
to live closed off from the outside world
and above all from the past. In this shout,
we condemn our origins and deny our
hybridism. The strange permanence of
Cortés and La Malinche in the Mexican's
imagination and sensibilities reveals that
they are something more than historical
figures: they are symbols of a secret con¬
flict that we have still not resolved.
When he repudiates La Malinchethe
Mexican Evethe Mexican breaks his ties
with the past, renounces his origins, and
lives in isolation and solitude.
The Mexican condemns all his tradi¬
tions at once, the whole set of gestures,
attitudes and tendencies in which it is
now difficult to distinguish the Spanish
from the Indian. For that reason the
Hispanic thesis, which would have us
descend from Cortés to the exclusion of
La Malinche, is the patrimony of a few
extremists.
The same can be said of indigenist pro¬
paganda, which is also supported by fana¬
tical creóles and mestizos, while the In¬
dians have never paid it the slightest
attention. The Mexican does not want to
be either an Indian or a Spaniard. Nor
does he want to be descended from them.
He denies them. And he does not affirm
himself as a mixture, but rather as an
abstraction: he is a man. He becomes the
son of Nothingness. His beginnings are
in his own self.
The opposition between life and death
was not so absolute to the ancient Mexi¬
cans as it is to us. Life extended into
death, and vice versa. Death was not the
natural end of life but one phase of an
infinite cycle. Life, death and resurrection
were stages of a cosmic process which
repeated itself continuously.
Life had no higher function than to flow
into death, its opposite and complement;
and death, in turn, was not an end in itself:
man fed the insatiable hunger of life with
his death. Sacrifices had a double pur¬
pose: on the one hand man participated
in the creative process, at the same time
paying back to the gods the debt con¬
tracted by his species; on the other hand
he nourished cosmic life and also social
life, which was nurtured by the former.
Perhaps the most characteristic aspect
of this conception is the impersonal nature
of the sacrifice. Since their lives did not
belong to them, their deaths lacked any
personal "meaning.
Our indigenous ancestors did not believe
that their deaths -belonged to them, just
as they never thought that their lives were
really theirs in the Christian sense. Every¬
thing was examined to determine, from
birth, the life and death of each man: his
social class, the year, the place, the day,
the hour. The Aztec was as little respon¬
sible for his actions as for his death.
Space and time were bound together
and formed an inseparable whole. There
was a particular "time" for each place,
each of the cardinal points and the centre
in which they were immobilized. Whereas
we dissociate space and time, mere stage
sets for the actions of our lives, there were
as many "space-times" for the Aztecs as
there were combinations in the priestly
calendar, each one endowed with a parti¬
cular qualitative significance, superior to
human will.
Religion and destiny ruled their lives, as
morality and freedom rule ours. We live
under the sign of liberty, and everything
Greek fatality and the grace of the
theologians involves choosing and
struggle, but for the Aztecs the problem
reduced itself to investigating the never-
clear will of the gods.
The advent of Catholicism radically
modified this situation. Sacrifice and the
idea of salvation, formerly collective, be¬
came personal. Freedom was humanized,
embodied in man. To the ancient Aztecs
the essential thing was to assure the con¬
tinuity of creation; sacrifice did not bring
about salvation in another world, but
cosmic health; the universe, and not the
individual, was given life by the blood and
death of human beings. For Christians it
is the individual who counts.
Both attitudes, opposed as they may
seem, have a common note: life, collec¬
tive or individual, looks forward to a death
that in its way is a new life. Life only
justifies and transcends itself when it is
realized in death, and death is also a
transcendence, in that it is a new life.
To Christians death is a transition, a
somersault between two lives, the tem¬
poral and the otherworldly; to the Aztecs
it was the profoundest way of participating
in the continuous regeneration of the
creative forces, which were always in dan¬
ger of being extinguished if they were not
provided with blood, the sacred food. In
both systems life and death lack auto¬
nomy; they are the two sides of a single
reality.
Octavio Paz
27
