MAN AND HIS
IT is sometimes said today that the
triumph of technology has brought
about a divorce between man
and nature, and that this is gra¬
dually undermining a civilization which
neglects the very bases on which its
development must be founded.
The most obvious and frequently
encountered examples of the negative
effects of the changing relationship
between man and his environment
are : imperfect understanding of the
natural systems and mechanisms
which enable life on earth, to continue;
disregard of the unintentional effects
of technology, in particular the va¬
rious forms of pollution; poor man¬
agement of the soil, forests and water;
unbridled consumption of fossil fuels;
uncontrolled urbanization; the rele¬
gation of rural populations to the
fringes of society; destruction of
existing life support systems; and the
crushing of traditional cultures.
In this context, what is frequently
called the "environment crisis" refers
in the first place to the deterioration
of physical and biological surroundings
which is a by-product of the sharply
accelerated expansion of man's dom¬
ination of the planet and, more
particularly, of his unchecked exploit¬
ation of natural resources.
It should also be noted that this
environment crisis is commanding
attention at the very moment when
the necessity for a new international
economic order is becoming apparent
and when the classic forms of deve¬
lopment and the ways and means of
providing technical assistance for
countries in need of it are under
challenge.
There is talk, for example, of a
"crisis of civilization," which people
are trying to remedy by efforts to
improve the "quality of life".
It is no accident that the major
intergovernmental scientific co-operation
programmes with which Unesco is
concerned have developed, mainly
around such disciplines as geology,
ecology, hydrology and oceanography.
These activities are still of para¬
mount importance but the accent is
being laid more and more on inter¬
disciplinary attempts to improve the
quality of the human environment
in general. Increased and decisive
contributions from the social sciences,
the humanities, culture, education
and communication are called for,
as well as close co-ordination of all
these activities.
Unesco has supported, morally
and financially, two major international
research programmes: the Upper
Mantle Project (1963-1971) and the
Geodynamics Project (1973-1979)
launched by the International Council
Photo © Y. Vincent-Alleaume, Paris
28

ENVIRONMENT
Unesco has developed major programmes of international co-operation concerned with the sciences of geology,
ecology, hydrology and oceanography, as well as with the preservation of the cultural heritage. From works of art
to the tiniest forms of plant life, man's environment and all the living creatures that share it with him have been
adverselyand sometimes irremediablyaffected by the advance of technology. Above, a botanist at the
Timiyazev Agricultural Academy in Moscow examines a larch seedling. Left, restoration of the smaller of two
Buddha statues carved in a rock-face at Bamian, Afghanistan. It measures 35 metres from head to foot.
of Scientific Unions (ICSU). The
results have made it possible, for the
first time, to draw up a comprehen¬
sive account of the evolution of the
earth's crust throughout geological
time.
Ecology and ecosystems
The thin layer of soil, water and
air surrounding our planet, to which
all life is confined and in which man
lives and has evolved, consists of a
number of complex, self-sufficient
units or ecosystems, within which a
certain equilibrium is maintained as
a result of interaction between
communities of animals, plants and
other organisms and the chemical
and physical elements of their habitat.
The key question is, how far can
man go in the manipulation of the
environment? The progressive simpli¬
fication of agricultural ecosystems
carries with it the risk of disruption
and breakdown, since a simplified
ecosystem is generally less able to
resist invasion by pest or disease or
to accommodate unexpected events.
As the size of human populations and
economic activities increase, so does
man's potential for disrupting such
systems.
Resources are limited and unevenly
distributed. The land surface of the
earth, which forms man's habitat,
constitutes about a quarter (some
13,000 million hectares) of the total
surface of the globe. But of this total
only one hectare in ten is arable land
under cultivation. With very consid-
, érable labour and capital investment,
only one additional hectare out of
ten, at present covered by pastures
or forests, could conceivably be
brought under cultivation.
In other words, we are already
making use of the land that is most
productive and easy to exploit. What
is more important is that some of the
land already in use is showing signs
of deterioration. It has been estima¬
ted that about five million hectares
are at present lost for food production
each year, mainly through the
expansion of built-up areas and through
processes such as erosion and salini-
zation.
The urgently required increases in
useful biological production must
therefore be sought through more
rational use of available land resources.
There is an even more urgent need
in all regions for information which
directly links the resource and environ¬
mental problems encountered in a
given area with the social, cultural,
economic and biological characteristics
and aspirations of the populations
which live there.
In short, population-environment- 1
CONTINUED PAGE 31
29

Continued from page 29
natural resources balance is the key
problem area where further information
is required throughout the world.
Although problems concerning the
environment and the utilization of
resources assume a specific form in
different geographic areas of the world,
they should nevertheless be viewed
in their global or regional perspectives,
since the same type of problem is
often shared by several countries.
Information acquired in one country
on how to halt the spread of desert
areas, for example, has a major bear¬
ing on the ecological, economic and
social future of the country concerned,
but is also of obvious interest to
other countries facing similar condi¬
tions and difficulties.
The urgency of the problem of
developing a firm basis for the rational
use and conservation of the resources
of the biosphere and for the improv¬
ement of the relationship between
man and the environment led to the
launching of Unesco's Man and the
Biosphere (MAB) Programme.
This programme provides a major
interdisciplinary focus at the inter¬
governmental level for improving
knowledge of terrestrial biological
resources and interrelationships be¬
tween human activities and terrestrial
ecosystems. The programme, in
which both developed and developing
countries are playing an active part,
has now moved into its operational
phase and is conducted in co-opera¬
tion with the other United Nations
organizations concerned.
The complexity of these problems
calls for integrated, interdisciplinary
research. Natural scientists on their
own can supply only partial and- in¬
adequate answers, and these increas¬
ingly need to be related to social
requirements and conditions.
Natural and social scientists should
therefore participate on an equal
footing in the planning and implemen¬
tation of research projects. In a current
study on the interrelations between
population, environment and resources
in small islands of the Pacific, for
example, the research team includes
ecologists, pedologists, nutrition
experts, human geographers, bio-
geographers and marine biologists.
Water resources
The development of human socie¬
ties, and of the cities where these
societies flourished, has always been
conditioned by the availability of the
water resources essential for their
existence. Despite all its technological
transformations, the modern world
has not changed this immutable law.
On the contrary, the problem of
water has, in our time, assumed new
dimensions, due partly to population
growth but even more to the rapid k
increase in the requirements of f
31

agriculture and industry and to
urbanization.
The solution of this problem is a
prerequisite of economic and social
development, and calls for the cre¬
ation of special structures in national
administrations. More and more coun¬
tries are facing a crisis concerning
both the quality and the quantity of
their water supply.
In 1975, according to a rough esti¬
mation, the world consumed some
3,000 km3 of water, in other words,
about 70 per cent of the total mean
discharge of the rivers from which
most of the world's renewable water
is obtained.
It is reckoned that between now
and the year 2000 water consumption
will double, rising to about 6,000 km3
per year, or merely a quarter of the
volume of water in Lake Baikal, or
a tenth of the deep ground water
reserves under the North-West Sahara.
Viewed on a world scale, these
figures appear to give no cause for
alarm, but two points should be borne
in mind.
In the first place, doubling the
quantity of water available to users
represents for the world a vast invest¬
ment. Secondly, such investment will
be far greater than that already made
for current utilization, since the yield
from the necessary works will pro¬
gressively decline.
Furthermore, water resources are
very unevenly distributed throughout
the various regions of the world and
in different years and seasons, so that
there are many countries where the
situation is already critical.
The age-old practice of using rivers
and streams as sewers has not only
persisted to the present day, but has
assumed such proportions as to lead
to alarming results.
Subjected, successively, to domes¬
tic, industrial and agricultural uses,
all of which cause varying degrees of
pollution, the same water is finally
required to carry down to the sea all
the organic and inorganic waste ine¬
vitably produced by large population
centres and in particular by industrial
complexes.
These wastes collect in the rivers
and lakes which are no longer able to
destroy them by a natural cleansing
process, so that they even seep through
into the ground water.
The resultant deterioration makes
the water less fit for further use, and
creates a serious threat to public
health while harming the fauna, flora
and natural environment.
The solution of water problems
requires technological, administrative
and economic activities closely related
to the overall development of the
countries or regions concerned. The
programme proposed' by Unesco is
designed to furnish the essential scien¬
tific elements required to provide
guidance for these activités and to
ensure their effectiveness.
The oceans
Unesco must enable its Member
States to acquire the knowledge
necessary for them to exploit the
resources of the oceans in a rational
manner, balancing its various uses in
such a way that long-term survival
and an enhanced quality of life are
ensured.
It must also help Member States to
create the necessary structures, to
acquire scientific knowledge and to
apply that knowledge to the mana¬
gement of man's activities in the
marine environment.
Urbanism and
the quality of life
The man-made environment of
towns and villages is changing with
such ruthless speed that the author¬
ities in many countries confess that
they are powerless to control the
process. The forecast that the popu¬
lation will have doubled by the end of
the century, the advance of indus¬
trialization and the almost universal
trend towards urbanization all combine
to increase this anxiety.
In every case, the increasing density
of urban populations is accompanied
by a radical disruption of the very
fabric of the town. Traditional func¬
tions (communication, trade, political
affairs, leisure activities) are segre¬
gated in different districts. Historic
quarters disappear either as a result
of speculative building projects or
because the overcrowded streets are
abandoned to the least privileged
social categories and quickly deterio¬
rate. Fast transport networks tear the
city apart.
The inability to cope simultaneously
with the use of land, the creation of
jobs and improvements in communi¬
cation systems leads to a steady dete¬
rioration of urban living conditions.
Thus the town, once pre-eminent as
a hub of civilizing influences, is decried
as a place where every form of pollu¬
tion, time-wasting difficulties, segre¬
gation, psychological stress, solitude
and occasionally even danger are
rampant.
The environment is also being rad¬
ically altered by the tourist industry
which, in certain countries, dominates
the private and public building sectors
and destroys the natural balance by
setting up massive installations with
no regard for the sites and traditions
of the population.
Such problems always have insepa¬
rable ecological, social, ethical and
cultural aspects. Physical plans based
on purely economic calculations cannot
solve them.
Pseudo-planning extolled as a pa¬
nacea, still presides over the creation
and management of human settlement
and, astonishing as it may seem, must
share an equal responsibility with
anarchical liberalism for the sacrifice
of the architectural heritage to private
interest or those of State; for the
slow death of rural centres and the
cultures they nurture; for the conges¬
tion of subsidized housing estates in
remote suburbs; the concentration of
offices and factories and the dreary
migrations of workers which they in¬
volve; and, lastly, for the standardized
planning of residential areas in which
the car is king and whose inhabitants
lose both the feeling of belonging to a
community and their cultural identity.
True planning, which cares for the
quality of life, will consider human
settlements as extremely complex
systems requiring patient research in
many different fields if they are to be
dealt with scientifically.
Methods of measuring the quality
of the environment are being devised.
Studies are being conducted on the
social and cultural effects of tourism.
Exercises in programming are being
prepared for those responsible for
environmental matters. Other studies
are contributing to knowledge about
traditional architecture and the pro¬
blems involved in its adaptation to the
needs of present-day life.
Unesco is collaborating with several
Member States in the preservation
and presentation of monuments and
sites, and historic quarters and towns.
Practical experience shows that
operations designed to improve the
environment by what are regarded as
purely technical methods do not
succeed unless they take due account
of interrelationships between men
themselves and between men and
their environment.
From Unesco's Medium-Term Plan (1977-
1982), Chapter VII: Man and his Environment
32
