The awakening
African cinema
by Francis Bebey
AS far as the general public is
concerned, it may well be
that the cinema is more high¬
ly appreciated than anything else that
the West has brought to Africa.
From Niger to Botswana, from An¬
gola to Tanzania, people flock to film
shows, and every country boasts a
great many cinemas, most of them
in the towns.
These cinemas undoubtedly play a
part in keeping people who for va¬
rious reasons have moved to the
towns from returning to the villages
where they were born.
This makes the cinemachalleng¬
ed as a form of entertainment only
by football an important factor in
African society, and one that can in
certain circumstances have a major
impact on a country's economy. Since
most of these economies are predo¬
minantly agricultural, the rural exodus
which the cinema directly or indirectly
encourages is a matter whose impor¬
tance cannot be ignored.
I have often asked young Africans
why they insist on staying in the
towns, where they have no useful
occupation, instead of returning to
their villages where they would be
FRANCIS BEBEY, musician, novelist and
poet of Cameroon, is founder and director of
Ozileka, a record publishing house producing
records for Africa. Composer and guitarist,
he has given recitals of his compositions in
many countries, and has made several records,
the latest of which. Condition Masculine, is
published by Ozileka. He is also the author of
a book of initiation into the traditional music
of Black Africa, African Music: A People's
Art (Hill,' Lawrence and Co., New York, 1975).
In 1968 he was awarded the Grand Prix Litté¬
raire de l'Afrique Noire for his novel Le Fils
d'Agatha Moudio ("Agatha Moudio's Son",
Hutchinson, London, 1973). For ten years he
was associated with Unesco's programme for
the development of broadcasting in Africa.
happier. All too often these young
villagers mention the cinema as an
urban attraction which they find hard
to resist.
At this point it is perhaps worth
pausing to define exactly what we
mean when we talk about the cinema
in Black Africa. Basically, of course,
the African cinema is much the same
as in the West: a darkened room, a
screen, a projector, a film being pro¬
jected, and an audience watching the
film.
Often, though, the darkened room
is simply an open-air enclosure with
concrete terraces for seats. The
screen is open to the weather and
not always ideal for a satisfactory
projection. The projector is liable to
be a noisy old machine and the film
a "western" of doubtful taste. As
for the audience, its spontaneous in¬
volvement in the proceedings may
sometimes be a little disconcerting.
To be fair, things are not always
thus, and in the big cities such as
Dakar, Nairobi, Lagos or Bukavu the'
cinemas are air-conditioned and every
bit as comfortable as those in Europe
or America, with the most up-to-date
equipment. These cinemas generally
cater to a relatively well-off public,
offering programmes of perfectly res¬
pectable intellectual, cultural and
artistic credentials.
Open-air cinemas, which are found
in many countries of the African sa¬
vannah and in some towns of the
forest regions, cost little to build and
the running expenses are practically
nil. They are pretty uncomfortable for
the "ordinary" members of the public,
but they nearly always have three or
four rows of covered seats on a raised
dais at the back for the more impor¬
tant Africans in the audience or for
Europeans should they ever venture
into these "cinemas for Africans".
For many teenagers and poor adults,
these open-air cinemas are a godsend,
especially when there are a few trees
nearby. It is an easy matter to climb
up onto a stout branch and enjoy an
excellent view of the screen.
So cinema audiences in Black Africa
are socially stratified and could in
themselves provide the subject for an
interesting sociological study. Depend¬
ing on the kind of cinema and the
neighbourhood in which it is situated,
the price of a ticket may vary between
the equivalent of 25 cents and $ 6.
Most cinemas belong to non-Afri¬
cans or to chains set up by European
or American distributors. For several
decades, two French firms owned and
ran a network of over 300 cinemas
in the French-speaking part of Africa.
The situation is no longer quite the
same. A Tunisian journalist, Tahar
Cheriaa, writing in the weekly maga¬
zine Algérie-Actualités in January 1972,
reported that 33 of these cinemas
had been nationalized by State bodies
following independence; that 83 now
belonged to private individuals, al¬
though their programmes were still
provided by non-African companies;
and that 200 or so still belonged to
the two companies.
But although the situation today is
no longer what it was 15 years ago,
the changes that have occurred do not
seem to have brought about a genuine
assumption of control, over distribution
by African governments. In the En¬
glish-speaking countries the circuits
set up by the British, and the arrival
of American companies on the market
are a matter of concern to government
leaders and officials responsible for
African cinema.
The fact is that these companies,
which have enjoyed a monopoly over
film-distribution in Black Africa ever
since the beginning, are at the root
of the appalling state of the cinema k
on the African continent. r
30

Right, Emitai, the thunder
god of the Diola people of
Casamance (Senegal). Photo
is a still from Emitai, made
in 1971 by the distinguished
Senegalese director
Ousmane Sembène. The
theme of the film, which
won a prize at the Moscow
Film Festival in the same
year, is the resistance of
Diola farmers to the
demands of the colonial
armed forces.
Left, a scene from Ousmane
Sembene's film La Noire de...
("Black Girl"), made in 1966.
Among the first full-length
feature films made by an
African, the film shows events
in the life of an African girl
whose emigration to France
ends in tragedy.
31

They are answerable to no one but
themselves when deciding on the sort
of film to be shown to the public. As
a result, African film-goers are offered
a diet of European duds, third-rate
American westerns and Egyptian or
Indian films so bad they could never
hope for a showing in Europe or
America.
THIS widespread distribution of
poor-quality films has at least
two tragic consequences: it
develops and nurtures uncritical taste
on the part of the public while at the
same time leaving scant room for the
development of Africa's own potential
already existingfilm-making
creativity.
In addition, it misleads many film-
goers into thinking that the cinema-
fiction served up to them is in fact
reality, and into accepting uncritically
everything they see on the screen.
The public thronging the cheap ci¬
nemas in the poorest districts, in other
words the vast majority of African
film-goers, is in such thrall to the ci¬
nema that the dangers underlying the
kind of unscrupulous programming
imposed by the existing distributors
are all too apparent.
The fact that audience participation
does not stem from any profound
reflexion means that "lessons" learn¬
ed from the cinema screen are often
put into practice in real life. For ex¬
ample, certain African towns expe¬
rience periodic outbreaks of lawless¬
ness following a spate of films glorify¬
ing outlaws and gangsters.
The trouble is, this kind of film
makes up the bulk of Western cine¬
ma's contribution to Black Africa; the
great films of the international cinema
are a rarity. True, in some parts
Charlie Chaplin is as familiar a figure
as Tarzan. Still, on the whole, and
certain improvements in programmes
over the past few years notwithstand¬
ing, the African cinema-going public
continues to be overwhelmed by ar¬
tistically stultifying and morally re¬
prehensible films.
African film-making as such has ex¬
panded over the past 15 years, but
it is handicapped not only by a lack
of financial resources, not only by
obstacles placed in its way by the dis¬
tributors, but also by the attitude of
the public, trained as it is in the school
of poor taste rather than that of
thoughtful scrutiny.
When someone like Ousmane Sem¬
bène suggests a moment's reflection
about some aspect of society, as in
his films Mandabi or La Noire de...,
(Black Girl) he is by no means sure of
having the African public on his side.
"What kind of a film is this, it doesn't
feature any of our favourite blood-
and-thunder heroes?" think some,
while others mutter, "What on earth
does he think he's up to, showing us
all the most commonplace aspects of
our daily lives?"
After all, it is understandable enough
that African film-goers, as avid for
exoticism as their counterparts the
world over, should have little time for
scenes of everyday life taken from all
around them. But the problem goes
deeper still: for all too long the African
public has been encouraged to think
about anything but its own condition.
This encouragement, which was an
integral part of colonialism, has not
altogether vanished with the advent
of independence.
Little has been done to combat the
foreign distributors' monopoly, to
create new circuits or to bring to a
wider public films capable of helping
Africans along the road to intellectual,
cultural and moral emancipation. One
even begins to wonder whether this
misuse of cinema is not at least part¬
ly responsible for the misfortunes of
Black Africa today.
Despite all this, the past 15 years
have seen the growth of an African
cinema worthy of the name. Some
people have seen its output as a new
form of modern African literature; at
any rate, it has included a number of
films condemning colonialism, and
others dealing with the struggle
against neo-colonialism, with mistakes
made in the early days of indepen¬
dence, with the position of women
in African society and with what Guy
Hennebelle has called the "new black
slave trade" in his book Les cinémas
africains (African cinemas; published
by the Société Africaine d'Edition,
Dakar, 1972).
The development of an African
cinema has had a number of conse¬
quences, including the foundation of
the Panafrican Cinema Federation,
which has fostered African partici¬
pation in various festivals (such as
the Carthage Film Festival), and which
is also partly responsible for the found¬
ing of the Ouagadougou Festival.
These subjects have already inspir¬
ed a great many films, but certain
names stand out from the crowd.
The Senegalese writer and film-maker
Ousmane Sembène is undoubtedly
the best-known African film-director
at the present time. With La Noire
de..., Mandabi, Taw, Emitai and
Xa/a, all of which are good films
aesthetically, ethically and technically,
Ousmane Sembène has brought the
Senegalese film industry to the fore¬
front of Black African cinema.
His films draw their inspiration from
everyday African in this case Sene¬
galese revealing its charm and
its poetry while at the same time re¬
flecting deeply on the human condition
in Africa. This film-maker, who is in
many ways a model for contempo¬
rary Africa, has already received nu¬
merous prizes and awards for his
work.
Med Ondo of Mauritania (Soleil O
in particular); Paulin Soumanou Viey-
ra, a pioneer of Senegalese cinema;
Mahama Traoré, better known as
Johnson Traoré (Diegue-bi and Njdjan-
gan), another Senegalese film-maker,
have, along with Babacar Samb-
Makharam (Kodou) and others, also
played an active part in the burgeon¬
ing of African cinema.
The Ivory Coast is represented by
Désiré Ecaré (Concerto pour un Exil)
and A nous deux, France), Bassori
Timité (La Dune de la Solitude and
La Femme au Couteau) and Henri
Duparc (Mouna, ou le rêve d'un Ar¬
tiste). However, unlike Senegal,
where one really can speak in terms
of a "national school" of film-making
due to the relatively large number of
film-makers at work, in the Ivory
Coast, these artists are isolated
creators.
Mustapha Alassane (Le Retour d'un
Aventurier, Le Téléphoniste, etc.)
and Oumarou Ganda (Cabascabo)
from Niger, Daniel Kamwa (Pousse-
Pousse and Boubou-Cravate) and
Dikongué Pipa (Moun'a Moto), both
from Cameroon, round up this brief,
but by no means exhaustive list of
the better-known French-speaking
African film-makers.
Turning now to the English-speak¬
ing countries, it is too early to speak
of the birth of a genuinely African
cinema, although Bernard Odidja of
Ghana (Doing Their Thing), Egbert
Adjesu, another Ghanaian (I Told
You So) and particularly the Nigerian
Ola Balogun (Alpha, Aj'ani Ogun,
etc.) all deserve mention.
Ola Balogun is both film-maker and
theoretician. Speaking of African ci¬
nema's development possibilities he
points out that in many countries
cinema audiences are too small for
receipts to be able to finance a "con¬
ventional" cinema industry. "How¬
ever, we may regard the economic
problem as more apparent than real,
since a reorganization of structures
32

coupled with judicious planning ought
to make it possible to resolve it."
(See article page 12.)
He believes that one solution that
might permit the development of film
production in Black Africa might lie
in cooperation between the African
States themselves, especially through
the pooling of technical and financial
resources, and through the adoption
by African film-makers of new types
of equipment especially lightweight
material. Traditional 35 mm cameras
could be replaced by 16 mm ones,
and production crews could be pared
down to a minimum, all of which
would naturally help to cut film-pro¬
duction costs.
This view, expressed by a film¬
maker thoroughly familiar with the
problems of his craft, which he pract¬
ises in Africa itself at the present
time, deserves to be borne in mind
by all concerned with the growth of
African cinema: film producers them¬
selves, but also cinema managers
and operators, Ministries of Culture
and the Arts, the teaching profession
as well as other bodies concerned
with education.
ONE thing is certain, namely that
at a time when the rich na¬
tions are dropping methods
and techniques that have come to be
regarded as outmoded; at a time when
Hollywood is abandoning its studios
in favour of shooting on location with
increasingly compact production crews,
African film-makers would be well-
advised to reassess their art and to
adopt a more realistic approach to
production than they have done in
the past.
In my opinion, the only kind of
equipment which is really suited to
economic conditions in Africa is nei¬
ther 35 mm nor 16 mm, but the cheap¬
est of them all. Super 8 mm. For
the moment, most "self-respecting"
professionals will have nothing to do
with this format; and yet it alone is
capable of making films serve the
cause of development education in
Black Africa.
Francis Bebey

