The sea's rhythms have left
their imprint on coastal sands
and mollusc shell alike.
The text below outlines some
of Unesco's major activities
and achievements in oceano¬
graphy during the past two de¬
cades. It presents passages
from a background paper to
the six-year plan of action
(1977-1982) approved by Unes¬
co's 19th General Conference,
meeting in Nairobi (Kenya) in
October-November 1976 (see
page 34).
OVER the past two decades,
vitally important advances
have been made in our know¬
ledge of the marine environment.
These advances relate first to the
actual description of this environment.
They further concern such subjects as
the revolutionary concepts of "global
plate tectonics" and their conse¬
quences for our knowledge of the sea
floor, recognition of the phenomenon
of ocean turbulence, the study of the
interrelated dynamics of the oceans
and the atmosphere, of the chemistry,
of sea water, of the marine food
chain and the effects of the glacial
lowering of sea level.
Mapping of the sea, its properties,
its organisms and its floor has been a
major scientific objective of Unesco
Member States. Through interna¬
tional co-operation under Unesco's In¬
tergovernmental Océanographie Com-'
mission (IOC), this objective has
been successful on a global scale.
Maps (such as the General Bathy¬
métrie Chart of the Oceans) and
atlases now faithfully depict such
features as bottom topography, the
magnetic and gravity fields, oceanic
currents and water masses.
They also show distributions of
sediments, important marine orga¬
nisms, seawater salinity, temperature,
density, and numerous other physical
and chemical aspects.
The concepts of "global plate tec¬
tonics" now recognize that the earth's
surface is made up of seven huge and
several smaller slowly-moving plates.
On one side, these. plates form at the
central rifts of oceanic rises, through
volcanic action, while on the far end,
at the oceanic trenches, they slowly
sink back into the earth's mantle.
Similar phenomena on land are conti¬
nental break-up and collision, with
attendant earthquakes and volcanoes.
This discovery has opened the way



UNESCO AND
to major advances in petroleum explo¬
ration and in ore formation theories.
Key components of the concept were
developed during the first co-operative
action of the IOC Member States,
the very successful International
Indian Ocean Expedition (1959-
1965), organized through the Océa¬
nographie Commission and the Scien¬
tific Committee on Oceanic Research.
The scientific impact of the Indian
Ocean Expedition is shown by eight
volumes of collected scientific reprints
and thirteen large atlases which have
since appeared. The expedition also
had a lasting beneficial effect in
strengthening the marine sciences
in some Member States of the region.
A deep-drilling programme has
extensively sampled the sediments
and volcanic basement of all the
world's oceans except the Arctic
Ocean (see article page 30). Unesco
and its Océanographie Commission
have been involved in directly related
activities such as organizing general
investigations and supporting sym¬
posia at quadri-annual océanographie
congresses, and the publication of
charts.
The deep-sea drilling programme
has made major contributions to the
advance of oceanography. It has
confirmed the plate tectonic theory
by finding that the earth's volcanic
basement gets older as its distance
from the mid-ocean rift increases and
that the ocean floor is spreading.
The programme has also reconstructed
the location of rifts and continents
through time and shown major and
violent changes in the ocean's circu¬
lation.
It has revealed major changes in
the salinity of the oceans with the
possibility that the ocean may even
have dried up in places.
14

THE OCEANS
Finally the deep-sea drilling pro¬
gramme has discovered vast depo¬
sits of salt, demonstrated the distri¬
bution of manganese nodules and
shown indications of petroleum and
ores.
Recognition that the ocean is
highly turbulent on all scales and at
all depths represents another impor¬
tant scientific advance. For instance,
surface and near-surface currents
have been shown to be highly dyna¬
mic, meandering in space and tran¬
sient in time, besides giving rise to
large offshoot eddies (see article
page 24). Furthermore, fast deep
currents hug the western borders of
deep basins; these currents have had
profound effects on the sea floor by
moving bottom sediments.
A co-operative investigation of the
mighty Kuroshio Current in the north¬
west Pacific has been impressively
successful in determining the current's
dynamics. The Indian Ocean Expe¬
dition showed that the equatorial
undercurrent varied with the mon¬
soon season. The Atlantic tropical
experiment examined the current
structure of the deep ocean. The
Mid-Ocean Dynamic Experiment ex¬
amined a single giant deepwater
eddy.
A major international scientific ef¬
fort by Member States, working
through the Océanographie Commis¬
sion in co-operation with the World
Meteorological Organization, is now
studying the ways in which the oceans
and the atmosphere interact, as
well as long-term changes in climate.
Such studies should allow more re¬
liable prediction of the weather, both
short-term and seasonal.
Studies of the chemistry of sea
water, marine sediments and marine
organisms through co-operative in¬
vestigations have traced the path
ways of various chemical compounds
through the water and through living
organisms, not only for the major
constituents such as sodium, calcium,
chloride and carbonate, but also for
trace elements such as mercury, fluo¬
rine, the rare earths and various radio¬
active elements. This has laid a firm
base for the study and control of
marine pollution, a field in which
Unesco and its Océanographie Com¬
mission have been active.
The nations of the world are co¬
operating in observation and in rapid
data exchange, through the Integrated
Global Ocean Station System which
aims to provide immediate access by
Member States to ocean temperature
and certain oil pollution data. A
global plan for the investigation of
marine pollution guides the Océano¬
graphie Commission's pollution
studies. A major effort in collabo¬
ration with the U. N. Environment
Programme and the U. N. Food and
Agriculture Organization is designed
to bring Mediterranean pollution
under control.
Studies on marine food chains,
nutrients and species identification
have provided major advances in eco¬
logical knowledge. This knowledge,
together with fishery statistics, has
allowed nations to co-operate effecti¬
vely and realistically in regional and
global management of marine fish¬
eries, thus providing an effective link
between the scientific activities of
Unesco and the fisheries activities of
FAO.
Nearshore, some equally striking
scientific advances have been made.
Much more is now understood about
the effects of the glacial lowering of
sea-level (some 200 metres), about
complex marine ecological systems
such as coral reefs, seaweed and
plankton communities, and about
nearshore marine geological pro¬
cesses and currents, etc. These
advances form a sound basis for the
management of man's coastal acti¬
vities by individual Member States.
Unesco and its Intergovernmental
Océanographie Commission have con¬
tributed to many of these interna¬
tional achievements, acting as a
catalyst or as a link in the chain of
international research.
15
