Adults learn to read in an open-air literacy class near Dar es Salaam (Tanzania).
Photo V Jesper Kirknaes, Copenhagen.



AFTER LITERACY, WHAT NEXT?
Tanzania records its heritage of folk tales
in reading books for the newly literate
by Simoni Malya
ILLITERACY is a form of oppres¬
sion to the extent that it has nar¬
rowed the scope of so many of
our adults and has inhibited them from
participating fully in solving problems
and making decisions that affect
their day-to-day existence.
The oppressive nature of illiteracy
in the United Republic of Tanzania
and the seriousness of its impact on
our people can be seen quite vividly.
It is estimated that there are over
13 million Tanzanians of whom
SIMONI MALYA, Tanzanian educator, is
senior resident tutor at the Institute ofAdult
Education, Dar es Salaam. He is the author
of several books in Kiswahili on the develop¬
ment of reading materials for the newly
literate and the creation of conditions enabling
them to retain their knowledge. A longer ver¬
sion of this article originally appeared in
Unesco's international educational quarterly
Prospects (Vol. VI. N°. 1, 1976).
7 million are adults and 6 million are
under 1 5 years of age. Over 80 per
cent of the adults cannot read or write.
This data has been drawn from a
census conducted in 1967 in the
United Republic of Tanzania (main¬
land). As a result of a literacy cam¬
paign embarked on after the census,
the rate of illiteracy has definitely
dropped but exact figures are not yet
available.
These are the people who form the
productive sector of our population.
In order for them to participate in
development and change they must,
in the first place, be conscious of the
need to develop and change. We
are not saying that people cannot
bring about development and change
merely because they are unable to
read and write. We are saying,
rather, that literacy is a useful tool
and that it may quicken the pace of
both these processes.
It is further estimated that out of
Tanzania's 6 million young people
about 3 million are of school age.,
Yet half of these do not go to
school at all, either because no
schools are available near their homes
or because of a general apathy to¬
wards schooling. This means that
in addition to the illiterate adult popu¬
lation there are some 1.5 million
youngsters in danger of growing
up without learning to read and write.
It is estimated, moreover, that well
over 90 per cent of Tanzanians live in
rural areas where the rate of illite¬
racy compared to that of the urban
areas is overwhelming. The efforts
of the adult educator to create a
favourable environment for literacy
therefore must be focused largely on w
the rural areas. r
23

Tanzania has launched a far-reaching
literacy campaign to teach
reading and writing in the rural
areas where 90 per cent of the
country's population lives today.
Right, market day in Lushoto, a rural
community some 300 km north-west
of Dar es Salaam. Opposite
page, village woman of the Uluguru
mountains, 200 km west of the capital.
Furthermore, the lack of follow-up
reading materials means that each
year over 60 pec cent of those adults
who once knew how to read and write
relapse into illiteracy. This poses
another grim challenge to the adult
educator, and calls for a two-pronged
attack in the war against illiteracy.
As adults are being made literate,
sound steps must be taken simulta¬
neously to prepare reading materials
which will motivate the newly literate
to keep on reading and retain their
knowledge. There is no single or
simple answer to this problem
because the number of adults to be
attended to is so vast and their tastes
for reading materials are inevitably
varied.
Finally, while the estimated rate
of illiteracy among men is over 80
per cent, among women it is over 90
per cent. There is an urgent need
for something specific that will appeal
to parents and especially to mothers
and housewives so that they may be
induced to continue reading after they
have become literate. It would be
unthinkable to set about promoting
development and change without
taking account of women, who have
such a significant role to play.
From these few facts and figures
we can fairly describe our country as a
nation of illiterates. And so the
problem is how to teach reading
and writing meaningfully and, at the
same time, prepare the required
follow-up reading materials.
In attempting to find at least a par¬
tial solution to this problem we
turned to materials which originated
from adults themselves, influenced
by ideas and reactions against the
"banking" concept of education in
which, in the words of the Brazilian
educator and sociologist, Paulo
Freiré, "the scope of action allowed
to students extends only as far as
receiving, filing and storing the
deposits."
We imagined that such raw mat¬
erials as traditional stories could
provide a base upon which follow-up
reading materials could be produced
through the participation and invol¬
vement of adults. Such materials
are likely to appeal to them more
than those produced outside the
country. So we chose Tanzanian tra¬
ditional stories and selected a tenta
tive system consisting of seven easy
and distinct steps.
First, we located tribal elders who
had earned a reputation as story¬
tellers and who were willing to share
those stories with somebody from
outside, their tribal grouping.
Then we visited and made friends
with them individually. In the com¬
munities we visited, story-tellers were
accorded the respect that is due to
teachers. We introduced ourselves
as young teachers who were keen
to learn from older teachers and we
were made to feel most welcome.
Thirdly, we exchanged views on the
significance of traditional stories and
the importance of having them
recorded permanently. A date was
set during which story-tellers from
around the village would be invited to
contribute and participate in a semi¬
nar-workshop on the production of
reading materials.
When they came we were faced
with the problem of creating an
atmosphere that was conducive to
story-telling. The elders themselves
dictated these conditions.
They decided when they would
work, when they would go for a
walk, when they would eat, in short
the general conduct of the seminar-
workshop that would produce reading
materials from their stories. The
chairman, whom they themselves
elected, spoke both their own lan¬
guage and Kiswahili fluently.
In the fifth phase, before taping the
stories, we again discussed the im¬
portance of having stories and other
traditional materials recorded. Em¬
phasis was put on the fact that we
do not have sufficient reading mat¬
erials and that elders were in a position
to provide us with such materials.
It was also stressed that the materials
contained values which would soon
disappear if we did not write them
down while the teachers were alive.
Then there was a rehearsal before
the actual taping. This was meant
to enable the elders to recall the
stories and be as fluent as possible.
In the seventh and final phase the
stories were recorded. When one
elder completed a story, it was played
back immediately, first, to give an
opportunity for correction, and also to
amuse all participants, who enjoyed
hearing their own voices from the
tape recorder.
But before the tapes were stored,
the stories had to be translated into
KiswahiliTanzania's national lan¬
guage then printed. Here
the chairman of the seminar-work¬
shop also had a crucial role. Every,
sentence was examined until the
chairman was satisfied that its equi¬
valent in Kiswahili had been found.
It was only after checking against
the original statements from the tape
recorder that sentences were trans¬
cribed into Kiswahili. The process
of checking and counter-checking
went on until a whole story had its
24

^- ' '
equivalent in Kiswahili.
Next, manuscripts were turned into
the first (rough) typed draft of a book¬
let. This consisted of typing the
manuscripts into the shape, size and
pages that the completed booklet
would have.
Then, the first typescript was sten¬
cilled, and the stencils were number¬
ed and duplicated according to the
number of booklets required. In this
way the adults' own reading materials
were born ! Could this be an ins¬
tance in which the participants had
"said their own words and named
the world" as Paulo Freiré has put it,
thereby making a tiny but significant
move away from the "culture of
silence ?"
The problems we ran into in collect¬
ing and printing these materials in¬
cluded travelling long distances some¬
times in order to get to know only
bne elder in an entire village who was
reputed as a story-teller and who was
willing to recount one or more stories
he had remembered for so long.
On several occasions it was not
easy to convince elders to leave their
homes in order to be involved in a
seminar or workshop.
Despite the excellent work done by
the chairmen of these seminar-work¬
shops and the fact that they could
speak fluently both the languages of
their fellow-participants and Kis¬
wahili, it was not always easy to find
exact translations of the original
texts. We were more concerned
with the general meanings of sen¬
tences and phrases than with indivi¬
dual words.
The . elders agreed to give away
their "copyright" on these stories for
the sake of producing relevant and
readable materials and of recording in
print a part of our culture which is in
danger of vanishing as tribal elders
pass on. This is a problem that calls
for urgent action.
The problems we encountered are
nothing at all compared to the satis¬
faction we derived from seeing,
holding and reading booklets that had
been produced by our adults.
Transforming the texts into books
is a minor problem, compared to the
major ones of gathering the materials
and recording them permanently in
typescript, manuscript or even tapes.
Nevertheless, in stencilled form,
the stories may not be attractive to
adults who are used to reading pri¬
mers with larger print. Then, of
course, there is the question of illus¬
trations; our adults prefer books with
pictures to those without them.
Nevertheless, the question of pub¬
lishing books out of the typescripts
should be considered secondary to
the problem of securing the raw mate¬
rials. We have already prepared
five booklets with a total ' of 28
stories and 59 proverbs. Already we
have distributed over 500 copies
within the Mwanza region of Tanzania
alone and we have standing orders
for over 1,500 copies of the type¬
scripts. So even in typescript form
the materials can be very popular.
If we send the typescripts to pri¬
vate publishing firms we run the risk
of defeating our purpose. Whereas
we are interested in preparing the
materials as abundantly and as
cheaply as possible, private publishers
are interested in maximizing profit.
And so, when sufficient typescripts
have been secured, we suggest they
be handled by non-profit-making
national institutions.
The stories produced so far are
brief and appeal to people who are
not used to reading long texts. They
have been written in Kiswahili, a
language most adult Tanzanians un¬
derstand even if they cannot speak
it fluently. Through this language
a reader interested in finding out
something about the culture of
Wanyamwezi or Wasukuma can do
so by reading these stories even
though he cannot speak Kinyamwezi
or Kisukuma. The stories have hu¬
mour which can be appreciated by all
those who are familiar with the cul¬
ture of Tanzania.
Thus far we have discussed the
production of these reading materials
as a solution to the problem: "After



literacy, what next?" But gathering
and printing traditional stories is more
than a mere exercise in procuring
reading materials.
Such materials incorporate the type
of education that our forefathers
practised. They embody learning
and teaching situations which may
help us to find better ways of serving
CONTINUED PAGE 27
25

We publish on this double page two traditional
Tanzanian stories told by village elders (left)
during a "seminar-workshop". Here, the
story-tellers are rehearsing their tales before
putting them on tape. These and other folk-tales
of Tanzania, hitherto transmitted orally,
have now been written down and are used
as reading materials for the newly literate.
Photo © Simoni Malya, Dar es Salaam
How
the Hippo
lost
his hair
Drawing C M. P Papapietro, from
Contes du Zaire (Tales of Zaire) published
by the Conseil International de la
Langue Française. Pans 1976.
LONG ago the Hippo used to live on land and not in rivers and lakes
like he does today. He used to be a beautiful animal with long,
» soft hair.
Other animals wished they could have hair as beautiful as the Hippo's.
One animal that particularly envied the Hippo was the Giraffe. The
Giraffe played a trick which made the Hippo lose all his beautiful hair and
become perhaps the most ugly-looking animal known.
This is what happened. The weather became bitterly cold. Every
animal was shivering. The Hippo was shivering like the other animals
but because he was so huge he appeared to be shivering more than any
of them.
The Giraffe was shivering too but when he saw the Hippo he pretended
that he was not feeling the cold. He cunningly approached the Hippo
and said, "I can see you are shivering badly. What's the matter? Why
has this change in the weather affected you more adversely than anyone
else?"
"I really don't know why I should shiver so much," replied the Hippo
innocently. "In the last few days I thought I was going to die."
The Giraffe pretended to be thinking hard about how to help the
Hippo. He meditated for a while and then said, "Well, you've got long
hair which should be able to protect you from either excessive heat or
excessive cold. But your hair doesn't seem to be of much use in this
kind of weather. Was this so in the past or is this an unusual occu¬
rence?" The Giraffe spoke like a sympathiser who is willing to help but
has to diagnose the situation before prescribing a cure.
"I must say that I have gone through all sorts of weather but this cold
spell perplexes me completely," answered the Hippo in a self-pitying tone.
Not far from where the Hippo and the Giraffe were talking there was a
crater. In this crater there was a spring that produced boiling water.
So hot was the water that nobody used it except for medicinal purposes.
Certainly it did not do for bathing.
The Giraffe was aware that if one bathed in the pool in which this
water collected, one would be burnt to death. "I have an idea", said
the Giraffe after a pause. "Yours is a rather extraordinary case and I
suppose it calls for an extraordinary treatment. There is a pond in the
crater which has warm water." (The Giraffe knew that the water was
more than just warm. It was as hot as hot could be.) "Why don't you
go and dip yourself in that pool?" suggested the Giraffe with malice.
"That sounds like a bright idea. But for how long shall I have to stay
in the pool? There are other things to do besides bathing in a pool, you
know", commented the Hippo ironically.
"Perhaps you will have to stay in the pool until you feel all right again.
At any rate, you cannot go on shivering like this indefinitely."
The Hippo grinned and shivered again, this time most disturbingly.
"Besides, rumour has it that the water in the pool has curing effects in
case one has been bewitched or poisoned," added the Giraffe.
Apparently the Hippo was convinced. "Let me try," he said, and
moved towards the crater. As he was about to descend the walls of the
crater he wondered what would happen. When he reached the pool he
hesitated. He stood on the verge of the pool and took out a little water
to find out just how warm it was. It did not appear to be too warm.
Certainly it was far from being hot. Without further investigation or
thought, the Hippo plunged into the pool.
Alas! His face and the rest of the body were badly burnt. His skin
blistered. Somehow he managed to close his eyes and get out of the
pool, screaming. Later the skin and the hair on it peeled off leaving the
Hippo a hairless animal.
Even though he was eventually cured, the Hippo is remarkably devoid
of hair. As a result of the burns, his face became distorted, rendering
him a really ugly-looking creature. The Giraffe, having watched what
had happened, walked away quietly amused.
To this day, whenever the Hippo remembers this incident, especially
how hot it became when he was in the pool, he rushes into a cool river
or a lake. Many times he comes ashore to look for food. But if ever
there is an animal he does not wish to set his eyes on, it is the Giraffe.
26

Why
the Ostrich
sticks
its
neck out
Drawing © Ibou Diouf, from Ethiopiques, Dakar
WHY is it that the Ostrich has such a long neck?
Long ago the Ostrich had an ordinary neck that was propor¬
tionate to the size of the rest of its body. The Ostrich made
friends with the Crocodile. Animals and birds that knew the behaviour
of Crocodiles approached the Ostrich and advised it not have anything
to do with the Crocodile. "A Crocodile is so unpredictable and unre¬
liable," commented an elderly animal.
The trouble with Ostriches is that even though they have voluminous
bodies, they have extremely tiny heads in which there are equally tiny
brains. This Ostrich would not listen to the advice of the rest of the
animals for, like other Ostriches, it was foolish.
The Ostrich, having ignored the advice of other animals, went to a lake
to drink. There it met its friend, the Crocodile, who had been looking
for food in vain and was very hungry. "Come closer, my friend", said the
Crocodile enticingly. "I am in serious trouble and I think that you
could help me out if only you would."
"What's the trouble?" asked the Ostrich sympathetically as it raised its
small head. "Maybe I can help you."
"One of my teeth is aching badly. I can hardly chew anything", com¬
plained the Crocodile.
"What do you want me to do then?" enquired the foolish Ostrich.
"I shall open my mouth widely", said the Crocodile, "and ask you to
put your head in it so that you may have a close look and tell me exactly
what is wrong with the tooth at the end of my left jaw."
"All right," agreed the unsuspecting Ostrich. As soon as the Ostrich
inserted its small head in the mouth, the Crocodile shut it and tried to
pull the Ostrich into the lake. Even though it was foolish, this Ostrich
was young and strong. In the effort to save its head, the Ostrich almost
pulled the Crocodile out of the lake.
The more they pulled in opposite directions, the more the Ostrich's
neck lengthened and the more the Crocodile came ashore. The Croco¬
dile gave up in the end and let go of the head. The result of this tug-of-
war was such that the Ostrich's neck had become many times Ipnger
than its original length. . On being released, the Ostrich ran fast to safety.
Up until this day the Ostrich is one of the fastest birds that walk
instead of flying. Its neck is unusually devoid of feathers and it is also
particularly long. The Ostrich prefers to keep away from rivers and lakes
for fear that it may find the Crocodile there.
>our adults. By collecting and print¬
ing the materials we are, in fact,
perpetuating adult education as it was
known by our forebears.
More research should be carried
out to find out how traditional educa¬
tion can be used to make today's
education more effective. The prac¬
tice of telling stories is dying out and
such innovations as radio are taking
its place. When the elders who
preserved such oral materials die, our
unwritten culture dies with them.
In this experimental programme,
then, we handled only traditional sto¬
ries. But many other aspects could
be treated, such as historical back¬
grounds (as remembered by elders);
outstanding personalities; songs;
maxims; riddles; poems; birth;
marriage and death ceremonies; and
proverbs.
The list of possibilities is long and
exciting. The United Republic of
Tanzania has more than 120 tribal
groupings, each with its own way
of life. Suppose only stories were
worked on and that about 30 of them
were gathered, and printed from each
tribal grouping. This would produce
3,600 stories for our adult readers.
Similar treatment of poems, proverbs,
etc., would provide a tremendous
amount of reading material bearing
the stamp of Tanzanian culture.
The United Republic of Tanzania is
a young nation, only 13 years old.
Before it attained political indepen¬
dence it was made up of many diffe¬
rent tribes and one of the tasks facing
us is to shape the former tribal group¬
ings into a united nation.
Fortunately, there already exists a
powerful unifying factor, namely the
Kiswahili language. Another great
force for unity is the traditional cul¬
ture in which Tanzania is so rich.
It is thus essential that we should
gather and print in Kiswahili all our
oral traditions so that they become
available to Tanzanians and to the
world at large.
Simoni Malya
27
