How Arabic became
the international
language of science
by Salah Galal
CLASSICAL Arabic science was a
vast and complex enterprise that
was effectively launched by the
early Abbasid caliphs at Baghdad shortly
after 750 A.D. For at least 600 years
thereafter it maintained a vigorous existen¬
ce, gradually spreading over a geographi¬
cal area that extended from Andalusia to
the lands beyond the Amu Darya River in
Central Asia.
Arabic rapidly became an international
language of science to, a greater extent
than any other language had ever been.
SALAH GALAL, science editor of the Egyptian daily
AI Ahram since 1959, is also editor of the Arabic
edition of the World Health Organization's monthly
World Health. The author or translator of many
scientific publications, he is correspondent of the
weekly science journal Nature.
Until the caliphs organized the translation
into Arabic of ancient Greek and Syriac
scientific texts, Arabic had been the lan¬
guage of poetry, of the Quran, and of the
recently developed disciplines concerned
with Islamic religion and with the Arabic
language itself.
By the 11th century the great scientist
Al-Biruni was describing Arabic as the
language most suited for scientific expres¬
sion. But he was speaking after the
event. The ninth-century decision to turn
Arabic into a vehicle for scientific tradition
that had previously been alien to it was an
act of great originality and imagination.
Islamic achievements in optics were
solidly based on the foundations laid by
the ancient Greeks. Ptolemy's treatise on
optics was translated into Arabic early on,
and a Latin version was made from Arabic
in Sicily in the 12th century. The treatise
now survives only in the Latin version,
both the Greek original and the Arabic
translation having been lost.
Some Arabic authors, as a result of the
translation of their works into Latin,
became widely known under Latinized
names: Al-Razi as Rhazes, Ibn Sina as
Avicenna, Ibn Rushd as Averroes, and so
on. Their books were widely read and
frequently cited and quoted by writers in
the West.
In the 10th century, Ibn al-Haytham
formulated a theory of vision quite distinct
from any other that existed then or had
existed earlier. He was a mathematician,
Photo Roland Michaud © Rapho, Paris
46

£.*<- <.< i
r
l'Aj
"> J»
^ 7 7 ^
1 è f
p
i
74"^
r
i^ac ''t <*^r*
^ <j
-A* t^vA|^/^jr*»
HT
'>
Lt
H* ^ _>«
\l
"^
f ,?
-rUl
A
á
y
^HHI
^
Photo Roland Michaud © Rapho, Paris
Left, the great reservoir at Kairouan (which means
"encampment" in Arabic) in Tunisia, built in 862. A 48-sided
polygon (128 m. in diameter) it is the most impressive of a series
of hydraulic projects realized by the Emir Abu Ibrahim Ahmed of
the Aghlabid dynasty. Adjoining it is a smaller (17-sided)
polygonal reservoir with a diameter of 37 metres.
Above, map of Central Asia by the 10th-century geographer Ibn
Hawqal. The title, inscribed in Kufic script, reads "Picture of
what lies beyond the river" (the Amu Darya). In margin at right
are the words "the Maghrib" (where the sun sets). (See also
caption on page 9).
not a natural philosopher, but he combin¬
ed physical doctrines with mathematical
methods.
From natural philosophers Ibn al-Hay¬
tham derived the idea that vision occurs
when a "form" emanating from an object
enters the eye. As a mathematician, he
was impressed by the geometrical approach
taken in the works of Euclid and Ptolemy.
His own contribution can be characteriz¬
ed as an attempt to apply the geometrical
method to the physical doctrine of forms.
He tried to show how a form capable of
representing the visible features of an
object, whether large or small, can enter
through the pupil and make its way to the
brain, where the process of vision is
completed. To achieve the synthesis he
desired, Ibn al-Haytham was led to alter
important, sometimes essential, compo¬
nents of earlier theories. At the same time,
he formulated questions that had never
been conceived before.
Ibn al-Haytham's Optics is a large and
comprehensive work that includes, not
only a new theory of vision, but also
important discussions of the propagation,
reflection, and refraction of light and
colour. Its superiority to the treatises of
Euclid, Ptolemy, Al-Kindi, and Ibn Sina,
all of which were translated into Latin,
soon became clear to Latin medieval
writers. In the 13th century, Roger Bacon
frequently referred to Ibn al-Haytham as
"the author on optics".
Almost all branches of the healing arts
in Islam were indebted more to the indefat¬
igable efforts of Hunayn ibn Ishaq Al Ibadi
(809-873) and his team of translators than
to any other ninth-century author or
educator. Together with his students and
associates, Hunayn made the most impor¬
tant medical writings of the Greeks availa¬
ble in Arabic, and established a solid
foundation for the development of Arabic
medicine by devising a distinctive metho¬
dology, which was followed, modified,
and perfected during the following century.
The physician Ibn Butlan elaborated on
the six "non-natural principles" that had
been identified earlier by Hunayn: clean
air, moderate diet and drink, rest and
work, wakefulness and slumber, evacua¬
tion of superfluities, and emotional reac¬
tions and involvement.
If these six principles are kept in equili¬
brium, he maintained, health results; if
abused or imbalanced, sickness occurs.
Ibn Butlan also recommended the utiliza¬
tion of fine music to lift the morale of
patients and help speed their recovery.
The development of Arabic clinical
medicine and therapeutics reached its peak
in Andalusia, in the works of the physician-
statesman Ibn Wafid and in the medical
writing, teaching, and practice of Ibn
Zuhr (known in Latin as Avenzoar). In his
famous Book Facilitating the Study of
Therapy and Diet, he dealt with the
diagnosis and treatment of diseases,
describing, possibly for the first time in
medical history, certain chest abcesses and
pericardial diseases. He also emphasized
medical experimentation, as well as clinical
observation, treatment and pathology.
It was under the patronage of the Arab
caliphs that hospitals were first estab¬
lished and flourished in the Muslim world.
The early Arab concept of the hospital
became the prototype for the development
of the modern hospital an institution
operated by private owners or by govern¬
ment.
The great 10th-century philosopher and
physician Al-Razi considered hospitals of
primary importance in providing practical k
training in the medical profession and in Y
47

Hercules the celestial dancer
In his Book of Fixed Stars, the 10th-century astronomer As-Sufi followed the ancient
practice of representing the constellations by animal or human figures or objects. Above,
representation of the northern constellation Hercules is from a 13th-century manuscript
version of As-Sufi's work. According to tradition, Hercules is depicted as a dancer, but
although he is elsewhere shown as a youth with a scimitar, here he is bearded and
weaponless. This version of The Book of Fixed Stars, produced in the North African city
of Ceuta, is the only known western Islamic manuscript to mention its place of origin.
An eye on the heavens
The illustrations produced in 1237 by the artist Al-Wasiti for Al-Hariri's classic tales known
as the Maqamat are an outstanding example of medieval Arabic art. (See also pages 6
and 25). These miniatures and their surrounding text, which describes the adventures
of a witty and resourceful figure named Abu Zaid, are today preserved in the Bibliothèque
Nationale, in Paris. Below, a scene with a scientific flavour: Abu Zaid measures the
height of the celestial bodies with an astrolabe.
> disseminating health information. The
Adudi hospital in Baghdad was a striking
example of an institution which performed
such a role. It had 24 doctors on its staff
and was equipped with lecture halls and
an ample library. In the late 10th century,
its fame spread far and wide.
Among Arabic authors who wrote on
ophthalmology and eye diseases, a branch
of medicine that received special attention
in the Muslim world, Hunayn ibn Ishaq
was perhaps the first to write a systematic
manual on ophthalmology, complete with
diagrams. His work was developed by ,
later authors and has survived until today.
In ten treatises written between 840 and
860 and completed by his student and
nephew, Hubaysh, Hunayn discussed the
anatomy of the eye, brain, and optical
nerves, as well as the physiology, diseases,
and treatment of the eye. Although he
copied extensively from Greek works, he
added many new, personal observations.
Al-Razi was possibly the first to describe
pupillary reflexes.
Arabic progress in ophthalmology reach¬
ed a peak around the year 1000 in the
work of Ali ibn Isa, an oculist of Baghdad.
His book A Treasury for Ophthalmologists
was a comprehensive summary of all the
achievements of the past. His contempo¬
rary Ammat ibn Ali Al-Mawsili was the first
to introduce the technique of suction
removal of cataracts. He devised and
used a hollow needle for the purpose, a
technique revived in 1846 by a French
doctor, Blanchet.
This high level of performance was
continued by Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen)
and in a guide for oculists written by
Muhammad al-Ghafiqi of Andalusia.
Al-Ghafiqi illustrated his manual with
pictures of the surgical instruments he
used in performing eye operations.
The physician-philosopher Ibn Rushd k
once stated that "whosoever becomes fully Y
Stalactite fantasy
in a royal chapel
The royal chapel built in Palermo around
1140 by Roger II, ruler of the Norman
kingdom of Sicily, is famed for its richly
painted wooden ceiling (detail at right)
with "stalactite" vaults arranged in a
honeycomb design. The paintings,
depicting scenes from princely life, were
executed by Muslim artists and constitute
the largest surviving ensemble of Muslim
painting. Specialists believe that they
were probably produced by artists
following Mesopotamian traditions and
influenced by the pictorial art of Fatimid
Egypt (11th century) or of Tunis.
Photo Michel Desjardins © Top Réalités, Paris
48


Y: f ¿}
%
^Z îtv l SÉX
è:
ÏCP
.r
P*
.g
\L
/? H
VvC*
>fl
\ * '
I A il^ jj^ja
'2$^jk&-
MSP,., *^n fV
IfV;
^
è£~U&' £S*
¿
'.*. ' le.**
-*M1vx
HÏÏL
È.^7
Al
*
nu* í$¡i
^^^
** 1*1
È
7
^
«à* LH| .-<?*--
¿$
feu
ffi
*V -i^'i- r¿3
¡tfi
tir A

Anatomy of a thoroughbred
Knowledge of the animal world was highly valued in Islamic civilization, for
animals, along with plants and minerals, were regarded as essential to the
cosmic equilibrium. Animals such as the horse were frequently depicted in
works of art and literature, and were also studied scientifically. This
anatomical study is from a 15th-century Egyptian manuscript now
preserved in the university of Istambul.
Photo Roland Michaud © Rapho, Paris. University of Istambul Library, Turkey
( familiar with human anatomy and physio¬
logy, his faith in God will increase". This
statement explains why surgery was
accepted by the Arabs from the early days
of Islam (1). It also explains why Muslim
surgeons were among the first to use
narcotic and sedative drugs in operations:
Islam teaches that God has provided man
with a great variety of natural remedies to
cure his ills. It is man's obligation to
identify them and to use them with skill
and compassion.
The greatest achievements in medieval
surgery, however, are attributed to Az-
Zahrawi of Moorish Spain. An important
part of his medical encyclopaedia, The
Book of Concessions, deals with obstetrics,
paediatrics, and midwifery, as well as with
general human anatomy. The surgical
part of the encyclopaedia contains a
discussion of cauterization, the treatment
of wounds, the extracting of arrows, oral
hygiene, and the setting of bones in simple
and compound fractures.
He used antiseptics in the treatment of
wounds and skin injuries; devised sutures
from animal intestines, silk, wool, and
other substances; and developed tech¬
niques to widen urinary passages and ex¬
plore body cavities surgically. His surgery
contained about 200 surgical instruments
that he himself designed and depicted in
his writings. Such instruments, with
modifications, were later used by many
surgeons in Christendom as well as in
Islam.
Donkey-driven
irrigator
Most Arab countries are arid,
and water management has
always been a major concern in
Arab civilization. One problem
faced by Arab engineers was
how to raise water from
streams and canals for irrigation
or domestic use. In his
celebrated Treatise on
Mechanical Devices; the great
13th-century inventor Al-Jazari
described in detail the
construction of an array of
mechanical devices, including
water-raising machines such
as the donkey-powered irrigation
system shown at right. The
donkey turns an upright pole
connected to a series of toothed
wheels. The wheels are linked
to four water scoops (here
submerged), which rise in
succession and empty their
contents into a canal.
(1) Editor's note: in some parts of the Western world,
the dissection of human bodies was prohibited for reli¬
gious reasons.
Herbs for healing
A Book of Antidotes attributed
to the Greek physician Galen
was translated into Arabic and
widely used in medicine. Detail
at right is from an illuminated
manuscript version produced
in 1199, probably in Iraq. It
shows two medicinal herbs
used for treating poisonous
bites. The name of each herb is
annotated in Arabic.
:>'-,1 :KP
New theories of vision
Ophthalmology was a branch of medicine
which received special attention
throughout the Islamic world. Scientists
such as Ali ibn Isa, author of a famous
Arabic Treasury for Ophthalmologists,
added new theories and experience to
the knowledge they inherited from the
Greeks. Left, diagram showing the
interconnection of the optic nerves is from
a treatise on ophthalmology in the
Egyptian National Library, Cairo.
51

, Az-Zahrawi's discussion of mother and
child health and the profession of midwifery
is of particular interest in the history of
nursing. His text imples the existence of
a flourishing profession of nurses and
midwives in general practice, which
explains the reluctance of many conserva¬
tive Muslim families to seek the assistance
of male doctors in normal childbirth. Skilled '
physicians and obstetricians such as Az-
Zahrawi instructed and trained midwives
so that they could carry out their duties
with competence.
Pharmacy, as a recognized profession,
is an Arab-Islamic institution. It became
an independent scienceseparate from,
yet co-operating with medicine, and it
was practised by skilled and trained spe¬
cialists. It achieved this status around the
year 800, under the patronage of the
Abbasid caliphs. The first privately owned
and managed pharmacies were opened in
the early 9th century in Baghdad, the
Abbasid capitl, where drugs and spices
from Asia and Africa were readily available.
Within a short time, pharmacies sprang
up in other large cities of the Islamic
world.
In Arab mechanical technology two main
categories of machines were produced:
firstly those designed for use, such as
mills, water-raising devices, and war
machines; and secondly, devices designed
to cause wonder and aesthetic pleasure
within courtly circles.
The inventors of ingenious devices, or
"automata", such as Ibn al-Razzaz al-
Jazari, also designed useful machines.
They were thoroughly familiar with the
work of carpenters and millwrights, from
whom they derived much of their vocabu¬
lary and many of their techniques, tools
and mechanisms.
The most impressive array of automata
were displayed in Al-Jazari's monumental
clocks. Circles representing the Zodiac,
the sun, and the moon rotated at constant
speed; birds discharged pellets from their
beaks onto cymbals to sound the hour; .
doors opened to reveal small figurines. At
regular intervals musicians such as drunv
mers, trumpeters and tambourine players
performed on their instruments.
These automata were usually actuated
by a float sinking at a constant rate in a
water reservoir. Their mechanism involv¬
ed the use of complex hydraulic systems
which later reappeared in Europe during
the Industrial Revolution, and incorporated
a type of conical valve which was first
mentioned in the West by Leonardo da
Vinci and which came into general use in
Europe during the 16th century. A great
deal of research still remains to be done
before the sources of Leonardo's ideas
can be fully established, but it seems
likely that he had access to some of the
translations from Arabic made in Toledo
in the 12th century.
Arab technology was essentially based
upon the use of the effects of water pres¬
sure and air pressure. Most of the mathe¬
matical relationships that underlie these
physical phenomena had not then been
identified, and so engineers had to draw
upon a large fund of practical experience.
Two types of mill have been known
since classical times, one with a vertical
waterwheel that drives the millstones
through a pair of gear wheels, the other
with a horizontal-vaned water-wheel with
direct drive to the millstones. It has been
computed that the second type could
reach an output of 10 horsepower with an
efficiency of 75 per cent. From the ac¬
counts of geographers and travellers, we
know that both types of mill were widely
used in the Islamic lands for grinding grain
and for industrial purposes.
The five full-scale machines described
by Al-Jazari were all designed to raise
water, and four of them incorporate
features that are of great significance in
the history of machine technology.
There is ample evidence that knowledge
of Arabic science, medicine, mathematics,
and philosophy was transmitted to Europe
in written form, but very little evidence
that engineering ideas were disseminated
in this way. Technological ideas have
frequently been carried from one culture
to another by travellers' reports, by the
observations of commercial agents, and
by direct contacts between craftsmen.
Until modern times, such cross-fertiliza¬
tion was probably more frequent and
more fruitful than written communications.
Arabic culture, including its contributions
to the life sciences, reached its highest
stage of development between the 9th
and the 11th centuries, and experienced
a number of major revivals during the 12th
and 13th centuries. During this period the
West was just beginning to awaken from
the Dark Ages.
From the 12th century to the Renais¬
sance, via translation and copying activities
in Spain, Sicily, and Syria, the bulk of
Arabic writings in all fields was made
available in Latin. Despite the poor quality
of translation and scholarship that prevail¬
ed in the West at that time, these Latin
versions revived the spirit of learning in
Western Europe during the late Middle
Ages.
In the life sciences, Arabic authors not
only preserved the classical achievements
of the ancients but also added new and
original data. to the fund of human know¬
ledge, thereby contributing to the well-
being of all men everywhere.
Salah Galal

