VAN LEEUWENHOEK
FATHER OF MICROBIOLOGY
by J. W.M. La Rivière
Some 300 years ago in the 1670s
a vast new world was uncovered
by the ingenuity and perseverance
of a self-made scholar living in the city of
Delft, the Netherlands. The scholar's
name was Antonie van Leeuwenhoek.
He did not sail uncharted oceans, nor
did he cross inhospitable mountains and
deserts. He made his discoveries quietly
at home looking at a candle, armed with a
tiny hand-microscope.
The candle served as a light source for
the illumination of a great variety of objects
ranging from a drop of blood to the wing
of a butterfly. These he studied with his
home-made instrument about the size of a
matchbox, which nevertheless gave a
JAN WILLEM MAURITS LA RIVIERE is professor
of environmental microbiology at the International
Institute for Hydraulic and Environmental Engineering,
Délit, the Netherlands. He is chairman of the Inter¬
national Cell Research Organization (ICRO), of the
International Commission on Microbial Ecology and of
the natural sciences subcommission of the Netherlands
National Commission for Unesco.
magnification of some 270 times with a
single lens.
Having started his career as a draper,
van Leeuwenhoek had been counting the
threads of his wares with a magnifying
glass. Gradually he became so fascinated
by microscopy that he devoted more and
more time to perfecting his lenses arid
bringing them to bear on everything he
could put his hands on.
Thus he turned from a small business¬
man into one of the world's great natura¬
lists, earning what money he needed
through several jobs in the service of the
town of Delft.
He recorded his observations in great
detail and with passionate objectivity in
his famous letters to the Royal Society in
London; the Society eventually elected
him a Fellow in 1680.
His collected letters are now being
published by the Royal Academy of Scien¬
ces of the Netherlands in Doth Dutch and
English, illustrated with his drawings, and
Portrait of Antonie
van Leeuwenhoek
(1632-1723)
by J. Verkolje
annotated in the light of present know¬
ledge. More than 20 thick volumes are
foreseen.
Even today his reports are a delight to
read. On the one hand he leaned over
backwards to remain factual and to refrain
from unwarranted interpretations and
speculations, providing ingenious quanti¬
tative measurements wherever he could.
On the other hand he could not always
restrain himself, a human being possessed
as he was by the elation engendered by
marvels freshly discovered.
On such occasions he let himself go,
giving vent to his excitement, an ex¬
citement easily shared by biologists peer¬
ing through their microscopes today.
Describing, for instance, his observations
on what we now call bacteria in infusions
of pepper in water, he wrote (1676) .
"In the afternoon of the same day, about
3 o'clock, I saw still more animalcules, both
round ones and those that were twice as
long as broad, and besides these, a sort
34

which were still smaller, and incredibly
many of the very little animalcules whose
shape I could not make out this morning.
I now saw very distinctly that these were
little eels or worms..., lying huddled toge¬
ther and wriggling, just as if you saw with
your naked eye a whole tubful of very little
eels and water, the eels moving about in
swarms; and the whole water, seemed to
be alive with the multitudinous animalcules.
"For me this was among all the marvels
that I have discovered in nature the most
marvellous of all, and I must say that, for
my part, no more pleasant sight has yet
met my eye than this of so many thousands
of living creatures in one small drop of
water, all huddling and moving, but each
creature having its own motion. And even
if I said that there were a hundred thousand
animalcules in one drop of water which I
took from the surface of the water, I
should not err."
And in his letter (1693) on the anatomy
of the flea he recorded the following excla¬
mation of his draughtsman: "Dear God,
what marvels there are in so small a
creature." 	-
Because he also observed and described
many other kinds of microbes such as
algae, protozoa and yeasts, van Leeuwen¬
hoek became perhaps best known as the
Father of Microbiology. Nevertheless we
should not forget that he made many more
pioneering discoveries in other branches
of biology as well, including:
the spermatozoids of man (1677); the
circulation of the blood in arteries; the
structure of hair, teeth and bone; the
components of blood, milk and sputum; I
the structure of wood and many other
plant tissues;
the anatomy of insects, worms and
many other animals.
Through his work in botany, anatomy,
histology, entomology, physiology, as
well as that in microbiology, van Leeuwen- |
hoek became a universal forerunner in the |
life sciences, a field of intensive activity ^
for Unesco too, in which the Organization |
closely collaborates with the International |
Cell Research Organization (ICRO), found- ^
ed exactly 15 years ago.
A major segment of this programme is
carried out jointly with the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) and is
directed towards the application of micro¬
biology to the basic human needs in the
developing countries, especially rural areas.
Most microbes less than one-tenth of k
a percent of them can cause disease are Y
PIONEER EXPLORATION
OF THE MICROBE WORLD
Above, a brass microscope, one of 500
made and used by Antonie van
Leeuwenhoek between 1673 and 1723 in
his pioneering studies of microbes. The
tiny lens was mounted between two metal
plates (approx. 40 mm by 18 mm) riveted
together. Objects to be viewed were
mounted on a needle and brought into
focus by adjusting the screw which moved
On
II
!»
5 -o
<sfá: G
the specimen in front of the lens.
15 April 1977 a replica of a van
' Leeuwenhoek microscope was presented
to Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow, Director-
General of Unesco by the Netherlands
National Commission for Unesco in
recognition of Unesco's activities in the
life sciences. Below left, van
Leeuwenhoek's drawings of bacteria
from the human mouth. Fig. A is a
drawing "of a motile Bacillus. Below right,
cell of a motile Bacillus seen through a
powerful modern electron microscope.
In a famous letter to the Royal Society In
London, written In 1683, van Leeuwenhoek
vividly described the above bacteria and their
movements: A, he wrote "had a strong and
nimble motion and shot through the water like
a pike"; B "often spin about like a top and
sometimes took a course as shown between C
and D "; E "went ahead so nimbly. . . that I can
compare them to nothing better than a swarm
of gnats or files"; F were "streaks or threads...
which lay disorderly ravelled together"; and
G "bent themselves in curves as they moved. "
35

beneficial and eminently suited to serve as
tools in the production of food, fodder;
fuel and fertilizer, in the recycling of waste
materials and in the production of chemi¬
cals like antibiotics (see Unesco Courier,
July 1975). These are the areas on which
the UNEP-Unesco-ICRO programme of
applied microbiology concentrates its
activities.
But there is one more good reason why
Unesco should join in the celebrations of
the tercentenary of van Leeuwenhoek's
discoveries. At a time when Europe was
seething with conflict, van Leeuwenhoek
quietly conducted his correspondence
with the Royal Society in London across
the barriers of the war between England
and the Netherlands (1672-1674).
This is spelled out in the letter through
which Reinier de Graaf, an anatomist from
Delft, introduced van Leeuwenhoek to the
Royal Society in 1673: "That it may be the
more evident to you that the humanities
and science are not yet banished from
among us by the clash of arms, I am writ¬
ing to tell you that a certain most ingenious
person here, named Leeuwenhoeck, has
devised microscopes which far surpass
those which we have hitherto seen... The
enclosed letter from him, wherein he des¬
cribes certain things which he has observed
more accurately than previous authors,
will afford you a sample of his work...."
The letters in which van Leeuwenhoek
communicated his discoveries to the Royal
Society 300 years ago manifest the univer¬
sality and pervasiveness of scientific en¬
deavour among the nations of the world,
spiritual foundations upon which Unesco
also depends.
J.W.M. La Rivière

