THE
EDUCATIONAL
IMPERATIVE
A
NY fundamental reform of edu¬
cation is first and foremost a
structural reform.
The idea of universal education
was slow in taking shape. For a
long time access to education was
restricted to the few.
Now, as a result of increasingly
rapid changes during the last few
decades, it is clear that education is
both a factor of development and
progress and a fundamental human
right.
But broader access to education
is not enough if education is to be
truly democratic. Equality of oppor¬
tunities must also be achieved, and
this means that education must be
adapted to the needs and characteris¬
tics of different groups.
Whilst education is taking an in¬
creasing number of forms, the need
for an educational experience com-
22

By 1985, Asia, Africa and Latin America will need 12 million teachers (3 million more
than in 1977). It has always been and remains one of Unesco's major concerns to promote
education as a ladder to progress, especially in the developing countries. The teaching
provided for tomorrow's men and women must have international dimensions. Below,
infant class at the Malalaï school in Kabul (Afghanistan). Founded in 1921, the school now
has 3,000 pupils of all ages.
mon to all, and in any case for an
education of equal quality for all,
is essential to democracy.
Educational policies, once limited
to a few broad guidelines, now tend
to set their objectives firmly within
the framework of the social, econo¬
mic and cultural environment.
Unesco has played a major role
in this process. After an earlier pe¬
riod of scattered activities, it set out
to define the goals of educational
policy and planning more clearly, edu¬
cation being considered as an integral
part of social and economic deve¬
lopment. A special effort has
been made to emphasize the need
for formulating national educational
policies based on the principles of
self-reliance.
Priority for Unesco assistance will
be given to the least developed
countries and to those countries
which are preparing or carrying out
fundamental educational reforms,
aiming in particular at improving edu¬
cation for the socially and economi¬
cally underprivileged.
Concern for renewal of the content
and methods of education lies at the
heart of the universal desire to en¬
sure that education meets the re¬
quirements of our time.
But the preparation and applica¬
tion of content and methods are
hampered by certain specific diffi¬
culties. The most obvious of these
results from the transformation of
human knowledge caused by the
progress of science and technology.
Secondly, the tasks assigned to
education by a world undergoing
technical, social (and doubtless mo¬
ral) change are linked to the emer¬
gence of new goals, and in particular
to the search for a new world order,
embracing the economic, social and
cultural aspects of life.
Thirdly, those directly involved in
education expect its content and
methods to be less theoretical and
better adapted to the social environ¬
ment, and more deeply rooted in na¬
tional languages or mother tongues.
More important still, they expect
education to be more closely related
to life and capable of helping chil¬
dren, young people and adults not
only to understand the world in
which they live or will live, but also
to transform it.
The content of school textbooks
must no longer reflect cultural and
ethnic values (or indeed cultural and
social conditions) other than those
of the country in which the pupil is
living, so as to facilitate learning
and the integration of individuals
with their family and with their so- k
cial environment. t
; ».
ë
.
Photo © Laurence Brun, Paris
23

Universal access to education is not
enough. Teaching programmes must be
adapted to local cultural traditions and
local social and economic conditions, and
should be deeply rooted in the national
language or the pupils' mother tongue.
Too many schools throughout the world
still have to contend with a crippling lack
of facilities lack of books, equipment
and teaching materials. Teacher and
pupils at this village school in Tanzania
(right) seem to be coping with such
difficulties, judging from their expressions
of rapt concentration. Far right, tiny oil
lamps brighten the autumn darkness in
India during Dewali, the festival of light.
> Generally speaking, Unesco will
endeavour to stimulate and guide
the activities undertaken in Member
States by identifying gaps to be filled
by international action, with particular
reference to the specific needs of
the developing countries.
In the vast majority of countries
there is still a considerable demand
for teachers, despite the efforts of the
last decade.
To provide universal primary educa¬
tion in 1985, the three regions of
Asia, Africa and Latin America would
require more than 12 million teachers
or 3 million more than in 1977.
Taking potential world require¬
ments as a whole, it is estimated
that more than 4 million primary
school teachers must be trained
between 1977 and 1982, the majo¬
rity for the least developed countries.
The problem is equally serious in
secondary education since, during the
same period, the annual average
rates of increase for teaching staff
should reach 3.9 per cent in Asia,
6.1 per cent in Latin America and
6.4 percent in Africa.
During the next few years, there¬
fore, the recruitment crisis, still acute
in many developing countries, may be
expected to persist or even to worsen
in those countries where population
growth and the rapid expansion of
enrolments in primary schools will
entail an increased demand for tea¬
chers at all levels.
In the majority of countries, insti¬
tutions of higher education have
been responsible for a cleavage both
between urban and rural populations
and between intellectual and manual
workers. Despite continuing attempts
to view society as a whole, these
divisions still persist even in the
most industrialized countries, and to
a much greater extent in countries
which imported models from the
former colonial powers. 61.2 per
cent of the total world population
lives in rural areas, and in several
developing countries this figure
exceeds 75 per cent.
The way to integrated rural deve¬
lopment will be much easier if higher
education is made accessible to rural
populations.
Higher education can no longer be
geared exclusively to the needs of a
specific age group. It must widen
its scope to include the community
as a whole. Democratization is thus
essential if the contribution of higher
education to social progress and
human development is to be streng¬
thened; it is also one of higher edu¬
cation's chief goals.
In this respect, the establishment in
1972 of the United Nations Univer¬
sity in Tokyo (Japan) constitutes an
important landmark. Its task is to
study the urgent problems concerning
the survival, development and welfare
of mankind from an interdisciplinary
standpoint.
Another feature of the current
transformations is the emergence of
educational systems which employ
the services of various kinds of spe¬
cialist teachers, such as part-time
teachers with practical experience in
production or management. This is
one of the trends in education's
growing responsiveness to society.
Secondly, the use of media such
24

as radio, television and other audio¬
visual systems makes it necessary
to call on technicians and even engi¬
neers who thus contribute their
skills to the work of education.
The training received by teachers
is reflected in the education they
provide, the effects of which extend
into the working life of their pupils.
The adults of the early 21st century
will have passed through the hands of
teachers trained in the next few years.
Unesco's work in this field has
three guiding principles:
to ensure that the training of edu¬
cational personnel plays a significant
role in educational innovation;
to promote the formulation of inte¬
grated policies and plans for the
continuous training of teachers of all
kinds;
to compare practical experience
acquired in teacher training in the
light of educational reforms in diffe¬
rent countries.
The growing demand for education
is coupled with the increasing length
of the educational process. There
can, however, be no question of
prolonging school or university edu¬
cation indefinitely. The concept of
life-long education implies that
adults at different times in their lives
and within the framework of their
various experiences, should make use
of all the opportunities offered to
them.
Unesco's activities in this respect
are threefold:
endeavouring to help Member
States to develop certain elements of
their educational systems, such as
literacy, adult education, etc.;
making a considerable contribution
to the elaboration of the concept of
life-long education;
thirdly, in recent years, Unesco
has begun to study certain specific
problems related to the reorganization
of educational systems.
There is at present a broad agree¬
ment of principle in the different
countries concerning the need to
promote and intensify adult education
using procedures suited to the diver
sity of situations. Adult education is
an integral part of educational sys¬
tems designed with life-long educa¬
tion in mind. By educating parents
and parents-to-be, it creates a fav¬
ourable environment for, and is
complementary to, the education of
their children.
Adult education, which is in
essence multidisciplinary, may be
regarded as a set of activities corres¬
ponding to' various objectives, of
which the most important are:
the intensification of the struggle
against illiteracy;
the improvement of professional
efficiency;
the understanding of the major
problems faced by the national and
international community;
the acquisition of practical know¬
ledge in areas such as health, nutri¬
tion, upbringing of children, and
consumer affairs.
From Unesco's Medium-Term Plan (1977-
1982), Chapter V: Educational Action
25
