The
reat Green Walls
of China
The following article presents the
main points of a study prepared
by the Laboratory for Deserts,
Glaciers and Tundra of the
Lanchow Academy of Sciences
(People's Republic of China). The
study will be presented to the
United Nations Conference on
Desertification that will be held in
Nairobi (Kenya) this year.
IN China, deserts cover an area totalling
1,095,000 square .kilometres or 11.4
per cent of the country's entire area.
The largest, Takla Makan, is in Sinkiang
province.
These deserts are, however, very differ¬
ent. Some, such as Takla Makan, are
comprised of shifting dunes 100 to 150
metres high. Others, with semi-stabilized
furrows, stretch out over vast expanses.
Some have sharply delineated sand hills
from 200 to 300 metres high with swampy
stretches between. One also finds deserts
of drifting sand and swampy, grass-filled,
areas. Others have sand hills that alternate
with eroded areas. A typical example of
this last type of desert is the Chaidamu
basin which, with altitudes between 2,600
and 3,400 metres, is the highest desert in
China. Lastly, there are regions whçre
shifting sands juxtapose semi-stabilized
dunes, swampy basins, and sometimes
even rivers.
To contain these deserts, a number of
methods have been used. In the areas
near oases, where sandstorms can wreak
havoc, the inhabitants plant forests around
the oases to hold back the sand. Then,
inside the oases, they plant rows of trees
around the fields and, on the edge of the
desert, they plant grass to hold down the
sand. Water resources are used to the
maximum to irrigate the fields, to evacuate
the sand and to create new farmland in
problem areas.
In deserts where the sand hills are semi-
or fully stabilized and in deserts of shifting
sand, the inhabitants are trying to make
use of stabilized dunes, certain grass-lands
and the more humid zones to turn the
desert into a steppe. At the same time,
trees, shrubs and grass are used to hold
down the shifting sand and a forest belt
is established to protect the land under
cultivation.
In the great desert regions, reservoirs
are built to catch water from flash floods,
and underground water is tapped. The
terrain is levelled, protective forests are
set up, land is cleared and new oases
created.
Here are a few examples of the tech¬
niques used. If the dunes are less than
ten metres high, a chain of extended
forest belts is set up at their base. To hold
down the sand between the belts of trees,
two things can be done: sand barriers,
within which plants are grown, are set up
and a layer of clay is added to thicken the
sand to increase its wind resistance. Wind
speeds then decrease by from 28 to 33 per
cent.
Expanses of flat land, shifting sand and
semi-stabilized dunes are found in the
vicinity of certain oases situated near the
edge of the desert. Protective forests of
tall trees and bushes are planted which
decrease the velocity of the wind at ground
level. When, for example, tamarisks are
planted and when wind speed is average,
the amount of wind-borne sand drops by
nearly 80 per cent.
To protect the oases plagued by sand¬
storms, notably in the Gobi desert, a num¬
ber of protective forest belts are planted
every 50 to 100 metres.
Another method consists in planting
rows of trees in channels. This was the
technique used at "Five Stars", a people's
commune in the Turpan desert in Sinkiang.
Five tree belts were created. First, five
channels measuring 1.5 metres in width
were dug at intervals of four to five metres.
Then shrubs and small trees were planted
the length of the first channel, which is
exposed to the wind. The next two chan¬
nels were planted with poplars and mul¬
berry trees. The last two each got a row
of poplars and elms. As the trees are of
varying heights, the tops form a staggered
surface, which makes it much more wind-
resistant. Such a surface can reduce wind
velocity by two-thirds.
At the same time, the oasis is divided
up into a grid-like pattern; groves of trees
are planted in squares around each field to
form a wind screen. The size of each
square in the grid varies according to the
force of the wind it is exposed to. The
effectiveness of these tree barriers is
directly proportional to their height. At a
height of ten metres, wind velocity de¬
creases on the average by 33.2 per cent
up to 300 metres from the barrier. For a
height of six metres, the decrease is 20.9
per cent up to 240 metres.
On the land where hydraulic resources
permit it, trees, bushes and grass are used
jointly to hold down the shifting sand.
One method, called "protection from the
front and retaining at the rear", applies to
crescent-shaped dunes and to chains of
dunes. Planting is done in the spaces
between the dunes, under the wind, to
prevent the sand from sliding forward.
This creates a grid-like pattern that sur¬
rounds the dunes. Other planting is done
in the lower third of the slopes exposed
to the wind, which holds the sand down,
reduces the wind's force and retains the
dune from the rear. It takes from four to
five years to complete this process.
Results are already forthcoming. A
thick forest barrier now crosses the western
part of the regions of Liaoning, Jilin and
Heilongjiang, covering an area more than
800 kilometres long and 500 kilometres
wide. It is the largest forest barrier in
China and protects 2,800,000 hectares of
land. What was once sand dunes whipped
by wind is now rich farmland producing
high yields.
In the southern part of the Mu Us desert,
in Shansi province, the people have already
set up forest barriers that cover more than
200,000 hectares. This has enabled them
to reclaim as many as 20,000 hectares
of arable land. To the north, over half the
grazing land was in the process of deser¬
tification and was covered with shifting
sand dunes. Since the revolution, 15,000
hectares of these shifting dunes were
reclaimed, 6,000 hectares of which were
32

Photo © China Press, Peking
In China, tremendous energy is
being expended in the fight against
desertification. Here, members of -
the commune of Wushenchow, in
Inner Mongolia, are planting a wind¬
screen of vegetation to hold down
the sand.
turned into grazing land. Livestock has
increased six-fold.
In Inner Mongolia, north of the Ulanbur
desert, a forest barrier more than 170 kilo¬
metres long was planted; this "Great
Green Wall" has stopped the encroach¬
ment of sand. More than 600,000 hecta¬
res of rich farmland have become available
for cultivation on the edges of two other
deserts, the Takla Makan and the Gur¬
bantünggüt. ' The southwestern part of
Gurbantünggüt was once a bleak and
barren desert. In the last fifteen years,
15,000 hectares of rich farmland have
been created, and the region has become
an oasis dotted with forests.
The Chinese people have expended
tremendous energy and ingenuity on these
projects; they have already succeeded in
accomplishing a great deal.

