Advancing deserts are a danger
that can also threaten
developed countries. In certain
regions of the United States,
desertification processes were
set in motion by man, that is,
by overgrazing and by
ploughing techniques
ill-adapted to fragile soils. In
these areas, droughts brought
on disastrous situations. One
of the most famous, that
struck the centre and south of
the country between 1934-1936,
created an exodus that was
immortalized in The Grapes of
Wrath. As this photo taken in
Texas in 1934 shows, erosion
and dust storms were such that
everything was half-buried in
the sand.



THE SANDS
OF WRATH
America's Dust Bowl
in retrospect
by Harold E. Dregne
14

OF all the lessons that have been
learned from desertification in the
United States, probably the most
significant is this: land productivity is easy
to destroy but difficult to restore.
Arid lands have fragile ecosystems with
low resilience after disturbance. Exploita¬
tion during a drought at the level accepta¬
ble during a wet spell can prove disastrous
to plants, soil and people. And overgraz¬
ing during good times weakens plants and
makes them more vulnerable when a
drought comes. Good land stewardship
must be practised continually.
This lack of resilience, this inability to
recover, in arid lands makes it essential
that signs of desertification be recognized
before it is too late. Now we can do this,
and so it is much easier to identify poten¬
tial problem areas while there is still time
to control them.
HAROLD ERNEST DREGNE, American soil special¬
ist, is an expert in arid zones, and particularly in plant-
water-soil relationships and the effects of salinity.
Chairman of the department of agronomy at Texas
Technological University since 1969, he was director
of the International Centre for Arid and Semi-aridLand
Studies in 1976. He is also the chairman of the Advi¬
sory Committee on Desertification of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science and edit¬
ed "Arid Lands in Transition".
In the United States, there have been
three instances of widespread desertifica¬
tion over the past century. The most
recent of all was wind erosion in the semi-
arid southern Great Plains during the long
drought of the 1930s. The situation was
worst of all in what came to be known as
the Dust Bowl.
The Dust Bowl covered parts of five
states: Colorado, Kansas, New Mexico,
Oklahoma and Texas. Wind erosion
damage was so great that a mass aban¬
donment of farms and an exodus of fami¬
lies resulted. This was the basis for John
Steinbeck's novel. The Grapes of Wrath,
which described the migration of the
"Okies" from Oklahoma to California.
Most of the scars of the Dust Bowl
have been healed during the intervening
years. However, the threat of a repetition
of the disaster is present again, now that
pressure is on to expand food production
into marginal areas to meet world needs.
The experience of the United States could
well be relevant elsewhere.
Dryland farming was introduced into
the western (and drier) Great Plains in the
late 1800s. Settlers had no previous expe¬
rience in coping with the vagaries of an
arid climate.
They often believed that the high rain¬
fall of the 1870s was either the normal
condition (despite the evidences of aridity
all around them) or that "rain followed
the plough", meaning that cultivation
induced increased rainfall. Yields during
the wet years encouraged an optimistic
view of the future.
But then the inevitable drought return¬
ed in the 1880s and a wholesale flight from-
the region occurred. A second major re¬
treat took place in the early 1920s, 12 years
before the Dust Bowl days began.
A stark picture of the Dust Bowl was
given in a report of the U.S. Soil Conser¬
vation Service set up in 1934. A year
later, a survey of the area was made and
Arthur H. Joel described what it found:
"The conditions around innumerable
farmsteads are pathetic. A common farm
scene is one with high drifts filling yards,
banked high against buildings, and partly
or wholly covering farm machinery, wood
piles, tanks and troughs.
"In the fields nearby may be seen the
stretches of hard, bare, unproductive sub¬
soil and sand drifts piled along fence rows,
across farm fields and around Russian
thistle and other plants. The effects of
the black blizzards are generally similar to k
15

( those of snow blizzards. The scenes are
dismal to the passerby; to the resident
they are demoralizing."
Black blizzards were the massive, dark
dust storms that blotted out the sun and
turned day into night. Livestock died
from starvation and from eating excessive
amounts of sand, a notable increase in
human illness was attributed to the dust-
laden air, machinery was ruined, cars
damaged and roads became impassable.
Erosion was so great that a dust pall
spread over the humid eastern United
States and out over the Atlantic Ocean
3,000 kilometres awayafter major wind
storms in the Great Plains.
Less than twenty years after the
terrible droughts of 1934-1936,
another hit the same regions of the
United States in 1952-1953. This
photo, taken in Texas in April 1953,
shows that damage was
considerable but soil conservation
measures taken after 1934 this time
prevented a major catastrophe.
The Soil Conservation Service report
prophesied what would happen if correc¬
tive steps were not taken before deserti¬
fication got out of hand. In a section on
adjustment measures, which meant return¬
ing cultivated land to grassland, it spoke
of personal sacrifices. Many people would
have to move away, some businesses
would fail, tax revenues would decrease
and there would be losses on land
investments.
Harsh though this adjustment would be
for some, delaying it would invite a more
complex and costly adjustment in the
future.
Despite predictions that much of the
land was ruined forever, crop yields gener¬
ally returned to normal when the rains
began again. Some areas, however, have
never recovered even though cultivation
ceased.
The second case of widespread deserti¬
fication in the United States began with
the settlement in earnest of the arid west
during the second half of the 19th centu¬
ry. A rapid increase in cattle and sheep
led to heavy grazing pressure on what
seemed to be endless grassland.
Within a few decades, undesirable
shrubs were replacing grass near watering
points where livestock were concentrated.
As overgrazing went on, much of the
remaining grassland went the same way.
By the beginning of the 20th century,
desertification had left its mark on virtually
all of the arid rangelands. Deterioration
of plant cover led to a speed-up of wind
and water erosion and the appearance of
man-made gullies and sand dunes.
Increases in shrub density, and shrub
expansion into grasslands following selec¬
tive grazing of grasses by livestock and
recurring drought, had their most marked
impact on the hot Southwest.
There, creosote bush (Larrea divaricata)
and mesquite (Prosopis spp.) were the
principal invaders. In the worst cases,
areas between the bushes have been
eroded by the wind down to hard, barren
subsoils and are referred to as "blow¬
outs".
Natural re-establishment of a grass
cover is very difficult under such circum¬
stances, even if further grazing is totally
excluded, simply because few plants and
seeds remain and much of the topsoil is
gone.
Awareness of the desertification problem
in desert grasslands became general in the
1910s and 1920s. Since then, research on
range management has developed tech¬
niques of rotational and deferred grazing,
reseeding, determining optimal stocking
rates, location of watering points, and
brush control that have, when properly
applied, improved livestock production.
However, progress has been slow,
especially in the hot desert regions. The
16

magnitude of the problem can be seen in
the lack of improvement of a creosote
bush-infested test plot in southern New
Mexico when little or no grazing was per¬
mitted. After 20 years, there was little
difference between the protected plot and
an adjoining unprotected one. Such re¬
sults point up the weakness of relying
upon total exclusion of livestock to bring
about rapid improvement of overgrazed
land.
The third instance of desertification is
associated with irrigation. Waterlogging
and salinization began to affect large areas
shortly after a rapid expansion of irrigation
began in the arid west at the end of the
19th century and in the first part of the
20th.
As a consequence of the lack of know¬
ledge of the hazards posed by irrigation,
salty and poorly drained soils were irri¬
gated because they occupied low-lying,
level areas that were easy to water. Water
tables rose when excessive irrigation water
was applied.
The most pervasive problem is the in¬
crease in soil salinity sometimes slowly,
sometimes more rapidly that threatens
many thousands of hectares of irrigated
land. The Imperial Valley of southern Cali¬
fornia is a case in point.
There, where over 250,000 hectares are
irrigated with water from the Colorado
River, increasing salinity of the river water
and difficulty in draining the fine-textured
soils has made it necessary to install ever
more costly drainage systems.
As more dams are built, evaporation
losses rise, and so does the salinity level.
Even the simple act of irrigating more land
serves to raise the salinity of the river in its
lower reaches, due to the reduced volume
of flow in the main channel and the great¬
er salinity of the drainage water when it
returns to the river.
The rise in the salinity level of the river
has aggravated the salt problem in the
Imperial Valley, and the problem will be¬
come steadily worse as more dams are
constructed and more water divertedfor
various purposes in the upper Colorado
River Basin.
As with overgrazing, salinization is a
greater problem in the hot deserts of the
West than in the cool deserts. Unlike
the grazing lands, there are no large areas
of irreversibly desertified salty lands at
present. However, the struggle to prevent
a disastrous buildup of salt in the soil is
never-ending where irrigation is practised.
With continued expansion of irrigation
from a limited number of rivers, water
potentially available tor any one hectare
declines at the same time that the need for
extra leaching water rises. The technol¬
ogy for controlling salinization is available;
it remains to be seen whether it will be
used effectively. Political decisions and
economics will decide.
H.E. Dregne
Imperial Valley in southern
California (below, an onion field in
flower) was reclaimed for farming
thanks to irrigation water from the
Colorado River. Excessive irrigation,
on the other hand, can raise the
salinity level, which harms crops and
which must in turn be combatted.
