Athenian
democracy's
grand design
by
Manolis Andronicos
THE Acropolis as it appears today is
essentially a product of the classical
age, even though the monuments
that have survived from its amazing his¬
tory range from vestiges of the Mycenean
period to the medieval tower at the south¬
west corner of the Parthenon.
The admiration for classical art, which
saw in its manifestations the archetype of
an ¡deal Beauty, disembodied and super¬
human in its calm detachment, helped to
distort the manner in which these works
were perceived. Our own age has reacted
against that attitude; with the discovery of
archaic, pre-classical art, the pendulum has
swung the other way.
Well-worn platitudes concerning the
harmony, beauty and serenity of classical
art are no longer enough, for we now know
that the art of any society is an expression
of the relationship between deep-seated
contradictions. It is consequently in
Athenian history itself that we must seek
an interpretation of the architectural elation
reflected in the buildings of the Acropolis.
An initial point to be emphasized is that
these buildingswhose celebrity is so well-
deservedwere only a part of the great
programme of public works initiated during
the period of Periclean democracy.
MANOLIS ANDRONICOS, professor of classical
archeology at the University of Thessalonika, is the
author of many studies on Greek archeology and his¬
tory. Among his works translated into English are:
The Acropolis, Delphi and Olympia, all published by
Caratzas Bros., New Rochelle, U.S.A., 1975. He also
contributed to Greek Museums, Barrie and Jenkins,
London, 1976.
How, indeed, can one fail to be amazed
when one considers not only the number
of edifices raised between 450 B.C. and
4Ö0 B.C., but also their variety, in form
and function alike? In Athens itself, this
period saw the construction of such build¬
ings as the Strategion (military head¬
quarters), the new Bouleuterion (where the
Council met), the Mint, the odeon of
Pericles, the Pompeion, the south porch of
the Agora, the Chalcothek (a storehouse of
bronze implements and arms), and the
porch of Artemis Brauronia (the bear
goddess) on the Acropolis.
During the same period, the first theatre
of Dionysos was fitted out, while an abun¬
dance of religious buildings made their
appearance, including the Parthenon, the
Propylaea and the Temple of Athena Nike,
the Erechtheum, the Temple of Hephaistos
(the Theseum) and the Temple of Apollo
Delphinios.
This feverish activity was an outward
expression of the inner wealth and ambi¬
tion of Athenian democracy under the
guidance of Pericles. The combination of
strength and equilibrium found in the forms
of classical art constitutes an intellectual
counterpoint to the social and political
stability of Athens at a rare moment in
history when deep contradictions were in a
state of balance.
Classical art is thus an attempt to recon¬
cile opposing tendencies which, instead
of cancelling each other out or yielding one
to the other, resolve their differences
through a process of thoughtful one
might say "democratic" dialogue.
But behind this facade of harmony and
coexistence, bold and radical forces were
at work. Together with his friends Anaxa-
goras the scientist, Protagoras the philo¬
sopher, Phidias the architect and sculptor,
and Damon the musician, Pericles dreamed
of transforming Athens into the political,
economic and intellectual capital of Greece.
Inspired by an enlightened patriotism,_
the Periclean circle believed that the whole'
world should rally round Athens and
accept a supremacy that threatened neither
friend nor enemy but was merely a fact of
history.
This outlook conditioned Pericles' pro¬
gramme, which set as a priority the recon¬
struction of the monuments on the Holy
Rock, symbol of the city's age-old history
and site of its ancestral cults. Barbarians (1 )
had burned down the ancient sanctuaries;
here was a unique opportunity to recon¬
struct the Acropolis in its entirety. Its three
outstanding monuments, the Parthenon,
the Propylaea and the Erechtheum, linked
by a relationship of function, would reflect
through their audacious architecture the
inventiveness of Periclean democracy.
Indeed, the buildings of the Acropolis
reflect more than a state of peaceful coexis¬
tence between the traditional Doric and
Ionic styles; they are a synthesis of these
styles^ brought together in an architecture
that has no precedents. What is more, the
Doric and Ionic elements themselves trans¬
cend the limits of their respective traditions
and assume a new, specifically Attic form.
Let us look first at the gateway to the
Acropolis, the Propylaea. Here, the archi¬
tect, Mnesicles, took the simple form of the
propylon (a gateway sheltered on each side
by an overhanging roof supported on two
pillars) and composed, with a host of archi¬
tectural innovations, a matchless prelude
to the buildings which lie beyond. The
underlying form and its components are
readily discernible; what is amazing is the
(1) The Greek word barbaros did not necessarily have
a pejorative sense. It was simply used to designate all
those who did not speaK the Greek language.
20

imaginative and creative manner in which
the parts are combined in the whole without
losing their individual value and without
obscuring the essential purpose of the
building.
Equally simple and ingenious is the inner
Ionic colonnade. Vast crowds of Athenians
were expected to visit the sanctuary; as
much space as possible had to be reserved
for their passage through the entrance.
Instead, therefore, of placing the thicker
Doric columns both outside and inside the
portal, the architect supported the roof of
the central passageway on the more slen¬
der Ionic pillars, which could be built to the
required height, but which took up less
room at ground level.
Passing through this monumental
entrance, we find ourselves on the Holy
Rock, face to face with its two most famous
buildings: the Parthenon, to the south, and
the Erechtheum, to the north. Both are
dedicated to the same goddess Athena,
the city's patron. "Live in happiness,
people of this city, seated beside the Virgin
of Zeus, and return her love," wrote Aes¬
chylus in the Eumenldes.
Pericles wished a special temple to be de¬
dicated to Athena, who was to be repre¬
sented in an incomparable manner by a
gold and ivory statue commissioned from
his friend Phidias.
Athena is thus the apotheosis of the
Athenian city-state, or rather, the expres¬
sion of its divinity. The outward appear¬
ance of the goddess matches the outward
appearance of the city over whose destiny
she presides. Her temple as conceived
by Pericles and his counsellors is an
outstanding symbol of Athens in the hey¬
day of its glory.
The Parthenon, which is the product of
collaboration between the architects Ictinus
and Callicratès, under the decisive gui¬
dance of Phidias, is a building of vision,
designed and realized with matchless
skill.
That the enormous amount of money
required for its construction was collected
in so short a time is a tribute both to the
determination of Pericles and to the state
of the city's finances.
Construction began in 447 B.C. and was
completed by 438 B.C.; a further six years
were required for the sculptures on its
gable ends, or pediments.
Measuring 31 x70 metres along the top
step of its foundations, the Parthenon is
the largest of the Greek temples, the only
one to be built entirely of marble and the
only temple in the Doric style whose
metopes (square spaces above the outside
colonnade) of which there are 92, are all
decorated with sculptures.
It is not these measurements, however,
which attract attention, but rather the
outstanding quality of execution and the
spirituality which emanates from the
material elements. For the first time in
Greek architecture, as a result of Phidias'
insistence that his gold and ivory statue
must be comfortably housed, the internal
A masterpiece of the Greek Doric order
(style) of architecture, the Parthenon also
incorporates elements of the more
decorative Ionic style. Through these
badly eroded Doric columns on the west
side of the temple can be seen part of the
superb Ionic frieze, the work of the great
sculpor Phidias, encircling the celia
(the temple's inner sanctum).
volume of a temple determines its external
form.
The proportions of the building are based
on the ratio known as the "golden
section". In the case of the Parthenon,
the ratio is 4 : 9, reflected in the relation¬
ship between the breadth and length of the
stylobate (the stepped foundation on
which the columns stand); in the relation¬
ship between the diameter of the columns
and the space between them; in that bet¬
ween the height and the width of the tem¬
ple; and in that between the numbers of
columns on its shorter and longer sides
(8 : 17).
The columns of the Parthenon are
unusually slender; they are set more closely
together than is generally the case, and
support a lighter entablature, or super¬
structure. The space between the columns
and the walls of the temple is abnormally
narrow (less than one-and-a-half times the
distance between the columns themselves)
while a second row of columns at each end
of the building give the impression that it
has a double peristyle.
This dense construction on the outside
of the temple contrasts with the space and
calm of the interior, whose amplitude is
underscored in the celia, or principal
chamber by a transversal row of columns.
The feeling of life inspired by the Parthe¬
non, the sense that it is indeed a living
organism, are due to two series of refine¬
ments: the subtle adjustments made to its
horizontal lines, which curve, and to its
vertical lines, which are inclined.
In fact, the horizontal lines of stylobate,
epistyle (architrave), cornice and pedi¬
ments alike are all slightly curved. The
stylobate, for example, which one would
expect to be a level foundation for the
columns, is not really level at all, but rises
in a gentle bulge (0.11 m.) in the centre of
each side and 0.06 m. in the middle of
each end.
The walls and columns, instead of being
strictly vertical, are inclined slightly inwards.
The columns at the sides and the ends
lean inwards to a distance of 7 cm., while w
those at the corners since they are inclin- Y
21

Photo © Tombazi, Athens Photo Dominique Roger-Unesco
, ed diagonally lean inwards to a distance
of 10 cm. The inner face of the walls inside
the colonnade is vertical, but the outer face
is similarly inclined. Thus, the volume of
the temple, instead of being contained by
parallelograms, is shaped like a truncated
pyramid.
When we realize that each building block
was trapezoidal and not rectangular in
shape, and that almost every one of them
had its own specific dimensions, since the
curving of the horizontal lines and the
inclination of the verticals create different
angles and surfaces throughout the build¬
ing, the skill required to transform these
subtleties of design into reality is well-nigh
unbelievable. If the architects of the
Parthenon were men of genius, the crafts¬
men responsible for the execution of the
project had to work with the highest degree
of precision, calculating each element in
the minutest detail.
The sculptures which decorate this
matchless piece of architecture are proba¬
bly the work of Phidias himself, helped by
his two closest collaborators, Alcamen and
Agoracritos. The decorations are both
grandiose and original; those on the east¬
ern pediment represent the birth of Athena
in a composition which combines strength
with nobility. Those at the western end
relate the Attic legend of the contest
between Athena and Poseidon (the sea-
god) for possession of the city.
The 92 square metopes above the colon¬
nade illustrate four cycles of myths, in¬
volving the combats of Gods and Giants,
of the Centaurs and the Lapiths, of
Greeks and Amazons, and the capture of
Troy. Pediments and metopes alike thus
provided Phidias with the opportunity
of re-telling, in a manner that was unique,
the ancient myths of Athena and the land
of Attica.
Inspired by the vision of Athenian demo¬
cracy at the height of its glory, Phidias
conceived the ingenious idea of immorta¬
lizing in marble the people of Athens them¬
selves. He would portray for posterity the
joyous occasion when the whole city old
men and boys, women and maidens alike-
mingled with the gods for the great Pana¬
thenaic Procession, Athens' biggest festi¬
val, and climbed the Holy Rock with offer¬
ings and with the new saffron robe, the
peplos, woven to drape the xoanon, an
ancient statue of Athena carved from the
wood of the olive-tree.
A friend of Pericles and of the philoso¬
pher Anaxagoras, Phidias believed that his
representation of the old Attic legends
should be accompanied by the new
achievements of democracy.
But Phidias was a sculptor, not an ora¬
tor, and it is difficult to transform pane¬
gyrics into images. The task required all
his genius, experience and audacity as one
of the leading artists of his time.
The vision demanded a greater spread
of space than pediments and metopes
could provide; what was wanted for his
composition was a continuous frieze.
Boldly, Phidias decided to add to his Doric
temple this element of the Ionic style, in
the form of a band, 160 metres in length
and 1.60 metres high, running round the
temple walls.
This frieze should not be considered as
a realistic portrayal of the Panathenaic
procession. The composition is above all
a poetic one, the translation of a sacred
occasion into plastic terms. "Real" space
and "real" time have been abolished here:
the participants in the Panathenaea advan¬
ce with a rhythm imposed by the sculptor
in an environment of "poesy". The pro¬
cession becomes a symphony, in the mu¬
sical sense of the term. Reality, religion
and art are interwoven.
As if following the procession in space
and time, Phidias sets its beginning at the
southwest corner of the temple, and takes
it round the building to the east door. But
this is really a pretext for the movements
of his symphony, which opens pianissimo,
with simple harmonies and the introduction
of the major themes such as the rearing
horse on the eighth carved slab of the
western end and the escort of horsemen
on the north and south sides of the temple.
On these carved slabs, the art of sculp¬
ture in relief achieves perfection: six or
seven horsemen are represented with re¬
markable clarity on different planes. The
rhythmic procession continues towards the
centre of the east end, where the Gods
have already arrived.
22

The temple of victory
The elegant temple of Athena Nike (Athena Bringer of Victory)
stands on a precipitous platform at the western edge of the
Acropolis (far left). In Antiquity the temple was protected by a
parapet of marble slabs executed in high-relief. The surviving
slabs, which show scenes of winged victories at various tasks,
include this graceful figure of Victory adjusting her sandal (left)
Right, youth bearing an amphora, detail from the great
Parthenon frieze in which Phidias depicted the Athenians in
procession at the festival honouring the birthday of Athena. 1 1
^^^
By
j^^L B
m fl
Although carved on a relatively small
scale they measure only one metre in
height the gods are impressive figures.
\ Seated at ease, with ample space around
them, they convey an atmosphere of
freedom and well-being, as if in the sur¬
roundings of their distant home on Mount
Olympus.
In the influence which he exerted on his
own and succeeding ages, Phidias was to
classical art what Pericles was to Athenian
democracy. Under the imprint of his
genius, the art of modelling transcended
its limitations to become a vehicle for
spiritual, religious and political messages
of the highest order. It became the visible
Curves
that look
straight
These drawings of the east front of the Par¬
thenon show techniques used by its archi¬
tect to correct optical illusions.
1. The temple as it appears to the viewer.
Its lines seem to be perfectly horizontal or
vertical, though in fact they are curved and
inclined as in figure 3.
2. The temple front as it would appear if it
had been built as in figure 1 without optical
correction.
3. The temple as it is actually built. The
columns are inclined inwards: it has been
calculated that if extended upwards they
would meet 1,500 m. above ground level.
The stylobate, architrave, entablature and
pediment are convex, producing the optical
impression shown in figure 1.
and eternal' embodiment of divinity at its
most imperceptible and transcendent, of
man himself in full assumption of his res¬
ponsibility and freedom andfinally of
the city at peace with itself, immune from
both anarchy and despotism.
Opposite the Parthenon, on the north
. side of the Acropolis, stands the second
of its most famous temples, the Erech¬
theum. Though dedicated to Athena Po-
lias, the goddess of the city, the building
was imbued with a religious significance
that outstripped the limits of the traditional
cult. It went deeper than the roots of the
traditional faith into the soil of Attica,
the medium which brought into communi¬
cation with each other all the divinities and
demons which presided over the destiny of
the citizens of Athens.
From time immemorial, a temple had
sheltered the xoanon, the wooden ¡mage of
Athena which had supposedly fallen from
heaven. The primitive cults of Attica were
also worshipped there. The Persians had
destroyed this ancient temple. Although
Pericles had died before the work of re¬
construction began in 421 B.C., it is certain
that the plans for a new building worthy of
the cults it was to house had been prepar¬
ed, and the site chosen, before his death.
The new temple was constructed a little
to the north of its predecessor, at a respect¬
ful distance from the Parthenon. Besides
housing the most venerable cults of Athens
of Athena and Poseidon the tem¬
ple included among its furnishings the
tomb of Erechtheus (son of Gaea, goddess
of the earth, represented as half-man, half-
serpent) and the sacred serpent; and the
tombs of Cecrops, founder and first king
of Athens, and of the Athenians' earliest
ancestors.
It also contained the mark where Posei¬
don's trident struck the rock so that a salt
water spring known as the "Erechtheis
sea" leapt from the cleft. Room had to
be found not only for the altars of Zeus,
Poseidon, Hephaistos, and the ancient
xoanon of Hermes, but also for the city's
sacred olive tree and the sanctuary of
Pandrosos (daughter of Cecrops and pries¬
tess of Athena) containing the altar of
Zeus Herkeios.
Despite all these difficulties, the resultant
building, which resembles no other temple
in Greece, was of a skilful simplicity that
met all the above requirements.
Without departing from tradition, its
architect was able to introduce a number
of strikingly apt innovations, such as the
elegant loggia which projects from the
southern part of the temple, where the
Caryatids courageously support the weight
of the entablature without sacrificing any
of their feminine grace and charming
nobility.
The Ionic grace of the Erechtheum con¬
stitutes a discreet yet captivating pendant
to the Doric power and splendour of the
Parthenon. Centuries later, contemplating
these eternally fresh examples of Attic
art at its most glorious, Plutarch, one of the
last of the ancient Greeks to appreciate his
country's classic past, was to sum up the
feelings they inspired as follows (from
"Lives of the Noble Grecians and
Romans", translated by Sir Thomas North,
1579. See also page 26):
"For every one of those works which
were finished up at that time seemed then
to be very ancient and yet it looketh at his
daye as if it were but newly done and finish¬
ed, ther.e is suche a certaine kynde of flor-
ishing freshness in it, which letteth that the
injurie of time cannot impaire the sight
thereof: As if every one of those foresaid
workes had some living spirite in it, to
make it seeme young and fresh: and a
soule that lived ever, which kept them in
their good continuing state..."
Manolis Andronicos
23
