by Augusto Roa Bastos
PARAGUAY has always been a vir¬
tually unknown quantity in Spanish-
American culture; in more ways
than one, it is "a land-locked island" in
the heart of the continent. What is more,
observers of Latin America have, for some
mysterious reason, rarely bothered to
pinpoint the reasons which have made
Paraguay a terra incognita, closed to
exploration and analysis.
Paraguay is actually one of the Latin
American nations and peoples that has
known the greatest vicissitudes. Para¬
guay's history reads like a melodrama, a
non-stop tragedy punctuated by moments
of great and sublime significance.
The basic stages in its history are as
follows:
It was from this land-locked island that
the conquistadors, obsessed with the myth
of Eldorado, set forth in search of treasure.
AUGUSTO ROA BASTOS, of Paraguay, won an in¬
ternational reputation with his book Hijo de Hombre,
published in English as Son of Man by Victor Goliancz,
London, 1965. His latest novel Yo el Supremo is re¬
quired reading for students of Latin American litera¬
ture in a number of European universities. He is cur¬
rently teaching Latin American literature at the univer¬
sity of Toulouse (France).


THE
LAND-LOCKED
ISLAND
OF PARAGUAY
Paraguay, like most Latin American countries, has a large rural population,
amounting to some 70 per cent of the total. Almost all of them are Indians
(above) who communicate among themselves in Guarani, a language which
is spoken in Paraguay's towns and cities as well as in the rural areas.
In its heyday, towards the end of the
16th century, it represented the largest
single colonial administrative unit. Para¬
guay was then the "Giant Province of the
Indies", and it stretched across almost half
the continent, from the torrid tropical
forests to the icy southern tip of Tierra del
Fuego.
When the mirage of gold disappeared,
the conquistadors were left only with the
vast resources represented by the indige¬
nous population, which eventually turned
out to be poor compensation for their loss.
They began to exploit "the gold of their
bodies", a dark, living metal which, instead
of running out, multiplied constantly. It
provided them with slave labour for the
subsistence economy of the encomiendas,
or slave holdings, and with slave women
for their harems. It also provided them
with children of mixed blood, the criollos.
who were later to outdo their parents in
exploiting their half-brothers, who had not
had the "privilege" of being the children
of Europeans.
In the early years of the 17th century,
the vast amorphous Giant Province began
to shrink and break up, losing access to
the sea in the process. Now land-locked,
it turned into a poor province which the
metropolitan administration abandoned to
its fate.
Meanwhile, the Jesuits had begun an
incredible experiment which combined
proselytizing with the exploitation of the
indigenous population. They founded the
Indian communities called Reducciones
which, under the name of the Guarani
Republic, came to form an empire within
the Spanish empire, with which it eventu¬
ally clashed. Based on a system that made i
full use of the division of labour, the enter- I
51

( prise yielded profits beyond the wildest
expectations of its founders.
The province also witnessed the first
mass insurrection against Spanish abso¬
lutism. This was the so-called revolt of the
communeros which lasted from 1717 to
1735, and in some ways resembled the
Revolt of the Communeros, or Common¬
ers, of Castile against the usurpation of
the Emperor Charles V in the 16th century.
Thirty years after these events, in 1767,
the Jesuits were expelled by Charles III
from all the territories of the Spanish
empire. The king saw the empire built by
the Jesuits not only as a virtually impreg¬
nable stronghold against his authority
but also as a dangerous example to his
corrupt and tyrannical colonial admini¬
stration.
For the Jesuit system Of temporal and
spiritual organization was more humane
than that of the encomiendas, as well as
being the first of its kind in America to
preserve the language and culture of the
indigenous population and their traditional
modes of production.
It is not surprising, then, that certain
chroniclers spoke of the "communist"
regime set up in the Reducciones: a kind
of communist republic-empire. Such
semantic confusion could not, however,
conceal the true nature of an experiment
which preceded the formation of an inde¬
pendent sovereign state in Paraguay by
over a century.
The independent state of Paraguay
began its existence under the dictatorship
of José Gaspar Rodriguez Francia (1816-
1840) and flourished under Carlos Antonio
López and his son Francisco Solano López.
But in 1865 Argentina and the Brazilian
Empire entered into a secret agreement.
Drawing Uruguay along with them, they
declared war on Paraguay with the blessing
of the British.
The war of the "Triple Alliance", which
lasted five years, was a bloodbath. The
male population was all but decimated,
and the countryside plundered. It marked
the end of the independent state, laid the
country open to extortion and led to
many years of dependence on the victo¬
rious countries.
The martyrdom of this freedom-loving
people constitutes a break in the continuity
of Paraguay's history: from one of Latin
America's most advanced nations, the
country was turned into one of its poorest
and most backward.
Paraguayan culture must be seen against
this background of historical events and
geographical isolation which provides clues
to its enigmatic fate as a nation.
But one cannot hope to understand
Paraguay without taking into account its
linguistic problem. For 400 years now,
two languages have coexisted in the
country: Spanish and Guarani the lan¬
guage of the conquerors and the language
of the conquered. These two languages
are used as parallel, though not comple¬
mentary, means of expression for a whole
society.
In this, Paraguay is unique in Latin
America. For a long time it was common¬
place to say that Paraguay was a bilingual
country and that this bilingualism was an
obstacle to its cultural development or, as
others would have it, a handicap to its
material progress.
According to the leading authority on
the subject, Father Bartomeu Meliá, "The
description of the Paraguayan linguistic
situation as 'typically' bilingual is very
widespread and is accepted even by some
linguists. But Paraguayan bilingualism is a
myth.
"Since the time of the conquest and the
formation of the colony, Paraguay has al¬
ways constituted a unique case of bilin¬
gualism. Two languages and two cultures
have existed side by side in apparent har¬
mony, each influencing and complement¬
ing the other. To this extent Paraguay
seems to represent the triumph of the
colonial ¡deal: antagonism between master
52

A living
tradition
at the loom
Handed down from generation to
generation, the art of weaving has always
been one of the most important
occupations of the Indian women of
Paraguay. Centre photo: two villagers
weaving ponchos with "typically Indian"
designs. Village weavers today
manufacture more of these ponchos,
much sought-after by tourists, than other
traditional garments such as embroidered
shirts. Left, Paraguayan men construct a -
"weft" of palings around their farm.
and slave has been overcome. Further¬
more, as Governor Lázaro de Ribera com¬
plained at the end of the 18th century, 'We
have reached such a point that the langua¬
ge of the conquered peoples has become
the dominant one.' "
But for the child with a European father
and an Indian mother, the natural mother
tongue was Guarani, and Spanish was a
language imposed as a symbol of author¬
ity. It was the language which the mestizo
would in turn use to impose his own au¬
thority on the Indians.
Under the harsh conditions of the enco¬
miendas, which were nevertheless more
liberal in Paraguay than in other parts of
conquered Latin America, mestizos and
Indians felt that the language of their
father or master, as the case happened to
be, was a more integral part of his domi¬
nance than the arms, tools, food, houses
and customs which were the trappings of
his power.
In the missionary settlements of the
Jesuits, however, sermons and prayers
were in Guarani. There, the Indian was
not forced to change his language. He did,
however, have to change his rituals, his
liturgy, his gods, and his conception
of nature, of the world and of the
universe although the embers of all these
still glow brightly today in. Indian myths
about the universe.
CONTINUED PAGE 69
Birthplace of a nation
Below, the Casa de la Independencia (Independence House) in Asunción,
capital of Paraguay, where a group of patriots gathered on the night of 14
May 1811 before deposing the Spanish governor, Bernardo de Velazco, in
a bloodless coup d'état. A month later, the independence of the
Paraguayan Republic was proclaimed. Of all the capitals of Latin-
American countries with a large Indian population, Asunción is the only
one in which bilingualism (Spanish-Guarani) is widespread, although here
and in the country's other major cities Guarani is increasingly losing
ground to Spanish.
Photo © Jesús Ruiz Nestosa. Paraauav

THE LAND-LOCKED ISLAND OF PARAGUAY (continued from page 53,
And so Governor Lázaro de Ribera was
mistaken. The language of the conquered
peoples was not, and could not be the
dominant language. Guarani retreated into
the depths of the collective memory,
settled there like a sediment, and came to
dominate from within the self-expression
of Paraguay, whether it be bilingual or not.
"Colonial society", Meliá explains, "was
officially Spanish-speaking from the start.
Guarani played no part in administration
or official policy. During the colonial
period, Guarani had no literary foundations
and was in contact with a major literary
language Spanish. Gradually, a Paragua¬
yan Guarani emerged which had all the
characteristics of^a vernacular language:
it became the mother tongue of a group
dominated socially and politically by ano¬
ther group speaking a different language."
Such a situation could perhaps be de¬
scribed as di-lingualism rather than bilin¬
gualism.
According to Meliá, "Paraguay is bilin¬
gual, but few Paraguayans are themselves
bilingual. Indeed, it may be that no one in
Paraguay is really bilingual. The situation
can best be described as rural-urban bilin¬
gualism". For although Guarani is even
spoken in the capital, Asunción, it is be¬
coming increasingly obvious that the towns
are moving towards Spanish monolingua-
lism while in the countryside the proportion
of monolingual Guarani speakers is very
high.
The use of Guarani or Spanish in Para¬
guay is governed by social and regional
factors. Even people who think of them¬
selves as bilingual will never discuss certain
topics in the indigenous language: it would
be simply impossible because social cir¬
cumstances do not allow it. The Guarani
speaker thus finds in fact that he is exclud¬
ed from a whole range of fields because he
cannot make himself heard in them. Worse
still, he cannot even conceptualize them
because he lacks adequate linguistic means
of self-expression.
If, for example, someone speaking
Guarani had access to the world of advanc¬
ed technology, he would find that he
would have to use so many neologisms
that his language would be practically
annihilated.
In Paraguay, then, the problem of bilin¬
gualism is rendered more acute by the fact
that Guarani, which is above all an oral
language, has become impoverished during
the centuries in which it was forced to
play a marginal role in Paraguayan society
and culture. It is, according to Meliá,
"like a country which has been deprived
of vast areas of territory and is losing its
capacity to express its cultural identity".
It is clear that the future of Guarani like
that of Spanish is closely linked to the
historical destiny of the country itself.
Although Guarani has been relegated to
the status of a vehicle for communicating
emotions, it will continue to modulate
the expression of a whole people's deepest
and most vital feelings. Herein lies its
strength.
Linked to the mysteries of blood, in¬
stinct and collective memory, the survival
of Guarani is guaranteed by the density of
the linguistic sediment that forms the
foundations of the bilingual island of
Paraguay.
Augusto Roa Bastos

