The madrasah (literally "the place for
lessons") was the university of the
medieval Arab world. The curriculum
was centred on the Quran, Islamic
theology and law, but a variety of other
subjects such as grammar, literature and
mathematics were also taught in some
madrasahs and are still taught today.
Students were well looked after. Not
only was tuition free, but food, lodging
and medical care were also provided.
Left, traditional scene of instruction in a
13th-century manuscript. One pupil
recites for the teacher while another pulls
the ceiling fan.
Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris.




The three R's
in the mosque
The pursuit of learning
as a sacred duty
by Hisham Nashabi
THE most outstanding characteristic
of Islam is its repeated insistence on
unity: the unity of God and the unity
of the spiritual and the worldly aspects of
life, of the religious and the secular.
Islamic education reflected this aspect
of Islam by considering the various
branches of knowledge as a cohesive unity.
Hence practically no subject was barred
from study in the mosque.
The acquisition of knowledge was also
considered a religious obligation. This
explains why the ulemas, scholars trained
in religion and law, have always occupied
a high position in Muslim society.
Seen from this viewpoint, education is
not only a means of achieving knowledge
for its own sake or for the sake of truth.
Nor is it simply a means of becoming a
good citizen nor of earning a living. It is
first and foremost a way to moral and
spiritual development.
Islamic society frowns on the scholar
who refrains from passing on his know¬
ledge to others. People are in duty bound
to transmit their learning, thus gua¬
ranteeing that the stock of human know¬
ledge will be preserved and, in the course
of time, enriched. This attitude may be
considered as the historical antecedent of
what is today referred to as the "democra¬
tization of education".
The mosque, äs an educational institu¬
tion, was the first and most effective
instrument to ease the transition of Arab
society from an early stage in which the
oral tradition was a dominant characteristic
to a more developed stage based on the
written tradition.
The Prophet Muhammad brought a
message which was essentially represented
HISHAM NASHABI is director of the Makased .
Institute of Islamic Education in Beirut (Lebanon). He
is professor of history at the American University of
Beirut and at Beirut University. A fuller treatment of
the subject of this article will appear in a forthcoming
study on the Islamic city, to be published by Unesco.
by a book, indeed The Book, the Quran.
The study of the Quran immediately
became the core of intensive educational
activity. Reading, writing and arithmetic
were primarily aimed at a better under¬
standing and appreciation of the Quranic
text and the application of what it taught.
And yet the oral tradition, deeply rooted
in the Arab mind since pre-lslamic times,
was not abandoned. On the contrary, it
was institutionalized and systematically
organized in the new Islamic society.
The story-tellers, poets and narrators
who were the repositories of this oral
tradition continued to perform their func¬
tions after the coming of Islam, side by
side with the educators of the new society.
All these educators unanimously believ-
' ed that a good memory was the most
valuable quality in a student, since the
highest aspiration of the first Muslim
scholars was to learn by heart both the
Quran and, if possible, the hadith (tradi¬
tions concerning the acts and sayings of
the Prophet).
During the reign of the first four caliphs
(the Prophet's successors as head of the
Muslim community), Muhammad's com¬
panions followed their leader's example in
expounding the different aspects of Islam
to their fellow citizens. Apart from the
emergence of the mosque as an educa¬
tional institution, there were no significant
developments in Islamic education during
the first century of the Hegira (1).
However, the Arabic language attracted
the attention of scholars at an early date.
It began to be studied in the mosques,
where it soon occupied a place of honour
in the curriculum.
The beginnings of theological debate in
the Muslim world also date , from this
period, when the first "circle" to discuss
(1) Hegira: the Muslim era, which began in 622 A.D.,
when the Prophet Muhammad left Mecca and setjled in
Medina.
theology met in the mosque of Basra
(Iraq).
The 9th and 10th centuries saw the
appearance of great Muslim jurists, theo¬
logians and linguists, as well as the cre¬
ation of the kuttab, which became the
most widespread institution of elementary
education in the Muslim world. The kuttab
developed in response to the needs of the
new Islamic city, where the ability to write
in Arabic was necessary for transcribing
the Quran, as well as being an essential
qualification for government posts. As a
rule each kuttab had a single teacher, but
in some cases there were two or more,
one of whom always specialized in Quranic
studies. The homes of the ulemas and the
shops of "paper merchants" were also
used for educational purposes.
Major developments in Muslim educa¬
tion occurred in the 10th and 11th centu¬
ries, when the mosque became a veritable
public university as well as a place of
worship and a community centre. The
"circles" formed in the mosques were of
high intellectual calibre and produced a
number of outstanding works.
Two new institutions of learning also
appeared during this period: the "Houses
of Wisdom" and the "Houses of Science."
Unlike the mosques, they were not places
of worship and their activities, which were
purely academic, were not strictly related
to the religious sciences. On the other
hand, some of the academic pursuits
which took place in the mosques may have
been of a secular nature: it should never
be forgotten that in Islamic society the
secular and the religious are inextricably
interlinked.
Translation was the principal activity of
the House of Wisdom founded in Baghdad
sometime during the reign of the Caliph
Al-Mansur (754-775) or that of Harun al-
Rashid (786-809). In its golden age during
the reign of Al-Ma'mun (813-833) this
great library became an academy where i
eminent scholars translated Greek and I
33

The great Qarawiyin mosque in Fez is the
centre of one of the world's oldest
universities, founded in 850 A.D. and
still active today in the teaching of Muslim
law. Students sit around their lecturers
in a circle, following a tradition
dating back to the earliest days of Islam.
Indian works into Arabic and studied and
discussed a range of scientific subjects.
The first "House of Science" known to
history was created in 10th-century Egypt.
Houses of Science had more students and
teachers than Houses of Wisdom and
concentrated on mathematics and the
medical sciences rather than translation.
It should be noted that mathematics then
encompassed arithmetic, algebra, geo¬
metry, astronomy and music.
The 12th century saw the development
of the state-sponsored colleges known as
madrasahs (from the Arab word darasa,
"to learn"). These institutions are generally
associated with the vizier Nizam al-Mulk,
who established the famous Nizamiyah of
Baghdad between 1065 and 1067. (See
facing page.)
In medieval times medicine was consider¬
ed a branch of philosophy, and as such it
attracted the attention of several Muslim
philosophers, such as Äl-Farahbi and
Avicenna. Medicine was taught in the
mosques, but medical studies flourished
above all in an institution known as the
bimaristan, which was the equivalent of
the modern teaching hospital.
Although the mosques, kuttabs, houses
of wisdom and science, madrasahs and
34
hospitals were the main educational insti¬
tutions in Arab cities, the ulemas and the
apprenticeship system practised by the
guilds and the mystic orders also played
an important role in educational life.
The Muslim educational system had
only two levels: the elementary and the
advanced. Children between the ages of
five and ten had no option but to attend
the kuttab, where they were taught to
read the Quran and to memorize as much
of it as they could. They also picked up
writing from copying passages from the
Quran and learned a little arithmetic.
Sometimes poetry and "wise sayings"
were also taught at this level.
Kuttab education lasted roughly five
years. The educational system did not pro¬
vide an intermediate or pre-mosque stage,
and a pupil who wanted to continue his
education after leaving the kuttab had to
find a "circle" in a mosque or a madrasah
which would introduce him to advanced
studies.
In most cases, however, a pupil would
choose to take up a trade or craft when
he left the kuttab, becoming apprenticed
to a master craftsman who was often his
own father or another member of his
family. (See article page 12).
Muslim teachers made a sharp distinc¬
tion between the methods to be used for
educating children on the one hand and
adolescents and adults on the other. At
the kuttab level, reliance was placed
almost exclusively on learning by heart, on
the grounds that memory is usually most
active during childhood and must be
fully exploited.
In subjects other than the Quran it was
generally accepted that the teacher should
proceed "from the simple to the difficult"
and adapt his teaching to the pupil's
capacities. Avicenna insisted on the
importance of taking into account the
child's temperament and natural aptitudes
before preparing him for a particular career
or profession.
The most characteristic feature of Muslim
education in the mosque was the "circle",
a group of young scholars gathered around
a teacher who sat with his back against
the column of a mosque. This practice,
later followed in the madrasahs, dates
back to pre-lslamic times and is still follow¬
ed today.
At first teachers lectured from memory
without referring to a text. Soon, how- k
ever, they began to use notes, and in the*
CONTINUED PAGE 52

THE 3 Rs
IN THE MOSQUE
(Continued from page 34)
course of time the writings produced by
the great early masters became textbooks
for their successors and their students. In
many cases teachers simply read out and
commented on these ancient texts,, a
method which led to the stagnation of
Muslim education for several centuries.
Discussion and questioning were two
other features of education in the mosques.
Students often engaged in heated debate
with their teachers and professed opinions
which were at odds with theirs. At the
same time they remained highly respectful
of their teachers' views. An art of dial¬
ogue and discussion regulated by clearly
defined rules thus developed in Muslim
academic life.
In the early days of Islam, Muslim
scholars travelled far and wide to collect
hadiths which certain elders had committ¬
ed to memory, but which had never been
written down. Later scholars journeyed in
search of unusual Arabic expressions and
syntax, and eventually the practice of
travelling "in search of knowledge" expand¬
ed to include all other fields of academic
life.
"All knowledge is ultimately religious
and is acquired in God's name". This prin¬
ciple underlies the transmission and acqui¬
sition of knowledge in the Muslim world.
Any secular calling must be placed in a
.divine setting, and in the last analysis the
purpose of education is to serve God.
Hisham Nashabi
