Rural newspapers in Africa
In Africa, where rural communities constitute 80 per cent of the total population
and speak some 800 languages, the use of the press as a medium of mass
communication presents many problems. And yet it is in the rural areas, where
the need to promote development is most urgent, that information can play a
highly important role. Rural newspapers using local languages began to appear
in 1964, notably in Niger, providing not only excellent follow-up material for
literacy programmes but also a highly effective means of communication. Rural
newspaper readers in Africa write to their paper at a rate of one letter for every
five copies sold. In spite of enormous difficulties, the rural press has developed
in many parts of Africa where, since 1972, Unesco has helped to create more than
a dozen papers and supported many other projects, some of them launched by the
countries concerned, others the fruit of various forms of bilateral co-operation.
Most rural newspapers are written in local languages, thus promoting real co¬
operation with isolated populations. As President Julius Nyerere of Tanzania once
remarked: "While other nations try to reach the moon, we are trying to reach the
village." Above, front pages of some African rural papers: 1) Kibaru (the News)
in Bambara (Mali); 2) Game Su (It is time), in Ewe (Togo); 3) Kpodoga (Listen)
in Ewe (Ghana); 4) Linga (Drum), in Sango (Central African Empire); 5) Misénu
Miségbe (Listen and learn) in Fon (Benin); 6) Kisomo (Education) in Kikuyu
(Kenya); 7) Elimu Haina Mwisho (Education has no end) in Kiswahili (Tanzania).
Well before the Conference began,
certain people feared that Unesco
wished to restrict freedom ofexpression
and was, for example, advocating
nationalization of the media, govern¬
ment control of information, or mea¬
sures to prevent the media from
publishing news displeasing to the
authorities.
What had Unesco really done? In
the first place, it had prepared the
working documents, which set out
the problem in an objective manner.
Then, it raised the essential questions,
promoted the exchange of experience
and stimulated reflection on the situa¬
tion, and on the considerations and
mechanisms involved in the formula¬
tion of communication policies.
After extremely fruitful discussions,
the participants drafted and adopted
the "Declaration of San José", a
balanced and carefully-worded text
which demonstrates the absurdity of
the charges levelled against Unesco.
While the Conference did in fact
recommend "the establishment of a
Latin American and Caribbean news
agency, or a consortium of agencies,
in the region", it also took care to
stipulate that this should "in no way
impair the free operation of existing
agencies or-their future development."
In fact, Unesco is very well aware
that it is up to each nation to define
its own policies in the light of its
own options and requirements with
due regard for national realities, for
the freedom of expression and respect
for individuals and communities.
"Where information is concerned,"
Unesco's Director-General told the
San José conference, "multiple and
varied sources constitute the only
guarantee that communication will be
founded on the democratic principle
that all peoples and all nations are
equal in dignity." And, he pointed
but, within each society "the demo¬
cratization of communicationdemo-
