A cluster of roofs surrounds the
blasted shell of the Parthenon in
this early 19th-century depiction
of the Acropolis by the English
traveller Edward Dodwell. The
temples of antiquity, half-buried
in rubble, are lost in a maze of
village lanes. In 1833, a local
figure complained: "The
archeologists will destroy all the
picturesque additions (to the
Acropolis) in their zeal to lay
bare and restore the ancient
monuments."



Village life
among the ruins
by Jacques Lacarrière
Photo © Agora Excavations, Athens
IT is a curious fact that for many centu¬
ries, from the twilight of Antiquity till
the dawn of the Romantic Age, the
Acropolis was quite absent from the mind
of Western man, his ¡mages, his dreams
and his memory. It was lost in a limbo as
distant as the days before the Flood, as
remote as the caverns which echoed our
ancestors' first cries and darker than the
darkest ages of history; lost in a "black
JACQUES LACARRIERE is a well-known French
writer and Hellenist. A translator from ancient and
modern Greek, he has brought before the French public
the work of contemporary Greek writers such as
George Seferis (Nobel Literature Prize, 1963) and
Vassili Vassilikos, the author of Z. His L'Eté Grec
("Greek Summer"), an account of his 25 years exper¬
ience of Greece and its people, was a best-seller in
France (Plön publishers, Paris, 1975).
hole" in time like those which modern
astronomers are discovering in space.
During the long period before its discov¬
ery, or rather, rediscovery, the Acropolis
did not, of course, really cease to exist. On
the contrary, old engravings and the tales
of the earliest travellers show it to be a
busy, crowded place, cluttered with
houses, with churches andat a later
datewith mosques.
There on the Rock, in a hubbub of his¬
tories, customs and facades, so different
from today's bright emptiness, a bustling
population of Greeks, then Turks, Arme¬
nians and Albanians lived out their lives and
loves. For hundreds of years, these "Acro-
politans" (a name we may give them for the
sake of simplicity) were its only occupants!
A number of engravings, which deserve
to be better known, reveal to us this long-
lost age, and tell its strange, forgotten
story. Let us look, for example, at those
made from drawings by "Athenian" Stuart,
from Edinburgh, and the Englishman
Revett, who travelled together in Greece
between 1751 and 1753, and who saw the
Acropolis in the state we have described.
A patchwork of houses, stitched with
narrow, winding lanes, and gardens graced
with olive and mimosa covers the whole
site, from the Propylaea at its entrance to
the far end of the Parthenon, which is
itself hemmed in by walls and screened
with branches. Inside the temple gleam the j
cupolas of a Turkish mosque; it will remain I
29

there for many years to come, and only
disappear in 1842.
Another engraving shows the Erech¬
theum, and beyond it a large house, from
whose walled courtyard prods a single
cypress. The ancient temple seems to
have become a place of meditation: under
its porch lower than it is today because
not yet excavated an Acropolitan sits
cross-legged and gazes dreamily at the sky.
Close at hand, in the streets and square of
what might be a village, stroll men in tur¬
bans; children play, dogs sniff, and a
horseman crosses in the background.
Fifty years later, in 1805 or thereabouts,
when Edward Dodwell, another English
traveller whose remarkable series of Views
in Greece from Drawings will be published
in London in 1821, paints the Acropolis,
the scene has hardly changed. The houses
on the Rock are still set in walled court¬
yards shaded by olive trees and slender
cypresses. A large building (a barracks or a
warehouse?) flanks the north side of the
Parthenon. Turkish noblemen and shep¬
herds idle the hours away under the dazzl¬
ing Attic sunlight, its brilliance stippled
with the red of tiled roofs.
Now there can be no mistake: this is
indeed a village and not a temple or a
shrine a real village, captured by the
painter in its hours of bustle and of sun¬
drenched silence, with its braying, bleating
animals, its market, its bazaar. Here, now,
the ancient gods are dead beyond recall;
the only remaining trace of their presence is
in these half-buried columns, these toppled
marble heads and busts which the Acrop-
olitans sometimes use as seats.
Many other pilgrims saw and described
the Acropolis thus transmogrified: the
Oriental village, the improvised fortress,
the bazaar littered with marble blocks and
statues. Their accounts and their engrav¬
ings all tell the same reassuring and yet
melancholy story.
They tell us that the Acropolis was not
lost to history throughout all these obscure
centuries, but that it humbly survived, as
village, citadel and market-place; that the
Parthenon was saved from abandon and
ruin to become a church dedicated to the
Mother of God, and then a Turkish
mosque.
They tell us that a daily life that was first
Greek and then Turkish in content, first
Christian and then Muslim in belief, per¬
sisted on the Holy Rock of the Ancient
Greeks, in the stronghold of the Byzan¬
tines and in the fortress of the War of
Independence.
I like to think that in this way, throughout
a long history that has been sacred as well
as profane (since gods, or a single God,
have always been worshipped there), the
Acropolis has remained true to its ancient
vocation, nurturing in its own way the
same sacred and profane spirit that moved
with the crowds through its .statue-lined
streets, arnong its altars and its trophies,
during the Golden Age of Pericles.
Today's Acropolitans are the tourists.
Archeology is the new faith and arche¬
ologists are the priests of the new cult.
After so many centuries of obscurity, I
cannot but reflect on the strange destiny
of a site which resurfacing barely a cen¬
tury ago in Western consciousness, re-
emerging as the birthplace of Reason
after 25 centuries of neglect is once again
threatened.
Although it served as market-town,
fortress and refuge for religions, and
although its ruins remained eloquent, the
Acropolis was for so long a backwater,
leading a withdrawn, meditative and pro¬
vincial life.
Today, as a place of pilgrimage for those
in quest of culture, it retransmits the newly
transparent message of the ages, the time-
worn brilliance of its marbles, the purity of
this flat-topped hill, to which excavations
and the clearance of rubble have restored
the naked virginity of its primeval rock
(yellowed in autumn by tufts of camo¬
miles there are flowers on the Acro¬
polis for those who know where to look).
But there is also the thoughtless immo¬
deration of its crowds of visitors....
Although the long silence has suddenly
been broken by tumult, the Acropolis
remains an enigma, questioning us as the
Sphinx questioned Oedipus. Whether we
look at it at dawn, at midday or in the
evening twilight, whether we contemplate
the interplay of light and shadow at the
beginning or the end of things, we seem to
hear the same voice quietly asking: "Who
built me as the sun rose on the Western
world? Who perfumed me with incense as
it passed through the zenith of Reason?
Who protected me during the twilight of
my gods?"
"Man", is the answer. And not only
Attic man, but man come out of the East,
and out of the West, to live together,
throughout all the forgotten centuries, on
this incomparable rock.
The monument of the Acropolis which
has always been my favourite is the little
temple of Athena Nike (the Giver of Vic¬
tory), which stands at its westward end,
facing the sea and the setting sun.
Once, it sheltered a statue of the god¬
dess, carved from an olive trunk, standing
upright, holding out in her right hand a
fruit, a pomegranate. This statue no longer
exists; it had already disappeared when the
rock was occupied by the Acropolitans of
our story.
And yet it is in this long-lost statue that
I see the clearest and most lasting symbol
of the essential agelessness of the site and
of the rock: this Victory carved from an
olive-tree, offering to all eternity the most
ephemeral of fruits.
This symbol, too, the olive-tree grafted
by human hands, this gesture of offering,
of certainty and light, is part of the heritage
of all mankind.
I Jacques Lacarriöre
In this work executed by the Hungarian painter Csontvary around
the beginning of the 20th century, the Acropolis forms a
picturesque backdrop to a scene of elegant ladies visiting Athens
in a horse-drawn carriage.
30
