Apartheid represents today the vilest form of modern
slavery. Unesco's patient but tenacious and vigorous
action ties in with the struggle of the South African blacks
themselves, who have shown that with the courage of
revolt they have discarded fear and regained hope. If the
international community is to remain true to itself, it must
mobilize and act firmly in order not to disappoint that
hope.
Unesco's position is based primarily on a detailed
analysis of the effects of apartheid on education, on
culture and on information. What is involved is not just
isolated occurrences. Apartheid is a whole, a system, and
this system is not the result of chance, it cannot be
improved with a little tinkering here and there. It is, like
Nazism, the coherent ideology of a racist state which,
though it first hits the numerically largest black
community, also affects the coloureds, the Asians and the
whites themselves. Nobody escapes this master-slave
dialectic.
This ideology finds expression in every institution of the
Republic. It permeates the educational system at all
levels, it is taught in the schools, it is imposed on creative
artists and it controls information within South Africa
and seeks to control it in other countries as well.
Unesco has repeatedly proclaimed that it is totally and
radically opposed to this system. The "respect for...
human rights... without distinction of race, sex, language
or religion" stipulated in Article I of Unesco's Constitution
would lose all meaning if such an ideology were to be
tolerated.
Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco
From an address given at the
opening of the World Conference
for Action against Apartheid,
held In Lagos, Nigeria,
22-26 August 1977

The U.N.'s
world campaign
against apartheid
by
Enuga
S. Reddy
Of all the crises in the world today, the grow¬
ing conflict between the minority régimes
and the liberation movements in southern
Africa is of most direct and urgent concern
to the United Nations. At stake are the
purposes and principles of the U.N. and the
imperative need to eliminate colonialism and
racial discrimination, which are major
sources of international tension and conflict.
The African people in Rhodesia, South
Africa and Namibia patiently tried for
decades, by peaceful and non-violent means, to obtain their
legitimate rights. But the authorities consistently rejected peace¬
ful change to full equality, and met the African demands with
increasingly ruthless measures of repression. The African political
movements were-obliged to abandon non-violence and organize
underground activity, sabotage and armed struggle.
Rhodesia is now the scene of an armed conflict between the
illegal régime and the liberation forces in which, according to
official accounts, over 5,000 people have been killed.
Encounters between the South African forces and the freedom
fighters of the Namibian liberation movement, the South West
Africa People's Organization (SWAPO), have become a frequent
occurrence.
In South Africa, many hundreds of Africans have been killed
and thousands wounded since the killings of African school¬
children demonstrating against racial discrimination in Soweto in
June 1976. The violence has been entirely by the police, but the
beginnings of armed resistance by the black people have i
appeared. |
ENUGA S. REDDY of India is Director of the United Nations Centre against
Apartheid, and also heads the U.N. Educational and Training Programme
for Southern Africa and the U.N. Trust Fund for South Africa. He was
Executive Secretary of the World Conference for Action against Apartheid
held at Lagos (Nigeria) in August 1977.

These conflicts have spilled beyond national boundaries.
South "African and Rhodesian forces repeatedly committed acts
of aggression against Angola, Mozambique and Zambia in pur¬
suit of freedom fighters and to intimidate the neighbouring
African states which support them.
In 1946 the United Nations was seized with the problem of
racial discrimination in South Africa and with South Africa's
moves to annex Namibia. Since then, U.N. action on southern
Africa has evolved from mere appeals to attempts to apply
sanctions and other forms of pressure, and finally to wide-
ranging programmes of international action at governmental
and non-governmèntal levels.
Until 1960, the United Nations annually appealed to the
South African government to end racial discrimination in the
hope that it could be persuaded by world opinion. These appeals
failed, but the United Nations debates were not without value.
They resulted in the gradual acceptance by all Member States
of the competence of the U.N. to consider the situation in
South Africa, in greater world awareness of the aspirations of the
black people of that country and in the moral isolation of the
South African government.
The discussions on Namibia reinforced by advisory opinions
of the International Court of Justice affirming the international
status of the territory and the accountability of the South African
government for its administration helped prevent an annexation
of that territory. The Namibian people were enabled, despite
strenuous South African objections, to approach the inter¬
national community through petitions to United Nations organs
and hearings before them.
By 1960, the rapid advance of decolonization in Africa and
the entry of newly-independent African states into the United
Nations drew greater world attention to southern Africa.
The South African government, determined to resist the
"winds of change" sweeping the continent, stepped up repres¬
sion against the growing movement for freedom in South
Africa and Namibia. On 10 December 1959, Human Rights Day,
the South African police opened fire on a crowd of Africans in
Windhoek, peacefully demonstrating against a forcible move
to a segregated location, killing 11 and wounding 44.
On 21 March 1960, in Sharpeville, South Africa, police shot
indiscriminately at a peaceful demonstration against racist
"pass laws", killing 68 and wounding over 200.
These tragic events heightened world concern over the situa¬
tion, especially in Western countries which had earlier resisted
strong condemnations.
On 1 April 1960, the Security Council consi¬
dered the situation in South Africa for the
first time, and called on the South African
government to abandon apartheid and racial
discrimination. In December of that year,
the General Assembly adopted the historic
Declaration on the Granting of Indepen¬
dence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
solemnly proclaiming the need to bring
colonialism in all its forms to a speedy and
unconditional end.
As the South African government continued to defy United
Nations resolutions, the African states, supported by Asian,
Socialist and other states, pressed for economic and other
sanctions against South Africa.
They felt that South Africa would pay little attention to
United Nations resolutions so long as it was able to count on
continued political, economic and other relations with the
Western countries and its other major trading partners. The latter
resisted sanctions, arguing that they were neither feasible nor
appropriate, and that they could not achieve the desired results.
United Nations deliberations began to reflect a consensus on the
objectives but sharp differences on the means of promoting them.
On 6 November 1962, the General Assembly adopted a resolu¬
tion requesting Member States to break off diplomatic and eco¬
nomic relations with South Africa, and to refrain from supplying
arms and ammunition to that country. This resolution was
opposed by the main trading partners of South Africa, and many
other states abstained. The Security Council decided in
1963-1964 to recommend an arms embargo against South Africa
but could not agree on mandatory sanctions.
In 1966, the United Nations General Assembly decided by an
overwhelming vote to terminate South Africa's mandate over
Namibia and declared that the territory was henceforth under the
direct responsibility of the United Nations. (See article page 16.)
Following South Africa's refusal to withdraw from the territory,
the General Assembly and the Security Council recommended a
number of measures to secure its compliance but again there
was no agreement on mandatory decisions.
Meanwhile, the United Nations became increasingly concerned
with the situation in Southern Rhodesia as the minority régime
in that territory attempted to obtain independence without
granting equal rights to the African population.
After that régime made a unilateral and
illegal declaration of independence in 1965,
and on the proposal of the administering
power, the United Kingdom, the Security
Council imposed mandatory sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia. The effective¬
ness of these sanctions was, however, limit¬
ed by the fact that South Africa (and
Portugal until the independence of Mozam¬
bique in 1975) enabled the Rhodesians to
circumvent the sanctions.
Most nations of the world have broken, or refrained from esta¬
blishing, diplomatic relations with South Africa, but 21 countries,
including the main trading partners of South Africa, maintain
diplomatic representatives in Pretoria. All countries have recog¬
nized the illegality of South African administration over Namibia
and almost all have terminated official relations with it. No coun¬
try, except South Africa, maintains diplomatic relations with the
illegal régime in Rhodesia.
But in the economic field, the results have been particularly
disappointing. Though many countries complied with U.N. reso¬
lutions, some at considerable sacrifice. South Africa was able to
increase its economic relations with its main trading partners.
Even more alarming was the military build-up by South Africa,
despite the arms embargo. While most governments prohibited
the supply of arms and military equipment to South Africa, a few
. arms exporting countries delayed action or followed restrictive
interpretations of the United Nations recommendations. South
Africa increased its military budget from $ 168 million in 1962-63
to $ 1,900 million in 1977-78. It acquired an enormous amount of
sophisticated military equipment, and developed local manufac¬
ture of arms and ammunition.
While continuing to press the powers concerned to disen¬
gage from the minority régimes, the United Nations organs began
to push for greater action in directions where there was broader
agreement. Particular emphasis was placed on assistance to the
oppressed people of southern Africa and their liberation move¬
ments, on dissemination of information on the situation in
southern Africa and on encouragement of action by inter¬
governmental and non-governmental organizations to reinforce
United Nations efforts.
Two important world conferences were held in 1977 with
impressive participation of governments, liberation movements
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations: the
International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia, held in Maputo, Mozambique, from 16 to 21 May;
and the World Conference for Action against Apartheid, held
in Lagos, Nigeria, from 22 to 26 August.
The United Nations has recognized the legitimacy of the
struggles of the national liberation movements for freedom, and
has granted them observer status in its deliberations on southern
African problems. It has encouraged the specialized agencies
and other intergovernmental organizationsas well as churches,
trade unions, anti-apartheid and solidarity movements and other
non-governmental organizations to take all appropriate action.

SWAZILAND
LESOTHO
each within its mandate, to isolate the minority régimes and
assist the struggles for freedom.
In 1967, it established the office of the Commissioner, for
Namibia to help execute the decisions of the Council for Namibia,
administer assistance to the Namibian people and mobilize public
support to press for South Africa's withdrawal.
It also established a Centre against Apartheid, to help the
Special Committee against Apartheid develop an international
campaign, to expand information activity and to administer
humanitarian and educational assistance to the victims of
apartheid.
As a result of persistent efforts by the United
Nations and other organizations, as well as
by African and other Member States, the
minority régimes are increasingly isolated.
The specialized agencies of the U.N. and
other intergovernmental organizations have
all excluded Southern Rhodesia, and have
refused to recognize the South African
administration in Namibia. Many of them
have accepted the United Nations Council
for Namibia as the legal authority for Nami¬
bia, and have invited the national liberation movements from the
three countries to their conferences and meetings. South Africa
withdrew from Unesco in 1955 and has since been expelled from
or obliged to leave many other intergovernmental organizations.
None provides any assistance to South Africa or Rhodesia.
An important aspect of the effort to isolate the minority
régimes is the encouragement of public action, especially in coun¬
tries which continue to maintain relations with South Africa.
Non-governmental groups have organized boycotts of South
African and Namibian goods.
. They have exerted their influence to dissuade transnational
corporations from collaborating with South Africa and from
practising racial discrimination in their operations in southern
Africa. The campaign to boycott racially-selected sports teams
from South Africa has involved hundreds of thousands of
sportsmen and sports enthusiasts in "many countries, and has
brought home to the white communities in southern Africa the
extent of worldwide abhorrence of racial discrimination.
Several Western countries and other main trading partners
of South Africa have taken further steps, however cautious and ,
moderate, towards the implementation of U.N. resolutions.
France, for example, announced in 1977 that it was halting
supplies of military equipment to South Africa, and the Federal
Republic of Germany has decided to close its consulate in;
Namibia. Scandinavian and other states have taken steps to stop
new investments in South Africa.
The United Nations and related agencies undertook humanita¬
rian and educational assistance to the victims of colonialism and .
apartheid in the early 1960s when repression greatly increased
and sizeable numbers of refugees began to come out of southern
Africa. In subsequent years, they established and encouraged
programmes of direct assistance to the liberation movements,
including help in preparing cadres for the' future development of
these countries. ,
The U.N. Trust Fund for South Africa established in 1965 to
assist political prisoners and their families in South Africa,
Namibia and Southern Rhodesia has received over $5 million in
voluntary contributions.
The United Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa, also financed by voluntary contributions, has
received over $10 million to train inhabitants of the three territo¬
ries. It now administers over 1,300 scholarships. .
The Fund for Namibia, established in 1972, has received over
$9 million. Part of this goes to the Namibia Institute, establish¬
ed in Lusaka in 1976, to train cadres for the future administration k
of Namibia. r
7

A turning point in African resistance to apartheid came on
16 June 1976, in the black township of Soweto, outside
Johannesburg, when 10,000 black pupils made a protest march
(right) against the compulsory use of the Afrikaans language
in school. The police opened fire, killing a 13-year-old boy, and
sparked off months of riots and strikes around the country.
In the first week alone, 176 were killed and over 1,200 wounded.
The United Nations Development Programme has allocated
substantial funds for assistance to national liberation movements,
to be administered by Unesco, the International Labour Organi¬
zation (ILO), the World Health Organization (WHO), and the
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). The U.N. High
Commissioner for Refugees has been assisting tens of thousands
of refugees from the three territories. Unicef provides assistance
to mothers and children through the national liberation
movements.
Few liberation struggles in history have
received greater political support and con¬
crete assistance from the international
community.
The minority régimes in southern Africa are
increasingly isolated and face mounting
pressure. This has resulted in some move¬
ment towards settlements in Zimbabwe and
Namibia, with U.N. participation in the
process of transition to independence.
But the South African government remains
adamant in rejecting majority rule and so long as it and its
supporters resist change, there can be no secure peace in the
region. The threat of a widening conflict, perhaps even a race
war, with enormous casualties and inevitable repercussions
beyond the region, will remain.
The United Nations is attempting, as a matter of utmost
urgency, to maximize international efforts to avert this danger.
Full observance of International Anti-Apartheid Year in 1978
can make an effective contribution to this effort.
Enuga S. Reddy
The vignettes in the above text are by the Polish artist Zygmunt Gasowski
© International Institute of Human Rights, Strasbourg, France

