For
Rhodesia's
blacks,
the name
Zimbabwe
symbolizes
past glories
and future
freedom
by
Marion
O'Callaghan
MARION O'CALLAGHAN of Trinidad
and Tobago is a social anthropologist and
the author of Southern Rhodesia: the
Effects of a Conquest Society on Educa¬
tion, Culture and Information (Unesco,
1977; see inside back cover) as well as
various articles on racism and culture. A
staff member of Unesco's Division of the
International Development of Social
Sciences, she is also a novelist under her
maiden name of Marion Patrick Jones.
22

THE two names Southern Rhodesia and Zimbabwe symboli¬
cally represent the history of a single country. The Zimbab¬
we complex of ruins, south of Salisbury, goes back to the
11th century and was the political and religious centre of an Afri¬
can society which spread far beyond the boundaries of today's
state.
This civilization produced not only impressive buildings but also
pottery, a settled agriculture, domesticated livestock, mining and
smelting, and the manufacture of fabrics. There was already some
occupational specialization and a highly developed internal and
external trade.
We will not go into the details of shifts of power and of sov¬
ereignty within Zimbabwe, preferring to concentrate on the crea¬
tion of Southern Rhodesia. In 1870 Lobengula became king of
Zimbabwe and faced the growing push of British influence north¬
wards from South Africa.
The Moffatt treaty signed between the government of the Unit¬
ed Kingdom and Lobengula established a British sphere of interest
Zimbabwe. Through the Rudd concession, the British South
Africa Company was granted mineral rights. There is, however,
some indication that Lobengula did not understand and was not
told the implications of these two treaties.
In 1890, that part of Zimbabwe known as Mashonaland was
occupied by the "Pioneer Column", an expeditionary force fund¬
ed by the British South Africa Company.
Within a few years white settlers proceeded to evict the Shona
people from their lands, to exercise an authority never before exer¬
cised by Lobengula, and to force the Shona people to work for
them. The European settlers also dislocated the Matabele's eco¬
nomy, seized their cattle, countermanded the orders of Lobengula,
and punished the Shona and the Matabele if they resisted settler
. rule.
In the face of this the Shona and the Matabele united in the
"rebellion" of 1897. This was harshly put down, and in its wake
was established today's Rhodesia, named after Cecil Rhodes, the
founder of the British South Africa Company, which was deleg¬
ated by the British Government to administer Rhodesia. In prac¬
tice this meant settler rule, and from the beginning ensured that
the colonization of Rhodesia would follow a different pattern from
that of most of Africa.
Indeed as early as the end of 1898, the major institutions of
administration and legislative policies had been elaborated. These
were to last in their broad outlines until today. A franchise was ela¬
borated that was, like today's, theoretically non-racist. But few
Africans could meet the property, monetary and literacy qualifica¬
tions for voting.
White political power was consolidated by the unequal tenure
and allocation of land, by white control over the labour power of
blacks, and by the system of education which ensured that there
was a white monopoly of technology as well as of the trade
unions. The old society was shattered.
Chiefs and headmen were retained but they were apppointed
and could be removed by the central white government: they were
salaried civil servants. Their power was now subordinate to that of
the white District Commissioners and their main occupation was to
collect taxes for the white government.
Just as important was the introduction of a money economy,
which while it did notand was not meant toend the semi-
subsistence farming of all Africans, forced many to seek work on
European farms or mines in order to buy the things they needed
and which were no longer produced, or which were new needs
created by the nature of the new economy.
African society was further disrupted by the introduction of a
new religion Christianity that was closely linked with the politi¬
cal power of the settlers, -by. new laws elaborated by a settler
government, by new methods of settling disputes (the European
courts) and above all by the massive alienation of land and cattle
which, together with a hut tax, forced Africans to become
labourers.
Land became more important for the settlers as the hopes enter¬
tained by Rhodes of vast mineral wealth receded. The result was a
continuing appropriation of African land from the 19th century on.
Indeed, between 1936 and 1959, according to a Rhodesian Select
Parliamentary Committee on Resettlement (1960), over 113,000
Africans were compulsorily removed from "white" farming areas.
B
Y 1969, 250,000 whites had the legal right enshrined in the
Constitution to 44.95 million acres, while 5 million Africans
had the right to 44.94 million acres.
Africans, moreover, have been hampered by the nature of mar¬
keting, which is tilted in favour of white farms; by the little com¬
mercial credit available to modernize their holdings compared with
that granted to whites; by the fact that they have to pay higher
interest rates than Europeans on what credit is available; by the
lack of resources to employ paid labour; by the small size of their
farms; and by the fact that their land is often poorer than that alio- .
cated to white farm's.
It is not surprising, therefore, that with the constant degradation
of the African rural areas, an increasing number of Africans were
forced to seek work in the white areas, not only to maintain them¬
selves but to subsidize the reserves.
Work on the plantations is poorly paid, and contact with outside
society is discouraged. In 1975, adult workers on European planta¬
tions were often getting as little as between $8 (Rhodesian) and
$15 (R) for 30 days' work, semi-skilled and skilled workers earning
between $30 (R) and $40 (R). In 1964, the African agricultural
wage was 4.6 per cent of the European wage; by 1974 it had drop¬
ped to 4.3 per cent.
Child labour is often part of the farm school system, children
being given half-day schooling and $1.50 (R) to $3.00 (R) for
30 days.
The mines present a similar picture. In 1964 in mining the ave¬
rage African wage was only 8.6 per cent of the average European
wage. By 1974, average African wages were only 6.9 per cent of '
the average European wage.
The difference between European wages and African wages has
become greater in nearly every sector of the economy, but it is in
mining and farming that inequality is greatest.
Most Rhodesian Africans therefore prefer to go to the urban f
23

¡L
m^t&5ry'
Drawing ©
Ian Mackenzie Kerr
Zimbabwe:
eloquent ruins
of an ancient
capital
Massive granite remains of Zimbabwe
dating back to the 11th century rise on a
hilltop to the south of Salisbury. They
include a 10-metre-high tower and
ramparts (detail, right) that measure some
300 metres around. Zimbabwe, which
means "dwelling of a chief" in the Shona
language, was a sanctuary and the burial
place of kings, as well as the capital of a
flourishing African civilization until it was
sacked in the early 19th century. Drawing
above depicts one of the famous carved
soapstone birds discovered at Zimbabwe
that were symbolic representations of the
dead kings.
. areas to seek jobsthe men in industry, the women in domestic
* service.
African movement is regulated by the 1957 African's Identifica¬
tion and Registration Act. This law, which provides not only for
the registration of Africans, but obliges them to carry a special
identification card, is the Rhodesian equivalent of the South Afric¬
an pass laws. Certain Africans are exempt from this: chiefs, head¬
men, property owners, master farmers and licensed traders.
The number of Africans who can inhabit a particular township is
fixed, and Africans who live there must prove that they are either in
employment or have a bona fide reason for being there. The effect
is to limit African urbanization to the number of Africans needed
by European employers and to channel African labour into farm
jobs.
The African townships themselves are, partly for security rea¬
sons, isolated by land and trees from the European areas. In the
major European towns the townships have not been incorporated
into the European municipalities. They remain outside of them
although often controlled by themand therefore do not elect
municipal councils and are not administered in the same way as
white municipalities.
Housing in the African areas is often deplorable, and recreation
centres, local amenities and social welfare are unequal to those
available in white areas. African social welfare is maintained
through the beer profits of halls often run by the municipalities.
There is therefore a vested interest in promoting the sale of beer
and its consumption.
Housing varies from tin huts to men's barracks and family dwel¬
lings. The tendency however is to establish single dwellings, so
even when men can legally bring their wives from the rural areas,
there may be no accommodation for them. The result is a new type
of concubinage, prostitution, and a number of relatives who live
there illegally children hoping to get to school or adults looking
for a job.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the African rate of urbaniza¬
tion is much lower than that of Europeans. However, in spite of.
the government policy of regulating the flow of Africans to the
towns, the African urban population has risen from 676,000 in 1969
to about 970,000 today.
Africans, with the exception of a small middle-class of teachers,
lawyers and priests, are employed in the lowest paid jobs in the
economy: semi-skilled and unskilled labour, with as many as 14.08
per cent in domestic service.
It could be argued that this picture would change with the
spread of education. Let us therefore look at the educational
policy and practice of the Rhodesian authorities.
Separation in education started with European settlement.
After conquest, the dynamics of European control led directly to
the establishment of separate systems, first for the education of
settlers, and then for that of Africans.
24

African education was intended to maintain African inferiority
both on the labour market and in terms of access to political
power.
'' Both the economic role expected from Africans and the method
of maintaining white political control through a limited franchise
dictated the level and the content of African education. Efforts
were concentrated on providing Africans with primary education,
and then only on the first four years of schooling, thus ensuring
that most Africans who had gone to school at all were
semi-literate.
Secondary education, on the other hand, expanded very slowly,
and there wasand isan increasing emphasis, not on the acade¬
mic subjects that lead to a university career, but on technical sub¬
jects, such as carpentry for boys or domestic science for girls.
As long as the status quo was not threatened, African education
could remain the affair of the missionaries. This provided a
method of, not only conversion, but of decreasing government
expenditure on African education. After the Rhodesian Front
made a so-called Unilateral Declaration of Independence in 1965,
and in the light of statements from most churches in favour of
social justice, the Rhodesian authorities took certain measures to
increase government control over education and to implement the
government's overall policy of "community development".
Rhodesia has not officially announced an apartheid policy. Its
aim has rather been stated in the more neutral terms of "commu¬
nity development". The aims of "community development"
however, differ only slightly from the Bantustan policy of the
South African Government.
In both cases apartheid and community development chiefs
are resurrected, tribes are recreated, and a so-called "traditional"
political structure imposed. It has nothing to do, however, with
the old traditions of black Rhodesians or black South Africans. It
is a modern device whereby it is hoped that nationalism will be
diverted into tribal loyalties.
The policy of the present illegal régime is to transfer African edu¬
cation from the missions to "responsible" community boards and
councils, themselves politically controlled by the central govern¬
ment. These community boards are to be responsible for collect¬
ing extra taxes and contributions for African education, thus
decreasing its cost to the white government as well as finding
"voluntary" African labqur for school building.
The financing of education follows the same lines as the division
of land. Approximately the same amount of money is spent by the
Rhodesian government on the education of white children as on
Africans. Yet there are 275,000 whites and. 6 million Africans.
We have gone into education in some detail. But the same
situation exists with regard to health services. Hospitals are segre¬
gated both because of deliberate policy and because housing areas
are segregated. Nor are they "separate but equal". Africans are
more likely to suffer from diseases linked to malnutrition and
poverty. They also have less access to medical care. The same
situation is repeated in access to amenities and social services:
water, electricity, roads, pensions.
The situation in Rhodesia, however, is not quite the same as that
in the Republic of South Africa. First, the present ratio between
the black and white population is much greater than in South
Africa, and in recent years the possibility of increasing the white
population by immigration has vanished: more whites now emi¬
grate than enter the country. Moreover, nearly 60 per cent of Rho¬
desian whites were born outside Rhodesia. The excuse of 300
years' settlement used by the Afrikaners in South Africa is hardly
relevant to the situation of white Rhodesia.
The so-called Unilateral Declaration of Independence in 1965
was in fact made to stem any advance towards majority rule.
The flowering
of modern
Shona sculpture
In recent years, a number of sculptors of the Shona
people, descendants of the builders of ancient
Zimbabwe, have come to the forefront. They are
producing powerful creations that have nothing in
common with copies of traditional Shona objects
made for the tourist trade. Exhibitions of their work
have been held at major museums in New York, Paris
and London. A recurrent theme of Sona sculpture is
a head with two or more faces, with a cyclopic eye in
mid-forehead. Above, "Spirit of Wisdom" by
the Shona sculptor John Takawira.
Times, however, have changed since 1965. First of all the Portu¬
guese empire collapsed and was replaced by independent states
such as Mozambique^which is hostile to racism, and which,
moreover, won its independence through armed revolt. Guerrilla
incursions into Rhodesia had started before the independence of
Mozambique: they increased afterwards.
But besides armed revolt, Rhodesia was faced with the non-
recognition of its so-called independence and with sanctions
which partly dislocated its. economy. It continues- to exist only
because of the massive assistance still provided by the Republic of
South Africa.
The arms budget soared; Africans were forcibly removed to be
concentrated into so-called "safe" guarded villages; the age for
compulsory military service was extended; and a series of "raids",
sometimes amounting to an invasion, was made on Mozambique
and other front-line African states. Even internally, the chiefs on
whom the Rhodesian authorities depended were less willing to be
informers, faced with the opposition of their people.
Faced with almost total isolation and an African population
determined to be free, supremacy has become impossible to main¬
tain without a massive military effort. Even so, it is unlikely to last.
Indeed, Africans look confidently to the future. For is not white
rule at best only a century in the long history of their country and
will not Zimbabwe continue long after Rhodesia is nothing but a
name?
Marion O'Callaghan
25
