THE BLACKS IN LATIN
Africa's imprint on the art
and life of another continent
by Alejo Carpentier
IN the year 1441, ten natives of north¬
ern Guinea were taken to Portugal
as a "present" for King Henry the
Navigator from Antam Gonçalves, a mer¬
chant-traveller who had brought them
with him simply as exotic curiosities, just
as he might have brought a few parrots
or some rare plants back from the tropics.
Soonall too soon Europeans realized
that these "tropical oddities" might make
a tremendous labour force, and within
three years 235 African men, women and
children had been forcibly taken to Por¬
tugal "in order", as a pious chronicler of
the time noted, "to save their souls, which
were hopelessly lost."
Thus it was that black slaves in ever
greater numbers came to do domestic
work in the palaces and farmwork on the
domains of wealthy landowners. This was
the start of the abominable slave-trade
which was to take on such staggering
proportions with the discovery of America.
It was Charles V, King of Spain and
Emperor of Austria, who in 1518 gave
official status, as it were, to this traffic by
ALEJO CARPENTIER of Cuba is one of Latin Ameri¬
ca's leading novelists. His many books have been
translated into 22 languages and include, in English
editions: The Kingdom of this World (1957), The Lost
Steps (1957) published by Knopf, New York, Explosion
in a Cathedral (Gol/ancz, London, 1963) and Reasons
of State (Partridge, London, 1976). A musicologist,
Carpentier is the author of A History of Cuban Music
(1949). He was for some years director of Cuba's
national publishing house, in Havana and professor of
the history of music at the National Conservatory,
Havana. He is currently Counsellor for Cultural Affairs
at the Cuban Embassy in Paris.
8

AMERICA
African slaves and the caravels that transported them to the New World dominate a huge
mural, below left, in an office in Bahia (Brazil). Along with the Iberian conquistadors, the
blacks were to create a new form of culture in the Caribbean, Brazil and other parts of
Latin America. Black artists in the New World lost touch with purely African art forms, but
family resemblances to the African tradition have survived in the work of such artists as
the Cuban mestizo painter Wif redo Lam. His monumental canvas The Jungle, which
created a furore when shown in New York in 1943, has been seen as the first painting to
express the Third World's awareness of the need to pool all the world's cultures. Below, in '
his canvas Presencia Eterna (Eternal Presence) painted in 1944, Lam returned to some of the
major themes of The Jungle.
authorizing the transportation of 4,000
í African slaves to the islands of Hispaniola
(Santo Domingo), Cuba, Jamaica and
Puerto Rico.
Even before that time, the custom of
using black slaves had spread throughout
Spain in imitation of what was being done
in Portugal. (Cervantes alludes to the
^practice in his Exemplary Tales). In this
way, many blacks found their way to the
New World, and especially to the Antilles,
which were already being colonized long
before the slave-trade' actually became
established as a large-scale commercial
enterprise.
The Catálogo de Pasajeros a Indias, or
list of passengers embarking for the Indies,
in the Casa de la Contratación in Seville,
is an invaluable source of information
about population movements in 16th-
century Spain. In its pages are the names
of those who first sought passage to "the
recently discovered lands on the other side
of the Occeana Sea." Among its entries,
one finds:
"5 February, 1510.- Francisco, a black
man." (Francisco was the first one of his
race to apply and was assigned number
38.); "27 February, 1512. Rodrigo de
Ovando, a black freedman; April 1512.
Pedro and Jorge, slaves (travelling with
their masters); August 1512. Cristina, a
black woman, and her daughter Inès."
The list goes on and on, with the names
of many slaves, freedmen, loros (those
with particularly dark skin), mulattoes (with
skin "the colour of stewed pears") and
curious cases like that of one "Juan
Gallego, a black, born in Pontevedra,
Galicia," who embarked on 10 November,
1517, though the record does not specify
whether he was a slave or a free man.
With the slave-trade now firmly esta¬
blished by both the Spanish and the
Portuguese, the number of blacks shipped
to America began to grow in geometric
proportion till they gradually formed one
of the basic ethnic components of the
population.
The Europeans who had children by
Indian women, plus the new African
elements, soon gave rise to the criollo
(creóle) class, which is basic to the inter¬
pretation and general understanding of
the history of Latin America.
The word criollo first appeared in a
geographical study by Juan López de
Velazco, published in Mexico between
1571 and 1574. "Spaniards who go out to
those parts" (that is, America) "and stay
there any length of time, necessarily
undergo some colour and personality
changes as a result of differences in tem¬
perature and climate; but those who are
born there are called criollos, and although
they are considered and held to be Spa-
Photo © André Morain. Paris. Private Coll.. U.S.A.
niards, they are obviously different in
complexion and build."
Silvestre de Balboa^ in a poem written
in Cuba in 1608, refers to a ¿lack slave as
a creóle. Another poet, Garcilaso de la
Vega, known as "the Inca" because his
mother was a princess of the royal line of
the Incas, wrote in 1617: "The Spanish
call those born in the New World criollos,
whether their parents are Spaniards or
Africans."
Sensing the danger implicit in this
neologism, the Spanish Crown tried for a
while to prohibit its use in any document,
report or legal text, but the word continued
to be used to designate a type of human
being that had arisen in America and was
taking on characteristics of its own, with
variations according to the region and to
the ethnic components responsible for its
formation.
In the Antilles and along the coasts of
Mexico, Colombia, Venezuela and Brazil
with outposts as far north as the Missis¬
sippi basin these people were to be
strongly marked by their African origins,
and in some of the Caribbean islands the
black ' population eventually outnumbered
the Europeans.
Around 1920, Paris experienced what
Jean Cocteau, the French poet and paint¬
er, did not hesitate to describe in alarm
as the "negro crisis". Picasso had painted
Les Demoiselles d'Avignon in 1907,
obviously influenced by certain African
art objects which had aroused his- enthu¬
siasm, as they had that of Matisse and
Derain. They and others, like the poet
Apollinaire, started collecting what they
dubbed "negro art". Galleries were filled
with sculpture, carvings, masks and all
kinds of objects from the African continent
whose history and creations were quite
unknown.
To lump all this together and call it
"negro art" was as preposterous as putting
the label "white art" on a collection ofr/
say, Greek Venuses, Renaissance marbles,
medieval gargoyles and Calder mobiles. .
After these art objects, a whole oral Y

Spontaneous art
and voodoo rites in Haiti
k tradition arrived in Europe. Spoken, recited
and sung, it was a literature in which
magic and religion alternated with more
or less epic tales, cosmogonie legend,
beast fables, proverbs and simple stories
meant to entertain or edify the listeners.
This literary corpus, gathered here and
there by explorers and missionaries, began
to be published in collections of "negro
literature". (Needless to say, the term
"negro", as usual, failed to make any
distinction between the various ethnic
groups or degrees of cultural develop¬
ment). The best known of these is Blaise
Cendrars' famous Anthology, translated
into 20 languages and still to be found in
bookshops the world over.
So now there was "negro art" and
"negro literature"; the only thing missing
was "negro music". It soon put in its
appearance.
Jazz made its spectacular entrance on
the scene shortly after World War I. Stra¬
vinsky was enchanted with this novelty,
just as Picasso had previously been enthu¬
siastic about masks from Dahomey, and
he composed a piece entitled Piano Rag
Music, followed by Ragtime for Eleven
Instruments.
A key work embodying the spirit of the
times was Darius Milhaud's ballet The
Creation of the World, composed in 1923.
The music uses the syncopated beat and
runs of jazz, and the. story, by Cendrars, is
based on an ancient African legend about
how the world began. Since the stage
sets and costumes had to match the rest
of the work, the painter Fernand Léger did
his best to convey the spirit of African
objects.
A serious misunderstanding arose,
however, and it was to become the source
of many later errors. The first two pieces
of jazz to become hits in Europe were
"Alexander's Ragtime Band" and "Saint
Louis Blues", but European fans did not
seem to realize that the latter had been
written by a black musician from New
Orleans named Christopher Handy, and
that the former was the work of a free¬
style white composer named Irving Berlin.
In other words, such elaborated jazz had
very little in common with African music.
It was an authentically creóle product that
had its source in a racial intermingling that
had been going on for a long time in the
New World.
As Deborah Morgan so aptly comment¬
ed in the review Musique en Jeu: "The
history of jazz began in 1619 when a Dutch
frigate landed in Jamestown, Virginia, with
the first blacks sent to work in North
America. For jazz is not a type of music
that sprang up somewhere around 1900
in New Orleans, as a die-hard legend
holds; it is the result of á three-hundred-
year confrontation between two commu¬
nities, one which came from Africa and
the other from Europe."
It is curious to note that Cuban popular
music acquired its own specific features
about the same time, that is, in the early
17th century, though they were of course
quite different. Cuban rhythms scarcely
resembled jazz, but they spread through
the world in the early 1930s, whereas
Brazilian music began to be known outside
Brazil only just before World War II.
If jazz is totally different from the African
musical forms with which we are now
familiar, so is the music of Cuba and
Brazil. Blacks have indeed contributed
greatly to the development of all these
musical forms, but any similarity to what
is heard in the African countries has
disappeared. The Cuban cha-cha-cha, the
Dominican plena, the beguine of Santa
Lucia and Martinique, the calypso and
steel bands of Barbados and Trinidad, the
samba and bossa nova of Brazil, like the
boogie-woogie and free jazz of North
America, have nothing in common with
the scholarly recordings of African folk
music or the careful notations made by
ethnographers.
What has happened is that the black
man, cut off from Africa, has changed.
As Franz Fanon, an expert on the subject,
pointed out: "There is as much difference
between a Haitian and someone from
Dakar as there is between a Brazilian and
an inhabitant of Madrid."
This leads us to an observation on the
creative activity of the displaced African
living in North or South America. When
he is forced from his homeland, he seems
to lose his feeling for the plastic arts.
But what he forfeits as a sculptor, carver
or painter, he gains as a musician. A
transfer of energy takes place within him.
And though we may admire some sta¬
tuettes or drawings he turns out today
10

In recent years, a group of black and mulatto artists has created an authentic school of
"spontaneous" or "primitive" painting in Haiti, in other islands of the Antilles and in
Venezuela. Below left, work by an artist from Haiti, where ancient African rites such as
voodoo (below) are still practised, especially in rural areas. Voodoo, which originated in
what is now Dahomey, was introduced to the island in the 18th and 19th centuries by
slaves brought by the French. Since then, local beliefs as well as elements of the Catholic
liturgy have been added.
Photo Eve Arnold © Magnum, Paris
such as the "signatures", or graphic sym¬
bols, of the Abakuá groups in Cuba, the
vevés drawn at the foot of the voodoo
altars in Haiti, or the small wrought-iron
figures used in candomblé rites in Brazil
none has the force, the originality or the
technical mastery of an art that was left
behind and slowly forgotten.
On the other hand, the greatest compo¬
sers of this century, in both Europe and
America, have drawn inspiration for major
works from the extraordinarily inventive
music written by blacks in the most widely
different regions of the New World.
This apparent loss of their original plastic
sense can be explained by the fact that
sculpture, carving -and decorative painting
required free time, which the slave-holder
was not prepared to grant.
He was not going to place workshops
and tools at the disposal of men who were
there to increase his wealth, simply so that
they could have the pleasure of carving
figures that he considered barbaric idols
and repositories of ancestral beliefs.
. On the contrary, any such recollections
had to be wiped from the black man's
memory with the help of the overseer's
lash. "Civilized man" in the West did not
yet have the slightest interest in what he
would later come to value as "folk art".
While the black man's paintings or
carvings were considered works of the
Devil, music, on the other hand, did not
cause much inconvenience. The planta¬
tion owners in Cuba, for example, allowed
their slaves to beat their drums and dance
every evening because this showed that
they were in good health and that their
"ebony flesh" was fit for hard labour.
Meanwhile, the slaves listened to what
they heard around them. During the 16th
century, when they were first taken to
America, they assimilated Spanish ballads,
songs from Portugal and even French
square dancing. They discovered musical
instruments unknown in their own lands
and learned to play them.
j ......
If one of them succeeded in being freed
by a master who was more benevolent
than othersfor slavery as an institution
was only abolished by degrees in . the
Americas he might well turn to music as
a way of earning his living, mingling with
white people in a kind of occupational
freemasonry. As the Cuban essayist José
Antonio Saco noted in 1831: "Music enjoys
the prerogative of bringing blacks and
whites together; in orchestras, no distinc¬
tion is made between whites, browns and
blacks."
Far removed from his African roots, the
black man in Latin America became a basic
constituent, together with the Indian, of
the creóle class that was to affect the
destiny of a whole continent with its
aspirations, its struggles and its protest.
As the centuries went by, the blacks were i
slowly incorporated into the society of I
11

, their new homelands and, little by little,
they recovered their poetic sense and the
feeling for the plastic arts which they
seemed to have lost.
Observing ancestral traditions that no
longer bore any relation to their surround¬
ings was now out of the question. The
black peoples had forgotten their African
dialects by this time and spoke only the
major languages of the New World. They
felt no need to revive old Yoruba tales, to
recall ancient legends or return to the
sources of an oral culture they were alie¬
nated from, but rather to "make poetry"
in the full sense of the term. (1)
The same thing happened in painting.
Black artists in the New World were
completely out of touch with art forms that
in Africa were related to religious cults
now left far behind (even though some
vestiges can still be found on altars osten¬
sibly consecrated to Christian saints).
On the contrary, they had to solve the
same technical problems that face artists
everywhere in any period. It is obvious
then that the work of the black and mes¬
tizo painters and sculptors active in Latin
America in the 19th century bore no
resemblance whatsoever to the forms and
stylizations of African art.
This was also true of poetry at that time.
And one may add that there were many
"white" writers the word "white" has
always been quite relative in Latin Ame¬
rica published novels with "negro"
settings, denouncing the loathsome
aspects of slavery in the Americas.
It is only in the last 50 years that a new
generation, of poets and painters has
appeared, whose works are marked by the
symbiosis of cultures fostered by the
New World.
There has been much talk, for example,
of "black poetry", referring to a resonant,
percussive, onomatopoeic type of poetry
which, despite a prevalent assumption,
has often been written by perfectly "white"
poets, like the Cuban Emilio Ballagas or
the Venezuelan Manuel Felipe Rugeles.
In point of fact, this is an exotic view
of "négritude". The truth is that if "black
poetry" as such ever existed, it would have
had to be a protest on behalf of the black
people oppressed by centuries of slavery
and racial discrimination.
First and foremost, it would have had to
be a revolutionary cry because, since the
16th century, the blacks have always been
in revolt against their overlords in some
part of the hemisphere, and even formed
small independent states in Brazil, the
(1) It may be argued that the Abakuá and Santería
groups in Cuba, the Obeah rite in Jamaica, and the
voodoo of Haiti are authentic African survivals. But
it could also be said that such vestiges, besides absorb¬
ing and being much influenced by small local cults, are
destined to disappear in a few years, or else to be given
a strong creóle character. Such is the case of the
voodoo sect, which has had a fresh crop of gods added
to it, such as Criminel Petra, Erzulie and Marinette
Bois-Cheche.
On other islands in the Antilles, African folklore has
become a tourist attraction; "magic ceremonies"' and
"ritual dances" are performed for money. When folk
art is for sale, it has long ceased to be authentic. Not
to mention the fact that in a country like Cuba, the
socialist system makes the old nanigo groups (secret
mutual aid societies) completely superfluous.
Guyanas and Jamaicastates that some¬
times survived for many years.
The blacks of Latin America never
resigned themselves to their status as
slaves: there were countless uprisings and
escapes. The rebellion organized in Vene¬
zuela in the 16th century by Black Miguel,
and the liberation movements in Haiti in
the 18th centuryadmirably led by Tous¬
saint Louverturewere forerunners of the
great wars of independence soon to be
fought in Latin America.
Never during their long history in the
New World did the blacks give up their
quest for freedom, a quest furthered by
the creóles of all classes and stations who,
after much struggling, finally threw off the
yoke of Spanish, Portuguese, French and
English colonialism.



'Never
did the blacks
give up
their quest
for freedom
in the
New World'
It was a typically creóle thought that
Montesquieu, in 1721, put in the mouth
of a black from the Antilles: "Why should
I work for a society that I don't wish to
belong to? Why should I abide by a cove¬
nant made without my being consulted?"
Because he is a creóle, and also educat¬
ed in the best classical traditions, the
Cuban poet Nicolás Guillen was able to
write poetry which took as its metrical
basis the rhythms of the Cuban son, a
musical form with strong creóle influence.
His verses plunge their roots not into
African soil but into well-cultivated ground
broken centuries before by Lope de Vega
and Luis de Góngora in Spain, and Sor
Juana Inés de la Cruz in Mexico in what
they chose to call "poems of blacks."
If there is a kind of poetry that can
properly be called creóle, it is that of
Guillen who, in any case, does not confine
himself within the narrow limits of any
particular style. Whether he is writing his
classical poems or the resounding first
verses of Motivos del Son or Songoro
Cosongo, he is Cuban through and
through.
Similarly in painting: Wifredo Lam's
monumental canvas The Jungle, a com¬
pendium of the plant life and forms pecu¬
liar to the magical environment of the
Caribbean, is the work of a mestizo painter
who has a truly creóle sensibility and
whose painting occupies a special place
in the panorama of modern art.
In Venezuela, Haiti and the small islands
of the Antilles, there is currently developing
an authentic school of "spontaneous" or
"primitive" painters who have been doing '
extraordinary things since the 1940s.
Their work constitutes another contri¬
bution to Latin American painting in gene¬
ral, without a trace of any ancestral African
tradition other than a common fondness
for bright, lively colours, which stems
more from individual temperament than
from a hereditary predisposition.
In short, there exist in the Antilles, where
Spanish, English and French are spoken,
literature and painting with a markedly
creóle character, and it would be difficult
to say just what can be attributed to their
various ethnic components.
The contribution of the blacks to the
world where they were taken by force
does not consist, therefore, in what has
mistakenly been called "négritude". (If
that were the case, we should also have
to speak of the contribution of "white-
itude") It is something much more impor¬
tant, namely, their creative sensibility.
The blacks brought with them a fresh
energy that added a new dimension to
both art and history in the New World.
The creóle class, formed of Indians and
Europeans, did not reach maturity in Ame¬
rica until it had the benefit of black sen¬
sibility.
From the blending of these three races
with greater Indian predominance in some
regions and a more pronounced black
strain in others there arose a type of
man who, with his music, art forms,
poetry and novels, has won a place in the
forefront of world culture.
Alejo Carpentier
12
