Photo Emile Schultess, Bern © Rapho, París
WORLD TRENDS IN ARIDIFICATION



A precarious
balance upset
by Victor A. Kovda
VICTOR ABRAMOVITCH KOVDA, eminent Soviet
soil scientist directed Unesco's Department of Natural
Sciences from 1958 to 1965. Initiator and head of the
joint FAO-Unesco project for a soil map of the world
11960-1965), he has worked as an expert in a large
number of Asian, African and South American coun¬
tries. This specially written article is based on his
book "Aridity and the Fight Against Droughts", ori¬
ginally produced at the request of the United filetions
Environment Programme.
THE age of anarchic economic activity
which once characterized a portion
of the globe is drawing to a close.
The curtain is rising on an era of rational
and controlled use of the resources and
mechanisms of the biosphere.
Aridification probably begins as a result
of deforestation, increasing surface run¬
off, a deepening level of groundwater and
a deterioration of grassland, while tern- k
perature and rainfall remain normal. Y
Atlas of aridity
On this map, compiled for the United Nations Conference on
Desertification, to be held this year, the various regions of the
world are divided into 14 categories according to their degree of
aridity or humidity.
1) Stable humidity, droughts unlikely. 2) Droughts very rare
(incidence: 5%). 3) Droughts rare (incidence: 5 to 10%).
4) Relatively frequent droughts (incidence: 10 to 25%). 5) Frequent
droughts (25 to 30%). 6) Highly frequent droughts (30 to 50%).
7) Exceedingly frequent droughts (50 to 75%). 8) Continuous
droughts (75 to 95%). 9) Absolute droughts (incidence: about
100%). 10) Semi-bound drift desert, dune sand. 11) Surface
latérite crusts denuded by erosion with almost no vegetation.
12) Arctic deserts. 13) Mountain chains, thin forests, shrubland and
savannas with over 50% drought incidence. 14) Mountain deserts
and semi-deserts with almost absolute drought.
11

Human activity may accelerate this pro¬
cess. Drainage of groundwater, erosion,
dust storms, the destruction of vegetation,
dehumidification of the soil and drifting
sand all contribute to the desiccation and
degradation of land and intensify deserti¬
fication.
Today, as in the past, man can obtain
food from arid lands if he exploits them
cautiously and sensibly as grazing land or
by means of dry or irrigation farming. But
the present productivity of arid and sub-
arid lands quite obviously fails to meet
human requirements.
The natural tendency observed in recent
years towards aridification and cyclical
climatic changes, coupled with the conse¬
quences of human error, has aggravated
the generally unfavourable state of world
agriculture.
Several years of severe drought in Afri¬
ca (from Ethiopia to Upper Volta, Mauri¬
tania and Senegal), in Asia (notably India),
in a number of South American countries
and in the plains of Eastern Europe and
North America have been followed by
belated downpours, which were of little
benefit to agriculture and caused flooding
and erosion. Moreover, droughts seem
to return with identical or even greater
intensity in one- to three-year cycles, as
has been observed in Eastern Europe,
India and Africa.
In many countries, such unstable clima¬
tic conditions create highly acute food,
fodder, water and fuel problems. Pastures
and farmland suffer from overuse, exhaus¬
tion and erosion. Marginal arid and semi-
arid tracts acquire the appearance of
desertland, while the desert itself begins
its encroachment or quickens its rate of
advance.
Desertification is accompanied by a
rapid drop in the productivity of semi-arid
and sub-humid zones. Destruction of the
ecological balance leads to profound
changes in the vegetation cover and in
the variety and quantity of animal life and
particularly to destruction of the
soil. In the past, this happened as a result
of overgrazing of pastures and primitive
husbandry. Today, the process is aggra¬
vated by the extensive and disorderly
introduction of heavy vehicles and ma¬
chinery and by mining operations.
Primitive methods of farming, based on
fallowing and the one-crop system, cou¬
pled with the age-old practice of excessive
pasturing, is the main cause of declining
fertility and desertification.
This is especially true of Africa. Land
along the southern border of the Sahara
is turning into desert at an estimated rate
of over 100,000 hectares annually. Each
year the border of the Sahara shifts sever¬
al kilometres further south.
Many believe the deserts of the Middle
East and the Mediterranean region to be
man-made. Two or three thousand years
ago, the mountain-slopes and plains of
Lebanon, Syria, the Egyptian seaboard
and Tunisia were covered with rich vege¬
tation (including the celebrated cedars of
Lebanon), and provided ancient Rome
with ample supplies of timber, grain, ol¬
ives, wine and other produce. Tree-felling,
the destruction of forests and herbaceous
vegetation and the trampling of pastures,
together with erosion by wind and water,
have transformed these territories into
semi-deserts and deserts.
Arab scientists point out that the natu¬
ral environment of Arabia and North Africa
has been almost completely replaced by
man-made landscapesas a result of a
long history of uncontrolled nomadic pas¬
turing and the complete deforestation of
sandy land, loamy plains, hills and moun¬
tain-sides alike, intensified during the 19th
and 20th centuries with the arrival of colo¬
nialists, traders and industrialists.
Desertification has reached alarming
proportions in the Sudan, where the
savanna is advancing on the forest, the
steppe is advancing on the savanna and
the desert is advancing on the steppe.
The borderline between the zone of vege¬
tation and the desert south of Khartoum
has shifted between 90 and 180 kilometres
during the past 20 to 50 years, at an ave¬
rage rate of 5 kilometres each year.
The famous gum arabic acacia planta¬
tions are disappearing from areas where
they once flourished. In the space of a
dozen years, groundnut and sesame crops
have fallen to a half or a quarter of the
previous yield. The picture is the same in
the dry-farming areas and grazing lands
of Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco.
The governments of the independent
African states are endeavouring to draw
up and implement vast projects to check
the spread of desertland, involving the
binding of drift sand, protective afforesta¬
tion, plant improvement and the rotation
of pastures, irrigation and other measures.
In fact, it was the Arab countries and
those of the Sahel region which promoted
the special United Nations programme to
combat the desertification of the planet.
Most of the Sonora desert in Arizona
and virtually all the desert of New Mexico
owe their existence to several hundred
years of overgrazing. The vast arid fracts
of Central Asia were once covered not
only with grass, but also with trees and
shrubs.
Man destroyed the vegetation of arid
and semi-arid areas by using it not only
to feed his livestock but also to meet his
own requirements in fuel, shelter, medi¬
cine and food. The worst damage was
done in years of drought and famine.
When the rains came, they washed over
the denuded surface, carrying away the
humus, without penetrating into the
ground. The result was further desicca¬
tion and an aggravation of its consequen¬
ces. The deforestation of hills and moun¬
tain-sides led to the disappearance of
streams and brooks, with a corresponding
drop in the groundwater level in the plains.
The nomadic way of life and nomadic
livestock raising have existed for three or
four thousand years. The total popula¬
tion of domesticated animals has now L
12

Oases under siege
Like islands floating in the desert,
these oases in the Souf, in the
Algerian Sahara, must be
constantly defended against the
invasion of sand drifts. Palisades
made of palm fronds hold back the
. drifts and protect the often very deep
craters where the date palms grow.
In the Sahara, oases are home to
two-thirds of the population.
13

grown to some 3,000 million head, almost
half of which are found in the world's arid
zones. In North Africa alone, there are
almost 30 million head of cattle, and in
Australia nearly 50 million.
Yet ecologists point out that semi-
deserts and dry steppelands are highly
"fragile" and unstable. Sandy pasture-
land can be transformed into moving
dunes in the space of two or three years,
whereas the restoration of vegetation and
stabilization of the shifting sands require
as much as 15 or 20 years or longer.
The loss of vegetation cover and humus
intensifies the process of aridification.
Larger areas of soil are exposed to sunlight,
the surface temperature rises by 18-25°C,
soil humidity declines and the albedo (the
amount of radiation reflected by a surface)
is doubled or trebled, approaching that of
deserts (40-50 per cent).
All these considerations indicate that
the increasing frequency of drought con¬
ditions, and crop failures, the loss of
vegetation and the destruction of soil over
large areas are interrelated, that they are
linked with the general trend towards
aridification and that they are aggravated
by thoughtless and misguided human
activity.
The intensity and regularity of droughts
during recent years (albeit with some fluc¬
tuations) have turned the semi-arid and
sub-humid zones of Africa, Asia and
America into what look like semi-deserts
and deserts. The danger of desertification
has increased.
World food demand has rocketed, toge¬
ther with the price of foodstuffs. At the
same time, the known world reserves of
food and livestock fodder fell in 1973-1974
from their previous level of 40-80 million
tons to 30 million tons.
What makes matters worse, as noted
by the Soviet scientists A.V. Shnitnikov
in his study of the world's rhythmic chan¬
ges of climate, is that the 20th century
falls basically into a prolonged period of
desiccation. Hence the conclusion that
droughts are an increasing probability in
the immediate future, and that both crop
farming and livestock raising must be
organized to meet the possible conse¬
quences.
Specialists who have studied climate,
weather and yields of crop and animal
farming conclude that it is at present
impossible to predict how soon and in
what direction this unfavourable situation
will change. But the general opinion is
that it may be expected to continue for
some time, perhaps for 10 or 20 years,
and perhaps even for a century or two.
At all events, most climatic forecasts, at
least until 1985, are pessimistic.
Victor A. Kovda
