The link-up of a U.S. Apollo
and a Soviet Soyuz 19
spacecraft on 17 July 1975
was a milestone in the
history of international co¬
operation in space. The
two-craft docked while
hurtling over Europe and
the crews met through a
special airlock which
allowed them to transfer
from one craft to the other.
Left, during a joint training
session near Moscow, the
commander of Soyuz 19,
Aleksei Leonov (right of
photo), acquaints his
American opposite number,
Tom Stafford, with the
systems of the Soviet
spacecraft. Above, during
the historic joint flight,
Leonov and Stafford display
Soviet and U.S. flags during
a news conference
televised from the Soyuz
spacecraft. Amateur artist
as well as pioneer
cosmonaut, Leonov drew
this sketch (right) of Vance
Brand, pilot of the Apollo
command module.
Photo © APN, Moscow
16

Space co-operation in orbit
The first man to walk in space
tots up the benefits
of international research programmes
by Aleksei A. Leonov
TWENTY years ago, ground tracking
stations picked up the radio bleeps
of the world's first artificial satellite.
On that day, men and women everywhere
looked at the skies with different eyes.
Four years later, Yuri Gagarin took the first
steps on the path to the stars. As Neil
Armstrong, the first man to walk on the
Moon, would later say, "He called us all
into space."
Since then, 51 manned space flights
have been carried out, 32 of them from the
Soviet Union. In all, Soviet cosmonauts
have spent over 12,000 hours in space.
There is nothing surprising in the specta¬
cular development of space exploration.
What with the population explosion, the
energy crisis and the depletion of the
world's natural resources, I am convinced
that mankind will step up its efforts to mas¬
ter outer space, to build industrial com¬
bines there and gigantic thermo-electric
power stations run on unlimited "solar
fuel".
But I am equally certain that this will only
be possible if the conquest and use of outer
space are carried out exclusively for peace¬
ful purposes.
Today many countries are striving to
break into space research because their
industries need a stimulus of this kind in
order to increase their competitivity on the
world market. However, only scientifically
and technologically advanced states can
afford to engage in the systematic and
comprehensive study of space. Space
research has made tremendous progress in
recent years, costs have escalated, and
more and more people are asking what
benefits mankind has gained from it.
ALEKSEI ARKHIPOVICH LEONOV, Soviet
cosmonaut and twice Hero of the Soviet
Union, is the first man to leave a space vehicle
and walk in space. (For his account of his first
steps in space, see Unesco Courier, June 1965)
In July 1975 he was commander of the Soviet
Soyuz 19 spaceship which made the historic
linkup with a U. S. Apollo spacecraft as part of
the Soviet-American Apollo-Soyuz Test Project.
I shall begin my answer to this question
by pointing to the weather satellites which
today constitute an irreplaceable link in the
world meteorological system. The infor¬
mation collected by a meteorological satel¬
lite on a single circuit of the earth provides
a hundred times more information than
that provided by all the world's ground
meteorological stations in a whole day.
The Soviet Union's space meteorological
service, for example, has now been in op¬
eration for 10 years. Many countries, in¬
cluding the United States with which the
Soviet Union has concluded an agreement
on the exchange of meteorological infor¬
mation, today make use of this system.
With meteorological satellites, it is now
possible to obtain advance warnings about
the approach of such natural hazards as
typhoons and floods. Though figures are .
far from complete, it has been estimated
that such forecasts save as much as $60
billion a year in various countries around
the world.
Earth survey satellites used to examine
the anomaly in the Earth's magnetic field in
eastern Siberia revealed the presence and
precise depth of iron-ore deposits there, as
well as locating a hitherto unknown ano¬
maly in the southern Atlantic.
Satellites are also useful in detecting
forest fires all over the world, working 24
hours a day in all weathers, something
which no other fire prevention method can
do.
If automatic seismic recording stations,
which are relatively cheap to build, were
placed in key positions in the world's seis¬
mic zones and equipped for regularly trans¬
mitting data to special satellites, it would
be possible to obtain all the information we
need to draw up an overall map of the
seismic activity of the Earth's crust.
Satellites can also be used to chart the
movements of plankton and shoals of fish,
and to transmit this information to fishing
fleets.
A mere 15 years ago, TV programmes
were beamed over long distances through
a network of relay stations 40 or 50 kilo¬
metres apart. Each transmitter received
signals which it then amplified and relay¬
ed to the next station.
Today the Soviet network of Orbita
ground receiving stations, working with
Molniya satellites, provides television for
over 20 million Soviet citizens in the Far
North, Siberia, the Far East and Central L
Asia. The system also provides telephone, '
17

, , \
M
1
m
'u
i r
au
. .-.»
fi
vtysjft*??

Chalking up
a space success
Peaceful space exploration is
bringing mankind many
direct benefits in
communications, weather
forecasting, and the global
management of natural
resources, as well as a host
of spin-off applications in
science, technology and
industry. (1) A Soviet
Soyuz 22 spacecraft in the
final stages of assembly,
and (2) being transported
to the launching platform.
(3) Mission completed:
Aleksei Leonov chalks
a grateful "thank-you" on
the landing capsule of his
Soyuz 19 which brought
him back to Earth at the
end of the joint
Apollo-Soyuz mission.
(4) Spectacular overhead
photo of the splashdown of
a U.S. Apollo 17 manned
spacecraft in the Pacific.
(See also back cover).
Photo © USIS, Paris
telegraph and teletype communications,
as well as facilities for the transmission of
photographs and newspaper columns.
The network took several years to cons¬
truct and the cost was a massive 100 mil¬
lion roubles. (One rouble = 1.34 U.S. dol¬
lars.) However, to provide the same facili¬
ties using traditional techniques,
15,000 km. of cable would have had to be
laid in rugged areas of the Soviet Union.
The work would have taken several de¬
cades, and the costs would have run to
thousands of millions of roubles.
A year(ago, a new TV transmission
system came into operation in the
U.S.S.R., using the Ekran satellite. The
main advantage of Ekran is that its signals
can be picked up by small, inexpensive
aerials on the ground, similar to ordinary
TV antennae, and thus does away with the
need for complex and costly aerials of the
Orbita type.
Ekran's signals can be picked up in any
village within its operating zone. It is an
extremely reliable system, and provides a
24-hour-a-day link in all weathers.
Thanks to communications satellite tech¬
nology, the oilmen of Samotlor (Western
Siberia), the diamond miners of Yakutin
(Central Siberia) the hunters of Tuva
(South-Eastern U.S.S.R.), and the builders
of the Baikal-Amur railway (north of Lake
Baikal) today enjoy television services.
In the last five years, scientists have
begun to make wide use of space techno¬
logy in studying the Earth's surface. A sin¬
gle photo taken from an orbiting laboratory
can provide as much information as 2,000
photographs taken from an aircraft. The
Soviet Salyut 4 orbital research station
took five minutes to do the photographic
work that would have taken a photolabora-
tory aircraft two years.
The analysis of photos taken from space
makes it possible to "see" hundreds of
metres beneath the Earth's surface and to
draw the contours of geological formations
that cannot be charted either on the
ground or by aerial photography.
Right from the start, satellite photo¬
graphy of the Earth led to discoveries of
world-wide importance. It was possible,
for example, to confirm the hypothesis that
19

Europe's weather eye
Meteosat, the 11-member European Space
Agency's first weather satellite, is another
example of international co-operation in
space. As well as supplying Information
to European meteorological services, it is
also Europe's contribution to the World
Weather Watch system and the Global
Atmospheric Research Programme.
Right, one of the European satellite's first
pictures of the Earth, taken on 9
December 1977.
the geological structure of the Ural moun¬
tains stretches deep into the south as far as
central Asia. Photos taken from an orbiting
satellite were also used to improve the
plans for a tunnel on the Baikal-Amur rail¬
way, thus saving several million roubles.
In oil and gas prospecting, results were
equally gratifying. Geologists have been
studying the Fergan valley in Uzbekistan
for 60 years, and have discovered 102 oil
and gas deposits. The Salyut 3 orbiting
station found 85 new deposits within three
months.
Salyut 3 has also been used to draw up a
balanced land-use plan for the arid steppes
around the Caspian Sea. Space probes
over an area of 2,000 hectares located large
deposits of fresh or slightly mineralized
water fairly close to the surface, and as a
result plans are being made for the deve¬
lopment of irrigated farming there.
The economic value of the information
so far received from the Salyut 4 station,
launched in 1974, has been estimated by
specialists at between 50 and 70 million
roubles.
These are only a few of the results of
"space-earth studies". It should be noted
that any country could obtain similar
information by using these methods.
But I should like to draw attention to the
future potential of space-earth research,
for its applications open up vast possibili¬
ties. Particularly important today is its role
in surveying and drawing up an inventory
of the Earth's natural resources.
How can a region meet its food and
energy requirements without damaging
the environment. Where should tomor¬
row's big power stations be located? What
are the effects of swamp drainage on the
surrounding area? What are the most
rational ways of using land without upsett¬
ing the balance of nature? Space research
can help to provide the mass of infor¬
mation needed to answer such questions
and many others like them.
It is easier to pinpoint the direct contribu¬
tion of space research to the economy than
to assess its spin-off effects on industry in
general, through setting high_ standards of
precision, compactness, lightness, reliabi¬
lity and durability.
Recent experiments have shown that
perfectly pure crystals can be produced in
space, as well as certain alloys that are
practically impossible to obtain on Earth.
Grandfather of
the space rocket
The Russian scientist Konstantin
Eduardovich Tsiolkovsky (1857-1935)
pioneered the development of space
research. Before the end of the 19th
century he was already grappling with the
problems of using rockets In space,
including navigation, heating from air
friction, and fuel supply. A crater on the
moon today bears his name. Photo shows
Tsiolkovsky in his workshop in 1919.
20

One such metal, a 'lightweight but ex¬
tremely tough alloy of aluminium and
tungsten, may find a use in space research
or in aviation.
I believe that the time is not far off when
orbital dispatcher stations will be set up to
provide ships and aircraft with all the infor¬
mation they need to take the most econo¬
mical routes commensurate with complete
safety.
Data provided by navigation satellites
could lop some 45 minutes a day off the
time of ocean travel. Given the present size
of the world's merchant shipping fleet
(about 20,000 heavy-tonnage vessels),
orbiting navigational services could save
some $150 million a year. Satellites will
But however great its practical advan¬
tages may be, space exploration continues
above all to make a vast contribution to our
understanding of the solar system and the
rest of the universe, of the laws of outer
space and their effects on life on our
planet. We learn more about the history of
the Earth when we compare it with the
development of other planets. And sooner
or later this knowledge will be of tremen¬
dous practical use to mankind.
Space research is one of the most expen¬
sive activities in the modern world, and
international co-operation is absolutely
essential, if only from an economic point of
view. In 1967, when the Interkosmos pro¬
gramme of co-operation between the
socialist countries was set up, it was
French and American rockets have also
been launched from the Kerguelen Islands
in the southern Indian Ocean, while obser¬
vations were made in the northern hemis¬
phere, from Karpogory (Archangelsk,
U.S.S.R.).
The Soviet Union is also collaborating
with India in space research: the U.S.S.R.
helped to design India's Ariabata satellite,
which was put into orbit by a Soviet rocket.
Just over five years ago, the U.S.A. and
the Soviet Union signed an agreement on
space co-operation. Much has been
achieved since then.
The U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and
NASA (National Aeronautics and Space
Administration) have exchanged rock sam¬
ples brought back to Earth from various
Keeping tabs
on spacelabs
Antennae mushroom from
the deck of Kosmonaut
Yuri Gagarin, flagship of
the scientific research
fleet of the U.S.S.R.
Academy of Sciences.
They are used to maintain
round-the-clock
communications links
with orbiting Soviet
space laboratories.
also enable aircraft to take the shortest
possible routes, cutting flying time by 20
per cent and reducing the cost of air trans¬
port accordingly.
Another application of space research
technology will, I believe, be affecting our
lives in the near future. About a billion tele¬
phone calls are made in the world each
day, including some 10 million long¬
distance and 50,000 intercontinental calls.
By 1980, the number of transatlantic tele¬
phone calls and télégrammes will be so
high that at least ten new submarine cables
will have to be laid between Europe and
America.
Yet one or two communications satellites
could easily handle the soaring number of
calls, as well as reducing their costwhich
would be two or three times lessi A point
worth noting here is that even today calls
between many African countries still have
to be routed through the capitals of their
former ruling powers.
already clear that the conquest of outer
space would call for the combined efforts
of many states.
This nine-member programme was the
first move towards international co¬
operation in space involving such a large
number of states. So far the socialist coun¬
tries have jointly launched over a dozen
satellites, as well as several Vertikal
geophysical rockets and a large number of
meteorological rockets. A group of cosmo¬
nauts from the socialist countries is cur¬
rently being trained at the Soviet Cosmo¬
nauts' Training Centre in Zvyozdny near
Moscow.
In September 1976, Soviet cosmonauts
Valeri Bykovsky and Vladimir Aksyonov,
on board the. Soyuz 22 spaceship success¬
fully carried out a mission devised by the
socialist countries. During the flight they
tested and used a multispectral camera
designed by specialists from the U.S.S.R.
and the German Democratic Republic and
manufactured by Carl Zeiss, Jena (German
Dem. Rep.).
The years 1976-1978 have been declared
International Years for the Study of the
Magnetosphere. During this period some
50 space craft are undertaking global
research according to an internationally
agreed programme.
As part of the programme, the Franco-
Soviet Arax project has collected data
simultaneously from three widely distant
operating platforms.
parts ot the Moon's surface by the Soviet
automatic Luna craft and the manned
American Apollo spaceship.
Soviet and American scientists have also
exchanged a mass of valuable scientific
information about the phenomena re¬
corded by the Soviet Mars 2 and Mars 3
interplanetary craft and the American
Mariner 9 during their flights to Mars.
But the high point of this programme
was, of course, the Apollo-Soyuz link-up in
space in 1975. The American press esti¬
mated that the event was watched by a bil¬
lion televiewers around the world, while as
many again listened in to the radio reports.
Mankind had already witnessed dozens
of space launchings, but the Apollo-Soyuz
experiment captured the world's imagina¬
tion in an unprecedented way. Through
the link-up, the Soviet Union and the
U.S.A. gave a visible demonstration that
new and higher orbits of mutual under¬
standing, trust and co-operation were pos¬
sible.
The two countries recently signed a new
agreement on co-operation involving the
American Space Shuttle and a Soviet orbi¬
ting station of the Salyut type. Let us hope
that this new experiment will give a fresh
impetus to world détente. For if it does
not, it is hard to imagine what will
become of our Earth, the small, blue and
fragile looking planet which I have viewed
from space.
Aleksei A Leonov
21
