Owing to its ease of use and convenience as a vehicle
to carry energy to the consumer, electricity, whether
produced in a coal-fired or a nuclear power station or
by any of the alternative energy sources (solar,
geothermal, wind, tide), is in increasingly high demand.
At present ten per cent of the energy consumed in the
world is in the form of electricity and it is estimated
that this share will increase to twenty per cent by the
year 2020. Below, the camera captures the crystal-like
beauty of an electrical discharge induced in an
experimental laboratory.

Energy
for tomorrow's
world
Human ingenuity applied to
the natural resources of the earth
can ensure the energy needs
of future generations
by Boris M. Berkovsky
THE world's energy comes from a
number of different sources, which
may be broadly classified in two
categories. The first, which includes fossil
fuels and minerals such as oil, coal, natural
gas, uranium, etc., comprises sources of
energy that are non-renewable. The
second category which includes the winds,
the waves, the tides, the temperature of
the oceans, and the sun, comprises
sources that will continue to provide
energy in virtually unlimited quantities as
long as the earth and the sun exist. And
yet, despite the fact that they are to all
intents and purposes inexhaustible, the
sources of this second category remain
almost untapped.
Most energy is produced today by
burning hydrocarbon fuels drawn from the
world's non-renewable reserves. The
amount of these potential reserves, by
which is generally meant the quantity that
can be extracted by present or conceivable
future techniques, is a matter of some con¬
troversy; this is understandable, if we con¬
sider the enormous difficulties involved in
determining how much fuel Nature has hid¬
den in the earth, and how much of it is or
' will become accessible, and the fact that
different countries use different methods
of estimation.
It is impossible, for example, with
present-day drilling techniques, to drain an
Boris M. Berkovsky of the Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic is a specialist in thermo-
physics who is currently responsible for
Unesco's programme on fundamental scientific
and technological energy problems.
oil well absolutely dry; a considerable
amount remains underground. The estima¬
tion of oil reserves thus depends on the
efficiency of the extracting equipment, and
the improvement of this efficiency is a sub¬
ject of intensive research today in all the oil-
producing countries. The same is true for
coal and natural gas. But some idea of the
potential reserves of such fuels may be
obtained from the following figures.
World Energy Conference statistics indi¬
cate that almost 88 per cent of the world's
potential reserves of fossil fuels are in the
form of solid matter, principally coal. Solid
fuel potential reserves amount to approxi¬
mately 11,200,000,000,000 tons of codi
equivalent (TCE) (1), or enough coal to fill
an enormous cube twice as high as the
world's highest mountain ! This image ser¬
ves to show at the same time that although
these reserves are colossal, they are also
limited. Liquid fuel potential reserves
(mainly crude oil) are estimated to amount
to some 740,000,000,000 TCE, and poten¬
tial reserves of natural gas, to approxi¬
mately 630,000,000,000 TCE
Proven recoverable reserves, i.e. those
whose extraction is already an economi¬
cally feasible proposition, are consid¬
erably smaller, and amount to approxi¬
mately 4,000,000,000,000 TCE for all the
fossil fuels together. The great difference
between potential and proven recoverable
reserves is explained by the fact that
Nature has placed so much of this fossil f
(1) "Ton of Coal Equivalent" (TCE) is used as a unit o1
measurement of energy production or consumption, 1,
TCE being an amount of energy equivalent to that pro¬
duced by one ton of coal.

L fuel in remote parts of the globe, at depths
and in quantities that make its extraction
unjustifiable at present in economic terms.
It should be pointed out that the above
figures are under- rather than over¬
estimated, particularly as far as reserves of
natural gas and of shale and bituminous oil
are concerned.
Let us now compare proven recoverable
reserves with estimated consumption. Bet¬
ween now and the year 2000, the quantity
of energy required by the world will
account for almost 10 per cent of its proven
recoverable fossil fuels; if no other source
of energy is employed, 78 per cent of these
fuels will have been used up by the
year 2050; while a hundred years later
to the most moderate long-
term forecast there will be none left.
Comparison of consumption with poten¬
tial reserves produces a somewhat brighter
picture. By the year 2000, the demand for
energy will have used up only 3.6 per cent
of these reserves, and by 2050 per
cent. A century later, about half of these
reserves will still remain.
These comparisons clearly show that the
world's stock of chemical fuels is quite suf¬
ficient to cover its energy requirements for
at least another hundred years. There is
thus no immediate danger of, as it were,
emptying the coal-bucket. On the other
hand, these reserves of fuel are limited, and
within the foreseeable future there could be
none left. It is possible that our children's
grandchildren might find themselves in a
world drained dry of natural gas and oil.
We should thus lose no time in thinking
about ways and means of producing artifi¬
cial oil or artificial gas, and above all of pro¬
ducing energy in unlimited quantities from
sources which in no way threaten the
environment.
Science is already familiar with sources
and types of energy that are infinitely more
powerful than the old chemical fuels. At¬
omic energy, produced by controlled
chain-reactions involving the fission of
heavy elements such as uranium and pluto¬
nium, is the outstanding example. Then
there is thermonuclear energy, produced
by fusion of light atoms at very high tem¬
peratures such as those which occur inside
the sun. Finally, there is the mind-bending
process known as annihilation, in which
matter comes into contact with anti-matter
to release energy in unheard-of quantities,
and which astrophysicists believe to be the
source of the enormous energy of the so-
called "quasars", or quasi stellar sources.
Simpler chemical physics tells us that the
burning of one gramme of wood produces
enough energy to light up a hundred-watt
bulb for one minute, and that one gramme
of burning coal is enough to light two simi¬
lar bulbs for the same sixty seconds. One
gramme of uranium in a nuclear reactor
produces much more energy enough, in
fact, to light 200,000 bulbs or 20,000 apart¬
ments for a whole hour.
Exciting new prospects are opened up by
"fast breeder reactors", so-called because
they involve fast-moving neutrons, and by
controlled thermonuclear (fusion) reac¬
tions. One gramme of deuterium (an iso¬
tope of hydrogen) in such a fusion reaction
would produce enough energy to light all
the homes of a large modern town for an
hour. The process of annihilation mentio¬
ned above creates fantastic quantities of
energy: one gramme of matter and one
gramme of anti-matter produce the energy
equivalent of 6,000 tons of coal an hour's
lighting for the homes of all the inhabitants
of a country the size of France!



^ ANY experts think that the
HH^^^H utilization non-
I 1 V j I renewable sources of
I I II I energy is limited by ecolo-
I I I I I gical factors. Strange as it
| ^ ^ | may seem, this is not a
H^H^HH matter of pollution of the
^^BB^^HI environment by the solid
matter and poisonous effluents emitted
during the combustion of fossil fuels. Expe¬
rience shows that such pollution can be
handled. The real problem concerns the
overheating of the earth's surface and its
atmosphere resulting from both the pro¬
duction of energy, by nuclear and conven¬
tional power stations alike, and its con¬
sumption.
In accordance with Nature's immutable
laws, all forms of energy known to Man,
whether mechanical or electrical in origin,
end up as heat. And this heat affects the
temperature of the earth's surface and its
atmosphere in a way that can upset things,
as far as the climate is concerned, on a
local or even global scale, depending on its
influence on the natural process of give-
and-take which constitutes the world's
thermal balance.
Certain scientists believe that the maxi¬
mum amount of energy that can be prod¬
uced on the earth in any given year without
catastrophic consequences for its climate
amounts to some 70,000,000,000,000 TCE.
This is obviously much more than we are
producing at the moment but it is not an
inconceivably large amount. We may con¬
sequently say that although there appears
to be no immediate danger of a change of
climate on a worldwide scale, local distur¬
bances, particularly in the vicinity of indus¬
trial centres where large quantities of
energy are produced and consumed, are
already possible, and require some very
careful thought. Of course, the question
whether local disruption of the thermal
balance can affect atmospheric pheno¬
mena on a global scale remains open.
We have so far limited ourselves to the
consideration of terrestrial sources of
energy. But what about the sun ? It is
known that all the vegetation of our planet
absorbs an annual ration of at least
12,300,000,000 TCE of solar energy. The
amount of sunlight falling on a square
metre of the earth's surface theoretically
contains the equivalent of around one kilo¬
watt of energy. In other words, the sun¬
light falling on an area of very approxima¬
tely 100 kilometres square during the
course of a year would be enough to satisfy
all man's requirements at the present time.
The waves of the world ocean contain
almost three times as much energy as the
world is using today in the form of electri¬
city. Almost as much energy can be extrac¬
ted from the ocean by taking advantage of
temperature and salinity gradients and
there is the more immediately obvious
energy in its currents and its tides. There is
energy in the earth's body-temperature
too, and in the fresh waters that run over
its surface.
All of this goes to show that the real
question today is not one of inadequate
resources of energy, but of difficulties
which are mainly of a political and econo¬
mic nature. These difficulties stem from
arbitrary decisions at the level of produc¬
tion and from irrational patterns of
consumption.
How is the situation likely to develop?
The majority of specialists believe that the
way ahead lies through more thoughtful
and careful planning in the production, dis¬
tribution and utilization of energy, through
research designed to improve conventional
methods of energy supply and through the
establishment of a sound basis for the
energy production of tomorrow. Another
extremely important task is the exploitation
of reliable sources of energy that cause the
least possible harm to the environment.
In many circles, the call is for a concen¬
tration of efforts on the utilization of re¬
newable energy that can be produced
"ecologically", and of solar energy in parti¬
cular. Specialists agree that the time has
come to move in that direction, but point
out that it will be many years before such
energy is available in sufficient quantities to
contribute in an appreciable manner to the
satisfaction of mankind's requirements.
Opinions differ concerning the exact
amount of time involved, but concur that it
will be measured in decades, rather than
years.
This conclusion is based on the amount
of time required in the past to replace one
major source of energy by another, i.e.
wood by coal, coal by oil, oil by natural
gas. It is interesting to note that in each
case, the time-span of transition has never
been less than 60 years. It is reasonable to
expect although allowance must be made
for possible scientific and technological
breakthroughs that approximately the
same period will be required for the intro¬
duction of new methods of producing
energy.

The what's watt of energy
1 gramme
of wood
0.0018 kilowatt-hours
Power to light
1 hundred-watt bulb
for 1 minute
1 gramme
of coal
X^r ~
0.0037 kilowatt-hours =
Power to light
2 hundred-watt bulbs
for 1 minute
1 gramme
of uranium-235
= 20,000 kilowatt-hours
1 gramme
of deuterium (1)'
150,000 kilowatt-hours
Power to light
a small town
(60,000 inhabitants)
for 1 hour
Power to light
a large city
(500,000 inhabitants)
for 1 hour
(1) Deuterium, also called heavy hydrogen, is an important ingredient in
the fuel required to produce a fusion reaction. Supplies of deuterium,
which can be easily separated from water, are virtually inexhaustible.
Drawings Mas © Unesco Courier
For this reason, the priority task, in deve¬
loped and developing countries alike, is to
refine the traditional methods. During the
next few decades, the accent must remain
on wood, coal, oil and natural gas, while at
the same time work goes ahead in the
quest for their replacements.
Unfortunately, however, there is no lack
of examples today of futile attempts to
implement projects for producing energy
that are still in an embryonic state, if not
totally misconceived. The attraction of
novelty, coupled with a seemingly simple
method and limitless supplies as in the
case of solar energy creates the illusion
that widespread utilization is just around
the corner, and obstructs serious efforts to
introduce reliable long-term methods of
producing energy as rapidly as possible. It
is probably worth recalling in this con
nexion that in North America more than
half a century was needed before
oilwhich was the cheapest and most effi¬
cient primary source of energy at the
time took half the place then occupied by
coal, and that atomic energy, 35 years after
the earliest experiments, still accounts for
less than one per cent of the world's total
energy.
Energy is a key element of social and
economic progress, and its development is
linked with social and political as well as
scientific and technical problems. But there
can be no doubt that human ingenuity and
good will, applied to the unlimited resour¬
ces of the earth itself, will ensure that
future generations have at their disposal as
much energy as they require, without dis¬
ruption of the ecological balance of our pla¬
net. The energy of tomorrow will be vir
tually inexhaustible or renewable, and will
come for example from thermonuclear
reactions and the sun. And tomorrow must
be prepared today, through well prepared
and soundly backed research and practical
experiment, and through a reasoned com¬
bination of national efforts and internatio¬
nal endeavour.
Unesco and other international organiza¬
tions are making a substantial contribution
to the solution of the world's energy
problems. Unesco's long-term programme
concerning scientific and technological
aspects of these problems provides for
multilateral assistance to the developing
countries, the exchange of up-to-date
experience, the strengthening of internatio¬
nal co-operation and the joint examination
of prospects for development.
Boris M. Berkovsky
