A global
challenge
by Yahia Abdel Mageed
ALL the great challenges facing humanity, all the aspirations
of mankind for a better life with a greater measure of
dignity, justice and security require a greater use of water.
It is impossible to think of raising living standards without
providing adequate supplies of good-quality water for the basic
needs of human existence and survival.
The bold resolves of the United Nations Conferences on the
Environment, on Food, and on Human Settlements held in recent
years will come to nothing unless steps are also taken to assure
growing supplies of clean water to meet these challenging
demands.
The most obvious need is for drinking water for people and
livestock. Those who are accustomed to drawing their water by
turning a tap do not always realize what a precious commodity
water is to others. More than three-quarters of the rural popu¬
lation in developing countries have no access to adequate supplies
of reasonably g"ood-quality water to meet their essential needs.
Lack of water and poor-quality water are the sources of some
of the worst health hazards to which mankind continues to be
exposed. To permit such widespread conditions to continue
would be a slur on our civilization.
To the need for drinking water must be added the need of
water for food. Only a relatively small part of the world's pro¬
ductive acreage consists of irrigated land and the potential of even
this small area is not fully exploited.
It is significant that the U.N. Water Conference (see page 8)
and the U.N. Conference on Desertification (see Unesco Courier,
July 1977) were held in the same year, for the two subjects are
complementary.
In the context of today's world energy crisis, hydropower
assumes special significance in many developing countries and
there is much untapped potential awaiting development.
Another priority claimant is industry, which needs water both
for cooling and for cleaning. The thirst of industries for water
can be gauged by the fact that in highly developed countries the
water needs of industry often outstrip both agricultural and
household use.
Such vast needs can only be met by a major effort of govern¬
ments and the international community to mobilize the resources
required to tackle the job of water development.
The dimensions of the effort needed are truly staggering. The
cost of supplying adequate water of reasonable quality to all who
need it will run into billions of dollars.
We cannot rely solely on new water resources to meet our
greatly increased water needs. Over-use or "mining" of under¬
ground sources must be avoided. Fortunately there is immense
potential in water savings through more efficient delivery and use,
and through the reclaiming of streams, lakes and rivers which
once produced clean water but have since become polluted.
One consideration that makes me hopeful that we will prove
equal to the task is that water represents the point at which all
our international programmes meet: the need for food production,
for a better life for the poorest population groups and for a head-
on effort to restore a healthy balance to our environment.
Yahia A. Mageed
YAHIA ABDEL MAGEED, Sudanese hydrologist, was Secretary-Gene¬
ral of the United Nations Water Conference held in Mar del Plata
(Argentina) in March 1977. The Sudan's Minister of Irrigation and Hydro¬
electric Power, he is also a member of several international commissions
dealing with water problems.
