Dialogue
with the West
A fruitful interplay of ideas and talent
by Igor F. Belza
IGOR F. BELZA, Soviet musicologist, com¬
poser and specialist on Slav cultures, teaches at
the Institute of Slav and Balkan Studies of the
U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. Editor-in-chief
of the Moscow review Readings in Dante, he is
the author of many articles on Slav cultures.
THE Curies, Polish scientist Maria
Sklodowska and her French
husband Pierre Curie, who played a
major role in the discovery of radioactivity
at the turn of the century, constitute
perhaps the most striking, and romantic,
example of the interplay of scientific and
cultural ideas between the Slavs and the
West. Yet this "marriage of minds" bet¬
ween Slav scientists and artists and their
Western counterparts had begun long
before. During the eighteenth century,
Mikhail Lomonosov (1711-1765) in Russia
and Antoine Lavoisier (1743-1794) in
France each discovered independently the I
law of conservation of mass. W
The Sorbs, or Wends, of Lusatia (Lausitz) are the descendants of a Slavic people who
settled in the 9th century in the Elbe valley between present day Dresden and Cottbus in
the German Democratic Republic. Some 100,000 Sorbs still live in this area, maintaining
their cultural and linguistic traditions. Below, Sorbian women in traditional costume.
Opposite page
One of the most important of the Slav
manuscripts that remain from the
Middle Bulgarian period (13th to 14th
century) is the Tsar Ivan Aleksandur
Gospel (or London Gospel), copied by
the monk Simeon, in 1356, for the
"Tsar of all the Bulgars and the
Greeks", and now preserved in the
British Museum. The miniature
reproduced here (top half of page)
portrays the Last Judgement. The
artist has included a portrait of Tsar
Ivan Aleksandur who is seen standing
beside the Virgin Mary at the bottom
left of the miniature. Bottom right of
page, a pastoral scene from the Liber
Viaticus, a 14th-century manuscript
now in the National Museum of
Prague. Bottom left, Satan dressed as
a monk; a miniature from the Codex of
Jena, a ferociously satirical illuminated
manuscript dating from the end of the
15th century in which Hussite
reformers attacked the hierarchy of the
Church.
© '
59

Voltaire by Pushkin
Pushkin wrote of Voltaire that his every
line was a precious gift to posterity. Like
the children of most aristocratic families
of the day, Pushkin learned to speak and
read French at an early age.
Pushkin by Pushkin
One of over sixty self-portraits by the
great Russian poet, this sketch shows
how Pushkin visualized himself in old age,
which, ironically, he was never to attain.
60
'He sang of love,
to love subjected'
(Eugene Onegin)
"He was the beginning of all beginnings",
wrote Dostoevsky of Alexander Pushkin,
the first in a line of towering figures in
Russian literature. His was a brief but
tumultuous life. "I have to spend much
time in society," he wrote. "My wife is a
woman of fashion, and it all requires
money; but I can only acquire money
through work, and work means solitude."
Below, a painting of his wife Natalya. It
was in defending her honour that, in 1837,
he was mortally wounded in a duel.
Mickiewicz by Pushkin
Generally considered the greatest poet of
Poland, Mickiewicz met Pushkin in
Moscow in 1826. Both these great
Romantic writers were strongly influenced
by the English poet Byron.

h The same intermingling of Slav and Wes¬
tern names is found in the history of philo¬
sophy. Among the contemporaries of René
Descartes, the father of rationalist philo¬
sophy, were the "Polish Brethren", hun¬
dreds of whose works (especially those of
Simon Budny and Wolcogen) were pub¬
lished in Amsterdam in 1656 under the gen¬
eral title Bibliotheca Fratrum Polonorum.
The work of these writers was of great
importance to the seventeenth-century
Dutch philosopher Spinoza .(especially in
the elaboration of his Ethics) and also
influenced the English philosopher John
Locke, whose studies in their turn con¬
tributed to the development of French
materialist philosophy.
Mickiewicz by Delacroix
Mickiewicz settled in Paris in 1832 and
later taught Slavonic literature at the
Collège de France. His friendship with
Chopin drew him into the coterie that
formed around George Sand and which
included Delacroix.
Another contemporary of the Polish
Brethren was the great Czech educationist
and "teacher of the people", Jan Amos
Komensky (Comenius), whose Didactics
was well known in both Slav and Western
countries. He believed that the principles of
humanism should be assimilated at an early
age, and devised a harmonious, all-
embracing system of education. Echoes of
his teachings can be found in the ideas and
methods of the famous Swiss educational
reformer Pestalozzi.
Investigation of the cultural history of
the Slav peoples has drawn attention to a
number of remarkable figures who were
half-hidden in the shadows of the ages.
One example is the educationist Gyorgi-
Franciszek Skorina, Byelorussia's first prin¬
ter, who acquired wide learning during his
travels in the West. Another is the
eighteenth-century Ukrainian Grigori Sko¬
voroda, poet and self-styled "wandering
philosopher". The names of Skorina and
Skovoroda are today inscribed in the his¬
tory of European humanism.
Slav thinkers (including historians, wri-
line... played some pieces by Chopin.
Nothing banal, perfect composition! What
could be more complete? He resembles
Mozart more than anyone else. Like
Mozart's, his themes occur so sponta¬
neously, one might have thought of them
oneself."
Later he compared Chopin to Dante, and
portrayed him as "the greatest of poets"
("altissimo poeta"), both in his decoration
of the ceiling of the library of the Senate in
Paris, and in a drawing inscribed "Cher
Chopin" which was probably made shortly
after his friend's death.
There is an undeniable similarity between
the ideas and aspirations of the two mas¬
ters. Many of Delacroix's paintings, inclu¬
ding Dante and Virgil Crossing the Styx,
.The Massacre at Chios, Liberty Guiding the
People, and Greece Expiring on the Ruins
of Missolonghi, reflect a romantic percep¬
tion of nature and a violent denunciation of
evil and injustice.
In Chopin's sonatas, his ballades, his
fantasias and many of his preludes and stu¬
dies, Delacroix heard not only a Dantesque
Chopin
by Delacroix
Delacroix was a fervent
admirer as well as an
intimate friend of Chopin.
In this sketch, made
probably just after the
Polish composer's death,
he depicts Chopin in the
guise of Dante, the
"altissimo poeta". The
sketch bears Delacroix's
touching inscription
"Cher Chopin" (dear
Chopin).
V
ters and artists, as well as philosophers)
have always been profoundly attracted by
moral and ethical issues, and it is in this
field that the West has been most receptive
to the artistic and intellectual values cre¬
ated by the Slavs. Nowhere is this more
strikingly revealed than in the creative rela¬
tionship and warm friendship that united
the French painter Delacroix and the Polish
musician Chopin. Delacroix met many wri¬
ters, artists and musicians during his life
and was on close terms with a number of
them. None, however, impressed him more
than Chopin. During the composer's last
years, Delacroix frequently visited "this
great man who is dying". A few months
after Chopin's death, he wrote in his Jour-
naf for 13 February 1850: "Princess Marcel-
"outcry of anger", but also an incessant
call to combat.
Masterpieces of Western literature have
had a great influence on Slav writers. Wri¬
ting of the summits of literary achievement,
Pushkin set the works of Goethe on the
same high level as those of Dante, Shakes¬
peare and Milton. The Faustian theme of a
passionate search for the absolute on earth
has received highly original treatment in the
works of some Slav writers. In one curious
example, Mikhail Bulgakov's posthumously
published novel The Master and Margue¬
rite, the Faust theme is actually turned
upside down, thus prompting one critic to
dub it an "Anti-Faust".
The names of Gustave Flaubert and Ivan r
61

FJr^í'q*
All
the world's
a stage
St. Petersburg became a
world centre of ballet in the
19th century and produced
some of the greatest ballet
dancers of all time,
including Anna Pavlova and
Vaslav Nijinsky. The
tradition is maintained
today by the world
renowned Kirov Ballet.
Left, extracts from the
score of Stravinsky's "The
Rite of Spring" with
notations of the
choreography created by
Nijinsky for Sergey
Diaghilev's Ballet Russes.
They were sketched in 1913
by the French painter and
stage designer Valentine
Hugo.
t mM *» '111
> Turgenev are in many ways symbolic of the
creative union and mutual enrichment of
Western and Slav literature. Turgenev's
translation of Flaubert's Légende de Saint
Julien l'Hospitalier is an outstanding exam¬
ple of the truth of Stendhal's dictum that
affection for a writer's work is a prerequi¬
site to successful translation.
Hundreds of characters from the
"human comedy" throng the pages of
Gogol, Turgenev, Dostoevsky and Chek¬
hov. Despite the specifically Russian
aspects of their experiences, feelings and
tragedies, they form part of the heritage of
all mankind, along with the angry protests
and satirical denunciations of social injus¬
tice, which reach the heights of intensity in
Gogol's Dead Souls and The Government
Inspector.
"I am sending you a morsel of contra¬
band", wrote the Austrian Ambassador to
Russia, Count Finkelmon, to Pushkin. The
contraband in question was a new novel by
Balzac, whose works had been banned by
Tsar Nicholas I. And in 1850, the Czech
educator Vaclav Bendl warmly observed in
the Journal of the Czech Museum that the
name of Pushkin had become a symbol of
all who refused subjection.
In a conversation with the author of this
article, a group of English specialists once
declared that Chekhov's dramatic works
marked the most significant development
in the history of world theatre since
Shakespeare. Their view was that the Rus¬
sian dramatist had invented the "non-star"
principle by breaking with the tradition
whereby one central figure overshadows all
the others. The judicious choice of a "star"
to play Hamlet was enough, they said, to
guarantee a successful performance of the
play. But neither in The Cherry Orchard,
nor in The Three Sisters, nor even in 77?e
Seagull is there such a central figure in the
generally accepted sense of the term; what
is developed is a system of interrelated
characters.
There is no need to dwell on the recogni¬
tion which the classics of Russian and
Polish literature have attained in the West,
nor on the reception accorded in the Slav
countries to Italian, French, English, Ger¬
man, Spanish and Scandinavian master-,
pieces. It is worth mentioning, however,
that it was not merely the artistic power of
Above, Olga Knipper Chekhova in the role
of Pernelle in Molière's "Tartuffe". She
was a member of the company of the
Academic Art Theatre of Moscow and
married the great Russian author Anton
Chekhov in 1901 after appearing in several
of his plays.
Left, Shakespeare as seen through the
eyes of the great Russian director Georgei
Tovstonogov. Actresses of the Gorky
Drama Theatre, Leningrad, in a scene
from "Henry IV, Part 1".
62

the great Slav writers that attracted the
great masters of Western literature, but
also the languages in which they wrote. In
his eulogy of Pushkin, Prosper Mérimée
observed that no European language, with
the exception of Latin, could render the
beauty and laconic expressiveness of the
Russian writer's poem Anchar ("The Upas
Tree"). To make his point, he went on to
translate part of the poem into the lan¬
guage of Virgil.
, In music, the cultural links between the
Slavs and the West, which became particu¬
larly solid and varied, were established at
an early date.
The works of Glinka, Borodin, Mus¬
sorgsky, Tchaikovsky, Rimsky-Korsakov,
Skriabin, Chopin, Szymanowski, Smetana,
Dvorak and Janacek are all part of the
established repertory of world music.
Both Glinka and Rimsky-Korsakov treat¬
ed Spanish themes, while the latter turned
to Ancient Rome for a scene in his opera
Sevilla. Szymanowski portrayed medieval
Sicily, while Dvorak included themes inspi¬
red by Longfellow's Hiawatha in his Ninth
Symphony ("From the New World").
Rachmaninov and Moszkowski were both
inspired by the poetry of Edgar Allan Poe.
It should also be said that Bach, and to
an even greater extent the four great Vien¬
nese composers Haydn, Mozart, Beetho¬
ven and Schubert introduced "Slavisms"
into their works. Beethoven's three "Razu-
movsky Quartets", commissioned by and
named after the Russian Ambassador in
Vienna, contain the melodies of popular
Russian songs. Haydn, who was born in
the Croatian village of Trstnik (re-baptised
Rohrau by the Hapsburg authorities), and
who may well have spoken Croatian as his
mother tongue in childhood, thought
highly of the popular music of the Slav
peoples. Mozart and other Viennese com¬
posers followed his example, and their
works contain creative adaptations of the
beautiful and profoundly emotional songs
and dances of the Czech, Slovak, Polish,
Ukrainian and other Slav populations of the
"patchwork monarchy" of the Hapsburgs.
A picturesque example of this interplay
of influences is to be found in the "pastoral
intermezzo" which Tchaikovsky incorpora¬
ted in his opera The Queen of Spades. The
composer, who wished to give a Mozartian
flavour to this section, borrowed a theme
from one of Mozart's piano concertos. But
Mozart himself had taken this theme from
the gentle melody of a traditional Czech
folk-song, Mela jsem holoubka ("I had a
dove").
The attraction of Slav music in the West
has persisted up to modern times. The
world is familiar with the brilliant orchestra¬
tion of Mussorgsky's Pictures at an Exhibi¬
tion, created by Ravel who, like his older
contemporary Debussy, warmly admired
the five Russian composers (Balakirev,
Borodin, Cui, Mussorgsky and Rimsky-
Korsakov) who were known as "the mighty
handful". This admiration was, and
remains, mutual, as may be seen from the
recent publication in Moscow of a multi-
volume edition of the works of Debussy
and Ravel, and of studies of these great
composers by Russian musicologists.
Igor F. Belza
An amusing example of the
Russian popular engravings
known as "lubok", this late
17th-century woodcut is a
satirical attack on Peter the
Great (1672-1725) by the
Raskolnik! (Old Believers) who
were fiercely opposed to his far-
reaching reforms which affected
every field of national life. He is
depicted as "the Cat of Kazan".
The neatly groomed whiskers
are a jibe at the Tsar's own
moustachios
Peter the Great's
'Window on the West'
Leningrad, the U.S.S.R.'s second city, lies on the
Baltic at the eastern end of the Gulf of Finland.
Founded in 1703 by Peter the Great as a "window on
the west", it was named St. Petersburg and became
Russia's capital from 1712 to 1918. Famed for its
wide boulevards, its palaces and public buildings,
the city is threaded by many branches of the Neva
delta and has countless bridges, most of them
crossing canals such as the Winter Canal (above).
The State Hermitage Museum, one of
some 50 museums in Leningrad, is world
famous for its masterpieces. Founded in
1764 by the Empress Catherine II as a
private gallery for the art she had
amassed, it was first opened to the public
in 1852. The Hermitage has rich collections
of Oriental art, notably that of the Central
Asian steppes, as well as masterpieces of
west European painting since the Middle
Ages and fine collections of drawings,
coins and medals. Above, visitors throng
the entrance to the Hermitage.
As part of his aims to westernize Russian
institutions and customs, Peter decreed
that beards should be shorn. Old Believers
and merchants who insisted on keeping
their beards had to pay a special tax. This
lubok showing a barber cutting off the
beard of an Old-Believer merchant may
have been printed with the Tsar's
permission.
63
