Unesco's General Conference
Ornamental plaque from an ancient
Korean door lock. The inscription in the
inner circle means, literally, "Ten
thousand years of great peace", a form of
salutation roughly equivalent to "long live
the king". The outer ring inscriptions are
expressions of wishes for happiness,
many sons, health, wealth, honours,
peace and longevity.
THE twentieth session of Unesco's
General Conference, which opened in
Paris on 24 October 1978, ended its
work on 28 November after approving the
Organization's programme for 1979 and
1980. The Conference, which was chaired
by Mr. Napoleon LeBlanc of Canada, voted
a budget of $303 million to carry out the pro¬
gramme, an increase of six per cent com¬
pared with the budget for 1977 and 1978.
"The spirit of co-operation and the desire
for consensus (...) emerge strengthened
from this session of the General Conference
and have even acquired greater signifi¬
cance", declared the Director-General of
Unesco, Mr. Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow in his
final address.
"There can be no doubt," Mr. M'Bow
declared, "that the Declaration [on funda¬
mental principles concerning the contribu¬
tion of the mass media to strengthening
peace and international understanding, pro¬
motion of human rights, and to countering
racism, apartheid and incitement to war]
has been a central theme of the twentieth
session of the General Conference in view
of the place it has occupied in the discus¬
sion. (...) The ovation with which this
Declaration was adopted will without
doubt remain one of the most intense and
moving moments I have experienced as
Unesco's Director-General (...). This happy
issue is all the more remarkable because
the probability of failure appeared so high.
It is an illustration of the triumph of a
patient desire for conciliation which never
flagged".
The Director-General went on to point
out that other important decisions with
ethical implications had been taken and
should not be forgotten, confirming as they
did Unesco's mission in this sphere of
human activity. He stressed the signifi¬
cance of the unanimous adoption of the
Declaration on Race and Racial Prejudice:
"For the first time in the United Nations
system, and even in the history of
mankind's long efforts to extirpate racism
and racial prejudice, the international com¬
munity will dispose of a text which, without
being legally binding, represents a moral
engagement covering all aspects of the
problem."
Mr. M'Bow also recalled with satisfaction
that the statutes of the new Intergovern¬
mental Committee to promote the return of
cultural objects to their country of origin or
their restitution in case of illicit appropria¬
tion had been unanimously adopted.
The Director-General stressed that the
General Conference had "shown a strong
desire to see Unesco step up its action in
the field of science and technology" and
had also manifested "the wish of Member
States to see Unesco maintain and extend
the particular responsibility for science
falling to it within the United Nations sys¬
tem on the occasion of the United Nations
Conference on Science and Technology in
the service of Development".
The Conference, which was attended by
delegations from all Member States (whose
number rose from 144 to 146 with the addi¬
tion of Namibia and Dominica), including
93 Ministers for Foreign Affairs, Education,
Science, Culture, or Communication, was
an opportunity for a high-level expression
of views on concerns in Unesco's fields of
competence.
Throughout the general policy debate, it
was evident, in the words of Mr. M'Bow
that "the establishment of a new internatio
nal economic order is one of the most
important and, doubtless, most far-
reaching, goals to which the Organization's
activities must be directed". The discus¬
sions attested to the desire of Member
States "not to limit the concept of the new
order to the economic level, but to widen
and deepen it with due regard for its social
and cultural dimensions". Delegates were
also agreed that it was up to Unesco to
rectify the imbalance in the fields of
knowledge and information, whose con¬
sequences are still borne by the majority of
mankind. The programme to be carried out .
during the next two years illustrates this
determination.
"Unesco is at the crossroads (...) of all the
creative anxieties of our times", Mr. M'Bow
said. "It seeks to be a laboratory open to all
the intellectual currents converging to form
a new ethic of relations between men and
nations. This goal originates in the realiza¬
tion, as obvious as it is decisive, that the
world has ceased to have a single centre, a
single model for the future, and that it is
seeking new paths of development and a
new planetary order which takes account
of the upsurge of diversity. The vital im¬
perative for all is that this quest should be
carried out through a peaceful process of
reciprocal re-adaptation and of fruitful ex¬
changes between all systems and not
through confrontations based on deepen¬
ed distrust."
The cultures of many countries were
highlighted during the Conference through
a series of exhibitions and other cultural
events featuring internationally-known
artists and groups from the different
regions of the world.
The next session of the General Con¬
ference will meet in Belgradein 1980.
