The Slavs
and Byzantium
by Dimitr Angelov and Gennady Litavrin
STANDING astride Europe and Asia
and spanning a period of time
stretching from classical antiquity
to the Renaissance, the Byzantine Empire
linked different worlds and different ages.
This gave a special dimension to the cul¬
tural interactions of Byzantine civilizat¬
ion with those of neighbouring countries
and peoples interactions which were
vast both in range and scale.
Heir to antiquity and the culture of the
Hellenes and until the twelfth century the
leading power in Europe and the Near East,
the Byzantine Empire was the nucleus of a
vast area in which the Orthodox Church,
the eastern variant of Christianity, was,
throughout the medieval period, the domi¬
nant form of expression of spiritual life.
The frontiers of Eastern Christendom
were largely established by the early years
of the eleventh century. By this time they
encompassed huge tracts of south-eastern
and eastern Europe. In the Near East, in
north Africa and in the western Mediterra¬
nean region, however, Byzantium had lost
considerable ground, as a result of con¬
frontation with the Muslim world (first with
the Arabs and then with the Turks) and
with the Latin West and the Papacy.
Misunderstandings between Rome and
Constantinople came to a head with the
Schism of 1054, and the rupture became
final with the struggles and disputes arising
from the crusades. In the lost lands, the
once dominant Byzantine culture disappea¬
red with the passage of time and the
implantation of other civilizations.
In the northern regions of Eastern Chris¬
tendom matters evolved differently. Here,
the population, for the most part Slav, had
progressively been drawn into the orbit of
Byzantium throughout a thousand years of
stable and lasting cultural relations. Only
the West Slavs (including the Poles, the
Czechs, the Slovaks, the Baltic and Pola-
DIMITR ANGELOV is a distinguished Bulga¬
rian historian who has been professor of Byzan¬
tine history at the university of Sofia since 1949.
A corresponding member of the Bulgarian Aca¬
demy of Sciences, he is the author of many
works on Byzantine and Bulgarian history.
GENNADY LITAVRIN is a leading Soviet spe¬
cialist on Byzantine history and Russo-Byzantine
relations. He Is one of the authors of a basic
three-volume work "The History of Byzantium"
and assistant editor of the Soviet magazine
Byzantisky Vremennik (The Byzantine Period).
bian Slavs), the Croats and the Slovenes,
remained outside the pale of Eastern Chris¬
tendom, as the result of political events
during the ninth and tenth centuries,
coming instead within the sphere of
influence of Western Christian civilization.
Relations between the Slavs and Byzan¬
tium were complex. The initiative in es¬
tablishing contacts was generally taken by
the Slavs, and early links were strengthen¬
ed with the formation of the Slav States.
The first historically recorded contacts
date from the end of the fifth century A.D.
during the closing stages of the Great
Migration, which had seen the establish¬
ment of Slav peoples over vast areas of
eastern, central and south-eastern Europe.
In the seventh century, they arrived in the
north of the Balkan peninsula, and settled
in large numbers in Moesia, Macedonia,
lllyria and northern Thrace. Groups of
Slavs also moved into Thessaly, northern
Greece, the Péloponnèse and the Aegean
islands.
The aim of Byzantium, as it faced up to
its new neighbours, was not to dislodge
them, but to secure control over them, to
transform them into Christians and to
absorb them as vassals of the Empire.
These contacts and the occupation of
lands which had been intensively cultivated
for ages past and which contained centres
of sophisticated urban life had a catalytic
effect on the social development of the
Slavs. In a great many cases, they did not
oust the original inhabitants but merged
peaceably with them.
The arrival of the Slavs in the Balkans
was- also a matter of great importance for
the Byzantine Empire. They filled the
vacuum left by the devastating campaigns
of the Goths, Huns, proto-Bulgars, Avars
and earlier Slav tribes.
The Slavs who settled in the former
Roman province of Moesia found them¬
selves in a particularly favourable situation,
with all-round natural protection afforded
by the Danube, the Black Sea and the Bal¬
kan Mountains. It was here, during the last
quarter of the seventh century, that the
Slav settlers joined forces with and accep¬
ted the temporary leadership of a relatively
small but militarily well-organized group of
new arrivals, the proto-Bulgar horde of
Khan Asperuch, and created the first Slav
State on Byzantine soil Bulgaria.
Byzantium maintained close and lasting
contacts (at times peaceful and at times
hostile) with this new State and, towards
the middle of the ninth century when inde¬
pendent States were founded in the wes¬
tern and north-western parts of the Balkan
peninsula, the Empire entered into regular
political relations with the Serbs and the
Croats; similar relations with the Russians
began after the year 860.
Among the instruments of Byzantine
politics and diplomacy, conversion to
Christianity was a powerful and well-tried
tool. According to time, place and circum¬
stance, it was used as a first step towards
expansion of the Empire, as a method of
securing friendly neutrality, of
strengthening political influence or of
acquiring allies and vassals. Among those
Balkan Slavs who had not yet organized
themselves into States, for example, con¬
versions to Christianity served the Empire's
purposes of subjection and assimilation.
Missionaries either preceded, or followed
in the footsteps of the Byzantine armies.
The civil servants and ecclesiastics of
Byzantium had acquired great experience
in proselytizing and subduing alien neigh¬
bours. Unlike the Latin West, they allowed
newly converted peoples to worship in
their. own language, particularly when the
political possibilities of absorbing them ap¬
peared unrealistic.
In 863 A.D., just two years before Bulga¬
ria followed the same path, the kingdom of
Great Moravia became the first Slav State
to accept the Christianity of Byzantium as
its official religion. The same period saw
the invention by Constantine (better
known by his monastic name of Cyril) and
Methodius of a Slavonic alphabet. The two
brothers also translated into Slavonic all
the canonical and liturgical literature that
was required for the normal functioning of
the Church. They became the leaders of a
devoted group of Slav disciples and pupils
and their work launched a revolutionary
process in the cultural development of Bul¬
garia, Serbia and ancient Russia.
During the last third of the ninth century,
and the century that followed, Slavonic let¬
ters made triumphant progress in all the
Slav countries and became accessible to.
virtually every segment of society. The
principal role in spreading literacy among
the Slavs, and in disseminating the so-
called "Old Slavonic" literature belonged
to the kingdom of Bulgaria.
Although none of the independent
States which surrounded Byzantium, in¬
cluding those created by the Slavs, and
which accepted Christianity from Constan-
22

. v" iMñfltii
.
F5^
fa i
! B
,
I i
H w'-'^'ï
p.,;:J|
Hl* ** «1 ^"^* f>
f- ?S^
V" » *
iy
1
3 £ v
1
É
*
-, *
1
The murals of the church of Boyana, at the
foot of Mount Vitosha to the south of Sofia,
Bulgaria, are ranked among the masterpieces
of 13th century painting. Dating from 1259, the
Boyana frescoes herald the introduction of the
new realism that marked the "Palaeologian
style" of the late 13th and early 14th century.
Above, St. Ephraim by the unknown master
painter of Boyana.
tinople, was actually coerced into doing so,
Byzantium adopted a somewhat firmer
stand during the Christianization of Bulga¬
ria than it had during the conversion of
Great Moravia.
When, in 865 A.D., Bulgaria adopted the
Christian faith, the Byzantines, for political
reasons, deliberately refrained from pro¬
viding the new Church either with clerics
of Slav background or with church books
in the Slavonic language, and services had
to be conducted in Greek.
In 893, however, things changed.
Shortly after the accession to the Bulgarian
throne of Tsar Symeon (893-927), who was
to become the country's greatest medieval
ruler, Greek, which had remained the offi¬
cial State language, was proscribed. Wor¬
ship in the Slavonic language was introd¬
uced in the churches, and the Greek
clergy were expelled. Under the inspiring
influence of the seminaries created at Och-
rida and Preslav by Clement and Naum,
two disciples of Cyril and Methodius, the
number of educated people sharply increa¬
sed, and the foundations were laid of an
original and, for the period, highly sophisti¬
cated spiritual culture which made itself felt
in the neighbouring Slav countries, and in
Serbia and Russia in. particular.
This was the Golden Age of Bulgarian
literature, reflected in the works of talented
writers like John the Exarch, Chernorizets
"the Courageous", Bishop Constantine
and others, whose work was actively
encouraged by Tsar Symeon himself. The
close similarity between the written lan¬
guage and the popular speech of Bulgaria
was of no small significance in the develop¬
ment of national education, while the same
period also saw a flowering of architecture,
painting, mosaics, ceramics, glassware and
other applied arts.
The second great leap forward in the cul¬
tural development of Bulgaria occurred at
the turn of the twelfth and thirteenth cen¬
turies. During this period, the Bulgarian
Zograph monastery, founded on Mount
Athos in the twelfth century, played an
important role in strengthening cultural
contacts with Byzantium, Serbia and
Russia.
Outstanding developments in Serbian
culture, and in literature in particular, date
from the twelfth century onwards. Serbia's
first Golden Age was linked with the
coming to power of the Nemanja dynasty,
and in particular with the reign of Stephen
Nemanja ("the first-crowned") and the
23

activities of his brother. Saint Sava, who
' founded an important cultural centre, the
Serbian monastery of Hilendar on Mount
Athos, and was also Serbia's first Arch¬
bishop.
Relations between Byzantium and Rus¬
sia began to develop at a somewhat later
date. Early Russia, or Rus', as it was called,
was situated so far from the frontiers of the
Empire that there was no danger of direct
Byzantine aggression.
Through an alliance with the Pechenegs,
Byzantine diplomacy aimed to contain the
military forays of the Russians and to deny
them access to Byzantium's markets. The
attempt failed, and even before they were
united in a single State, the Russians had
established trading relations with Kherson
and Byzantium's Crimean colonies. Press¬
ing on still farther, the Russian merchant
adventurers, part-traders and part-soldiers,
reached the Byzantine commercial centres
on the southern shores of the Black Sea,
and in 860 A.D. their ships dropped anchor
beneath the walls of Constantinople itself.
Whilst gradually yielding ground to Rus¬
sia in the economic and political spheres,
Byzantium exercised on the young State an
increasingly far-reaching cultural influence.
During the decade which followed the ar¬
rival of the Russians off Constantinople, a
number of their leaders were converted to
Christianity. At the beginning of the tenth
century, a Christian church dedicated to
St. N'ya (Elias) existed in Kiev. In the
middle of the same century, Olga, the
widow of Prince Igor, who had become the
Russian ruler, was baptized during a visit to
Constantinople; and in 989, Prince Vladimir
accepted Christianity as the religion of his
country.
Bulgarian experience and the already rich
stock of Bulgarian literature were of con¬
siderable service in the enlightenment of
Russia. Immediately after his conversion,
Vladimir turned to Slavonic letters as the
basis for the organization of ecclesiastical
affairs and State business. It is probable
that the first officials to be entrusted with
this task were trained with the assistance of
"experts" from the South Slav Orthodox
States.
Less than half a century after conver¬
sion, Kievan Russia entered a period of cul¬
tural development that was to reach its
zenith in the twelfth century. That literacy
was widely disseminated is amply borne
out by the hundreds of birch-bark docu¬
ments discovered by Soviet archaeologists
since the 1950s, containing the accounts
kept by quite ordinary people of their every¬
day affairs. This period saw the construc¬
tion of magnificent palaces and churches.
Painting and the applied arts flourished,
and the splendours of eleventh-century
Kiev, including its Cathedral of St. Sophia
and the Golden Gate, made the city a
worthy rival of Constantinople itself.
The influence of Byzantine models was
particularly apparent in religious and mor¬
alistic didactic literature, architecture in
stone and mosaic work, stained glass,
icons, monumental painting and book illu¬
mination. In all these fields, however, the
Slavs began, a century and a half or so
after conversion to Christianity, to develop
their own artistic schools, language and
idiom, which reached back into their pre-
Christian traditions and pagan art and cul¬
ture. The result was a creative re-modelling
of Byzantine examples, and their adapta¬
tion to local tastes and requirements.
Byzantine influence was less marked as
far as secular literature was concerned.
This was especially true in the case of chro¬
nicles, poucheniya (written "admonitions"
or testaments generally left by rulers for
their successors) and accounts of journeys,
and of music and singing, the applied arts,
ornamentation, festive rituals, clothing and
interior decoration.
When it escaped from the constraints of
"official" religious ideology, spiritual life
was clearly influenced by local traditions
going back to farthest antiquity. And even
today, without knowledge of the living tra¬
ditions of the pagan culture of the Slavs it
is impossible to begin to understand Ser¬
bian heroic songs, the popular festivities of
the Bulgarians or the epic poems (byliny) of
ancient Russia.
Cultural interchange between Byzantium
and Slavdom was conditioned in great
measure by the selective approach which
the latter adopted as far as the Byzantine
legacy was concerned. Indeed, selectivity
on both sides reflected the single-minded
policies of the rulers of each: Byzantium
refrained from transmitting matters which
it considered dangerous for neophytes (the
latest acute theological controversies, for
example), while the rulers of the newly-
converted countries rejected importations
which seemed alien and potentially harmful
(such as the employment of eunuchs as
State officials, or organized horse racing
tournaments).
N even more important
reason for selectivity in
the adoption of Byzan¬
tine civilization was the incompatibility of
many of its aspects with the Slav environ¬
ment. The various collections of Byzantine
legal texts which circulated widely through¬
out south-east Europe during the thir¬
teenth and fourteenth centuries under¬
went, in their Slavonic versions, substan¬
tial amendment in the form of abbreviation,
addition and modification. Byzantine tem¬
poral law had virtually no impact in Russia,
whose legislation took the native form of
Russkaya Pravda, a collection of laws
whose origins could be traced back to
pagan times.
In the Latin West, the period from the
ninth to the twelfth century saw the forma¬
tion of original cultures in all the major
States, despite the levelling influence exer¬
cised by a single ideological and ecclesiasti¬
cal centre (the Papacy) and a single lan¬
guage (Latin) which, although incompre¬
hensible to the bulk of their populations,
dominated religious life, affairs of State,
science and culture.
In the Slav countries of Eastern Christen¬
dom, however, original cultures ripened
more rapidly for a number of reasons: their
Churches were less dependent on Cons¬
tantinople than their Western counterparts
were on Rome, and the language of litera¬
ture and of the church was not Greek, but
their own Slavonic language which was
comprehensible to the peoples of Bul¬
garia, Serbia and Russia alike.
Half a century to a century after their
conversion to Christianity, these countries
all had their own identifiable culture.
When, after a century and a half (1018 to
1185) Byzantium managed to acquire undi¬
vided control over the Balkans, to liquidate
the kingdom of Bulgaria and to annex the
Serbian principalities, the cultures of these
countries were sufficiently well-established
to resist not only assimilation but also any
substantial degree of transformation. The
historical memory of their early indepen¬
dence, the persistence of their own literacy
and literature, their own customs and life¬
styles, and their ethnic self-awareness
served as banners in the armed struggle
to reconquer their freedom, which they re¬
gained during the last quarter of the
twelfth century.
The sharpest confrontations in Eastern
Christendom occurred where Byzantium
was particularly stubborn in its attempts to
convert the cultural commonwealth it had
created into a hierarchical system of politi¬
cal and administrative units under overall
Byzantine direction.
Thus, from as early as the tenth and ele¬
venth centuries, the pronounced historical,
ethnic and cultural individuality of the Slavs
within the Orthodox sphere of influence
precluded their assimilation with Byzan¬
tium, though, paradoxically, the develop¬
ment of this individuality was accelerated
by the acceptance of Christianity from
Byzantium.
It is not surprising, therefore, that a deep
mutual sympathy grew up between the
South and East Slavs and the Greek people
that was to last for many centuries. Nor is it
surprising that when, with the fall of
Byzantium and the South Slav countries,
Russia remained the last bastion of Euro¬
pean Orthodox Christianity, the peoples
conquered by the Ottoman Turks should
look to Russia for deliverance. And finally,
it is not to be wondered at that their hopes
were finally to be fulfilled.
Dimitr Angelov
and Gennady Litavrin
24

The making of an alphabet
The Cyrillic alphabet was invented in the 9th century by the
scholar-missionary brothers St. Cyril and St. Methodius so
that they could instruct the people of Moravia in the
Christian faith in their own Slavonic tongue. Use of the 43-
letter alphabet spread quickly throughout the West Slav
lands, finally reaching Russia in the 10th century. Over the
years the alphabet was gradually modified and during the
reign of Peter the Great a simpler version was elaborated
which today is used not only by the Slav nations but also by
many non-Slavs including the Aleuts and Eskimos. The
spread of literacy that the new alphabet made possible was
rapid and widespread. A number of letters and documents
written by ordinary citizens on birch-bark scrolls, found at
Novgorod in 1951, indicate that the new literacy was not
confined to an elite class. Photos : (1) A 14th-century
manuscript shows St. Cyril and St. Methodius, "the apostles
of the Slavs", transcribing the Scriptures and liturgical texts
into the Slavonic language. (2) Detail of a fresco on the
façade of a 13th-14th century church at the village of
Berenda, in Bulgaria, depicting St. Cyril the Philosopher.
Photo © The Bulgarian Artist, Publishers, Sofia
(3) An 18th-century wood sculpture of St. Clement of
Ochrida, a disciple and companion of Cyril and Methodius.
(4) This remarkable document shows two letters written on
birch-bark some 750 years ago by a seven-year-old boy from
Novgorod called Onphime. At top, the alphabet followed by
drawings of Onphime and his friends. Below, self-portrait of
Onphime astride a charger with an enemy dead at his feet.
HTiïfïo^p'oTA/ xZOS1 ¿TIT* p- A
-
Photo <£) Unesco Courier, Russian Edition Photo © Literature for Children, Publishers, Moscow
25
