The
multinationals
and the Third World
MULTINATIONAL enterprises cov¬
er a wide spectrum of econo¬
mic activities. Their ownership
is varied: the bulk of them are private,
but they can also be state-owned. A
high and increasing proportion of inter¬
national transactions in goods, services,
capital and expertise takes place under
the auspices or through the mediation
of such firms.
For a number of years now, criticisms,
some severe, have been levelled against
the activities of multinational enter¬
prises, particularly in developing coun¬
tries. From the research carried out so
far by the ILO and others the conclusion
has emerged that it is very difficult to
generalize about their effects on such
phenomena as employment, technology
and labour skills.
It has been estimated that the multi-
tionals directly employ a total of 13 to 14
million people. Out of this total, the
share of developing countries has been
estimated at approximately 2 million
persons, or roughly 0.3 per cent of the
active population, all of whom are in the
"modern" or "formal" sectors. But this
figure takes no account of indirect
employment effects or the jobs created
through activities of multinational
enterprises other than direct invest¬
ments. Moreover, employment effects
vary enormously from sector to sector.
For example, in 1960 in Chile, Argen¬
tina, Brazil and Mexico, the jobs directly
created by multinationals in extractive
industries represented only a small per¬
centage of total employment. Both
foreign and domestic firms in these
industries use highly capital-intensive
processes, and generally very little
transformation of the raw material
takes place on the spot. In the case of
agriculture, however, direct employ¬
ment creation by the .multinational
enterprises is much larger, since pro¬
duction techniques In agriculture are
traditionally labour-intensive. In 1968, in
Zaire, the large foreign agricultural com¬
panies had 230,000 - employees plus
200,000 "independent contractors", that
Is, 10 per cent of the active population.
In the case of manufacturing, direct
employment in the multinational enter¬
prises has increased sharply in recent
years although the number of jobs cre¬
ated Is still quite small when compared
with the rest of the economy. For exam¬
ple, in countries such as Brazil and
Mexico the multinational enterprises
employ less than 10 per cent of the wor¬
kers in manufacturing whereas their
share of investment amounts to 30 per
cent. This Is partly because they are
investing increasingly by taking over
existing firms rather than by creating
new ones. There is indeed a risk that
multinationals may in some cases re¬
organize firms in such a way as to lead
to a fall in the number of jobs.
Among the criteria for evaluating the
role of particular multinational enter¬
prises (particularly when engaged In
direct investments) in the creation of
employment or the meeting of basic
needs are: the adaptability of their pro¬
duction technologies to local environ¬
ments, the appropriateness of the pro¬
ducts which they promote for local
mass consumption, their performance
in the training of workers and mana¬
gers, their behaviour with respect to
social policy and wage rates, and the
extent to which they have developed
local subcontracting.
Many studies have shown that the
technologies adopted by the multinatio¬
nals in the host country are the same as
those used In the home country. The
reasons for this situation include the
need for standardization of production
techniques, the small size of domestic
markets, the scarcity of supervisory
skills and distortions in prices. This is
not to minimize the importance of the
adaptations to existing capital-intensive
technologies and the Introduction of
labour-intensive ones which some firms
have undertaken or the marketing
efforts in the field of major agricultural
crops which others have conducted. On
the other hand, very few of the applied
research and development activities of
the multinational enterprises have been
undertaken in the developing countries.
In the sphere of social and wage poli¬
cies, ILO studies suggest that multi¬
national enterprises typically abide by
local laws and customs and, if anything,
tend to pay higher wage rates than local
firms in similar lines.
By importing advanced management
and productive techniques, the multina¬
tionals can also contribute to training in
developing countries. While almost all
production staff are given training, the
position is not necessarily the same for
management. Localization of skilled
labour and management posts has
taken place at a steady pace but it is not
yet clear to what extent the training
efforts which made it possible have yiel¬
ded benefits to the host countries out¬
side the firms.
15
