Before
we are six
In ten years time there will be 900 million children
of pre-school age in the world
by Henri Dieuzeide

THE concept of pre-school education,
as we know and accept It today, is
the culmination of a long Interna¬
tional effort representing a century and a
half of research, experiment and achieve¬
ment. The phenomenal Increase In the
number of pre-primary school Institutions
since the end of the Second World War
has been largely Inspired by these achieve¬
ments and by the notion that children
should be treated as complete personalities
and accepted, respected and appreciated
as individuals.
A variety of forms of pre-schooling have
been devised: Indian Balwadies, or rural
schools, derived from very ancient rural
institutions, Sudanese Khalvas, nurseries
run by religious communities, the recently
Introduced British playgroups, French
écoles maternelles, German Kindergarten,
and other types of nursery school, all bear
witness to the desire of communities to
help the Infant to acquire, during the early
years, a firm foundation for later life.
Such systems vary considerably in scope
ranging from the Sabatinas in Salvador
which bring together the children of the
district or village once a week, to the Israeli
kibbutzim In which all the small children of
the community are looked after 24 hours a
day. They also depend on a wide range of
different bodies, from local authorities,
governments, companies and movements
to private groups (which form almost a
third of the total).
HENRI DIEUZEIDE is director of Unesco's divi¬
sion of structures, content, methods and tech¬
niques of education, and director of Prospects,
Unesco's quarterly review of education. He was
formerly director of educational radio and tele¬
vision in France and a department head at
France's National Pedagogical Institute. He is
the author of several books on education,
including Les Techniques Audio-Visuelles de
l'Enseignement (Audio-Visual Techniques in
Education) which has been translated into six
languages.
The principles on which they operate are
everywhere more or less the same. The
children regularly attend these Institutions
where they are helped to express them¬
selves better in their own language, to pick
up the elementary rules of hygiene and
good health, to discover rhythmical self-
expression, to dance, sing and draw, to
mould sand and model clay, to make
objects, to observe nature, to respect the
plants and animals around them, to sort
and classify objects by type and by shape,
and above all to live together and become
responsible.
It is estimated that some 40 million chil¬
dren under six now attend such establish¬
ments, three times as many as 20 years
ago (1). In many countries the tradition is
by no means recent. Infant schools In
Europe go back to the early 19th century,
to the eve of the Industrial revolution which
saw the start of a period of research and
experiment in education beginning with
Friedrich Froebel (Germany), who was
born in 1782, and continuing with Ovide
Decroly (Belgium), Ellen Key (Sweden) and
Maria Montessori (Italy), who died as
recently as 1952. But there were precur¬
sors of the present system many centuries
ago, such as the rural nurseries of Asia and
Koranic schools in Moslem countries.
It is true that, before Froebel, pre-
schooling was the prerogative of the elite;
the most privileged social classes, and
indeed the richer countries, found it easier
to obtain, or provide, pre-primary educa¬
tion than their poorer neighbours. But the
principle of such education is now univer¬
sally accepted, and regarded increasingly
as an essential tool for the democratization
of society.
But since Pastor Johan Friederich Ober- \
lin opened the first nursery schools In 1767 I
(1 ) This figure does not include the People's Republic of
China, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and
the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.

Stepping out into the future, this Yemeni child is one of the world's
765 million children under the age of six. Recent research suggests
that these are the crucial formative years with 50 per cent of the
attainments that go to make up the seventeen-year-old's general
Intelligence level being acquired before the age of four and a further
30 per cent between the ages of four and eight.
7
<_
v5*>3
^

t in some of the remoter villages of Alsace,
the facts of the situation have changed
with the growth of society.
The natural family unit that used to
assume responsibility for the first steps in
education has been unavoidably disrupted
by the industrialization of certain societies
or by the desire in the rest of the world for
economic development. In most countries,
the majority of women leave their home, or
their family business (whether it be a farm
or a workshop), in order to work else¬
where, either regularly or seasonally. A
link-up between family and society has
become essential, particularly since this
very process of development makes new
and more urgent demands on the content
of pre-primary education.
In Hungary, where women make up 44
per cent of the working population, crè¬
ches and kindergartens offer day care with
meals, seasonal summer day care or full
board six days a week. In Senegal, the fact
that the rainy season requires women to
work long hours in the rice paddies has
resulted in the setting up of special nursery
schools for two months of the year. In
India, tens of thousands of mothers who
work on building sites leave their children
in mobile crèches during the day. (see page
24).
All child psychologists, moreover, now
agree on the enormous bearing that the
first four to five years of a child's life have
on the formation of its personality, as
regards both the development of logical
and linguistic skills, emotional balance, and
ability to establish social relationships.
Purely from the point of view of intellec¬
tual development, recent research seems
to Indicate that some 50 per cent of the
knowledge which goes to make up a gen¬
eral intelligence level by the age of seven¬
teen Is already acquired by the age of four,
while the following 30 per cent is acquired
between the ages of four and eight. Most
of the time spent in school by pupils bet¬
ween eight and seventeen Is therefore
devoted to acquiring the remaining 20 per
cent, which suggests that the way resour¬
ces are currently being allocated to each
type of school needs to be reviewed.
Some economists even go so far as to
claim that if the educational authorities
systematically channelled the appropriate
funds into pre-schooling they would make
a substantial saving on subsequent educa¬
tional expenditure. However that may be, it
is now clear that, so long as its cost can be
kept within reasonable bounds, pre-
primary education could be a decisive fac¬
tor In bringing about greater justice and in
offering all pupils a better chance of suc¬
ceeding in life, precisely because it would
help alleviate the social and cultural handi¬
caps affecting many children (inability to
handle language or abstractions, malnutri¬
tion, lack of medical care, the failure to
detect physical handicaps, and so on).
But the task ahead ¡s a daunting one, if
only because of the sheer scale of the
problem. There are at present 765 million
children under six in the world and in ten
years time there will be nearly 900 million.
This means that of ten children aged bet¬
ween three and six only one now enjoys ^
any kind of organized pre-schooling. f


Furthermore, certain types of pre-
schooling are over-compartmentalized or
excessively oriented merely towards prepa¬
ration for primary school instead of being
conceived as the first phase In a long pro¬
cess of continuing and all-embracing edu¬
cation.
Lastly, there are certain limitations to the
formulae that have been adopted, possibly
because researchers have failed to examine
closely enough whether the various
systems now being used are not too rigidly
linked to a particular cultural pattern, i.e.



One tenth
of the population
of the world
It's hard work growing up, but even at
rest these boys and girls in a Pakistani day
care centre (left) and a Chinese crèche
(below) are learning to live in society.
Opposite page : A Mayan chief gazes
benevolently across the centuries at a
20th-century Mexican girl at play in the
famous Palenque ruins, Chiapas State,
Mexico. In 1975, there were 327,068,000
Asian and 51,690,000 Latin American
children under the age of five, almost a
tenth of the total population of the world.
8

that of the Western world. The educatio¬
nal authorities of the developing countries,
who are keen to develop children capable
of adjusting to rapid change and displaying
flexible and creative behavioural patterns,
are faced with the problem of how best to
achieve a smooth transition between a
child's original culture and the constantly
changing modern culture in which he will
have to live.
It has now become obvious that the pre-
schooling system in Its present form can¬
not be extended to all three- to six-year-
olds In countries with limited resources
because of the tremendous cost involved.
Although no-one would dispute that pre-
schooling is now a reasonable necessity,
not a luxury, and although educationalists
are more or less agreed on the intellectual
and moral principles on which it should be
based, fresh approaches and ingenious
new systems still need to be defined almost
everywhere if pre-primary education is to
be more closely geared to the social and
cultural environment as a whole.
This is why an increasing number of
countries are now striving, with the help of
Unesco, to identify and co-ordinate exis¬
ting material and human resources with the
aim of developing "streamlined" systems
of mass pre-primary education. They want
to determine, for instance, how at local
level the community can be made more
aware of the needs of childhood through
the insertion of educational content into all
the groupings of young children it organi¬
zes. They are also keen to define a
childhood policy likely to inspire the same
concerted educational effort from all sorts
of establishments, whether they be crè¬
ches, day nurseries, infant schools, educa¬
tional centres, religious institutions, or wel¬
fare centres. This raises institutional diffi¬
culties when, for example, a Ministry of
Health may vie with a Ministry of Education
for the responsibility of co-ordinating acti¬
vities for the very young, or a Ministry of
Social Affairs may be pitted against a
Ministry of the Family.
There is also a psychological problem
between the various people involved at the
local community level; doctors may feel
they have overall authority where a child's
future is concerned, but such responsibility
is often claimed by social workers, while
teachers are not infrequently regarded as
subordinates whose duty it is to bow to the
authority of the specialists. Experience
shows, however, that these problems can
be solved when they are tackled with deter¬
mination.
Another crucial factor is increased parti¬
cipation by families in the educational pro¬
cess. It is not enough merely to persuade
mothers to comply with the basic rules of
nutrition and hygiene; attempts must be
made to create within each family the
material and psychological conditions most
likely to encourage the child's intellectual,
emotional and social development (new
types of behaviour, play, exchanges, envi¬
ronment).
In many South American and Asian
countries, there ¡s a tendency to turn the
pre-primary teacher into a social action
worker whose influence extends over the
whole community. In this context, certain
"parents' school" schemes, which use the
radio to broadcast regular advice to
mothers or to nursery school teachers on
educational techniques, have made an
important contribution to pre-primary edu¬
cation.
This approach is usually combined with
the use of communal buildings to house
classes of children, the manufacture of the
necessary educational furniture and toys
with cheap locally produced material, and
the recruitment of various types of volun¬
tary staff who are given a brief training
period focused on the psychological deve¬
lopment, education and health of very
young children.
The people making up such staff can
vary, depending on the country, from ado¬
lescents and students to non-working
wives, retired school-teachers and grand¬
parents. They are sometimes called upon
to assist a professional teacher, but when
vast mobilization efforts are undertaken, as
for instance in Peru, they occasionally have
to be able to cope with the full range of
everyday educational tasks. Experience has
shown almost everywhere that the merits
of such schemes are not merely economic;
parents are more willing to accept a type of
pre-schooling that associates the family
with the community.
The purpose of Unesco's action in this
field Is not to encourage communal pre-
primary education at all costs and to the
detriment of the family. Aware as it is of
the difficult problems that have to be faced
daily by parents all over the world, Unesco
is working hand in hand with governments
and educationalists to strengthen and per¬
fect schemes that can combine and harmo¬
nize the reciprocal roles and influences of
family and school.
In recent years, through meetings of
experts (USA, Czechoslovakia, Malaysia),
publications such as The Child from Birth
to Six Years Old and World Survey of Pre¬
school Education, its advisory servi¬
ces in Sierra Leone, Ghana, Nigeria,
Venezuela and Mexico, the encourage¬
ment of pilot schemes (Sri Lanka, Jordan),
and co-operation with UNICEF and the
relevant non-governmental organizations
such as the World Organization for Early
Childhood Education, Unesco has sought
to encourage the idea that pre-school edu¬
cation is a real priority for its Member Sta¬
tes and, above all, to convince them of the
need to summon up the necessary determi¬
nation and imagination to devise ever more
efficient forms of action in this area.
With all this in mind, Unesco hopes to
make International Year of the Child
(1979) which aims to encourage Member
States to increase their efforts in this field,
for instance, by setting up national com¬
missions for children an important stage
in the development of pre-schooling invol¬
ving the whole community and suited to
the needs and resources of each country.
Henri Dieuzeide
