A graphic portrait
of the
human voice
by Lee Ki-mun
The Korean script known as Han'gul was developed by a board of
scholars appointed by King Sejong, who ruled Korea from 1419 to 1450.
Above, statue of King Sejong In Seoul. Left, the word Han 'gui itself Is
made up of the following letters (from left to right and from top to
bottom): .¿-=h h = a |_=n -|=g -=u E = I.
SPOKEN by some fifty million people,
Korean ranks among the twenty
major languages of the world.
Although most speakers of Korean live on
the Korean peninsula and its adjacent
islands, about one million are scattered
throughout the world on every continent.
The origin of the Korean language is as
obscure as the origin of the Korean people.
In the nineteenth century when Western
scholars "discovered" the Korean lan¬
guage, this was the first question that they
raised. These scholars proposed various
theories linking the Korean language with
Ural-Altaic, Japanese, Chinese, Tibetan,
Dravidian, Ainu, Indo-European and other
languages.
Among these, only the theories of the
relationship between Korean and Altaic
(which groups the Turkic, Mongolian, and
Manchu-Tungus languages) on the one
hand and between Korean and Japanese
on the other have continuously attracted
the attention of comparative linguists in the
twentieth century.
Altaic, Korean and Japanese exhibit not
only great similarities in their general struc¬
ture, but also share remarkable common
features such as agglutination (the combi¬
nation or running together of simple or root
words into compounds in which the form
and meaning of the constituent parts
undergo little or no change) and vowel har¬
mony, although the vowel harmony in Old
Japanese has been the object of dispute
among specialists in the field. More¬
over, it has been found that these lan¬
guages have various common elements in
their grammars and vocabularies. Although
much work remains to be done, research
seems to show that Korean is probably
related to both Altaic and Japanese.
LEE KI-MUN is professor of Korean language
and literature at Seoul National University. His
Comparative Study of Manchu and Korean
appeared, in English, in Ural-Altaische Fahrbu-
cher. Volume 30, 1958.
According to early historical records,
two groups of languages were spoken in
Manchuria and on the Korean peninsula at
the dawn of the Christian era: the northern
or Puyo group and the southern or Han
group.
Around the middle of the seventh cen¬
tury the kingdom of Silla conquered the
kingdoms of Paekche in the south-west
and Koguryo in the north and its language
became dominant on the peninsula. As a
result, the linguistic unification of the
peninsula was achieved on the basis of the
Silla language.
After the peninsula was unified, the
Koryo dynasty was founded in the tenth
century and the capital was moved to Kae¬
song in the centre of the Korean peninsula
and the dialect of Kaesong became the
standard for the national language.
When the Yi dynasty was founded at the
end of the fourteenth century, the capital
was transferred to Seoul. However, since
Seoul is geographically close' to Kaesong
this had no significance as far as the deve¬
lopment of the language was concerned.
The Korean script which is now generally
called Han'gul was invented in 1443 by
Sejong, the fourth king of the Yi dynasty,
who called it Hunmin-chongum (the cor¬
rect sounds for the instruction of the peo¬
ple). However, the script was not promul¬
gated until 1446 in a document which was
also called Hunmin-chongum.
The motivation behind the invention of
script was, according to Sejong's
preface in the above book, to enable the
Korean people to write their own language
in their own way. Until the invention of
Hunmin-chongum, only Chinese charac¬
ters were used by the upper classes. There
also seems to have been a secondary moti¬
vation behind the invention of Korean
script, that of representing the "correct"
sounds of Chinese characters.
In inventing Korean script, Sejong and
the scholars who assisted him probably
referred to several writing systems known
to them such as Chinese old seal charac¬
ters, the Uighur script and hP'ags-pa
script, but the system of Korean script is
based upon phonological studies. Above
all, its inventors developed a theory of tri¬
partite division of the syllable into initial,
medial and final, as opposed to the bi¬
partite division of traditional Chinese
phonology.
The initial sounds (consonants) are
represented by sixteen letters of which
there are five basic forms. According to the
explanations of the original Hunmin-
chongum text,
~1 (k) depicts the root of the tongue block¬
ing the throat.
L_ (n) depicts the outline of the tongue
touching the upper palate.
(m) depicts the outline of the mouth.
A (s) depicts the outline of the incisor.
O ( depicts the outline of the throat.
The other initial letters were derived by
adding strokes to the basic letters. No let¬
ters were invented for the final sounds,the
initial letters being used for that purpose.
The original Hunmin-chongum text also
explains that the medial sounds (vowels)
are represented by eleven letters of which
there are three basic forms :
is a depiction of Heaven.
is a depiction of Earth.
I is a depiction of Man.
By combining these three signs the other
medial letters such as ±. (o) and îî (yo) are
formed.
One of the characteristics of Korean
script is the syllabic grouping of the initial,
medial and final letters. However, Korean
script is essentially different from such
syllabic writing systems as Japanese kana.
It is an alphabetic system which is charac¬
terized by syllabic grouping.
After the promulgation of the Korean
alphabet, its popularity gradually increased
to the point, especially in modern times,
where it replaced Chinese characters as the
main system of writing in Korea.
Lee Ki-mun
13
