The great Spanish painter Francisco
Goya y Lucientes died 150 years ago,
on 16 April 1828, in Bordeaux (France)
where he had gone Into voluntary
exile to escape the political and
intellectual oppression which then
prevailed in Spain. The product of an
inexhaustible imagination, much of
his work is a scathing denunciation
of the despotic forces which crush
mankind and debase human values.
Self-portrait shown here is one of
several Goya painted around 1815.



GOYA
An art that defied the powers of darkness
by Santiago Amón
THE mantle of "Champion of Human
Rights" rests easily upon the shoul¬
ders of Francisco de Goya. Indeed,
in most critical assessments of his
paintings, drawings and engravings, praise
for the way in which he succeeded, as
never before, in illuminating aesthetic
values, goes hand in hand with admiring
recognition of his outspoken denunciation
of injustice, oppression and the caprices of
power, and of his moving heart-cry against
the disasters of war.
Goya's arj breaks completely with the
decadent neoclassicism of his immediate
predecessors. But more than this, it has
historical significance as an act of defiance,
a stand against the unjust social and
political conditions of his country and his
age, and as such provides an example and
a lesson for other lands and other times.
The one hundred and fiftieth anniversary
of his death prompts one to begin a
reflection on his life and work in the very
place where his remains now rest, having
SANTIAGO AMON, Spanish art critic, poet
and historian, writes regularly on art in the Spa¬
nish daily El Pais and the Madrid periodical Cua¬
dernos para el Dialogo. Among his published
works are a biography of Giotto and a study of
Picasso (Madrid, 1973). He has written widely
on contemporary Spanish art.
been brought to Spain years after his death
in more or less voluntary exile in Bordeaux.
They now lie in the San Antonio de la
Florida Hermitage in Madrid, at the foot of
the transept, beneath the very dome which
he himself decorated. Rather than
theological allegory or the ecstatic fervour
of the visionary, its magnificent frescoes
portray a conflict of everyday life resolved
in the name of Justice, a protest against a
violation of human rights and a straight¬
forward testimony in defence of truth.
A Witness to Truth. This is the title
which Goya's life and work have truly
earned him and he will for ever be
remembered as a faithful, uncompro¬
mising, incorruptible chronicler of the living
history of his day. He was one of those
daring, noble spirits who proclaimed the
truth, come what might even his own
death in exile. His outspoken artistic
message seems to echo that of his spiritual
forefather, the seventeenth-century poet
and satirist Francisco de Quevedo, who
met imprisonment and persecution crying:
"I shall not rest silent, though your finger
touch lip and brow, enjoining silence or
inviting fear".
The splendid murals which, thanks to his
genius, now crown his tomb in San
Antonio de la Florida, provide, as it were, a
summary of iniquities occurring daily in the
streets, whose flagrant injustice calls for
public condemnation. On the cupola which
he painted for our universal delight, there is
no trace of divine fable or dogmatic pro¬
nouncement from on high. What we see is
a medley of figures from popular life
local Madrid men and women, ragged
children, the Madrid "cockneys" in their
gay dress, working-class beauties, ordinary
labourers and the rogues and wits of the
Spanish underworld, simple people flock¬
ing to see a good deed performed in
defence of Truth by the miracle-working
Saint.
Saint Anthony's miracle is performed in
the street, in an ordinary courtyard with its
typically Madrileño railed balconies. The
sumptuous marble stairways and porticoes
which form the setting for the working of
miracles in traditional art are relegated to
limbo. Saint Anthony has just raised a man
from the dead, not to bring us tidings of life
beyond the grave, but to prove the inno¬
cence of his own father, falsely accused of
murder by the true culprit who is seen run¬
ning off through the astonished crowd. All
present are thanking the Saint for his good
deed and marvelling at the appearance of
the unexpected witness.
The composition of Goya's paintings in
the Saint Anthony cupola are clearly in line
with a renaissance tradition which origina-'
ted with Andrea Mantegna's Camera degli
Sposi, was continued with Correggio and
14

Right, The Colossus or The
Panic (around 1809), an
astonishing evocation of the
terror and desolation
unleashed by war. A horror-
struck multitude takes flight
beneath a raging giant. Only a
little donkey in the foreground
seems unmoved by the
prevailing panic.
Photo © Prado Museum, Madrid
Below, detail from the great
fresco which Goya painted in
1798 in the church of San
Antonio de la Florida in
Madrid. The graceful trio of
Madrid belles forms a striking
contrast with the sombre
figure above them, possibly an
Old Testament prophet. Goya
is buried beneath the dome of
San Antonio.
Photo © Snark International, Pans
flourished most brilliantly in Tiepolo's
ceilings. The radical transformation Goya
brings about in these matchless ¡mages
above his tomb is in their content and signi¬
ficance. The old imperial or sacred allegori¬
cal themes here make way for essentially
popular scenes, and the splendours of the
gold and marble and the multi-hued cloud
effects of yesteryear give way to a line of
washing hung out to dry in the patio, to the
colourful hubbub of everyday life, and to
the defence of rights yesterday trampled
underfoot but today restored in the sight of
all.
As for colour, we find that Goya uses a
rather muted palette verging on the aus¬
tere. Flouting the conventions of fresco
painting, Goya dares to replace the classic
splendour of church or palace ceiling paint¬
ing with the bleak harshness of the natural
colours of the earth. The sepias of Sienna
and Seville are the essence of this miracle
of fresco work; which even now stretches
out before the sightless gaze of the artist
within his tomb. The typical countryside of
Spain, melting into faded yellow, a fleeting
patch of bright vermilion, the hard cold
clarity of cobalt blues or a dash of solid,
stiff purple; a countryside, in short, which
epitomizes in his work a basic opposition
charged with human significance the
clash of black and white.
What is the essence of Goya's vision?
Let us leave general historical and aesthetic
considerations aside and concentrate on a
single, immediate aspect of his sensibility.
Goya offers us a vision of blackness, not
only in his so-called black period, but in all
of his work. His art, or at least a great part
of it, is dominated by or oriented around
carefully studied and starkly dramatic black
shading. Goya offers or evokes an after¬
glow of clear white (a veil, a piece of gauze
or a lining) in front of or above a stark slash
of black. This dramatic contrast is based on
an internal dissociation in his painting,
symbolized by a stain of black growing and
invading Goya's plastic vision until it breaks
it down into shreds.
An intruding black against dominant
white is the essence of Goya's innovation k
in art; solid, massive blacks and whites f
15

The dark
vision
of a deaf
master
Photo © Prado Museum, Madrid
Even though he was the
official court painter and a
portraitist much sought-
after by the nobility, Goya
always remained a satirist
and a moralist who
relentlessly exposed the
folly and injustice of his
times. In 1792 he was
stricken by a terrible illness
which left him permanently
deaf but also released his
tumultuous imagination.
Enveloped in a curtain of
silence, he produced a
series of 82 etchings known
as the Caprichos. On these
pages we present six
Caprichos on the theme of
imprisonment. (1) and (4)
two drawings in which
Goya attacks one of his
favourite targets, the
Inquisition : To Discover
the Movement of the Earth
(Galileo Imprisoned) and
Zapata, Your Glory Will Be
Eternal. Zapata was a
doctor from Valladolid who
was suspected of Judaism
and arrested because of his
scientific writings. Goya
himself fell foul of the
Inquisition, being
compelled to withdraw the
Caprichos from sale. (2) A
Prisoner In Chains
(drawing). (3) Because She
Was Sensitive, one of many
etchings of prison life.
16
Photo © Lauros-Giraudon, Pans. Bonnat Museum, Bayonne, France
which eschew the profusion of colour and
the fiction of line. "Always line, never
mass", complained Goya at his height; and
turning away from this tradition in order to
look afresh at things themselves, he won¬
dered "Where does one find lines in
nature?" Later he adds:' "I see only bright
or dark masses, flat areas advancing or
receding... My eye never sees lines or
details, so my brush should not see what I
do not see myself... In nature there is only
sunlight and shadow". And to dispel all
doubt, he crowns this statement with the
unforgettable phrase: "Give me a stick of
charcoal and I will make a picture".
A vibrant counterpoint of light and
shade; a duel between black and
white this was the vision which led Goya
to experiment with etching, an art in which
he was to become a master. Nor did the
political dramas and evils of his day escape
his attention in this new art form. Goya
uses the bite of acid on copper to cut a las¬
ting image of the struggle between the
powers of night (terror) and the kingdom of
light (liberty), a struggle then a dramatic
reality in his country. "What his burin and
acid portray in those copper rectangles",
writes the French critic Claude Roy, "is the
struggle then tearing Spain apart, the
struggle between reason and the dreams of
reason, between life and death, between
the unspeakable seething of darkness and
the rationality of light; between night and
day".
Perhaps one should include this critic's
remark that the technique of etching
achieved a degree of autonomy with the
French artist Jacques Callot (1592-1635),

but that despite everything it was still con¬
sidered to be a mere technique for making
a copper record of a drawing. It was the
experiments of the Dutch engraver Lucas
Van Leyden, who discovered how to
express distances by an exquisite thinning
of lines and shades, which inspired Rem-
On 2 May 1808 the
people of Madrid
rose against
Napoleon's troops
which were
occupying the city.
Goya immortalized
the first days of the
rising, which
sparked off a war of
national
independence, in
two famous
paintings: 77is
Second of May 1808:
The Charge of the
Mamelukes and The
Third of May 1808:
The Execution of the
Defenders of Madrid,
right. (A detail is
shown on back
cover) Goya
captured all the
horror of these
bloody massacres,
which he saw with
his own eyes and
would later expose
in grim detail in his
Disasters of War.
tyranny and lies, contempt for the human
being and the wretchedness of the down¬
trodden. There is a certain quality which
marks off trivial satire from major satire,
such as we find in Rabelais, Swift or
Goya".
In Goya's reveries, and particularly in his
In this etching Goya ridicules the heavy
burden of taxation imposed on the people
for the benefit of fools and knaves.
Photo © Prado Museum, Madrid
brandt in the same city of Leyden. Lucas
Van Leyden's work released drawing from
its previous rigidity and eventually made
engraving a marvellous medium for recor¬
ding everyday life, a delicate interplay of
light and shade, of "bright masses", as
Goya put it, "and dark masses, flat areas
advancing and receding".
With the genius of Rembrandt, etching
ceased to be simply a method of producing
several copies of a drawing or a means of
using the engraving press to replace hand-
painting with the main purpose of illustra¬
ting literary works. The year 1639 is usually
taken to mark a turning point in the history
of etching. It was in this year that Rem-
brandt,with his famous Pesadora de Oro,
transformed the ancient craft of engraving
into a new art form based essentially on the
interplay of shades of dark and light. More
than a century and a half was to pass
before Goya transformed this interplay into
a dramatic conflict between obscurantism
and freedom, with all the social and politi¬
cal implications that these words bear.
And what, in the San Antonio de la Flo¬
rida frescoes, is a straightforward denun¬
ciation of the trampling underfoot of rights,
becomes, in his etchings, a profound and
detailed social message. "What the Spa¬
niards of 1799 unerringly recognized",
Claude Roy remarks, "was that Goya's
Caprichos are a social document rather
than a metaphysical vision". In this series
of eighty-two etchings, as in Gulliver's Tra¬
vels or Candide, what is brought in ques¬
tion "is not Man Eternal or God, but living
man and the society he creates and which
is an expression of him, throne and altar,
Caprichos with their savage conflict of light
and shadow, many have rightly seen a new
Dantesque descent into Inferno. But his
was not a descent into an otherworldly,
theological or mythological Avernus, but to
the underworld of the life of his day, where
the figures damned to the shades are men
of flesh and blood. Goya goes down into
the inferno of a prison where the convicts
lie in rat-infested dungeons; or he visits a
madhouse where inmates wander the filthy
rooms in grotesque paper hats. Thus does
he offer us a spectacle of the abysmal col¬
lapse of the values of the spirit.
A new religion? This is the view of,
among others, Lionello Venturi, who does
not hesitate to ascribe a clear religious con¬
tent to Goya's work. But he concludes with
the paradoxical observation that "Goya's
contribution is the abolition of. the trans¬
cendental dimension". Venturi draws our
attention to the hapless wretch, in the
famous The Third of May 1808: The Execu¬
tion of the Defenders of Madrid, who is
about to fall with all the savage immediacy
of a charge of lead in his chest. As though
nailed to an invisible cross, his arms are
outstretched, heroic and anonymous, a
moment before the volley is fired. There is
no aura of martyrdom. There is no personal
identity to this emaciated figure; even the
rigid figures obeying a blind mechanism of
destruction of human values are not execu¬
tioners but more like featureless bureau¬
crats or puppets. For Venturi, "the ragged,
unforgettable wretch, with arms tragically
outstretched, is a new Christ on
Golgotha". This, then, seems to be Goya's
way of expressing his beliefs, by a powerful
statement of the driving force behind the
"new religion" of humanity and freedom, a
religion born of the French revolution the
slow and painful emergence of the concept
of human rights.
A blind mechanism is in the process of
annihilating not just a man, but mankind
itself; and the dramatic contrast between
human courage and the inhumanity of the
mechanism is what confers upon the scene
its truly epic proportions. "What Goya
represents is the revolt of popular passions.
He consecrates them, suffers them, weeps
for them. His powerful visual expression
transcends the tragedy of the Napoleonic
suppression of Spanish patriotism, and
acquires a universal human value".
Santiago Amón
17

The
disasters
of war
In his series of 82 etchings inspired by the
War of Independence, Goya gave free rein
to his genius for depicting fantasy and
nightmare. The Disasters of War are not
simply the chronicle of a war of liberation
but one of the most powerful indictments
of brutality and sadism ever made. The
artist does not take sides; he simply
records the fact that war is collective
madness. There is no attempt to idealize
or justify; there are no heroics. Men are
tortured, exploited and massacred by their
fellows. Goya's genius brings to these
savage events a dimension of universal
humanism. Like the Caprichos, the
Disasters (executed between 1810 and
1820) bear captions or titles written in the
artist's own hand. These inscriptions are
often ironic or sarcastic and In some cases
their meaning remains obscure. On these
pages we show six of the most heart¬
rending scenes from this great series.
Photos © Mas, Torello Collection, Barcelona
Against the General Good
Grim Forebodings of What Lies in Store
Luckless Motherl
18

They Don't Know the Way^
19
