School
is other people

For African children the village community
is one big family of teachers
by A. Babs Fafunwa
LEARNING starts early for children In
Africa, and more often than not
begins at the mother's breast. Fed
regularly, weaned when the time is ripe,
the African child spends the first five years
of its life in a close relationship with its
mother. During this early stage, the child Is
reared by the mother, not by the family as a
whole.
In a polygamous African family, there
may be several "mothers"; and they all play
a part in caring for the youngest genera¬
tion. But ultimate responsibility for each
child lies with its true mother, who carries it
on her back wherever she goes, puts it to
bed, looks after it when it is ill, and teaches
it to speak. Full of curiosity, the baby wat¬
ches her every gesture, and learns to inter¬
pret her smiles, her frowns and her tears.
Little by little, this lively curiosity reaches
out beyond the mother's world. Some¬
where between the ages of four and six,
the grandparents and sometimes uncles
and aunts begin to take part in the chil¬
dren's education, sending them on little
errands, teaching them to be obedient and
to respect their elders (this is a very impor¬
tant matter in African society), and to
A. BABS FAFUNWA, Nigerian educator, is
professor of education at the University of Ife,
Ibadan, and was formerly professor and dean of
the faculty of education at the University of
Nigeria, Nsukka. He is the author of several
published works on African education, including
New Perspectives in African Education (Mac-
Millan, Nigeria, 1967) and a History of Education
in Nigeria (Allen and Unwin, London, 1974).
observe certain rules of behaviour. The
grandparents also teach them the history of
their family or of their people.
African education is "global". In other
words, each social institution has a role in
providing the moral and practical teaching
that will enable young boys and girls to
take their rightful place in the community.
The traditional educational system is
based on age-groups, or on affinities within
these groups, whose limits are defined dif¬
ferently by different peoples.
Age is very important to Africans. It con¬
fers economic and social privileges, parti¬
cularly as far as the distribution of prey,
rewards and wealth are concerned. In
many Nigerian ethnic groups, men and
women, too tend to claim that they are
older than they really are.
The objectives of traditional African edu¬
cation are many and varied, but the ulti¬
mate goal is to produce individuals who are
honest, respectful, clever, co-operative
and mindful of the established order. Char¬
acter training is, in fact, the keystone of the
system.
African children love to explore their
immediate surroundings, to observe and
imitate the actions of adults and to discover
new horizons. In this, they are no different
from other children, whether in Europe,
Asia or elsewhere. What distinguishes
them is their way of doing things, and
above all the spontaneity with which, in
societies that have retained their links with
the past, they jump about, climb trees,
dance or move to a rhythm, simply because
their brothers and sisters or their elders are
doing so. No sooner, in fact, have they dis¬
covered their limbs, than they discover
how to use them.
African children perhaps differ from their
European counterparts in that they have
completely untrammelled access to the sti¬
mulating world of music and dance. The
movements of the African dance, in their
infinite variety, offer the best possible
physical exercise for growing bodies. No
teacher or dancing-master is needed: the
children join in naturally, following the
steps of adults or other children. Dancing
and music are also a means of transmitting
the culture of a people, and of performing
together as a group.
In a study of the Yorubas of West Africa,
M.A. Fadipe has described certain practical
aspects of the education of young children:
"As soon as her daughter is of age, it Is
the mother's duty to teach her the rules of
hygienic and well-mannered behaviour
observed by the group. One of the most
important of these rules concerns the use
of the right and the left hand.
"Before the whites brought their culture
to Africa, the use of forks and spoons was
unknown. The right hand was traditionally
used for lifting food to the mouth
and mainly for this reason was forbid¬
den to touch unclean objects...
"A child caught eating before early-
morning ablutionswhich involved at least
washing the face and mouth would be
scolded and punished by an adult member
of the group...
"The 'indirect' education received by the
child in the community is almost as impor¬
tant as that received at school."
"In certain regions of northern Nigeria,"
writes another specialist, "character train¬
ing took many forms. Parents encouraged
healthy rivalry between children of the
same agesometimes as early as the age
of five by organizing wrestling matches
and by setting the children competitive
tasks.
"Fair play was also encouraged; winners
and' losers alike were congratulated when
they played well. The main thing was not
winning and losing, but playing the game.
With the introduction of Islam, the Koranic
schools brought additional elements of
character training. Children were sent to
the Mallam for three or four hours every
afternoon, to learn the Koran by heart,
together with the principles of Islamic
ethics."
Traditional education, as far as
character-building was concerned, was
certainly severe, to say the least. But this
was because of the importance which Afri¬
can society attaches to this aspect of edu¬
cation. The habit of physical exercise,
apprenticeship In a trade, a religious
upbringing, a respectful attitude towards
one's elders and active participation In
community life are indispensable condi¬
tions for any African wishing to be consid¬
ered a person of consequence. The lack of
more formal education can be forgiven, but
a person who does not fulfil these condi¬
tions inflicts the worst possible humiliation
on both his immediate family and his more I
distant kinsfolk. '
11

Respect for one's elders, which is an
'important part of character training, in¬
cludes respect for all who represent autho¬
rity: village chiefs, religious leaders, sooth¬
sayers, uncles, relatives and neighbours.
Styles of greeting play an essential role in
the expression of respect. Salutation is a
complicated affair in Africa, with different
modes for addressing relatives, elders,
equals, chiefs, and so on, and special
greetings for morning, afternoon and eve¬
ning.
There are different formulae for games,
dancing or drumming, for sitting or stand¬
ing, for tilling the soil or fishing, for weav¬
ing, swimming, walking or recovering from
an illness. Anniversaries, funerals or wed¬
dings, yam-growing ceremonies, the rituals
of ancestor-worship, the Egungun festivals
and other special occasions all call for
special types of greeting.
If "intelligence" means the capacity to
assimilate experience, and if "intellectuali-
zation" denotes abstract reasoning as
in the formation of concepts or
judgments then it may be said that tradi¬
tional African education encourages intel¬
lectual development. Observation, imita¬
tion and participation are three pillars of the
educational process.
African children and adolescents learn
the geography and history of their commu¬
nity. They know their local hills and valleys
like the backs of their hands; they know
where the land is fertile and where it is bar¬
ren. They know when to expect rain and
when to expect drought. They know the
right times to hunt and fish. In every family
the old people are teachers of local history.
The songs of praise which often comme¬
morate great events enrich the oral tradi¬
tion, creating an experience which it is diffi¬
cult to forget.
Botany and zoology are the subjects of
both theoretical and practical lessons, in
which special attention is paid to local
plants and animals. Where animals are
both a source of danger and a means of
livelihood, their behaviour is another
important subject of study.
Proverbs and riddles are exceptional wit-
sharpeners, and are used to teach the child
to reason and to take decisions. (See page
16, and also "Unesco Courier", May 1977).
Yoruba mathematics are particularly
interesting. According to CA. Taiwo, a
Nigerian educator, "The Yoruba have cre¬
ated their own system of arithmetic and
use a wide range of real-life situations to
develop skills of numeracy. At a very early
age, Yoruba children learn to count with
the aid of objects, rhymes and games, both
at home and in the fields.
"The use of cowrie shells for currency
offers good practice in counting. The
Yoruba have a different name for every
number, whatever its size. The name itself
may be long and complicated, but the mea¬
ning is precise, and no number is too large
or too small to be deciphered by a
Yoruba".
On the subject of cardinal and ordinal
numbers, Taiwo observes: "The Yoruba
understand the concepts, just as they
understand the mechanisms of certain frac¬
tions, of addition, subtraction and multipli¬
cation. Eleven Is one-plus-ten; fifteen is
twenty-minus-five; forty-three is three-and-
twice- twenty".
The Nupe of Nigeria have a similar
system, which is elaborate, lucid, practical
and unlimited in its application. According
to S.F. Nadel, author of A Black Byzan¬
tium: The Kingdom of Nupe in Nigeria, "A
number such as 3,600,000 is expressed as
'two-thousand-times-eighteen- hundred',
or in greater detail 'two-thousand-
times- two-hundred-times-nine'... Four
hundred is 'two-hundred-times-two', and
so on...".
The same author writes: "The area of
farms is measured by the number of heaps
of yams they can produce. Volumes are
expressed in 'liquid' or 'dry' measures, the
units being calabashes, gourds and in
more recent times tin cups and tin cans."
Most Nigerian tribes use similar systems of
measurement. Africans also have fun with
their mathematics in games of skill, such as
the "Ayo" game where players must out¬
wit their opponents in addition, subtrac¬
tion, multiplication and division.
Some educators have come to believe
that certain espects of traditional African
education should be integrated into the
modern system, and have begun to work
along these lines. This is a field which
should be given priority in all developing
countries.
One of the aims of education, whether
modern or traditional, is to perpetuate a
given culture. Traditional Africa sets great
store by this aspect of human develop¬
ment.
As they grow up, children of traditional
societies absorb and assimilate their peo¬
ples' cultural heritage, without formal tea¬
ching. They observe, imitate and mimic the
During the first few years of
life, an African child
develops a very close
relationship with its mother
and, like this Togolese infant
(left), is carried on her back
wherever she goes. One of
the earliest lessons an
African child learns is respect
for his elders. Among the
Dogons of Mali (above right),
the word of the patriarch of
the family is accepted
without question.
12

Photo © Pierre Pittet, WHO, Geneva
actions of their elders and their siblings.
They attend baptisms, religious ceremo¬
nies, weddings and funerals, the corona¬
tions of kings or chiefs, and the annual yam
festival. They watch the acrobatic displays
of guilds and associations, often joining in
with members of their own age-group or
with their families.
As we have already pointed out, respon¬
sibility for the upbringing of young Africans
is traditionally shared by the entire social
group. Good manners, conventions, cus¬
toms, moral rules and social laws are incul¬
cated by close relatives, by more distant
members of the extended family or by
neighbours. The hallmarks of a successful
traditional education in Africa are honesty,
perseverance and sincerity.
Today, however, African society and
its children face a dilemma.
From birth to the age of five, African
children are invariably brought up in the
traditional environment. But from the age
of six onwards, between one-third and
one-tenth of all these children (depending
on the country) enter another educational
system, which is almost totally different.
After spending their early years in a world
which has its own methods of transmitting
knowledge, they suddenly find themselves
in another world, whose concepts are by
no means the same. This phenomenon has
not received the attention It deserves from
educators and psychologists.
We tend to assume that African children
make this dramatic transition without diffi¬
culty, and we expect them to react just like
little English, American or German boys
and girls. But the fact is that their percep¬
tive balance is upset, and this abnormal
situation (for there is a world of difference
between the "non-formal" traditional
system and the "formal" Western system
of education) tends to retard the process of
learning as it normally occurs in the Wes¬
tern context.
More than half of all the children who
enter primary schools in Africa fail to com¬
plete the course. A number of studies on
"primary school failures" in Nigeria and
elsewhere attribute this wastage, which
ranges between 40 per cent and 60 per cent
according to country, to three factors: the
premature introduction of English as the
language of instruction in primary schools;
inadequate teacher training; and the short¬
comings of the educational means and
methods employed (due primarily to their
"alien" nature).
Of all the children in the world, only
those of African countries (and certain for¬
mer colonial countries in Asia and Latin
America) are obliged to learn in a language
other than their mother tongue. In some
developing countries children are educated
in their mother tongue during the first two
or three years of primary schooling, but
after this they must adopt either English or
French.
There is every reason to suppose that the
early introduction of a second, "foreign"
language obstructs the process of learning
and Is at least partly responsible, in the
developing countries, for the high drop-out
rates from primary and university education
alike.
If one of the essential objectives of edu¬
cation is to transmit a culture and by this w
we mean the culture specific to the child f
13

and to his or her particular social group,
then it must be said that most educators
and psychologists in the developing coun¬
tries have not made enough efforts to esta¬
blish a link between the school and society.
In most African countries today, there is a
lack of continuity between the family and
the school. A four-year-old Kenyan boy
described his experience In these terms.
"I was not yet four years old when my sis¬
ter was born... Although I was still very
young, I had to become my sister's nurse
for days on end. So that I should do the
job properly, my mother had to teach me
what to do, give me instructions and see
how I carried them out.
"First I had to do things while she
watched: feeding the baby, for example.
That took us up to planting-time the
following year; and then, because my
mother had more work to do, I had to do
more things with the baby.
"The day began with morning jobs for all
the family for everyone, that is, except
the baby... My father took out the
animals the cows, goats and sheep...
Mother went to fetch water from the river,
and cleaned the house... My job was to
collect fire from the neighbours, and lay or
light our own fire...
"Finally, before she went off to the
shamba, mother gave me my instructions:
'Don't leave the house unattended,' she
said, 'in case of thieves. Don't let Alusa
(the baby) cry for too long, it will make her
ill. Feed her when she cries. Keep stray
cats away from the hens, and watch out for
hawks over the chickens. Be polite with
visitors and with strangers who ask the
way'...
"Last of all, she promised to bring me a
present a fruit or a sweet potato when
she returned. And then she went off to
work, and it was late in the evening when
she came home..."
The experience of this little boy in East
Africa should bring home to educators,
psychologists and educational planners the
urgent need to provide continuity between
the child's domestic and scholastic expe¬
rience, so that schools and homes in Africa
are truly linked.
In most African countries, the first task is
to provide free primary education that is
valid for all the children. There is no need
for these countries to cling to the methods
employed up to now, which are very
costly; there is ample room for innovation
in the context of development.
Another urgent task is to harmonize the
traditional and modern systems of educa¬
tion, each of which can make an important
contribution to the upbringing of African
children. Research and experimentation
are called for here, and although each
developing country will have to define its
own objectives, and to direct its efforts
accordingly, three subjects appear to
deserve close attention: the impact of tradi¬
tional education on "formal" schooling;
the ways in which African children learn;
and the relationship between bilingualism
and education.
Children between the age of one and five
must be given real opportunities of learn¬
ing outside the "formal" system which
should take over at the age of five or six.
This calls for government planning at the
informal level, in order to make the transi¬
tion to the formal system less traumatic.
In a typical traditional African society,
education is not divided Into watertight
compartments. Children and young
adults, during the development of their
vocational aptitudes, pass imperceptibly
from one stage to the next. Some learn
quickly; others need more time. The
system which we envisage for the deve¬
loping countries in the coming decade will
permit children and adults alike to learn at
their own rhythm, whatever their age, sex,
level of education or specialized subject of
study.
A. Babs Fafunwa
Pupils of nature
The outdoor world is a natural classroom
where many African children express their
creative imagination through such
pursuits as dancing, music, hunting and
exploring. The spontaneous movements of
the dance are an ideal form of exercise for
growing bodies, as well as providing good
entertainment for friends who prefer to sit
it out (right). All youngsters are natural
scientists by inclination, and like this little
Cameroonian boy (left) love to examine
insect life at close quarters.
14

: v. - >
M>%
.v
i?
»
* OSJ^
/
/
X v
m.
'--» » .
-*
