This 11th-century bas-relief
sculpture on slate depicts
Cybele, Mother of the
Gods, reclining on a chariot
drawn by lions. It was
discovered in Kiev's
Pecherskaya Lavra
Monastery, Russia's oldest
monastic establishment,
whose monks lived in cells
hollowed out of cliffs
overlooking the River
Dnieper. Mythological
motifs from Antiquity,
especially Hercules and
Cybele, often figure in
Kievan 11th-century art.



KIEV
The mother
of Russian cities
by Yuri Asseyev
YURI ASSEYEV, Sower architect and profes¬
sor of the history of architecture, is assistant to
the rector of the Kiev Institute of Art.
32

THE heyday of the ancient Russian
State, whose territory stretched
from the White Sea to the Black Sea
and from the Carpathians to the steppeland
of the Volga, began in the tenth century
with the unification of the East Slav tribes
around Kiev. It lasted until the fourth
decade of the twelfth century, when the
development of feudalism led to a process
of fragmentation. During these centuries
the most outstanding masterpieces of
ancient Russian art and architecture were
created.
The roots of Kievan art were threefold.
The first ran backwards in time, towards
the rich cultural heritage of the East Slavs
themselves. The second grew out of the
living conditions and the demands of the
State in ancient Russia. The third stretched
beyond the frontiers of Russia itself
towards the accumulated experience of
other countries and above all of Byzantium,
the custodian of the great cultural tradi¬
tions of Antiquity.
The golden age of ancient Russian art
was eulogized in oral epics and in written
works alike, and nowhere more so than in
the cycle of poems (byliny) which com¬
memorate the exploits of the Kievan war¬
riors llya of Murom, Dobrynya Nikitich
and Alyosha Popovich. Conserved in the
popular memory over the centuries, these
poems transmit a message of pride and
admiration inspired by the grandeur and
power of the Kievan State.
The same sense of belonging to a great
and illustrious country permeates the Dis¬
course on Law and Grace composed in the
mid-eleventh century by Hilarión, the
Metropolitan of Kiev. Praising the princes
of Russia, he writes, "Not in some miser¬
able and unknown country did they rule,
but in the Russian land, whose name is
known and whose voice is heard in the
four corners of the universe".
The adoption of Christianity in 989 A.D.
brought Russia into closer contact with the
Christian world, and above all with the
world of Orthodox Christianity. By then the
Russians had a written language, and they
were able to practise the new religion in
their native tongue. This was a powerful
stimulus to the development of original
features in their art.
Patriotism was an important component
of the ancient Russian sense of beauty, and
had a strong influence on lyrical poetry.
Indeed, love for the homeland and the
natural environment is a leitmotif which
runs through ancient Russian art, particu¬
larly the epic poems. It echoes through the
Russian chronicles; it lies at the heart of the
famous Lay of Igor's Campaign; and it
finds expression in the Tale of the Ruin of
the Russian Land, whose author proclaims:
"0 Russian land, how radiantly bright and
beautifully adorned you are! Many and sur¬
prising are your charms: your lakes, your
rivers and your sacred springs, your steep
mountains and your lofty hills, your thick,
leafy forests and your lovely fields, your
monastery gardens and your churches..."
The building of cities, fortresses and
castles was an extremely important activity
which provided Russian architects with a
wealth of opportunities for developing and
perfecting their skills. The early cities,
whose buildings, naturally enough in a
country of forests, were for the most part
made of wood, usually consisted of a forti¬
fied nucleus (the detinets) whose precincts
contained the palaces of princes, nobles
and their retinues. Around this central area
lay the outer city, whose ramparts shelter¬
ed the bulk of the population. At the edge
of the city were the districts where the
craftsmen and tradesmen lived. During the
eleventh and twelfth centuries, the popula¬
tions of Kiev, Novgorod, Smolensk, Cher¬
nigov, Vladimir Volynsky and other major
Russian cities numbered tens of thou¬
sands, which made them among the most k
densely populated centres of Europe. t
33

m§gfo¡
f¡r,ti
With their ornately constructed and
high-towered wooden palaces, their many
wooden and stone-built churches and
monasteries, the Russian cities were an
impressive sight to the merchants from
Germany and Central Asia, from Italy and
the Arab Caliphate, from Scandinavia and
Byzantium, who made their way towards
their crowded market-places. These visi¬
tors, together with the Russian merchants
themselves, who travelled from their
homes in Kiev, Novgorod and Smolensk on
long journeys overseas, brought to Russia
a great variety of goods and articles of
foreign make, which served as models and
as inspiration for the local craftsmen.
The tenth century saw a sharp rise in
Russian standards of craftsmanship and in
the output of Russian craftsmen. In Kiev
alone sixty different crafts were practised.
Jewellery made in this city was particularly
prized, and won praise from the Byzantine
poet Tzetzes and from Theophilus of
Paderborn, a tenth-century German author
who wrote a voluminous treatise on the
jeweller's craft.
Foreign visitors to Kiev exclaimed that
nowhere else had they seen such beautiful
things, and this is not surprising if we take
as a single example the small piece of
jewellery, preserved to this day, consisting
of no less than 5,000 soldered ringlets 0.06
cm in diameter, in the centre of each of
which is a tiny precious stone measuring
0.04 cm. On a surface measuring eight
square centimetres, the jeweller fixed 120
golden flowers on thread-like gilded stems.
The first mention of the use of stone for
the construction of a palace dates from 945
A.D., but this material only began to be
widely used for building at the end of the
tenth century. Even at this early stage,
specifically Russian architectural tech¬
niques and forms appeared, as distinct
from those employed in Byzantium. One
original feature of Russian churches is the
onion-shaped cupola, which in the opinion
of many specialists was inspired by the hel¬
mets of the Russian warriors.
The most precious treasure of Kievan
Russia is the Cathedral of Saint Sophia.
According to the oldest surviving manus¬
cript, the Russian Primary Chronicle, it was
founded in 1037 on the site where, a year
earlier, Yaroslav the Wise had finally routed
the Pecheneg nomads. Beneath later addi¬
tions and the reconstruction carried out
during the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, the cathedral has to a remark¬
able extent conserved its original outline.
With its majestic and harmonious archi¬
tecture, Saint Sophia is a brilliant symbol
of Russia's new-found unity under the
authority of the Kievan prince, as well as a
memorial to victory over the nomads.
Particularly outstanding are the frescoes
decorating the staircases which lead to
upper galleries in two of the towers. They
depict scenes of princely entertainment:
wrestling matches, horse-races, hunting,
bird-snaring, dancing, music-making and
other activities. Beneath the galleries are
portraits of the family of Yaroslav the Wise,
including his daughters Anne, Elizabeth
and Anastasia, whom he married to the
kings of France, Norway and Hungary.
teî»!ïîvWri
NVlYlfîÇîL
pîJtïtÏYÎYiTiW'jfJi
IiJ/fïvrfît ! t it it itiL
c;I.'tiTjt»ti\>ititititl
fcfSN^WfîtîWr
Ü
l*&
¿*l»l
ILLUMINATED MINIATURE of St. Mark from a page of the Ostromir
Gospel, a masterpiece of Kievan art. Copied in 1056-1057, this Slavonic
manuscript was lost for centuries and accidentally rediscovered in the
18th century in the wardrobe of Catherine the Great. It is now preserved
in the Saltykov-Shchedrin Public Library, Leningrad.
LUXURIANT FRESCOES AND MOSAICS cover the columns, walls and
vaulted ceilings of the 11th-century cathedral of St. Sophia in Kiev.
Predominantly Byzantine in their symbolism, execution and
arrangement, they portray Apostles, Saints and martyrs and depict
episodes from the Old and New Testaments. Right, detail of fresco
illustrating the Visitation of the Virgin Mary to Elizabeth, the mother of
John the Baptist.
Some 2,000 square metres of eleventh-
century frescoes have been uncovered
from beneath later inscriptions and res¬
tored, and these constitute only a fraction
of the original decoration.
The mosaics covering the pillars, vaul¬
ting and walls of the luminous central area
of the cathedral are equally striking, and
the representation of the Eucharist and the
Church Fathers in the central apse is a
masterpiece of composition. Among the
portraits of the Church Fathers, those of
Saint Lawrence, Saint Gregory Palmyras
and Saint John Chrysostom are executed
with supreme artistry.
Approximately 650 square metres of
mosaic have been preserved in the cathe¬
dral. In the opinion of Soviet specialist Vic¬
tor N. Lazarev, they are the work of at least
eight master craftsmen. The artists
employed a wealth of colour, 177 different
tones in all, including 34 shades of green,
23 shades of yellow and nine shades of
grey.
Another celebrated architectural monu¬
ment of Kievan Russia is the Cathedral of
the Transfiguration in Chernigov, which
was founded, according to the chronicles,
around 1035-1036.
In the middle of the eleventh century, the
development of feudalism in Kievan Russia
strengthened the self-confidence of indivi
dual regions, and the establishment of new
centres opened a fresh chapter in the his¬
tory of Russian art and architecture. The
separatist tendencies of different princes
weakened the hold of Kiev, while the
influence of the Church grew stronger and
monasteries sprang up all over the land.
Kiev, however, was still the Russian
capital, and the main source of cultural and
artistic inspiration, much of which origina¬
ted in the Pecherskaya Lavra Monastery.
The Church of Saint Michael with the
Golden Roof, founded between 1107 and
1113, contained magnificent mosaics and
frescoes, its main apse being decorated
with a mosaic of the Eucharist, like those of
Saint Sophia and the Church of the
Assumption in the Pecherskaya Lavra. But
this large-scale composition is quite diffe¬
rent from the Saint Sophia Eucharist. The
figures are portrayed with far greater free¬
dom of expression,, more attention is paid
to the delineation of their psychology, the
colours are bright and intense. The indivi¬
dual heads are more diversified and their
expressions and gestures are more anima¬
ted. These features, together with the ins¬
criptions which accompany the portraits,
suggest that the mosaic was produced by
local masters. Some specialists believe that
one of them was the legendary Russian
icon-painter Alipi.
34

The life and work of Alipi are described in
detail in the Pechersk Paterik, a collection
of writings on the religious and cultural
activities of the Pecherskaya Lavra. Accor¬
ding to the Paterik, Alipi "was not concer¬
ned with growing rich". He painstakingly
collected old icons by other masters and
restored them, while his own works were
so beautiful that the Kievans believed that
the angels had a hand in their production.
The power of healing was attributed to the
paints he used.
Many archaeological discoveries and lit¬
erary sources attest to the Russian attach¬
ment to pagan works of sculpture. This
attachment probably explains why Prince
Vladimir brought back ancient statues from
Khersonesus in the Crimea to decorate the
central square of Kiev.
Sculpture was associated with paganism
and the Byzantine Church disapproved of
this medium being used to depict religious
themes: the sculptures in Saint Sophia in
Kiev and in the Cathedral of the Transfig¬
uration in Chernigov are purely ornamental.
Another major centre of Kievan architec¬
ture was Novgorod. Three of its early
twelfth-century churches and monasteries
have survived in good order up to the pre¬
sent day: the Cathedral of Saint Nicholas
the Wonderworker (1113) and the Monas¬
teries of Saint Anthony (1117) and Saint
George (1119). Their cupolas, surmounted
by a cross and supported by six piers,
reflect the influence of the Church of the
Assumption at the Pecherskaya Lavra.
At the same time, Novgorod's own
Cathedral of Saint Sophia established a
new tradition of powerful forms and aus¬
tere stone and brick façades, in structures
with three or five cupola-topped towers. A
particularly splendid example of this style is
the Cathedral of the Monastery of Saint
George.
The surviving fragments of the frescoes
of the Monastery of Saint Anthony, dating
from 1125, are Romanesque in character,
but are executed in a particularly energetic
and free-handed manner that prefigures
some of the features of later Novgorod
painting.
Legend has it that Anthony of Rome, the
founder of the monastery, arrived in Nov¬
gorod after sailing across the Mediterra¬
nean and Baltic Seas on a millstone.
Meanwhile, some fishermen of Novgorod
hauled up a barrel full of precious objects,
which Anthony himself had thrown over¬
board at the beginning of his voyage. It
was on these riches that the monastery
was constructed.
Fantastic though it may be, this typically
medieval legend contains a grain of truth:
those of Anthony's possessions which
have survived are of authentically European
origin, and both literary and archaeological
evidence show that the city of Novgorod
enjoyed very close contacts with the West.
No trace has survived of Russian easel
paintings from the late tenth and the early
eleventh centuries, although the chronicles
mention the icons which decorated the
early churches. During the eleventh and
early twelfth centuries, a great number of
icons were imported into Russia from
Byzantium. One of the most famous of
them, "Our Lady of Vladimir", had a strong
influence on the development of Russian
icon painting.
Icons from Russia found their way to
neighbouring countries, where they were
held in high esteem; a notable example is
Poland's celebrated Virgin otCzestokhova.
The production of illuminated books
reached heights of perfection in Kievan
Russia. Books had long been prized, care¬
fully preserved and richly decorated in Rus¬
sia. In the words of an eleventh-century
chronicler, they were "rivers that quench
the thirst of the universe, sources of wis¬
dom whose depths are unfathomable".
The oldest surviving Russian book, the
Ostromir Gospel, was written in 1056-1057
by the deacon Grigori, for Ostromir the
posadnik (mayor) of Novgorod. It is dec- i
orated with a profusion of illuminated I
35

FOCAL POINT of Kiev's cultural, social
and religious life was the cathedral of St.
Sophia (dedicated in 1037), built by Prince
Yaroslav the Wise as part of plans to
emulate the splendours of Byzantium.
Little of the ancient edifice, whose 13
cupolas symbolized Christ and the
disciples, has survived, and the
extensively-restored exterior (above,
eastern façade) is largely baroque. A
unique feature of St. Sophia is its cycle of
secular frescoes depicting spectacles
similar to those presented at Christmas to
the Emperor at Constantinople. Over 130
merry-makers are shown juggling,
disguised as fantastic animals, dancing,
making music and hunting (below).
initials, head-pieces and miniature portraits
' of the evangelists.
Interesting portraits of members of the
family of Prince Yaropolk Izyaslavovich are
to be found in the so-called Codex of Ger¬
trude (also known as the "Psalter of Trier")
which was compiled between 1078 and
1087 and is today preserved in Italy (at Civi-
dale in Lombardy). Written in Latin at the
command of Egbert, Archibishop of Trier,
it came a century later into the hands of
Princess Gertrude of Poland, the wife of
Prince Izyaslav of Kiev, son of Yaroslav the
Wise. While in her possession, the manu¬
script was further decorated with a number
of miniatures, including portraits of Ger¬
trude's son Yaropolk and his wife Irina.
From about 1130 onwards, ancient Rus¬
sia entered a stage of "feudal disintegra¬
tion". If an all-Russian tradition persisted,
the different principalities created their own
cultural and artistic centres, where local
trends and tastes were intermingled with
more general features of artistic develop¬
ment at that time. In the words of Acade¬
mician Boris A. Rybakov, twelfth-century
Russia was a co-author of the many forms
of the Romanesque style.
By the fourth decade of the century, the
typically Kievan tradition of building with a
mixture of stbne and brick had been aban¬
doned, and Russian architects began to
turn to locally available materials. In the
Dnieper region and in Volynya, brick was
used. In Galicia and Vladimir-Suzdal,
limestone was at hand, and the façades of
buildings are decorated with carvings in
white stone. This feature finds masterful
expression in the Church of Saint Dimitri at
Vladimir (1194-1197) and in the Church of
the Intercession built in 1165 at the mouth
of the River Nerl.
The greatest masterpieces of Russian
icon painting in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries are those of Saint Dmitri, from
the town of Dmitrov near Moscow, the Vir¬
gin of the Pecherskaya Lavra, and the Vir¬
gin of the Novgorod Dormition, all of
which are now in the Tretyakov Gallery in
Moscow.
If Russian art branched out in different
directions as each feudal principality asser¬
ted its independence, its tap-root conti¬
nued to draw strength from the original
source Kiev. And herein lies the signifi¬
cance of the art of Kievan Russia, as the art
of a united ancient Russian people from
which the art and architecture of the Rus¬
sians, the Ukrainians and the Byelorussians
would later develop.
Yuri Asseyev
