Tea
and
sympathy
An intricate network
of trade and cultural
links with the Orient
by Olzhas O. Suleimenov
Right, 17th-century drawing of a
Mongolian horseman. Slav
travellers brought back many
novelties from the Orient
including tea, the abacus and
ginseng. Photo from The Slavs and the East © Unesco
THE earliest contacts between the
Slavs and the peoples of the East are
shrouded in a mystery which we can
only attempt to pierce by fitting together a
jigsaw of fragmentary evidence: scattered
allusions by Latin writers, the testimony of
folklore, and linguistic and archaeological
data.
It is not until the sixth century A.D. that
the picture becomes clearer. From that
time and later, writings have survived
which, disjointed and incomplete though
they are, shed much light on the age when
the Slavs began to be known in Byzantium
and when, through the Greeks, the word
Slav began to be heard in the Orient.
Later chroniclers recorded the traditions
OLZHAS O. SULEIMENOV is a leading poet of
Soviet Kazakhstan who writes in both the Rus-'
sian and Kazakh languages. The author of ten
volumes of poetry and a number of studies on
Turkic and Slavic cultures, he is one ofa team of
Unesco consultants engaged in the preparation
of a History of Civilizations in Central Asia.
of this early period, along with information
culled from pre-lslamic annals. By the
eighth and ninth centuries Arab authors
were calling the Don "the river of the
Slavs" and the Black Sea "the Russian
Sea".
Some Arab geographers of the early
Middle Ages gave the word Slav so broad a
meaning that they applied it to peoples of
Germanic origin. This was no simple "mis¬
take" on their part; the confusion arose
because the Slavs and the eastern mer¬
chants followed such a vast and intricate
network of trade-routes and because the
Slavs played such a prominent role in the
relations between East and West.
Trade between the countries of the Arab
Caliphate and those of eastern Europe and
the Baltic seaboard began to expand in the
eighth century. Right from the start much
of this commerce flowed along the Volga
on the boats of eastern merchants who
plied northwards through the rich trading
centres of Itil (near present-day Astrakhan)
and Bolgar, which lay south of the con-
28

Photo from Illustrated History ol the U.S.S.R. © APN, Moscow
A distant ancestor of the
rouble, this silver "grivna" or
ten-kopeck piece was used in
9th-century Kiev as both an
ornamental weight and a coin.
Photo © APN, Moscow
Overlooking Red Square,
Moscow, the 16th-century
Cathedral of St. Basil the
Blessed strikingly illustrates
how Eastern styles were
incorporated into Russian
architecture. Built under Tsar
Ivan the Terrible to
commemorate the conquest of
Kazan and Astrakhan, the
cathedral is actually a complex
of nine churches, the central
one being topped by a
traditional Russian "tent-
shaped" roof.
fluence of the Volga and the River Kama.
These merchants were attracted by the
legendary riches of the northern lands, and
chiefly by their furs: silver fox, sable, mar¬
ten, ermine, beaver and the pelts of other
animals. Such treasures were highly prized
in Baghdad, Bokhara, Khorezm and Cairo.
Poets sang their praises, and kings, emirs
and potentates strove to outdo each other
with magnificent gifts from the distant
northlands. They also imported wax, honey
and slaves from eastern Europe.
In return, the Slav countries received the
handiwork of eastern craftsmen, in particu¬
lar silver coins. Throughout the vast area in
which the East and West Slavs were set¬
tled, hoards of silver coins of the eighth to
the tenth centuries are still often dis¬
covered, evidence of intense commercial
activity. Torgovye gosti ("trading guests")
from Slav lands were familiar figures in
various towns of the Caliphate. Their boats
sailed down the Volga and the Don to the
Caspian and the Black Seas, and from
there they transported their wares by camel
to Baghdad.
The growth of trade between the Cali¬
phate and the Slav countries whetted the
appetite of Arab scholars for information
about their northern neighbours. Arab geo¬
graphers and historians writing between
the eighth and the tenth centuries discuss
the origin of the Slavs, their relations with
other peoples, their churches and their reli¬
gion, the life and customs of the different
tribes, and the first Slav States.
As for the Slavs, they obtained their
knowledge of the East both from eyewit¬
ness accounts and from written sources.
Russian, Polish and Czech annals (such as
the Polish chronicle of Gallus Anonymus
and the Czech chronicle of Cosmas of
Prague), compiled in the eleventh and
twelfth centuries, contained information
about the civilizations of the East: Egypt,
Assyria, Media and Iran. The early twelfth-
century Russian text known as the Russian
Primary Chronicle speaks of the trade route
along the Volga to the Caspian and thence
to Khorezm. Many references to the
ancient and medieval peoples of the East
are contained in the historical work of
the fifteenth-century Polish author Jan
Dlugosz.
The Pechenegs and later the Polovt-
sians, fierce Turkic nomad tribes who lived
to the north of Slav territory, often became
political enemies of the Slavs but did not
hinder the development of cultural con¬
tacts. They allowed Slav merchants to pass
through their territories, and sometimes
even served as middlemen.
Indeed, an important feature of modern
studies of the cultural relations between
the Slavs and the East is the current re¬
appraisal of the role of the Turkic peoples,
who served as intermediaries in the lasting
contacts which the Slavs established with
the vast and variegated cultural region
known as "the East".
These Turkic peoples, both nomadic and i
settled, were the closest eastern neigh- I
29

Ivory head (above) recently unearthed at
Vergina (Greece) is thought to depict
Alexander the Great as a young man. In
the Middle Ages the story of his epic
expedition became part of Slav folklore.
, bours of the Slavs; and whereas relations
between the Slavs and the Arabs, Iran and
the Far East were largely confined to trade,
the Slav-Turkic relationship was closer and
more enduring. It is impossible to examine
the subject of Slav culture, economics and
political organization without taking into
account this "Turkic factor". (1)
Total harmony has never reigned during
the creation and development of civiliza¬
tions. It was often armour-clad and sword
in hand, rather than with caravans of
goods, that the people of one country set
off towards their neighbours. Contact
sometimes turned into tragic confronta¬
tion. And this was the case of the East
Slavs at the beginning of the thirteenth
century, when the nomad hordes led by the
Mongolian Khagan Batu (the grandson of
Genghis Khan) swept westwards out of the
steppes to invade their lands.
Kievan Russia and many other indepen¬
dent Russian principalities collapsed under
this onslaught. By their struggle against
the Tartar yoke, the East Slavs hindered
the nomads' westward drive, but their own
culture was thereby condemned to develop
for the next three hundred years or so
under foreign domination. Their struggle
for liberation contributed to the unification
of Russia, the establishment of a central¬
ized Russian State, and the appearance
and development of new forms of culture.
Throughout all this period, however, con¬
tacts between the Slavs and the East were-
maintained.
After their adoption of Christianity, Rus¬
sians began to travel to the East on pil¬
grimages to the Holy Land. Pilgrims' tales
of Constantinople, the Byzantine Empire
and Palestine appear in Russian chronicles
from the twelfth century onwards. As early
as the eleventh century, the Russians had a
special quarter in Constantinople where
their merchants lived. Colonies of Russian
monks were established in the monasteries
of Constantinople. Some of these monks
translated books by Greek authors and also
transcribed works by South Slav writers
and sent them to Moscow.
From ancient times, India had captured
the imagination of the Slavs. The fantasy-
embroidered story of Alexander the Great's
journey to the East, to a land known as
"Aleksandrija", was familiar to both East
and West Slavs. Information about this
strana chudes ("wonderland") first
reached the Slavs indirectly, through
Central Asia, Transcaucasia and Iran.
The first Russian traveller to see India
with his own eyes was Afanasi Nikitin, a
merchant of Tver, who visited it between
1466 and 1472. He described his journey in
a book entitled "Travels Beyond Three
Seas". In contrast with many travellers,
Nikitin was able to mingle with the Indians,
and to acquire a sound knowledge of the
country and its customs.
In the sixteenth century, when the age of
great geographical discoveries began, and
Men are transformed into fabulous beasts
in this illustration from a 16th-century
Byelorussian version of the Alexander
romance.
(1) The Turkic peoples: a number of tribes and peoples
who in the sixth century A.D. founded an empire
stretching from Mongolia and the northern frontier of
China to the Black Sea.
Europe was fascinated by news of the
incalculable riches of India and China, the
Slavs were a major link in the expanding
commercial and cultural relations between
western Europe and the East. At the begin¬
ning of the century, the Musco¬
vite ambassador in Rome, Gerasimov,
launched a project for the discovery of a
northern sea route to China. Tsar Ivan the
Terrible, who was interested in the East,
promised a substantial reward to anyone
who reached China by the northern seas;
and it was only in the second half of the
seventeenth century that efforts to do so
were abandoned, when it was found that
China could not be reached by sea, "be¬
cause of great ice, frost and darkness".
The widening and steadily strengthening
pattern of relations between the Slavs and
the eastern peoples, and the mutual in¬
terest which grew up between them, led to
the establishment and development of con¬
tacts between and an intermingling of their
different cultures. The eastern nomadic
tribes, for example, were strongly influenced
by their encounters with the settled Slavs,
whose sedentary way of life they gradually
began to adopt.
Not infrequently, however, cultural
influences arrived via intermediary peoples,
absorbing in the process elements of many
different cultures. It was by no means
always a matter of simply borrowing from
alien cultures; creative receptiveness and
modification were more often the rule.
Tillers of the soil from time immemorial,
the Slavs took a keen interest in the agricul¬
tural practices of the eastern peoples. It
was thanks to Byzantium and the Arabs
that rice came to Europe from the distant
countries of the East; in Russia it was
known as "Saracen millet". As early as the
seventeenth century. Tsar Aleksei Mikhai-
lovich had a special garden laid out close to
Moscow, where plants from the East were
grown on an experimental basis. Russian
ambassadors always endeavoured to bring
back new types of plants from eastern
lands, and more than one envoy to China
was instructed to procure "tea bushes".
Rare animals, including lions, tigers,
camels and elephants, were also brought
back from the East to the Slav countries.
Camels arrived in Poland as early as the
tenth century; Prince Mieszko I sent one as
a gift to the German Emperor. In the six¬
teenth century the Shah of Iran presented a
number of elephants to Ivan the Terrible,
and in 1741 fourteen of them arrived simul¬
taneously in Saint Petersburg. A special
"elephant court" was built for these exotic
animals, who were looked after by Indian
keepers. News of these fantastic creatures
from beyond the seas spread by word of
mouth through the towns and villages of
Russia, and, transformed in appearance by
popular imagination, they began to figure
in the wood carvings with which the pea¬
sants decorated their houses.
Articles made by Oriental craftsmen
were imported into the Slav countries,
while Slav craftsmanship was highly es¬
teemed in the East. It was no coincidence
that experienced master craftsmen of Slav
origin were to be found at the courts of
many eastern potentates. In the thirteenth
century there was a whole colony of Rus-
30

sians in Karakorum, the Mongol capital.
One of them, a skilled goldsmith named
Kosma, built a throne for Khan Koyuk, and
fashioned the great seal of state whose
imprint is preserved on a letter from the
Khan to the Pope.
Cultural relations with the countries of
the East also influenced the daily life of the
Slav peoples. It was in Mongolia that the
Russians first came across tea, at a recep¬
tion given by Altyn-Khan in 1616. The Rus¬
sian ambassadors were treated to milk with
melted butter, "with leaves of some kind in
it". They at first declined to accept tea as a
gift for the Russian Tsar, but finally agreed.
Tea thus came to Russia considerably ear¬
lier than to Holland and England, and for a
long time afterwards it remained the main
Russian import from China.
The habit of drinking tea, together with
its Chinese name, chai, became wide¬
spread during the eighteenth century in
Russia, Central Asia, Iran, Turkey, Syria
and Egypt. The vessel which, in its native
land, China, was used for mulling wine was
adapted for infusing tea, while water was
boiled in a Russian invention, the samovar.
Many eastern peoples became acquainted
with the samovar of Russia, which proved
extremely popular in Central Asia, Turkey,
.*.
p ' M
Kk'íS Ir
-^j^H ^BL
M
it .41 mr
iî>
l^Ê9m K*
r 1
7 * ^
> 4.
T
* 1 t ir J
f < f jm
4 "**" À j , \ *9 *
/^'
¡*1* J
U 1 |fij|
r « Ife^l
) ) wrk
**m 1 ir 1
1 B^^^^^
1
<*L I
^
1 w V
' 1 f w i
I
M m . '
Elephants
and envoys
Shown here are two of the
many lively and picturesque
works of art which record the
relations between the Slav
countries and the East. Left, a
Japanese artist's impression of
the famous Russian traveller and
diplomat Nikolai Rezanov, who
led a mission to Japan in 1804.
Every detail of his uniform is
carefully described. Rare
animals such as lions, tigers and
elephants were sometimes sent
as gifts to Slav rulers by eastern
potentates. When the first
elephant seen in Moscow
arrived from Persia in the early
18th century, the event was
commemorated by a popular
woodcut (above).
Iran and the Arab countries. In Kashmir, it
has even kept its Russian name.
The Europeans, the Slavs among them,
learned much about science, including
mathematics, from the eastern peoples.
The numerals still employed today are cal¬
led "Arabic" (although they really origin¬
ated in India). For their part, the Slavs took
a keen scientific interest in the East. Peter
the Great with his own hand corrected an
inaccurate map of the Caspian Sea and
Central Asia.
During the seventeenth century, Yuri
Krzanic, a Croatian living in Russia, com¬
piled descriptions of Serbia, Mongolia and
China. Returning in 1680 to his native land,
he presented his History of Siberia to the
Polish king, Jan Sobieski, thereby making
an important contribution to knowledge of
the Far East among the West Slavs.
The age-old lore of eastern folk-medicine
was highly regarded by the Slavs, who in
turn played a major role in the introduction
of western medical science in the East. In
the mid-nineteenth century, Russian doc¬
tors founded the first hospital in Japan.
The first doctor in Mongolia, Pavel Shas-
tin, was a Russian. His methods of treat¬
ment made such an impression on the^
Mongolians that for a long time the words F
31

vrach (doctor) and shastin were synony¬
mous.
These long-standing relations with the
East left their imprint on the Slavonic lan¬
guages. Historically and genetically the
Slavs belong to the Indo-European peo¬
ples, and for this reason their languages
preserve certain features which relate them
to the Indo-European languages. More¬
over, all Slav languages contain large num¬
bers of borrowed words and grammatical
features of eastern (and particularly Turkic)
origin, while a whole series of Slav words
have, as it were, "gone East".
Generations of descendants of ancient
eastern peoples have remained in the lands
of the West Slavs. At the beginning of this
century, a Polish Orientalist visited one
such group, the Karaims, and came across
an old glossary of Polovtsian words in the
house of a Karaim family. To his great as¬
tonishment, the seven-year-old daughter
of the house explained the text to him as he
read it aloud. From generation to genera¬
tion, this family had handed down a lan¬
guage which had ceased to be spoken
many centuries earlier.
Slavonic architecture came under a
strong eastern influence. In its early days,
the Byzantine tradition had a powerful
impact, while somewhat later Muslim
architecture, introduced by the Turks, left
its mark on the buildings of the South
Slavs. Eastern influences are less pro¬
nounced in the architecture of the West
Slav countries, in Poland and Czechoslova¬
kia, although here too monuments of eas¬
tern type may be found side by side with
old Gothic churches. Monuments built by
Armenian architects have survived in the
Ukraine and in Poland.
After the union of the Khanates of Kazan
and Astrakhan with Russia, eastern motifs
became more prominent in Russian archi¬
tecture. The famous Pokrovsky Church
(Cathedral of Saint Basil the Blessed),
situated on Red Square in Moscow, was
built in the national Russian Shater (or
tent) style of ecclesiastical architecture,
but also incorporates a number of eastern
elements.
Traces of eastern influences may also be
found in ancient Russian folklore: several
tales (bylinyj contain echoes of Turkic
epics. Many of them refer to heroes with
Turkic names, and the events they describe
reflect the history of the relations between
various branches of the Turkic peoples.
The intermingling of Slav and eastern
cultures was not only a source of mutual
enrichment, but also made a substantial
contribution to world civilization as a
whole. Today, the launching of an Indian
satellite by a Soviet rocket or the practice
of ancient Tibetan medicine on the shores
of the Baltic occasion no more surprise
than the appearance of a turbanned Indian
on the streets of Prague or of a fair-skinned
European amid the hubbub of an eastern
bazaar.
Any major culture is the product of con¬
tact and intermingling with many others,
great and small. History has shown that
creative borrowing is an essential factor in
cultural development and that attempts at
cultural isolationism lead inevitably to
impoverishment.
Olzhas O. Suleimenov
