by Michel Bâtisse
The
strange ways
of H2O
WATER is the universal symbol of
purity and simplicity. Yet noth¬
ing is in fact more rare than
pure water and nothing is less simple than
this strange substance with its surprising
physical, chemical and biological properties.
The Greek philosopher Thaïes of Miletus
looked upon water as the principle of all
things. Later, Empedocles of Ag'rigen-
tumfollowed by Plato and Aristotle-
classed water as one of the four elements,
along with earth, air and fire, of which all
matter was composed.
. From then on, until the end of the 18th
century, no one questioned the notion
that water was a single element. In 1775,
a French chemist, Pierre-Joseph Macquer,
collected a few drops of water following
the combustion of some hydrogen. Yet
so tenacious were the ideas of Plato and
Aristotle that, three years later, he wrote
MICHEL BATISSE, French engineer and phy¬
sicist, is Unesco's Assistant Director-General
for Natural Resources and Environmental
Sciences.
Above, model of a water
molecule. The large black sphere
is an atom of oxygen. It is
surrounded by electrons (shown
as white balls) and linked to two
hydrogen atoms, as though it had
two ears. This combination
gives water its well-known
chemical formula H20.
Hydrogen is the most abundant
element in the galaxy. Left,
photographed from space, the
Earth and the hydrogen "blanket"
around it take on the appearance
of a multi-toned crescent.
(Contrasts were heightened in the
photo lab.)
that water appeared to be an "unalterable
and indestructible substance" which could
not be broken down.
Suddenly, however, these old ideas
were overturned in a flurry of chemical
experiments. In England, Henry Cavendish,
in the course of his studies on gases, was
the first to show, in 1781, that water was
formed by the combination of hydrogen,
which he called "inflammable air", with
atmospheric oxygen, which he called "vital
air".
As is often the case at the great turning
points of scientific advance, the researchers
of the day stumbled forward like sleep¬
walkers, to use Arthur Koestler's ¡mage,
and were hard put to it to distinguish what
their experiments indicated, all the more
so in that they were tackling several pro¬
blems at the same time. And as is w
again often the case, discovery was in the f
15

, air and many researchers, both in England
and in France, had inklings of the truth.
Great scientists such as Gaspard Monge,
Joseph Priestley and James Watt all
contributed to the discovery of the com¬
position of water. But credit for under¬
standing and interpreting the nature of
water must go to the famous chemist
Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier, assisted by
Pierre Laplace, the future astronomer. On
24 June 1783 Lavoisier succeeded in
actually synthesizing water from oxygen
and hydrogen, proving clearly that water
was composed of these two elements;
soon after he succeeded in carrying out
the reverse operation of decomposing
water. He it was, indeed, who gave
them their present names of oxygen and
hydrogen, the latter signifying "producer
of water".
Today everyone knows that the water
molecule results from the combination of
one atom of oxygen with two atoms of "
hydrogen. And this apparently very simple
molecule is the very basis of all life on
Earth.
Yet water does not behave at all like
other liquids; to take one simple example:
in its solid form as ice, it floats.
Normally, liquids contract as they cool;
when they solidify, they contract even
more and for this reason are more dense
in the solid than in the liquid state.
"Normally", therefore, ice should not
float. Water does in fact contract as it
cools down to 4°C, but then it starts to
expand again before solidifying as ice.
In addition to this, the compressibility
of water, which is very slight, diminishes
further at increasing temperatures between
0 and 50°C, quite the reverse of what
happens with other liquids. In the same
way its viscosity decreases as pressure is
brought to bear on it, instead of increasing.
A
ND if we compare water to simi¬
lar combinations, such as hydrogen and
sulphur or hydrogen and selenium, we find
that water should be gas at normal tempe¬
rature, that it should boil at 90° below zero
and become ice at 100°C. Obviously life
on this planet would be impossible if this
were so. We ourselves are two-thirds
composed of water and it is difficult to
imagine a world functioning at around
-90°C.
This is not all. Water has another
"abnormal" property of the greatest
importance it likes to remain in the liquid
state and is very resistant to temperature
change. In fact, it requires the expenditure
of a great deal of energy to transform
water into vapour or into ice. This is what
is meant when we say that its "latent
heat" of freezing or vaporization is very
high. Thus it is the "heat pump effect"
produced by the melting of an ice cube
that cools our drink rather than its actual
temperature.
Similarly it requires a relatively very high
amount of energy to increase or decrease
water temperature: we say that water has
a very high "calorific capacity", and it is
this remarkable propertywhich, of course,
applies to the enormous ocean masses of
our planetwhich saves us from the very
considerable variations in temperature
between day and night and between
summer and winter to which we would
otherwise be subjected. Water is our
great thermic regulator. Everyone knows,
for example, that countries directly border¬
ed by the oceans have much less contrast¬
ed climates than continental countries.
Water has many other curious properties,
such as the ease with which it dissolves
many substances (as a consequence of
which it is rarely pure), its strong tendency
to creep up and wet walls and to rise in
capillary tubes, its propensity for getting
trapped during the formation of rocks in
the form of hydrates which at times take
on highly iridescent colours, as in opal.
What, then, lies behind these unusual
properties? It would appear that they are
due to the special structure of the water
molecule and the way in which it binds
itself to other molecules.
Modern physics no longer admits of the
representation of atoms in drawings.
However, a simple geometric model would
show that an oxygen atom has six
electrons on its outer orbit whereas, for
this orbit to be stable, it should have eight.
Similarly each hydrogen atom has one
electron on its orbit, whereas, to be stable,
it should have two. Thus, (as shown on
page 15) two atoms of hydrogen and
one atom of oxygen place their outer
electrons "in common" to form the stable
water molecule. But this link is not just
formed anyhow; the two hydrogen atoms
place themselves next to each other, giv¬
ing the water molecule a special configura¬
tion, as though it had two "ears".
Two very important facts result from
this. Firstly, the water molecule is
extremely stable, the link between the
oxygen and the hydrogen being due to a
very harmonious sharing of electrons-
known as a covalent bond as a result of
which the molecule is very difficult to
break down. This explains why, for so
long, water was thought to be a simple
substance.
It also explains why it is difficult to
envisage the economic use of the enor-
mous.quantities of hydrogen contained in
the sea as fuel for use, for example, in
motor cars. It is true that hydrogen is
used as a propellant for space rockets,
where its combustion with oxygen consists
in fact in synthetizing water, but the
process of producing the necessary
hydrogen is extremely costly.
Secondly, the water molecule is elec¬
trically dissymetric, the oxygen part being
negatively charged and the hydrogen part
positively charged. Thus it acts like a
small magnet, which explains much of the
anomalous behaviour described above.
The electrical interactions between the
hydrogen of one molecule and the compa¬
ratively "free" electron pairs of another
molecule constitute a link known as a
"hydrogen bond". Through the interplay
of these bonds each molecule of water
tends to link up with four other molecules
and this produces, in ordinary ice, a crystal
structure which is rigid yet not very
dense and in which the water molecules
are arranged geometrically, rather as they
are in snow crystals and for the same
reasons. This not very compact structure
gives ice its lightness. The disorderly
structure of liquid water is, in fact, more
dense and more compact than ice, since
the hydrogen bonds are less systematic
and break up as temperature rises.
I
NVERSELY, the structure of or¬
dinary ice cannot withstand very strong
pressure. This led to the discovery of eight
other kinds of ice produced at pressures
reaching 20,000 kg/cm2 which are, in fact,
of a higher density than water. But these
laboratory-produced forms of ice do not
exist in nature, and it is as well for us they
do not. What would happen if the ice of
the North Pole were to sink and to pile up
gradually at the bottom of the sea? Noth¬
ing very good for us!
Hydrogen bonds seem to be at the root
of other curious properties of water. It is
these bonds that ensure the cohesion
between the molecules of living cells
which are largely composed of water, and
they are responsible for the fact that water
only boils at a relatively high temperature.
The truth is there is still a long way to go
before we know everything about the
complex substance of liquid water and
physicists continue to propose theories
and construct models to explain all its
properties.
Perhaps the greatest paradox of all is
that this liquid, which was thought to be
so simple but which is so non-conformist
in its behaviour, is the one that was select¬
ed as the standard of reference for the
measurement of temperature (by definition
water freezes at zero degree centigrade
and boils at 100°C), of heat (a calorie is
the amount of heat required to raise the
temperature of one gramme of water from
15 to 16°C) and of mass (one gramme
being the mass of one cubic centimetre of
water at a temperature of 4°c). Most
wonderful of all is the fact that the
abnormal properties of this unique,
mysterious liquid have determined the
nature and structure of the physical and
biological world of which we are part.
Michel Bâtisse
16
