The Bohemian religious reformer
Jan Hus (1369-1415) and Martin
Luther (1483-1546), the leader of
the Protestant Reformation in
Germany, pictured (symbolically
but anachronistically) serving
communion together in a 16th-
century woodcut by the great
German artist Lucas Cranach.



THE COMMON HERITAGE
A cultural community stretching from the Baltic to the Black Sea
by Slavomir Vollman
TIE non-Slav peoples became aware
of the existence of the Slavs as an
entity during the first eight centu¬
ries A.D., recognizing the relative unifor¬
mity of their spoken language and of their
cultural, social and ethnic characteristics.
Indeed, they painted colourful pictures of
SLAVOMIR VOLLMAN, Czech specialist in
comparative Slavic literature, is deputy director
of the Institute of Czech and World Literature of
the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences and
head of the Institute's department of Slavic and
Comparative Literature. Vice-President of the
International Association for the Study and Dis¬
semination of Slav Cultures, he is deputy editor
of Slavia (Review of Slavic Philology) and a
member of the International Committee of
Slavists. He taught at the University of California
at Los Angeles in 1968-69 and is currently a
member of the department of Czech and Slovak
literature at Charles University, Prague.
this group of Indo-European tribes at a time
when the Slavs themselves, who had
spread out in a massive and powerful
movement of expansion over a vast area
stretching from the west bank of the Elbe
to the Volga, from Rügen on the Baltic to
the Péloponnèse and from northern Italy to
Syria, had neither a written language nor
any of the other means of communication
with each other to sustain their self-
awareness and their sense of unity.
The ancient Slavs undoubtedly referred
to themselves as Slovene, and this was the
name given to them by Latin, Greek and
German writers, from the sixth-century his¬
torians Pseudo-Caesarius, Procopius and
Jordanes onwards. The earliest Arab tra¬
vellers who came into contact with the
Slavs as they stepped on to the pages of
written history agreed with these authors
that they were tall, shapely and fair-haired.
The "national identity" of the Slavs
preoccupied all those who wrote about
them. The Byzantine historian Procopius
said that "they are not subjected to the
authority of a single leader, but have lived
from ancient times under a democracy;
consequently, everything involving their
welfare, whether for good or ill, is referred
to the people". Other sources mention
their warlike character and virile courage.
In the early Middle Ages, when the Slavs
began to behave in a manner that was
already common in the "civilized" (i.e.
Latin) West, their adversaries complained
that they were cruel and ferocious.
Thus, from a very early date, the non-
Slav world had its preconceived notions
about "Slav unity", "Slav character" and
even about the "Slav soul", notions that
were full of contradictions and frequent
flights of fantasy, that blended fact with
54

fiction and formed part of a complex "East-
West" mythology.
At times the Slavs adopted the charact¬
eristics attributed to them by foreigners,
when these coincided with their own feel¬
ings and experiences. Consciousness of
their common origin and linguistic affinity,
and awareness that they shared the same
historical destiny are reflected in their ear¬
liest written literature, and appear in diffe¬
rent forms throughout the whole of their
history. At the same time, however, there
began in the early Middle Ages the process
of formation, transformation and "crystalli¬
zation" of individual Slav peoples without
which their subsequent interrelationships
in the cultural, political and other fields
could not have developed. This contradic¬
tory process, of integration on the one
hand and differentiation on the other, was
to leave a profound imprint on the develop¬
ment of their cultural relations from the
"ninth to the nineteenth century, when it
became a subject of scientific study.
In 1826, in the Hungarian city of Buda,
Pavel Jozef Safarik published the first
serious attempt to present an overall view
of the development of Slav culture, under
the title Geschichte der Slawischen Spra¬
che und Literatur nach allen Mundarten
(History of Slav Literature and Language in
all its Dialects). The theme and conception
of this work, its language and its place and
date of publication, together with the per¬
sonality of the author himself, constitute a
striking example of relations between the
Slavs and the social and historical circum¬
stances in which these relations evolved.
Safarik has a rightful place in the history
both of Czech and of Slovak culture and
literature. A Slovak by birth, and in his
youth a poet in that language, he became a
teacher in the Serbian high school at Novi
Sad, capital of one of the provinces of the
Hapsburg Empire. He was also a Czech
scholar, and did not altogether favour the
movement for the creation of a specific
Slovak literary language, which reflected
the nationalist aspirations of Slovakia at the
time and which led to a rupture in the old
Czech-Slovak linguistic and cultural com¬
munity.
Safarik was neither an exception in his
age, nor in Slav cultural history as a whole.
Cultural relations between the Slavs have
always been influenced to an important
extent by the action of such bilingual fig¬
ures who wrote in two languages. The
Greek brothers Cyril and Methodius who,
according to their biographers, were fluent
speakers of the Slavonic tongue, used their
knowledge of the dialect spoken by the
Slav population of their native Thessalo-
nica to lay the foundations of the first Sla¬
vonic written language, created in Great
Moravia; they were also the authors of the
earliest Slav literature which their Moravian
disciples carried with them to the lands of
the South Slavs, who participated enthu¬
siastically in this further development. In
their turn, and right up to the sixteenth
century, hundreds of South Slavs settled in
Russia, and contributed to the literary and
cultural development of the East Slavs. The
late tenth-century Archbishop of Prague,
Voytech (Saint Adalbert), was a Czech
who became one of the patron saints of
Poland; the writer and humanist Bartolemy
Paprocky, born in Poland, earned a niche
for himself in the history of Czech culture.
These are only two among many examples
of the dual attachments which character¬
ized Czech-Polish cultural relations from
the early Middle Ages to the Renaissance
and beyond.
In the seventeenth century, this tradition
was continued by Jan Amos Komensky
(Comenius), leader of the old Protestant
church of the Moravian and Bohemian
Brethren, who were expelled from their
homeland by the agents of the Counter-
Reformation and who settled in the Polish
city of Leszno.
As an example of Ukrainian-Serbian
"biliteral" relations, we may mention Ema-
nuil Kozaóinski: graduate of a seminary in
Kiev, he became the founder of the Slav-
Serbian theatre during the first half of the
eighteenth century.
In addition to these and other well-
known figures whose names have come
down to us through history, there were, of
course, a great number of anonymous
intermediaries who took advantage of the
similarity of language and the relative ease
of assimilation in Slav countries other than
their own. These included an uninterrupted
flow of jesters, jugglers, singers and other
"Wandering players", humble people for
the most part, who, long before the Slav
nations emerged as modern States and
long before Safarik, contributed to what
the latter's friend the Czech-speaking Slo¬
vak poet Jan Kollar (another example of
Czech-Slovak dual attachment) called the
Vzaimnost or "togetherness" of the .Slavs.
It is also worth noting that Safarik's His¬
tory was published in the Hungarian capi¬
tal, which was at the time an important
centre not only of Hungarian nationalism,
but also of the movement for national
resurgence of the Slavs. Besides Buda,
other non-Slav cities where cultural reía- l
tions between the Slavs themselves deve- 1
The great Czech
educational reformer and
Protestant leader John
Comenius was born in
eastern Moravia in 1592.
Forced into exile by the
persecution of the Catholic
Emperor Ferdinand II, he
settled at Leszno, Poland, in
1628. His fame spread with
the publication of treatises
advocating full-time
schooling and new
teaching methods and he
was invited to England,
Sweden and Hungary to
advise on educational
matters. In 1652, Leszno
was occupied and
destroyed, but Comenius
escaped to Amsterdam
where he remained until his
death in 1670. Photos: (1)
Comenius, detail of an
engraving by David Loggan
which formed the title page
of a collection of his
writings on education
entitled "Didáctica Opera
Omnia". (2) Comenius
advocated separate schools
adapted to meet the
requirements of the
different stages of a child's
development. (3) Engraving
at the head of a chapter of
his "Orbis Sensualium
Pictus" (The Visible World
in Pictures), the forerunner
of the illustrated school
book, depicts the various
branches of man's
intellectual activity.
55

> loped included Vienna, Leipzig, Dresden,
Cluj in Romania, Venice and, later, Istam-
bul and Paris.
These relations, moreover, rapidly ac¬
quired a European dimension, and became
an integral component of cultural ex¬
change and development throughout the
world. Safarik, whose mastery of his native
language was outstanding, deliberately
wrote his History in German so that it
might be of greater service in Slav and non-
Slav cultural circles alike, and to the
younger generation in particular.
The fact that translations and adapta¬
tions of Safarik's work were published in
western Europe and America reflect its
great relevance to the issues of the time.
The concepts of a "world literature"
enounced a year later by Goethe had the
same objective: to set the creativity of his
people in a universal cultural context at a
time when, following the French Revolu¬
tion and the establishment of the modern
nations as fully-fledged actors on the stage
of human affairs, the world was entering a
new phase of development.
The movement which led to the emanci¬
pation of the Slavs, to their formation, self-
determination or resurgence as nations
freed from the feudalists "prison-houses"
of the Ottoman, Tsarist and Hapsburg
empires, and to their mutual collaboration,
found support in the ideas of the German
philosopher Johann Gottfried Herder, who
predicted a glorious future for the Slavs.
But the feeling of affinity of the Slav peo¬
ples, their conviction of the significance of
their own languages and cultures, in¬
cluding popular Slav culture, and aware-
Founded by St. John of
Rila in the early 10th
century, the Monastery of
Rila stands on the
southern slopes of the
Rila Mountain in south¬
western Bulgaria. The
imposing medieval tower
is all that is left of the
buildings erected in 1335
by the feudal overlord
Prince Hreljo. Over the
centuries the monastery
was destroyed and rebuilt
several times. Most of the
present buildings were
erected in the first half of
the 19th century,
following a disastrous fire
in 1833, and constitute a
fine example of the
architecture of the
"National Revival" period
in Bulgaria. Throughout
its chequered history, the
monastery has maintained
its high reputation as an
important centre of
European culture.
ness of the necessity to co-operate with
each other in the struggle for national and
social freedom, were founded on a thou¬
sand years of experience. Had not the
Saxon historian Widikund written of the
Slavs, as early as 967 A.D. that there was
no suffering they would not bear for the
sake of their beloved liberty (omnem mise-
riam carae libertatis postponendes)...
This steadfast attachment to freedom
was growing from strength to strength at
precisely the moment when Herder was
ascribing a "dove-like" nature to the Slavs.
And if Kollar, during the difficult period of
the Holy Alliance, spoke of the Slav cul¬
tural community as being as harmless as "a
gentle ewe-lamb in the life of the peoples",
he probably did not share Herder's point of
view. After all, the advocates of Vzaimnost
were also freedom-fighters, and the strug¬
gle for liberty which had begun with the
peasant risings of the eighteenth century
bore clear signs of mutual collaboration
between the Slavs.
Poles are known to have participated in
the storm of revolt that swept over east and
south-east Russia in 1773 under the lead¬
ership of the Cossack Emel'yan Pugachev.
Pushkin's reference to this fact after the
suppression of the Decembrist Revolt in
Russia in 1825 and the Polish Rising in
1830-1831 (two of the most important
rebellions against the same Tsarist tyranny)
was highly apposite; his words conceal
allusions to the clandestine democratic
movements which existed at the time in
Russia, the Ukraine and Poland, and which
were preparing programmes for the libera¬
tion of the Slavs. One of these movements
was even called the Obshchestvo soyedi-
nennykh slavyan (the Society of United
Slavs).
If the ideas and example of the French
Revolution conserved their significance
during the period of triumph of the Euro¬
pean anciens régimes, it should be pointed
out that in the Slav countries the seeds of
freedom fell on soil already prepared by
earlier generations. Already in 1775 seven
thousand Czech peasants in the eastern
part of the country had risen in armed
revolt, with a rallying-cry of "Freedom or
Death!" thus anticipating later events in
France.
In 1824, as punishment for having
belonged to a secret society of students in
Vilno, the young Polish poet Adam Mickie¬
wicz was exiled to Russia. The Tsarist
authorities hoped thus to neutralize this
militant member of the Polish national libe¬
ration movement and, if possible, to con¬
vert him to the imperial reason of the
Romanovs. In fact, this short-sighted act
on the part of the tyrants facilitated his
contacts with the Decembrist rebels and all
who shared their views, and created the
conditions for the friendly intimacy and
creative collaboration that characterized
the association between the two greatest
Slav poets of their ageAdam Mickiewicz
and Alexander Pushkin.
Pushkin and Mickiewicz undoubtedly
reinforced each other's views concerning
the importance of the poetry of the people
in the new and genuinely national literature
that they were creating. This is reflected in
the former's Songs of the South Slavs, and
in Mickiewicz's Forefather's Eve and Pan
Tadeusz.
Interest in folklore, its collection, and the
re-working of popular themes had begun
during the second half of the fifteenth cen¬
tury, when the Hungarian poet Janus Pan-
nonius creatively transposed into Latin
verse the picturesqueness of Croatian
CONTINUED PAGE 72

THE COMMON HERITAGE
continued from page SB
songs and laments. During the nineteenth
century, this tendency was to be transfor¬
med into a powerful and enduring current.
The ancient Slav tradition inspired not only
Pushkin and Mickiewicz, but also Killar Lju-
dovit Stur, the founder of the Slovak lit¬
erary language; Vuk Karadzic, who estab¬
lished Serbo-Croatian on a similar lit¬
erary footing; the Ukrainian poet Taras
Shevchenko and many other prominent
figures of Slav culture.
The general tradition of Slav folklore also
gave rise to endeavours to create a new
"national music". These attempts were at
first reflected in the composition of "popu¬
lar songs" which were often the product of
cross-cultural collaboration. For example,
Czech musicians were actively involved in
the development of Russian music at the
turn of the eighteenth and nineteenth cen¬
turies. The works of Tchaikovsky and his
lively contacts with other Slav composers,
particularly Czechs, Dvorak's Slavonic
Dances and the long career of Josef Suk as
a composer and conductor in Russia are
just a few examples of collaboration of this
kind. Out of this current of "Slav music",
fed by the tributaries of individual popular
traditions, emerged the works of out¬
standing composers of worldwide
renown, from the operas of Smetana,
Glinka and Moniusko to Stravinsky's ballet
Petrushka.
The work of the Czech composer Leos
Janacek (1854-1928) is a brilliant example
of inter-Slav cultural exchange. His cantata
Taras Bulba is based on a poem by the
Ukrainian Shevchenko; the libretto of the
opera Katya Kabonova comes from a play
by the Russian dramatist Ostrovsky; ano¬
ther of his operas, From the House of the
Dead, is based on a novel by Dostoevsky;
and finally, his Glagolitic Mass draws its
inspiration from Slavonic literature and
ancient Russian music. All these creations
reflect at the same time the living tradition
of popular Slav music, which Janacek had
studied in great detail.
The continuation of the process of
crystallization of their national musical cul¬
ture may be observed today among diffe
rent Slav peoplesamong the Slovaks, for
example, where imaginative adaptations of
popular songs written by one of the foun¬
ders of "national" Slovak music, Stefan
Fajnor, are found alongside the operas of
composers like Suchon and Cikker.
Constant awareness of their affinity and
a feeling of belonging to a single family of
peoples was natural to the Slavs, who
could understand each other without inter¬
preters and who recognized the great simi¬
larity between the historical destinies of
their countries. And this awareness came
to the surface in different social, spiritual
and historical circumstances time and time
again between the ninth and the nineteenth
centuries. It formed the background to the
development of all the various themes and
forms of artistic creation, particularly
among the common people, who also ser¬
ved as intermediaries for its transmission. It
found an echo when the Slav peoples, one
by one, were converted to Christianity, and
lay at the foundations of their literacy. It
facilitated the dissemination of the "hereti¬
cal" ideas of the Bogomils, the Hussites,
the Arians and the Moravian and Bohemian
Brethren, and the circulation of the huma¬
nist ideals of the Renaissance and Baroque
periods. And it made itself felt even more
strongly during the age of Romanticism.
The founder of modern Czech poetry,
Karel Hynek Macha, who was a contemp¬
orary of Mickiewicz and Pushkin, appears
in the broad context of world literature and
culture as a confirmed "Byronist". Closer
examination, based on more detailed
knowledge of cross-cultural influences bet¬
ween peoples of different regions, reveals
him rather as a direct heir of the Polish pre-
Romantic and Romantic tradition. This is
merely one of many examples of the parti¬
cipation of the Slavs in the development of
world culture, either anticipating major
trends or joining in them. Throughout this
participation is marked by the reciprocity
and "togetherness" of the Slavs, men¬
tioned above. Thus, Czech actors, singers
and directors played an important part both
in the creation of a national South Slav
theatre, particularly among the Slovenes
and the Croatians, and in setting this the¬
atre in a broader European context.
The idea of a cultural "commonwealth"
of Slavs, which found reflection in the
works of so many Slav writers, was closely
related to the ideals of justice, universal
freedom and the common good. On the
eve of the revolution of 1848, Taras Shev¬
chenko praised, in a single line of verse,
both Safarik and Jan Hus, the spiritual
father of nationalist and anti-feudal revolt.
In the same stormy year, the Slovak poet
Karol Kusmany raised his voice in praise of
all "who were inflamed with the desire for
truth and were prepared to make the
supreme sacrifice for it, and those who
devoted their lives to the cause of human
rights". The words, "sweet freedom" that
appear in his verse echo the liberté chérie
of a French song of the same period. And
this should come as no surprise, since
there was no such thing as a completely
isolated and introverted "Slav world"; the
leading representatives of the culture of the
Slavs readily acknowledged that cultural
relations between themselves only made
sense when their purpose was to serve all
mankind, and to contribute to "the general
ordering of human affairs". This was the
message of freedom and universal equality
that Jan Amos Komensky had pronounced
two hundred years earlier.
Jan Komensky (Comenius) himself is
inscribed in history as an outstanding
educationist, the founder of pedagogical
science and the author of profoundly
humanistic teachings concerning the ach¬
ievement of universal peace and jus¬
tice through mutual understanding and cul¬
tural and scientific collaboration between
peoples, and through universal educa¬
tion, irrespective of religion, nationality,
sex or class.
The noble concepts of Comenius, the
"teacher of the people", might well serve
for all time as a sure guide and a standard
by which to measure the value and signifi¬
cance of cultural relations between peo¬
ples, and groups of peoples throughout the
world.
Slavomir Vollman
72
