Where do our water supplies come from?
How are they replenished? It was only
after centuries of observation and
speculation that science discovered how
water circulates in Nature. Left, drinking
fountain in a Paris street.
HYDROLOGY



A science 5,000 years
in the making
by Raymond L. Nace
IT was only some 300 years ago that
man began to understand how Nature's
system of circulating water through
the oceans, the atmosphere and land
really works. And it took a further century
before the concept of this water cycle, in
which the world ocean is both the source
of all water and its final destination, was
fully and clearly stated.
However, archaeological evidence indi¬
cates that man has had a working know¬
ledge of some aspects of hydrology for
thousands of years.
RAYMOND L. NACE is senior research hydro-
logist with the Water Resources Division of the
United States Geological Survey. He is a
former chairman of the U. S. National Committee
for the International Hydrological Decade.
The earliest civilizations arose in arid and
semi-arid regions, seemingly almost simul¬
taneously in several parts of the world.
Men who lived in dry areas had to under¬
stand and manage water in order to go
beyond mere nomadic survival and achieve
stability and security.
As early as 5000 B.C. irrigation was
practised in a few areas in southwest
Asia. Cities surrounded by irrigated fields
evolved around 4000 B.C., and this involv¬
ed extensive irrigation in the plains of
Mesopotamia. Basin-type irrigation with
flood waters in the Nile Valley began at
about the same time.
The Egyptians were an intensely practi¬
cal people and they began recording
annual flood heights before 3000 B.C.,
furnishing us with the oldest known hydro-
logical measurements. They had no
apparent scientific interest 'in floods, but
flood height was indicative of the amount
of land that would be flooded and could
be used as a basis for crop taxation.
Systematic irrigation with groundwater
began much later than that with surface-
water. A groundwater control device
known as a khanat was in use as early as
the 7th century B.C. In simple terms a
khanat is a tunnel whose head taps a
water table.
Water reaches the surface at the mouth,
from where it can be diverted for village
water supply or irrigation. It was the most
efficient method of groundwater use until
the invention of the modern drilled well
and power-driven pumps. Khanats were t
constructed in Armenia, Persia, Afghanistan, f
25

Nature's water cycle
The Earth's water circulates continuously from the oceans to the air, to
the land and back to the oceans again. Through evaporation (and
transpiration from plants) water rises as vapour and falls back to Earth
as rain, snow, etc. Most of it drops directly Into the ocean, the rest on
land. According to some estimates, an average 106,000 km3 of this
precipitation falls on the world's land masses each year (and almost 4
times more on the oceans): 68 per cent of it evaporates; 31 per cent
reaches the oceans via streams and rivers, and 1 per cent via
underground flow.
North Africa and China, and many are still
in use.
In Asia proper, in areas of rainfall agri¬
culture, the idea of measuring rainfall as a
basis for crop taxation arose early.
Measurements for such purposes began in
India as early as the latter part of the 4th
century B.C. This has generally been
called the birth-time of rain-gauging.
However, meteorological observations
were recorded in China as early as about
1200 B.C., rain gauges were used -as early
as 1000 B.C., and systematic rain-gauging
was well established by about 200 B.C. A
dynamic concept of the water cycle arose
as early as 900 B.C. China at that time,
however, had no influence on Western
thought.
Science in the West received a great
impetus from the Greeks during the
Hellenic period. Aristotle formulated a
number of ideas about hydrology, but they
were almost completely erroneous. He
thought that most of the water in rivers
originated in great, cold undergound
caverns where it was transformed from air.
His belief that rain could account for only
a small part of stream flow held sway for
2,000 years and was the intellectual road¬
block that prevented recognition of the
dynamic water cycle almost until modern
times.
Despite their consummate skill as
hydraulic engineers, the Romans had little
or no notion of a cycle or the relation
between precipitation and water supply.
One Roman, however, Marcus Vitruvius
Pollio, did have a non-Aristotelian concept.
He wrote that water which evaporates
from the sea and other water bodies forms
clouds; rain from clouds penetrates the
ground and emerges as springs.
The rapid intellectual decline that began
in the 4th century A.D. was followed by
the Dark Ages, during which all science
was at a virtual standstill in Europe for a
1,000 years.
The awakening of Western science from
its long submission to ecclesiastical and
Aristotelian authoritarianism was spurred
strongly in Italy by that universal genius
Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519). His concern
was largely with hydraulics rather than
hydrology, but in some passages Leonardo
expressed ideas consonant with what are
now known to be the correct principles of
the water cycle.
He recognized the importance of per¬
meable geological formations as aquifers
in the Alps, how groundwater replenish¬
ment occurs, and how lowland springs are
fed with water. Other men developed
these ideas more fully but much later.
In France too a few men were beginning
to think independently. Notable among
these innovators was Bernard Palissy,
who published a small book in 1580 in
which he said for the first time that springs
are fed by rain-water and that alone.
Palissy gave a correct explanation of
artesian wells, of the relations between
groundwater and rivers, and of the general
water cycle. Concerning artesian wells,
he preceded by 200 years Erasmus Darwin,
who has been credited with the first
"proper explanation" in 1785.
The early 17th century marked the
turning point in the history of hydrology
and its related sciences.
The invention of the barometer, the
scaled thermometer and the hygrometer
early in the century made possible some
notable advances in meteorology and
hence in hydrology. The first international
meteorological network was organized
around 1654 by Ferdinand II, Grand Duke
of Tuscany. The groundwork was develop¬
ing that would make possible the birth of
truly scientific hydrology, based on the
cyclic concept.
It was Pierre Perrault (1611-1680), a
French lawyer turned natural philosopher,
who broke fully with the most hallowed
traditions about water. He made the first
serious attempts to measure the factors in
hydrology, and showed that precipitation
in a selected upper part of the Seine river
basin was at least six times more than the
discharge of the upstream tributary of the
Seine. Thus he exploded the ancient
dogma that precipitation is inadequate to
account for the flow of springs and rivers.
He also observed that rivers disappear
into sinkholes in certain limestone areas
and noticed the rise of the water table in
26

Drawing © Natural History, NYC
the vicinity of Paris when the level of the
river rose. He correctly inferred from this
that river water was sinking into the
sediments of the Paris flood plain.
Perrault did not discuss the relative
importance of marine and land evaporation
for the replenishment of atmospheric
vapour. It is implicit in his ideas, however,
that some atmospheric moisture is derived
from the sea. Inasmuch as one-sixth of
precipitation runs off to the sea, a return
mechanism is implied, otherwise continental
air masses would soon become perma¬
nently depleted of vapour.
It remained for the English astronomer
Edmund Halley (1656-1742) to close the
atmospheric arc of the water cycle. Halley,
in 1687, was apparently the first person to
estimate evaporation from the sea and
directly to credit this as a source of vapour
for precipitation on land areas.
Halley made some crude experiments
on evaporation at controlled temperature
in his laboratory in England, using a flat
pan of water on a beam scale, a thermo¬
meter and a pan of coals to maintain the
temperature of the water.
Based on evaporation during two hours
from a pan eight inches in diameter, Halley
made a tremendous extrapolation to total
annual evaporation from the Mediterranean
Sea. Astonishingly, in the light of present
knowledge, the result was in the right
order of magnitude.
In another extrapolation based on the
flow of the River Thames, adjusted to
derive an estimate of the flow of rivers
into the Mediterranean, he showed that
daily evaporation from the Mediterranean
is equivalent to about three times the
amount of water discharged into it by
rivers. Halley recognized the processes of
evaporation and transpiration from land
areas, so that not all precipitation runs off
in streams.
Perrault started with water already in
the atmosphere and described its disposi¬
tion after precipitation. Halley identified
the ocean as the main source of atmo¬
spheric vapour and attempted to show a
balance in the complete cycle of water
movement. Their main combined contri¬
bution was the concept of a cycle support- .
ed by crude but convincing measurements.
The proof came nearly a hundred years
later.
The great pioneer French chemist
Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier (1743-1794)
proved that water is a chemical compound,
which he synthesized by burning hydrogen.
He deduced that water is 85 parts by
weight of oxygen and 15 of hydrogen.
(The actual ratio is 88.9 and 11.1) The
atomic theory in effect had arrived, but it
lay largely fallow until it was taken up by
the Englishman John Dalton.
In a publication in 1793, based on
experiment, Dalton asserted that water
retains its chemical identity when vaporiz¬
ed. He made another pronouncement,
now elementary but profoundly important
at that time: evaporation from land areas
must be less than precipitation, or else no
rivers could flow.
Dalton thus laid the groundwork for
estimates of water balances and he was,
in fact, the first person on record to attempt
to strike a water balance for a sizable
area, namely England and Wales.
In 1845 Sir Robert Kane calculated the
water power available from Irish rivers on
the basis of estimations of runoff obtained
by subtracting evaporation from precipita¬
tion. This implied recognition of the basic
water-balance equation: runoff = precipita¬
tion
Although some surprising empirical
knowledge of groundwater dates back at
least several hundred years B.C., true
understanding of groundwater hydrology
had to await the development of geology
as a definite discipline. This did not occur
until the early 19th century, notably with
the work of William Smith (1769-1839),
the "father of English geology", which set
stratigraphie and structural geology on its
modern path. The geological framework
of an area is the plumbing system of
groundwater, and the water cannot be
understood without a good understanding
of this plumbing system.
Smith used his knowledge of geology
and groundwater to solve the problem of
a water supply for the town of Scarborough,
including construction of a tunnel into an k
artesian aquifer with a regulation system f
27

, so that storage could be increased during
the recharge period and drawn down dur¬
ing the summer.
Smith's hydrological works were
ingenious innovations in his time. His
mapping and stratigraphie work laid the
foundations for the flowering of ground¬
water hydrology during the 19th century.
During the mid-century period, extensive
research on groundwater was carried out,
notably in France.
The Abbé Paramelle (1790-1875), a
French parish priest, was appalled by the
scarcity of water supplies in small villages,
towns and farms in the Jurassic limestone
region of the Causses, near to the Massif
Central.
Knowing that precipitation was adequate
to supply streams and springs, he spent
nine years studying the terrain and lime¬
stone hydrology with resounding success.
He resigned his priesthood in 1831 and
devoted his entire time to locating sites for
wells. In his book on fountains he claimed
to have found 10,000 subterranean sources
of water. Out of hundreds of localities he
chose as sites for wells, his ratio of success
to failure was 12 to 1 . His Art de Découvrir
les Sources, published in 1856, was a
landmark in groundwater hydrology.
Paramelle had no experts to consult and
was almost entirely self-taught.
In the latter part of the 19th century,
however, prominence in the whole field of
hydrology began to shift to the United
States. North American hydrologists
capitalized avidly on the brilliant laboratory
studies that had been carried out in Europe,
and North America became a major world
scene of hydrological studies with special
emphasis on field data and studies. This
permitted the testing, elaboration and
modification of theories and the extensive
development of instruments and methods
for studies at all scales, both small and
large.
In Europe, too, many 19th-century
investigators concentrated on measure¬
ments and compilations of data. One
outstanding accomplishment was that of
the eminent Hungarian hydraulic engineer
Pal Vasarhelyi (1795-1846), who made the
first hydrological survey of the middle
Danube.
This work, accomplished between 1822
and 1840, has been overlooked by most
historians, but it became the basis for all
subsequent control and surveys of the
Danube. Vasarhelyi also prepared plans
in 1846 for control of the River Tisza,
providing for flood control and drainage of
3 million hectares of marshland that had
been an effective barrier to human activity
and movement since prehistoric times.
Ideas about world-wide hydrology have
been advanced for some 2,500 years.
However, the importance of the global
cycle did not receive much serious recogni¬
tion until relatively recent times.
Much credit for this recognition is due
to Russian scientists, beginning in the
second half of the 19th century. During
the period from 1875 to 1911, A. I.Voyeikov
stressed the importance of vapour derived
from the Atlantic Ocean in the precipita¬
tion régime of Russia. He suggested that
evaporation from forested areas furnished
an important component of continental air
vapour. Soviet scientists were also early
to recognize the inseparability of the heat
and water balances of the earth.
The study of the world's water balance
was one feature of the International Hydro-
logical Decade (1965-1974) programme,
which gave great impetus to all the main
branches of hydrology and set up avenues
for the exchange of information throughout
the world.
Today, the International Hydrological
Programme, launched by Unesco in 1975
to help promote a rational policy for the
development and management of water
resources, is providing a continuing
stimulus to the study of world hydrology.
RaymontfL. Nace
Rivers of
blindness
In vast areas of the developing
world, water is the source not
of life but of debilitating and
often fatal diseases, such as
malaria and bilharziasis which
alone claim an estimated 200
million victims each. Right,
Sudanese fishermen at work
in a turbulent river. In
Africa some 20 million persons
are afflicted with "river
blindness" caused by a
parasite which breeds in
fast-flowing water.
28
