Who teaches
the teachers?
Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Pans
Looking after a group of young children demands an inexhaustible supply of energy and a
wide variety of skills, for the pre-school teacher is called upon to be by turns mother,
psychologist and nurse, as well as an educator. Above, a precursor of the modern play-pen
as visualized by the 19th-century French artist François-Louis Lanfant de Metz.
by Dorothy Fleming STAFFING policies for pre-schools vary
considerably around the world. In
many countries, staff working with
younger children are less well trained than
those working with older children. Policy¬
makers rationalize by saying that there is |
less need for trained teachers In pre- 1
DOROTHY FLEMING, British specialist in pre¬
school education, is senior lecturer in education
at Sheffield City Polytechnic (U.K.) and was
head teacher of a nursery school from 1960 to
1963.
31

schools than in compulsory schools. In this
connexion one must remember that in
some countries pre-school education was
and still is voluntary whereas primary
school is compulsory.
The trend now is both towards making
the pre-school experience available to more
children and towards providing better
trained and educated pre-school teachers.
Sufficient funds are not always made
available, however, to pursue both goals
at once.
In China, candidates for kindergarten
teaching complete upper primary school at
age 12, and then attend a junior normal
school for three to four years to qualify for
the work. On-the-job training is very much
encouraged.
In Japan, on the other hand, a very high
level of academic achievement is required
of entrants to teacher-training for young
children. The U.K. comes about half-way
between the two: a candidate must have
attended secondary school till age 18
before entering teacher-training courses for
young children.
A distinction is made in the U.K. as in
some other countries, between Nursery
Nurses, who work only in pre-schooling
and day-care (usually under supervision)
and Nursery and Infant Teachers, who are
qualified (after 3 or 4 years of higher educa¬
tion) to work in pre-school or primary
schools, with children up to seven or eight,
often supervising less qualified helpers.
The ways in which pre-school education
is organized around the world are also
extremely varied. One finds state- or
private-run classes, full- or part-time caring
arrangements; nursery groups may be set
up by parents or by employers. There are,
nevertheless, some interesting similarities.
Though in some countries there is dis¬
agreement about the priority that should be
given to state-run pre-schooling, there is
now fairly wide agreement that specially
trained people should be providing it. For
example, the pre-school playgroups in the
U.K. which were initiated and financed by
parents would on the whole prefer to be
using trained teachers.
At first sight, the social and educational
aims of pre-schooling may seem to differ
widely in various societies, for example, in
the USSR and in the U.S.A. However, on
closer examination, one finds that their
basic aims are much closer than might have
been thought.
In every kind of society, teachers of
young children have a variety of roles to
play and must resolve the conflicts arising
from these different roles. They have to be
instructors, managers, helpers, discipli¬
narians, welfare workers and decision¬
makers. They have to have insight and
understanding of a wide range of personal,
familial, social, economic and political pro¬
cesses as well as of their own place within
them, and so they need a remarkably wide
range of knowledge and skills.
If these teachers miss opportunities, fail
to make correct assessments and deduc¬
tions or take wrong action, the consequen¬
ces can harm or disadvantage a child in his
later years. On the other hand, if a child's
early experience of teachers and of school
is a positive one, this can lead to a life-long
love of learning and to the development of
an individual who is stable, independent
and well-functioning within his own
society.
It is more vital than ever to give the
highest possible level of training to those
professionals who will be working with
young children. They should have a mini¬
mum of three or four years initial training
with periodic refresher courses. Not only
are they being given much of the responsi¬
bility for passing on the culture and values
of societies to their youngest members but
they are also responsible for developing the
potential of individuals to the highest level.
It may well be the case that the training a
society provides for its pre-school educa¬
tors is a sign of its maturity and the confi¬
dence it feels in its own future.
Dorothy Fleming
According to Unesco's
Statistical Yearbook
(1976) there were
1,681,000 pre-school
teachers throughout the
world in 1974, although
these figures do not
include the People's
Republic of China, the
Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and
the Socialist Republic of
Vietnam. Over a million
and a half were in the
industrially developed
countries, as opposed to
only 163,000 in the
developing world
(including 4,000 in
Africa, 8,000 in Oceania,
10,000 in the Arab
countries and 86,000 in
Latin America).
32
