What's
in a game?
How the children
of Zaire play to learn
by Kimenga Masoka
In Zaire, compulsory education
starts when children enter
primary school at the age of six.
Organized facilities for pre-school
education, which begins at the
age of three, are still limited
despite efforts made in recent
years to increase the number of
nursery schools. (According to
Unesco statistics, Zaire had only
211 pre-school institutions in
1972). But the shortage of schools
does not mean that there is any
lack of pre-school education in
Zaire. On the contrary, learning
through play forms part of the
traditional pattern of life.
CHILDREN are children all over the
world... And all over the world
children play games... In different
ways perhaps... But then, a game is just a
game anywhere!
Or is It? A closer look seems to show that
there is something special about the games
Zairian children play. Children in other
parts of the world, who go to
kindergartens, nursery schools and the like,
learn as they play. Zairian youngsters play
in order to learn, showing in their games
their sense of creativity.
At the age of three, and newly-weaned
(like many African children, they are
breast-fed until relatively late), they are
ready to assert their independence. They
are free to join the other children of their
own age or older. They have plenty of time
on their hands, and thousands of
wonderful ideas about how to occupy it.
So what do they do?
First of all, they make toys.
A group of children is usually led by the
oldest and most authoritative member of
the group: all the other children must obey
him as long as the game lasts; according to
African custom the young must always
show respect and obedience to their elders,
who represent traditional values.
To begin with, the group splits up, and
each child goes off on his own. It Is
Interesting to note the different ways in
which they behave. As they scatter into the
countryside they will pick a cob of maize or
some mango leaves, hack off the branches
of a palm-tree or try to knock some oranges
KIMENGA MASOKA, a staff member of the
National University of Zaire, is currently pre¬
paring a doctoral thesis in applied psychology
for the University of Paris. He is the author of
several studies on African psychology which
have appeared in Zairian publications.
off an orange-tree. Then one by one they
return to their usual playground (under the
trees of a courtyard) carrying their booty.
Each child settles down on his own little
patch of ground and tries to make
something out of his spoils.
First there is a long period of intense
concentration during which scarcely a
word is spoken. Then gradually, the chil¬
dren start to move around here a knife is
borrowed, there a bamboo cane is swap¬
ped for a strip of liana. Soon the work
begins in earnest.
Generally the children try to make fami¬
liar objects that appeal to them but are hard
to come bya model train, an aeroplane, a
car, a house, a telephone, a doll, a sauce¬
pan, a pipe, or certain types of games simi¬
lar to draughts. Yet these objects are never
exact copies of the real thing; the children
always do their best to add a personal
touch so that once they have finished they
can say: "I made that".
I remember watching a five-and-a-half-
year-old child from a modest family make a
telephone from a piece of liana about 10
metres long and two boxes made of mango
leaves. He put it together by attach¬
ing the ends of the liana to the two boxes.
Once he had firmly tied the knots, he laid
his apparatus out on the ground lengthwise
and asked one of his school friends to pick
up the box at the other end of the liana and
hold it to his ear.
When he spoke into his own box, the
other boy exclaimed: "It's amazing! I can
hear everything you're saying along the
liana!" When I asked the first boy if what
he had made was a telephone, he denied
that it was any such thing. It was his own
personal invention, he retorted, and he
would give it a name in his own good time.
Play is widely used in Africa as a means
of teaching children the basic traditional
16

The effort of concentration and co-ordination is written on the faces
of these two miniature maestros as they beat out the rhythm of a
Bapende dance, at Kilembé, Zaire. Their instrument, a hollowed-out
tree trunk, is a drum used for transmitting long-distance messages.
elements of their culture. This is the
second important function of play.
According to one African belief, children
should not be told stories during the day¬
time, in case they stop growing. It is only in
the evening that adults interrupt their chil¬
dren's games and teach them proverbs or
tell them stories.
All kinds of instruction and knowledge
are passed on via proverbs and tales. "The
cola nut In grandfather's mouth" is not
merely a warning against the bitterness of
the cola nut, which adults like to chew. It
also carries another message: don't Imitate
grown-ups. Slavish imitation is as silly as it
is dangerous. "The palm nut falls from its
cluster only when it is ripe." In other
words, you should not go it alone in life
until you, too, are ripe (See Unesco Cou¬
rier, April 1977).
Zairian children, like children all over the
world, tend to copy adults. But only up to
a point; traditional wisdom makes a subtle
distinction between aimless aping of
adults' behaviour or attitudes and the kind
of imitation that ¡s a way of preparing one
self for life and broadening one's know¬
ledge. Here again, play has its contribution
to make, with the full co-operation of
adults.
Fishing and hunting naturally among
the most exciting kind of games involve
the same imitative, or rather educative pro¬
cess. The children only hunt grasshoppers,
rats and birds, but they have to make their
own bows and arrows out of bamboo,
strips of palm-wood and liana. They only
fish for small fry in flood water during the
rainy season, but they have to fashion their
own hooks and dig up their earthworm
bait.
Singing and dancing form an integral
part of all these activities. If pre-school
education of this kind doesn't bring out a
child's intelligence, sensibility, creativity
and physical gifts then nothing will. What's
more, Zairian children play not only to learn
about the world, but also to discover them¬
selves. Take "nzembo", for instance, one
of their favourite games.
"Nzembo" consists of making music
with water. Two or three children wade
out into a shallow part of a river. Another
child hums a tune and tells them to play it;
like a conductor, he allots various tasks to
each member of his orchestra so as to get
an accurate rendering of the tune. He gives
his musicians a starting note, and at a
signal from him they start to play.
How, you may ask, does one "play" a
river? The musicians plunge their clenched
fists into the water, smacking the surface
of the river as hard as they can, producing
very low rhythmical sounds as they hit the
water which are like the sounds of the tom¬
tom. Indeed, so catchy and rhythmical is
this music that the other children on the
river bank join In and dance.
...Once upon a time, In far away Zaire,
there lived a three-year-old musician whose
favourite instrument was a river. Standing
in the water he would coax music from the
water with his hands...
What a wonderful story to tell the chil¬
dren of Europe at bedtime, so as not to
stop them growing.
Kimenga Masoka
17
