FROM ancient times right up until the
late nineteenth century, Korean
science anJ technology developed
within the shadow of the sophisticated civi¬
lization of the neighbouring giant China.
Yet the science and technology introduced
from China came to a land already techno¬
logically experienced in certain fields. The
men who lived in the Korean peninsula
around the tenth century B.C. had, for
example, already reached a high level in
metal-working and alloy-making. They
knew something about the advanced tech¬
niques of zinc-copper alloy-making, a tech¬
nology that differed from that of ancient
Chinese bronze-making methods.
With this technological tradition behind
them, the Koreans did not simply accept
innovations imported from China. They
modified and adapted them to local needs
and conditions and this often gave rise to
new inventions and discoveries. In metal-
working, for example, this national gift for
assimilation and adaptation was to lead to
the invention, two centuries before Guten¬
berg, of the first movable metal type, in
astronomy to the building in 647 A.D. of
the Ch'omsongdae observatory, the oldest
known astronomical observatory extant in
East Asia, in meteorology to the invention
in 1441 of the world's first rain gauge, in
alchemy and medicine to the compilation in
1433 of the Hyangyak chipsongbang, the
great collection of native Korean prescrip¬
tions.
In 108 B.C. the Han dynasty established
the Chinese colony of Lo-lang in north¬
western Korea and transplanted Chinese
metallurgy there. Under the influence of
Chinese artisans Korean metal-workers, in
the region of the lower Naktong river,
rapidly developed new iron smelting
techniques which were so successful that
even the colonists of Lo-lang and the
Japanese purchased Korean iron.
Ornaments and decorations excavated
from Silla tombs, especially golden crowns
JEON SANG-WOON is assistant professor of
natural sciences at the Sungshin College for
Women Teachers, Seoul. He has written widely
on the history of science and technology in
ancient Korea; his Science and Technology in
Korea: Traditional Instruments and Techniques
was published, in English, by the MIT Press in
1974.



A practical
approach
to science
by Jeon Sang-woon
The oldest astronomical observatory of its kind still extant in the East, the Ch'omsongdae
observatory was built at Kyongju in 647 A.D. Opinions differ as to the use made of this
structure. Some scholars believe that instruments for observing the moon and the stars
were installed on top of the tower, others that it was a dome observatory open to the
sky, while a third theory holds that it was a gnomon used to determine the twenty-four
agricultural seasons by the position and length of the shadow of the sun. Top left, a
Korean Bronze Age radial axe.
35

and earrings, show that Korean metalwork-
' ing made great progress in the fifth and
sixth centuries A.D. Under the patronage
of the royal family and the aristocracy,
metallurgy gained momentum in the sixth
and seventh centuries with the flowering of
Buddhist culture, which encouraged the
casting of gilt bronze Buddhist images.
Buddhist bells of incomparable beauty,
which combined the functions of the tradi¬
tional chung bell and the t'o bell of old
China, bear witness to the innovative tech¬
niques developed by Korean artisans under
the Silla dynasty. In producing these bells,
the Silla artisans discovered a new bronze
alloy which was highly acclaimed in the
China of that time and which became so
renowned that it was said that "Persian
bronze is suitable for mirrors, but Silla cop¬
per (bronze) is superior for casting bells".
Astronomy is traditionally one of the first
branchés of science to be developed in
ancient cultures. Efforts to regulate agricul¬
tural production, which was the staff of
national life, combined with the influence
of the ancient Chinese astrological concept
that celestial phenomena were related to
affairs on earth, early led to the develop¬
ment of ch'onmun (heaven study) in
Korea. However, astronomy in ancient
Korea remained essentially subsidiary to
the Chinese mainstream, in spite of occa¬
sional original observations and indepen¬
dent researches.
In addition to their practical importance
for agriculture, astronomy and calendar-
making had special bearing on govern¬
ment. Astronomical charts were symbols
of royal authority, and under the ancient
dynasties the results of astronomical obser¬
vations were recorded in the form of star
maps. In Korea the first of these probably
dates back to the Koguryo period. Star
charts in the Koguryo tombs represent the
constellations, as well as the sun and
moon, on circles, placing the sun to the
east and the moon to the west, and depic¬
ting the four "celestial palaces" centered
on the cardinal points: the Blue Dragon,
Black Tortoise and Snake, White Tiger,
and Red Phoenix.
The armillary sphere was the basic astro¬
nomical instrument of ancient and medi¬
eval times in East Asia. First manufactur¬
ed in China around the second century
B.C., the instrument is believed to have
been brought into Korea sometime bet¬
ween the Three Kingdoms era and the age
of Unified Silla. Instruments similar in prin¬
ciple to the armillary sphere seem to have
continued in use during the Koryo dynasty
era.
The succeeding dynasties of Korea were
extremely sensitive to meteorological and
astronomical phenomena, especially solar
and lunar eclipses. The prediction of solar
and lunar eclipses was a part of the monar¬
chic ritual which augmented the dignity of
the rulers in the eyes of his people. Many,
indeed, are the royal astronomers and
meteorologists who lost their positions or
even their lives because of failure to pre¬
dict such occurrences correctly.
Developments in astronomy during the .
Three Kingdoms era (57 B.C. to 668 A.D.)
are exemplified by the construction of the
Ch'omsongdae observatory. A graceful.
36

bottle-shaped stone tower, nine metres
high, the observatory was built at Kyongju
in 647, the sixteenth year of the reign of
Queen Sondok. Its unusual shape indicates
that it was built in accordance with the tra¬
ditional round heaven, square earth theory
of ancient China.
This observatory, whose shape embo¬
dies Korean aesthetic preferences, is of
particular interest in several respects. First
of all, the tower permitted the measure¬
ment of the sun's shadow, much in the
way of a gnomon, to ascertain the season.
Furthermore, the window facing the south
opens in such a way that at noon on the
vernal and autumnal equinoxes, sunlight
covers the floor inside, whereas sunlight is
completely absent at both solstices.
The Ch'omsongdae was probably the
centre of astronomical activity of the King¬
dom of Silla. It served as the meridian for
astronomical observations throughout the
Silla period and gave the standard point of
reference for measurement of the four car¬
dinal points and directions. The sides of the
square stone slab on top faced the four car¬
dinal points of the compass and diagonal
projections from the corners pointed to the
four intercardinal points ; the window
faced due south. The area surrounding the
Ch'omsongdae was paved with flagstones,
presumably to prevent the erection of
houses and thus secure an open space
in all directions to facilitate unobstructed
observations.
The systematic measurement of time in
Korea is thought to have begun some¬
where around the beginning of the Chris¬
tian era and fragments of a sundial from the
Silla era are still to be seen in the Kyongju
Museum. The decimal sundial developed
during the early years of the Yi Dynasty is
one of the most accurate sundials ever
invented by man.
But the usefulness of sundials is con¬
fined to sunny days and during the Three
Kingdoms era the clepsydra, or water
clock, came to be regarded as a more use¬
ful and reliable time indicator. The first
clepsydras were made in 718.
When, in 1392, the Yi dynasty moved the
capital to Hansong (present-day Seoul),
there arose the need to install a new stan¬
dard clock, and accordingly a kyongnu
(night clepsydra) was installed in 1398 in
the centre of Seoul. Together with the new
clepsydra a belfry was erected to ring the
standard time throughout the royal
capital.
The armillary sphere was the basic
astronomical instrument of ancient
and medieval times in East Asia.
Armillary spheres were introduced
into Korea from China and the
armillary clock reached a high
standard of perfection during the
reign of King Sejong. (1) Detail of an
armillary clock built in 1669 and now
preserved in the Koryo University
Museum, Seoul. It incorporates the
principles of the Western striking
clock as well as features of Chinese
and Arabic clock-making traditions.
King Sejong's reign also saw the
invention, in 1442, of the world's first
rain gauge and in the same year the
first network of rainfall measuring
stations in the world was established.
(2) Korean rain gauge made in 1770
exactly in accordance with the
specifications established in 1442.
Systematic wind observation was
also developed under King Sejong. A
cloth streamer, attached to a bamboo
pole and placed on a stone column,
indicated wind direction and velocity.
(3) Stone anemoscope stand dating
from the 17th century.
Incense sticks or joss sticks were also
used in Korea for measuring time, espe¬
cially in Buddhist and Taoist temples. From
an early period attempts were made to
measure time so that the various rituals and
ceremonies might be punctually perform¬
ed. In the course of their rites, the Buddhist
monks learned that incense sticks burn at a
constant rate. They eventually found
incense sticks to be more reliable for accu¬
rate measurement of time than incense
powder.
Meteorology in the modern sense had its
start in Korea in the early Yi dynasty era
(fifteenth century). Until then a system pre¬
sumably devised in the Koryo era was
used, whereby the depth of rainfall was
gauged, and the statistics thus obtained
were consolidated by the provincial gover¬
nors and reported to the Board of Taxa¬
tion, which periodically recorded the fig¬
ures. At first this practice was not conduc¬
ted at regular intervals but only during the
farming seasons or in times of severe
drought when the method was used to
measure the aridity of the soil.
The first recorded mention of this
measurement appears in the Sejong sillok
(veritable records of the King Sejong era),
bearing the date May 3, 1423: "It rained
tonight, penetrating earth to the depth of
approximately 1 ch'on (about 2.13 cm.)."
Heavy rains and severe droughts alterna¬
ted around the year 1441, rendering
impracticable the conventional methods of
measurement. The difficulties encountered
led to the invention of the more scientific
method of collecting rainwater in a vessel
specially shaped for the purpose of accu¬
rate measurement the world's first rain
gauge.
The second most important meteorologi¬
cal phenomenon for agriculture after rain is
wind velocity and direction. Thoroughly
familiar with the influence of wind on farm
crops, the meteorologists of the Yi dynasty
took special care to observe wind direction
closely. An anemoscope, called a p'ung-
gijuk was set up for that purpose. There is
no clear indication when the observation of
wind direction was actually started, but the
wind gauge was erected in the era of King
Sejong to determine wind direction from
the flow of a streamer.
Wind direction was expressed in one of
twenty-four directions. The wind velocity is
presumed to have been classified, as in the
case of the volume of rainfall, into eight
degrees. For instance, a wind strong
enough to uproot a tree was referred to as
a taep'ung (great wind) and one violent
enough to strip the roof tiles was called
p'okp'ung (violent wind). There are specific
mentions of these two classes of wind.
Although the origins of alchemy are lost
in antiquity, Chinese alchemy, with its
emphasis on physical immortality, was
more closely linked to medicine than to
metallurgy. Alchemy in Korea, as was the
case in China, was associated chiefly with
the "way of the immortals" and was a
branch of Taoist learning. For Koreans, as
for Chinese alchemists, on the whole the
transmutation of base to precious metals
was not important.
Korean alchemy dates back to the fifth
century, when, under the influence of
Taoism, efforts were made to manufacture
an elixir of immortality. But Koreans had a
good deal of chemical and pharmacological
knowledge well before that time. Accor¬
ding to ancient Chinese documents
Koreans produced medicine and poisons
well before the birth of Christ.
There are many folk tales in Korean
about men who spent their lives wandering
deep in the mountains and valleys in search
of several-hundred year-old ginseng. There
is no doubt that these stories have a philo¬
sophical background in Chinese alchemy.
By about the eighth century, the folk
pharmacological knowledge of Silla had
been systematized into an academic disci¬
pline under Chinese influence. Eleven
medicines of Korean origin were included
in T'ao Hung-ching's pharmacopoeia. By
the ninth century another twenty-two
kinds were known to Japan and China.
In the tenth century, Koryo's medicine
was further subjected to the influence of
Indian medicine. With the rise of Buddhism
Koryo was able to build a foundation for
the development of its own pharmacology
CONTINUED PAGE 60
37

A practical approach
to science
(continued from page 37)
by combining the local variant of T'ang
medicine which it inherited from Silla and
the pharmacological information it got
directly from Sung China. Koryo estab¬
lished two state-run medical schools and
added a specialization in medicine to the
state civil service examinations which were
inaugurated in 958. In this the government
was following the lead of T'ang China.
The origins of Korean science can be
traced back through the technical tradition
of craftsmen who passed on their practical
experiences and skill from generation to
generation. They devoted themselves to
empirically verifiable phenomena and were
little concerned by theoretical explana¬
tions. The result of attaching importance to
empirical research instead of theory was
that technical developments did not grow
out of systematic experimentation.
It was very difficult for those craftsmen,
who were officials supported by their
government, tó have any opportunity to
follow their own bent because they had to
engage in practical research and manufac¬
ture dictated by government policy. In
addition craftsmen were part of society's
strict class system and were given little
freedom of thought or movement.
Their work was made more mechanical
and less creative than it might have been
because of the lack of social pressures and
rewards for innovation and exploration.
It was only in the seventeenth and eigh¬
teenth centuries that these traditional tech¬
niques acquired a systematic scientific
basis, thanks to the advocates of sirhak, or
practical learning, who rejected the idea of
the superiority of philosophical speculation
and adopted the slogan silsa kusl (verifica¬
tion of truth on the basis of factual studies)
thus opening the way to the introduction of
Western science and the initiation of a
scientific reformation.
Jeon Sang-woon

