i^
Safety^first
-i. m 4* .in
the air
Hs
Birds an<
same ain
damage <
impact w
maps foi
flvinn nn
irds and aircraft sometimes find themselves competing for the
sa e airspace. When they do the encounter often causes
and can be fatal. The cost of repairing planes after
ith birds runs into millions of dollars yearly. Special
r navigators show bird migration routes. Top photo:
flying ornithologists in the U.S. join a flock of Canadian geese to
study their migration habits.

by Olof Fritsch
3
©
O
human race, born to fly upward,
wherefore at a little wind dost thou
so fall?".
Wind shear was not exactly what Dante
had in mind in his poetic outburst 600 years
ago. Yet he couldn't have been more to the
point about this weather hazard which,
along with birds and wake vortices, the
ICAO Council has called one of the three
major technical problems facing aviation
today.
Wind shear the sudden change in wind
with height and distance is not the worst
thing in an aviator's atmosphere, but it
rates high because of the element of sur¬
prise. Under certain circumstances it can
turn a smooth take-off or a final approach
into a sickening roll if not a dive at the end
of the runway.
For over 10 years, ICAO has been trying
to establish requirements for measuring
low-level wind shears and turbulence at
international airports, and to develop inter¬
national procedures for warning pilots
about them. It recently studied replies from
42 states and three international organiza¬
tions to three inquiries on the subject and
especially on the kind of information
needed to avoid these dangers.
These replies show that less than half of
the ICAO states are studying wind shear.
Several of them mentioned that studies
were difficult because of the complexity of
the problem and the need for sophisticated
equipment and facilities.
A few states, however, are carrying out
studies using instrument towers, experi¬
mental ground-based measuring devices
and data obtained by aircraft. Some of
these studies concentrate on wind data
provided by masts or towers in the vicinity
of aerodromes or, as in the United States,
on a variety of aspects, including manned
flight simulation, wind shear hazard defini¬
tions and digital simulation, wind shear
forecasts and the development of airborne
and ground-based detection and , mea¬
suring systems.
The United States reply noted that since
five of the last six air carrier wind shear
accidents in the U.S. were associated with
OLOF FRITSCH, Swedish pilot, is Chief of the
ICAO's Accident Investigation and Prevention
Section. He is also Vice-President of the Cana¬
dian Society of Air Safety Investigators.
thunderstorms, a major portion of their
research deals with measures to prevent
thunderstorm-related wind shear acci¬
dents.
ICAO is cautiously optimistic about the
progress of studies now under way. Some
useful results may be expected within one
to two years, mainly in respect of wind
shear effects on aircraft, aircraft instrumen¬
tation and pilot training. The development
of effective ground-based wind shear mea¬
suring equipment, however, is likely to take
longer.
The increasing use of wide-bodied jets
has highlighted a phenomenon which
exists to a certain extent with all aeroplanes
but which has now become a matter of
great importance. This is wake turbulence.
It is a simple enough phenomenon but
one with serious implications for aircraft
operations and airports. Every aeroplane in
flight generates wake vortices, pairs of
counter-rotating masses of air extending
backwards from the aircraft's wing tips and
flaps when extended.
The violent, fast-spinning but invisible air
masses trail for several kilometres behind
the aircraft. The greater the lift being pro¬
duced by the wing and the bigger the aero¬
plane, the more violent and long-lived the
vortices and the greater the danger for any
light aircraft which follow too closely
behind during take-off or landing.
The U.S. National Transportation Safety
Board has cited wake vortices as a contri¬
butory factor in 147 accidents in the United
States between 1963 and 1974. While most
involved light aircraft, one fatal accident
involved a DC-9 behind a DC-10. In the
United Kingdom, where the proportion of
light aircraft is small, especialiy at busy air¬
ports, there has so far been no accident
caused by wake vortices, but a number of
near accidents have been reported.
Vortex encounters occur most frequently
when aircraft are approaching an airport
since it is in this phase of flight that succes¬
sive aircraft are most likely to follow similar
flight paths. These types of encounters are
especially hazardous since the aircraft may
be close to the ground and the crew's
workload is high in this phase of flight.
At the time the B-747 entered service,
authorities in the U.K. imposed a distance
of 10 nautical miles or four minutes be
tween it and any following smaller aircraft
as a precaution during landing. This sepa¬
ration was later reduced to five nautical
miles or two minutes on the basis of results
of trials in the United Kingdom and the Uni¬
ted States. In the U.K., the five-minute
separation was maintained for small aircraft
following big planes, including Concorde.
In the U.S., the five-minute separation was
applied behind aircraft having a take-off
weight in excess of 135 tonnes. This inclu¬
des the heavier B-707's, DC-8's and
VC-10's.
Extensive theoretical and experimental
research on wake vortices has been carried
out in recent years by private industry and
government agencies in the U.S. and the
U.K. In May 1974, a joint agreement bet¬
ween the U.S. Department of Transporta¬
tion and the British Civil Aviation Authority
established a test site at Heathrow Interna¬
tional Airport in London which recorded
12,950 landings through June 1975.
A vortex test site is also in operation at
John F. Kennedy International Airport in
New York while a joint U.S. -Canadian pro¬
gramme to collect data on departing air¬
craft has been set up at Toronto Interna¬
tional Airport.
It is hoped that further developments in
ground sensors and comprehensive data
collection will enable experts to find ways
to reduce and dissipate the vortices.
Meanwhile, separation standards remain
the best possible way of coping with the
problem.
While man gets craftier, birds also
become smarter. Scaring them away from
aircraft is not an easy task even if modern
techniques are better than the farmer's
scarecrow.
There exists no "Convention on Air Traf¬
fic Control" to regulate whether birds or
aircraft have the right of way. Although
most people in aviation are aware of a "bird
problem", few realize its magnitude. As
reported in the ICAO Bulletin, eight aircraft
crashes have been attributed to birds since
1973. In 1976, two executive jets were
downed by birds. It is estimated that each
year there are 2,400 significant bird strikes
to civil aircraft, and repairs to damaged air¬
craft were said to run into millions of dol¬
lars.
Since civil jet aircraft spend most of their
flying time at altitudes not normally occu¬
pied by birds, the hazard exists mainly at,
and near, airports. It is during the critical
take-off and landing phases that aircraft
and birds occupy the same airspace.
Simply stated, the bird strike prevention
programme aims at keeping birds from
coming to the airport, driving away those
that do come, and reporting on those that
stay too long.
Birds may live at an airport, but, just as
often, they may only be visitors and, like k
any visitor, look for a place to eat, drink or r
21

r rest. The airport can be made unattractive
to them by draining wet areas and cutting
down trees. Other countermeasures, such
'as changing the ground cover or extermi¬
nating earthworms, are more complex.
Each airport requires its own study and
improvement plan.1"
However, these measures will not elimi¬
nate all birds from an airport. Like any tou¬
rist, different birds are looking for different
things. What may be unattractive to one
may be inviting to another. Airports offer
large areas which, except for aircraft, are
relatively undisturbed by man.
In one reported case birds had built a
nest in the engine intake of a turbo-prop
plane in only one and a half hours while the
aircraft was idle on the ground. An¬
other report noted that a group of jack¬
daws had hidden 72 pieces of metal in a
plane while it was in a hangar. The largest
piece was a wrench. With resourcefulness
¡ike this, the only solution is to remove all
birds to other nesting places far away from '
the airport.
The most common techniques currently
being used to drive birds away are loud noi¬
ses produced by shells or gas explosions, |
flashes of light, flares and recorded bird !
distress calls. These calls, played back
through sound systems, have been found
most effective.
Many airports now employ patrol teams
equipped with vehicles and dispersal equip¬
ment. The noise of guns usually keeps the
' birds away for a short while, but they may
soon come back or be replaced by new¬
comers. It doesn't take a bird long to figure
out that the noise below is produced by
man.
It is also important, therefore, to have a
reporting system that will inform pilots
when they may expect competition for the
same airspace. The control tower, assisted
by ground staff, can provide such informa¬
tion.
Radar is also used to detect flocks of
birds flying in the vicinity of airports. This is
particularly useful during bird migration
periods when extremely hazardous condi¬
tions may occur. Besides reporting on birds
near airports, charts have been published
that show the migration routes of birds.
Improvements in aircraft design have not
been ignored. Agreement has been
reached in ICAO that aircraft structures
should be designed so that aircraft can
continue to fly safely after impact with a
1.81-kilogramme bird.
Olof Fritsch

