
The Nikolo-Karelsky monastery, built in the 16th century on the
shores of the White Sea (where the town of Severodvinsk now
stands) was fortified in 1692 with the addition of a wooden
octagonal tower (right), a stockade and watchtowers. In 1932
part of this outstanding example of Russian fort architecture was
transported to the Kolomenskoye Museum in Moscow.
Eighteenth-century wooden carving of the sun (below) once
adorned the mast of a Russian river-boat. Opposite page, a sirin
or bird-woman. Her wings protectively unfolded, this guardian
spirit of the household kept watch over the window of an isba
(log hut) of ancient Russia. Unesco, in collaboration with the
International Association for the Study and Dissemination of Slav
Cultures, is currently preparing an illustrated book on the history
of Slav wooden architecture and sculpture. Specialists from
Byelorussia, Bulgaria, Poland, Russia, Czechoslovakia, the
Ukraine and Yugoslavia are participating in the project, headed
by Professor Andrej Ryszkiewicz of Poland.


Workmanship
in wood
AMONG the tools and instruments of daily life in the coun¬
tryside of old Russia, the distaff, not surprisingly, held a
prominent place; for many months of the year it was the
country woman's constant companion.
Bridegrooms gave distaffs and spinning-benches as wedding-
presents to their brides, and for this reason, their carved decora¬
tions frequently depicted scenes related to the marriage ceremony:
the journey of the groom to the bride's house, the couple's first
encounter, their rendezvous and walks together. A brand-new
spinning-bench distinguished the newly-married woman from her w
friends when they spent the long autumn and winter evenings f

47

L together, while particularly beautiful specimens were handed
down by the womenfolk from generation to generation.
In the Kalinin region of the U.S.S.R., archaeologists have disco¬
vered a perfectly preserved distaff dating from the second millen¬
nium B.C., which closely resembles nineteenth-century models in
shape.
Both the form and the decoration of the distaff enable us to
identify its place of origin. Thus, the craftsmen of the Vologod-
skaya region preferred ornamentation in the form of large-scale
geometrical figures circles, triangles or zigzag lines.
The painters of Mezen, using simple brush-strokes of black on a
brown background, sketched galloping horses and deer and
soaring flights of birds; those of the Lake Onega region preferred
to portray luxurious flowers and bouquets in a setting of brilliantly
contrasting colours. The distaffs painted by the descendants of the
ancient Novgorodians, the village painters of the basin of the
Severnaya Dvina, are highly distinctive; their decoration is a verita¬
ble pageant of colours, with a variety of themes depicting fantastic '
animals and birds, as well as exotic plants.
Wood was used not only for the construction of dwellings and
outbuildings, but also for sacred images, churches, boats and
domestic furniture. Master wood-carvers produced kitchen uten¬
sils and children's toys, together with decorations for their isbas
(cottages) and the mastheads of their boats.
One of the most curious and widely distributed examples of
domestic wood-carving in the Volga region is the bereginya,
whose name indicates that its purpose was to protect (oberegat)
the person or object with which it was connected. It would appear
that such images, in their earliest form, were in the shape of
rusa/ki, or water-nymphs, and were part of the carved decoration
of boats; indeed, objects of this type are still known as
korabel'naya rez'ba, or "boat-carvings". Their origins lie in the dis¬
tant ages when people invoked the protection of a benevolent
deity against evil spirits as they set off on journeys by water. Far¬
ther north protection was provided by the okh/upen', a huge larch
log which was fixed to the roof of the cottage. The roots were left
The wooden figurine (top) is a household spirit or
domovoi (from the Russian word dorn, meaning house).
Carved by a 14th-century craftsman, it was discovered
during excavations at Novgorod (U.S.S.R). Above,
"Original Sin", detail from a baroque iconostasis (the
icon-adorned screen which separates the sanctuary
from the nave in eastern Christian churches of
By7antine tradition) in the church of St. Marina in
Plovdiv (Bulgaria). Right, sculpture evoking fertility
is by a modern Bulgarian artist, Anton Doncev.
48

attached and shaped into a somewhat fanciful outline of a horse, a
duck or a deer.
Originally revered as sacred animals, these objects acquired over
the ages such perfect form that long after people had forgotten
their function as protective symbols, they continued to be incorpo¬
rated as essential decorative features of wooden buildings. In the
Russian North, villages containing huts decorated in this manner
may still be found today, whilst in some places the okhlupni from
old buildings are incorporated in new constructions.
The bird of paradise, or Sirin, was another decorative element of
peasant houses, and carried across the centuries the echoes of the
old pagan beliefs of the northern countryfolk. Another creature of
fairy-tale and myth'was the lion, which clasped in its jaws the end
of its own long tail. If its head was at times more like that of a dog
than a lion, we must remember that the old village wood-carvers
had never seen such exotic animals, and had to rely on their own
imagination in portraying them.
Door frames and window frames also reflected the
wood-carver's concern to decorate the ¡spa, and resembled the old
Russian napkins with lacy fringes which were traditionally used to
decorate icons or portraits.
Popular imagination also found quaint expression in the bee¬
hives carved out of tree-trunks, in the form, for example, of a bear
whose paw concealed the opening from which the honey was
drawn, or decorated in relief with the figure of a woman whose
eyes and mouth served as entrances for the bees.
Hollow vessels in the shape of ducks were carved from tree
roots to hold alcoholic beverages. In northern villages, carved
wooden "birds of goodness" were hung beneath the rafters of
huts, over the large table with benches along the wall which served
to receive guests in the "prettiest" corner of the hut. In the rising
cloud of warm steam from the samovar, the "bird of goodness"
rotated smoothly and solemnly as if surveying the cottage, in
which dead wood had sprung to new life under the village crafts¬
man's hand.
A dobraya (literally "she who is good") or
bird of goodness. Such small masterpieces of
the woodcarver's art were found in homes
throughout the Slav world. Suspended from
the rafters, they gyrated slowly in the heat
rising from the samovar.
A traditional wedding present from
bridegroom to bride, the distaff was
both a symbol of domestic life and an
indispensable piece of household
equipment. Slav craftsmen excelled at
fashioning highly elaborate distaffs and
spinning-benches adorned with carvings,
giltwork, polychrome decoration and
pokerwork depicting scenes related to
marriage and the home. The founding of
a home and a family is evoked in 19th-
century example (above): husband and
wife bring together trunk and branches
to form a fruitful family tree.
A bear serves as the handle of this wooden utensil
from Byelorussia, once used for "ironing" linen.
49

Photo © APN, Moscow
An open-air museum of religious
and secular architecture has been
established on Kiji, one of the many
islands that dot Lake Onega in
Karelia. Photo shows some of the
22 cupolas surmounting the Church
of the Transfiguration, the most
remarkable edifice on the island.
Not a single nail was used by the
anonymous carpenters who built
the church in 1714.
50

Fretwork patterns on the wall of an isba
(cottage) at Vologda, some 300 km from
Moscow, evoke the lace fringes of
napkins traditionally used to decorate
icons.
Some country churches, such as this
little 19th-century chapel in Poland,
were simple wooden structures topped
by a cupola and a bell-tower.
Below, the Church of St. Paraskeva
(who was the personification of Good
Friday) in the village of Alexandrovka
is a typical example of eighteenth
century religious architecture in
southern Ukraine.
Left, wooden windmill
constructed at the
beginning of the 20th
century in the Kharkov
region of the Ukraine has
been transported to the
Museum of Popular Art and
Traditions at Kiev
(U.S.S.R). Below, anatomy
of the interior of a windmill
near Mogilev in
Byelorussia.
î
51

Hives of good
humour
Examples of wooden bee-hives which Slav
craftsmen carved to represent animal and
human forms which were by turns
humorous, dramatic and caricatural. The
bees came and went through the holes
pierced in the chest of the Russian bear,
through the poignantly dilated eyes of the
Byelorussian woman and through the
navel of the bearded Polish hermit whose
skull cap could be lifted when it was time
to extract the honey. Other hives take the
form of a Slovak couple, a pipe-smoking
patriarch from Yugoslavia, and two
betrothed lovers from Poland.
Poland Poland
Russia
Byelorussia Czechoslovakia
Yugoslavia
52

Three expressive pieces of religious sculpture in wood from three
parts of the Slav world. Right, King David, prophet, poet and
musician, as depicted by an 18th-century sculptor of Smolensk in
Russia. Below, portrait of the Apostle Peter sculpted by a 19th-
century village craftsman from Gorodishche in the Brest-Litovsk
region of Byelorussia. Below right, St. John of Nepomuk, an
ecclesiastic of 14th-century Bohemia who died rather than betray
the secrets of the confessional. He is here depicted by a 19th-
century Polish wood-carver from the Limanova region.
53
