by Gérard Francillon
At Kampung Laut in Sumatra, villagers have dug drainage canals
in the surrounding swamp forest to turn it into productive farmland.



Sumatra's
swampland
pioneers
The "Unesco Courier" presents
here a study of the problems
faced by migrant farmers in
swamp forests of the Upang
Delta in Indonesia. Indonesia
has launched a major research
project in the Upang Delta to
answer a wide range of questions
concerning the environmental and
social aspects of swamp forest
management. The project forms
part of Unesco's Man and the
Biosphere Programme (MAB)
which seeks to develop a basis,
within the natural and social
sciences, for the rational use of
planetary resources and to
improve man's partnership with
the environment.
SERIOUS demographic problems are
facing the government of the Indo¬
nesian Republic in Java and Bali,
two islands which comprise 65 per cent of
Indonesia's population, but represent only
10 per cent of the country's total area.
Though birth control and increased agri¬
cultural yields have produced encouraging
results, these alone will not be enough to
solve the problems of one of the most
densely populated areas in the world.
According to the 1973 census, there were
600 inhabitants per square kilometre in
GERARD FRANCILLON, French social anthro¬
pologist, has carried out a number of research
projects in Indonesia in recent years, notably in
the Padang highlands of Sumatra (for the
University of Nanterre, France). For Unesco
he has studied the effects of mass tourism on
traditional societies and cultures in Bali, and in
1974 took part in the regional meeting of MAB
(Man and the Biosphere) committees held at
Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia).
Java, and the figure is expected to rise to
over 1,000 by the year 2000. It is above all
the cities that will have to absorb the sur¬
plus population.
Transmigration is emerging as the swift-
test and most rational method of easing the
mounting pressure on the central islands.
Outlying areas are not so overcrowded.
Kalimantan (the Indonesian part of Borneo,
the biggest island of the archipelago and
one of the biggest in the world) has only
5.5 million inhabitants, while Sumatra,
Indonesia's second largest island, has
some 20 million people, which works out at
only slightly over 40 inhabitants per square
kilometre.
But while travel is extremely difficult in
most of Kalimantan because, of the many
impassable rapids on its major rivers,
Sumatra still has immense tracts of relati¬
vely accessible forest that is both uninhabi- v
ted and virtually unexploited. f
29

, The two main rivers of southeast Suma¬
tra, the Musi and the Batang (river) Hari,
are wide and deep throughout their lower
courses. The provincial capitals, Palem¬
bang and Djambi, located about 40 to 60
km. inland, are major ports that are readily
accessible to sea-going traffic. Both of
these cities held an important place in the
early history of Sumatra, and Palembang
was capital of the Srivijaya empire which
flourished from the 7th to the 13th century.
On each side of these great waterways and
their vast deltas, only a few metres above
sea level, lies most of Indonesia's 13 million
hectares of swamp forest which offered the
most promising conditions for the govern¬
ment's settlement scheme.
If the migrants were to settle for any
length of time, it was not enough simply to
clear the forest and supply them with seed.
Aware that any development project is
bound to have important ecological reper¬
cussions, the Indonesian government set
up a group of environmental specialists to
meet the planning and management needs
created by the accelerating pace of land
and water resource development. One mil¬
lion hectares of swamp forest is scheduled
to be developed under Indonesia's 1974-
1978 Development Plan.
The Indonesian MAB national
committee, with Unesco's support, was
given the task of preparing and co¬
ordinating research into the natural and
human environment, and of training young
researchers and engineers, both in the
field, at Bogor Agricultural University, and
at Bandung Institute of Technology.
The "field" consists chiefly of the
150,000 hectares of swamp forest in the
delta of the Musi river, whose main bran¬
ches (from west to east) are the Banyuasin,
the Telang, the Musi itself and the Upang.
A workshop for the Upang Delta pilot
project was established in 1974 to serve as
a base for teams of geologists, hydro-
logists, climatologists and botanists.
These were soon followed by experts con¬
cerned with practical aspects of the
scheme (soil scientists, foresters and ocea-
nographers) and then by specialists in com-'
batting various pests and parasites, in rice-
growing, pisciculture and land manage¬
ment. The aim was to broaden the scope
of the project, which was initially intended
above all to turn the Delta into a rice paddy.
The study of the various groups in the
Delta was approached from an ecological
standpoint and entrusted to a team of
researchers from Bogor Agricultural
University. The project was carried out in
liaison with the MAB committee and
Unesco's social sciences sector.
From an ecological point of view, the
project was intended as a large-scale expe¬
riment in swamp forest management, a
kind of gigantic laboratory that could prove
useful to many Southeast Asian countries.
One of the chief aims was to examine as
closely as possible the relations between
different groups of migrants and the extent
to which each group adapted to a new
environment.
It was known that some pioneer
migrants belonging to the Bugi people had
already settled in the Upang Delta without
any government aid, but their exact num¬
bers, system of settlements, farming
methods and real motives for migrating
remained a mystery. The only certainty was
that all along the southeast coast of Suma¬
tra they had preceded the first govern¬
ment-assisted transmigrants, and had suc¬
cessfully cleared and drained the forest,
and farmed without either advice, capital
or machinery.
Brief preliminary investigations sugges¬
ted that these Bugis had emigrated
because of population pressure in their
native peninsula on another Indonesian
island, Sulawesi. It was originally thought
that by clearing the forest and planting rice
paddies they had degraded the environ¬
ment and were forced, as soon as rice
yields began to drop, to plant coconut
groves.
It was supposed that they were biting
further and further into the forest to make
clearings for fresh rice paddies. It was also
generally assumed that once the Bugis had
made their fortune in the Delta they re¬
turned home or at least wanted to do so.
There was also some suspicion, despite
the lack of any firm evidence, that they
were not setting the best example to other
transmigrants.
After thorough investigation, however,
the team of researchers from the Bogor
Agricultural University reached quite diffe¬
rent conclusions. Their findings showed
that the Bugis were not forced to leave
their native island because of overcrowding
or uncertain crop yields, and that it was an
exaggeration to ascribe lower yields in the
Delta solely to intensive rice growing that
had exhausted the soil following the sud¬
den removal of its forest covering.
The team also discovered that the last
pioneers to arrive were frequently more
keen to go home than their predecessors.
Finally, the researchers had to admit that
the reason for the orderly and disciplined
atmosphere in the Bugi settlements was
due not to an innate acceptance of traditio¬
nal hierarchies (which had in fact fallen into
abeyance), but to the almost father-to-son
relationships existing between the more
recent settlers and their predecessors,
especially the most important man among
them, the so-called "canal head". They
also observed that the highest yields ob¬
tained were due to the intensity and regula¬
rity of the farmers' efforts the oldest drai¬
nage systems were the cleanest, and the
first land to be cleared produced the big¬
gest harvests.
But there is another side to the Bugis.
They have left their mark on the history of
the Malay-Indonesian archipelago not only
as settlers but as navigators. In fact a
migrant in the Buginese language is
pasompé, which literally means "he who
sets sail."
It is difficult to say exactly when the i
Bugis' long pioneering tradition first began, I
permanent dwellings
temporary dwellings 1
rice fields
coconut palm groves
30
Patterns of
penetration
Network of drainage canals (left)
in a typical swamp-forest
settlement established by Bugi
people who have migrated to
Sumatra from other Indonesian
islands. A long, straight canal
is linked to a river with smaller
drainage canals branching out on
either side. The canal network
grows as the first settlers are
joined by relatives, each of whom
clears just enough land to provide
enough rice for his family. Note
the three zones of vegetation: the
original swamp forest, coconut
groves, and rice-fields.

F ..*
Photos © Jef Bros, Paris
Although many Bugis are recent migrants to Sumatra, their expertise as farmers is so
admired that some long-established Sumatran villages such as Sungsang (above) have
called on them to transform adjacent swamp forest into rice-fields. Below, a flotilla of
Bugi boats in port at Palembang (Sumatra).
, but according to most historians the likely
date is 1669, when the fortress of Makasar,
in Sulawesi, fell to the Dutch.
This event prompted the Bugis to seek
refuge in estuaries near and far, and to
found a series of sultanates such as Kutei,
Selangor, Johor and Riau, most of which
are still prosperous today. But even before
then the Bugis had already proved them¬
selves to be a sophisticated and powerful
people. In 1638, for instance, the Makasar
Prime Minister was conducting negotia¬
tions in Latin, and in 1640 a prince wishing
to go to war could build 40 junks in less
than 40 days and embark in a galley with
400 oarsmen. In 1655, a sultan command¬
ed a fleet of 1,183 junks.
The wars in Europe and their repercus¬
sions on the Malay Straits tended to slow
down the expansion of the Bugis in the
early 19th century, but their influence really
began to dwindle only at the beginning of
this century.
Then the naval power of the Bugis went
into a long decline until 1970 when they
began to build a new fleet in order to sail
from the ports of Java to Bima in the east,
and Palembang and Djambi in the west. By
the following year, the Bugis had some 800
sailing boats, a.nd by 1976 3,000 or more.
During the same period the length of these
boats went up from 15 to 25 and even 30
metres, and vessels up to 40 metres long
and 12 metres wide were on the stocks in
the Palembang boatyards.
Most of these vessels are magnificent
ketches designed along the lines of 19th-
century brigantines. Some are sloops
which cost less to build and are easy to
handle. This considerable fleet carries tim¬
ber to Jakarta, usually returning empty to
Sumatra. Profits are enough to provide an
average annual wage of almost $550 for
each member of the crew. The income of
the Bugis, whether sailors or farmers, is
much higher than the national average and
is certainly well above the poverty line.
The Bugis in fact bear no resemblance at
all to either of the traditional roles in which
they have been typecast as sea-faring
adventurers, or itinerant farmers, wander¬
ing from one patch of fecklessly burnt
forest to another. On the contrary, as sai¬
lors who have navigated the archipelago
for centuries, they have methodically and
often audaciously seized every opportunity
history has offered to acquire power or
wealth.

Similarly, as farmers who have maintain¬
ed a centuries-old pioneering tradition, the
Bugis have always known how to spot the
right kind of opening in the dense forest
bordering the estuaries and coastline that
are so familiar to them.
They explored all the tributaries of the
major rivers down to the smallest inlet in
the coastal swamps. Then they sailed
upstream, and when they reached a likely
settlement site, they would go ashore, test
the soil, assess the depth of the peat layer
and decide which trees should be felled and
which left standing. ,
Then once they were far enough from
the bank or coast to enjoy natural protec¬
tion from intruders, they dug long straight
canals by the side of rivers or coastline
exposed to the northern monsoon.
Branching out on either side of them small¬
er drainage canals would be excavated for
the brothers or cousins who followed in the
footsteps of the first pioneer, the "canal
head"
In time, a regular hydrographie network
came to replace the more erratic pattern of
the original, naturally formed watercourse.
After 10 or 15 years, the ageing canal head
would decide to stop growing rice, with its
laborious cycle of constant thinning and
planting out, and replace it with the coco¬
nut palm, which produces fruit every three
months.
The old man and his original canal would
then be surrounded by the permanent
homes of his fellow pioneers, and together
they would gradually do less and less farm
work, leaving to their younger relatives the
task of clearing the forest as far as their
increasing numbers required. Little by little
the forest yielded to the rice paddies. These
in turn were replaced by coconut groves,
which slowly reconstituted a new forest
covering. This development has now rea¬
ched its final stage on the southwest coasts
of Riau and Johor, on either side of the
Malay Straits.
Many Bugis switch from being sailors to
farmers and back again, and both sailors
and farmers are found in every family, at
least among the Bugis of Boné in southern
Sulawesi. This is one of the main reasons
for the success of the Bugis who have set¬
tled on the southern coast of Sumatra. The
fact that each family and indeed each indi
vidual practises the same two occupations
enables any Bugi to communicate easily
and rapidly with his kinsmen and to partici¬
pate, wherever he may happen to be, in
community life.
The study of the Upang Delta peoples is
a highly original venture and marks' an
important stage in the still youthful science
of human ecology.
Gérard Francillon

