Top of the props In this remarkable photo, three giant Australian cargo planes flying nose to tail with only
a hazardous 8 metres between them look for all the world like a 12-engined airborne
monster with three sets of wings. Today's heavy-duty workhorses of the air transport a
wide range of bulk cargoes, from road-building machinery to life-saving supplies.



The sky's
the limit
The endless possibilities
of special purpose flying
by Patrick Finn
THE modern traveller usually thinks of
aviation in terms of airline transport,
and perhaps of military applications.
But the myriad uses of planes that come
under the heading "general aviation" are
often less known.
Yet they range from tasks that affect our
everyday life, such as cargo flights, to eso¬
teric scientific experiments such as flying a
set of clocks around the world to test Ein¬
stein's theory of relativity, or climbing ^
above the clouds to get a better look at anr
eclipse of the sun.
PATRICK FINN is a Canadian journalist specia¬
lizing in aviation and air transport news. He is a
former president of the Canadian Science Wri¬
ters' Association and a member of the Aviation
Space Writers' Association.
15

POLSKA
Farmer...
Flying farmers in many
parts of the world use crop
dusters or spray planes to
spray fields with liquid
plant food or Insecticide.
Light aircraft are also used
for bombarding forests
with nitrogen pellets to
speed growth. Left, aerial
forest-spraying depicted on
a Polish stamp.
.Doctor...
Far from the nearest coast,
a doctor is winched down
on to a supertanker to
examine a casualty.
The aeroplane, along with other types of
aircraft such as the helicopter, the glider
and lighter-than-air craft, have become
tools of economic development, sources of
recreation, and special aids to communica¬
tion and humanitarian effort throughout
the world.
In the field of air cargo, for example, air¬
craft such as the L-100 Hercules now travel
the skies like the "tramp ships" of an earlier
era, picking up and dropping off loads of
cattle, drilling equipment, road-building
machinery and life-saving supplies.
Large cargo aircraft have played a vital
role in such major projects as the Trans-
Amazon highway in Brazil, the Trans-
Gabon railway in Africa, and the Alaskan
oil pipeline.
Other, "general aviation" aircraft of
various sizes and designs are used through¬
out the world in such tasks as hurricane
hunting, the location of dangerous ice¬
bergs, and forest fire fighting.
But these spectacular uses are only part
of the story. General aviation in all of its
forms now contributes thousands of inte¬
resting and highly skilled jobs to the econo¬
mies of the nations, with a growing num¬
ber of small airports providing new trade
and communication networks.
One of the major roles of general aviation
is in business and commuter-type flying. In
fact, business flying has become one of the
world's fastest growing industries in recent
years.
Forecasters say that business flying will
continue to grow despite the energy and
fuel shortages in many areas. On a seat-
mile basis, small aircraft use less fuel than
big airliners. And as airlines continue to
cut back on flights to smaller communities
because of light and uneconomic loads.
businessmen will continue to turn to com¬
pany planes to get them to the right place
at the right time.
In many countries, business planes are
no longer used only for top company offi¬
cials. They now transport managers, engi¬
neers, accountants and other specialists
who must be constantly on the move.
Busy people are also becoming used to
the idea of hiring planes or taking small
commuter aircraft to get them to their des¬
tination quickly. In fact, such services fre¬
quently connect with the major airlines.
The result is a complex network of air com¬
munications similar to that which develo¬
ped in earlier eras in land and sea transport.
Personal transportation is probably the
most high profile category of general avia¬
tion. It means flying for fun, learning new
skills, and perhaps the opportunity to move
into the professional side of the aviation
world.
In the broad category of special purpose
flying, there are so many uses of general
aviation that it would be impossible to list
them all. However, some of the more
diverse uses include:
Flying health services. In Australia,
there is a flying doctor service, which is
designed to provide quick aid to persons
living in lonely, isolated areas of the "out¬
back"
Forest and crop spraying. In Canada
and the U.S., aircraft are used regularly to
spray forests in the northeast where spruce
budworm is infesting thousands of acres of
conifers. For crops, special low-flying air¬
craft have been developed for spraying,
and farmers are now also seeding their
fields from the air.
Disease control. In the Volta River basin
in West Africa, the World Health Organiza¬
tion is involved in a major spray programme
to kill the larvae of the blackfly, which
transmit the blinding disease of onchocer¬
ciasis.
Livestock airlifts. In Peru, cargo aircraft
were used to transport 35,000 head of
purebred cattle over the Andes to Amazon
villages in the interior.
Forest fire fighting. Both planes and
helicopters have proved successful in keep¬
ing these outbreaks under control. So-
called "water-bombers" drop both -water
and special fire-fighting chemicals on hot
spots in the forests.
Plant airlifts. In the Philippine islands,
cargo aircraft were pressed into duty to
move seedlings and plants as part of the
government's green revolution pro¬
gramme.
Pipeline and utility line patrol. Heli¬
copters and light aircraft are used all over
the world to fly up and down pipeline
routes and remote power and telephone
lines to check for possible problems.
Aerial photography. Map makers use
aerial photos that can be employed with
special viewing equipment to produce
three-dimensional effects.
Aerial archaeology. Aerial photography
has become widely used by archaeologists
in recent years as a means of discovering
hidden or partly destroyed ancient sites
that could not be found on the ground.
Aerial photos also help archaeologists to
plan digs by providing an overall view of
sites and their topography.
Urban planning. Air photos can provide
developers and city officials with an up-to-
date look at urban growth or creeping
blight.
Environmental and wildlife protec¬
tion. Helicopters and light aircraft can be
particularly effective in tracking down the
sources of water and air pollution. Conser¬
vationists in many countries use aircraft to
16

...Fireman...
Aircraft have proved their worth many
times over as versatile fire-fighting
machines. Above, a helicopter alms a
hose during a fire in Chicago. Below, a
plane specially designed for fighting forest
fires drops Its load of water.
(see also photos pages 18-19)
take inventories and assess the state of
wildlife.
Aerial logging. Planes can be used to
identify patches of valuable types of wood.
In the western part of the U.S., helicopters
are used to fly deep into forest areas and
remove small logs for the roof shingle
market.
Search and Rescue. This is one of the
better known uses of general aviation.
Many a hiker, mountain climber or wilder¬
ness traveller owes his life to airborne res¬
cue teams and spotters.
Cargo drops. Cargo can sometimes be
dropped by parachute in areas where there
are no airfields. Non-fragile supplies can be
allowed to free fall from a low altitude, if
necessary. During severe winters or
drought, an aeroplane or helicopter can be
used to drop hay and other forage to keep
animals alive until the weather improves.
Mail delivery. This is no doubt the
oldest form of general aviation. Early airline
passenger routes were pioneered by the
pilots who flew the mail.
Prospecting for natural resources.
Mining firms use aircraft to carry special
detection instruments over land that has
good mining prospects. Water resources
can also be surveyed easily by aircraft.
Disaster relief. Following major floods
and earthquakes, the aircraft is usually the
quickest way to bring clothing, food, medi¬
cine and blood into a disaster area, as well
as to evacuate the injured.
Recreation. Perhaps the most fascina¬
ting development in sport aviation in recent
years is the increased interest in gliding,
manpowered flight and the most basic type
of flight of all hang gliding.
The recent development of the short
take-off and landing aircraft (STOL) has
been a boon to general aviation. It paves
the way to flights to many areas that have
only makeshift or short runways.
Another general aviation trend is the
renewed interest in lighter-than-air craft.
Experiments have already been conducted
in North America on the use of balloons for
logging; several firms have plans to build a
new generation of lighter-than-air craft.
But spectacular as these experiments
and sports may be, it is in the area of busi¬
ness and special purpose aviation that
general aviation will make its economic
impact during the next few decades.
The aircraft has joined the computer as
one of the great new tools of our time. And
both can be of benefit to developed and
developing countries.
The small community with an industrial
airport can now compete on a more equal
basis with big cities in bidding to attract
industries. In fact, some observers see the
growth of general aviation as a handmaid
of industrial decentralization.
Companies can be attracted to smaller
population centres by their proximity to
raw materials, by their lower land and ope¬
rating costs, and by better living conditions
for employees. General aviation makes
remote communities accessible to the
larger market centres.
If the past is any guide, men will con¬
tinue to find v new special uses for the
aeroplane.
Patrick Finn
17

Art restorer...
Equestrian statue being carried
directly from the foundry to its
base in Cracow (Poland) in
1976. It now crowns the
reconstructed monument to
King Ladislas Jagello,
destroyed in World War II.
...Wildlife
protector...
Dancing on air, a young
elephant is airlifted to its
new home in Rwanda's
Akagera National Park as
part of a programme to
remove herds of elephants
that were roaming wild
across vitally needed
farmland.
Photo © Keystone, Pari Photo © Agence France-Presse, Pans
House mover... .Rescuer...
Metal hangar heads for an oil well
In an otherwise inaccessible spot in
Alaska. Drilling equipment was
also airlifted.
Passenger being hauled to safety in
1976 from a cable car that stalled
above the city of Grenoble in the
French Alps.
18

...Archaeologist...
Many archaeological sites have
been spotted and identified
from the air. Outline of the
foundations of a Gallo-Roman
villa at Biarre (France) is
clearly visible on aerial photo
at right. Small white blob in
front of the main rectangular
building Indicates
the site of a fountain.
...Carrier...
Like some giant insect clasping its prey, a heavy-duty helicopter
takes a bus for a ride.
