Flight
without frontiers
75 years after the Wright brothers,
the International Civil Aviation Organization
celebrates its 30th anniversary
by Yves Lambert
Secretary-General of the
International Civil Aviation Organization
ON 17 December 1903 in North Caro¬
lina, U.S.A., a frail structure of
metal, wood and fabric struggled
into the air and precariously managed to
remain airborne for 260 metres. Thanks to
the Wright brothers, Wilbur and Orville,
man had succeeded for the first time in
flying a heavier-than-air, engine-powered
machine.
The date is generally considered Year I in
the history of aviation. From the beginning,
however, the conquest of the air was inter¬
national and exploits were scored simulta¬
neously all over the world.
YVES LAMBERT, French civil aviation engi¬
neer, has been Secretary-General of the Interna¬
tional Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) since
1976. He formerly represented France on the
ICAO Council.
The Frenchman Clément Ader and the
Brazilian Alberto Santos-Dumont were
experimenting with flying machines at the
same time as the Wright brothers. The first
international flights were by the Frenchman
Louis Blériot who crossed the Channel in
1909 and the Dutchman Wijnmalen who
managed a Paris-Brussels round trip in
1910.
Their single seater planes flying at less
than 100 km. per hour were the not-so-
distant ancestors of today's jets which are
so much a part of our daily life that they no
longer evoke interest, much less wonder,
on the part of the public.
During the last 30 years, the transatlantic
flight has been cut from 17 to 3 hours,
thanks to Concorde. The number of pas
sengers using scheduled carriers has
grown from 24,343,000 in 1947 to 620 mil¬
lion (including the U.S.S.R.) in 1977,
without counting the millions of holiday-
makers who travel all over the world on
chartered flights.
The ocean liners which in 1947 still car¬
ried two-thirds of the passengers across
the North Atlantic have virtually disappear¬
ed. Aviation has become one of the major
means for international exchange, shatter¬
ing man's concept of time and distance and
causing him not only to reassess his con¬
cept of geography but also to re-evaluate
his social traditions and cultural patterns.
No other achievement of our century has
made such a profound impact on the lives
of peoples everywhere as aviation.
Yet travellers see only one facet of avia- f
Historic photo (left) was taken
on 17 December 1903 at Kitty
Hawk, North Carolina (U.S.A.)
when the Wright brothers,
Wilbur and Orville, achieved the
first powered, sustained and
controlled flight of a heavier-
than-air machine. (In the 1890s,
the French engineer Clément
Ader succeeded in making a
short hop in a powered plane he
had built, but the machine was
not capable of sustained or
controlled flight.) Orville, lying
prone in the middle of the lower
wing beside the 12 HP engine, is
at the controls of the plane
which the Wrights designed and
built after experimenting with .
kites and gliders. Wilbur has
just released the wing. The first
flight lasted 12 seconds. On the
4th, the machine was airborne
for 59 sees. Today, 75 years
later, civil aviation is a vast
industry employing over 10
million persons. Right, bird's
eye view from a modern airliner
over South America.
Photo © Smithsonian Institution National Air Museum, Washington, D.C.

3*
©

1906 On 12 November in Paris, the Brazilian Alberto Santos-Dumont became
the first holder of a world air speed record: 41 km. per hour. Three years
later, Santos-Dumont produced his famous series of "Demoiselle" or
"Grasshopper" monoplanes (above). These lightweight craft (wing span 5.10 m.;
length 8 m.) were among the first to be used for pleasure flying.
^ -
10 fi Q Above, children hail the first-ever oversea plane flight as Louis Blériot's
«U« tiny monoplane (wingspan and length 8 m.) crosses the English coast
near the end of its 37-minute Channel crossing on 25 July. A rival French aviator,
Hubert Latham, had attempted a crossing 6 days before but engine trouble forced
him down in mid-Channel. Below, two eras of travel and transport caught by a
photographer on 27 July 1909 as Latham made a second gallant but unsuccessful
attempt to fly the Channel.
Photo © Photothèque Hachette, Paris
, tion and hardly notice all those who work
behind the scenes to make their flight pos¬
sible. They can hardly imagine the complex
co-ordination required to make the interna¬
tional airline network operate efficiently.
An essential link in this chain is the Interna¬
tional Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), a
United Nations specialized agency with
headquarters in Montreal (Canada), which
has just celebrated its 30th anniversary.
In spite of setbacks at the beginning of
the jet age and the changing economic
situation, remarkable progress has been
made, far exceeding the hopes of those
who more than 30 years ago drafted the
1944 Chicago Convention to ensure the
"safe and orderly" growth of international
civil aviation.
The Convention, the birth certificate of
ICAO, has now been ratified by 141
governments, and is the legal basis which
made possible the multilateral agreements
governing international air transport. The
rapid development of international air
transport, the opening of new routes, the
search for new structures by carriers,
charterers, airports and, of course, national
administrations are the living and con¬
stantly renewed embodiments of the Chi¬
cago Convention.
ICAO is also a technical organization.
Aviation requires international standardiza¬
tion, for international flights would be
unthinkable if flight procedures and equip¬
ment were not the same throughout the
world. ICAO acts as the international regu¬
latory agency which sets the Standards
and Recommended. Practices for the pre¬
cise and detailed characteristics and
performances of both airborne and ground
equipment.
To be effective, these Standards and
Recommended Practices must be imple¬
mented. This is why ICAO establishes
regional air navigation plans which define
all the essential international air navigation
facilities and services in the various regions
of the world.
Thus, when taking a plane, whether for
the longest scheduled non-stop flight
10,876 km. from Tokyo to New Yorkor
for one of the shortest hops27 km. bet¬
ween Copenhagen and Malmothe pas¬
senger boards an aircraft which has a certi¬
ficate of airworthiness issued in accor¬
dance with ICAO regulations.
During the flight the aircraft crew suc¬
cessively contacts various area control cen¬
tres, using ICAO radio procedures. Finally,
the aircraft will be guided by an ICAO ins¬
trument landing system, whether touching
down in London or Bujumbura in the heart
of Africa.
The aeroplane has overcome many natu¬
ral obstacles, such as mountains, oceans
and deserts. In recent years, however', air
passengers have become concerned about

a new threat. Faced with the rising number
of unlawful seizures of aircraft and with
acts of terrorism against passengers, air¬
craft and aviation facilities, the internatio¬
nal community has reacted in two ways. A
complete international legal system has
been worked out in the form of three con¬
ventions signed in Tokyo, The Hague and
Montreal. ICAO has strengthened these
legal instruments with technical measures
that have been circulated to all contracting
states. (See page 22).
ICAO is not only concerned with the
interests of air transport users. For some
years now, it has also been active in the
field of environment by introducing mea¬
sures to limit aircraft noise. In 1971, the
ICAO Council adopted a set of standards
on aircraft noise which were incorporated
in Annex 16 of the Chicago Convention.
These standards are becoming progres¬
sively more stringent for the latest aircraft.
(See page 9).
Today the world is also concerned with
pollution caused by exhaust fumes from
cars, trucks and aircraft. Although it is
generally agreed that aircraft are little to
blame, it is nevertheless essential to es¬
tablish the facts.
A first step in this direction involves
drawing up international specifications for
measuring polluting agents from all
sources, including aviation. For this pur¬
pose ICAO is co-operating with other inter¬
national organizations, such as the
World Health Organization and the World
Meteorological Organization.
Air law is a new branch of international
law compared with maritime law, which
enjoys a long tradition. ICAO's task is to
codify international air law, taking into
account different legal concepts and
systems of jurisprudence, to draft conven¬
tions on various aspects of international air
law, and to try to obtain their ratification.
So far, ICAO has prepared eight conven¬
tions covering such widely different areas
as international recognition of the right of
ownership of aircraft, damage caused to
third parties on the ground, the liability of
the air carrier towards passengers, offen¬
ces committed on board aircraft and acts of
unlawful interference with civil aviation.
While ICAO does not set fares and does
not apportion air routes to the different air¬
lines, its role is neverthless essential in the
development of air transport.
There has been much talk about disorder
in the air transport market and about
unbridled competition on certain air routes.
However, this market is governed by bilat¬
eral agreements and the price of tickets is
fixed by the airline tariff conferences, sub¬
ject to government approval. ICAO's role
with regard to the economic aspects of air
transport has so far been limited to collec¬
ting and publishing statistical information i
and economic studies which can be used I
1Q1Q ^n era °* pioneering long-distance flights began on 15 June
lulu when British aviators John Alcock and Arthur Whitten Brown
landed in Ireland (above) after the first nonstop transatlantic flight (16
hours 27 minutes from St. John's, Newfoundland). Later that year the
world community showed its concern to promote international co¬
operation in civil aviation: the International Air Traffic Association
(IATA) was founded at The Hague; the League of Nations took steps to
draw up regulations for air traffic; and on 19 October the first
international convention on air navigation met in Paris.
z&
? m
^mm^. - ^m\
m% *^ ***m^ Jrm
fer ^Kf pr
\
W
Urn* '" Ám\ - un
B^nVHifln^n^HAfl
|Q97 The president of Japan's Imperial Aviation Company, Gen.
I U¿# Nagaoka, welcomes French aviators Costes and Le Brix to Tokyo
during the round-the-world trip (10 October 1927-14 April 1928) on which
they made the first nonstop flight across the South Atlantic. In the
same year (1927) the American Charles Lindbergh made his epic solo
flight from New York to Paris (in a machine only a little larger than the
Wrights' first plane). Aviation continued to make rapid advances during
the next decade, which saw many pioneering exploits including (in June
1937) the first nonstop flight over the North Pole from the U.S.S.R. to
the United States. Soviet pilot Valeri Chkalov did the 9,130-km. trip in
63 hours aboard a single-engine Tupolev aircraft.

High¬
flying
women , I
Photo © Keystone, Pans
Some of the most legendary figures of the "heroic age" of flight in the 1920s and 1930s were
women pilots who amazed the world with their flying skills and endurance. First great
performance by a woman aviator was due to Adrienne Bolland of France (1) shown here in
the single-engine craft in which she crossed the Andes on 1 April 1921 in spite of strong
adverse winds and bitter cold. Many men in more powerful machines had failed to perform
this feat. Amelia Earhart of the U.S.A. (2) was the first woman to fly the Atlantic, both as a
passenger (1928) and as a solo pilot (on 20-21 May 1932). She played an active part in efforts
to open aviation to women before disappearing in the Pacific in 1937 while attempt¬
ing a round-the-world flight. (3) 24-year-old New Zealander Jean Batten at Calcutta during
her record-breaking England-Australia flight (14 days 23 1/2 hours) in May 1934. (4) Soviet
aviator V. Grizodubova (centre) and her team beneath the ANT-37 in which they flew
almost 6,000 km. nonstop in 1938, breaking the long-distance record for an all-woman crew.
kby Member States for the preparation of
development plans.
These activities, as well as the role of
ICAO in co-ordinating air policies among its
Contracting States, are far from negligible.
They may have an even greater impact as
the result of a special Air Transport Con¬
ference held in April 1977, the first such
gathering in more than 30 years.' ICAO is
now entrusted with new tasks concerning
the application of rates and fares, policy on
chartered or non-scheduled flights, the
regulation of capacity on international
flights and the machinery for fixing interna¬
tional air tariffs. (1)
ICAO is active in many other fields, in¬
cluding aviation medicine, telecommunica¬
tions, search and rescue, training films and
manuals, and smoothing out cumbersome
customs, immigration and public health
formalities which impede the movement of
people and goods.
But among the many activities of ICAO,
technical assistance to developing coun¬
tries has a particularly important place.
(See page 12). A recent study carried out in
Africa by ICAO and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) has
shown how aviation can contribute to eco¬
nomic development in the Third World,
bringing an inflow of foreign currency,
creating new jobs and opening up export
markets.
In a world of increasingly rapid change,
aviation is destined to become the key form
of medium- and long-range transport. And
as aviation expands, its problems too are
bound to multiply. ICAO has already amply
proved its determination to solve them.
Yves Lambert
(1) As an intergovernmental organization, ICAO works
closely with a number of non-governmental bodies
representing various interests in international civil avia¬
tion. Among these is the International Air Transport
Association (IATA), with headquarters both in Montreal
and Geneva, which groups 109 scheduled airlines. Be¬
sides dealing with uniformity in fares, ticketing, hand¬
ling of baggage and freight, and with technical and legal
matters, IATA represents the scheduled airlines at ICAO
meetings. A major feature of lATA's work is its clearing
house which permits member airlines to settle pay¬
ments made all over the world in different currencies.
