Modern cities:
an unquenchable
thirst?
Photo Gilles Peress © Magnum, Paris
10

Deep wells
and dead fish
Hard pressed to keep pace
with soaring domestic and
industrial demand for water,
modern cities must make
massive investments to bring
supplies from long distances
and drill wells deep
underground (above). Drawing
shows the geological structure
of the Paris basin with pipe
descending to a water-bearing
bed some 600 metres down.
Measures have been taken to
prevent excessive "mining" of
these reserves. Water
pollution is another major
problem facing modern cities.
Left, dead fish float in the
Seine amid reflections
of Paris buildings.
ALTHOUGH half the world's popula¬
tion will be living in cities by the
end of this century, many questions
still remain unanswered about the impact
of urban growth and industrialization on
the world's water resources.
This was one of the findings of a work¬
ing group set up by Unesco and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) in 1971.
Four years later, in 1975, the Inter¬
governmental Council of Unesco's Interna¬
tional Hydrological Programme approved
five projects designed to provide. a better
understanding of the problems of urban
hydrology. They involved research into
water catchment areas, groundwater
pollution, and the interaction of economic,
social and ecological factors on urban
hydrology.
This research, carried out under Unesco's
auspices and within the framework of co¬
operation with other United Nations spe¬
cialized agencies, will make it possible in
1979 and 1980 to draw up an international
programme for the management of urban
water resources.
Any modern city has to face three main
water problems: the supply of water for
drinking and other purposes (chiefly
industrial); the removal of sewage; and
the renewal of supplies.
Cities need to be supplied first and fore¬
most with drinking water for domestic
consumption. Estimated daily needs vary
greatly, from 50 to over 400 litres per
inhabitant. It has been calculated that a
Swede uses on average 210 litres of water
per day for personal hygiene and house¬
hold appliances. These domestic require¬
ments of course account for only part of
total needs. Even so, the amount of water
used by a big town may seem small com¬
pared with the flow of even a small river.
But in addition to safe water needed for
domestic consumption, cities also have to
satisfy many other demands, particularly
those of industry. The supply of water to
industry (quite apart from piping off of
untreated water from rivers) represents a
high proportion of total consumption.
Cities are greedy for water. The total
urban needs of the United States in 1965
were estimated at 1,000 cubic metres per
second. The figure will probably rise to
1,500 cubic metres per second by 1980,
and to over 3,000 cubic metres per second
by the year 2020. Such amounts are the
equivalent of the flow of major rivers.
Some towns and cities bring their water
from long distances. A 300-km.-long
pipeline provides Stuttgart and its suburbs
with drinking water. In Sweden, the
needs of the Malmö-Lund-Helsingborg
conurbation could only be met by some
300 km. of pipelines. The California State
Water Project, set up to supply the state's |
cities and agriculture, includes an aqueduct I
11

Photo Sumí Janah, Unesco
1,100 km. long, with a flow of 167 cubic
metres per second.
Another frequently used method of
urban water supply is to tap groundwater.
This can sometimes cause changes in the
natural water balance. For quite apart
from cases where the water has to be
treated because of its high mineral content,
the amount of water drawn off can exceed
the natural supply. The level of the water
table drops, and this in turn can cause
land subsidence, as has already happened
in certain parts of the United States,
Japan and Sweden.
Forty-seven per cent of the water used
by Swedish cities is supplied by ground¬
water. Its removal, combined with the
weight of buildings, has caused subsidence
particularly in Stockholm, where some
structures have suffered serious damage.
In other cities the ground has sunk by
between 50 centimetres and one metre.
Sewage and rainwater also have to be
removed from cities. The total length of
sanitary sewers and storm-sewers in the
United States is over 300,000 kilometres.
The figure for Sweden, a country whose
population is 25 times less than that of the
United States was 35,000 km. in 1971. The
combined lengths of the Nile, the Amazon
and the Mississippi-Missouri, the world's
three longest rivers, amount to less than
20,000 kilometres. The geography of the
world's water has completely changed.
Cities thus modify the way water circu¬
lates. Nearly 7,000 km. of artificial chan¬
nels run under New York City's 329 square
kilometres. The city of Milwaukee, on
Lake Michigan, has a mere 60 km. of
natural watercourses and 13 km. of water¬
front, but 900 km. of sewers, 1,300 km.
of storm sewers, and 1,000 km. of sanitary
sewers.
Natural water networks are also affected
by urbanization. Watercourses are cover¬
ed over, integrated into artificial systems,
and often turned into sewers. A rural area
of 68 square kilometres near Washington
contained 103 km. of watercourses in 1913.
By 1966, it had turned into suburbia and
was left with only 43 km. of "natural"
open streams.
Urbanization also changes the pattern
of rainwater runoff. In cities the volume
of water seeping into the ground dimin¬
ishes, whereas there is an increase in the
amount which drains away in streams and
rivers.
The reason is that in towns and cities
rain does not fall on natural terrain, but on
large expanses of concrete and asphalt, a
type of impermeable surface that is also
becoming increasingly common in the
suburbs.
As a result, the sponge that once soaked
up part of the water is no longer there. It
has been observed in many countries that
all the rainwater in urban areas now finds
its way directly into the drainage system,
and then flows by the shortest possible
route into the nearest river. The flow in
such rivers thus rises steeply, which was
not the case before urbanization. In one
German valley, which has undergone
urban development during the last 30
12

Industrial development generally goes hand in hand with urban growth and also makes
heavy demands on water resources. The pollution of streams and lakes with industrial
waste is no longer a problem confined to the developed world. Opposite page, Tata iron
and steel works (India) seen from across its cooling basin forms a stark contrast with
pastoral lakeside idyll (above) as a Bengali fishes in untroubled waters.
Photo © Guy Van de Berg, Brussels
years, certain types of rainfall cause the
river to rise not only faster but twice as
high as in 1919.
Research in the United States has
shown that flooding is tending to become
more frequent and more serious in urban
areas, which are often located near rivers.
The degree of flooding increases in pro¬
portion with the extent of urbanization.
Not long ago, there was dangerous flood¬
ing near Marseilles, in France, ¡n an area
where there has been extensive building
over the last 15 years. Concrete was
identified ' as the main culprit of this
disaster.
It is becoming vital, then, to control the
flow of rivers by building dikes and reser¬
voirs in order to take the "punch" out of
floods. The natural regulatory mechanisms
which have been removed must be replac- -
ed by artificial control.
As well as altering the runoff pattern, _
cities have also affected the quality of"
water in a variety of ways:
A city like Philadelphia, in the United
States, produces 2,900 tonnes of pol¬
lutants every day. Each year its two
million inhabitants, spread over 330 square
kilometres, dump more than 1,500,000
tonnes of refuse, as well as industrial
waste. To this should be added the waste
produced by the asphalting of streets (30
to 40 km. per year), the wear and tear
caused by four million' pairs of shoes and
of more than two million car tyres, the
erosion of the city's 650,000 buildings and
the pollution of the pavements by some
250,000 domestic pets.
Similar figures could probably be pro¬
duced for all major cities. Naturally most
such deposits are removed via the drain¬
age and sewerage system, especially when
it rains. Flooding in such areas can cause
particularly serious damage, .as the first
surge'of water., is, always .extremely, pol¬
luted. The average amount of sediment
carried by a river is much greater as it
leaves ah urban area at least 5 to 10
times more than' in rural areas. According
to a survey carried out in the U.S.S.R. 20
to 30 tonnes of matter is dissolved and
deposited annually by rainfall on each
square kilometre of urban areas, as
opposed to a mere 5 to 10 tonnes in rural
areas.
In the U.K., sewage was examined to
see how much waste from building sites it
contained: one of Birmingham's main '
sewers was found to have a deposit of
building debris up to 50 cms. deep. In
Stockholm, 850,000 cubic metres of snow
are removed annually from the streets and
dumped in Lake Malaren. According to
estimates, they contain 30,000 kilos of
lead, 6,000 kilos of oil, and 130,000 kilos
of salt.
Pollution on this scale has introduced a
' new stage in the water cycle: purification.
All major cities 'now have one or ' more
plants/where "used" water is: generally
. put in sedimentation basins before being
y treated biologically (the actual purification l
( being ' carried out by bacteria). After a F
t13

To combat pollution In streams
and rivers, purification plants
have been built near major
cities. The water is put
through a complex process of
sedimentation, filtration, and
chemical and bacteriological
treatment. The Kuryanovo
plant, left, near Moscow,
treats 2,500,000 cubic metres of
water per day, making the
Moskva river clean enough for
the people of the Soviet capital
to swim In it in summer.
second sedimentation, it is returned to the
river.
As water needs. are increasing all the
time, it is often necessary to turn river
water into . drinking water. But water
: often needs to be purified on its way into
cities as well as on the way out, for there
are usually other towns or industrial plants
further upstream. Thus, a plant in the
eastern suburbs of Paris takes 600,000
cubic metres of water a day from the
river Marne (a tributary of the Seine) and
purifies it for drinking purposes. . It is a
highly sophisticated process: the river
water attains a state of absolute microbio¬
logical purity only after a quick filtration,
treatment with chlorine dioxide, then with
ferric chloride, then a slow, filtration, an
adjustment of acidity with common soda
and lastly an ozone treatment. It is not a
simple process to get pure water. .
So-called "natural" watercourses are
today becoming less and less natural.
This is not necessarily bad, since changes
in streams and rivers can be the result of a
deliberate policy to conserve or improve
their condition. The waters' of the River
Ruhr, which flows through one of the
most built-up and industrialized areas in
the world, have remained' very pure,
thanks to efforts by the German authorities
to maintain the river for local consumption
and recreation purposes.
: To prevent the Ruhr. from being pol¬
luted, sewage, and waste is , channelled
into another another . tributary : of the
Rhine, the Emscher, which flows a little
further north... and passes through a
purification plant.
In the Ruhr area each river performs its
own special task. A similar solution 'is
being envisaged for northern France. In
the Netherlands, there are plans to specia¬
lize the branches of the Rhine delta. Arti¬
ficial, man-made solutions are becoming
more and more widespread. > rSoon,
perhaps, the maps of : river systems ' in
school geography books will have. to be
redrawn.
Most of the ¡nfoimation in this article is drawn from
."Hydrological Effects of' Urbanization",- a " study
published by Unesco in 1974.
14
