Human Rights
A new school of law and learning
by Karel Vasak
'To teach respect for human
rights, both our own rights and
the rights of others, and to have
the courage to uphold them
even in the most difficult
circumstances is the major
imperative of our times,"
declared Mr. Amadou-Mahtar
M'Bow, Director-General of
Unesco, speaking at the opening
of the International Congress on
human rights education. The
Congress, organized by Unesco
at the invitation of the Austrian
Government, was held in Vienna
last September.
Addressing the two hundred
participants from some sixty
countries, Mr. M'Bow affirmed
that it was Unesco's duty to
commemorate the thirtieth
anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights "by
giving new impetus to the action
it has carried on since its
creation to promote the
recognition of these rights in the
fields of its competence."
Amodern expression of a time-
honoured reality, the rights of men
in virtue of their humanity today
referred to as "human rights" have only
comparatively recently become of more
than passing interest to lawyers.
Tainted by the shadow of political con¬
siderations, they lay for a long time in a twi¬
light zone, screened from the light of pure
law, whose attraction for the jurist versed
in the analysis of age-old codes and rules
was far more immediate. This tradition of
neglect was too strong to be broken by the
isolated individuals whose interest in the
philosophy of law led them to examine
human rights as part of their investigation
of the aims and objectives of power.
Today, however, the old reticence is
being abandoned: those called upon to
pass judgement in the affairs of men are
increasingly inclined to base their rulings
on the declarations of rights to be found in
the preambles to constitutions. And if, in
our age, the banner of revolution is rarely
raised in the name of human rights (some
would say that this is a pity), the number of
proceedings instituted with the aim of
ensuring that these rights are respected is
legion. This change of perspective alone is
enough to indicate that human rights have
indeed become a legal reality.
For human rights to be real in the eyes of
the law, however, three sets of conditions
must exist.
In the first place, the society concerned
must be organized in the form of a legally
established State.
Secondly, the internal structure of the
State must provide for the exercise of
those rights within a predetermined legal
framework flexible enough to take account
KAREL VASAK, French jurist, is Director of
Unesco's Division of Human Rights and Peace.
He has collaborated with the principal authors of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
including the late René Cassin, with whom he
was a co-founder of Revue des Droits de
l'Homme: Human Rights Journal. He has taught
at The Hague Academy of International Law,
the University of California, Berkeley, and at
several other universities (Singapore, Bangkok,
Besançon, Nairobi, etc.). He is the author of La
Convention Européenne des Droits de l'Homme
(The European Convention of Human Rights),
published In 1964, and general editor of the
Unesco manual Les Dimensions Internationales
des Droits de l'Homme, to be published shortly
in English under the title The International
Dimensions of Human Rights.
of the nature of the rights themselves and
of different circumstances.
Finally, the actual exercise of human
rights must be protected by precise legal
safeguards, particular provision being
made for recourse to ensure their respect.
Man can only be free in a State that is
free; conversely, the freedom of a State
depends on the self-determination of its
people. This collective self-determination is
to societies what freedom is to
individuals the very basis of their exis¬
tence. And if "self-determination" in this
sense cannot be counted as an individual
right, it is undoubtedly the sine qua non of
human rights as a whole: individuals can¬
not be free in societies that are unfree.
Self-determination is thus a prerequisite
to respect for human rights. But is It
enough to ensure that they are respected?
No one would be bold enough to make this
claim, obvious as It is that independence
secured through self-determination,
although invariably synonymous with col¬
lective liberation, may not necessarily entail
the liberation of individuals.
Unless a special place Is reserved for
them in the social order in which they are to
function, human rights are likely to remain
just so many fine-sounding words. In fact,
although they are by definition concerned
with individual human beings, they are at
the same time social in intent. We tend too
often to neglect this aspect of the matter;
and are led in consequence to consider the
two phenomena of human rights and
authority as somehow in opposition to
each other.
Given this opposition, in a sense natural
and automatic, it follows that a balance
between human rights on the one hand
and political power on the other can only
be achieved through the imposition of very
real limitations on each of the parties con¬
cerned. But such a notion of latent or
potential conflict between them ¡s a dan¬
gerous one, especially in the context of
attempts to secure legal status for human
rights. In case of conflict, the latter will
have the backing of law alone, whereas
political power, with or without the sanc¬
tion of the law, will always have force at its
disposal. If conflict does occur, therefore,
human rights will always be the losers.
If we look more closely at the matter,
however, ¡t becomes clear that the social
context of human rights affords fewer
grounds for their limitation than for theirs
promotion (the lawyer would say their F

The Cry, a lithograph by the French artist Ivan Levesque.
I
J
(
!

> "regulation"). When the legislator ordains
that vehicles shall keep to the left or right,
he Is facilitating rather than obstructing the
circulation of traffic. When, through the
nationalization of monopolies or steeply
increased taxation, the lawmakers chal¬
lenge the rights of property ownership,
their aim is not so much to encroach on
those rights as to make them as widely
accessible as possible.
The same is true in the case of numerous
human rights, which remain dead letters as
long as the political power which emanates
from society fails to insert them in the
social order. For example, the right to work
may mean no more than the right to starve
if the State makes no provision for its
active exercise; while the right to education
will mean no more for the bulk of the popu¬
lation than the right to remain ignorant if
the State fails to provide them with the
opportunity to learn.
In the last analysis, therefore, the fact
that human rights are intended for applica¬
tion in society makes them, if not directly
dependent on political authority, at least
potential allies rather than enemies of the
latter. It is not for political authority to limit
human rights, any more than it is for
human rights to rebel against authority.
NDISPENSABLE
though this modus vivendi may be, it is
easy to see how difficult it will be to main¬
tain through a system of regulations drawn
up by the authorities with the aim of en¬
suring the harmonious social exercise of
human rights. For where such rights are
involved, it is but a short step from neces¬
sary regulation through limitation to total
suppression.
Even if they are proclaimed by a free
State and regulated by law, human rights
will be of little significance if they are
not backed by effective guarantees
that is to say, those entitled to
them can obtain redress in case of vio¬
lation. Such guarantees may be of two
kinds, which we may call "institutiona¬
lized" and "non-institutionalized".
Within the framework of the State, insti¬
tutionalized guarantees are provided in the
form of recourse which permits individuals
to obtain either the annulment of the mea¬
sures which violate their human rights or,
when this is impossible, financial compen¬
sation for the injury sustained. At the inter¬
national level, provision for such recourse
exists on both a worldwide and a regional
scale.
Among the non-institutionalized guaran¬
tees of human rights, the right to refuse to
obey an unjust law seems to be firmly in¬
scribed, if not in the statute books of every
country, at least in the conscience of all
men. But where institutionalized safe¬
guards prove inadequate, resistance
The first of its kind...
In May 1978 an institute for training lawyers and magistrates in human
rights was set up by the Paris Bar under the auspices of Unesco. The
institute, the first of its kind, has aroused so much interest that other
Bars are considering the possibility of setting up similar institutes.
against oppression is the supreme guaran¬
tee of human rights. Written into the
Declaration of Independence of the United
States of America of 4 July 1776, pro¬
claimed in the French Declaration of the
Rights of Man of 24 June 1793, resistance
against oppression finds a natural place in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
whose Preamble contains the words:
"Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be
compelled to have recourse, as a last
resort, to rebellion against tyranny and
oppression, that human rights should be
protected by the rule of law".
Distressing though the admission may
be, individual liberties are suffering in¬
creasingly from the encroachments of
modern States. The only means, and an
inadequate one at that, of breaking the
stranglehold imposed by their omnipotence
on human rights is to carry the issue
beyond national frontiers. Whether in
bodies of regional or of worldwide mem¬
bership, the question of human rights
should be raised as a matter of international
importance, and as, perhaps, the only truly
international problem.
Understood within this legal perspective,
human rights, as Unesco's Medium-Term
Plan (1977-1982) declares: "...are neither a
new morality nor a lay religion and are
much more than a language common to all
mankind. They are requirements which the
investigator must study and integrate into
his knowledge using the rules and methods
of his science, whether this is philosophy,
the humanities or the natural sciences,
sociology or law, history or geography. In a
word, the task is gradually to build up or
promote a genuine scientific formulation of
human rights".
Unesco's involvement with human
rights, and with teaching about those
rights, is self-evident: the promotion of
human rights is inscribed in its Constitu¬
tion, and constitutes the raison d'être of
the Organization itself. Its specific role as
far as education about human rights is con¬
cerned has, moreover, been recognized by
the United Nations Human Rights Commis¬
sion, which, in March 1971, instructed it to
examine:
"The desirability of envisaging the sys¬
tematic study and the development of an
independent scientific discipline of human
rights, taking into account the principal
legal systems of the world with a view to
facilitating the understanding, comprehen¬
sion, study and teaching of human rights at
the university level, and subsequently at
other educational levels."
It goes without saying that the study of
human rights constitutes both a meeting-
point and a source of mutual enrichment
for all the human sciences, bringing them
together in "the science of sciences", as a
modern equivalent of medieval philosophy.
Even if there are those who would hesitate
to accord the subject such pre-eminence,
none would dispute the fact that human
rights require an interdisciplinary approach,
which is indeed the only approach through
which not only their wealth and variety but
also their simultaneously local and univer¬
sal character may be appreciated.
Nevertheless, the manual recently
published by Unesco on the occasion of
the International Congress on the Teaching
of Human Rights, which was held in
Vienna from 12-16 September 1978, and
entitled Dimensions Internationales des
Droits de l'Homme, is essentially a law text
book, intended primarily for use in teaching
about human rights in faculties of law and
of political and social sciences in uni¬
versities.
Practical considerations and educational
expediency governed this choice. In the
first place, human rights are formulated in
legal language: the collection and synthesis
of different texts related to the subject is
thus first and foremost a matter for jurists.
Secondly, the earliest response to the idea
that human rights might be subjected to
scientific study came from faculties of law
throughout the world; their teachers and
students are now looking for educational
material which will permit them to go
beyond the generalizations that have now
been everywhere incorporated in courses
on constitutional or international public
law.
The choice of a "legal" approach, rather
than one based on a social science, such as
sociology, entails a certain risk in that it
may obscure the fact that human rights are
a component of social structures and that
their violation may spring from built-in
defects in those structures. This risk can
only be averted through increased inter¬
disciplinary research into the subject and
here Unesco will play its part during the
years to come.
Karel Vasak
