Portrait of Jules Verne (1828 - 1905)
by his friend Nadar. When this photo
was taken about a century ago, Jules
Verne already had a wide readership.
Today his popularity is still growing.
According to Unesco's Statistical
Yearbook 1976, he is one of the three
most translated authors in the world
(with 156 translations in 1976). Only
Lenin (348 translations) and Agatha
Christie (159) had a higher score. His
universal appeal is due not only to his
outstanding gifts as a storyteller but
also to his prophetic qualities. In
Autour de la Lune, 1870 (published in
English as From the Earth to the
Moon... anda Trip Around It, 1873)
he described the weightlessness that
modern astronauts would later
experience. Right, drawing from the
first edition showing the hero happily
and weightlessly afloat.
30

Jules Verne
Seer of the Space Age
by Alain Bombard
To mark the 150th anniversary of the birth
of Jules Verne the Unesco Courier has
asked Dr. Alain Bombard to evoke the life
and work of the great French writer who
was one of the founders of modern
science fiction. Dr. Bombard could
qualify as a Jules Verne hero in his own
right. In 1952, to test shipwreck survival
techniques, he sailed across the Atlantic
on a tiny rubber raft without either food
or fresh water, surviving the 65-day
crossing from the Canary Islands to the
West Indies by catching fish.
J
ULES Verne was born in the Breton
seaport of Nantes 150 years ago, on
8 February 1828.
ALAIN BOMBARD, French marine biologist
and doctor, is the author of numerous scientific
studies. His account of his trans-Atlantic cros¬
sing on a rubber raft has been translated into a
number of languages, and appeared in English
as Dr. Bombard Goes to Sea (Vanguard Press,
New York).
His stories have been part of my life ever
since my earliest childhood. My mother's
parents had known him at the height of his
fame, and their house near Paris, where we
used to spend our Sundays, was crammed
with his books.
We used to imagine we were the children
of Captain Grant, and pretend to be other
heroes of his novels, such as Dr. Liden-
broek and Captain Hatteras. We fought
tooth and nail for the honour of being Cap
tain Nemo of 20,000 Leagues under the
Sea.
Maybe that was how my destiny was
shaped. I would be a mariner like Nemo, a
discoverer like Cyrus Smith, a shipwrecked
sailor like Kazallon (in The Survivors of the
Chance/or), a castaway on a Mysterious
Island.
Jules Verne was the apostle of a con¬
structive, useful science, as opposed to the
kind that kills or threatens mankind. He
foresaw many later inventions (for Verne
invented nothing himself; he simply projec¬
ted his ideas of progress into the future) k
but he also perceived their potential for evil f
31

Verne
prophesies
a Pacific
splashdown
The astronauts' splashdown in
Jules Verne's novel From the
Earth to the Moon (left, the
original illustration by Emile
Bayard) proved astonishingly
prophetic over a century later
when the U.S. Apollo 8 spacecraft
landed in the Pacific (right) a
mere two and a half miles from
the point mentioned in the novel.
In a letter to Jules Verne's
grandson, the commander of
Apollo 8, Frank Borman, paid
tribute to Verne's visionary genius
as "one of the great pioneers of
the space age". "Our space
vehicle was launched from
Florida, like Barbicane's," he
wrote, "and it had the same
weight and height." Would Verne
have been surprised by this
uncanny accuracy? Perhaps not,
for he once wrote: "For
Americans the Moon isn't much
further than Texas."
(as we can see in such works as The
Begum's Fortune, For the Flag and Master
of the World), and spoke out against their
use for destructive purposes.
Jules Verne was a prophet of progress,
not of violence. He may have had an over-
optimistic view of progress, but he believed
that it was bound to bring an improvement
in people's lives, take the backbreak out of
their labour, and ultimately bring them hap¬
piness.
Jules Verne first answered the call of the
sea in 1839 when at the age of 11 he
stowed away aboard the Cora/ie, a three-
master bound for the Indies. What an
adventure it would be to bring back a coral
necklace for his cousin Caroline, with
whom he had fallen madly and unhappily in
love!
As the anchors were weighed and the
vessel slipped out of Nantes into the Loire
estuary, a life of adventure stretched
before him. But the escapade lasted only a
day, for when the boat put into the nearby
port of Paimbceuf that evening, the would-
be sailor was recovered by his anxious
father.
His wings clipped, he decided to settle
for a legal career, and left Nantes to study
law in Paris in 1848, shortly after the dra¬
matic events that had drowned the fledg¬
ling Republic in blood and trampled the
demands of the workers. A reluctant law
student, he nevertheless managed to
obtain his degree in 1849.
He began to dabble in literature and tried
his hand as a playwright. Thanks to the
friendship and help of the elder Dumas,
one of his plays was performed, but it was
received with a chorus of boos and cat¬
calls, and the budding dramatist wondered
whether he might not be better off as a
lawver after all.
About this time, Verne developed a pas¬
sion for science. First of all he studied geo¬
graphy, and then took up mathematics
with the help of his cousin, a student at the
Polytechnique. He became fascinated by
the way the slightest miscalculation in
physics could have disastrous conse¬
quences.
Here lie the origins of the mathematician
J.T. Maston's astonishingly accurate cal¬
culations in From the Earth to the Moon, as
well as his monumental error in Sans Des¬
sus Dessous ("The Purchase of the North
Pole"), one of Verne's most remarkable
novels.
This is the tale of an attempt to shift the
Earth's axis to the perpendicular, as a result
Qf which the whole world will enjoy a tem¬
perate climate without extremes of heat
and cold. A tunnel is dug into Mount Kili¬
manjaro to house a gigantic cannon which
will fire a single shell whose recoil will be
powerful enough to "correct" the Earth's
axis. The experiment takes place, but fails
when Maston, who is responsible for the
calculations, loses his concentration at a
32

First inklings of the laser beam?
"... He added that by sending light rays concentrated in beams by parabolic
mirrors, it would be possible to establish direct communications. These rays
would be as visible on the surface of Venus or Mars as the planet Neptune is
from the Earth. He concluded by saying that bright spots already observed on
the nearest planets could well be signals being made to Earth."
Jules Verne
From the Earth to the Moon...
and a trip around It (1870)
crucial moment and makes a colossal error.
In the 1850s Verne tried his hand at two
travel stories, Un Voyage en Ballon ("Jour¬
ney in a Balloon") and A Winter amid the
Ice. They were only moderately success¬
ful, but they finally decided their author to
turn away from the theatre (where he had
had another ignominious flop).
In 1857, he married a young widow
named Honorine de Vignes, whom he had
met at a friend's wedding in Amiens. Two
years later, he was offered a free trip to
Scotland, and used his experiences there
as the basis for an exciting novel called
Black Diamonds in which he plunged his
readers into the depths of an abandoned
Scottish coal-mine.
For most of his life, however, Verne was
an armchair traveller, who took his often
limited daily experiences and transformed
them in his work. He always used a factual
starting-point for those flights of the imagi
nation which took him through time and
across distant continents.
On his return from Scotland, he met
Jules Hetzel, a young Paris publisher with a
particular interest in children's books.
Verne showed him the manuscript of
"Journey in a Balloon", which was rewor¬
ked and published by Hetzel as Five Weeks
in a Balloon, the account of an expedition
across then-uncharted regions of Africa.
At that time, geographers were involved in
heated controversy about the location of
the main source of the Nile, and in Five
Weeks in a Balloon Verne opted for the
hypothesis that it flows out of Lake Victor¬
ia. Fifteen years later he was proved right.
Author and publisher became firm
friends, and Verne signed a contract with
Hetzel, committing himself to writing three
volumes a year. Now he was well and truly
launched as a writer of fiction and his
genius could begin to express itself fully,
memory, he started work on 777e English at
the North Pole, the first part of a long novel
about polar exploration called "The Adven¬
tures of Captain Hatteras". (All his life
Verne was fascinated by the polar regions,
which appear in many of his stories such as
20,000 Leagues under the Sea, The Fur
Country, The Clipper of the Clouds and An
Antarctic Mystery.) Before completing his
polar novel, however, he published A Jour¬
ney to the Centre of the Earth in 1864.
This was the only occasion when Jules
Verne's extremely logical mind led him
astray, for this gripping and amusing tale is
packed with scientific howlers. The plot is
highly implausible, to say the least, and
generations of vulcanologists have tut-
tutted at the idea of being able to plunge
into the bowels of the Earth through Mount
Sneffels, the mysterious volcano in Ice¬
land, and then pop up in the Mediterranean
during a volcanic eruption of Stromboli
With his Scottish jaunt still fresh in his Captain Hatteras's search for the North
33

Machines
for mastery
of air,
land
and sea
Jules Verne took immense care with the details of the ingenious locomotive machines
and contraptions that play such a memorable part in his work. Above, rivalling the
eagles: a scene from Master of the World (1904). To make the fantastic birdlike flying
machine sound as feasible as possible, Verne went over its description word by word
with an engineer. But of course, he was not propounding a device that actually
worked but drawing attention to the possibilities of heavier-than-air flight at a time
when most people believed only in the dirigible balloon. Steam-driven elephant (below
left) is a more far-fetched Verne vehicle. It pulled two wheeled edifices through India
in The Steam House 11880). Below right, one of Verne's most unforgettable
characters. Captain Nemo of 20,000 Leagues under the Sea (1870) gazes through a
porthole of submarine Nautilus at "a squid of colossal dimensions."
Photos © Editions Hachette, Pans
>Pole aboard the Forward, on the other
hand, turned out to be astonishingly accu¬
rate. The Forward sailed as far North as
latitude 83°35' before becoming ice-bound.
Further north the ice never melts, not even
in summer, and no one had ever ventured
to these desolate regions. Forty years
later, the American explorer Commodore
Peary chose a spot just 10 km. away from
this same latitude to establish the base
camp for his successful trek to the North
Pole.
In 1865 came a novel of space explora¬
tion, From the Earth to the Moon. Here
again, Verne was almost dead on target.
His Moon projectile was fired from a spot in
Florida not far from the present-day Cape
Kennedy. What is more, Verne's manned
projectile made a splashdown in mid-
ocean, just like Apollo 8 a century later. On
the whole Jules Verne made more accurate
predictions and fewer mistakes about the
future than any other "prophetic" writer.
By now Verne was producing novels at a
furious rate. Notable works from this
period are The Children of Captain Grant
and The Mysterious Island, two tales of
adventure on land and sea which have pro-
.bably influenced later generations of vulca-
nologists, submarine explorers and speleo¬
logists more than any of his other works.
In real life too, he became a seafarer and
a geographer. He bought a converted fish¬
ing boat, the Saint Michel, and in the sum¬
mer of 1866 wrote a remarkable geographi¬
cal dictionary of France. The follow¬
ing year he sailed for America aboard the
world's biggest passenger liner, the Great
Eastern, on its last Atlantic crossing. The
voyage provided Verne with material for
the novel A Floating City, and from his visit
to America, much too brief for his liking, he
drew the sharply-observed Will of an
Eccentric.
The characters in this amusing and little-
known novel play a game with dice and a
checkerboard covered with a map of the
United States. After throwing dice, the
players move their counters forward by a
corresponding number of squares and
must then visit the state shown in the
square before playing again.
A few years later, in 20,000 Leagues
under the Sea, Verne created the unforget¬
table Captain Nemo, perhaps the most fas¬
cinating figure in all his work. Nemo is a
greater man than even the mighty Robur, k
hero of The Clipper of the Clouds, although r
34

Around the world in films
With their unique blend of adventure, dreamlike fantasy and
precise observation, Jules Verne's stories have been a gold-mine
for 20th-century film-makers in many countries. Some, such as
'The Children of Captain Grant and Around the World in Eighty
Days, have been filmed more than once, and no less than nine
screen versions have been made of Michel Strogoff. Shown
here, stills from three films based on Verne's works. (1) Le
Voyage dans la Lune by the pioneer French cineast Georges
Meliès (1902), freely adapted from the novel From the Earth to
the Moon; (2) and (3): scenes from The Invention of Destruction
(1957) by the Czech Karel Zeman, based on For the Flag (and
other Verne novels). Zeman skilfully recreated the period flavour-
in backdrops, props and costumes, so that the settings looked
exactly like the original illustrations. (4) David Niven as a
debonair Phileas Fogg is attended by his valet Passepartout
(played by the Mexican actor Cantinflas) in this airborne scene
from Mike Todd's Around the World in Eighty Days (1956)
directed by Michael Anderson.
Photos © Cinémathèque Française, Paris
f Tolstoy sketches
Phileas Fogg
Among Jules Verne's millions of fans all round the world was the
great Russian novelist Leo Tolstoy (1828 - 1910). Tolstoy often
read Verne's stories aloud to his children, and amused himself by
sketching a number of scenes from Around the World ¡n Eighty
Days in the margin of his copy of the novel, which was not an
illustrated edition. Left, Tolstoy's drawing of Phileas Fogg's
dramatic return to London after his round-the-world trip.
Photo© LN Tolstov Museum, Moscow
35

, Robur wields mastery of the air and the
oceans by inventing a fantastic heavier-
than-air flying machine which retracts its
wings and propellers to become a subma¬
rine and sprouts wheels for driving on land.
For Jules Verne, Nemo is a complete man:
he is the personification of genius,
altruism, goodness, generosity and learn¬
ing, in spite of his one great failing, his
thirst for vengeance.
In the person of Harry Killer, Verne also
created a character who used science for
evil purposes. In L'Etonnante Aventure de
la Mission Barsac (published in English in
two volumes as Into the Niger Bend and
City In the Sahara), Killer rules a town in
which he keeps a huge force of slaves and
a captive team of scientists and technicians
who spend their lives producing fabulous
inventionsweapons,- devices for fertili¬
zing the desert, ingenious flying
machines all used to serve the purposes
of crime, murder and tyranny. Verne's
message is that the scientist, who is capa¬
ble of providing humanity with inestimable
benefits, can also perpetrate the greatest
evil.
Although Jules Verne foretold the
machine age, he did not foresee the social
changes that the 20th century would bring.
In this respect he remained firmly rooted in
the 19th century; he never produced any
."politics fiction".
His genius lay first and foremost in his
extraordinary scientific rationalism and his
faith in humanity. He predicted the advent
of the submarine (in 20,000 Leagues Under
the Sea), the aeroplane (the "Mission Bar¬
sac"), the helicopter (in The Clipper of the
Clouds and Master of the World), and wea¬
pons of destruction ( The Begum's Fortune
and For the Flag) as well as prophesying
interplanetary and interstellar travel (in
From the Earth to the Moon... and a Trip
Around It, and Hector Servadac ), and des¬
cribing big city life (Propellor Island) and
life in natural surroundings (The Giant
Raft).
He foresaw the depletion of natural
resources, but he failed to predict pollution
and the rift beween man and his environ¬
ment. He was blind to the need to preserve
the balance of Nature and knew nothing of
ecology. No work of "biology fiction"
came from his pen. This is perhaps one's
sole cause for regret when confronted with
his otherwise monumental achievement.
Alain Bombard
