The whys and
wherefores of
education tomorrow
by Charles Hummel
CHILDREN who enter school today
will be about thirty years old in the
year 2000 and will therefore still be
in the early stages of their professional
careers. Those already in school will shape
the beginning of the next millennium.
In education, reforms and innovations
conceived today will not come into force
until a few years from now and it will be
several decades before their effects are felt.
Whenever an attempt is made to reform
existing educational systems, planning is
automatically implied, and it is thus essen¬
tial to try to make forecasts. Planning
means making choices, taking out options
on the future. Educational planning also
presupposes the existence of a political
purpose, for its aim is to bring into being a
given type of society.
A few years ago, educational planning
was still primarily conceived in quantitative
terms. For example, planners set out to
forecast the «number of enrolments in
schools, colleges and other educational
institutions, as well as the number of gra¬
duates they would turn out, and tried to
furnish a "product" that corresponded to
manpower requirements drawn up in the
light of economic and other objectives.
To some extent, this type of quantitative
educational planning has proved a failure,
largely because manpower needs cannot
be predicted over a long period.
It is generally admitted today that educa¬
tional planning should form part of a com¬
prehensive social policy designed to pro¬
mote changes and innovations that will
last. Since any policy reflects a system of
values, it is clear that educational planning
should be concerned with quality as much
as with quantity.
Planning also means forecasting how the
present situation will evolve, and defining
goals which are both desirable and realistic.
But the future is never completely open,
CHARLES HUMMEL, Switzerland's perma¬
nent delegate to Unesco, is a member of
Unesco's Executive Board. He also represents
Switzerland on the Council of the International
Bureau of Education, and was rapporteur at the
International Conference on Education held in
Geneva in 1975. The text published here forms
the conclusion of a study prepared for the Inter¬
national Conference andpublished by Unesco in
1977 as Education Today for the World of
Tomorrow.
r «J i jj
28

and the possibilities it holds are to a large
extent determined by the present and by
the past.
The future of education will depend
more on external factors political, .econo¬
mic, social and cultural than on the intrin¬
sic characteristics of educational systems.
These factors, which vary from country to
country and from region to region, will
determine tomorrow's education just as
they determine today's. However, as cer¬
tain similarities exist between educational
problems in different parts of the world,
one might expect to find certain common
trends appearing as well.
Certain trends do undoubtedly exist
which are bound to influence the future of
education. But their impact will obviously
depend on more general factors such as
economic growth. Until 1973 no one hesi¬
tated to base forecasts on the assumption
of continuing economic growth. Today this
hypothesis is extremely dubious, to say the
least.
It is more than likely that a slowdown in
economic growth, not to mention econo¬
mic stagnation or even a prolonged reces¬
sion, would hamper any attempts to re¬
structure educational systems, as well as
putting a brake on educational expansion.
The first signs of this have already ap¬
peared. There is a danger that reforms may
lose their- impetus, especially in the indus¬
trialized countries.
If the world, or at least most countries,
should enter a period of widespread insta¬
bility and insecurity and this seems to be
happening far-reaching changes in hu¬
man relationships could be on the way. In
seeking greater stability, social systems
may well tend to become more rigid. For
education this would imply a return to
more authoritarian teaching methods and
more rigid structures.
On the world political scene there is a
growing awareness that the future destiny
of mankind hinges on the establishment of
a new international economic order.
The task that lies ahead is to strike an
acceptable balance between the devel¬
oping world and the industrially developed
countries, and to create a world-wide soli¬
darity among peoples. Without this solida¬
rity, we cannot hope to survive on our pla¬
net, that rudderless boat adrift on hostile
waters. This task must be accomplished in
the very near future and it is in the broadest
sense an educational one. Although we
may not realize it, the race is on between
education and catastrophe.
The new world order cannot be based
exclusively on economic .considerations. It
must be social and cultural as well. Insofar
as it does or does notcome into being,
it will determine the future development of
education throughout the world. If it does
not come about, world peace will be
gravely threatened. If, on the other
hand, there is a real determination to reduce
injustice in this world of ours, then the edu¬
cational systems of the developing coun¬
tries are bound to expand at an unprece¬
dented rate.
But even if we accept the most optimis¬
tic forecasts about the resources available
to the developing countries after successful
negotiations on the establishment of a new
world economic order, it seems highly un¬
likely that the educational problems of
these countries will be solved by traditional
European teaching methods, often dating
from the 19th century.
It seems more realistic to suppose that
the new forms of non-formal education
now being developed will gain ground.
One does not need to go so far as the
famous thinker Ivan lllich, who believes
that the school as an institution is on the
way out, to feel that education will increas¬
ingly be affected by a certain "despool¬
ing" process. Teaching methods being
developed outside the schools, especially
those such as group dynamics now being
used in adult education, will have a grow¬
ing influence on teaching in the schools.
Non-formal educational activities and
above all the mass media are bound to have
a stronger impact.
All these influences will force schools to
open their doors to the outside world.
Teaching will become more flexible and
more relevant. It will break out of the
straightjacket of tradition and become
more closely associated with "cultural
development" in the widest sense.
This flexibility will be reflected in the
classroom: instead of being grouped ac¬
cording to age, pupils will be grouped
according to the extent of their knowledge.
Wide areas of the curriculum will be taught
outside the school, especially in other cul¬
tural institutions.
The extent of "deschooling" will, how¬
ever, depend on future economic perfor¬
mance. It will take place at a faster rate if
there is economic growth, for it is bound to
slow down during a recession if only
because new schools (or educational and
cultural centres) will have to be built to free
education from the excessively rigid struc¬
tures of today.
The concept of lifelong education seems
certain to change the face of education
throughout the world, even though it is still
far from being generally understood and
has not yet been fully integrated into any
educational system. But wherever major
educational reforms are carried out, they
will be conceived with lifelong education in
mind. This means that education systems
will become more coherent, but at the
same time more complex and therefore k
more unwieldy. V
Between 1960 and 1972, enrolment in
secondary schools throughout the world
grew faster than in primary schools, and
enrolment in higher education increased
even more rapidly. The greatest
discrimination seems to occur when
children reach primary school age, but for
those who succeed in entering the
system, chances of gaining admission to
the higher levels are Improving.
29

It also means that more and more people
will be engaged in learning. Pre-school
education will become universal, young
people will stay on longer at school, and
adults including the elderlywill enjoy
many more educational opportunities.
Education is already a mammoth undertak¬
ing: there are more than 50 million young
people in school in the U.S.A., and India
has over 100 million schoolchildren.
Tomorrow it may be absorbing an even big¬
ger share of national budgets, and so
cheaper, more efficient ways of teaching
will have to be found.
Expanded education systems will
become even more inert and resistant to
change than they already are. Far-reaching
reforms will need the most powerful back¬
ing if they are to succeed. There is a dan¬
ger that the "old democracies", where un¬
stable political situations seem to be gra¬
dually developing, may lose the necessary
strength to launch major reforms. The
most remarkable educational innovations in
the future may well appear in the "young"
developing countries.
The democratization of education is
already a major priority in many countries.
This trend will continue, and will probably
be reinforced by a growing decentraliza¬
tion, particularly in educational administra¬
tion.
It is likely that lessons will be learned
from certain failures to achieve equality of
opportunity, but one can assume that the
idea of equality will be further developed
and refined. This will be encouraged by the
strong trend towards individualized
teaching, for equality no longer means "the
same education for all", but "the best edu¬
cation for everyone".
The democratization of education will
put greater pressure on higher education,
and the resulting difficulties such as gra¬
duate unemployment, will become more
serious. The remedy for these problems
will not be found within educational
systems.
It may well be asked whether a different
division of labour may not solve the prob¬
lem. It is also possible that we may be
moving towards an increasingly strong
meritocracy.
As education becomes more democratic,
there will probably be an even greater tend¬
ency to standardize instruction up to the
end of the first stage of secondary school,
but adding an increasingly wide choice of
options to this common core. The same
trend will also be encouraged by the conti¬
nuing need of qualified people to keep
abreast of the latest developments in
science and technology. It will become
normal practice to change careers at least
once in a lifetime. The distinction between
general and vocational education will grad¬
ually disappear, since the ability to adapt to
change will become more important than
the possession of specific knowledge or
skills.
A few years ago, everyone expected that
such technological developments as class¬
room TV and computers would completely
revolutionize education. But although
some changes have occurred, they have
been far fewer than might have been fore
seen. Education systems have so far prov¬
ed surprisingly resistant to the impact of
new educational technology. It is thus
unlikely that they will bring about any major
changes in the future.
' International and regional organizations
will play an increasingly important role in
the development of education systems.
There have already been several instances
of new guidelines for education being
worked out in such organizations before
being taken up at the national level.
It is thanks to international organizations
that avant-garde thinking is crystallized and
disseminated. The international organiza¬
tions are the great catalysts of thought,
research and development in the service of
all nations.
It is also the international organizations,
and primarily Unesco in the field of educa¬
tion, which are creating networks for the
exchange of information and experience-
arteries which are vital to modern proces¬
ses of innovationas well as structures for
practical co-operation.
There is, however, a certain tendency to
establish international co-operation on a
regional basis. In some cases regional
bodies are tending to take the place of the
truly international organizations, which
have often become too unwieldy, too
ambitious and too "politicized" to provide
with maximum efficiency the "technical"
services that governments need.
Perhaps the promotion and co¬
ordination of regional activities will become
new tasks for the international organiza¬
tions, whose work will in turn become
more decentralized.
As the world becomes increasingly inter¬
dependent, international co-operation in
education will become more imperative
than ever. As a result the problems to be
solved will be increasingly similar, and
there will be an ever growing need for the
exchange of information, the comparison
of solutions adopted, and united action.
Charles Hummel
