Gold ornamental plaque
from a horse's trappings, found in a
Sarmatlan tomb in the Caucasus
region. It was probably made for a
Sarmatian noble by Greek craftsmen
who have deliberately adopted a
"barbarian" style. The two central figures are
representations of Dionysius and Athena.
Photo © Progress Publishers, Moscow



The making
of the Slav community
by Vladimir D. Korolyuk
VLADIMIR D. KOROLYUK, Sower historian,
is head of the department of ancient and medi¬
eval history at the Institute of Slav and Balkan
Studies attached to the U.S.S.R. Academy of
Sciences. He is the author of many studies on
the creation of the Slav states, the origins of the
peoples of Eastern Europe and the relations be¬
tween Eastern and Central European countries
between the 16th and 18th centuries. He con¬
tributed to the Unesco booklet The Slavs and
the East, published in 1965.
HISTORY portrays nomad peoples
such as the Sarmatians, the Huns
and the Avars as the main driving
force behind the great migrations of bar¬
barian peoples which crushed the Roman
Empire, leaving the ruins and ashes from
which feudal Europe was later to emerge.
Early written sources abound in graphic
descriptions of the nomads in action: stor¬
ming the ramparts of the Roman Empire,
besieging cities, subjugating the peoples of
the Roman provinces or putting them to
flight. Most of these accounts relate to
south-east Europe where nomad hordes
wrought havoc on Roman territory, turning
it into pastureland and enslaving part of the
local population.
Yet the Slav tribes, for the most part
farmers and herdsmen, played a role of
major importance in these great migra¬
tions, for the economic system of the
nomads could not survive without agricul¬
ture. When the Avars settled down in the
sixth century they turned to agriculture,:
and the toil of Slav farmers (as well as the
blood shed by Slav horsemen recruited into
the mounted hordes) was a decisive factor
in the emergence of the terrible and ruth¬
less force known as the Avar Khaganate.

But such States of nomadic origin were
short-lived. In 622-623, Samo led the Slavs
in a large-scale rebellion against their Avar
masters, and two centuries later, in 803,
the Emperor Charlemagne destroyed the
Khaganate and the Avars ceased to exist as
a political force.
It was, therefore, pre-eminently as farm¬
ers and urbanized craftsmen and traders
that the Slavs first reached the level of eco¬
nomic development attained by the other
European peoples. In eastern Europe,
where they had long been established, and
in central and south-east Europe where
they settled after the great invasions, Slav
tribes took the road to feudalism. Distinc¬
tive Slav nations and governments began
to appear.
As for the nomadic tribes, some "per- ,
¡shed like the Avars" (to quote an ancient
Russian proverb), while others, such as the
Proto-Bulgars, a Turkic people which had
emerged from Asia with the invading
hordes, found their destinies linked with
that of the Slavs. The Proto-Bulgars inter¬
mingled with the sedentary Slav farmers,
while the Hungarian people also absorbed
an element of the Slav farming population,
adopted their practices, and entered Euro¬
pean history as a farming people.
The earliest written sources to give a
general idea of the areas occupied by the
Slavs in the vast expanses of eastern and
central Europe date from the first centuries
A.D. From then untiï the age of the great
migrations there is a virtually uninterrupted
flow of information, the most interesting of
which is found in the works of two sixth-
century historians: the Goth Jordanes and
the Byzantine writer Procopius of
Caesarea.
According to the historians of Antiquity,
central and eastern Europe were divided
into two geographical regions, Germania
and Sarmatia. Some ancient authors, fol¬
lowed by later Byzantine writers, held
that the Slavs were from Sarmatia (or
Scythia), but this was contested by their
better-informed contemporaries.
The Roman historian Tacitus, writing in
the 1st century A.D., made a sharp distinc¬
tion (based partly on economic criteria)
between the Slavs and the inhabitants of
Sarmatia. The Venedi, he wrote (using one
of the early names given to the Slavs) were
rather "to be classed as Germans, for they
build houses, carry shields and travel on
foot at great speed, in all these respects dif¬
fering from the Sarmatians, who spend
their lives in waggons or on horseback".
These differences of opinion are
seemingly due to the fact that the Slavs
occupied a region straddling Germania and
Sarmatia, where western and eastern cul¬
tural influences intermingled. The strong
resemblances between the Slavonic and
Baltic languages suggest that the Slavs
shared this area of forest and forest-
steppe, which stretched southwards
through eastern Europe as far as the nor¬
thern foothills of the Carpathians, with the
Baits (the ancestors of the modern Latvians
and Lithuanians).
The historians of the sixth century locat¬
ed the land of the Slavs with even greater
precision and maintained that it covered a
vast area stretching from the Baltic to the
Carpathians, eastwards to the Dnieper, and
even as far as the lower reaches of the Don
and the Sea of Azov.
Twenty years ago, the discovery of
traces of agricultural activity as well as ob¬
jects dating from between the seventh and
fifth centuries B.C. suggested that the
early Slav settlements were also centres of
craftsmanship. Since then, discoveries by
Ukrainian and Polish archaeologists have
provided a virtually continuous picture of
the development of the material culture of
the Slavs from the dawn of the first millen¬
nium A.D. up to the tenth and eleventh
centuries. The fact that the artefacts pro¬
duced in this vast territory over such a long
period bear a strong mutual affinity, over¬
riding local variations, points to the exis¬
tence of a Slav ethnic community.
Written testimony exists concerning the
unity of the Slavs, but refers to them by
different names. The most detailed
accounts date from the sixth century and
speak of two main groups, the Antae and
the Sclavini, which are described as mili¬
tary and political federations of Slavs
governed by an elite class and under the
overall leadership of a warrior chieftain or
prince.
The Antae, despite certain features
which distinguished them from the Sclavini
(notably their types of pottery and the
nature of their fortified settlements in the
sixth century) were undoubtedly kinsmen
of the latter in all other respects, and
shared the same life-style, appearance and
language.
The irruption of the Goths, the Huns and
the Avars into the territory of the Slavs
broke up their unity. But the invaders failed
to shatter a way of life based on a common
language and customs, economic activities
and marriage ties, and this ensured the sur¬
vival of the Slav community.
Early historians also show that the Slavs
were united by á common mythology. Pro¬
copius tells us, for example, that "both
these barbarian tribes [the Antae and the
Sclavini] lead identical lives and have the
same laws. They recognize one god, the
author of lightning, the only master of the
universe, and they bring him sacrifices of
cattle and perform other devotions in his
honour."
The literary sources do not contain,
unfortunately, sufficient material for a
reconstruction of Slav mythology in all its
details. But a description of the reforms
introduced by Vladimir, Grand Prince. of
Kiev in the tenth century, contains a list of
the old Slav gods. The supreme deity was
Perun, god of thunder and lightning, who
brought life-giving rain to the crops; he had
affinities with another deity, Stribog. Chors
and Dazhd-Bog (bog means "god" in the
Slavonic languages) were the gods of day¬
break and the sun. Volos (or Veles) was the
patron of flocks and herds, livestock-
raising and pastoral activities. Mokosh was
the goddess of fertility, weaving and spin¬
ning. Latin chronicles and archaeological
finds dating from the eleventh and twelfth
centuries indicate the existence of a similar
patheon of pagan gods on the western Bal-
10

tic coastline and among the group of Slavs
known as the Ljutici.
Traces of many ancient beliefs survive in
Slav folklore: vily and beregini, who haun¬
ted, woodlands and hills and above all rivers
and lakes and other watery places; Yarilo, a
god of fertility associated with springtime;
Kupala, apparently related to the sun; and
a host of household and family gods reflec¬
ting the patriarchal organization of the
Slavs.
Conversion to Christianity broke up this
mythological world, although a number of
pagan cults and rituals were incorporated
in the new religious practices, and the
medieval ideology of the Christian Slavs
still contained echoes of the beliefs of their
heathen ancestors.
Common beliefs, a common material cul¬
ture, linguistic continuity and a tradition of
intermarriage all point to the persistence of
a Slav community.
Pagan Pantheon
The Slavs decorated their pagan temples with beautifully carved images
of their many gods and goddesses. These were generally carved in
wood and as a result few of them remain, but some of the rare stone
idols still exist. Left, a typical four-sided, sacred stele (or Svietovit),
dating from the 10th century, which was found in the silt of the bed of
the river Zbruc, in the Ukraine. It is thought to represent "Mother
Earth", the protectress and symbol of fertility. Above, a stone statue
known as the "Idol of Shklov".
The map called Peuthger's Tabula (one
of the oldest maps of Europe) offers the
only indication that the Slavs (the Venedi)
moved south-westwards in the third
century.
Later, between the fifth and the seventh
centuries, they moved in a great wave into
central and south-east Europe, and settled
in the Balkans, the Dinaric, the Karawan¬
ken and Julian Alps, in the Danube basin,
and in the land east of the Elbe. Confronta¬
tion with the Slavs resulted in the transfor¬
mation of the slave-owning Eastern Roman
Empire into the medieval feudal State of
Byzantium.
But' let us now return to the Antae and
the Sclavini. Jordanes and Procopius tell
us that these two peoples played an equally
important role in the Slav migration into
the Danube basin and the Balkans. These
two federations of tribes, closely related by
language and customs, undoubtedly pos¬
sessed a highly developed sense of ethnic
identity. But when, during the concluding
stages of the great migration, the Slavs
settled in south-east Europe, the Greek
name Slaveni (which the Latins translitera¬
ted as Slavi) was extended to include the
whole of the Slav world, while the name
Antae disappeared.
This sudden upsurge of Slav conscious¬
ness, which occurred at the turn of the
sixth and seventh centuries and was reflec¬
ted in the adoption of a single name, was
largely due to the fact that the Slavs, after
centuries of confrontation with the Ger¬
mans, the Finns and all the nomadic tribes
that had come storming out of Asia, now
found themselves face-to-face with the
Eastern Roman Empire, and in doing so
became more keenly aware of their own
identity.
The consolidation of the Slav community
was followed by a complex process in
which the Slavs separated into three bran¬
ches, eastern, southern and western, each
of which evolved according to dif¬
ferent historical, geographical and econo¬
mic circumstances, absorbing in the pro¬
cess the indigenous population of the terri¬
tories it had occupied. At the same time,
Slav nation-states began to be created.
The Slavs were firmly set on the road to
feudalism.
There can be no doubt that the Slavs
who occupied the former Roman provinces
of south-east Europe and the lands which
bordered on Byzantium evolved more
rapidly than their kinsmen who had remain¬
ed closer to the original homeland. It was
here that they created the first central and i
south-east European States, Great Moravia I
11

Detail showing the blind arcading and the faience tiles that embellish the tambour supporting the
single cupola of the late 15th century church of St. George-on-the-hill, at Pskov.
> and the first Bulgarian Kingdom. It was not
until the tenth and early eleventh centuries
that the rest of the Slav world
reached the same level of development.
The greatest medieval Slav State was
Kievan Russia which, like all the early feu¬
dal States, owed all its trappings of royalty
and aristocracy, and its secular and eccle¬
siastical "Establishment", to the back-
breaking labour of the peasantry.
The former forest regions were cleared
and put under the plough, and by the thir¬
teenth century, arable farming may be said
to have predominated everywhere. But
horticulture continued to be important: the
Slavs cultivated beans and peas, lentils,
poppy-seeds and turnips, as well as carrots
and gherkins, while in the words of an old
Russian folk-song"apple and pear-trees
flowered" in their orchards in the spring¬
time. The country people supplemented
their diets by bee-keeping and
fishing, by gathering wild berries, roots
and mushrooms.
The development of arable farming with
the use of draught animals implies that
livestock-raising was also an important
activity. The Slavs indeed bred oxen and
horses to pull their ploughs, as well as large
numbers of cows and pigs. Goats and
sheep were also reared, notably in the pas-
turelands of the Carpathians and the
Balkans.
But it was not "all work and no play" for
the Slav peasants, and their daily life was
enlivened by three cycles of festive
occasions one involving rituals and cere¬
monies related to cultivation, another con¬
nected with the raising of animals, and the
third with the mysteries of marriage and
fertility.
The development of Slav cities as cen¬
tres of craftsmanship and trade dates from
the eighth and ninth centuries, but subjec¬
tion to Byzantium a century later tempora¬
rily slowed down the expansion of South
Slav towns. Urbanization in ihe countries
of the East and West Slavs continued
throughout the tenth and especially the ele¬
venth centuries; their cities were fortified
with ramparts, moats and towers, special
attention being paid to the security of their
gateways.
These fortress-cities were built by the
Slavs themselves,' who became metal¬
workers, blacksmiths, locksmiths, armour¬
ers, potters, glass-makers, stonemasons,
cobblers and shoemakers. The craft of
wood-working was practised by turners,
coopers and wheelwrights. The Slavs also
proved to be accomplished jewellers, while
Russian craftsmanship, especially in the
form of steel blades and chain mail, ena¬
melled golden ware and objects carved out
of bone, was highly valued in the markets
of East and West alike.
The fortunes of all medieval cities de¬
pended essentially on the creation of local
markets capable of absorbing the produc¬
tion of their craftsmen. The foundation
and expansion of the Slav cities in partic¬
ular reflected the acceleration of a trend
which had begun at a considerably earlier
datenamely the separation of crafts¬
manship from agriculture. Cities with large
permanent populations of craftsmen and
traders, and with a transient population of
foreign merchants, rapidly became flouri¬
shing commercial and diplomatic centres.
In the streets of Prague and Wolyn, Kiev
and Novgorod, ambassadors and mission¬
aries rubbed shoulders with merchants
who had come to sell cloth and precious
stones, silverware, jewellery and exotic
spices, or to exchange them for slaves or
prisoners-of-war, furs or locally-produced
goods.
Busy trade routes ran from the Caspian
Sea along the Volga to Novgorod and the
Baltic, "from the Vikings to the Greeks",
and from Kiev to Cracow, Prague to
Regensburg. Arabic, Greek, German, Nor¬
dic as well as Slavonic languages were all
to be heard in the markets, princely pal¬
aces and aristocratic mansions of Kiev,
Novgorod and Smolensk. The picture was
much the same in the cities of the South
Slavs, while in Dalmatia, where the popula¬
tion combined Slav and Latin elements,
merchants from Italy were much in evi¬
dence.
A cultural tradition took root in the great
Slav cities where its basis existed already in
the form of sagas and songs recounting the
exploits of kings and princes, and where
story-tellers entertained the nobility with
byliny, or epic poems. It was in these cen¬
tres that architecture and painting develo¬
ped, and especially literature which,
throughout the early medieval Slav world,
lost no time in putting to use the alphabet
invented in the ninth century by Cyril and
Methodius for the transcription of the Sla-,
vonic language. The texts inscribed on
birch-bark discovered by Soviet archaeolo¬
gists (see page 25), which contain simple
accounts of everyday affairs, offer outstan¬
ding evidence of the cultural level attained
by the society of early Russia,
largely as a result of this leap forward in
Slavonic letters.
Vladimir D. Korolyuk
12
