In spite of major efforts to train personnel, the socialist
countries of Europe today face a manpower shortage. In the
U.S.S.R. alone, only some 40 per cent of the new jobs in
industry were filled in 1975. Left, a Soviet worker dwarfed
by a hydroelectric installation in Siberia.



The manpower situation
in European
socialist countries
THE U.S.S.R. and other European socialist countries have, in
recent years, achieved rapid rates of economic growth. Yet
this does not imply that employment problems, such as
those associated with long-term manpower planning and produc¬
tivity, have been absent.
Although specific policies differ from one socialist country to
another, employment problems are now viewed in all of them as
part of the more general problem of improving productivity and
efficiency.
In the early years of Soviet planning, however, the authorities
had to grapple with a serious problem of urban unemployment and
extremely low productivity in rural areas. The strategy adopted was
to link employment policy to a programme of rapid industrialization
so that the attainment of full employment became a by-product of
the priority accorded to industry.
Careful attention was paid to the choice of technology, particu¬
larly In the early stages when unemployment was a significant
problem. In general, capital-intensive techniques were used in the
new branches of industry, whereas labour-intensive, capital-saving
methods of production were adopted in those industries In which
there was the possibility of choice.
According to official statistics. In all socialist countries, except in
Yugoslavia, open unemployment was virtually eliminated by the
1950s. In subsequent years a combination of a shift of labour out of
agriculture, increasing entry of women Into the paid labour force
and the coming of age of children born during the post-war baby
boom ensured that labour bottlenecks did not arise until recently.
Today, however, with the able-bodied population increasing by less
than one per cent a year, labour scarcity is likely to become an
increasing problem.
Growth in output and productivity has been accompanied by a
high degree of apparent price stability.
Price policies have been complemented by wage and Income
policies. The wage structure in the European socialist countries is
notable for its low differentials. In Bulgaria, for example, the mini¬
mum wage is about two:thirds of the average wage.
In addition, a considerable part of the national income in socialist
countries is distributed in kind to the population in the form of col¬
lective or public consumption. Health and educational services, for
example, are free, as is the use of many cultural, recreational and
sporting facilities.
The trends in growth, productivity, prices and income distribu¬
tion described above have developed during a period of rapid struc¬
tural change. The proportion of the labour force engaged in
industry and construction has risen rapidly and there has been a
steady fall in the proportion of the labour force engaged in agricul¬
ture and forestry while increasing numbers are being absorbed into
the service sector.
Labour shortages are beginning to make themselves felt and
there is little prospect of relief through population growth. More¬
over, the rapid growth of education and training is certain to result
in a fall In the proportion of the able-bodied population engaged in
productive occupations. Nor is there any possibility of increasing
substantially the participation rate of women since they already
constitute a large proportion of the paid labour force. Thus the
need for improvement in labour utilization is becoming more and
more evident.
For the past fifteen years considerable effort has been devoted to
increasing output and productivity in the agricultural sector in the
U.S.S.R. Investment in farming has increased faster than in
industry and its share of the total has almost doubled, from 14 per
cent in 1960 to 27 per cent in 1974. Agricultural incentives have also
been improved.
Parallel to the need for faster progress In agriculture, there is an
increasingly recognized need to shift more resources to the produc¬
tion of manufactured consumer goods.
Thus the socialist economies have reached a stage of develop¬
ment at which there must be simultaneously a shift in the balance
of production and hence in the balance of investment between the
various sectors, and in the rate of technical change with a view to
reducing manpower needs.
It Is in this context that the economic reforms now under way
acquire their significance. Their aim is to increase productivity by
decentralizing decison making and placing greater responsibility
for economic performance at the branch and enterprise level.
Another urgent requirement will be to satisfy the more qualita¬
tive basic needs of the citizens of socialist countries. As In other
industrially advanced societies, the satisfaction of basic material
needs through rising living standards and higher levels of education
leads to demands for an improved quality of life, greater participa¬
tion in decisions affecting management of enterprises and an
improved working environment, including safety, health and job
satisfaction.
This text is based on a longer study which appeared in
Employment and Basic Needs, A One-World Problem, a
report of the Director-General of the International
Labour Office, Geneva, prepared for the Tripartite
World Conference on Employment, Income Distribution
and Social Progress and the International Division of
Labour.
10
