200 years
before Gutenberg The master printers
of Koryo
by Ch'on Hye-bong
CH'ON HYE BONG is professor of history and
bibliography and director of the university
library, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul. He is
the author of numerous articles on ancient
Korean printing techniques.
JOHANNES Gutenberg, a fifteenth-
century German craftsman and
inventor, is widely believed to have
been the first man to produce a font of
movable metal type. This belief is mis¬
taken. This momentous invention had been
anticipated over two centuries before in
Korea, where no less than six distinct fonts
of metal type had been created by the time
the famous Gutenberg Bible was printed.
According to Lee Kyu-bo, an illustrious
man of letters who was also the prime
minister of King Kojong of the Koryo
dynasty, the first book to be printed with
metal type was produced around 1234. In a
book of his own he describes how twenty-
eight copies of a Confucian work entitled
the Sang-jong-ye-mun ("Detailed Text for
Rites of the Past and Present") were pro¬
duced and distributed to various govern¬
ment offices.
This great innovation occurred in a
country where the art of printing already
had a long history. More than seven hun¬
dred years before Gutenberg and five hun¬
dred years before the invention of movable k
metal type, artists under the Silla dynasty f
Two early examples of Korean work in
xylographie (woodblock) printing and the
use of metal type. Above left, the oldest
surviving Buddhist text printed with a °
woodblock, the "Pure Light
Dharani-sutra", dates from the mid-7th
century A.D. It was discovered in a
Korean temple in 1966. Left, two pages
from a Buddhist classic
printed in 1377 with movable metal type.
11

, had achieved great proficiency in wood¬
block printing.
Woodblock printing is an art form which
reached a high level of development in
many parts of east Asia, but the achieve¬
ments of Korea in this field are so remark¬
able as to support the view that the most
brilliant accomplishments are often foster¬
ed within the smaller cultures.
Historians acknowledge that the Chinese
invented xylographie (woodblock) printing
between 712 and 756 during the great age
of T'ang culture. At that time Korea's
ruling Silla dynasty was in very close con¬
tact with China as a result of a military
alliance with the T'ang dynasty which had
led directly to the unification of the Korean
peninsula. Therefore it may be assumed
that knowledge of printing using carved
wooden blocks reached Korea soon after
its invention.
The oldest surviving woodblock print in
the world seems to be the Pure Light
Dharani-sutra, a small Buddhist scroll dis¬
covered in 1966 at the Pulguk-sa Temple in
Kyongju. Scholars have deduced that it
was published under Silla patronage
around 751 A.D.
The oldest surviving Chinese woodblock
scroll is the Diamond-sutra, which was
printed in 868 under the T'ang dynasty by
Wang Chieh for the purpose of praying for
the souls of his dead parents. Comparison
of this scroll with the Korean sutra from
Pulguk-sa reveals that the Korean product,
while displaying similar excellence of work¬
manship, unmistakably shows features of
an earlier age.
The art of printing was further developed
in the early years of the Koryo period (918-
1392). The Precious Box Seal Dharani-
sutra, a scroll published by Ch'ongji-sa
Temple in 1007, is a work of exquisite skill
and is undoubtedly the best of all such
works dating from the early years of the
Koryo dynasty.
But the greatest of the Koryo accom¬
plishments in the art of woodblock prin¬
ting, and perhaps in all the arts, is the
monumental 6,000-chapter Tripitaka
Koreana, based on a Buddhist text impor¬
ted from Sung China in 991. This project
was motivated by the desire to enlist the
aid of the Buddha in an attempt to with¬
stand invasion.
The first set of woodblocks, completed
in 1013, was destroyed two centuries later
when the Mongols invaded Korea in 1232.
The invaders ravaged the entire country
except for the island of Kanghwa off the
west coast, where the king and the court
took refuge. It was here that the
government-in-exile began the mammoth
task of restoring the destroyed Buddhist
books. The work went on for sixteen years
and resulted in over 80,000 woodcut blocks
which are today preserved in the Haein-sa
Temple. A precious source for the study
of Buddhism, the Tripitaka has a strong
claim to be considered Koryo's finest pro¬
duct in the arts.
Whatever the truth of this claim, it is
indisputable that the invention of movable
metal type was Koryo's overwhelming con¬
tribution to science and technology. The
technological capability existed by the early
Photo © Jeon Sang-woon, Seoul
Traditional Korean bronze form tray, set
with Chongyu type cast in 1777. The text
¡s a page of the Kukcho pogam (Precious
mirror of the YI Dynasty).
thirteenth century in the form of suitable
papers and inks and in the availability of
sufficient metalworking knowledge. The
need for books to be produced in a number
of copies was driven home when the royal
palace of Koryo, along with tens of thou¬
sands of books in the royal library, was
twice destroyed by fire, in 1126 and 1170.
At the same time China, a major source of
book supply, was preoccupied with wars
which caused a decline in book output.
Further stimuli included a growing scarcity
of wood suitable for making printing
blocks, an abundance of bronze, and the
prospect of reduced costs from using a
type font on many occasions.
And yet the promoters of movable metal
type were initially to be disappointed, for
their innovation did not win general accep¬
tance. To the Koreans a book was both a
store of knowledge and a work of art, and
the unsurpassable beauty and fineness of
detail achieved with wood was to relegate
this new technique to the status of a minor
oddity for the next one hundred and
seventy years.
It was not until 1403 that T'aejong, the
second king of the Yi dynasty, revived the
neglected technique when he initiated the
casting of bronze type for the printing of
Confucian classics and historical literature
with the aim of helping government offi¬
cials to rule wisely. His type font was re¬
vised by his son, King Sejong, the most be¬
loved of all Korean rulers, and there ensued
a series of technological improvements
which by the end of the fifteenth century
resulted in the printing of books as beauti¬
ful as any produced with wood.
Ch'on Hye-bong
The library at the monastery of Haein-sa houses the famous set of
woodblocks inscribed in the 13th century with the Tripitaka Koreana. The
Tripitaka ("The Three Baskets") is the most complete collection of early
Buddhist sacred literature. The Tripitaka blocks at Haein-sa (see also colour
photo page 8) are the oldest and best-preserved of any complete Buddhist
scriptures in the world.
12
