The brain drain
a hidden
subsidy
from poor
to rich
TßßTfHE developing countries have,
over the past fifteen years,
witnessed a significant loss of
their human capital through the process of
'reverse transfer of technology' or 'brain
drain'. For the receiving countries, on the
other hand, such an inflow has helped to
increase the highly qualified manpower at
their disposal with. corresponding savings
in education costs.
"For example, a report prepared for the
United States House of Representatives
Committee on Foreign Affairs estimates
the total educational cost savings to the
United States of immigrant scientists, engi¬
neers and doctors from the developing
countries at around $1.8 billion for the two
fiscal years 1971 and 1972, an average of
little less than $1 billion per year."
These observations, which highlight a
situation which is having dramatic con¬
sequences for the developing world, are
taken from a new study prepared by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD) (1).
(1) The Reverse Transfer of Technology: An In-Depth
Analysis of Major Issues and Suggestions for a Frame¬
work of Approach.
The United Nations has been concerned
with this disturbing problem for some
years. In 1975 the General Assembly adop¬
ted a resolution which underscored "the
urgent need to formulate national and
international policies to avoid the 'brain
drain' and to obviate its adverse effects",
and last December, at its 32nd session,
called for an in-depth study of the subject.
It was requested that particular attention
be devoted to a proposal concerning the
establishment of an international labour
compensatory facility to idemnify labour-
exporting countries for their loss of highly-
trained personnel.
The UNCTAD study was prepared in res¬
ponse to the General Assembly resolution.
Based on work by UNCTAD including case
studies on India, Pakistan, the Philippines
and Sri Lanka, it also draws on the work of
other international organizations such as
Unesco.
It throws into relief the main features of
the brain drain, investigates its causes and
suggests ways in which developing and
industrialized countries alike could develop
an equitable system of exchange between
those who lose and those who gain from
the brain drain.
According to the study, an estimated
305,000 highly skilled persons migrated
from developing countries to the United
States, Canada and the United Kingdom
alone between 1961 and 1976. Nearly
61,000 were physicians and surgeons, over
100,000 were engineers and scientists, and
123,000 were technical staff. In addition,
some 115,000 more skilled migrants are
reckoned to have moved to other countries
of western Europe.
The study also shows that in 1971-1972
half the new doctors in the United States
and 40 per cent of those in the U.K. came
from the developing countries. The burden
of these losses was all the heavier for the
developing countries since the migrant
doctors, engineers and scientists tend to
leave these countries during the most pro¬
ductive period of their lives.
The case studies on India, Pakistan, the
Philippines and Sri Lanka underline the
sombre implications of skilled migration for
the developing countries. In the 1970s bet¬
ween 50 and 70 per cent of Pakistan's
newly-trained doctors were believed to be
emigrating each year, while in the mid-
1960s it was reckoned that some 25 per
cent of India's newly-trained engineers and
16

Photo © Draeger, Pans. Private Collection
some 30 per cent of its new doctors were
leaving the country. In the Philippines in
the mid-1970s, one newly-trained doctor in
every five was leaving the country to find
work elsewhere.
Between 1971 and 1975 some 35 per cent
of Sri Lanka's accountants left to work
abroad, along with 20 per cent of its doc¬
tors and 18 per cent of its engineers.
Although Asia has been the major catch¬
ment area for skilled migration, the lower
figures for other developing regions still
reflect a grim reality. For a developing
country, the loss of only a handful of skilled
personnel may be critical, either because
they represent a big proportion of the
country's limited resources of skilled man¬
power or because they are concentrated in
areas of key importance to the economy.
A survey of the causes of migration sug¬
gests that a number of factors are involved,
including international income differences,
employment opportunities, living and wor¬
king conditions and the social environ¬
ment. Analysis of these causes does not,
however, "suggest any strong implication
of responsibility on the side of either the
developing or the developed countries;
rather the brain drain seems to be sympto¬
matic of the overall situation of unequal
development of the international
economy".
The UNCTAD study draws attention to
the "need for concerted action at the natio¬
nal, regional and international levels in
order to assist the developing countries to
find solutions to the brain drain problem."
Within this broad framework several alter¬
native proposals have been advanced in
recent years.
It is clear that the main brunt of the battle
to stem the flow of skilled emigrants must
be borne by the developing countries them¬
selves. Three kinds of policies are currently
envisaged:
incentive policies to encourage professio¬
nals to stay in their home country or to
return from abroad;
"restrictive policies" to discourage pro¬
fessionals from leaving their country or to
oblige them to return after a specific period
abroad;
policies aiming to minimize the need or
desire of professionals to go abroad.
Action by the developed countries could
help make these policies more effective.
Décalcomanie, a work
by the Belgian
surrealist painter
René Magritte (1898-1967).
Traditionally, the most common measure in
these countries has been to limit immigra¬
tion of skilled workers from the developing
world through the application of selective
immigration quotas. However, since such
restrictions on immigration pose questions
concerning discrimination and the right of
individuals to free movement, the recom¬
mendation of bilateral or multilateral agree¬
ments may prove especially useful.
CONTINUED PAGE 32
17

THE BRAIN DRAIN continued from page 17
In addition, developed countries could
assist the developing countries to absorb
their skilled manpower better by setting up
and supporting funds that encourage
Research and Development activities in
developing countries. Another possibility is
to use personnel or consultants from deve¬
loping countries to carry out programmes
or projects in these countries which would
be funded by the industrialized nations.
The problem of compensation is particu¬
larly complex because of the difficulty of
clearly establishing the cause and effects of
migration, and of assessing its scope in
statistical terms.
One major obstacle is the lack of com¬
prehensive and standardized statistics.
Definitions and categories used for clas¬
sifying immigrants to developed countries
have not yet become standardized, and
even when they are available, the data take
no account of emigration back to the deve¬
loping countries which, according to one
UNCTAD study, may represent 25 per cent
in some cases.
IINALLY, inconsistencies
may arise from the general practice of
recording immigrant data on the basis of
last permanent residence as distinct from
nationality. This is important since, to take
one example, as many as 80 per cent and
50 per cent of Pakistani scientists and engi¬
neers entering the U.S. as immigrants in
1966 and 1973 respectively appeared to
have resided outside their country of birth.
In such cases, therefore, the use of the
"last permanent residence" concept would
tend to underestimate the figures of immi¬
grants from developing countries into
industrialized countries. The United King¬
dom has, for instance, often been regarded
as a stopping-off point for migrants from
developing countries whose ultimate desti¬
nation is the United States or Canada, and
these migrants may constitute a significant
proportion of both the inflow and the out¬
flow from the U.K.
A number of proposals have been made
regarding compensation:
Contributions by host developed coun¬
tries, related in some way to the imputed
value of skilled migration from developing
countries. These might take the form of
direct assessment or tax-sharing arrange¬
ments under an agreed formula, supple¬
mented by the possibility of permitting
migrants from developing countries to
make voluntary tax-deductible contribu¬
tions to charitable organizations in develo¬
ping countries and of earmarking, again on
a voluntary basis, up to 10 per cent of their
income tax payments in developed coun¬
tries for development purposes;
A moderate supplementary tax levied on
the income earned in developed countries
by skilled migrants from developing coun¬
tries (at a rate, say, of 5 per cent for a
period of no more than ten years);
The creation of specially chartered orga¬
nizations created in conformity with a
model to be prepared and continually re¬
vised in accordance with internationally
agreed procedures. These organizations
could receive and spend funds raised
through the foregoing measures;
The possible extension of the Internatio¬
nal Monetary Fund compensatory finan¬
cing facility to take account of "adjustment
problems" associated with fluctuations in
migrants' earnings.
In recent years there has been a decline
in the numbers of skilled immigrants from
developing countries to the industrialized
world, but although it is difficult to forecast
the likely size of the brain drain in the next
decade, it can be plausibly argued that this
decline has been related to a number of
factors which are mainly cyclical and tem¬
porary in nature. Future trends in such
migration would, consequently, depend in
part at least on the rate of recovery in the
developed countries.
They may also partly be determined by
the extent to which the economies of the
developed countries have become structu¬
rally dependent on certain types of impor¬
ted skills. As the Report prepared for the
House of Representatives Committee on
Foreign Affairs observed: "Future projec¬
tions of American requirements... suggest
that shortage rather than surplus of techni¬
cal manpower may characterize this cen¬
tury from the late 1970s or early 1980s on.
To satisfy these needs, the advanced coun¬
tries may complement their own indige¬
nous stock with emigrants from developing
countries."
According to one estimate a 4 per cent
annual growth rate in 1978-1980 and a 3.5
per cent rate in 1980-1990 in the Federal
Republic of Germany might necessitate an
additional inflow of foreign labour (both
skilled and unskilled) of the order of two
million by 1990 in that country. In the Uni¬
ted Kingdom, the maintenance and deve¬
lopment of the National Health Service
depends on an inflow of foreign doctors
ranging between 2,500 and 3,000 a year.
"The current system under which skilled
manpower migrates from country to
country is largely a legacy of the past",
concludes the UNCTAD study, "and fails
to distribute equitably to the developing
countries the value of their contribution, in
the form of skilled manpower, to the deve¬
loped economies. The various proposals
outlined above, which aim at correcting
some of the asymmetries in the internatio¬
nal market for labour, are neither novel nor
would they involve any change in existing
international practices; rather they may be
regarded as a step towards broadening the
application of existing international rules to
take into account the concerns of the deve¬
loping countries as suppliers of skilled man¬
power."
The material on which this article is
based represents UNCTAD's
contribution to the in-depth study
of the brain drain problem called
for by the General Assembly of the
United Nations In December 1977.
32
