Symbolic photo of a child jumping in the air as a plane roars by
overhead won second prize (amateur category) in the international
photo competition organized in 1974 by Photokina of Cologne,
Germany (Fed. Rep.). The theme of the competition, "A World for
AH", was chosen by the United Nations for World Population Year.
THERE is nothing like noise to make a
noise. While most people don't care
a decibel about aircraft nuisances as
long as they are not bothered themselves,
the roar of planes at many airports is real
enough for those living close by. Distant
echoes are also heard by airline executives
and international aviation bodies concern¬
ed with safe and efficient air transport.
Consider these facts :
Not long ago, stores, office buildings,
schools and homes around Los Angeles
International Airport occupied what is now
a large swathe of open space laid bare as if
by a giant lawn mower. These 2,800 build¬
ings have been destroyed in the most dras¬
tic step yet taken in the United States to ^
deal with the thunder and whine of jets, f



Down
with decibels!
by Eugene Sochor
EUGENE SOCHOR, head of the Office of
Public Information at the International CivilAvia¬
tion Organization (ICAO) in Montreal, was for 12
years a staff member of Unesco's press division.

Since it was impossible to move the air¬
port, city officials decided after more
than $4 billion in damage suits over aircraft
noise to move the people instead at a
cost of $300 million.
A survey of U.S. airports conducted
recently by the Airport Operators Council
International found $245 million in pending
noise-related lawsuits filed against airport
authorities in the U.S. In addition, over the
past five years, airports have spent some
$200 million in land acquisition program¬
mes because of noise.
In some schools, jets disrupt teaching.
One junior high school near Los Angeles
Airport had to be closed because of cons¬
tant interruption. The Airport agreed to
pay $21 million to five local school districts
for sound proofing.
Usual complaints of residents near air¬
ports are interrupted sleep, bad television
reception and houses that shudder every
few minutes. A survey indicates that peo¬
ple living close to airports suffer a higher
incidence of nervous breakdowns than
people living further away.
In response to public outcry, many air¬
ports have had to cut operations at night as
part of a growing pattern of resistance to
aircraft noise. Wellington Airport in New
Zealand is a good example. It is closed to
traffic from 11 P.M. to 6 A.M. except for
emergencies, delayed international flights
and meteorologicaí conditions.
A list of major cities with some sort of
night curfews includes: West Berlin, Bre¬
men, Cologne, Dusseldorf, Frankfurt,
Geneva, Hamburg, Hong Kong, London,
Manchester, Malmo, Montreal (Dorval),
Munich, Nice, Oslo, Paris (Orly), Sydney,
Stockholm, Tokyo, Toronto and Zurich.
Internationally, the growth of local shut¬
downs has caused air carriers to alter flight
plans and schedules, with resulting traffic
peaks and strain on air traffic control, and
on airport and customs facilities immedia¬
tely before or after curfews. Some interna¬
tional airports must handle as many as 500
flights and 70,000 or more travellers a day.
The chain reaction is also felt on stop¬
overs. Bombay International Airport, for
instance, is completely saturated with traf¬
fic at night and deserted during the day.
The reason is Bombay's strategic location
between Europe and Tokyo. Most interna¬
tional flights arrive at night since they take
off comparatively early to avoid the cur¬
fews on departure in Europe and at their
destination points. It has been pointed out
that if a night curfew were imposed at
John F. Kennedy International Airport in
New York and the summer night curfew at
London Airport were made year round, jets
would have only 3 hours a day to cross the
Atlantic.
The noise issue has also affected the
development of new airports. As an execu¬
tive of the Airport Operators Council Inter¬
national noted recently : "No new major
airport has been started in the U.S. since
1970/ Even relatively minor projects like
runway extensions are being delayed, often
for years, as citizens fight to ward off more
noise".
ICAO experts who have been working on
the problem of airport curfews in relation to
traffic peaks think that the most that may
be expected is some easing of the situation
through prudent, well considered and wor¬
kable measures. These measures should
be applied both nationally and internatio¬
nally and will require a co-ordinated inter¬
national approach.
Action taken at airports in one country
may affect operations half-way round the
world. A variety of differing and inconsis¬
tent restrictions applied at random at dif¬
ferent airports in the network may prove
disruptive to airlines and their passengers,
to air traffic control, and to airport opera¬
tions generally.
Responding to public concern, the last
ICAO Assembly clearly recognized its res¬
ponsibility and that of member govern¬
ments to achieve maximum compatibility
between the safe and orderly development
of civil aviation and the quality of the
human environment.
It noted that with most jets now in ser¬
vice exceeding the noise limits set by ICAO
for new aircraft, the noise problem in cer¬
tain areas, including many busy internatio¬
nal airports, had led to curfews and genera¬
ted strong opposition to the expansion of
existing airports or the construction of new
ones. The Assembly called on all states to
recognize the role of ICAO in "aggressively
pursuing a comprehensive programme" to
reduce aircraft noise at its source and to
develop effective noise abatement
strategies.
The whole question of aviation and envi¬
ronment is in fact one of ICAO's major con-



Reckoning with noise
102 decibels
98 decibels
107 decibels
102 decibels
91 decibels
86 decibels
long-haul jet, recent model,
on landing (1.500 m. from
runway end)
medium-haul jet, recent
model, on take-off, 1,500 m.
after leaving taxiway
car horn heard at 7.5 m.
express train travelling at 140
km./hr. heard at 25 m.
bus heard at 7.5 m.
motorcycle heard at 7.5 m.
10

cerns. It is resulting in ever-tightening
noise limitations on aircraft, which, accor¬
ding to the ICAO Constitution,' are binding
on all contracting states. These standards
(which are part of Annex 16 of the Chicago
Convention on International Civil Aviation)
aim at reducing the noise at source through
certification of the aircraft, starting with
future subsonic jets through production of
current jets, propeller-driven planes, super¬
sonic transport planes and STOL (short
take-off and landing) aeroplanes.
. ICAO is also studying noise reduction
requirements for existing first generation
subsonic jets which do not meet the Annex
16 requirements. It must, however, be
recognized that the cost of "hushing" or
"retrofitting" such jets the noisiest in the
world's aircraft fleetwould be exorbitant
for most airlines.
Airline executives also question the use¬
fulness of modifying engines with sound
absorbing material when in fact these older
jets are due to be replaced by the newer
wide-body jets which do meet ICAO noise
standards. Also, the cost of "retrofitting"
the older planes would be passed on inevi¬
tably to the travelling public.
Airlines have readily co-operated in
working out procedures and route patterns
which generate the minimum noise distur¬
bance and meet the needs of a particular
airport. Some approach and landing pro¬
cedures to ease the noise over residential
areas are being steadfastly opposed by
pilot organizations as being too dangerous,
instead, the International Federation of Air
Line Pilots' Associations (IFALPA) has
always maintained that aircraft noise abate¬
ment should be achieved by control of
noise at its source, rather than by
modifying aircraft operating procedures
which may impinge on safety of opera¬
tions.
The ICAO Assembly is also concerned
with another aspect of the situation: better
airport planning and zoning. Land in many
countries has become a rare commodity
keenly disputed by people and planes. A
dramatic case in point is what a newspaper
called: "The carrot patch standing in the
way of Tokyo's shiny new airport". This
massive airport at Narita was built to ease
congestion at Haneda airport. Its opening
has been postponed 12 times since 1972 by
the violent opposition of squatters, inclu¬
ding a farmer who refused to move his car¬
rot patch from under the shadow of the
control tower.
Quite a different story is the new Naga¬
saki Airport on Kyushu Island, the first
"floating" airport in the world. It resembles
a huge aircraft carrier. Japanese officials
are so enthusiastic about this novel
approach that they are also planning to
locate the new Osaka Airport off the main¬
land in the bay of Osaka. Few countries,-
however, can be as fortunate in selecting a
site and financing its airports as the
sparsely-settled and oil-rich United Arab
Emirates, which boast four international
airports within short distances of one an¬
other. Even so, a new airport is under con¬
struction in Abu Dhabi.
Land requirements for older airports took
into account only the needs of the airline
operators to move people the fastest,
safest and most economical way. Few
people lived around the airports anyway.
People came to watch the new jets take off
in a roar of excitement. But as traffic
increased and housing developments
moved closer to the airports, the novelty
wore off and the problems piled up.
The land required for airport develop¬
ment has increased dramatically as a result
of increased numbers of flights and pas¬
sengers, volume of cargo and operating
requirements of aircraft. Whereas 1,600
hectares may have been adequate 20 years
ago for a major international airport, some
airports being constructed now require
areas as large as 6,000 hectares merely to
satisfy direct operational needs. Mirabel
Airport servicing Montreal occupies the lar¬
gest such area in the world7,000 hec¬
tares in its final phase and a protective
cocoon of 27,700 hectares. The price for
such seclusion is distance in this case 55
km. from the city.
The fartner away the airport from the city
centre, as common sense would dictate,
the louder the outcry of travellers who
stand to lose the time gained in air travel.
Hence the need for fast and improved city
to airport transportation, if necessary by
rail or even helicopter.
The^location, size and configuration of
the airport must be co-ordinated with the
patterns of residential development and
other major land uses in the area. An ICAO
Airport Master Planning Manual states that
in long-range planning of airports, inclu¬
ding the expansion of existing airports,
planners should assess the impact on the
airport's surrounding community. This
necessarily involves a close relationship
with the authorities that control the land
around the airport.
Like so many of man's other machines,
the aircraft is both a blessing and a curse.
Its nuisances cannot be wished away.
Perhaps the patient outlook of the writer
and flyer Antoine de Saint-Exupéry is to the
point. If, as he wrote, we feel that the
machine is destroying man, it is that we
lack the hindsight to assess all the sudden
changes which it has brought about.
Eugene Sochor
Photo © Jean J. Moreau, Paris
This presentation of the noise levels caused by various means of
transport was prepared on the basis of a diagram published by
the ICAO Bulletin, the technical monthly of the International Civil
Aviation Organization, In February 1975. Above, giant silencers
at Charles de Gaulle airport, Paris. The enormous tubes are
designed to muffle the noise of jets being tested after overhaul.
11
