The colourful world
of Third Theatre"
Performers from five continents
test new forms of communication
at a unique theatre 'laboratory'
by Ferdinando Taviani
CONTINUED PAGE 32
8

FOR several days and nights at the end
of last summer, the old town of
Bergamo in northern Italy was
caught up in a swirl of fantastic and col¬
ourful events which left its inhabitants
agog.
A wave of exotic intruders invaded the
streets, turning the daily routine of work
and leisure topsy-turvy and driving away
the cares and anxieties of the towns¬
people. Fantastic birdlike creatures on
stilts strutted through town flapping their
FERDINANDO TAVIANI, professor of his¬
tory of theatre and the performing arts at the
university of Lecce (Italy), has published a
number of studies on the Commedià dell'Arte
and modern theatre. He is also the author of
II Libro dell'Odin (Feltrinel/i, Milan, 1975) and
Lo Straniero che Danza (Studio Forma, Turin,
1977), which, present the work of Denmark's
Odin Theatre, whose founder Eugenio Barba
is a leading figure in the "Third Theatre"
movement described in this article.
Versatile performers from many countries recently met in the beautiful
Italian town of Bergamo to take part in an international workshop on group
theatre. In a carnival atmosphere, actors, musicians, dancers, acrobats and
circus people from a diversity of cultural backgrounds worked together on
equal terms and shared their experience. Left, "albatross" with diaphanous
wings dance on stilts during a performance by Bergamo's Pocket Theatre.
Above, performer from Denmark's Odin Teatret troupe.

One of the highlights of the
Bergamo workshop was an
onstage encounter between
distinguished exponents of
two forms of traditional
Eastern drama: the Japanese
IMoh theatre, in which the
actors are also singers and
dancers, and Kathakali, an
ancient form of danced
drama from southern India.
Photo below shows Noh
actor Hideo Kanze (at left) in
the midst of this unique
improvisation session with
Kathakali master Krishnan
Nambudiri. Right, masked
actor on stilts during a
performance by the Piccolo
Teatro of Pontedera (Italy).
, wings. Clowns, harlequins, buskers and
dancers mingled with the crowds, and
figures in outlandish masks and costumes
plied the streets. Actors, singers and
circus people had descended on Bergamo
from the four corners of the earth.
The unusual happenings in Bergamo
were part of an "International workshop
on group theatre", presented by the Inter¬
national Theatre Institute, under Unesco's
auspices and with Unesco's aid. The work¬
shop was a response to a crisis in the
theatre, which periodically gets stuck in
the rut of traditionah'sm and repetition,
and like any other art form which loses its
vitality, has to break out of the deadlock.
One of the boldest recent innovations in
Western theatre was the appearance in the
early 1960s of what (by analogy with the
Third World) has been dubbed "Third
Theatre". Outside the mainstream of tra¬
ditional theatre, it also stands apart from
avant-garde or experimental theatre, which
seeks to transcend tradition in the search
for new forms of expression.
In the last 15 years Third Theatre groups
have mushroomed all over the world in
Europe, North and South America, Aus¬
tralia and Japan. Few of the artists involv¬
ed have had traditional theatre training,
but they are not amateurs. They do not
consider a stage performance, however
original and polished it may be, as the
ultimate goal of their work. To them the¬
atre means involvement in the world and a
way of changing human relationships: it is
part of the living fabric of society.
10

They reject the age-old split between
actors and audience and look on the the¬
atre as a creative workshop, a laboratory
of human life. Instead of being merely a
formal means of expression, it is a way of
life and a means of communication.
In Third Theatre, the dividing walls that
used to separate the different arts of the
entertainment world have come tumbling
down. The idea of the performer as a
specialist is dead. Actors must also be
dancers, singers, jugglers and acrobats.
They discard the dull clothing and stereo¬
typed gestures of modern life, dress up in
Drama of
masks and
make-up
At Bergamo masters of O
traditional Eastern theatre
demonstrated their techniques
of make-up and masks, age-old
ways of helping spectators to
identify stock characters.
Krishnan Nambudiri created a
traditional character in
Kathakali theatre (1 and 3).
Rice-paste, overlaid with
painted designs, is the basic
ingredient in Kathakali make¬
up, which takes several hours
to apply. (4) A performer from
Greenland made up as a
sorceress. (2) Harlequin mask
from Commedià dell'Arte, a
form of improvised drama that
originated in 16th-century Italy.
11

, shimmering materials, don masks, and
parade around on stilts. Instead of merely
acting a role, they express the creative
potential which all human beings possess
but rarely have a chance to display.
The expression "Third Theatre" was
coined by Eugenio Barba, the founder of
Denmark's Odin Teatret. It today describes
the activities of hundreds of groups, most
of which are unknown on the established
theatre circuit of the world's cultural
capitals.
In 1976, Eugenio Barba was asked by
Unesco and the International Theatre Ins¬
titute to organize an International work¬
shop of theatrical research on the theme
of Third Theatre. The workshop was held
in Belgrade that autumn, during the world
season of the Theatre of the Nations. (1)
"What interests me," says Barba, "is
that the theatre can form and sustain new
pueblos. I use the Spanish word inten¬
tionally, because some theatre groups to¬
day do resemble pueblos, or villages, in
both senses of the termon the one hand
as places where people live and have their
home, and on the other as communities
of persons with a common past".
Urban theatre, whether "institutionaliz¬
ed" or experimental, does not put down
roots in local soil. Its existence is based
on words, on paper, and on the opinions
of the critics. It needs an audience, and
an audience (however boisterously it ex-
At a working session in
Bergamo, participants
observe the movements of a
member of Japan's Buto Sho
group who was leading them
in rigorous training inspired
by Japanese martial arts.
One of the most popular
"happenings" at Bergamo
was a carnival improvised by
the 15-member Catalan Els
Comediants group. Below,
the crowds join in as a giant
masquerader leads the dance
in a Bergamo street.
presses its approval or disapproval) is
essentially passive. In the words of the
Brazilian Augusto Boal, one of the pro¬
phets of the new theatre in the Americas,
a spectator is "always somehow less than
a human being".
The world's major theatre companies
aim to attract the attention of an élite of
media people, critics, and in some cases
the general public. But their work does
not bite deep into life. Third Theatre, on
the other hand, creates a village atmos¬
phere, and Third Theatre groups them¬
selves constitute a kind of village, even
though they do not always originate in
rural communities. Third Theatre is a
place where human relationships are in¬
vestigated and human bonds are created.
Its function is ethical rather than aesthetic
and its purpose is to rescue people from
loneliness.
These guiding principles inspired the
work of the 30 groups which took part in
last summer's Bergamo worshop, which
ended with a mammoth series of non-stop
performances, transforming the town into
(DThe Theatre of the Nations was founded by the
International Theatre Institute in 1955. For 15 years,
many ot the world's most famous companies took
part in its season in Paris. Since 1975, it has moved
about, first to Warsaw (1975), and then to Belgrade
(1976), Paris (1977) and Caracas (1978).
12

a theatre. They came from many parts of
the world: the United Kingdom, Argentina,
France, Greenland, Japan, Italy, Peru,
Switzerland, Spain, Belgium, Poland,
Uruguay, the United States, Colombia,
Australia, Iceland, Denmark and Sweden.
None of them was so famous that it
arrived in Bergarno to a fanfare of recogni¬
tion. Some were even unknown in their
own countries. Others came surrounded
by a vague aura of scandal created by
conventionally-minded and blinkered critics
who saw only elements of fantasy and
absurdity in their work.
Some great masters of Eastern and
Western theatre took part in the workshop,
including Jerzy Grotowski of Poland;
Hideo Kanze, one of the greatest inter¬
preters of Japanese Noh theatre; Krishnan
Nambudiri, an actor in India's Kathakali
theatre; and I Made Bandem an his family,
who are continuing the tradition of Bali-
nese dancing and comic theatre.
The working sessions began each morn¬
ing at seven and sometimes went on until
late at night. Time was set aside for semi
nars, whose participants, in addition to the
performers listed above, included the KSEK
theatre group from Japan, the Roy Hart
theatre, the International Visual Theatre (a
group of deaf and dumb performers) and
the Cardiff Laboratory from the U.K.
For most of the day and in the evenings,
the public could join in the workshop acti¬
vities. These sessions attracted growing
audiences of up to 1,000, consisting of
young people from France, Switzerland
and elsewhere in Italy, as well as the
townsfolk of Bergamo.
The spectators did not see a "show"
in the usual sense of the term, but the
patient and dedicated process of theatrical
creation. One set of activities neatly
dovetailed into the next. A set piece would
lead to a spell of improvisation which
sometimes reached the point where per¬
formers broke the bounds of their own
skill and knowledge.
On 1 September; actors from the East
demonstrated their techniques of using
masks and make-up. Then Hideo Kanze
came on stage, having discarded his Noh
Two cultures with a single likeness:
there is a striking resemblance
between the Noh mask worn by the
Japanese actor Hideo Kanze (below)
and the expression of the drummer
from Greenland's Tukak group (lower
photo).
Photos © Maurizio Buscarino, Bergamo, Italy
13

mask for a Commedià dell'Arte mask
designed by Italian sculptor Donato Sar¬
tori. Kanze and Krishnan Nambudiri then
began an improvisation session with a
"sorceress" from Greenland and a Bali-
nese clown.
Other masked performers joined in: a
group of zannl (buffoons) from the Corn-
media dell'Arte; masqueraders from the
Catalan Els Comediants group; and pa-
pier-mâché puppets from the Piccolo Tea¬
tro of Pontedera, a little town in Tuscany.
An actress from Pontedera wore a grotes¬
que mask fashioned from an olive-tree
root, while another actress from the Pot-
lach theatre of Fara Sabina, a tiny village
near Rome, wore a mask that might have
been inspired by Goya's bestiary.
Improvisations and confrontations of this
kind reveal the principles on which Third
Theatre is based. The essential process
is not to teach, borrow or copy acting
techniques, but the patient development
of authentic group cultures.
At Bergamo, these groups formed a
unique cultural kaleidoscope. Virtuoso ac¬
tors from the Far East, the heirs of centu¬
ries-old traditions, who had trained for up
to ten hours a day since the age of eight
or nine, were perfectly at home working
with young Western actors who in some
cases had only made their stage débuts a
few months before and had no roots in
ancient cultural traditions.
A sense of affinity emerged from the
contact between those whose culture was
deeply rooted in the past, although in
some cases it might be stifled and embalm¬
ed within the supranational culture of the
modern world, and small "self-made"
group cultures which had sprung up from
nowhere.
Eugenio Barba, who directed the mask
performance from the wings, has had a
varied career. After attending secondary
school in Italy he went to Scandinavia,
working as a sailor on a Norwegian ship
for two years. He then entered Oslo Uni¬
versity, where among other subjects he
studied the history of religions. In 1960
he was awarded a Unesco scholarship and
went to Poland, where he spent four years,
working first at the Warsaw Conservatory
of Dramatic Art and then for three years
with Jerzy Grotowski at Opole.
Although in some respects he has parted
company from Grotowski, Barba remains a
self-confessed disciple of the Polish
master. When he returned to Norway, he
struck out on his own, and in 1964 found¬
ed the Odin Teatret, which two years later
made its home in Denmark.
Barba's knowledge of the history of reli¬
gions has influenced the development of
his ideas on ritual as a technique of dra
matic expression. "What some people call
'ritual' in our theatre is what I would
prefer to call a pattern of behaviour,"
he has said. "At moments of great
emotion extreme joy, fear and enthu¬
siasm react quite differently from the
way we do in everyday life. In our the¬
atre we try to bring out these behaviour
patterns and funnel them into disciplined
expression.
"Through our work we try to get
through to our living, original feelings,
which society has turned into conditioned
reflexes, and through discipline, to trans¬
late them into signs and situations. If
what we create sometimes smacks of
religious ritual, then it can't be helped.
"Perhaps what we regard as the natural
behaviour of the man in the street isn't as
natural as we think.. When the average
man is in the grip of real and violent
emotions, and his gestures instinctively
become strange or ritualistic, he may be
closer to nature than when he is relaxed
and puts his feet up on the table".
In September 1976, during the Theatre
of the Nations season, Barba directed
the Belgrade workshop on current trends
in the theatre, including Third Theatre, held
under the auspices of Unesco and the
International Theatre Institute. It was a
great success, but unlike the Bergamo
workshop in the following year it was only
attended by a limited public of theatre
people, journalists, writers and artists.
One of the most popular events at
Bergamo was a performance given by the
Els Comediants in a popular quarter of the
town. This was the first time that the
group had performed outside the Iberian
peninsula, and it attracted an audience
numbering between 3,000 and 5,000. The
15 members of the troupe paraded through
the streets, mingling with the crowds and
inviting bystanders to dance, enjoy them¬
selves, and let off steam.
14

The next night, 15 performances were
given by clowns in "lower" Bergamo, the
modern part of the town. (Upper Bergamo
is the medieval town and the centre of
community life.) According to stories
that have grown up around the Commedià
dell'Arte masks, Brighella, the wise and
cautious valet, is said to have come from
the upper town of Bergamo, while Harle¬
quin, the foolish valet, came from the
lower town.
On the following day, 3 September, all
the groups descended on the lower town
from upper Bergamo by four different
routes. A medley of masked figures, fire-
eaters, jugglers, metal robots and white-
faced melancholy maidens wearing bowler
hats and brandishing umbrellas, burst into
the astonished crowds of shoppers.
That evening the Bergamo Pocket
Theatre presented an "Albatross" show
featuring great birdlike figures strutting
along on stilts with flapping wings. Six
masked and hunch-backed entertainers of
the "Theatre of Adventure" from Treviglio,
a small town near Milan, declaimed non¬
stop, filled the nearby streets with the
sounds of their accordions and perform¬
ed riotous antics for all and sundry.
At Bergamo, flights of fancy went hand
in hand with a solid sense of organiza¬
tion. The Italian groups Bergamo's
Pocket Theatre, the Piccolo Theatre from
Pontedera, Pisa's "theatre-laboratory", the
Potlach Theatre from Fara Sabina, Tre-
viglio's Adventure Theatre, Genoa's Drum
Theatre and the Arcoiris Theatre from
Rome are all small companies of up to a
dozen actors working in little towns or on
the outskirts of big cities. They all manag¬
ed to solve the organization problème
caused by the invasion of the town.
Though the streets of Bergamo sound¬
ed like the Tower of Babel, the language
barrier was forgotten in the creative
ferment of Third Theatre.
There is a world of difference, as Euge¬
nio Barba has remarked, "between a thea¬
tre which produces culture and a theatre
which is culture". The Bergamo Work¬
shop demonstrated that promoting culture
does not only mean working with cultural
"products" but also creating the condi¬
tions in which new cultures, new cells of
community life, can confront one another
and develop.
We theatre critics often spend our time
looking for new gems to distribute on the
market places of culture. We find it hard
to accept that events like the Bergamo
Workshop are also encounters between
those who are prospecting for precious
stones. It is true that many of them have
embarked on a vain and fruitless search
and will return home at the end of the day
with nothing but the memory of their
own anxieties. But we should never for¬
get that some of them may strike gold.
Ferdinando Taviani
Spectators rolled up in their hundreds to see the clowns, who delighted the
townspeople with simultaneous six-hour shows on two squares in different
parts of town. Left, clowns from Denmark's Odin Teatret. Above right,
balancing act by clowns from the Cardiff Laboratory (U. K.) amuses
passersby on a street corner. Above left, music and movement from
Sweden's Schahrazad troupe.
Photos © Maurizio Buscarino, Bergamo, Italy
15
