Destination
development
by Luis Cabrai
LUIS CABRAL is an Indian economist working
with the TechnicalAssistance Bureau of ICAO in
Montreal.
MODERN air transport can drama¬
tically improve the economic
development prospects of Third
World countries.
Investment in aviation is usually consid¬
ered a costly and risky business, but there
is now abundant evidence to show that a
well-organized national and international
air transport system can substantially boost
the foreign-exchange earnings of develo¬
ping countries, as well as creating thou¬
sands of new jobs and millions of dollars of
revenue.
These are the unexpected and welcome
conclusions of a two-year International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) study of
the contribution civil aviation can make to
the economic development of African
states. The study, funded by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
following a resolution of the African Civil
Aviation Commission (AFCAC) involved 37
countries south of the Sahara, from Mauri¬
tania in the north to Lesotho in the south.
These countries have a total population of
250 million people; twelve of them are land¬
locked.
While countless studies have been made
of African economies and many of civil
aviation, this was the first attempt to link
the two fields in a "cause and effect" rela¬
tionship. ICAO worked closely with other
U.N. agencies to cover a multitude of acti¬
vities, but attention was focussed primarily
on agriculture, industry, commerce and
civil aviation itself. At first project members
doubted whether aviation could make
much of a contribution to economic
12

growth in Africa and provide anything
more than luxury transport for the privi¬
leged few. After studying the question for
two years, the governments involved are
convinced that aviation is indeed a vital
force in Africa.
Its contribution to exports is already
significant: airlines carried over $30 million
worth of fresh horticultural products to
Europe in 1974 and could carry much more,
if production and marketing were better
organized. While only seven of the 37
countries visited contributed to these
exports, the study revealed that most of
the others could create employment and
earn valuable foreign exchange by growing
fruit and vegetables for overseas markets.
As a result, a recommendation was made
to 27 governments that they request assis¬
tance from the Food and Agriculture Orga¬
nization of the United Nations (FAO) so as
to get a larger slice of this lucrative market.
Project members were often amazed by
the opportunities civil aviation offers to
increase Africa's earnings. Most of them
were aware that cut flowers represent a
potential export, but hardly imagined that
the retail market for flowers in Western
Europe is worth $3 billion a year, and that
African countries are so well-placed to take
an increasing share of it. AN states were,
therefore, encouraged to become active in
this area and at the same time to
increase wherever appropriate their par-
Aviation can contribute to
the economic development
of Third World countries by
providing speedy transport
for perishable goods and by
opening up hitherto
inaccessible regions. Above
left, cattle flown over the
Andes frpm the Pacific coast
are unloaded at Tingo Maria
(Peru). As part of its
livestock improvement
programme, Peru has
airlifted thousands of cattle
to breeding centres in its
Amazon region. Right, 100-
tonne cargo of grapes was
flown from Nicosia (Cyprus)
to London, arriving 10 days
ahead of grapes sent by sea
and fetching premium prices
on the British market.
ticipation in the export market for fresh
fish.
Industry is still in an embryonic stage in
Africa. Most activity is in light manufactu¬
ring, designed to reduce imports by pro¬
viding local populations with foodstuffs,
beverages, textiles, bicycles and the like.
The study found, however, that better use
could be made of the plentiful supply of
low-cost labour to produce a wide range of
goods, from fashion garments to electronic
equipment. Many of these goods would
still be competitive even with the added
cost of air transport.
While tourism is highly developed in a
few African countries, many others would
like to enter the field. Tourism in Africa is
almost entirely dependent on aviation, but
here the experts expressed caution.
Though the continent as a whole is rich in
tourist attractions, few countries have
enough to offer individually to draw signifi¬
cant numbers of visitors.
The study warned that tourism can be a
risky venture, with no assurance that
returns will cover the large investments
required. In order to avoid costly errors,
governments were advised to seek expert
advice before launching tourist develop¬
ment programmes.
Though it can bring high financial
returns in a short period, tourism does little
to stabilize national economies, and there is
little doubt that in the long run air com
merce geared to the exporting of perishable
merchandise represents a sounder invest¬
ment for most African states.
A rapid survey of the actual and potential
markets for perishable goods reveals that
handsome profits could be made by Afri¬
can countries willing to make a modest
investment and to exploit the available
capacity of air-transport carriers to Europe.
During the winter. of 1975-76 Western
Europe imported 105,000 tonnes of fruit
and vegetables from Africa south of the
Sahara, but only 20,000 tonnes were car¬
ried by air. Given normal rates of expan¬
sion, the latter figure should double by
1980.
But if further efforts are made along the
lines suggested by the ICAO study, there is
no reason why air exports should not reach
60,000 tonnes, worth $90 million or more
by 1980.
The possibilities offered by the cut
flower market are even more impressive. In
1974, flower imports to Europe, worth $45
million in all, were dominated by Israel,
Colombia and South Africa. Only two Afri¬
can countries (Kenya and the Ivory Coast)
had a share in this market (to the tune of
$3.3 million), and yet the climate and soil
throughout most of Africa are ideal for
growing flowers and aircraft are available
to transport them.
'Experts predict that European flower
imports will treble by 1980 to $135 million,
and provided a sufficient number of states
respond to the challenge, Africa could well
capture half of this market.
Another export field where rewards are
high is that of fresh fish. Shipped by air,
fresh fish command very high prices and
bring exporters between 50 per cent and
100 per cent profit. But Africa has done
almost nothing to capitalize on this oppor¬
tunity. Only 1,300 tonnes of fish (worth
$4.5 million) were air-freighted to Europe
from Africa in 1975, yet Africa's exports
could easily total $25 million in two years'
time.
One tangible proof that the ICAO survey
results are being taken seriously is the
recent purchase by a group of West Afri¬
can states of ten turbo-prop cargo planes
from the U.K.'s Royal Air Force. The
planes, which can carry a maximum pay-
ioad of 35 tonnes, are designed for both
long- and short-haul. operations from the
most difficult terrain and do not need
sophisticated ground support equipment.
As this example shows, developing
countries are already making decisions in
the field of air transport which are bound to
affect their rate of economic growth. Not
all of these choices concern the develop¬
ment of exports; many have to do with
regional and internal problems and pros¬
pects.
Preliminary findings of ICAO studies in
five East Asian countries show that while
the level of aviation development is more
advanced there than in Africa, the potential
of air transport is not fully utilized and
should be better integrated into the social
and economic growth of the region. This
group of countries, which includes Indone¬
sia and the Philippines, consists of morei
than 10,000 island archipelagos. It would I
13

be a big and costly process to develop sur¬
face transport to link up the isolated com¬
munities living in this difficult terrain.
Another preliminary study indicates that
better air transport between the islands in
the South Pacific (including Fiji, Papua-
New-Guinea and Western Samoa) and
Australia, New Zealand, Japan and the
U.S.A. might benefit tourism, light
industry, agriculture and trade.
In Latin America, air transport is already
playing an important role in the develop¬
ment of several countries. It is not generally
known, for example, that Brazil has the
world's largest general aviation fleet, after
Canada and the U.S.A. The development
of Brazil's interior provinces in the last 20
years would have been much slower
without the intensive and intelligent use of
aircraft. The same goes for the rest of
South America.
Brazil uses aircraft in numerous develop¬
ment programmes, including construction
of the Trans-Amazon Highway, while
Venezuela has pressed them into service to
prospect for oil and mineral resources in
Amazonia. In Peru, the Ministry of Fishery
employs C-130 cargo-planes to airlift 20-
tonne loads of frozen fish from Lima to
Aycucho in the interior. The aircraft cross¬
es the Andes in one hour, while a truck
with only a 4-tonne load takes 22 hours to
circle the mountains.
Taking advantage of airfreight develop¬
ment, Peru is now building freezer plants in
the towns of the Andes to improve the
local diet. It has also flown in thousands of
pure-bred cattle from Brazil, Argentina,
Costa Rica, Guatemala and Panama.
Across the Andes, Argentina uses a
large cargo fleet to airlift machinery, vehi¬
cles, fruit, meat and other products to
various countries in Latin America and
even to Africa. Bolivia too is now using two
new C-13 Hercules to airlift farm produce
from its Amazon basin area to La Paz. The
aircraft will also be used to promote
exports and to prospect for oil and gas.
Mineral prospecting and oil and gas
exploration can be made easier and quicker
with the help of a well-organized air trans¬
port system. Inaccessibility is no longer the
obstacle it was, thanks to shuttle services
capable of airlifting personnel and equip
ment to a desired location in a matter of
hours.
In Alaska's North Slope, for example,
aircraft ranging from heavyweights to light
helicopters are used to prospect for oil,
moving men and supplies in a quick and
efficient manner.
Again, if a preliminary geological survey
shows that a region contains enough mine¬
rals and ore to justify exploitation, vehicles
and equipment can be airlifted to the site
either by conventional air-transport or by
specially adapted STOL (short take-off and
landing) aircraft. These aircraft can then
make the return journey with a cargo of ore
refined on the spot. This might prove a
solution, for instance, to Egypt's difficul¬
ties in exploiting the inaccessible, yet ore-
rich regions between the Nile and the Red
Sea.
These specialized uses of air transport
offer new hope to countries unable to
exploit their natural resources because of
the exorbitant cost of constructing related
road or rail networks. But the most imme¬
diately productive use of aircraft in Third
World countries, at least in Africa, is for
exporting perishable goods to overseas
markets.
Europe and the United States are the tra¬
ditional markets for such goods, but there
is also a growing demand for rare fruits and
exotic seafood in the oil-rich countries of
the Middle East, where shrimps from
Ghana, Brazilian limes, and Senegalese
beans are beginning to make their appear¬
ance.
The term "perishables", however,
covers a whole range of commodities other
than food and cut flowers, which develo¬
ping countries can export by air. Such
items include fashion garments, short-life
radioactive substances, gold, gems, bank¬
notes and valuables of all kinds, antiques,
newspapers and magazines.
In the highly competitive world of
modern business, developing countries can
reap enormous benefits from air-freighting
perishable goods. Contrary to general
belief, air freight is no longer a means of
transport to be used only in emergencies or
when cost is not a prime factor. In many
cases, air freight is the most economical
way of shipping and marketing goods.
According to an IATA (International Air
Transport Association) study, the compari¬
son between air and surface costs only
makes sense as part of an overall export
drive. In terms of packing and crating, insu¬
rance premiums, transport charges, transit
warehousing and wharfage and interest on
capital invested in shipments en route, air
freight comes out better. There are also the
invisible benefits such as speed, punctua¬
lity, dependability and flexibility in adapting
to changing market demand all of which
help to ensure the overall success of the
operation.
At .the national level, any developing
country must sooner or later face the ques¬
tion : what form of transport is the most
productive investment? Compared to road
transport, transport by air is relatively
cheap to develop, but somewhat expensive
to run.
This leads to the surprising conclusion
that in a majority of cases the least expen¬
sive and most satisfactory way of develo¬
ping a national transport system seems to
be to start with air transport, then cons¬
truct railways, and finally to build roads to
link outlying villages with the railway
stations.
Luis Cabrai
Aviation holds out great potential
for Africa's developing economies
by boosting exports and foreign
exchange earnings and by
creating new jobs. Right, coffee
being loaded on to a cargo plane
at Tlppi (Ethiopia).
14
