An aureole
of legend on
a golden crown
Ancient bronze ornament from a wooden
staff used by a shaman to lure spirits
down to earth. Birds played a major role
in shamanistic ritual and symbolism and
shamans donned wings or feathers to
equip themselves for their journey to the
spirit world.
Colour page
The luck of
the leaping carp
For Koreans a carp leaping from the
waves was a harbinger of good fortune. It
might herald the birth of a son or presage
some great success in life. The carp was
thought to live for a hundred years and in
old age to turn into a benevolent dragon
which repelled evil spirits. Leaping carp
shown here is a detail from a painting on
rice paper (55 cm. by 95 cm.) by an
anonymous 18th-century Korean artist.
Photo © Zo Za-Yong, Emilie Museum, Seoul
by Li Ogg
ON 24 September 1921, a group of children were playing on
a patch of waste ground in Kyongju, once the capital of
the ancient kingdom of Silla which was founded in the
first century B.C. and later held sway over most of the Korean
peninsula. Suddenly the children noticed a handful of glass beads
lying on the ground. Unwittingly they had stumbled across the site
of a burial mound, once imposingly high but by then considerably
flattened, which contained the tomb of a king who had reigned
sometime around the beginning of the sixth century A.D. Excava- k
tions brought to light some thirty thousand glass beads and a fabu- f
LI OGG is assistant professor at the University of Paris VII and director of
the Centre of Korean Studies at the Collège de France. His Histoire de la
Corée was published in 1969 in the Que Sais-je ? series by Presses Univer-
sia tires de France.
44

s
ñr,
yg
/
'\P^
b»5


Colour page
Magnificent gold crown bedecked with
comma-shaped jewels of green jade (top
right) was once worn by a 6th-century
ruler of the Silla kingdom in Korea.
Discovered at Kyongju, the ancient capital
of Silla, it incorporates a wealth of
symbolism (see article this page). Also
found in the "Gold Crown Tomb" was the
elaborate gold belt (below) made of 39
openwork plates and 17 pendants. It is
embellished with motifs of a type then
current in China where such belts were
traditionally hung with pendants
representing objects found in every
functionary's saddlebag, such as a sword,
a knife, a whetstone and a flint. Note the
fish-shaped pendant of a kind which in
T'ang China indicated its wearer's rank.
The use of this type of belt may have
originated in ancient times among the
nomads of the northern steppes. Top left,
gold ornament dating from the early 6th
century. It was discovered in the tomb of
King Muryong (see photo page 25) at
Kongju capital of the kingdom of
Paekche.
Photos © Korean Overseas Information Service, Seoul
Photo © Han Sok-hong, Seoul
Photo © Dong-wha Publishing Co , Seoul - Museum of the University of Taegu
These earthenware ducks with human feet date from Ancient Silla times.
Birds acted as intermediaries between the shaman and the spirit world.
L lous hoard of jewellery. The most spectacular find was an exquisite



" golden crown which in spite of its extreme fragility had survived
intact. As a consequence of this discovery the tomb became
known as The Tomb of the Golden Crown.
The crown's design was rich in symbolism which, when deci¬
phered, provided precious information about the shadowy myths
and legends then current in east Asia and about the religious vision
of the universe which prevailed among the ancient Koreans.
The crown takes us back to the age of the shamans, who profes¬
sed beliefs which had reached Korea from the Siberian Altai moun¬
tains and practised magical nature-cults based on an obscure com¬
plicity between men and animals. For the hunters of ancient
Korea, the animal was a tutelary being. To slay a beast was to
make a sacrifice to the celestial being which would allow the hun¬
ter to arrogate for himself the dead animal's physical and spiritual
attributes. Hunting rituals and legends like the story of Chumong,
the founder of the kingdom of Koguryo, strikingly illustrate this
complicity between men and animals.
Legend has it that a daughter of the Lord of the River, a water-
deity, was out walking when she met Hämosu, the son of the
Celestial Emperor and became friendly with him. Later she concei¬
ved and brought forth an egg. The egg was thrown first to a dog
and then to a pig, but neither of them would touch it. Then it was
left on the highway, where the horses and oxen gave it a wide
berth. Next it was placed in a field, where the birds protected it
with their wings. Attempts to crack it proved vain. From the egg
emerged handsome Chumong.
Animals were thus linked to men by deep undercurrents of com¬
prehension which brought into being a whole language of animal
symbolism, of which the Golden Crown of Kyongju (see colour
photo opposite) is a glittering and instructive expression.
For the ancient Koreans, the universe consisted of three worlds:
heaven, earth and the nether regionthe kingdom of the dead
which was also often known as the world of water. A shaman had
to "dominate" these three worlds, often by changing into different
beings, as illustrated in the story of how Chumong's father sought
the hand of the Lord of the River's daughter.
To put the suitor to the test, so the story goes, the Lord of the
River transformed himself into a carp; straightaway Chumong's
father turned himself into an otter and caught the carp. Next the
Lord of the River assumed the form of a stag, but this time his
antagonist turned into a wolf and hunted him down. Finally the
Lord of the River changed into a pheasant, whereupon Chumong's
father became a falcon. By this time the Lord of the River knew for
sure that he was dealing with the Celestial Emperor's son. He con¬
sented to the match and decreed that the marriage should take |
place. I
47

Mounted archers and their dogs are shown in
hot pursuit of stags, deer and tigers in this
wall painting from the Tomb of the Dancing
Figures, on the T'ung-kou plain, south
Manchuria. For ancient Koreans hunting was
imbued with ritual reflecting the unity of the
world of humans and the animal world.
1
Photo © Aurora Publishers, Leningrad
, The Golden Crown of Kyongju, like the legend of Chumong's
birth, is dominated by two wings. They are attached to the pointed
cap within the crown. They afford protection but they also sym¬
bolize the ascent to heaven. A piece of headgear discovered at
Chunghwa, in the land Chumong once ruled, incorporates a
mysterious three-footed bird which has the same religious signifi¬
cance. But the significance of bird-symbolism on ancient Korean
crowns does not end here. The Wei Che, a Chinese text from the
third century A.D., recounts how among the Han of southern
Korea the dead were made to "fly" using birds' feathers. Mongo¬
lian shamans felt themselves transformed into flying creatures as
soon as they put wings on their backs. Shamanistic priests in Sibe¬
ria and Manchuria also decked out their costumes and head¬
dresses with birds' feathers. A gold and bronze alloy crown dis¬
covered at Yoshino in Japan bears traces which prove that it was
once adorned with wings, thus suggesting that this bird-cult may
have reached as far as Japan.
For the ancient Koreans, birds' wings were not the only means
of ascending to heaven. A flying horse, like the eight-hoofed steed
painted on birch bark (see photo page 25) could also perform the
task.
Were the wings which dominate the Golden Crown meant to
symbolize those of a real bird or of some mythical flying beast?
Might they not have been the wings of a cock, the bird whose role
in Silla mythology was so important that the kingdom was known
as the "Land of the Cock and the Forest"? In the Samguk Yusa, a
thirteenth century Korean text, it is also recorded that the people
of Silla venerated the cock as a god and used its wings for orna¬
mental purposes.
In ancient Korean beliefs the cock symbolized the sun and was
the counterpart of the mythical Stone Age reindeer with golden
antlers which flew across Siberia from east to west.
In Korea the stag, another religious symbol, corresponds to the
Siberian reindeer, and attached to the circlet of gold which forms
the base of the Golden Crown are two antler-shaped projections.
The antler motif can also be discerned in crowns from the king¬
doms of Koguryo and Paekche, although some believe that these
designs are simply floral decorations reflecting the influence of
Chinese art. The people of Paekche, Silla's western neighbours,
believed that a stag taken during a royal hunt was sin or divine,
while a Chinese text describes how the aristocracy of Koguryo, the
State which dominated the north of the Korean peninsula during
the period of the Three Kingdoms, attached gold and silver "ears"
to their helmets. It is possible that the word ears might have
been a copyist's error,, since the Chinese characters for "ears" are
According to ancient shamanistic
beliefs, bird-spirits hold sway in the
Upper World, while the nether
world is ruled by mammals. (1)
Drawing of a Tungus shaman
whose reindeer-costume enabled
him to descend to the Nether
World. By doffing his head-dress he
could also rise to the Upper World.
Similar beliefs are found in Siberian
mythology. (2) Fabulous beast
combining features of deer, eagle
and tiger was found tattooed on
the embalmed body of a chief
buried at Pazyryk in Siberia (5th or
4th century B.C.). (3) Ornament in
openwork gold leaf adorned the
crown of a Paekche queen. It was
unearthed In the tomb of King
Muryong at Kongju.
48

similar to those which signify "the horns of a stag". This in turn
calls to mind the iron horns with which Tungu shamans adorned
their headgear, thus evoking the antlers of a stag. Shamanistic
headgear was similarly adorned with iron reindeer antlers among
the Siberians of eastern Ket.
Other, equally venerable animals also figure on the Golden
Crown, from the base of which hang a large number of hook- or
claw-shaped pieces of jade. They recall the bear claws, some real,
some made of iron, which adorned the boots of Tungu shamans,
and probably represent those of wild beasts such as the tiger,
which was worshipped by the people of Ye, north of Silla.
The plant world appears on the Golden Crown in the form of
tiny, metal-shaped plaques. The best example of a floral motif on
an ancient Korean crown, however, is the corolla featured on the
crown of a Paekche queen (see photo page 48). An ancient docu¬
ment also describes how the king and aristocracy of Paekche wore
crowns adorned with gold and silver flowers.
As for the nether world, it is depicted on the crown by the zigzag
pattern, evoking waves, which runs along the circlet.
At the front of the circlet are three tree-shaped uprights. Each
one has three branches which symbolically represent the three
worlds of the Korean cosmogony. The same religious symbolism is
found in Japanese mythology in a head-dress made from the
C/eyera japónica flower. In Korean cults the tree is often replaced
by a post which represents the centre of the earthly world and
makes it possible to communicate with heaven. Among the Sibe¬
rians and the Tungu, this post was sometimes capped with birds.
Ancient Chinese texts record how in the south of ancient Korea a
post was planted in worship of the kuisin or spirits, and a bell and a
kind of drum were fixed to the top.
With its green jade jewels and fluttering gold sequins, the fragile
Golden Crown of Kyongju thus affords a glimpse at the beliefs of a
long-vanished world.
UOgg
49
