The fast breeder
A nuclear reactor that produces
more fuel than it consumes
by Wolf Häfele
IN principle, and to a large extent also in
practice, the fast breeder reactor can
provide virtually unlimited amounts of
energy. Energy from fast breeders there¬
fore is not just an extension of existing
energy resources; it changes our whole
conception of the energy problem.
The fundamental difference between
fast breeder reactors and today's nuclear
power stations is that the former "breed"
more fuel than they consume. Current
nuclear reactors, the predominant type
being the light water reactor, obtain most
Wolf Häfele of the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many is deputy director of the International Insti¬
tute for Applied Systems Analysis (IlASA) at
Laxenburg (Austria), where he leads IIASA's
research on energy systems and problems of
energy demand. While attached to the Karlsruhe
Nuclear Research Centre he participated in the
design of the first German-built nuclear reactor
(FR2) and later established and led the Centre's
Fast Breeder Project. He is a member of the
Scientific Advisory Committee of the Inter¬
national Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
of their energy from slow-neutron fission of
the scarce isotope of uranium known as
uranium-235. Natural uranium consists of
only 0.7 per cent of uranium-235; the rest is
uranium-238 which cannot readily be used
by the light water reactor.
A thousand-megawatt light water reac¬
tor consumes some 5,000 tonnes of natural
uranium during its lifetime. A world total of
a thousand such power stations would
thus consume five million tonnes of natural
uranium, a figure approximating to current
estimates of world uranium reserves.
The fast breeder is fuelled with a mixture
of uranium-238 and plutonium. It makes
use of a fast-neutron fission process during
which there is a net gain of about half an
atom of plutonium for every one and a half
atoms of uranium-238 consumed. Since all
the abundant uranium-238 in natural ura¬
nium can be used as fuel, the fast breeder
reactor produces sixty to seventy times
more energy from a given quantity of ura¬
nium than any other reactor now in use.
Consequently, it will be possible to tap eco¬
nomically uranium resources which today
are too costly to exploit.
At the present time, the fast breeder is
the only technology at hand which offers
the possibility of resolving the problems of
energy resource limitations which will have
to be faced in the coming decades.
In the short term, however, if fast
breeders are to be introduced soon they
will be part of energy systems which are
closely integrated into the present world
economy and will have to show that they
can compete with the available alternative
energy sources. It seems reasonably likely
that they will achieve this goal by the end
of the 1990s.
All new technologies have to establish
themselves through hard economic compe¬
tition, a process which ultimately saves
investment in terms of labour, capital and
ingenuity. Light water reactors have
already been through this process and have
proved to be commercially viable. The elec¬
tricity they produce is usually from three to
six dollars per megawatt hour cheaper than
that produced by fossil fuels. During the
recent cold winters in New England, for
instance, light water reactors assumed the
baseload of electricity production. There
are today some 200 of them in operation
throughout the world, and by the year 2000
it is expected that their installed capacity
will be 1,500,000 megawatts.
All fission reactors produce plutonium or
a uranium isotope, U-233, neither of which
occur in nature. Both isotopes permit
breeding and must be handled with very
great care. Both emit alpha-rays and it is
dangerous for the organism to bear traces
of them.
~>
A light water reactor produces about 170
kilogrammes of plutonium per thousand
megawatt year. The safest way of handling
this plutonium is to put it back into a reac¬
tor after separating it chemically from the
rest of the irradiated fuel.
The fast breeder thus has a role to play in
dealing with the "hot end" of the light
water reactor fuel cycle, and a wide variety
of strategies for combining light water
reactors and fast breeders have been
studied and assessed. From these studies it
appears that the principal role of the fast
breeder in the next few decades will be as a
depository for plutonium. Only later will the
multiplying effect on plutonium stocks
become of prime importance.
The second, or present, generation of
fast breeder reactors uses the mixed oxides
Pu02/U02. The inherent negative Doppler
coefficient thus installed acts like a tran¬
quillizer upon the reactor. In the final analy¬
sis, this leads to a situation where the con¬
trol devices of a fast breeder reactor are vir¬
tually identical to those of a light water
reactor, and the safety features of the fast
breeder reactor can be designed to meet
the same predetermined safety standards
as are applied to light water reactors or any
other reactor.
Today's energy systems will not be ade¬
quate to meet tomorrow's needs, and we
must face the fact that a changeover to
new systems is inevitable. Some studies
seem to indicate that the crucial moment
will come shortly after the year 2000. By
that time, if adequate preparations have
not been made, it will be too late to develop
and deploy the technologies capable of
satisfying such a massive demand. The
problem is one of time: several decades will
be needed and there seems to be no quick
solution.
A new technology must meet three
demands before it can be used on a large
scale: it must be scientifically feasible; it
must be feasible from an engineering point
of view; and it must be commercially .
viable. f
8

Nuclear power is one answer to dwindling fossil fuel supplies. Nuclear
reactors create heat by fission splitting apart uranium atoms. The heat
boils water to steam which propels turbines that generate electricity.
The first generation of reactors could only use a minute proportion of
natural uranium as fuel. Today, however, a new generation of "Fast
Breeder Reactors", fuelled by a mixture of natural uranium and
plutonium, create more plutonium than they consume, thus offering the
promise of virtually limitless energy. Below, the gleaming heart of the
U.K.'s 250 megawatt prototype fast reactor, which began to generate
electricity in 1975.
9
'rmtJSx
1**
!SS
;. ïifixrf
*
m +
©

7
Ï-'AV»» »*_
> » _» « é « » «r» * «r
i,««,«»
	,! C -
	
»ii i
IM -
i
I
Public debate on nuclear energy has focussed largely on the environmental and safety
problems involved in operating reactors, handling nuclear fuel and particularly in the
disposal of radioactive wastes. The proponents of nuclear energy point to the excellent
safety record of nuclear power and maintain that reactors are essential in a time of
dwindling fossil-fuel supplies. Others argue that the risks outweigh the benefits and that
no long-range techniques have yet been perfected for the transportation and storage
of nuclear wastes. Above, lead column for transporting wastes from a French reactor.
, The fast breeder has been scientifically
feasible for 30 years. To meet the second
condition, power plants of a scale big
enough to provide electricity for a grid
must be designed, constructed and
brought into operation. In Europe this has
been accomplished during the 1970s. The
prototype French Phénix breeder, with a
capacity of 250 megawatts, went into suc¬
cessful operation in 1974. Shortly after¬
wards, the U.K. 's 250 megawatt prototype
PFR reactor gradually came into operation
and is now at full power. The USSR's 1 ,000
megawatt BN 350 has been used since the
early 1970s, partly for generating electricity
and partly for desalinating sea water. In the
Federal Republic of Germany, the 300
megawatt prototype SNR 300 reactor will
be completed by 1981 or 1982, while con¬
struction work on Japan's Monju pro¬
totype is expected to begin next year.
France has taken the lead in this movement
by starting construction of its second big
reactor. Superphénix, a 1,200 megawatt
power station.
The fast breeder reactor has thus
crossed the threshold of scientific and
engineering feasibility. Other new
technologies solar power, fusion, and
new, large-scale uses of coal will go
through these phases, but the world eco¬
nomy into which they will have to be inte¬
grated will probably be different from that
of today. Because the fast breeder already
exists, there is a great temptation to
evaluate it exclusively in the context of
today's world energy systems. However,
we must look further ahead and not limit
our long-range technological options by
taking only short-term considerations into
acount. This means going ahead with the
development and deployment of the fast
breeder reactor, together with our other
long-range energy options.
Wolf Häfele
10
