A voice
from the
Third World
by Radhika Coomaraswamy
RADHIKA COOMARASWAMY is a Sri Lanka
lawyer who has specialized in human rights
research and education. She gave a fuller treat¬
ment to the subject of this article in a report pre¬
pared for the Sri Lanka Foundation, Colombo, a
governmental organization for the promotion
and protection of human rights in Asia and the
Pacific.
In impoverished societies the need to
wrest a living from Nature would seem to
come before all else. But, notes Kéba
M'Baye in Unesco's handbook on human
rights teaching for universities, it would
be false "to conclude that there is little
concern about rights and liberties in
societies which have not reached a certain
degree of satisfaction of their material
needs." Traditional Africa had a system of
rights and liberties in which we can see
"an undeniable affinity which links it to
the present system of human rights."
Right, burgeoning traditional house and a
modern building in Addis Ababa highlight
architectural affinities between ancient
and modern in Ethiopia.
20

AN impoverished, pastoral, isolated
community needs a set of human
rights different from that which
applies to a highly sophisticated, industria¬
lized society with an integrated legal
system, a long-established judiciary and an
effective police and which belongs to the
principal international organizations.
This is the view of many Third World
thinkers who believe that the whole con¬
cept of human rights acquires a different
meaning in the context of traditional cul¬
tures and impoverished societies. This
belief stems from the assumption that,
even if human rights as listed in interna¬
tional declarations and conventions are
inherent in the very existence of man, the
specific interpretation of these rights
derives not from natural law but from the
social . organization of human beings.
Human rights are seen as dependent upon
the nature of the society that formulated
and enforces them.
Thus many Asian policy-makers consider
human rights to be a Western-oriented sub
ject of low priority for the developing coun¬
tries; as a result the vast majority of stu¬
dents in the Asian region, with the excep¬
tion of those attending Law School courses
in Constitutional Law, Civil Rights or Inter¬
national Law, receive no formal instruction
in human rights.
Of course, no policy-maker in the Asian
region would deny the values implicit in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights or
the various international convenants;
however, the comprehensive nature of
these international instruments allows lee¬
way for varying interpretations and for find¬
ing justification for inaction on the grounds
of the specific social, political and econo¬
mic realities of a particular country.
The countries of the Asian region are
deeply proud of their traditions and culture
and all would agree that the concept of
human rights formed part of their tradition
and emerged in their struggle against colo¬
nialism.
Even though there is a tradition of human
rights in Asian culture, there is also a wide-
/ 4
spread feeling that the interpretations given
to certain abstract notions, such as the
dignity and worth of the individual, equa¬
lity, justice, freedom from want, etc., are
importations from the West. To present the
concept of human rights as an absolute
value whilst avoiding allegations of ethno-
centricity would be an extremely difficult
process in the Asian region. It may be
necessary, before a region-wide pro¬
gramme for the promotion of human rights
is established, to formulate an "Asian"
interpretation of human rights which does
not compromise the ideals of human rights
law.
The other assumption made by Asian
policy-makers with which advocates of
human rights must contend is that the stark
reality of poverty in some countries of the
Asian region militates against the exercise
of human rights.
Many Asian planners believe that talk of
human rights implies that a level of deve¬
lopment has been achieved which raises
man above the status of a biological entity
and bestows upon him the dignity of being
human. This, they maintain, involves the
most fundamental of all rights the right to
remain human and the right to some say in
the planning of their own survivaland that
therefore achievement of this level of deve¬
lopment must precede the adoption as
government policy of the wide-ranging
rights envisaged in international declara¬
tions and conventions.
To meet these objections, human rights
in the Asian region must be integrated with
the problem of development. They must be
involved in the process of planned social
change and must ensure that the public
power is exercised in favour of the deprived
and dispossessed. At present, human rights
and development remain distinct concepts,
especially in the context of educational
planning.
This approach to educational planning
resulted in low priority being assigned to
subjects of no technical value, and human
rights were, naturally, among the topics
that were completely ignored. More
recently, however, educational planners
have stressed the need for multidisciplinary
knowledge and an integrated approach to
the problems of development. Economic
development is no longer seen as the only
important aspect of planning and priority is
also being given to education aimed at
social and political development.
Research in the area of human rights is
necessary on topics of primary concern in
the Asian regionfor example, on min¬
ority and race discrimination and discrimi¬
nation against women, as well as on econo¬
mic rights. This research should also
include an assessment of the perceptions of
human rights among citizens of the various
countries of the region. This would make
for a better understanding of the attitude
towards human rights in the region and pro¬
vide a better framework for future action.
Radhika Coomaraswamy
21
