Society's
poor
relations
Teachers
count among
the lowest
paid workers
24

Photo Satyan, Unicef
IN both developed and developing
countries primary school teachers
starting their careers are often paid
less than semi-skilled workers in their first
job in manufacturing industry.
As in few other professions, the impact
of teachers, who in some countries repre¬
sent over 2 per cent of the active popula¬
tion, is felt on the economic and social
health of the country concerned for as
much as forty years. And yet, it may be
thirty years, or just prior to retirement,
before a primary school teacher catches up
with the worker on the pay scale long
after his first pupils have entered the
employment market themselves.
This is one of the findings of an ILO
study (1) which contains information on
some 70 countries and was undertaken to
ascertain the methods of determining tea¬
chers' earnings and the relation of these
earnings to those of other occupations.
Incremental progression, compensation
for non-scholastic duties, difficulty of
recruitment in isolated areas and large
cities are but a few of the factors which
must influence the final determination of
teachers' earnings. These considerations
vary from country to country and even
within countries, from one locality to an-
(1) Teachers' Pay. ILO, Geneva. 1978.
other, making it impossible to lay down
hard-and-fast rules on a global scale.
However, for purposes of international
comparison, average earnings in manufac¬
turing industry were found to present the
most practicable universal norm with which
to relate the earnings of primary school tea¬
chers at the start of their careers.
Using this as a yardstick, among the 27
countries (with a total population of 1,900
million) for which detailed data for 1976
were available, Canada (New Brunswick)
paid the lowest salaries44 per cent less
than average earnings in manufacturing
industry to primary teachers at the bot¬
tom of their salary scale, while the highest
went to their counterparts in Nigeria, who
received the unusually high pay level of 144
per cent more than the relevant workers'
remuneration. Next to. Nigeria, teachers in
Switzerland (Aargau) did best with 27 per
cent more, followed by teachers in the
Federal Republic of Germany with 14.3 per
cent more.
Other countries where teachers in the
same situation received less than the ave¬
rage manufacturing industry worker during
1976 were Japan where it was 35 per cent
less; England and Wales, 32.5 per cent less
while in Norway they received 5 per cent
less.
Figures for 1975 show that, by this same
yardstick, the best place for beginner pri¬
mary teachers that year was Argentina
where their salary was 60 per cent more
than that of the worker. Starting salaries in
Denmark during the same period showed a
respectable 30.1 per ceni more, but in Italy
the percentage was 41.8 less; in Austria,
33.6 less; Kenya, 28.7 and Australia (New
South Wales), 19.6 less than the workers.
In countries where relevant data were
available only up to 1974, beginner primary
school teachers were best off in Mali with
12.7 per cent more than workers in manu¬
facturing industry, while in Belgium they
received 6 per cent more and in France, 4.8
per cent more. In both the Philippines and
Sri Lanka teachers and workers were paid
approximately the same. Teachers' salaries
for 1974 were less than those in manufac¬
turing industry in New Zealand where the
difference was 3.7 per cent; in the
Syrian Arab Republic, 11 per cent less; the
German Democratic Republic, 18.9 per
cent less and Zambia, 34.2 per cent less.
Statistics from both the United States
and the U.S.S.R. covered the ten-year
period from 1965-75 but were compiled on
an average salary basis. In the United
States salaries- of primary and secondary
teachers averaged out slightly ahead
(about 5 per cent) of average earnings in ma- 1
nufacturing industry, over the entire period. I
25

h During the same decade in the U.S.S.R.,
average earnings of educational personnel
in general trailed those of manufacturing
industry and in 1975 were 26.5 per cent
less. However, these figures do not take
into account subsidized rentals, social ser¬
vices, etc. Moreover, in 1977, the govern¬
ment increased salaries of educational per¬
sonnel by 18 per cent.
One of the most pressing problems
which has become acute in the last decade
is the defence of the purchasing power of
teachers' salaries against rampant inflation.
Methods of determining periodicity and
amounts of cost-of-living increases range
from ad hoc, almost casual arrangements,
to regular reviews which may be carried out
by an autonomous government agency
such as the National Personnel Authority in
Japan. The time interval between reviews
may be as much as two years or more as it
is in some of the ad hoc surveys, or as little
as three months as is the case in France.
However, in the countries for which it has
been possible to construct true scores, it is
clear that the purchasing power of teachers
has shown a general upward trend,
although government intervention has
sometimes been necessary to bring this
about.
Although the study draws no con
clusions, several trends are apparent. Over a
number of years, differentials have narrowed
between the salaries of primary and
secondary school teachers and between
salary levels at the bottom and top of indivi¬
dual scales. This may be socially justifiable
but it tends to dampen enthusiasm for
obtaining higher qualifications which in
turn could lead to a deterioration generally
in the calibre of education, the study
warns. There are also indications that in
some educational systems graduate tea¬
chers in secondary schools as well as pri¬
mary school teachers receive less than the
average earnings in manufacturing industry
when commencing their careers.
With the advent of audio-visual tech¬
niques, programmed learning and new
approaches to traditional subjects, the tea¬
ching profession is becoming more com¬
plex and more demanding, and teachers'
organizations are requesting, more and
more, that recognition be made of these
new responsibilities when it -counts the
most on pay-day. ]
The salaries that teachers receive reflect
the importance that society attaches to the
profession. The study points out that the
question is often asked "can the country
afford to pay?" The question may equally
well be asked, "can the country afford not
to pay?"... After the family, the teacher is
the most important influence on the next
generation.
This article has also appeared in the
International Labour Organisation's
bulletin ILO Information, Geneva
(Vol. 13, No. 5, 1977).
26
