An Arab traveller
to an Antique land
The longest river in Europe, the Volga
rises in the Valdai Hills, north-west of
Moscow, and discharges its waters
into the Caspian Sea 3,690 km to the
south. Known in ancient times as the
Ra and during the Middle Ages as the
Itil, the Volga has always been of
immense importance as a cultural
and commercial highway. Today, the
Volga and its navigable tributaries
carry some two-thirds of all Soviet
inland freight. Opposite page, the
Volga at sunset. Right, carved
wooden prow of an 18th century
Volga rivercraft.
26

Ibn-Fadlan was a member of the embassy sent by the
Arab Caliph Al-Muktadir to the rulers of the Bulgare of
the Kama and Volga rivers in 921 A.D. He visited Itil, the
capital of the Khazars, and travelled to the capital of the
Bulgare, Great Bolgar, which stood near the junction of
the Kama and the Volga. It was in Itil or in Great Bolgar
(ruins of which have survived to the present day) that he
came into contact with the Slavs. We present here an
extract from "Ibn-Fadlan's Journey to the Volga", an
account of his travels edited by I.Y. Krachkovsky and
published in Moscow- Leningrad in 1939.
I saw the Russians, when they came with their goods and est¬
ablished themselves on the banks of the river Itil (1). Never
have I seen men of more perfect stature; they are like palm
trees. They are red-haired, and wear neither jackets nor kaftans,
but the menfolk wear cloaks, throwing one side over the shoulder
so that an arm emerges from beneath. Each of them has a sword, a
knife and a pole-axe, and from these they are inseparable. Their
swords are broad and curved like waves; the blades are of Frankish
make. From head to toe they are painted with marks depicting
leafy trees, pictures and designs of all sorts. Each of their women
has pinned to her breast a little box made of iron or copper, or sil¬
ver or gold, according to the status and wealth of her husband.
Each little box has a ring, to which a knife is attached.
Around their necks they wear chains of gold and silver, for when
the husband has ten thousand dirhams, he gives his wife a chain;
when he has twenty thousand dirhams he gives her two chains; in
similar fashion, he gives her another chain for each ten thousand
dirhams, so that she often has many chains around her neck. Their
most beautiful ornaments are the green beads made out of clay,
which are sometimes to be seen on their ships; they try to get hold
of these beads at all costs, pay a dirham each for them and thread
them into necklaces for their women...
They come from their country and drop anchor in the Itil, which
is a mighty river, and set up large wooden houses on its banks; and
they gather together, ten or twenty, more or less in each house.
(1) The River Volga
Each of them has his own bench, on which he sits... to do his
bargaining...
When their ships come to the anchorage, everyone comes
ashore with bread, meat, milk, onions and some kind of fiery bev¬
erage. He goes up to a tall pillar which bears a face on it, resem¬
bling a human face; and around it there are smaller images set in a
circle; and behind these images there are tall pillars stuck into the
ground. He goes up to the biggest image, prostrates himself in
front of it, and says: "0 Lord! I have travelled a great distance...
and with me I have so many head of cattle, so many sable furs, so
many skins..." and so on, until he has enumerated all the goods
that he has brought for trade. Then he says: "And this gift, I have
brought for you", and places what he has brought before the pil¬
lar, saying: "I beg you to send me a buyer who has dinars and
dirhams, and who will buy from me all that I wish to sell him, and
who will not contradict me in what I say to him." And then he goes
away. And if the selling is difficult and lasts a long time, he comes
back again with a gift, and yet again. And if his wishes still remain
unfulfilled, then he brings a gift to one of the smaller images, and
seeks its intercession, saying: "This is for the wife of our God, and
his daughters", and from each of the ¡mages without exception he
solicits intercession... Often the selling is easy for him, and when
he sells his goods, he says: "My god has answered my prayer, and
I must thank him for that." So he takes a certain number of cattle
and sheep and slaughters them, and distributes part of the meat
among the poor ; the rest he takes and throws down before the
big image and the little ¡mages surrounding it, and hangs the heads
of the cattle and sheep on the pillars stuck into the ground. And
after nightfall, the dogs come and eat the meat, and he who made
the offering says, "My god has deigned to eat my offering".
27
