Human rights and the international community
Twenty
questions
by Leah Levin
What is meant by human rights?
The concept of human rights is the acceptance of an inherent
and inalienable right due to man simply because of being mafn. It is
a moral right which derives from being a human being, and which
in turn ensures the dignity of every human being.
LEAH LEVIN is secretary of the Human Rights Committee of the United
Nations Association of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Her article Is
adapted from a longer study. Human Rights: Questions and Answers, pre¬
pared at Unesco's request to serve'as a model for teaching materials in
human rights education.
How is this idea reflected in practice?
Human life and human dignity have been disregarded and vio¬
lated throughout history and continue to be so violated. Never¬
theless, the idea of natural law common to all mankind equally
dates back many centuries. Natural law was long accepted as the
source and standard of political right.
During the eighteenth century the early ideas of natural law
developed into an acceptance of natural rights, and these rights for
the first time became a basic part of national constitutions, thus
reflecting an almost contractual relationship between the States
and the individual and emphasizing the power of the State as deri-r

ving from the assent of the free individual. The American Declara-
} tion of Independence and the French Declaration of the Rights of
Man were based. on this premise.
During the nineteenth and twentieth centuries this principle was
followed by a number of European, Latin American, and Asian
States. During the 1960s, with the attainment of independence by
a large number of African States, they too included recognition of
human rights in their new constitutions, sometimes by incorpora¬



ting into them the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Despite the recognition of human rights in constitutions, these
rights can be and are still violated by States, and can be removed
by legislation or arbitrary means.
even though they may be prepared to discuss the affairs of other
States. These same governments have supported United Nation's
resolutions which sanctioned investigation into the affairs of other
Member States. Thus different governments have taken different
positions at different times.
It is also widely argued that "intervention" does not include dis¬
cussion and examination since it means essentially "physical"
intervention. There is consequently a growing acceptance in legal
terms that when States have undertaken similar obligations it is
legitimate for each State to undertake that other States respect
them.
Is there any other way of ensuring
the protection of human rights?
The State is the guarantor and protector of human rights, both
traditionally and historically.
But since the First World War there has been a growing belief
that governments alone cannot be left to safeguard these rights,
and that they are a subject for international guarantees. Although
its mandate did not mention human rights, the League of Nations
. nevertheless tried to undertake the protection of human rights
through international means. Its concerns, however, were limited
to the extent of establishing certain conditions for the protection
'of minorities in a few countries.
The major pressure for internationalization, however, built up
after the Second World War, during which totalitarian regimes
grossly violated human rights in their own and occupied territories,
and were responsible for the elimination of entire groups because
of their race, .religion or nationality. This approach to the protec¬
tion of human rights is reflected and reinforced in the Charter of
the United Nations.
Article 1 of the Charter states that the U.N. aims to achieve
international co-operation by "promoting and encouraging respect
for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without dis¬
tinction as to race, sex, language or religion". Article 55 expresses
a similar undertaking; and in Article 56 all members of the U.N.
"pledge themselves to take joint and separate action in co¬
operation with the Organization for the achievement of the purpo¬
ses set forth in Article 55".
The provisions of these Articles also form the basis of Unesco's
activity in the sphere of human rights through its relationship as a
specialized agency of the U.N. in accordance with Article 63 of the
Charter.
The provisions of the Charter have the force of positive interna¬
tional law because the Charter is a treaty and therefore a legally
binding document. Its provisions should not be contradicted by
national laws or practices. It also establishes basic duties which all
members must fulfil in good faith. Thus nations, as an integral part
of the Charter, have the obligation to promote respect for, and
encourage observance of human rights and are committed to co¬
operate with other nations in fulfilling these aims.
Why do States resist international scrutiny of
their compliance with their duties to promote
and protect human rights under the Charter?
One of the Articles of the Charter (Article 2[7]) states that the
U.N. should not intervene "in matters which are essentially within
the domestic jurisdiction of any State..."
This provides the basis for the claims of States when they do not
want their affairs discussed, and do not wish to be shown up as
having contravened their undertakings in respect of human rights.
Does it follow that the U.N. Charter can have
an effect on actual situations?
The Charter recognizes that peace and stability among nations is
related to the recognition of respect for human rights and seeks to
establish conditions under which this can be achieved. It also
establishes a close link between human rights and other world¬
wide concerns such as the promotion of economic and social
co-operation.
Since the signing of the Charter, great changes have occurred,
especially regarding decolonization, and many new nations have
emerged.
However, as the provisions of the Charter are of a general
nature, it was necessary to establish more specific definitions of
human rights and freedoms in order that these could be practically
applied.
How was this done?
In 1945, a U.N. Commission on Human Rights was established
and entrusted with the task of drawing up an International Bill of
Human Rights, whereby these rights and freedoms would be
defined.
The first part of the Bill of Rights was achieved when on 10
December 1948 the General Assembly unanimously adopted the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights "as a common standard of
achievement for all peoples and all nations" (1).
Do States which were not at the time members
of the United Nations accept the Declaration?
The impact of the Declaration and the use made of it bear out
the universal acceptance of the Declaration and it has become a
norm of reference in human rights for all countries.
In a formal sense, parts of the Declaration have been cited in
national constitutions and other international instruments.
Governments have no hesitation in invoking the Declaration
when accusing other countries of violating their obligations under
the Declaration; parts of the Declaration were also included in
many new United Nations instruments agreed to by Member
States.
The Declaration, together with the Charter, served both as an
inspiration and a means for millions of people under colonial rule to
achieve self-determination. The universality of the claim to human
rights provided the justification and the means for liberation of
these oppressed peoples. In 1961 President Julius Nyerere of Tan-
(1) The full text of the Universal Declaration was reproduced in the November 1977
issue of the Unesco Courier.
8

Is the Declaration legally binding upon States?
The Declaration is not, as such, a legally binding document, but
by their actions and use of the Declaration, nations have endowed
the Declaration with a legitimacy which allows it to be invoked
both legally and politically at the international and domestic levels.
The consensus of the international community was expressed in
these terms at the Tehran Conference on Human Rights in 1968:
the Declaration "states a common understanding of the people of
the world concerning the inalienable rights of all members of the
human family and constitutes an obligation for all members of the
international community".
There is no legal sanction to compel States to meet this obliga¬
tion. As with other areas of international law and practice the main
sanction available to the international community is the withdrawal
from States of the confidence of other States upon their unwil¬
lingness to co-operate to discharge their obligations.
What steps were taken toward implementation?
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was the first tier in a
three-tier objective.
The second and third parts of the International Bill of Rights
were adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 1966.
They consisted of two Covenants the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights; and the International Covenant on
Social, Economic and Cultural Rightsand the Optional Protocol
to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. In adopting these
Covenants agreement was reached by the international commu¬
nity, not only on the contents of each right, but also in respect of
the right of States to derogate from or restrict these rights.
The Eternal Victim, a linocut by the French artist Paul Siehe.
ganyika in addressing the United Nations General Assembly said
"We shall try to use the Declaration of Human Rights as a basis for
both our external and internal policies".
All Member States take part in nominating and electing mem¬
bers to the Commission on Human Rights and participate in the
implementation machinery.
What are the rights proclaimed in the
Declaration?
These rights can be broadly divided into two kinds. The first
consists of civil and political rights which include the right to life,
liberty, security of person; freedom from torture or slavery; politi¬
cal participation; property, marriage and the fundamental free¬
doms of opinion, expression, thought, conscience, and religion;
freedom of association and assembly.
The second kind are social, economic and cultural rights which
relate to work, a reasonable standard of living, education and free¬
dom of cultural life. In addition, the first article of the Declaration
expresses the universality of rights in terms of the equality of
human dignity; and the second article expresses the entitlement of
all persons to the rights set out without discrimination of any kind.
The priorities underlying the rights proclaimed in the Declaration
are contained in the preamble to the Declaration, which starts by
recognizing the "inherent dignity, and the equal and inalienable
rights of all members of the human family".
How dó the Covenants differ from the
Declaration?
Firstly, the Covenants, once ratified by thirty-five governments,
are legally binding treaties.
Secondly, upon agreeing to become party to the Covenants,
States undertake to submit reports on their compliance with the
provisions of the Covenants.'
Thirdly, although the General Assembly adopted the Covenants
in 1966, they only entered into force in 1976 when the required
thirty-five States had ratified them.
Fourthly, the Covenants are only binding on those States which
are parties to them. In September 1978 fifty States had become
parties to the Covenants.
How do the Covenants relate to the Charter?
The Declaration interprets the basic rules on international law on
the subject of human rights embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations. Although the Covenants apply only directly to the States
which have ratified them, they have a relevance to all States in res¬
pect of the obligations of Member States of the United Nations
under the Charter and as interpreted by the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights which were both adopted as international stan¬
dards to be achieved.

L What means are provided for implementation?
A special Human Rights Committee has been established under
the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, consisting of eighteen
independent experts nominated by, but not representing, their
governments. This Committee receives and examines reports from
States as to how they are implementing their undertakings in res¬
pect of the Covenants. The Committee is able to question the
government concerned, and forwards comments to the govern¬
ment subsequently. The Committee is also empowered to receive
inter-State complaints when one State considers that another
State is not giving effect to its obligations under the Covenants.
This provision is not yet operative as the number of States required
to agree to it in the first instance is ten, and to date there have only
been six acceptances.
What can the Human Rights Committee do if it
considers that governments are not complying
with their undertakings?
Since the immediate protection of human rights depends upon
compliance at the national level, the effectiveness of the Commit¬
tee is limited as there is no enforcement machinery. However,
there is a persuasive value derived from the examination of reports
in public. Governments are sensitive to criticism of their human
rights performance. The principal object of the Committee is to
develop a constructive dialogue with reporting States and thereby
promote the compliance of States with the provisions of the
Covenant.
Are there other human rights instruments
besides the Bill of Rights?
There are a number of declarations and conventions adopted by
the General Assembly which elaborate and detail the specific
obligations and safeguards relating to particular human rights laid
down in the Declaration and the International Covenants. Among
these are conventions relating to discrimination and to the right to
life.
Genocide
In December 1948 the U.N. General Assembly adopted the Con¬
vention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Geno¬
cide. It came into force in 1961 and has now been ratified by
eighty-two States. Genocide is defined in the Convention as the
committing of certain acts with the intent to destroy, in whole, or
in part, a national, ethnic, racial or religious group. Genocide is
designated a crime under international law, whether committed in
time of war or of peace.
Discrimination
The International Convention on the Elimination of all forms of
Racial Discrimination entered into force in 1969 and has been rati¬
fied by ninety-seven States. It represents the most comprehensive
United Nations statement regarding discrimination on the grounds
of race, colour or ethnic origin.
States parties to the Convention undertake to pursue a policy of
eliminating racial discrimination in all its forms and to ensure the
protection of special racial groups guaranteeing their members full
and equal enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
A special Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
was established under the Convention to supervise governmental
compliance.
Does the Committee deal with individual
complaints?
Under the provisions of the Optional Protocol to the Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, the Committee can act on complaints
by individuals of violations of their rights by a State. Only citizens
of countries which have ratified this undertaking can make com¬
plaints to the Committee, and only after all domestic remedies
have been tried. Representation may also be made by another per¬
son on behalf of a victim who is not able personally to appeal to the
Committee. These complaints are considered privately, and the
Committee then makes its comments to the individual and to the
State concerned.
What provision is there for the implementation
of the Covenant on Social, Economic and
Cultural rights?
Under this Covenant States party to it submit reports to the Eco¬
nomic and Social Council (ECOSOC) of the United Nations on pro¬
gress made in achieving the rights recognized. A working group of
fifteen of its members, representing States which are parties to the
Covenant, has been appointed by ECOSOC to consider these
reports. All other States can attend as observers. In addition, the
sections of the reports relating to the sphere of competence of the
International Labour Organisation (ILO) or of Unesco are examined
by these bodies. Since most of the economic and social rights are
outside the reach of most of the world's peoples, largely through
no fault of their own, it remains the responsibility of the internatio¬
nal community to work towards the realization of these rights for
all peoples.
What are the functions of this Committee?
The Committee has four functions. The first, and hitherto its
main occupation, is the examination of reports from States on the
measures they have taken to implement the Convention. The
second procedure, which has not yet been invoked by any State,
allows the Committee to deal with inter-state complaints. The third
allows the Committee to examine complaints from individuals
against States, provided that the State concerned has recognized
the right of private petition. This procedure is not yet operative as
it requires at least ten States to have recognized this right and only
five have done so, to date. The fourth function is to provide assis¬
tance to the U.N. organs which review petitions from inhabitants
of trust and non-self-governing territories.
The way in which the Committee has conducted its task of
handling and examining reports has yielded a measure of success
insofar as getting States to file reports is concerned, and in en¬
suring that governments are represented at the examination of
their reports. The latter procedure allows for eliciting additional
information to that contained in the report. The Committee
refrains from any formal condemnation and pursues the means of
informal dialogue to encourage governments to comply with their
obligations. It is entitled to make "suggestions and recommenda¬
tions", but is dependent upon the General Assembly to endorse
and give authority to these.
Can anyone who feels that human rights are
being violated appeal to the United Nations?
Since its inception the United Nations has received annually
thousands of complaints from individuals and organizations al¬
leging violations of human rights. Between 1951 and 1971 there
were 120,000 such communications.
10

What is done about them?
The Human Rights Commission, which is a subsidiary body to
the Economic and Social Council, is the body primarily responsible
for dealing with these complaints, but it has no power, under any
of its procedures, to take action in respect of individual com¬
plaints. The method of dealing with complaints has been laid down
by the Economic and Social Council.
Confidential lists of complaints are handed to members of the
Commission, and States are informed of complaints against them;
but replies received from States are not passed on to the person or
organization submitting the complaint. In the early 1960s, the deep
concern of many new nations with the colonial and racial
attitudes in southern Africa prompted a move towards extending
the United Nations measures so that gross violations of Human
Rights could be dealt with. In 1967, the Economic and Social
Council adopted a Resolution, instructing the Commission on
Human Rights to "make a thorough study of situations which
reveal a consistent pattern of violations of human rights, as exem¬
plified by the policy of Apartheid"; and to report and make recom¬
mendations to the Economic and Social Council.
Fact-finding studies were then initiated, mainly concerned with
southern Africa, followed later by fact-finding groups of govern¬
ment experts concerned with other territories. Despite the fact that
none of these groups has ever been allowed to enter the territories
concerned they have been able to gather a great deal of evidence
on which subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Commission on Human Rights have been based. The activities of
these groups are carried out in public; but it has nevertheless been
a restricted operation, as it has not been extended to situations
beyond those mentioned.
In 1970, an Economic and Social Council Resolution set up a
rather complex confidential procedure whereby complaints which
reveal "a consistent pattern of gross and reliably attested violation
of human rights and fundamental freedoms" should be examined.
For the first time, evidence could be submitted not only by victims
of violations, but also by any person, group or non-governmental
organization with a direct and reliable knowledge of the violations.
The complaints are examined in the first instance by a Working
Group of the Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination
and the Protection of Minorities (a subsidiary of the Commission
on Human Rights), which makes recommendations to its Sub-
Committee, which in turn makes recommendations to a Working
Group of the Commission on Human Rights, which in turn makes
recommendations to the Commission on Human Rights. The Com¬
mission on Human Rights has to decide whether to recommend to
the Economic and Social Council that the situation re¬
quires a thorough study, and report on whether an ad hoc com¬
mittee should be established to investigate the situation in co¬
operation with the State concerned.
The entire procedure is confidential until such time as the Com¬
mission on Human Rights makes a recommendation to the Econo¬
mic and Social Council; hence there has been no official informa¬
tion hitherto regarding the operation of the procedure. For the first
time, in March 1978, the Commission listed the countries which
had been considered at its session that year under this procedure.
To date, however, no situation has been publicly reported to have
been recommended for further study.
Leah Levin


