Catalan masters
of modern art
by Alexandre Cirici
c
ATALONIAN art can only be fully
understood when set in its geo¬
graphical and historical context.
The Catalan language is used in a broad
area on the western littoral of the Mediter¬
ranean. Catalonia, which was for many
centuries an independent state, is today
inhabited by some 10 million people and
divided between Spain and to a lesser
extent the Principality of Andorra and
France. In France, Catalonian territory
coincides almost exactly with the adminis¬
trative department of the Pyrénées Orienta¬
les (Eastern Pyrenees), and in Spain with
the provinces of Gerona, Barcelona,
Lérida, Tarragona, Castellón, Valencia, Ali¬
cante and the Balearic and Pitiusan Islands.
Catalonia first appeared in history in 801
as an outpost of the Carolingian empire
known as the Spanish March (Marca His¬
pánica). In the 10th century, during the
rule of Count Borrel II, it declared its inde¬
pendence of the Frankish empire. Thus
was born a sovereign state which would
last until the 18th century.
In the 12th century Catalonia began to
grow, with the conquest of Tarragona and
Lérida, and in the 13th, when expansion to
the north was blocked by the French, it
acquired fresh territory further south.
Mallorca was conquered in 1229, Ibiza and
Formentera in 1235, Valencia in 1238 and
Minorca in 1287. The resulting confedera¬
tion between Catalonia, Valencia and the
Balearic Islands marked the appearance of
national unity in the territory where the
Catalan language is still used today.
The construction of a vast Catalonian
Photo Jean
16
© Editions Carmen Martinez, Pans
ALEXANDRE CIRICI, Barcelona-born Spanish
art historian and art critic, is professor of the
sociology of art in the university of Barcelona.
The author of some 80 published works, includ¬
ing studies on Gaudi, Picasso, Miró and Tapies,
he is member of the Miro Foundation Jn Barce¬
lona. He is also a member of the Spanish senate
and of Spain's delegation to the European
Parliament in Strasbourg.
empire in the Mediterranean then got under
way with the annexation of Sicily in 1282,
Greece in 1311, Sardinia in 1323, and the
kingdom of Naples in 1443.
Pyrenean Catalonia, where people lived
mainly from farming and livestock rearing,
became a meeting-point of cultures. The
urban civilization of Islamic Cordoba, then
the greatest city in the West, spread from
the monasteries of Ripoll and Cuixa to the
rural areas of Europe. Monumental sculp¬
ture, instrumental music, secular poetry
and so-called "Arabic" numerals were
important features in this process of cul¬
tural transmission. Catalonia was also
among the birthplaces of troubadour
poetry.
At the beginning of the 16th century, the
last king of Catalonia and the queen of Cas¬
tile made the Fleming Charles V their sole
heir. Thus Catalonia and Valencia came to
figure among the states ruled by the House
of Austria.
In 1660 France annexed the northern part
of Catalonia (present-day Roussillon), and
in the 18th century Spain brought the
Catalans under its rule. Valencia lost its
independence in 1705, and in 1713 Minorca
became an English possession. Mallorca
and Ibiza lost their autonomy in 1715, as
did Catalonia in 1717. From that moment
on, France and Spain began to stamp their
imprint on their new acquisitions.
Even so, 19th-century Catalonia enjoyed
a remarkable economic, literary, scientific
and political renaissance, which trans¬
formed it into a modern industrial region
equipped with a major seaport. At the
same time, Catalan came to the forefront
of the world's "non-official" languages in
terms of published output.
Catalan is today the only official lan¬
guage of Andorra. It is also one of the two
official languages of Catalonia, a status;
which it is also expected to acquire in'
Valencia and the Balearic Islands during
1978. Since 1977, the area of Catalonia i
which forms part of the Spanish state has I

Catalonia, which produced
a remarkable school of
Romanesque painters and
sculptors in the Middle
Ages (see following pages),
has also made a major
contribution to modern art.
Some of the boldest artistic
innovators of the century
were Catalonians, such as
Julio González (see page
23) and Pau Gargallo. A
pioneer of cubist sculpture,
Gargallo was one of the
first artists to experiment
with modern industrial
techniques for fashioning
metal. Shown here, two
typical examples of his
work: The Prophet (detail
left) and David with his
Harp (opposite page).
17

> been moving towards the autonomous sta¬
tus it enjoyed between 1931 and 1939. It
now has a government of its own that
devotes special attention to Catalan lan¬
guage and culture.
The most remarkable contribution of the
Catalan people to world culture is without
doubt their art. Architects, sculptors and
painters from Catalonia have played a
major role in the revolution in visual idioms
that has taken place in this century.
The development of modern art in Cata¬
lonia can be broken down into three main
phases.
Between 1890 and 1910 the Symbolists
opened up new horizons, and their works
reflect the joy of life and the spontaneous,
instinctive manifestations of human nature.
The period from 1910 to the outbreak of
the Spanish Civil War in 1936 was marked
by bold experimentation, as artists sought
new directions, new methods and intellec¬
tual concepts, as well as a fresh sensibility.
A renewed spirit of adventure in the arts
appeared around 1950, when the fascist
régime ceased to be applied in all its
severity.
The first of these periods was that of
"Modernism", a revolutionary movement
in the arts that affected architecture in par¬
ticular, but also radically changed the
forms of objects such as ceramic ware and
curtains, stained-glass windows and metal
ornaments, jewellery, porcelain, clothes,
posters and books.
Everywhere the forms inherited from
classical art began to give way to sinuous
lines and a profusion of floral shapes, the
lyrical manifestation of a quest for an inten¬
sified sensuality which could only find
expression in the most mysterious art
which on the one hand sought its inspira¬
tion in grandiose concepts, and on the
other took delight in a close scrutiny of
details the meticulous observation of
twigs and insects.
Art of this kind existed in other European
countries as a form of decorative fantasy,
but in Catalonia it had a remarkable vitality
that expressed itself in hundreds of build¬
ings and in decorative ensembles and
objects of exceptional quality.
The most outstanding figure in this
movement was the architect Antoni Gaudi,
who broke with dull, colourless academic
traditions to create a highly original type of
architecture rich in colour, sometimes in¬
fused with Islamic or Japanese motifs, and
always looking to Nature for its inspiration.
Gaudi began with shapes borrowed from
exotic styles, but he was soon covering his
buildings with a coating of sculptural forms
taken from the landscape and from the
living world of Nature stars, constella¬
tions, clouds, rocks, icicles, plants, animals
and people.
Later he even went so far as to treat
architectural features as organic shapes.
Thus windows became gaping mouths,
cornices eyebrows, columns thighbones,
rooftops scaly skins, domes garlic bulbs,
vaults rib cages, and so forth.
Towards the end of his life Gaudi put this
imitation of natural forms behind him and


, concentrated on the inner logic of struc¬
tural design.
Another architect of the period, Lluis
Domènech ¡ Montaner, combined a search
for technical innovations with a lavish use
of decorative floral motifs, covering every
inch of his buildings with ceramic flowers
in high relief, mosaics, stained glass and
trees sculptured in stone.
Younger than both Gaudi and Montaner,
Josep Puig i Cadafalch carried on where
they left off. To the fantastic, polychrome
architectural style of "Modernism" he
added a whole range of structural and
decorative forms taken from the folk art of
Catalonian rural houses to which he gave a
rich ornamental character. He was also
instrumental in helping to revive the tradi¬
tional skills of blacksmithing, glassworking,
graffito decoration (1) and tile-making.
The most original figurative artist of the
period was Isldre Nonell, who broke with
academic theory by choosing to paint the
slums, the poor, the mentally retarded,
gypsies and outcasts. The most important
phase of his artistic career might be the
record of a descent into hell. During this
sombre period a bronze-green colour pre¬
dominates in canvases depicting the
melancholy faces of gypsies bowed down
by care and rapt in silent thought. Yet des-
Dite the gloomy subjects and the sombre
(1) Graffito is a method of decoration in which designs
are produced by scratching through a superficial layer
of plaster, etc., revealing a ground of a different colour.
Colour page opposite
Above left: the Nativity, detail of
an altar panel from the church of
St. Andrew, in Sagas, north of
Barcelona. This 12th-century
work is now in the Diocesan
Museum, Solsona. Above right,
Lazarus at the rich man's gate. A
detail of murals from the
12th-century church of St. Clement,
in Tahull, it is now in the Art
Museum of Catalonia, Barcelona.
Nativity (below) from a frontal of
the church of St. Mary, Avia, was
painted around 1200 by the Master
of Avia. It is also in the Art
Museum of Catalonia, Barcelona.
Photos Unesco
Photo © Spanish Embassy, Paris
tones of these paintings they are rich in
subtle colour gradations.
Nonell was a friend of Picasso during the
latter's famous "blue period" in Barcelona,
and his own development followed similar
lines. Only towards the end of his life did
he again come to terms with joy, beauty,
light and transparent hues.
Aristide Maillol, the sculptor from French
Catalonia, stands on the borderline bet¬
ween the dreams and visions of the turn of
the century and the new taste for simple,
concrete forms which was to characterize
art after 1910. He discarded the concept of
sculpture viewed as the interplay of light
and shadow, and introduced the new idea
that sculpture was the art of volumes set in
space.
Two other Catalonian sculptors took part
in the avant-garde movement in Paris and
went on to win international acclaim. One
of them, Pau Gargallo, was a key figure in
the creation of cubist sculpture. His great
contribution was to show that volume did
not necessarily imply a physical mass but
that it could also be represented by empty
space. Gargallo discovered that it was pos¬
sible to express volume by the use of inter¬
secting planes and the technique of per¬
foration.
The other sculptor, Juli González, after
working for many years as a jeweller,
invented an art form that would be widely
imitated sculpture made by welding metal
with an acetylene torch. This technique
often produced dramatic results because of
the effects of the molten iron dripping.
The most important contribution to the
avant-garde, however, came from the pain¬
ters associated with the surrealist move¬
ment.
The most brilliant was Joan Miró, who
has today become the national painter of
Catalonia and is still as active and produc¬
tive as ever.
Miró began to be known about 1918. In
1923, influenced by his friendship with the
surrealist poets in Paris, he made the great
discovery that was to lead to his distinctive
of painting.
As he himself said, he stopped looking
for Nature and let Nature come to him.
Thus he learned to look at landscape for a
long while, allowing it to impress itself on
his mind. Only then would he paint, giving
his hand free rein, guided only by the feel¬
ings that contemplation of the countryside
had aroused in him.
Since that time Miró has painted his own
highly personal world. It ¡s a world full of
mystery, strength and joy, but one which
also sends out cries of despair, a universe
peopled by creatures that hover between a
mythological earth and sky filled with
signs, where birds and star clusters exist
side by side with great red suns and blue
moons.
A few years later there appeared another
surrealistic vision, that of Salvador Dalí
who used a meticulous, academic manner
to paint his dreams and obsessions, reveal¬
ing in his work a whole new world of sub¬
conscious realities.
The Spanish Civil War (1936-1939) did
not.interrupt, but on the contrary stimula-
CONTINUED PAGE26
Julio González, a Catalonian who
settled in Paris as a young man and
became a friend of Picasso, is one of
the founders of modern sculpture. He
used the techniques he learned as a
welder in a car factory to create works
in sheet metal. Above, Don Quixote, a
cubist work by González.
23

Surreal living quarters
Two multi-storied apartment buildings in Barcelona (above, the Casa Battlo; below
right, the Casa Mila) illustrate Gaudi's penchant for highly animated surfaces. Broad
wavy balconies enliven the façade of the Battlo house, which is covered with pieces
of coloured glass and enamelled ceramic tile. Building with stepped gable end, at
left of the Battlo house, is by another Catalonian architect, Josep Puig i Cadafalch,
who played a leading role in the modernist movement. The Mila house, and
especially the roof terrace shown here, is one of Gaudi's most astounding creations.
An undulating path without handrails runs round the void of two inner patios,
creating an atmosphere of insecurity heightened by the weirdly-shaped chimneys.
Another great Catalan artist, Salvador Dali, is a fervent admirer of Gaudi and drew
inspiration from the Mila terrace in architectural drawings (below).
kted, the artistic efforts of the Catalonians
who almost to a man defended their auto¬
nomous regional form of government and
the Republic against Falangist forces. An
example of the spirit of the time was the
opening of the pavilion of the Spanish
Republic at the Paris International Exhibi¬
tion in 1937 where Picasso's Guernica, Juli
Gonzalez's Montserrat and Joan Miro's
Segador were all displayed in a building
designed by Josep Lluis Sert.
Sert is an architect who took part from
the outset from 1929, to be exact in the
creation of the international movement in
favour of functionalist architecture. His
contribution consisted in broadening its
programme by incorporating features
drawn from Mediterranean folk art, as well
as the equally Mediterranean concept of
deep interior spaces where light filters in.
Sert was exiled at the end of the Civil War
and sought refuge in the United States,
where he became Dean of Architecture at
Harvard University.
For years the directives of the Falangist
State forbade any attempt to build in a
modern style, until finally the treaty con¬
cluded between Spain and the United
States in 1951 brought with it more free¬
dom in architecture.
From then on a style known as organic
architecture began to develop around J.A.
Coderch, an innovator with a fondness for
trapezoidal spaces and star-shaped ground
plans, though he later evolved towards
sophisticated experiments in the use of
materials and space.
The restless yearnings of Catalonian
architects ultimately crystallized in the Bar¬
celona School, in which Oriol Bohigas
played a leading role. Members of this
school followed the tenets of empiricism,
which was given the name of "realism",
and looked for a fresh kind of visual poetry,
while continuing to use traditional building
methods.
In the last 25 years Catalonian painting
has been dominated by the personality of

Masters
of despair
Isidre Nonell (1873-1911) was a leading figure in the Catalan artistic revival of the early 20th
century. As a young man he broke away from prevailing trehds in academic painting, and turned
to portraits of gypsies, outcasts and the poor. In Barcelona around the turn of the century, he
was closely associated with the young Pablo Picasso, who made a careful study of Nonell's work.
Several of Picasso's paintings from this famous "Blue Period", such as the Absinthe Drinker (left)
display a strong affinity with such typical Nonell works as the Seated Gypsy (right).
Antoni Tapies. After a period in which he
painted magical, mysterious imagery, he
began to produce what has been called
"matter painting", in which terrifying graf¬
fiti are scraped or scratched on rough, sim¬
ple materials to express the anguish of life
and a protest against death and destruc¬
tion.
Since 1970 there has been a marked
trend towards the "dematerialization" of
art and the use of media such as video
tapes. Antoni Muntadas, In conjunction
with certain groups in the United States, is
carrying out highly original research in this
field, as well as experiments in tactile and
olfactory art.
Catalonia continues in the forefront of
world art developments.
Alexandre Ciricl
The Centre of
Contemporary Art Studies
in Barcelona (left) ¡s a
major work by José Luis
Sert, one of Catalonia's
most outstanding modern
architects. Also known as
the Miró Foundation after
its creator, the great
Catalan painter Joan Miró,
the Centre has just been
awarded a prize by the
Council of Europe for "its
contribution to the creation
of a new conception of the
art museum as a cultural
centre". The Centre
houses an Important
collection of works
donated by its founder.
27
