DUBROVNIK
Gateway to the Latin West
by Vuk Vuco
Photos Nenad Gattin © University Press Liber, Zagreb
Ever since medieval times when Slav and Latin settlements merged to form a single city on a
promontory jutting out into the Adriatic, Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia (Croatia) has formed a link between East
and West. Although the port was almost totally destroyed by an earthquake in 1667, vestiges of the
ancient walls and bastions that once guarded its seaward approaches (above right) have survived to
frame the modern port (aerial view above left).
THE seventh decade of the seven¬
teenth century was an unhappy
one for Europe. Throughout the
1660s waves of disasters and afflictions of
all kinds swept the continent, from London
to the shores of Asia Minor, from Sicily to
Scandinavia. Wars and epidemics were
rampant, and claimed hundreds of thou¬
sands of victims.
At this time one proud European city on
the Adriatic enjoyed the blessings of peace
and prosperity in such abundance that its
VUK VUCO, Yugoslav poet and novelist, is also
a critic specializing in the dramatic arts. His
novel Les Voleurs de Feu (The Fire Robbers) has
been published in France by Seuil publishers,
Paris. He is currently editor-in-chief of Danas, a
magazine for Yugoslavs living in France.
citizens might have been forgiven for
thinking that the kindly waters of their sea
would protect them forever. This city, one
of the most beautiful in seventeenth-
century Europe, had a banner which bore
the inscription Libertas freedom. Its name
was Dubrovnik.
On 6 April 1667, the Wednesday of Holy
Week, a cloudless day dawned over
Dubrovnik. A calm, unruffled sea stretched
beneath an azure sky. By 8 o'clock that
morning the sky was still clear and the
waves lapped gently against the city fortifi¬
cations. A group of notables strolled out¬
side the palace, waiting for the bell to sum¬
mon them to the Great Council, which met
at Eastertide to pardon convicted criminals.
In the palace chapel a religious ceremony
attended by the ruler and by Dubrovnik's
highest dignitaries was drawing to a close, i
The bishop was intoning a prayer of grati- |
43

tude for the peace and plenty that prevailed
in the tiny republic and expressing his hope
that they would long continue.
At that moment the earth began to trem¬
ble. Within a matter of seconds, amid a
crescendo of noise, the entire city was
transformed by an earthquake into a mass
of rubble. Palaces, monuments, churches,
fortifications the pride of Dubrovnik
which had been lovingly and painstakingly
created over the centuries, all collapsed
like a house of cards.
The ruler of Dubrovnik, his retinue and
the highest servants of State perished in
the cataclysm along with three-quarters of
the city's population. On the nearby island
of Lopud, which was also hit by the earth¬
quake no more than 400 of the 14,000
¡slanders survived.
Misfortunes never come singly. The
earthquake was followed by a fire and a
tidal wave. Then came an army of looters
who for weeks on end pillaged the ruins
and robbed the dead. The enemies of
Dubrovnik, who until then had never dared
to attack the mighty fortress, flocked by
land and sea to the stricken and defence¬
less city.
Several times in its history Dubrovnik has
risen from the ashes of disaster. Barely two
centuries before the earthquake of 1667 the
city had experienced and survived another
terrible earthquake followed by an epi¬
demic of plague which decimated the
population. But neither natural catastro¬
phes nor the vicissitudes of history could
wipe this remarkable city from the map.
Many cities in the modern world pride
themselves on their cosmopolitanism and
boast that they provide a favourable setting
for the intermingling of different cultures.
Few can rival Dubrovnik as a cross-roads
where the cultural heritage of the East and
West' have met and been mutually en¬
riched. For Dubrovnik is remarkable not
only for its vitality and its resilience in the
face of ordeals, but as a gem which has
been polished for centuries in the ebb and
flow of East and West.
At the time of the great invasion of Dal-
matia by the Avaro-Slavs, around 614
A.D., the settlement of Epidaurus (present-
day Cavtat) was sacked and razed to the
ground. Tradition has it that the survivors
of this massacre went on to found a new
colony, Ragusium, two hours' march
northwards along the rocky coast.
Close by this settlement, whose name is
derived from a Latin word meaning escarp¬
ment, was the Slav forest colony of
Dubrovnik (dubrova in Serbo-Croat means
"woody"). The initial antagonism between
the two populations slowly disappeared,
and the two colonies merged into a single
city. By the beginning of the 13th century
"Ragusium-Dubrovnik" had become a
single community where different ethnic
groups, cultures and religions developed a
spirit of coexistence which still survives
today.
In the course of its long history, Dubrov¬
nik has transformed its handicaps into
advantages: it has turned poverty into
wealth, calmed the warlike, and reoonciled
different religions and opposing economic
forces. All this it has achieved by obeying
whenever possible an ancient local proverb
according to which "A bad quarrel is
always better than a good war".
Right from the start Dubrovnik's econo¬
mic life was based on seafaring and trade.
In the.ninth century sailors plied eastwards
as far as the Black Sea and northwards as
far as England, whence they set out on
even longer voyages in the Atlantic. By the
beginning of the thirteenth century its fleet
was so large that the tiny republic began to
challenge Venice for mastery of the seas.
Through a combination of diplomatic and
maritime skills, Dubrovnik had become a
great seaport by the 14th century.
Dubrovnik rapidly became the main
trading centre of the Balkan Peninsula, and
its operations extended as far as Italy and
other Mediterranean countries. Nor was
the shift of maritime trade from the Medi¬
terranean to the Atlantic a major drawback
to the city's economic fortunes ; indeed it
was in the sixteenth century and the first
half of the seventeenth century that
Dubrovnik achieved the very height of its
prosperity.
To preserve its freedom, the city always
had to pay a high price to the Venetians,
the Byzantines, the Turks and the Slav
kingdoms in the north. The Serb kingdoms
cast particularly covetous eyes on the tiny
independent state, attracted by the wealth
it had garnered from the four corners of the
earth but above all because it was an
incomparable outlet to the sea. And yet the
sea receded before them like a mirage as
they advanced, for all their efforts to wage
open war against Dubrovnik ended in
failure. Powerful protectors Slav Tsars
and Latin Kings alike rushed to aid the
republic whenever danger threatened.
After two perilous centuries, a ruler who
understood the true importance of Dubrov¬
nik came to the Serbian throne in the per¬
son of Tsar Dusan. An able statesman and
a prodigious expansionist, Dusan decided
to withdraw the sword of aggression and
extend the hand of friendship. Like the
other Slav rulers, indeed like all the Slavs,
he was mesmerized by Dubrovnik. But
paradoxically, for he was after all a Serb,
he felt that the city should be treated as a
precious relic. In 1346, shortly after his
coronation as Tsar, he set out for Dubrov¬
nik on a peace mission.
The meeting between Dusan and the
patricians of Dubrovnik beneath the gilded
beams of the Great Council Chamber
44

Customs house, mint and granary, the
16th-century Sponza Palace (above left)
played a central role in Dubrovnik's
economy. In niche beneath the roof is
statue of St. Vlaho (St. Blasius), the
city's patron saint. The early 16th-
century artist Nikola Bozidarevic
portrayed St. Vlaho holding a model of
Dubrovnik in painting (above) which
forms part of a triptych in the city's
Dominican church.
marked a turning point in the history of the
Serbian state and of the entire Slav world.
It opened up a new channel of communica¬
tion along which different traditions could
flow and be exchanged. This fruitful
alliance with Dubrovnik, a child of Western
civilization, would open for the Slavs a
gateway to European culture.
Medieval chronicles recount how certain
Serbian dignitaries persistently urged
Dusan to attack and conquer Dubrovnik
and how he categorically refused, prefer¬
ring instead to confirm the city's centuries-
old freedoms and to shower lavish gifts on
its churches and monasteries. Rather than
trample on the banner of St. Vlaho, protec¬
tor of the city, he would send young Slavs
to Dubrovnik for their education. Contem¬
porary writers report him as saying: "I res¬
pect the Senate of Dubrovnik for its signal
virtues. Through its Latin erudition, its
wealth and its trade, Dubrovnik is a fitting
model for the edification and the prosper¬
ity of my reign; this fine city will be the
trading centre of all the territories of my
realm."
In more recent centuries Dubrovnik also
had to pay a high price for its freedom.
When it came under Napoleon's domina¬
tion in 1806, and two years later ceased to
exist as a free republic, the city fathers
fomented a plot without parallel in history.
As a gesture of protest and as a means of
ensuring that no descendants of theirs
should ever bé subjected to foreign rule,
the families of Dubrovnik vowed not to
procreate until they were free once more.
From that moment until the liberation of
the city in 1815 no child was born to the
nobility of Dubrovnik.
In a long history stretching over twelve
centuries, Dubrovnik has never spared any
effort to preserve its freedom. This passion
for independence may be partly due to the
fact that the city's geographical position
makes it a point at which world cul¬
tural trends and influences converge. But
this is only part of the story. Dubrovnik has
succeeded in resisting threats and dangers
from East and West because of its links
with what is today Croatia, a hinterland
from which it has drawn linguistic and cul¬
tural sustenance. The Renaissance saw a
great flowering of Croatian literature in
Dubrovnik whose lasting achievements in
poetry and the dramatic arts are just as
important as the city's architectural master¬
pieces. By drawing life from the Croatian
artistic genius, Dubrovnik brought Croatia
into the great movement which was the
Renaissance in the West.
Travellers of the past penned ecstatic
descriptions of their first glimpse of
Dubrovnik from the sea. "An enchanting
picture opens out before your eyes", wrote
one of them. "The islands are deployed like
ships right as far as the port of Dubrovnik.
Your boat glides over the calm sea- and
rounds the lighthouse; it is as if you were
entering wonderland..."
Today the spell is still unbroken. The
modern traveller is transported into the
past as he approaches Dubrovnik's marble
and granite monuments eternally caressed
by the sun.
The city's long main street, the Stradun,
runs along a valley which was formely a
marshy channel dividing the Latin settle¬
ment from the Slav colony. Seven hundred
years ago the channel was filled in and
became a thoroughfare along which Latins
and Slavs would live together forever.
The people of Dubrovnik remain proud
of their city and its cosmopolitan traditions.
Walk along the Stradun today, especially in
the summer months, and you will hear
dozens of different languages being spo¬
ken. With its beautiful palaces, fountains
and churches, Dubrovnik has remained
faithful to its past. Each summer its music
and drama festivals attract great perfor¬
mers from all over the world, further
evidence that the cosmopolitan spirit still
lives on. The Slavs in our time the
Yugoslavs have preserved this gateway
to the Mediterranean. This city on the
shores of a sea which cradled more than
one civilization, continues to be a focus for
the exchange of traditions. Here where the
history of Europe began it continues to be
made and enriched.
Vuk Vuco
45
