by A. Ramachandran
and J. Gururaja
A. Ramachandran, president of India's Solar
Energy Society, is Secretary for Science and
Technology of the Government of India, New
Delhi, and director-general of his country's
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research.
J. Gururaja is secretary of India's Solar Energy
Society and director of the new energy sources
section of the Indian Government's department
of science and technology. He is the author of
some 25 studies on thermal engineering.



The sun
also surprises
From refrigeration to desalination
the myriad possibilities of solar energy
THE sun is the source of nearly all forms
of energy on the earth and there is
strong evidence that recent scienti¬
fic and technological progress in the collec¬
tion, storage and conversion of solar
energy will bring the widespread utilization
of this form of energy much nearer. Given
suitable conversion systems it could, at
least ¡n principle, meet the bulk of the
world's future energy demands.
The world's total energy consumption
equals the solar energy received every year
by an area of 22,000 square kilometres a
mere 0.005 per cent of the surface of the
globe. Even if a conversion efficiency of
only 10 per cent were achieved, global
needs could in theory be met from solar
energy falling on less than half the area of,
say, France.
~ln practice, however, the exploitation of
even a fraction of this energy presents a
colossal challenge to both technology and
industry. There are two major problems.
Firstly, although solar energy is abundant
and ubiquitous, its diffuse nature means
that it is expensive to collect and convert.
Secondly, it is not always available, and so
storage is necessary. Thus, cost-effective
technologies for collection, conversion and
storage must be developed.
The possible uses and potential benefits
of solar energy have aroused high hopes.
Grandiose schemes have been aired, such
as putting a few square kilometres of solar
cells in geostationary orbit and beaming the
electricity so generated by microwave to
the earth, and building solar power stations
(in the form of towers) of 100 to 1,000
megawatt capacity. Pilot studies on pro¬
jects of this kind are already underway. In
the industrialized world, it is estimated that
it will take between 20 and 25 years for
such schemes to come to fruition. For
most developing countries; however, such
schemes are an even more distant, and
perhaps unattainable prospect.
Other, simpler applications of solar
energy that seem more feasible in the short
or medium term are water and air heating
systems, distillation, industrial process
heat, small and medium scale power
plants, various systems and devices using
photovoltaic (or solar) cells which convert
solar energy directly to electricity, and a
number of indirect uses such as bio-
conversion and wind energy.
These applications, which are accorded
different priorities in different countries,
call for a variety of technological ap¬
proaches. In the developing world, the
major emphasis is on small-scale solar tech¬
nologies compatible with local skills and
materials, but such constraints do not
usually obtain in the industrially developed
countries.
Specially designed collectors which
absorb and transform the rays of the sun
into energy are a feature of all solar energy
devices. Such collectors fall into two
broad categories focussing collectors and
flat plate collectors, the latter being gen¬
erally used at low temperatures (less than
100 °C). Thermal energy used for heating
buildings (such heating accounts for a
significant proportion of energy consump¬
tion in the U.S.A. and Europe), for drying
various commodities, and for producing
hot water for domestic purposes, can be
provided by flat plate collectors.
Where high temperatures are involved,
focussing collectors are essential. Nearly
all focussing collectors require equipment
for tracking the sun and their surface must
have a high degree of reflectivity. Meeting
these requirements poses complex techno¬
logical problems.
Solar water heaters are already being
widely used in Japan, (where over a million
have been installed), Australia and Israel
(250,000) and are becoming increasingly
popular in the U.S.A. and some parts of
Europe. In the industrialized countries, the
need for domestic heating systems is well
established and its impact on the economy
is an accepted fact. In the developing
countries, however, the priorities have not
yet been fully worked out.
One view is that climatic conditions and
the life style of the vast majority of people
in the developing world are such that
demand from private consumers is relati¬
vely low and that the development of pri¬
vate consumption should not be given pri¬
ority. However, it is becoming increasingly
clear that a wide range of potential uses of
low grade heat exists in countries like
India ¡n rural industries based on agricul¬
ture, in dairy farming, in the chemical,
paper and food Industries, as well as in
public health centres, schools, canteens,
laundries, hotels, restaurants and other
commercial enterprises.
There is an enormous need for plant to
dry various agricultural products such as
rice, corn, groundnuts, copra, tea, coffee,
16

This prototype solar boiler was developed at
Genoa University's botanical research farm on
the Mediterranean coast of Italy. The array of
271 flat round mirrors (each of 0.5 square
metres) focusses sunlight onto a small
superheater boiler suspended from the stalk¬
like arm. Steam from the boiler is used to
operate an electricity generator.
cashews, chillies, grapes and other com¬
modities such as fish. The lack of adequate
drying and storage facilities is largely res¬
ponsible for food losses of between 20 and
25 per cent. Solar driers can be an effec¬
tive substitute for traditional methods.
Solar driers ranging from simple locally
manufactured cabinet driers to big blower-
driven models have been built and tested.
One such unit, capable of drying 10 tonnes
of rice per day, recently came into opera¬
tion on a seed farm near Ludhiana in India.
Preliminary estimates tend to show that the
cost of solar drying is much less than that
of conventional oil-fired systems and that
capital costs could be recovered in less
than five years.
However, only the industrially developed
countries seem likely to develop sufficient
productive capacity in this field, supporting
their efforts by marketing policies and fiscal
incentives. In the developing countries,
the lack of economic structures and manu¬
facturing facilities ¡s hindering the applica¬
tion of solar energy even in sectors where
its use is a viable proposition.
Energy from the sun can be used to cool
things as well as to warm them, and solar
refrigeration is another field in which rapid
progress could be made. It could play a
major role in the preservation of perishable
goods, reducing wastage and bringing eco¬
nomic stability to farmers who often have
to resort to distress selling due to lack of
adequate preservation facilities.
Development of community-size cold
storage facilities should be accorded a high
priority in developing countries. Although
various types of solar absorption refrigera¬
tion units have been made and tested in a
number of countries (the U.S.A., the
U.S.S.R., Japan, France and India) many
financial and technical problems still remain
to be solved. Solar refrigeration is unlikely
to be available on a commercial scale in less
than five years.
In spite of great technological achieve¬
ments, thq development of small engines
for solar energy applications has so far not
yielded positive results. The small engines
now available are expensive. Two kinds of
engine are currently being developed:
prime movers of one to three kilowatts,
capable of driving small irrigation pumps;
and medium-sized (20 to 50 kilowatt) pum-,
ping or power plant units for lifting irriga i
tion water. f
17

r Prototypes of both have been developed
¡n France and the U.S.A., and a few have
even been sold in African countries. One
solar irrigation pump developed in the
U.S.A. can lift some 50,000 litres of water
per minute to a height of over four metres. '
These developments indicate that there
is no dearth of technological potential. At
present costs are high and many systems
are too complex and hence difficult to op¬
erate under rural conditions. Thus al¬
though the development of solar pumps is
a priority target in many developing coun¬
tries, such engines do not seem to be desti¬
ned for widespread use in the near future.
For small capacity pumping of the order of
one kilowatt or so, photovoltaic cells may
prove attractive if costs are brought down.
Bigger units in the 10-to-50-kilowatt
range are more suitable for large farms, but
in developing countries power plants of
this capacity should be developed not only
for Irrigation but for village industries, and
other community activities. Only a few
experimental power plants in this range
(including a 10 kilowatt experimental solar
thermal power plant in India) have so far
been installed. A number of systems based
on a variety of technologies are currently
being studied. Technical and economic
data are not yet sufficient to enable us to
forecast future demand for such units.
The conversion of solar energy Into elec¬
tricity by photovoltaic cells is a particularly
promising technique. The manufacture of
such cells demands a highly sophisticated
technology but systems based on photo¬
voltaic cells are so simple to operate that
they are highly attractive to industrialized
and developing nations alike. . They have
no moving parts, last a long time, and
require little maintenance. Their capacity
ranges from a few watts to several kilo¬
watts. As things stand, however, costs are
still prohibitive for anything other than
highly specialized applications.
Nevertheless, in the last five years there
has been a tenfold drop in the cost of solar
cell electricity, which now ranges from $12
Solar power
18

n orbit
Beyond our atmosphere solar energy is
available in quantities up to 15 times
that which reaches the earth's surface.
The challenge of tapping this virtually
unlimited energy source has stimulated
the imagination and ingenuity of
modern scientists and engineers. Pho¬
tos 1, 2 and 3 show an artist's impres¬
sions of one audacious project for a
satellite solar power station currently
being studied in the United States. The
design calls for a massive solar power
collector, assembled in space, to be sta¬
tioned in fixed orbit some 35,000 km.
above the equator. (Unlike ground-
based solar power systems, the station
would face no energy storage problems
because the sunlight would be virtually
uninterrupted.) From this orbital posi¬
tion it would transmit solar power via a
microwave beam to a vast off-shore
receiving antenna (3) 10 km. in diameter,
on the earth. There the microwave
energy would be converted into electri¬
city and fed into the grid.
The satellite station itself would consist
of a vast array of solar cells (of the kind
now used in spacecraft and satellites)
mounted on two massive rectangular
panels each measuring approximately 6
km. long by 5 km. wide (1). Between the
panels is a circular microwave antenna
some 800 metres in diameter, which
rotates so as to remain always pointed
at the earth receiver. The solar cells
constantly face the sun. The satellite,
which would provide 5,000 mega¬
watts to meet the needs of a
city the size of New York would weigh
some 20,000 tonnes. Elements of a solar
power sky-lab could be transported into
space in the 1980s by the Space Shuttle,
but a much larger "Heavy Lift Launch
Vehicle" would be required to put cons¬
truction materials into orbit for a full-
sized satellite. When the basic materials
were in orbit, assembly would begin.
Photo 2 shows work proceeding on a
solar panel while (beneath it) a utility
vehicle brings more material to the site.
In photo 1 the assembled satellite heads
for its final orbit point, gently pushed by
a solar-electric propulsion system.
Photo 4 shows another project for a
satellite solar power station: a four-
segment array stretching 15 km. across
space. The round disc collects energy
and transmits it to earth in the form of
microwaves.
19

/t\ :4x^^H¿S^
~i
û4^-^j^i\
Éj^Éj^fjnwLTjjiiwi » »Mu
A solar-powered water desalination plant
provides drinking water for the sheep of a
State farm in the Turkmenian SSR.
A solar air blower developed at the
Faculty of Agricultural Engineering,
Jabalpur, India. A reflector
concentrates the rays of the sun on to
the blower causing air to be sucked in
through the aperture in the base; the
heated air is blown out at the top of
the blower and directed at the produce
to be dried.
to $20 per peak watt ( 1 ) . This trend is very
encouraging and proponents of photovol¬
taic devices believe, perhaps rightly, that
by the end of the next decade, costs could
be brought down as low as $0.50 a peak
watt. This is also borne out by the results
of massive research and development pro¬
grammes and technological progress in the
United States, the Federal Republic of Ger¬
many, Japan, France and elsewhere in the
past few years.
Major recent innovations include the
development of techniques for continuous
production of silicon ribbon suitable for
solar cells, the production of polycrystalline
silicon, improvements in the efficiency and
stability of solar cells, and the development
of Inexpensive wide aperture concentra¬
tors. Photovoltaic systems will thus be a
serious contender for meeting energy
demands at village level, in such fields as
drinking water supply, lighting, community
radio, TV and even small scale irrigation.
(1) Solar cells are generally rated in terms of "peak
power" how much electrical wattage they produce in
direct sunlight.
Another type of drier using a flat plate roof
collector installed at a seed farm near
Ludhiana, India. It has a drying capacity of ten
tonnes of rice per day.
A hundred horsepower solar power plant designed and installed at
Meadi, Egypt, as long ago as 1913 by an American engineer. The
energy obtained is used to power an irrigation system.
A solar power plant at Bouzareah, Algeria. The dish-shaped
reflector tracks the sun as it moves across the sky.
20

Solar energy can also be used for
cooking, but despite the fact that solar
cookers have been in existence for many
years, their success with the public has
been minimal. Current models ranging
from wooden hot boxes covered with glass
and insulation to parabolic reflectors and
other types of concentrators, all cook
effectively, but none seems capable of
replacing traditional methods in terms of
cost and convenience, and without inter¬
fering with the existing pattern of life.
Another application of solar energy is the
desalination of water. Here small family
size solar stills seem viable and because of
their extreme simplicity and the ease with
which they could be manufactured locally,
they lend themselves to extensive use in
rural areas of developing countries.
Sea water distillation by this method is
already being widely used in Israel and
some other countries. Recently a pilot
scheme producing up to 5,000 litres of
fresh water per day was installed in a village
near Bhavnagar in India, where the water is
extremely brackish. . At first the people
were unwilling to use water from the solar
still (because they felt that some vital ingre¬
dient had been removed!) but their reluc¬
tance was overcome when the word got
round that tea prepared with the water
required 25 per cent less sugar. All the
villagers there are 1,000 of them now
use the water for drinking and cooking.
In the last analysis, it is the storage of
solar energy which poses most problems.
Whatever solution is adopted, storage will
add considerably to the cost of the system.
As far as the future is concerned, inte¬
grated systems using various sources of
energy are an increasingly practical propo¬
sition. The possibility of meeting village
energy requirements by the combined use
of such sources as the sun, wind, and bio-
conversion should be seriously studied and
implemented on a selective basis. The
future trend in developing countries may
well be towards such autonomous energy
systems.
Solar technology is still in its early days,
and teething troubles are Inevitable. Since
it is in financial terms a high-risk activity,
many of the resources for solar technology
development will have to come from
government support and international co- >
operation.
I A. Ramachandran
and J. Gururaja
Model of a projected solar power plant to be erected near Barstow
in the desert region of south-eastern California, U.S.A.
1,800 mirrors will focus the sun's rays on to a tower furnace.
For centuries the Nepalese have dried their crops and herbs in the sun. Today,
according to a study by engineer Gyani R. Shakya, this traditional use of sunlight
should be extended by the widespread use of solar water heaters. Made from locally
available materials by local craftsmen, solar heaters have proved .themselves to be
efficient and economically viable. Already solar energy collectors are to be seen on
the roofs of scores of hospitals, schools, hotels and houses. Above, solar energy
collector being installed on a school roof at Godawari, Nepal.
The hospital of the Faculty of Medicine of Kinki University, Osaka, Japan, is supplied
with hot water by a solar heater which incorporates 1,856 tubular collectors.
21
