Unesco,
youth
and the right
to work
JJ young person has the same
MB inalienable right as all other
human beings to perform fairly
paid, creative work" this was a major con¬
clusion of the European Regional Meeting
of Youth organized by Unesco In Venice
(Italy) from 7 to 11 November 1977. The
gathering's theme was "the effects of the
economic situation on the access of young
people to education, culture and work".
The problem of unemployment was
uppermost in the minds of many speakers,
at a time when there were six million unem¬
ployed in the European Community, one-
third of them young people.
On the other hand, delegates from the
socialist countries, where the right to
employment is effectively guaranteed by
the constitution, pointed out that the prob¬
lem did not arise in the same way in their
countries, although it was recognized that
the question had many different forms,
perhaps more difficult to pinpoint but no
less important. One of these was employ¬
ment in jobs unsuited to the holders' abili¬
ties, education or aspirations.
Although most speakers were concerned
with factors bound up with the prevailing
economic situation, they all expressed the
view that a more human approach should
'be adopted regarding unemployment. Pre¬
sent concepts of work were questioned,
and participants stressed that young work¬
ers and employees are particularly sensitive
to the boredom, frustration and lack of ful¬
filment that characterize many employ¬
ment situations today. Work, they felt,
should be viewed as an integral part of cul¬
tural life, and education should be con¬
ceived with this in mind.
Participants formulated a number of
recommendations seeking: to facilitate the
exchange of information and experience
between young workers in Europe and
those in the developing countries; to pro¬
duce studies on the transition from school
to work, on work as young people see it,
and on the role of the mass media in rela¬
tion to employment problems; to promote
the adoption and implementation by the
United Nations of a code of conduct for
multinational enterprises; to organize inter¬
national meetings on problems faced by
young workers such as new forms of voca¬
tional training and the access of young
workers to culture.
As a follow-up to the Venice meeting,
Unesco's Youth Programme has accorded
increased attention to the problems of
young people at work or seeking work. In
early 1979 an international study will be
published on the specific difficulties of
schooled or university-trained jobless
youth.
An agreement is being concluded bet¬
ween Unesco and ILO to review special
employment-related youth training pro¬
grammes in Africa.
Finally, the renewal of vocational training
programmes, which should prepare youth
educationally and culturally as well as for
job mobility but which are at present over
rigid, has become a central concern of the
world community and thus of Unesco.
