The unicorn,
the phoenix
and the flying horse
Recent discoveries from three ancient royal tombs
by Kim Won-Yong
AROUND the beginning of the Chris¬
tian era, at the height of the early
Iron Age in Korea, the inhabitants
of the Korean peninsula began to form
what might be called village-states in
various parts of the country.
According to Samguk Sagi, the official
history of the Three Kingdoms in Korea,
compiled in the twelfth century, the
Koguryo kingdom was formed on the
northern bank of the Amnok (Yalu) river in.
37 B.C. Twenty years later, in 18 B.C., a
group of political refugees from Koguryo
established the state of Paekche in what is
today the Seoul area on the lower reaches
of the Han river.
Koguryo was renowned for its mounted
archers who harassed the north-eastern
frontier of China across the Liao-ho river in
the Liaotung peninsula. Towards the end
of the fourth century, however, when the
Northern Wei dynasty (386-534) rose to
power in northern China, the Koguryo
kingdom had to change its policy and in
427 moved its capital further south to
Pyongyang. This southward advance natu¬
rally led to friction between Koguryo and
the two southern kingdoms.
The Paekche kingdom remained in the
Seoul area until 475, when it moved its
capital to Kongju in south-western Korea
after being defeated by Koguryo. In 538
Paekche again moved its capital, this time
to Puyo a little further south. Puyo remain¬
ed the capital of Paekche until the kingdom
collapsed in 660.
The State of Saro, or Silla, emerged in
57 B.C. in south-eastern Korea in the valley
of Kyongju, which remained the capital
Fabulous stone animal with a single
iron horn guarded the burial
chamber of King Muryong (501-523)
at Kongju, capital of the Paekche
dynasty.
KIM WON-YONG Is professor of archaeology
at Seoul National University. He is the author of
History of Korean Art, Seoul, 1968.
throughout Silla's thousand-year-long his¬
tory. Silla steadily expanded northwards
and westwards at the expense of Koguryo
and Paekche respectively, and by the
middle of the sixth century had won pos¬
session of the Seoul area, thus securing a
base on the west coast. This expansion
naturally led to battles with its two neigh¬
bours and as a result Silla formed an
alliance with the T'ang dynasty in an
attempt to unify the entire Korean penin¬
sula.
This policy succeeded, and Paekche and
Koguryo fell before the allied forces in 660
and 668 respectively. Silla before unifica¬
tion is usually known as Old Silla, and after
unification as Unified or Great Silla (670-
935).
Many tombs of kings and aristocrats of
each of the three kingdoms have been dis¬
covered near the ancient capitals. In sou¬
thern Korea those of the Paekche kingdom
are clustered around Seoul, Kongju and
King Muryong and the queen who was
buried with him were laid on a bier with
elaborately painted wooden pillows and
foot-rests. Phoenix heads face to face on
each side of the queen's pillow, above.
Below, the king's foot-rest.
22

Crown, bracelets and jewellery as they
were found in the Great Tomb of
Hwangnam. Barely visible are the lines of
the grid used by archaeologists to record
the exact position of each object.
General view of ancient burial mounds at Kyongju,
capital of the kingdom of Silla (57 B.C. -668 A.D.).
Dwarfing all the rest, the twin mound at right is the
Great Tomb of Hwangnam in which a royal couple
was buried in the late 5th century.
A scene during the excavation of the Great Tomb: the
mound has been removed, revealing the layer of stones
which covered the burial chamber.
Puyo, while Silla tombs are concentrated in
the Kyongju area.
Paekche tombs are stone (very rarely
brick) chambers covered with a mound of
earth. Because access to the burial cham¬
bers was easy, almost all of them were
looted of their contents long ago.
Thus the accidental discovery of the
intact tomb of King Muryong (501-523) in
Kongju in 1971 was an event of major
importance.
At the northern edge of Kongju there is a
brick tomb with mural paintings, probably
dating from the early sixth century. Dis¬
covered in 1933, it had been completely
stripped by robbers. Nevertheless it was
the first Chinese-style brick tomb to be dis¬
covered in Paekche territory, and also the
second Paekche tomb to be discovered
decorated with wall paintings, the first
being a tomb in Puyo.
In early July 1971, a labourer workings
behind the tomb to improve the drainage f
The stones are removed beneath a temporary structure
erected to protect the site.
23

around it struck a brick which turned out to
be the left upper corner of the façade of the
tomb of King Muryong. The new tomb was
covered by a low mound which archaeolo¬
gists had previously assumed to be an
earthwork to protect the portion of the
tomb with wall paintings.
The royal tomb, whose entrance faces
south, was constructed by cutting into the
slope of a hill. It consists of a main chamber
and a smaller passageway leading in from
the south (See colour page opposite). A
vertical brick wall was constructed at the
outer end of the passageway. This façade
had an arched doorway which was sealed
with bricks.
A drain, eighteen metres long, was posi¬
tioned at the bottom of the main chamber,
extending as far as the slope of the hill.
Both the main chamber and the passage¬
way are tunnel-shaped and are lined with
hard grey bricks decorated with lotus
designs in relief. The structure is a faithful
copy of contemporary Chinese tombs in
the Yangtze river area.
At the entrance to the tomb chamber,
there is a step down to a recessed portion
of the floor, which occupies approximately
one-fifth of the total area of the main room.
Thus the rear four-fifths of the chamber,
where the royal coffins were placed, give
the impression of being raised. Five small,
onion-shaped niches were set in the walls
to hold porcelain lamps which, when dis¬
covered, still contained the remains of
burnt wicks.
In the middle of the passageway stood a
stone guardian animal with a single iron
horn and carved stylized wings. In front of
the animal were two inscribed stone
plaques placed side by side, each of them
bearing a number of iron Wu-shu coins of
the Liang dynasty (502-557). One of the
plaques bore the name of King Muryong,
along with the dates of his death and of the
deposition of his coffin in the burial cham¬
ber. The other, dedicated to his queen, was
inscribed with the contract drawn up bet¬
ween King Muryong and the Earth Deity
for the purchase of the site for 10,000
coins.
According to the inscriptions the king
died in 523 and was buried in the tomb in
525, exactly twenty-eight months after his
death. His queen died in 526 and was
buried in 529. The king was sixty-two years
old when he died, but the age of his queen
was not given in the epitaph. A molar
tooth, the only organic material in the
queen's coffin, however, was identified as
that of a woman about thirty years old who
had experienced a healthy adolescence.
We do not know whether or not her death
was a natural one.
When Seoul, the first capital of Paekche,
was sacked by the army of Koguryo in 475,
the defeated King Kaero died in the battle.
Members of the royal family, including the
fourteen-year-old Prince Sama, who later
became King Muryong, fled to Kongju. It
was there that he ascended the throne in
501, immediately sending an envoy across
the Yellow Sea to China as a measure of
security against the invading Koguryo.
Paekche enjoyed peace and progress
during the reign of Muryong who, accor¬
ding to the Samguk Sagi, was a tall, hand¬
some man greatly loved by his people. It
24
was only after his death that the title
"Muryong", meaning Military and Peace,
was bestowed on him.
Muryong's tomb may have been an imi¬
tation of a Liang brick tomb, commemora¬
ting the king's close alliance with Liang
China. It is the only Paekche tomb yet dis¬
covered to be identified as that of a known
king, to contain inscriptions of dates and a
full, intact inventory of rich burial objects.
The discovery caused great excitement
not only in the city of Kongju but through¬
out Korea and even in Japan, because
Paekche was traditionally regarded by the
Japanese as the transmitter of an advanced
culture into Japan.
The king's coffin was placed in the east¬
ern side of the chamber with its head point¬
ing to the south; that of the queen occu¬
pied the western side. Both coffins had col¬
lapsed because the planks at each side had
decayed. The heads and feet of the royal
couple had rested on painted wooden pil¬
lows. According to the history of Liang
China, Paekche kings wore a black silk
crown with gold floral ornaments attached
to the back and front. A pair of such orna¬
ments was found near the king's head-
pillow. Both the king and his queen had
once worn, a garment studded with many
tiny beads and gold floral ornaments. The
king also wore gold earrings and a girdle
with a long silver pendant. Two bronze mir¬
rors were in the king's coffin, one near his
head and one near his feet. The latter is
particularly remarkable on account of the
animal figures depicted on it in relief over
patterns of a kind usually found on Chinese
mirrors.
The queen's wooden head-pillow is more
elaborate than that of her spouse. Minia¬
ture portraits of animals and birds were
painted on a red background, and a
phoenix head was carved at each end of
the pillow. The queen wore a gold neck¬
lace, gold and silver bracelets and gold ear¬
rings. A pair of tiny glass figurines in the
shape of a small boy with a shaven head
were suspended from the queen's girdle,
probably as a charm.
The relics from this royal tomb provide
solid clues to the chronology of archaeolo¬
gical specimens and works of art from the
Three Kingdoms period, as well as the con¬
temporary Kofun Period in Japan.
The second major archaeological dis¬
covery in Korea in recent years occurred in
April 1973 when a team of specialists began
excavations in the centre of the Silla ceme¬
tery in the city of Kyongju, the capital of
Silla.
Hundreds of Silla tombs, dating from the
fourth to the eighth century A.D., are still
to be seen in and around the Kyongju
Basin. Although many of them have lost
their covering mounds, some are well pre¬
served with enormous mounds over twenty
metres high and fifty metres in diameter.
The typical Silla tomb consists of an
earth mound enclosing an inner mound of
boulders, which in its turn covers a box-like
wooden chamber containing a coffin and
burial objects. Within a few years of
construction, the wooden chamber col¬
lapsed due to natural decay and the stones
fell into the burial chamber, crushing most
of the tomb offerings.
CONTINUED PAGE 29



Fabulous beasts
from royal tombs
The only architectural remains of the
ancient Korean kingdom of Koguryo are
mound tombs with stone burial chambers
often richly decorated with wall paintings
depicting real or mythical creatures as
well as scenes from everyday life. The
turtle and the snake entwined to form the
so-called creation symbol of the north are
shown in this detail of a mural In the
Great Tomb (6th-7th century A.D.) at
Uhyon near Pyongyang. Portrayed
elsewhere in the tomb are the other
fantastic animals symbolizing the cardinal
points of the compass: the dragon, the
tiger and the phoenix.
Its mane bristling, its long curved tongue
protruding from its mouth, the Heavenly
Horse (near right) bears the dead to the
next world. This remarkable painting
adorns a birch bark saddle flap discovered
in a 6th-century tomb at Kyongju, once
capital of the historic State of Silla. In
Siberia and Manchuria the birch was a
sacred tree whose wood was used for the
shaman's staff. The word tan, meaning a
variety of birch, appears in the name of
the mythical founder of Korea, Tan'gun.
Far right, the tomb of King Muryong, ruler
of the Kingdom of Paekche in the early
6th century. The discovery of the tomb at
Kongju, southwestern Korea, in 1971, was
a major find since unlike most tombs of
its kind it had not been plundered and
contained a rich store of gold, silver and
bronze objects. The tunnel-shaped burial
chamber, 4.20 metres long and almost 3
metres high, is lined with bricks decorated
with lotus designs.
Photos © Kim Tae-byok, Seoul


Covered by a mound 12.7 metres in
height and forty-seven metres in diameter,
tomb 155 at Kyongju is known as the Tomb
of the Heavenly Horse because a flying
horse is depicted on a birch bark saddle flap
found among its burial objects. Study of
the tomb and the goods in it has shown
that they date from the early sixth century.
All the organic material in the coffin has
disappeared, but gold and glass objects
have survived intact. The male occupant of
the tomb wore a girdle and a magnificent
gold crown, the fourth to be recovered
from Silla tombs in Kyongju. Its wearer
must have been a king of the Old Silla
period.
The crown consists of a circlet of cut
sheet gold with three tall uprights at the
front, each with stylized branches like a
tree. The uprights are flanked by two
upright ornaments shaped like antlers. The
tree form and the antler symbols reflect
shamanistic beliefs widely spread across
the Siberian steppe. Strands of comma-
shaped jade pendants are suspend¬
ed from the upright ornaments of the
crown by means of twisted gold wire. A
shimmering effect is added by numerous
gold spangles attached to the uprights. A
pointed cup of cut sheet gold with open¬
work designs was placed outside the. cof¬
fin. Two wing-shaped frontal ornaments
for a cap, made of pure gold, were also
found in the tomb.
A wooden chest at the eastern end of the
burial chamber contained a rich array of
burial gifts including horses' trappings,
vessels of gold, silver, bronze and iron,
lacquerware and pottery. A pair of saddle
flaps for a horse were made of several
layers of birch bark sewn together with lea¬
ther trimming. A galloping white horse
with streaming mane and tail is painted in
the centre, surrounded by a band decorat¬
ed with a floral pattern painted in red,
black, white and green (see colour photo
page 25). Wings sprout from each hoof.
The saddle flap is a prized example of a
unique form of Silla painting; nothing like it
has survived anywhere else in east Asia.
To the east of the Tomb of the Heavenly
Horse is tomb 98, the largest tomb in
Kyongju. It is known as the Great Tomb at
Hwangnam, after the area of Kyongju in
which it is situated. It consists of twin
mounds set on a north-south axis and join¬
ed together at their base. It is twenty-three
metres high and 123 metres long, and was
excavated between July 1973 and October
1975.
The northern mound contained the tomb
of a female, probably the wife of the male
buried in the southern mound. The struc¬
ture of the mound suggests that she had
outlived her husband. She wore a magnifi¬
cent gold crown, a gold girdle, five pairs of
gold bracelets, two necklaces made of
glass beads and gold ornaments. Three
pieces of evidence confirm that the tomb
contained a woman: the fact that there was
no sword in the coffin; the presence of a
large ornamental clay spindle-whorl; and
above all the inscription "Girdle 'for the
Lady" scratched with a needle on the orna¬
mental silver end of a girdle found in the
gift chest. A striped glass goblet probably
manufactured in the Mediterranean region »
was also found. f
29

, The husband of the royal female wore a
gilt-bronze crown and a gold belt with
fewer pendants than the one worn by his
wife. The tomb dates from the second half
of the fifth century, and since Silla had no
ruling queen until the seventh century, it is
puzzling that the male occupant, who
should have been a king, wore a bronze
crown and his wife a gold one.
A huge array of iron weaponry, however,
was found in a pit connected to the hus¬
band's grave, while a late Roman glass
ewer and cup were found inside the gift
chest.
A skeleton identified as that of a girl
around fifteen years old was found outside
the wooden chamber of the male burial.
She may have been killed and thrown into
the pit as a human sacrifice. According to
the Samguk Sagi, King Chiiung of Silla
officially forbade the practice of human
sacrifice in 502 A.D.
Finds from these three royal tombs
throw into relief the lineage and sophistica¬
tion^ early Korean culture, and especially
its genius for metalworking. The discovery
of these spectacular intact burial sites in
Korea can best be seen in perspective
when compared with finds from contem¬
porary Chinese and Japanese tombs. The
artistic riches of these tombs reveal eastern
Asia as a cultural mosaic, in which high cul¬
ture was achieved in a variety of forms
among different ethnic groups.
Kim Won-yong
Intricately worked gold cap (5th or 6th
century) was discovered in the Tomb of
the Heavenly Horse at Kyongju.
Probably worn inside a crown, it
consists of four pieces of gold plate, each
bearing a different openwork design.
Photo © National Museum of Korea, Seoul
