The stones of Sokkuram
A cornucopia of Buddhist sculpture
in a 1200-year-old temple-grotto
by Hwang Su-young and promised to build a temple on the spot
where he had caught the bear.
The tradition states that Tae-song was
converted to Buddhism as a result of this
incident and that afterwards he built Pul
guk-sa Temple and Sokkuram Temple, one
in memory of his parents during his former
existence and one in memory of his parents
during his second existence.
Kim Tae-song was born in 700 into the
royal Kim family and served King Kyong-
dok for a period of five years between 745
and 750 as chief minister of state. When he
finally left office in 750 he devoted himself
in accordance with the royal command to
the construction of the two temples. He
personally supervised the actual construc¬
tion work until his death in 774, and the old
IT5"
I :
EMPLES were as numerous as the
stars in the sky and pagodas as
a flock of geese on the wing.'
With these words an ancient chronicle des¬
cribes the spate of building which accom¬
panied the spread of Buddhism in Korea,
where it was introduced from India via
China in the latter half of the fourth cen¬
tury, later to become the State religion.
As temples increased in number there
was a corresponding development in
ancient Buddhist art. The period from the
latter half of the seventh century through
the eighth century is known as the golden
period of Buddhist art in Korea. It was a
period of close contact with India and
China where many young students and
monks went to pursue their studies.
Kyongju was the capital of Korea at the
time and haturally many temples were
constructed there. Of those which survive
today, Pul guk-sa Temple and Sokkuram
Temple are perhaps the most famous. Both
of these temples were built in the eighth
century A.D. on T'oham Mountain which
lies to the north-west of Kyongju. They
were built by the same man, Kim Tae-song.
Tradition has it that during the Silla
Dynasty Kim Tae-song was reincarnated as
the son oT a chief minister of state because
of his merits during a former existence.
When he was a full-grown man he liked to
hunt on T'oham Mountain. During one of
these hunts he caught a bear. When the
hunt was over he spent the night in a
country house at the foot of the mountain.
In a dream during the night the bear ap¬
peared to him in the form of a ghost and
began to attack him. Greatly alarmed, Tae-
song appealed to the bear for forgiveness
HWANG SU-YOUNG is professor of Buddhist
arts and dean of the Graduate School, Tongkuk
University, Seoul. A former director of the
National Museum, Seoul, he is one of the contri¬
buting authors of Korea, its Land, People and
Cultures of all Ages, Seoul, 1963.
Detail of one of the ten disciples of Buddha carved in
relief on the granite walls of the main hall of Sokkuram
temple. The entire figure is 2.18 metres high.
32

Photo Masakatsu Yamamoto © Kodansha International, Tokyo, Japan
This huge granite Buddha, over 3 metres high, sits on a lotus pedestal at the
centre of Sokkuram temple. The right hand lies palm downward, in the
"calling the earth to witness" gesture, signifying Buddha's activity in
the universe. The left hand is laid palm upwards on the lap, signifying
meditation. A figure of majesty, serenity and peace, the statue is a masterwork
of sculpture of the Unified Silla period.
33

records tell us that the State completed the
' project.
We know that Kim Tae-song was a
member of the royal family and we can pre¬
sume that he was very close to the king
himself. We can also surmise that he built
these two temples to honour the king, the
royal family and his own ancestors.
The T'oham Mountain, on which Sokku¬
ram Temple stands overlooking the sea,
formed a natural barrier protecting the
Kingdom of Silla and its capital Kyongju
from foreign invaders, and it became cus¬
tomary to offer sacrifices on its eastern
peak for the prosperity of the nation. The
remains of the fourth king of the Silla
Dynasty, King T'halhae (57 - 79 A.D.), who
was held in popular belief to be the "strong
warrior without a single enemy under hea¬
ven", were transferred there, and he was
venerated as the god of the mountain.
A number of important historical remains
are concentrated in the area where the
waters from T'oham Mountain meet and
flow down into the sea: Kamun-sa Temple,
which was built at the end of the seventh
century for the purpose of protecting the
nation, the tomb of King Munmu, and a
ceremonial rock used by the people for rites
in honour of the deceased king.
The most important of these historical
remains is the tomb of King Munmu.
Munmu reigned in the middle of the
seventh century and was the monarch res¬
ponsible for the establishment of the king¬
dom of Unified Silla. His dying wish was
that after cremation he should become the
Guardian Dragon of the Eastern Sea and a
protector of the nation. It was his hope that
his example would teach the people to hold
Buddhist doctrine in high esteem. The
ashes of King Hyosong (734-741 A.D.)
were also scattered in this area, which is
thought to have been a common burial
ground for the royal Kim family. Another
interesting fact is that Sokkuram and the
main Buddha figure in it face directly
south-east. This is probably no chance
arrangement. One feature that distinguish¬
es Sokkuram from other stone cave tem¬
ples in India and China is that Sokkuram is
man-made. In other words, the builders
were able to site it in the direction of their
choice.
Sokkuram consists of a main domed hall,
a small square anteroom, and a fan-shaped
connecting corridor. The main hall was
constructed in granite and the smaller ante¬
room was built in wood with a tiled roof.
The method of construction follows long-
established Korean tradition in this form of
building, and it is especially noteworthy
that similar temples in India have the same
floor plan.
Eight standing figures carved in granite
adorn the walls of the anteroom. The
solemn-faced Deva kings guard the corri¬
dor. The entrance to the main hall is sup¬
ported by twin eight-sided pillars which are
decorated with lotus designs. In the centre
of the domed hall is the main Buddha
figure, seated on a large circular table, also
decorated with lotus designs, and sur¬
rounded by fifteen other figures including
his ten principal disciples.
The main figure, 3.26 metres tall and in a
sitting posture, breathes a sense of peace.
serenity and harmony, making it one of the
great Buddhist art treasures in the world.
Ten niches are cut into the wall just below
the dome, and these niches hold ten seated
Bodhisattvas. It is noteworthy that with the
exception of the main figure and the ten
seated Bodhisattvas all the other figures
are carved on granite slabs.
Traditionally the main figure was regard¬
ed as the Buddha Sakyamuni, (the "Sage
of the Sakya dynasty") but recent research
reveals that it is in fact Amitabha, the Bud¬
dha of infinite light.
The influence of Buddhist art, stretching
all the way from India, resulted in the cre¬
ation of a great masterpiece in Korea in the
middle of the eighth century. Sokkuram,
though small in area, has been the guardian
for more than twelve hundred years of
priceless art treasures, and the credit for
preserving these treasures must go in
large part to the strong faith and devotion
of so many Buddhist believers down the
centuries.
In our own time the preservation of the
art treasures in Sokkuram has been no easy
task. First of all, a section of the ceiling col¬
lapsed and a large scale operation had to be
mounted to repair the damage. Then in
1960 scholars became aware of a whole
series of problems concerning the conser¬
vation of these art treasures. Unesco pro¬
vided invaluable assistance in seeking solu¬
tions to these problems, and repair work
began in 1961 and continued for three
years. In the years to come stricter super¬
vision will be required, as well as research
into the many aspects of the question of
preserving these unique art treasures.
Hwang Su-young
The figure of Avalokitesvara, the bodhisattva ("Buddha-to-be") of
infinite compassion and mercy, is carved in granite on the walls of
Sokkuram's main hall. He is portrayed with eleven heads, looking in all
directions to save all creatures. The whole sculpture is 2.18 metres high.
34
