I
Above, a batch of globes from a Soviet
factory awaiting dispatch to schools.
Right, schoolgirls in Quito (Ecuador) pool
efforts during a geography lesson. 


Learning
to share
the same
globe
by William J. Piatt

THE schoolchildren of today, who will
come of age as the calendar turns to
the 21st century, will be confronted
as adults with an unprecedented challenge.
They will have to learn to cope with global
interdependence. Indeed, they must do so
if they are to survive.
Interdependence in the affairs of soci¬
eties and nations is by no means new.
Trade is as old as recorded history. Cultur¬
al exchange through travel, through the
diffusion of art, music, and literature and
through communication, are part of an
almost universal heritage. Science owes
much to international exchange. In
politics, interdependent relationships
through alliances, ententes and treaties,
and even intergovernmental organizations
of world-wide membership, existed before
WILLIAM J. PLATT of the U.S.A. was direc¬
tor of Unesco's Department of Planning and
Financing of Education and then Deputy Assis¬
tant Director-General for Education (1970-1975).
the present generation was born. In some
cases, they have existed for centuries.
What is new, as we move into the 21st
century, is that whereas earlier generations
throughout the world could practise a par¬
tial and largely selfish, "dilettante" inter¬
dependence, today's generations will have
to practise the real thing.
Dilettante interdependence meant that
societies and nations could choose the rela¬
tions which suited them best. One country
could, for example, buy raw materials from
another, while denying access to its own
markets for consumer goods. It could be
an active member of an international orga¬
nization and yet refuse that organization's
help or advice when sensitive domestic
issues were involved. It could appeal for
protection of the environment while per¬
mitting or even encouraging pollution.
When compromise or sacrifice of its own
interests were the price of further interde¬
pendence, or when justice demanded such
accommodations, it could retreat into its
shell, claiming that the matter at stake,
despite its side-effects on others, was of
domestic concern only, and immune from
outside interference.
Up to now, the issue of true interdepen¬
dence has been shelved. This is because
most complex relationships, when they are
not stretched to their limits, are quite able
to tolerate abuse. Let us take as an illustra¬
tion, a network of highways, with their
access streets and roads. Under light traf¬
fic conditions, drivers who commit offen¬
ces seldom tie up the whole system. On
the other hand, when the network is ope¬
rating at full capacity, during the rush hour,
a driving offence or accident usually brings
everything to a standstill and often starts a
chain-reaction of incidents. It may take
hours to set the traffic moving again.
Similarly, the earlier dilettante inter¬
dependence sometimes crueland
inequitable in its effects worked relatively
well in a world of seemingly endless hori¬
zons, where each nation was free to follow
its own course, where population was not

pressing on available land and resources
and where common definitions of justice
and human rights were not yet required.
But the modern world is a finite, limited
and crowded place, and is becoming more
so. Its population^ 4 billion today, will
increase to 7 billion at the beginning of the
21st century. Now there is less room for
manoeuvre and for the toleration of abuse.
Survival thus depends on a minimum of
global interdependence. If education is to
contribute to its creation, changes will be
required everywhere.
Minimal interdependence will have to
cover a number of related subjects on a
worldwide scale: security; economic rela¬
tions, including the supply and use of
energy, resources and food, together with
co-operation for development; and justice
and human rights.
Present arrangements for interdepen¬
dence in all these fields are both rudimen¬
tary and changing. But this is no excuse
for education to continue to neglect them
until they crystallize. The quest for a new

world order is an open one; it should be
brought into every classroom so that those
who will have to live with the consequen¬
ces of interdependence may understand its
mechanisms and the process of give and
take which it requires.
As fa r as peace and security a re concern¬
ed, the United Nations Organization was
created in 1945 primarily "to save succeed¬
ing generations from the scourge of war".
To do so, a considerable, though under¬
used and under-funded machinery for
peace-keeping and conciliation is available.
But in practice, international security
depends more on threats by sovereign
nations or blocs of nations to use military
force. Distrust breeds distrust, while a
nuclear sword of Damocles hangs over the
world, whose nations spend 163 times
more on armaments than they do on U.N.
activities for development and peace.
But if governments do, on occasion, turn
to U.N. peace-keeping arrangements,
usually when unilateral efforts have failed,
we must realize that an institution is like a
muscle of the human body. Without pro¬
per exercise, it will atrophy. The U.N.
peace-keeping apparatus should become
more of a first, rather than a last resort.
International economic interdependence
has become the subject of elaborate ar¬
rangements. But colonialism, imperialism,
and dilettante interdependence have left a
legacy of enormous and increasing inequa¬
lities in a world where poverty, malnutrition
and disease condemn hundreds of millions
Education for world understanding
The quest for a new world order based on interdependence between peoples
is one of the greatest challenges facing humanity today. If tomorrow's adults
are to understand the mechanisms of interdependence, teaching programmes
must be given a global perspective and develop a sense of commitment to the
world community. Unesco has for many years encouraged the development of
education for international understanding. Its Associated Schools Project, in
which over 1,000 schools and teacher training institutions from 66 countries
take part, seeks to promote wider knowledge of international problems and
co-operation and to foster the study of different peoples and cultures. Above
left and below, contrasting images of solitude and community at school.
Above, children dance a round in work by Turkish artist Ibrahim Balaban.
of people to a sub-human existence, if not
to a merciful early death. The food-hunger
balance is precarious: world grain reserves
declined from 105 days' supply in 1961 to
31 days' in 1976.
The U.N. Environment Programme
reports that much of the world's fertile soil
is being degraded, contaminated or lost,
and that in many cases the process is irre¬
versible. Until recently the world was obli¬
vious to inequalities of access to energy
and other non-renewable resources which
cut across generations and political boun¬
daries alike. The depletion of these resour¬
ces and the pollution of the environment
compromise the heritage of future genera¬
tions, as does the exploitation of the sea-
beds and space, whose resources might
have been obvious elements of the univer¬
sal patrimony.
There was a time when we could trust in
science and technology to make good any
deficiencies. But the former has its limits,
while a more modest and useful conception
of the latter's contribution is emerging from
the movement for "appropriate techno¬
logy".
Co-operation for development is crucial
to economic interdependence. The first
objective of Third World development-
political liberation from colonialism-
has been substantially achieved. But the
economic gap continues to widen,
although the slow but hopeful search for a
new international economic order promises
more equitable and mutually beneficial co¬
operation for development between deve¬
loping and industrialized countries.

In the last analysis, we will only achieve
true interdependence by observing global
ethics and justice. Although the world has
only the flimsiest machinery for this pur¬
pose, we are, paradoxically, closer to
understanding the ethics and justice of
interdependence than we are to under¬
standing its other aspects. The improve¬
ment of justice depends in part on the new
international economic order which is
evolving. But a magnificent edifice for
interdependence with justice exists
already, with its foundations in the work of
those who drafted the U.N. Charter, the
Constitution of Unesco and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which antici¬
pated the true interdependence to come.
The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights begins:
"Whereas recognition of the inherent
dignity and of the equal and inalienable
rights of all members of the human family
is the foundation of freedom, justice and
peace in the world..."
Its 30 articles spell out rights "without
distinction of any kind, such as race,
colour, sex, language, religion, political or
other opinion, national or social origin, pro¬
perty, birth or other status", which should
be the subject of lessons in every class¬
room.
Although these principles are binding on
members of the U.N., they are only par¬
tially realized. The lag between principle
and practice should come as no surprise
when we remember the time required for
even partial implementation of the Magna
Carta of 1215 or of the 200-year-old Bill of
Rights of the United States of America.
But now justice, like other aspects of 21st-
century interdependence, is becoming less
tolerant of abuse and neglect.
What does the shift from dilettante
interdependence to a true minimal inter¬
dependence signify in terms of educational
reform?
It does not mean reduced attention to
the identity of self, family, community,
province, nation or region. On the contrary,
civic training in these fields will fit a
student for world citizenship.
Nor does education for interdependence
imply a movement away from cultural
diversity. Interdependence itself depends
on specialization, and reflects the division
of labour in cultural as well as economic
terms. If anything, education for interde¬
pendence will be more complex and varied
than it was in the past. True interde¬
pendence will not be free of conflict and
confrontation. But mankind's common
destiny will be the theme for reconciling
differences and for resolving conflicts
without violence.
Thirdly, education for global interde¬
pendence does not imply the introduction
of special courses in international relations,
in inter-cultural studies or in interde¬
pendence itself. Instead, what is required
is the injection of a global perspective into
all parts of the curriculum.
What is the present state of education
for global citizenship and interdependence?
With some rare but encouraging excep¬
tions, teachers throughout the world
seem to have been listening to another set
of drums.


LEARNING TO SHARE THE SAME GLOBE (Continued from page 8)
Generally, these drums beat to ethno¬
centric and nationalistic rhythms only. At
worst the values implicit in what is taught
encourage the worship of parochial military
heroes, the glorification of self-righteous¬
ness, the reinforcement of patterns of
dominance and dependency, the distrust
of foreigners, the conquest of the environ¬
ment, the providence of an unfettered
science and technology, and, in some
cases, racism, aggression, and the oppres¬
sion of minorities. Too much teaching is
preoccupied with images of the past rather
than the future, fostering independence
rather than interdependence and national
rather than world citizenship.
Fortunately, however, the educational "
reforms which are required have been well
charted in international bodies and in
theory if not in practice in a number of
individual countries.
Unesco's General Conference in 1974
adopted a "Recommendation concerning
Education for International Understanding,
Co-operation and Peace and Education
relating to Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms". Article III, which applies to
"all stages and forms of education",
begins:
"Education should be infused with the
aims and purposes set forth in the Charter
of the United Nations, the Constitution of
Unesco and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights...", and sets out the follow¬
ing objectives as guiding principles of
educational policy:
an international dimension and a
global perspective in education at all
levels and in all its forms;
understanding and respect for all
peoples, their cultures, civilizations,
and ways of life, including
domestic ethnic cultures of other
nations;
awareness of the increasing global
interdependence between peoples and
nations;
abilities to communicate with others;
awareness not only of the rights but
also of the duties incumbent upon
individuals, social groups and nations
towards each other;
understanding of the necessity for
international solidarity and co-opera¬
tion;
readiness on the part of the individual
to participate in solving the problems
of his community, his country and the
world at large.
The Recommendation then specifies the
kinds of behaviour and attitudes that
derive from the principles of interde¬
pendence. Member States are invited to
design the daily conduct of their educa¬
tional programmes in such a way that
these principles "become an integral part
of the developing personality of each
child, young person or adult..."
It indicates how international and inter-
cultural dimensions can be introduced into
education of all kinds and at all levels, and
how teachers may be prepared for this
task. It speaks of the needed reforms in
the production, dissemination and exchan¬
ge of equipment and materials, and urges
stimulation and support for research and
experimentation, the results of which can
make education more effective.
The Unesco Recommendation, which
incorporates the other ethical instruments
of the U.N., reflects a remarkable con¬
sensus by the world's governments on
what education should do to support basic
human rights and global interdependence.
A study entitled "International Human
Rights and International Education",
commissioned by the U.S. National Com¬
mission for Unesco, contains a critical
analysis of the Recommendation and its
antecedents, together with a review of
research concerning the international
knowledge and attitudes of young people.
This document should be of value to other
Member States of Unesco.
QHE conference of the World
Council for Curriculum and
I Instruction, held in the
U.K. in September 1974, whose proceed¬
ings have been published under the title
"Education for Peace", made an important
contribution to education for security and
peace-keeping. One chapter makes a
comprehensive diagnosis of the issues
facing mankind and draws implications for
education's role "in the challenging tasks
of building the mansions of peace". The
author insists that:
"The task of education is to develop a
global patriotism, to inspire commitment
to a larger world community; and to teach
behavioural skills that can imagine, analyze
and evaluate future possibilities and pro¬
babilities, or in short, the strategies of
survival."
The Unesco Recommendation and the
suggestions contained in "Education for
Peace" are only initial steps towards the
reforms that will prepare today's young
people for the interdependence of
tomorrow. The present time is one of
widespread and fruitful enquiry into a new
world order by the "North-South"
Conferences on international economic
co-operation, by the Club of Rome, and
by others. These investigations should be
adapted for classroom use.
The debates of the Sixth and Seventh
Special Sessions of the U.N. General
Assembly in 1974 and 1975 reflect the
struggle of the developing countries for
full partnership in international affairs.
Looking at the present, and delving into
the past, the quest for a new international
economic order is a fascinating adventure.
What better educational material could be
found?
Effective education for interdependence
must include attention to the methods,
processes, and structures of education as
well as to its content and curriculum.
Content affects form, and vice versa.
Authoritarian teaching would negate the
principle of participation at every level. A
class of pupils segregated by race or ethnic
background would have difficulty in learn¬
ing tolerance. Teaching which encourages
unquestioning, non-critical responses
would make students easy prey to dogma.
Similarly, an education seen primarily as
a "sorting" process (or the identification
of a few winners and many losers) would
encourage the competitive conception of
societies and nations, and thus run counter
to the notion of international and mutually
beneficial collaboration, while reinforcing
concepts of superiority and dominance.
This attitude should be contrasted with
the concept of "mastery learning" and the
emphasis on equality of educational output
as well as opportunities, an alternative
whose roots lie in the work of educational
reformers John Comenius in the 17th and
Johann Pestalozzi in the 18th centuries.
As Professor Benjamin S. Bloom has
shown, mastery learning begins "with the
notion that most students can attain a
high level of learning capability if instruc¬
tion is approached sensitively and system¬
atically, if students are helped when and
where they have learning difficulties, if they
are given sufficient time to achieve
mastery, and if there is some clear criterion
of what constitutes mastery." (1)
Even the concepts of development and
change can have a positive or negative
effect: the "trickle-down" concept would
not encourage participation because of its
reliance on elitism, while the "trickle-up"
notion would encourage initiative and
communication, and thus favour interde¬
pendence.
Students will only master a new educa¬
tion for interdependence if they assimilate
its principles and make them a part of
their own behaviour. This would suggest
that civic training, for example through the
encouragement of deliberation on children's
and students' rights, should form part of
their activities. When reality cannot be
brought into the classroom, simulated
situations should be used.
In asking education to adopt the reforms
which will help to prepare today's genera¬
tion for the challenge of tomorrow, we are
asking something which has always been
difficult to implement. Education more
easily follows than leads, more easily
mirrors the present and past than anti¬
cipates the future. But this time, world
survival is at stake. Isn't this the kind of
challenge implicitly assumed by all who
dare to take the sacred trust "to educate"?
William J. Piatt
1) Human Characteristics and School Learning, by
B.S. Bloom. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1976.
32
