JEAN-JACQUES
ROUSSEAU
The children's
champion
notion that man is born good, is perhaps of minor importance. His major
achievement lay in attacking long-accepted practices, drawing up new
guidelines and implanting the idea that the true purpose of education is to
teach children the business of living, that living is not just a matter of brea¬
thing, but of acting, sloughing off a deadweight of useless restrictions, and
of learning how to exercise freedom. And so, says Rousseau, "Let us allow
childhood to ripen in the child"; let us be on our guard against entrenched
ideas enshrined in tradition, training and society, let us put these ideas
under the microscope of rigorous and unrelenting criticism. For if might is
the enemy of right, habit is the enemy of freedom. Let us encourage the
growth of liberty from the moment of birth; education begins when the
child first draws breath.
THIS year marks the 200th anniversary of the death of the philosopher
Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who was born in Geneva in 1712.
Rousseau was not only the author of the first eloquent and persua¬
sive piece of writing to glorify childhood but also a thinker whose ideas
about education, with their insistence on respect for the liberty and dignity
of the child, are now widely accepted in the modern world. He is also
remembered for his celebrated warning, still so often echoed today, that
"We know nothing about childhood" and that "with the false Ideas we
entertain about childhood, the further we go, the further we go astray." It
is customary to attribute the generalization of breast-feeding to his advo¬
cacy of it in Emile, although it must be admitted that the climate of opinion
had already changed and many mothers were nursing their children
(instead of farming them out to wet-nurses) before Rousseau's famous
treatise on education appeared in 1762. On other issues too, Rousseau's
eloquent arguments, including his plea that babies should be liberated
from "the tyranny of swaddling clothes", caused the welfare of infants to
be viewed in a fresh light and gave rise to an entirely new approach to older
children.
There was, then, what we might call a "Rousseau effect"; but whether
or not it was based, like his other great work, 77je Social Contact, on the
For the aim of education is to prepare for life, and not to turn out
pedants and the kind of "profound thinkers" who understand everything
except the world they live in. This is implied in Rousseau's insistence that
children should have the right to find things out for themselves, to acquire
experience at first hand. The exercise of this right fosters the development
of freedom and curbs the will to dominate. Children also learn from expe¬
rience how to tailor their desires to their capabilities.
However, if the originality of Rousseau's ideas can still be appreciated
200 years after his death, we know today that a hunger for truth is not
necessarily the prerogative of the child or "the noble savage". The theory
that civilization is nothing but a source of failure, ruin and decay is no
longer tenable. The concepts of "experience" and "mastery", as we
understand them today, are much more complex and subtle than they
appeared to Rousseau. He was doubtless aware of the difficulty of the
problems he was dealing with, and when he wondered whether it could
ever be possible to "direct fully the speech and actions of all those who
come into contact with a child" he showed that he had some idea of the
importance of the social and cultural environment. But an awareness that
those who deal with a child play a major role in his development is not
enough, even if it is combined with a realization that children are the focus
of plans and expectations even before they are born. The all-important
question remains to be solved: how do these expectations actually affect
the child and in what sense, if any, do they "predetermine" his develop¬
ment?
Mohammed A. Sinaceur
Division of Philosophy, Unesco
30
