Farming microbes
for food and fuel
by Jan Willem M. La Rivière
and Edgar J. DaSilva
Jan Willem M. La Rivière of the Netherlands is
professor of environmental microbiology at the
International Institute for Hydraulic and Environ¬
mental Engineering, Delft, the Netherlands. He
is chairman of the International Cell Research
Organization (ICRO), of the International Com¬
mission on Microbial Ecology and of the natural
sciences subcommission of the Netherlands
National Commission for Unesco.
Edgar J. DaSilva, Indian microbiologist, is a
staff member of Unesco's Division of Scientific
Research and Higher Education. He is engaged
in the promotion of the Unesco-ICRO pro¬
gramme on the use of micro-organisms for the
management of the environment.
MODERN agricultural practices are
causing serious environmental
problems through waste gen¬
eration and pesticide use and, furthermore,
absorb large amounts of fertilizer and fossil
fuel energy.
From research all over the world on
seemingly divergent topics, one highly pro¬
mising approach to these problems is emer¬
ging: fully integrated farming exploiting not
only plants and animals but also the enor¬
mous and flexible potential of micro¬
organisms.
Microbes are not only highly efficient at
capturing solar energy, but, equally impor
tant, they can help make room for the pro¬
duction of energy by biological means
because they are ideal instruments for
improving food production and for reduc¬
ing the wasteful use of resources. Last but
not least, they can expand agriculture from
land into water through aquaculture. Thus
integration has in this case a two-fold signi¬
ficance; the integrated use of all types of
living organisms also makes it possible to
integrate food, fodder, fuel, fibre and che¬
mical production into a new type of highly
economic, multipurpose agriculture.
This new agriculture will be character-^
¡zed by a minimum of waste of energy and f
Photo © J W M. La Rivière
From time immemorial plants, which combine energy from sunlight with water and
carbon dioxide to make food, have also served mankind as a source of fuel and building
materials, while animals fed on plants have furnished additional food. This microscopic
blue-green alga, Spirulina placentis, has for centuries provided the people living around
Lake Chad in Africa with supplementary protein. It was also harvested from lakes by the
Aztecs who ate it in dried form as a biscuit.
29

, minerals, reduced use of fertilizers and pes¬
ticides, a much larger diversity of crops,
the use of aquaculture, and, most impor¬
tant of all, the utilization of biotechnology
both at household and village level and on
an industrial scale.
Microbes are not newcomers to the
farm. For thousands of years they have
played essential roles, although their
actions were not understood and their
potential was not fully exploited.
Almost all types of living matter can be
converted by special micro-organisms into
a mixture of carbon dioxide and methane, a
clean gaseous fuel which is easily stored
and transported. Besides this process,
known as anaerobic digestion, (so called
because it takes place in the absence of
air), there is the process of alcoholic fer¬
mentation in which carbohydrates are
transformed into the liquid fuel ethanol by
yeasts assisted by other suitable microbes.
In both cases the remaining waste mate¬
rial is rich in minerals that can be used as
fertilizer. Methane or ethanol can be ob¬
tained in this way either from waste mate¬
rial or from living organisms grown for the
purpose on land or in water.
Anaerobic digestion has been used for
half a century on a large scale in industrial
countries as part of the sewage treatment
system.
In remote rural areas in developing coun¬
tries where there is little hope of estab¬
lishing electricity grids in the near future,
biogas production from waste is of great
value. In Asia thousands of small blogas
plants of household to village scale have
been brought into operation over the past
10 years. India and Korea have 30,000
plants each, the People's Republic of China
more than 2,000,000.
The gas is used for cooking, lighting,
pumping, heating and refrigeration. Its use
replaces the old practice of burning dung
which caused local air pollution and wasted
a lot of energy and fertilizer. Since biogas
installations provide a hygienic means of
disposing of waste they have helped
reduce the spread of infectious diseases.
Furthermore, by offering an alternative fuel
to firewood they are counteracting defores¬
tation and its consequent erosion.
Among the land plants, sugar cane so far
holds the record for the highest rate of pro¬
duction per hectare 112 tonnes per year.
Hence this crop was chosen by the govern¬
ment of Brazil as the basis for its National
Alcohol Programme which is now under¬
way and alms at an annual production of 8
million cubic metres of ethanol in the
1980s, to be produced by microbial fermen¬
tation of sugar. Up to 20 per cent of the
alcohol will be used for blending with
petrol, the annual consumption of which
was 15 million cubic metres in 1975. The
rest is to be used as raw material for the
chemical Industry.
This large pioneering programme will
help make Brazil less dependent on oil
imports and will involve large sugar cane
plantations, extraction and fermentation
plants coupled to distilleries fuelled by
bagasse, the waste part of sugar cane.
Only a few of the thousands of known
plants are today used for crops; further
^,S.
TI
^ **'%. - V w^ / Sw«.
iV ^ / 1 -áEflJJ
/ * *Pm-
»
i ^
14 '" -WW- m\ *'É 5
JlflSC,
CO
c % '
Sjp, * i Ben 4'%
c
o \* IkTX !Fi3§£? ^aW.
> ^L JrJr j£
,^0r
¿ I f Wr m\\ mr*^ íJmmw Ï*
<0 ^Êj T ^'L ^ », f
? mwi j ' v " 71iS »
(- mj^ / i ¿ J
.2 MKmi à "kim BL - _ém
"£ \m ï im ^^mr I*^*î
3 ¿mt ^V ?6S
< m\ / .»
© >L \r .1
r ^v _<ß
O *C <r vr:
u 'tu*
m ir
i
U. If -' '
o w
<D
0.
o \i
o
o.
Photosynthesis on photo
The Austrian botanist Hans Molisch (1856-1937) was one of the great pioneers of plant
physiology. Photo of the great scientist, above, illustrates the mechanism of
photosynthesis, which is the ultimate source of all fossil fuels such as coal and oil. In
photosynthesis light is absorbed by a green pigment called chlorophyll. A negative of an
ordinary photo was laid on top of a leaf. The dark patches on leaf at right show where the
sunlight was prevented from penetrating to the chlorophyll. In "print" at left the effect is
reversed, the dark patches showing where the light did penetrate and starch was formed.
screening coupled with genetic and physio¬
logical study will no doubt produce new,
even more efficient, carbohydrate pro¬
ducing plants some of which will be suit¬
able for the exploitation of marginal,
hitherto unused, land. It is also likely that
the versatile fermentation industry which
became dormant after World War II will be
revived to produce, besides alcohol, the
Important chemicals butanol, acetone and
acetic acid, thus alleviating the strain on
oil resources from which they are now
derived.
The same result will be achieved through
increased exploitation of the rubber tree
and the guayule shrub for making natural
rubber. Finally, cellulose, the main compo¬
nent of plants, can now be made Into a
petrochemical substitute through new
effective microbiological methods.
Water cannot be ploughed, seeded and
weeded in the same way as land but its pro¬
ductivity can be much higher. The problem
is how to maintain a culture of water plants
or of microscopic algae in a steady state
without the risk of overgrowth by weeds.
Two different approaches are now rapidly
removing aquaculture from phantasy to
reality.
The first one focusses on the use of
natural weeds that already predominate in
polluted waters, like the water hyacinth,
which infests with its floating mats many
square kilometres of tropical fresh water
and is kept in check by expensive combat
programmes, mostly using pesticides. Tur¬
ning a curse into a crop, the U.S. National
Aeronautics and Space Association labora¬
tories have shown that water hyacinth
grown on sewage in lagoons can yield up
to 374 litres of biogas (containing between
60 per cent and 80 per cent methane) per
kilo dried material when subjected to
microbial anaerobic digestion.
This operation produces not only energy
from waste but also makes minerals in the
waste reusable for fertilizer and, in addi
tion, permits the withdrawal from sewage
of toxic heavy metal. Thus energy produc¬
tion and the struggle against pollution here
go hand in hand.
A further example of the use of water
plants is the farming of the giant brown
kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera which grows up
to a length of 100 metres, and with a daily
elongation of between 15 and 60 cm per
day is one of the fastest growing plants in
the world. It occurs abundantly on the
coasts of California, Mexico and New
Zealand.
The best yields are, of course, to be
expected in zones rich in minerals, that is
where upwelling occurs. General Electric,
with the sponsorship of the American Gas
Association and the U.S. Energy Research
and Development Administration, is now
embarking on a trial project on the Callfor-
nian coast in which kelp is grown attached
to rafts moored to the sea bottom. The har¬
vest of this marine farm will be converted
to methane, food additives and chemicals.
The second approach constitutes an ela¬
boration of one of the oldest and simplest
waste treatment practices, the oxidation
pond or lagoon as used all over the tropical
world. In these systems, bacteria decom¬
pose the waste into minerals which serve
as nutrients for the layer of microscopic
algae that grows on top and, ¡n turn, prov¬
ides the bacteria with oxygen, thus enabl¬
ing them to do their job. Normally, the
resulting slurry of algae is discharged into
the receiving surface water without cau¬
sing serious environmental problems but
still the energy contained in the algae and
their minerals originating from the
waste is lost to human use.
Workers at the University of California at
Berkeley have added to this system the
ingenious process of Harvestable Cell
Recycle. This solves in one swoop the pro¬
blem of the economic harvesting of living
matter and that of maintaining one particu¬
lar alga in a predominant position in the
30

pond. The desired algae can be separated
by a cheap filtration process and returned
to the pond, which is thus constantly
populated by such filtrable algae.
These algae, whose cells contain some
60 per cent of protein, can be harvested
and used as food, animal fodder, and feed
for fish, or (after anaerobic microbial fer¬
mentation) as a source of biogas and
fertilizer.
While this technique started out as a
means of waste utilization, it has also op¬
ened the way to bioenergy farming through
aquaculture on any scale desired: in princi¬
ple one and the same stock of mineral
nutrients can maintain a constant supply of
algae and hence also of methane. In this
way the intensity of the solar radiation and
the available water surface become the sole
determinants of the bioenergy-generating
capacity of an aquafarm. At present capa¬
cities of 80 tonnes dry weight per hectare
per year have been obtained but a further
increase is to be expected.
As mentioned above, microbes can help
plug the drains of present agricultural prac¬
tice by recycling minerals and converting
waste into useful materials. They open the
road towards aquafarming and may render
marginal lands more productive by making
a great variety of plants accessible to
human use. Furthermore, bacteria of the
genus Rhlzobium can fix gaseous nitrogen
from the air and thereby reduce the need
for nitrogenous fertilizer, the manufacture
of which requires much energy (see the
Unesco Courier, July 1975).
In addition, microbes that cause disease
among plant parasites are already used to
replace chemical pesticides for crop protec¬
tion and thus assist in attenuating the envi¬
ronmental hazards of Intensified agricul¬
ture. But perhaps most Important of all,
microbes can help set the world on a
course towards a more vegetarian diet and
thus reduce the agricultural capacity now
used for fodder production in favour of
food and energy production.
Single Cell Protein (SCP) can be manu¬
factured from a wide diversity of raw mate
rials ranging from cellulose, the main com¬
ponent of wood, to carbohydrates like
starch and even mineral oil. Microbes
made to grow on these materials enrich
their nutritive value by adding protein and
vitamins. In addition, they may enhance
durability and palatability. Already hun¬
dreds of such fermented foods are
available.
Exploitation of the microbe's versatile
potential for bioconversion thus provides
the new agricultural capacity for local
needs and changing markets. For ins¬
tance, the same crop of cassava can be
converted at will to blogas, to ethanol, to
SCP or to petrochemical substitutes accor¬
ding to prevailing demands, while in each
case environmental risks are minimized
through full waste utilization.
In building the new agriculture much can
be learned from time-honoured practices
found in developing countries. Using
microscopic algae for food, for instance, is
not really new. People living around Lake
Chad have for centuries obtained supple¬
mentary protein from the alga Spirulina,
and the same type of alga was eaten by the
Aztecs under the name of "tecuitlatl".
Even now a Mexican firm produces two
tonnes of dry Spirulina per day, which is
sold as fodder. The same alga is the major
food for the Tilapia fish and the flamingoes
¡n Lake Nakuru and other African Rift
Valley lakes.
The value of traditional recycling
methods used ¡n the rural areas of Asia is
also being increasingly widely recognized.
Far from being old-fashioned, the night soil
collection and composting systems of
China are models for the future. So are the
Indonesian village ponds in which wastes
are converted to algae which are then
eaten by fish.
At a syposium held in Bangkok ¡n 1977
more than 200 varieties of fermented foods
from all over the world were described. In
most cases they were prepared by traditio¬
nal methods from soybean, rice, yams,
potato, cassava, etc. Rich in proteins, they
can be used as substitutes for meat.
In this respect biotechnology ana
enzyme engineering have much to offer,
and genetic engineering applied to plants,
animals and microbes may not only boost
yields but may also increase the diversity of
renewable resources. Large research cor¬
porations and industries all over the world
are working on various aspects of the
problem.
The International Council of Scientific
Unions (ICSU) and its Scientific Committee
on Problems of the Environment (SCOPE)
have launched programmes on the produc¬
tion of renewable resources. In the U.N.
family, the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) jointly with Unesco
and the International Cell Research Organi¬
zation (ICRO) embarked several years ago
on a project on the exploitation of microbial
resources, with special emphasis on rural
development in developing countries.
Wishful thinking of some five years ago
is now achieving tangible results in terms
of research, development and implementa¬
tion. Many hurdles still remain, but the
new integrated agriculture is definitely
underway.
J.W.M. La Rivière
and Edgar J. DaSilva



Seaweed
for food
and
fertilizer
On the Portuguese coast
a group of women and
children collect seaweed
for use as fertilizer. A
number of seaweed
species are also nutritious
and are considered a food
delicacy in some parts of
the world.
31
