The decision-makers
by Francisco Papa Blanco
ALTHOUGH man is both the fount and the
finality of all action, on however large a
scale it may be, as an individual he
rarely has a say in decisions on technology except
perhaps in his own home or occasionally, when
he is self-employed, in his work. Even in these
restricted fields his habits as a consumer and his
access to the benefits of technology depend
largely upon decisions that are taken in circles
remote from him as an individual, whether by
large private companies or by legislative, political
or administrative bodies that govern society.
In fact, the general technological framework as
well as specific activities are increasingly deter¬
mined by society and the ruling political groups.
More and more, actions and their consequences
transcend frontiers, even though the era of fully
shared and concerted action on global problems
(climate, the hydrosphere, pollution of the upper
atmosphere, rational management of non¬
renewable resources, etc.) is still far off.
This inexorable removal of the centres of deci¬
sion further and further from the individual tends
to reverse the process of "spontaneous aggrega¬
tion" experienced to some extent by the few
countries in which conditions favouring the
development of technology first came together.
The approach has become more global, less con¬
cerned with the detail of specific actions, an in¬
version which leads to solutions which "descend"
upon the individual and upon communities and
social groups, not merely from the large private
companies (including the multinational com¬
panies) but from the society itself.
This is one further aspect of the inexorable pro¬
gression towards the structuralization, the
systemization or globalization of social life. One
day, as yet far off, our planet _will function as a
complex, vulnerable, perhaps ponderous and not
very efficient technological system. Such a
system, necessary for the management and the
survival of mankind and the planet, in an ineluc¬
table symbiotic relationship of mutual interaction,
will doubtless involve a huge superstructure
which will weigh heavily on national structures,
themselves at times unwieldy.
At present, the benefits and the disadvantages
this "planetization" may entail remain a matter of
speculation. Yet one fact is certain, the State can
introduce, and is introducing, new elements into
the classic decision-making processes of
technology. In principle, technology is devised in
order to satisfy needs and to improve living condi¬
tions. The State which takes technological deci¬
sions may, however, perceive needs, ways and
means which do not necessarily coincide with
those perceived or desired by the individual or by
the agents of technology, that is, business' in the
widest sense of the term. Thus the State may call
upon technology:
to act as a social instrument, primarily as a
distribution mechanism, through job creation,
geographical re-distribution of economic activity
or the reconversion of industry, agriculture or the
service sector;
to function as a bargaining factor. In this case,
technological production and services would be
oriented towards external trade, even at the ex¬
pense of internal objectives of immediate interest,
giving rise often to distortions of all kinds, for ex¬
ample, by the establishment of technological
enclaves which are the antithesis of a true implan¬
tation of technology in the general framework of
society;
finally, to fulfil its classic role the satisfaction
of needs and the improvement of the standard of
living.
These three objectives are basically divergent.
Generally speaking, any specific activity which
would lead to the achievement of one of these ob¬
jectives could not at the same time further the ac¬
complishment of the other two. As a "bargaining
factor" the specifications to be respected and the
methods to be used would be those appropriate
to foreign trade; productivity would have to en¬
sure competitiveness. As a "social instrument",
specifications and productivity would become
secondary to the methods of work used and the
materials employed. Finally, technological activity
conceived in function of the domestic re¬
quirements of a developing country would scarce¬
ly open the way for exports or radically improve
social conditions.
It is an essential part of the activity of every
State to take technological decisions on a greater
or lesser scale. Yet actual technological undertak¬
ings are necessarily the province of more or less
specialized bodies, whether private or otherwise,
having a certain autonomy as far as management
and executive decision-making are concerned.
Such bodies include private companies,
autonomous organisms, services within
ministries, or "mixed economy" companies all
businesses in the widest sense of the term.
For such "businesses", even those inspired by
the highest motives, the individual is a unit of
consumption, a user of the services offered. This
individual, with all the others, forms a market
which can be defined in terms of habits,
possibilities and capacities, and decisions have to
take account of this market. It is natural,
therefore, that sooner or later the line taken by
the State will diverge from that which business or
the market will tend to take spontaneously. The
roles of "bargaining factor" or "agent of distribu¬
tion" imposed on technology, coupled with the
superimposition of other conditioning factors (in¬
cluding the adoption of so-called "appropriate
technology") will end by altering, perhaps pro¬
foundly, the spontaneous course that would have
followed the application of technology more or
less directly in relation to the ultimate user.
In its planning and directive capacity the State
necessarily works on hypotheses and not on solid
technical standards sanctioned by experience or a
chain of reasoning backed by scientific
knowledge, as would be the case at more elemen¬
tary levels of conceptualization and execution.
Evaluation of the factors involved is in large part
subjective; a posteriori rationalization of the
policy or plans adopted may conceal spurious per¬
sonal or group motives. Both the political
strength and the practical weakness of
technocracy lie in the imprecision of the compo¬
nent elements of the technological system and in
the uncertainty of its links and of its evolution in
time, in the impossibility of allowing for and con¬
trolling the ever more powerful external in¬
fluences in a world ever more closely interlinked
yet still out of step in terms of reason and equity.
Man is suffering today from the negative con¬
sequences of the indiscriminate application of
technology, yet he is plunging ever deeper into it.
He does not properly understand what
technology is nor what its purpose is, but he
wants the products it offers. Technology extends
man's mastery in every direction, yet, because of
this, man finds himself submerged in an increas¬
ingly artificial world, confronted with options that
are beyond him. Man is at the same time actor
and spectator, beneficiary and victim of
something he himself created.
Technology is the one major sphere of activity
of modern society in which public conscience is
virtually non-existent and in which it exercises no
controlling influence. It is thus becoming more
and more the prerogative of the great industrial,
commercial, military and political interests.
It is strange that, at the same time, man is
becoming more and more capable of understan¬
ding other aspects of the world in which he lives,
such as its political, geographical, religious and
social aspects. The one aspect which seems to
escape his control, except in so far as he is a con¬
sumer unit, is technological advance.
Only public awareness of the way technology
functions, of the factors that carry the most
weight with decision-makers, will enable mankind
to control advances that otherwise may have
dehumanizing effects. This is the great challenge
to education, to the great communications media
and, above all, to those who hold in their hands
the power to make decisions on technology.
FRANCISCO F. PAPA BLANCO, of Uruguay,
is a staff member of Unesco 's science sector spe¬
cializing in development problems. He has served
as a Unesco specialist in several countries and has
wide international experience of questions of
industrial management and higher education. He
is the author oí Tecnología y desarrollo ("Techno¬
logy and Development") published in Costa Rica,
1979, and ofmany articles on technology, the tea¬
ching of engineering and other subjects.
34
