UNDER the constant, brooding
menace of the nuclear bomb, the
ultimate weapon of mass destruc¬
tion, it is all too easy to discount the impor¬
tance of conventional anti-personnel
weapons intended primarily to kill or maim
individual human beings.
For some 250,000 years by the middle
of the Pleistocene Epoch our ancestors
were fashioning crude arms for use against
beasts and their fellow men the history of
these weapons has been the history of a
progression of invention, improvement and
refinement of such fertile evil genius as to
make one wonder whether the human
brain is not the deadliest weapon of them
all.
There is a stage in the life of almost every
weapon as it progresses from invention to
obsolescence at which refinements are
added to the weapon or its projectile which
ensure that the injuries inflicted are even
more horrible and "unnecessarily" in¬
jurious.
During the twentieth century, military
thinking has been concentrated less on
defeating particular groups of enemy
troops and more on denying terrain to the
enemy by covering large areas with con¬
centrations of missiles. This involves a
massive stepping-up of fire-power and the
use of indiscriminate weapons such as
delayed-action, multiple bombs, non-
directional fragmentation mines and booby
traps of all kinds.
This development has led the United Na¬
tions to call a conference, to be held in
Geneva in September 1979, with a view to
reaching agreements on "prohibitions or
restrictions of the use of specific conven¬
tional weapons, including those which may
be deemed to be excessively injurious or to
have indiscriminate effects, taking into ac¬
count humanitarian and military considera¬
tions, and on the question of a system of
periodic review of this matter and for con¬
sideration of further proposals".
Some of the weapons the conference is
likely to consider are described below :
777e cluster bomb is typical of the
modern indiscriminate anti-personnel
16

The deadliest
weapon of
them all?
Photo © Spire, Paris. Reproduced with permission of Dausse Laboratories, Paris
weapon. To outward appearance a cluster
bomb is similar to a conventional 350 kg
bomb, but it is designed to open in mid-air
and scatter large numbers of grenades or
bomblets, with or without delay fuses, over
a wide area. Systems have also been
developed that are capable of dispensing
incendiary, chemical and biological agents.
The possibility of using these weapons far
behind the battle front adds greatly to the
danger of indiscriminate effects.
Fléchettes are small needle-like darts or
arrows, usually made of steel, that can be
fired from rifles or shot guns using car¬
tridges containing from four to twelve
fléchettes. Rocket warheads containing as
many as 6,000 fléchettes have also been
developed. Since fléchettes tend to buckle
into a hook shape on impact, the wound in¬
flicted is particularly big and nasty and
usually fatal.
Booby traps are concealed explosive
devices attached to apparently harmless
objects; they are activated, for example,
when the door of an abandoned house is
opened or a radio is switched on. There are
even reports of booby traps being attached
to the bodies of dead or wounded soldiers.
Fuel-air bombs have been developed that
spray out a cloud of gas or an aerosol of
particles of, for example, aluminium or
magnesium, which detonate when mixed
with a certain proportion of oxygen. The
cloud spreads out over a wide area and
may penetrate trenches and foxholes
before exploding.
Bounding fragmentation mines are anti¬
personnel mines which, when activated,
jump to about eye level before detonating.
Mines of all kinds present a particular dan¬
ger to civilian populations, sometimes for
many years after hostilities have ended.
This text, prepared by the editorial staff of the
Unesco Courier, is based on a recent study by
the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute: Anti-Personnel Weapons, published
for SIPRI by Almqvist and Wikse/I International
(for Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark),
Crane Russak and Co., Inc. (for the United
States of America) and Taylor and Francis Ltd.
(for the rest of the world). 1978, 299 pp., £9.
17
