M
¿M
Stucco carving from a chronological inscription at the Forgotten Temple at Palenque. The
face, left is that of the divinity of the figure three and the medallion with the carving of(a
dog's head represents the day OC. The full inscription means the day 3 OC of the ritual
calendar of 260 days. The carving dates from 600-900 AD.
Photo Corson © Fotogram, Paris



The vital statistics
of the
Mayan language
by Vladimir A. Kuzmishchev
10

THE colossal pyramid-temples that
dominate the ancient cities of Chi-
chen-ltza. Copan and Tikal are tan¬
gible evidence of the skill and inventiveness
achieved by the Mayas, a people whose
civilization flourished in Middle America
during the first millennium AD. Yet these
majestic ruins, imposing as they are, can
tell us less about Mayan civilization than
the columns of multi-coloured characters
and tiny symbolic drawings of the Mayan
VLADIMIR A. KUZMISHCHEV, Sower spe¬
cialist on the culture of Latin America, heads the
cultural section of the Latin American Institute
of the USSR Academy of Sciences. He is the
author of many articles on the ancient Mayas
and his book The Mystery of the Mayan Priests
has been translated into Bulgarian, Hungarian,
Latvian, Lithuanian and Estonian. He is vice-
president of the Soviet Association of Friendship
and Cultural Co-operation with Latin American
Countries.
Right, extract from the
Paris codex. The central
figure, the god of rain, is
seen holding the head of
the god of fire. He is
wearing a sash decorated
with shells and the signs of
the wind. He stands facing
another barely visible god
seated on a throne and
holding a sceptre. A bird
hovers above his head. A
tripod between the two
gods holds offerings of food.
fig-bark manuscripts that for so long defied
the attempts of experts throughout the
world to decipher them.
Although attempts had been made over
the centuries to unravel the mysteries of a
number of unknown scripts, it was only
relatively recently, about two hundred
years ago, that deciphering was placed on
a proper scientific basis. One by one the
problems were solved ; Egyptian hiero¬
glyphics and the Sumerian cuneiform script
yielded up their secrets, and it became an
accepted principle that any unknown
script, however unusual, could be read,
even if, as in the case of the cuneiform
script, the language in which it was written
had been lost.
There remained, however, the enigma of
the Mayan codices. For over a hundred
years scholars the world over had pored
over them to no avail, finally concluding
that the codices could never be read since
they consisted of pictographs, or "sign-
writing", which could be interpreted but
not read.
This was how things stood at the begin¬
ning of the 1950s, when Yuri Knorozov, a
young Leningrad scholar working on
problems of comparative and historical
language studies and mathematical lin¬
guistics, began to take an interest in the
Mayan codices.
As a rule, unknown scripts have been
deciphered with the aid of a "key" in which
the same text is recorded in two languages,
one of which is known. The French scholar
Jean-François Champollion used the
Rosetta Stone in this way to solve the
riddle of Egyptian hieroglyphics. The task
of deciphering is also made easier by a
knowledge of history, of events running
parallel in different countries and of con¬
tacts between countries.
Information of this kind, however, was
totally lacking about pre-Columbian Ame¬
rica. Nor could a single bilingual text be
found. New methods of deciphering the
codices had to be employed.
Only three codices were known at the
time: the Dresden, Madrid and Paris codi¬
ces, thus named after the cities in whose
libraries they were conserved. After
studying all the available written material
about the ancient Mayas and their codices,
Yuri Knorozov was amazed to find enor¬
mous gaps in the research undertaken.
Knorozov began with a very elementary
assumption if the codices were indeed
"written" texts, the system of writing
could be determined by a comparison of its i
structure with that of various other known
Examples of Mayan hieroglyphs and their
meaning: (1) Sprouting seed; (2) Corn-cob;
(3) Ripening (depicts the ripening of
maize); (4) Talking; (5) Road (foot-print);
(6) To pour; (7) (two meanings) Store of
rainwater or the moon; (8) Death (eyes
closed); (9) A dead person in the foetal
position.
11

writing systems. But what was to be the
basis of comparison if the meaning and
function of the Mayan characters remained
unknown?
The answer proved simple. Knorozov
gave each sign a number and this enabled
him to determine the total number of signs,
their repetition frequency and other charac¬
teristics which, when compared with the
indicators of other known systems, reveal¬
ed the structure of ancient Mayan writing.
In the three codices there proved to be
only about three hundred signs ; if the
Mayan manuscripts had been full of picto-
graphic writing there would have been
several thousand. Pictography, therefore,
was ruled out.
The number of sounds in any language
usually averages thirty to forty, which cor
responds approximately to the number of
letters in the alphabet. So this was not a
simple alphabetic system.
In the so-called syllabic systems (the
Japanese katakana and hiragana, the
Indian devanagari, or the ancient Cypriot
script) the number of syllables does not
exceed one hundred to one hundred and
fifty, so this did not apply.
In morpheme writing, where the sign
corresponds to the root of the word or to a
grammatical particle, one thousand to one
thousand five hundred morphemes are
essential. So this too was eliminated.
There remained only the last of the
known systems hieroglyphic writing, a
mixed system in which some of the signs
stand for morphemes and others represent
sounds and syllables. How did the number
of signs compare in this case? It coincided!
Thus, using the precision tool of figures,
Knorozov confirmed a hypothesis that had
first been put forward by the French orien¬
talist Léon de Rosny as early as 1881. The
Mayas used a hieroglyphic script which
could, therefore, be read.
This was but a beginning, it remained to
discover the precise meaning of each of the
three hundred signs, how they were pro¬
nounced (if, indeed, they were pronounced
at all) and in what language they were
written.
This called for another "simple" dis¬
covery and a brilliant piece of guesswork
which came to Knorozov as he was read¬
ing and analysing the "Landa alphabet" in
a famous manuscript dating from 1566, the
Re/ación de las cosas de Yucatan (An
Down-to-earth
Before the Spanish conquest all Mayan
priests had manuscripts which served as
manuals and there were libraries in all the
towns; but in the mid-sixteenth century,
the Inquisition burned these "pagan"
manuscripts. Today only four Mayan
manuscripts are extant the Dresden
codex, the Paris codex and the Madrid
codex, all named after the cities in which
they are now preserved, and the Grolier
codex, which is in a private collection in
New York. The extract from the Dresden
codex, right, tells, in text and pictures, how
Kashish the god of wind and rain sets out
(first panel), like a peasant, to plant maize
before the coming of the rains. He carries
an implement to make holes in the ground
and a bag of seeds on his back. The
footprints beneath his feet symbolize the
long walk to the maize fields. When this
task is finished Kashish goes (second
panel) to a burial site, indicated by buried
bones, where he invokes the aid of the
ancestors. Then he goes (third panel) to
fetch lime from a lime pit (the Mayas kept
their maize in a lime solution). Having
obtained enough lime, Kashish wades into
a river (fourth panel) to collect water lilies
and mussels. The text above the first
panel reads: "Eleven [days before] the
ninth [period]. Goes to the field [the god]
Kashish before he leaves for the journey
[?]. This is his task. One [day before] the
second [period]." In a later version of the
Dresden manuscript, bottom right, the
god's peasant-like activities have been
replaced by an elaborate ritual. He goes
(first panel) to the temple to collect
offerings. Then he goes to a lake (second
panel) where he invokes rain with magic
gestures of his arms. One chapter of the
codex treats of women and of days of
good- or ill-omen for them. On twelve out
of every twenty-six days, the god of death
"received a flower", c'an nic-te, (which in
Mayan also means the consummation of
marriage) and on those days, unless
forewarned by a priest, a woman could
become death's bride. Yumtsek, the god
of death (third panel) is seen seated and
holding a flower, nic-te, in his hand. The
text above reads: "He receives a flower
[god of death] Yumtsek, he who has the
power of death. Twelve [days before] the
second [period]."
12

Reading the stars
The Mayas kept careful astronomical and meteorological records in
an attempt to determine the onset of the rains, when maize was
sown. It is difficult to judge what success they had in forecasting
weather, but Mayan astronomers made a thorough study of the
solar year, picking out thirteen constellations similar to the signs
of the zodiac. Each constellation bore the name of an animal.
Right, reading from right to left in this extract from the Paris
codex, we see a rattlesnake (today's Pleiades), a turtle (Gemini), a
scorpion (Cancer). The Mayan zodiac as depicted in the Paris
codex, can be traced back to the first centuries BC. Above, El
Caracol, the impressive Mayan observatory at Chichen-ltza. It
consists of a tower-like.construction built on a huge raised
platform measuring 67 by 57 metres. In the centre of the tower
rises a spiral staircase in the outer wall of which windows were
pierced to allow astronomical observations to be made.
^Koaiimtiiui nT-rr-r
\^.
i©~®'-r©r*p
account of matters relating to Yucatan). In
this manuscript, the franciscan Diego de
Landa, Prior Provincial and later Bishop of
Yucatan, informed his superiors about the
Maya Indians and about what he had done
to eradicate heresy.
The heresy was wiped out and with it the
culture that embodied the spiritual world of
the Indian. Many thousands of Mayan
manuscripts perished, but the franciscan's
Re/ación has come down to us, a unique
source of knowledge about the ancient
Mayas. The Re/ación, a copy of which was
discovered in 1863 by the French writer and
explorer Brasseur de Bou rbourg, contained
not only an "alphabet", but examples of
words written in Mayan signs. But for long
these had been considered to be, if not a
forgery by Diego de Landa or whoever
copied his manuscript, as at best a highly
inexpert attempt to correlate the letters of
the Spanish alphabet with Mayan sign-
drawings.
Knorozov began by checking de Landa's
alphabet and it soon became apparent that
there was no forgery or confusion either in
the alphabet or in the examples. Outstand¬
ingly accurate in everything he did, de
Landa had tried to make it easier for his
superiors to understand Mayan hieroglyphs
by using in his alphabet not letters but their
names, since they were actually nearer and
corresponded phonetically to some ele¬
ments of Mayan hieroglyphics, and the
names of letters consist of syllables. Kno¬
rozov understood this from a casual remark
of de Landa's: "they (the Mayas) write in
syllables..."
However, the Landa alphabet contained
only examples of Mayan signs and was not
a complete catalogue. Of the three hun¬
dred signs, it gave only those which
directly or closely corresponded to the
names of the letters of the Spanish alpha¬
bet, and these totalled only twenty-five.
The position was further complicated by
the fact that, as noted earlier, hieroglyphics
constitute a mixed system of writing and
are a far cry from the almost ideal simplicity
of letter combinations. Not only were there
three hundred signs, but the signs them¬
selves performed varied and sometimes
dual functions. There were three kinds of
sign: ideographic signs, giving the roots of
words; phonetic, conveying one syllable or
one sound; and key hieroglyphs or determi¬
natives, which explain the meaning of
words but are not themselves words that
are meant to be read (the word "robin", for
example, can mean a bird or a man; the key
sign tells the reader which is meant).
Knorozov turned again to mathematical
analysis of the grammatical laws of lan¬
guage. For this purpose he used mainly the
texts known as the Books of Chi/am Balam,
which were written in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries and consisted of
Mayan texts transposed into Latin script.
Parts of these texts referred to the pre-
Columbian period and were consequently
nearest of all in time to the language of the
hieroglyphic manuscripts.
13

Stone disc portraying a Mayan ball-player. The Mayans played a ritual ball game a form of
which still survives in north-western Mexico. Games took place in a walled, rectangular
court. The players struck a solid rubber ball against the walls with their forearms and
hips. The ball travelled at great speed and fatal injuries were not uncommon. The players'
hips, elbows and knees were protected with leather padding. Post-game ceremonies are
believed sometimes to have included the sacrifice of the players of the losing team.
k Each given a number, the hieroglyphic
signs were used to discover the grammati¬
cal laws of the language. And though there
was very little material to work on (all three
manuscripts filled only two hundred and
ten pages) the basic indicators of the
Mayan hieroglyphs, such as the repetition
frequency of each sign and its characteris¬
tic placing, were gradually determined.
This method, which has come to be
known as "positional statistics", finally
revealed the secret of Mayan hieroglyphic
writing. Each sign now had its "passport"
testifying to its purpose and position in the
structure or combination of signs. Cross¬
checking of individual words gave positive
results. Thus positional statistics became
something of a Rosetta Stone for Knoro¬
zov, except that he had to invent it, not just
find it.
The outcome of these enormous labours
was a fundamental work, The Writing of
the Maya Indians, published by Knorozov
in Leningrad in 1963.
It remained to read the Maya manu¬
scripts, a quite different but no less time-
consuming, complex task. It must not be
forgotten that the language of the six¬
teenth century Mayas in which the Books
of Chilam Balam were written, is very diffe
rent from that used by Maya Indians today.
The manuscripts, however, contained texts
in a language going back two thousand
years.
An enormous amount of work was done
by Mexican scholars at the Centre for
Mayan Studies at the Autonomous Natio¬
nal University of Mexico, who concentra¬
ted on the problem of determining the lan¬
guage of the manuscripts. They attempted
to discover which of the existing groups of
Mayas talk in a language nearest to that of
ancient times, just as we might ask which
of the modern "Latin" languages, Spanish,
Italian, French, Portuguese or Romanian, is
nearest to the Latin of ancient Rome.
This work continued simultaneously in
several countries and at the end of 1975
Knorozov's new book. The Hieroglyphic
Manuscripts of the Mayas, was published,
containing translations of all the four
extant manuscripts.
These manuscripts are not books as we-
understand the word, but reference
manuals or "encyclopaedias" covering all
facets of the life and traditions of the
ancient Mayas. "These manuscripts",
writes Knorozov, "which were reference
manuals for the village priests, were cer¬
tainly not meant to be read straight
through. The priests used them to find
their way through the labyrinth of ritual for
the countless movable feasts... The official
significance and ceremonial of these feasts
were, it is clear, known not only to the
priests but also to the lay community."
The full extent of Knorozov's talent and
achievement shines through his trans¬
lations (see examples page 12). It is hard to
overestimate their importance for our
understanding of the history of the Mayan
people.
First of all, the very existence of writing
confirms the extremely high level of civiliza¬
tion attained by the Mayas. Secondly,
during the deciphering process, irrefutable
proof was obtained that the writing was a
"local" invention, since the hieroglyphic
signs are based on local flora and fauna and
on Mayan traditions and culture.
Terra-cotta figurine of an ancient Maya
notable. Once the Mayas developed an
agricultural civilization, society quickly
divided into strictly defined classes and a
wide gulf appeared between the nobles and
the ordinary people. Power and property were
transmitted through the eldest son and the
younger sons of nobles became priests or
warriors. Other classes were formed by
artisans, merchants, sorcerers, doctors and
soothsayers and each class had its own
patron deity.
14

Detailed study of the manuscripts,
however, tells us much more than that. For
instance, with the aid of the manuscripts it
is possible to look into the skies of that
remote era, since the Mayan priests were
excellent astronomers who recorded not
only the annually repeated movements of
the sun, the moon and the stars of the solar
system, but also such unusual occurrences
as the appearance of shooting stars,
meteorite showers and eclipses. These
happenings of one and a half thousand
years ago can hardly fail to interest con¬
temporary astronomers.
The Mayas also created a calendar which
was more accurate than our own Gregorian
calendar. The length of their solar year was
365.2420 days, as compared with the
365.2425 days of the Gregorian calendar
and the actual length of the solar year
which is 365.2422 days. Such startling
accuracy draws attention to their whole
system of reckoning the years. Researchers
have established that the Mayas had a
mythical zero date, the year 5,041,738 BC,
and that they began their chronology at the
year 3113. How and why these dates were
selected is not yet known for certain. Any
assumption that the year 3113 marked a
world flood or the birth of a Mayan Mes¬
siah is pure conjecture.
Knorozov has translated all the known
Mayan manuscripts (the fourth was publis¬
hed by the eminent American authority on
the Mayas, Michael Coe, who discovered it
in 1973 in a private New York collection).
But it is entirely possible that new Mayan
books may be discovered. Moreover, there
are Mayan inscriptions on countless steles,
on buildings and utensils, on frescoes, bas-
reliefs and other products of the culture of
this remarkable people.
These inscriptions are also written in hi¬
eroglyphs, but their "construction" differs
in many respects from that of the manus¬
cript writings. Most of these inscriptions,
as we know from those that have been
deciphered so far, deal with historical
rather than religious or ceremonial themes,
and this should enable scholars to fill in
many blanks in our knowledge of the
Mayas and of pre-Columbian America.
The Mayan manuscripts, however, are
only a part of Yuri Knorozov's theoretical
research in the field of the theory of signs.
With a team of young Soviet scientists he
has published a series of basic works on
inscribed seals from Harappa and Mohenjo-
daro, and other scholars, using his method
of positional statistics, are attempting to
unravel the mysteries of other as yet unde-
ciphered scripts.
Vladimir A. Kuzmishchev

