A widening
chasm
between
rich
and poor
900 million
people
still living
in absolute
poverty
by IM.A. Cox-George
THROUGHOUT the life-time of the
great majority of people alive today,
mankind has been obsessed with the
threat of a mutually destructive nuclear
world war. Yet this is a speculative,
hypothetical threat. Paradoxically, man has
always seemed to have an inordinate
fascination for the remote while giving scant
regard to fundamental realities that should
concern him most.
The phenomenon of "absolute poverty",
one of the greatest indignities the human
race has suffered, is one such present reality
and, although during the latter part of the
19th and the early part of the 20th century
social reformers such as Henry George in the
United States and Charles Booth and Ben¬
jamin Seebohm Rowntree in England show¬
ed their concern with this phenomenon at
the national level, it remains a reality with
which the world as a whole seems content
to co-exist.
Absolute poverty is the condition of peo¬
ple whose incomes are insufficient to main¬
tain bare physical efficiency. In Charles
Booth's words they are living "below the
poverty line". The absolutely poor are those
"trapped in conditions so limited by illiteracy
and low life-expectancy as to be denied the
very potential of the genes with which they
were born. Their basic needs are simply not
met."
The World Bank has estimated that in
1976 there were no less than 900 million peo¬
ple in the world living in absolute poverty.
To be sure, they are concentrated largely in
the developing countries, accounting for
forty per cent of their total populations. But
even in the developed countries, despite
their economic growth and the progress of
the Welfare State, there were approximately
20 million absolutely poor people in 1976.
People in this category have per capita in¬
comes of well below $200 a year, and in the v
thirty least developed countries well below Y
13

i*p*
~
Photo © Parimage, Paris
To feed the constantly rising world population and fight the hunger and malnutrition which
are rampant in many regions, food production must be increased. Another approach to the
problem, of particular concern to developing countries, is to reduce the enormous losses of
food after harvest. Every year millions of tons of food perish during storage, as a result of
deterioration, contamination, spillage, or attacks by insects, birds and rodents. The
introduction of modern technology may not be the only solution because traditional
methods of storage have been found to work well as long as they are in balance with the
rest of the farming system. Above, the marriage of modern technology and traditional
methods in China. Grain pours up the conveyor belt into a granary made of straw. The
outside is made as the grain flows in, and when it reaches a certain height the structure is
covered with a straw roof. Below, traditional granaries in Mali are made of clay reinforced
with timber.
i *LÍfoïi-PÊF

> s 100 a year. Even on- the most optimistic
assumptions these incomes are not ex¬
pected to rise beyond $180 by 1985. Thus
the absolutely poor earn incomes equal to
half the amount it takes to maintain a pet
dog in the industrialized Western world.
The experience of the last two United Na¬
tions Development Decades offers no hope
at all for these people through the develop¬
ment process itself. The trends are all too
clear. Not only has the gap between the rich
(developed) and the poor (developing)
countries widened into a chasm, in the Third
World itself development has been uneven
and in some cases there has been a decline
in the growth rate.
The poorest nations have an infant mor¬
tality rate eight times higher than that of the
developed countries, a life expectancy one
third lower, an adult literacy rate sixty per
cent lower and a nutritional level, for one
out of every two in the population, below
minimum acceptable standards; and for
millions of infants, less protein than suffi¬
cient to permit optimum development of the
brain.
Such briefly is the profile of the absolutely
poor in today's world which, incidentally, is
predominantly young, with more than fifty
per cent of its total population under the age
of 15.
In international discussion of the problem
of poverty it has always been held that its
solution (as, indeed, that of the problem of
development generally) is primarily the
responsibility of the national governments
themselves. The developing countries
themselves, with their adoption of the no¬
tion of collective self-reliance in the Manila
Declaration and elsewhere, have tacitly ac¬
cepted this responsibility. It is therefore per¬
tinent to consider how the least developed
countries can lift themselves out of absolute
poverty as it were by their own bootstraps.
How can they contribute to growth and self-
reliance and improve their own productivity?
In doing so one does not necessarily have
to subscribe to the prevailing view. On the
contrary, one can deny its acceptability and
its applicability. The least developed na¬
tions, like the absolutely poor, are enmesh¬
ed in a web of adverse conditions which
tend to suck them further into poverty like a
drowning man caught in the quicksands.
Absolute poverty, it has been said, is the
result of both past and present neglect. In
many respects the phenomenon as it ap¬
pears today is a backwash from the colonial
era and failure to give practical effect to the
League of Nations' mandatory principle of
trusteeship. Had the colonial powers, for ex¬
ample, educated, or even offered literacy to
the peoples of the colonial territories in the
period between the wars, the profile and
dimensions of absolute poverty, given its in¬
ner dynamics, would have been entirely dif¬
ferent today.
Recent development experience clearly
reveals the inability of the governments of
many former colonial territories to deal with
the poverty problem. Nor are the poor in any
position to help themselves. Held fast in the
iron grip of appalling conditions, they are
like immature infants who have to be cared
for and brought to maturity before they can
be expected to exercise any initiative what¬
soever.
To give another analogy, the first thing to
be done to save a drowning man is to rescue
him from the water and administer first aid.
And this brings me closer to the kernel of my
own disagreement with the current conven¬
tional wisdom on this subject. The truth is
that we now live in a single world communi¬
ty and the problems of absolute poverty and
of development are world problems and, as
such, are the responsibility of the world and
not primarily of individual nations.
This viewpoint implies not only the need
for a new world economic order but for a
new world political order. This is a vast sub¬
ject. Suffice it here to say that until a ge¬
nuinely democratic world government
evolves, based not on the policeman's
philosophy but on the sacred principle of the
equality of its citizens everywhere and
guaranteeing each of them a minimum stan¬
dard of living above the poverty line, ab¬
solute poverty will remain with us.
Coming back to the question of what the
poor countries can do to help themselves,
the answer, frankly, seems to be very little;
or rather, they can do as much as a slave can
do to emancipate himself in a slave society.
The crucial point is that they must first be
helped, given the strength, as it were, to use
their muscles. And here the rest of the world
stands convicted at the bar of history.
Whether it be a matter of trade policy and
trade relations, of aid, technology and
technical assistance, or of access to capital,
the story is the same, a story of almost
criminal neglect of the fate of the poor coun¬
tries. During the first United Nations
Development Decade, 90 per cent of the
capital development of the middle-income
range of developing countries was financed
from their own domestic savings, while the
rest had practically no savings of their own.
Thus the possibility of mobilizing increased
domestic savings for investment is slim.
But there is one avenue for creating some
savings or rather for re-directing expen¬
diture, and that is the re-direction of military
expenditure; euphemistically referred to as
defence expenditure, this is, in reality, no
more than the defence of poverty. If,
without waiting for general world disarma¬
ment, the poorer countries would renounce
their claim to maintain military forces or
decide to transform them into "production
brigades", then productivity and real pro¬
duction could be increased. This would im¬
ply the end of foreign military aid and its
transformation into economic development
aid. But is such a renunciation conceivable?
Another possibility is for those poor coun¬
tries that have a substantial export trade in
primary products but are large importers of
foodstuffs to reduce exports and switch
their efforts to the production of more food,
since the internal comparative cost advan¬
tage will lie with food.
One other way in which they could
enhance their productivity would be to
adopt the most efficient technology in
everything they do. Confused at first by
various notions that have been bandied
about such as "appropriate" technology and
"intermediate" technology, they are now
realizing that what they need to speed up
the closing of the gap between them and the
rich countries is the "most efficient"
technology. Here also they need external
assistance.
In his introduction to Progress and Pover¬
ty, published in 1879, Henry George wrote:
"The present century has been marked by a
prodigious increase in wealth-producing
power. The utilization of steam and electrici¬
ty, the introduction of improved processes
and labour-saving machinery, the greater
subdivision and grander scale of production,
the wonderful facilitation of exchanges,
have multiplied enormously the effec¬
tiveness of labour.
"At the beginning of this marvellous era it
was natural to expect, and it was expected,
that labour-saving inventions would lighten
the toil and improve the condition of the
labourer; that the enormous increase in the
power of producing wealth would make real
poverty a thing of the past. Could a man of
the last century have seen, in a vision of the
future, the steamship taking the place of the
sailing vessel, the railroad train of the
wagon, the reaping machine of the scythe,
the threshing machine of the flail; could he
have heard the throb of the engines that in
obedience to human will, and for the
satisfaction of human desire, exert a power
greater than that of all the men and all the
beasts of burden of the earth combined;
could he have conceived of the hundred
thousand improvements which these only
suggest, what would he have inferred as to
the social condition of mankind?
"He would have beheld these new forces
elevating society from its very foundations,
lifting the very poorest above the possibility
of want, exempting the very lowest from
anxiety for the material needs of life; he
would have seen these slaves of the lamp of
knowledge taking on themselves the tradi¬
tional curse, these muscles of iron and
sinews of steel making the poorest
labourer's life a holiday, in which every high
quality and noble impulse could have scope
to grow."
That dream is still with us. Since the days
of Charles Booth's pioneering study on
poverty there has been considerable im¬
provement. The development among the
, poor themselves of trade unions and co-
* operatives has engendered a significant
degree of income re-distribution and an
awakening of the social conscience. The
persistent belief that the poor were responsi¬
ble for their condition has today been replac¬
ed by the philosophy of the Welfare State
that their condition is the responsibility of
the whole community and its government.
: The absolute poor of today may wish to take
this lesson to heart.
N.A. COX-GEORGE, of Sierra Leone, is head of
the department of economics at the University of
Sierra Leone, and has been associated with
several other African universities as a teacher and
an examiner. Vice-President of the West African
Economic Association anda member of the inter¬
national Pugwash movement to promote the
peaceful uses ofscience, he has also served at the
United Nations, notably with its Economic Com¬
mission for Africa and with the U.N. Conference
on Trade and Development.
15
