After the sack of Napata by the
Egyptian pharaoh. Psamtik II, in about
590 BC, the capital of the empire of
Kush was transferred further south to
Meroe, near the sixth cataract.
Above, granite statue, over three
metres high, of Aspalta (593-568 BC),
the first attested Meroe sovereign.
With its favourable climate and
geological conditions Meroe became
a prosperous agricultural, mining and
trading centre.



The Empire
of Kush
An original civilization
which flourished for a thousand years
in ancient Nubia
by Jean Leclant
THOUGH today the region is ex¬
tremely isolated behind a barrier of
deserts and the difficult hurdles of
the Second, Third and Fourth Cataracts of
the Nile, Dongola and the adjacent basins
of the Middle Nile were formerly the centre
of rich and powerful political structures. In
the first half of the second millennium the
so-called Kerma culture marked a rich and
prosperous kingdom, the Kush of the
Egyptian records.
The extremely patchy archaeological
prospection of this still little-known zone is
quite inadequate for fixing the history of
this sector after the brilliant but relatively
short phase of Egyptian domination under
the New Empire (1580 to 1085 BC). For
nearly three centuries, the link between
Africa and the Mediterranean world seems
to be broken and almost total silence
blankets Nubia. But from the end of the
ninth century BC we get a re-awakening:
excavation of the Kurru necropolis near
Napata below the Fourth Cataract revealed
the tombs of a succession of princes.
These were the royal ancestors of the
line which effected the union of Egypt and
the Sudan, known as the twenty-fifth or
"Ethiopian" dynasty of Egypt.
With the illustrious monarch Peye, we
enter the mainstream of history. One of the
inscriptions which he caused to be carved
at Napata is now preserved in the Cairo
Museum and is one of the longest and
most detailed texts of ancient Egypt. On
front, back and sides are 159 lines of
hieroglyphs describing the deliberations of
king in his palace and the phases of his
campaign against the Libyan princes who
were masters of Middle Egypt and the
Delta.
Towards 713 BC, Shabaka, brother of
Peye, ascended the throne. He brought the
entire Nile valley as far as the Delta under
the empire of Kush. The international
JEAN LECLANT, of France, is a professor at
the Sorbonne and director of studies at the
Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Paris. An
egyptologist, he specializes in Nubian studies
and Ethiopian archaeology. His publications
include Dans les Pas des Pharaons (In the Steps
of the Pharaohs) and Recherches sur les
Monuments Thébains de la 25* Dynasty
(Research on Theban Monuments of the 25th
Dynasty).
politics of the Middle East drew the
Kushites towards Asia where Assyrian
pressure was beginning to make itself felt.
But to begin with, Shabaka seems to have
preserved good relations with Assyria. In
the Sudan and Egypt, he launched a policy
of monument building which was expand¬
ed under his successors, the two sons of
Peye, first Shabataka (700 to 690 BC), and
then the glorious Taharqa (690 to 664 BC).
Taharqa's name is found on numerous
monuments throughout the whole length
of the valley. He built his sanctuaries at the
foot of the holy mountain of Gebel Barkal,
a kind of sandstone table formation which
dominates the large fertile basin of Napata.
Taharqa had accepted the challenge of
war with the Assyrians. His name looms
large in the Bible where the terror caused
by the black warriors of the land of Kush is
evident. Assarhaddon failed in his attempt
to invade Egypt and it was his successor
Assurbanipal who, at the head of an ex¬
tremely strong army, captured and sacked
Thebes in 663 BC. The Kushites withdrew
southward and their dynasty in Egypt came
to an end.
We shall do well to pause over this fifty-
year period during which Egypt and the
Sudan combined as a great African
power. The Kushite kingdom presents
itself as a twin monarchy; its symbol is the
double Uraeus, the two snakes which rise
above the forehead of the Pharaoh and
protect him. In their general style, their
clothing and their attitudes the sovereigns
of the twenty-fifth dynasty copy the
Pharaohs of Egypt who preceded them and
whose successors, if not descendants,
they claim to be.
The style of their monuments is typically
Pharaonic. The inscriptions are Egyptian,
recalling the pure classical tradition. But
the faces portrayed on reliefs and statues
show marked cheekbones, heavy chins and
thick lips. They also wear ornaments
characteristic of the Sudan. A popular
headdress is a kind of close cap fitting
tightly to the neck with a sidepiece protec¬
ting the temple; a thick knotted head-band
holds It in place leaving two streamers w
hanging behind the shoulders. Earrings and Y
55

r, the pendants of necklaces are adorned with
rams' heads, the ram being the sacred
animal of Amon.
After the retreat of the Kushites from
Egypt under the assaults of Assyrians, their
history is much more difficult to determine.
For a millennium a State survived, becom¬
ing ever more African, the kingdom of
Kush, the name of its own choice from the
ancient native name for the territory.
To begin with the capital remained at
Napata, at the foot of the sacred mountain,
Gebel Barkal. Later, almost certainly in the
sixth century BC, it was transferred much
further south to Meroe near the Sixth
Cataract.
A possible explanation for the transfer of
the capital may have been climatic and
economic considerations. At Meroe the
steppes were much more extensive than in
the basins around Napata, hemmed in by
deserts. Agriculture was practised as well
as livestock raising, cultivation being
perfectly possible in this zone of summer
rainfall. Enormous irrigation basins (hafirs)
were dug out adjacent to the principal
sites. Commerce must have been brisk, as
Meroe was an ideal entrepot for the
caravan routes between the Red Sea, the
upper Nile and Chad.
With Queen Shanakdakhete (around 170
to 160 BC) we appear to get the accession
to full power of a typically local matriarchy.
It is on an edifice in her name at Naga that
we find inscriptions engraved in Meroitic
hieroglyphs which are among the most an¬
cient known.
These hieroglyphs are borrowed from
Egyptian but differ in their values. They are
written and read in the opposite way to the
Egyptian ones; this "may attest a deliberate
desire to be different. With these
hieroglyphs there goes a cursive form of
writing often abbreviated; the signs seem
to be derived in part from the demotic
writing used in Egypt at that period for ad¬
ministrative and private documents.
Whatever the case may be, the Meroitic
language, whose nature is still not known,
and the graphic system are completely dif¬
ferent from the Egyptian.
Thereafter a preponderant place falls to
two queens, Amanirenas and Amani-
shakheto. Their husbands remain forgotten
and we do not even know the name of
Amanishakheto's. The throne was also oc¬
cupied for some years by a king, the former
prince Akinidad, son of Queen Amanirenas
and King Teriteqas. Nevertheless it is im¬
portant which of these two queens or
"Candaces" came first (the word Candace
is the transcription of the Meroitic title
Kdke according to the tradition of the
classical authors).
One of the two queens had dealings with
Augustus in a famous episode, one of the
rare occasions when Meroe appears on the
stage of universal history. Following the
sack of Aswan by the Meroites (which was
probably when the statue of Augustus was
captured, the head of which has been
discovered buried under the threshold of
one of the palaces of Meroe), the prefect of
Roman Egypt, Petronius, mounted a
punitive expedition and captured Napata in
23 BC.
A permanent garrison was established by
the Romans at Primis (Qasr Ibrim), which
held off the Meroites. In 21 or 20 BC a
peace treaty was negotiated at Samos,
where Augustus was staying at the time.
The Roman garrison appears to have been
withdrawn; the exaction of a tribute from
the Meroites was renounced and the fron¬
tier between the Roman and Meroitic em¬
pires was fixed at Hierasykaminos (Mahar¬
raqa).
This period around the start of the Chris¬
tian era is one of the peaks of Meroitic
civilization, as a number of buildings attest.
The names of Akinidad and of the Queen
Amanishakheto are inscribed in Temple T
at Kawa, and a palace discovered in the last
few years at Oüad ben Naga close by the
river has been attributed to the queen. Her
fine tomb is still to be seen in the Northern
Cemetery of Meroe. The pyramid, with the
traditional eastern approach of pylon and
chapel, is one of the most imposing in the
old city.
Natekamani, son-in-law and successor
of Amanishakheto, and his wife. Queen
Amanitere (12 BC to AD 12) were also
great builders, and their names are in¬
disputably those recurring most frequently
on the Kushite monuments. Throughout
the major cities of the empire, these
monuments speak of the power of a dynas¬
ty at its apogee. The royal couple also put
in hand the restoration of Napata,
devastated by Petronius' expedition, and in
particular of the temple of Amon. They
devoted particular attention to Naga, the
great centre of the steppe-country south of
Meroe: the frontal approach to the temple
of Amon became a pylon whose decoration
combines Egyptian influences and purely
Meroitic features, while the most famous
building is the Naga lion temple whose
reliefs are among the most representative
examples of Meroitic art.
We know very little of the last centuries
of Meroe. The indigenous component in

the culture becomes more and more impor¬
tant. The control of the caravan routes bet¬
ween the Nile valley, the Red Sea and the
Nilo-Chadian savannahthe economic
cornerstone of this empire was probably
not easy to maintain.' The royal pyramids
become progressively smaller and poorer;
while the rarity of Egyptian or Mediterra¬
nean objects indicates a cutting-off of out¬
side influences.
The Meroites, who until then had beaten
back the raids of the nomad tribes,
thenceforward became a tempting prey for
their neighbours, Axumites to the south,
nomadic Blemmyes to the east and Nubas
to the west. It is almost certainly to this last
group, mentioned for the first time by
Eratosthenes in 200 BC, that the overthrow
of the Meroitic empire should be ascribed.
The glory of Kush is quite surely
reflected in certain legends of Central and
West Africa. The Sao and the
Bushongothey have legends of the bring¬
ing of knowledge by men from the east.
Knowledge of techniques spread; certain
peoples cast bronze by the "lost wax"
method, as in the Kushite kingdom. But
above all, and of vital importance, it would
seem to be thanks to Meroe that the work¬
ing of iron spread over the African
continent.
Whatever the importance of this
penetration of Meroitic influences through
the rest of Africa, the role of Kush should
never be underestimated: for over a thou¬
sand years, first at Napata and then at
Meroe, there flourished a strongly original
civilization which, beneath an Egyptian-
style veneer fairly constantly maintained,
remained profoundly African.
Jean Leclant
Carved from black granite and nearly four metres in height, this
powerful portrait of king Taharqa (690-664 BC) of the 25th, or
"Ethiopian", dynasty comes from the temple of Gebel Barkal,
near Napata. Under the uraeus, the emblem of royal power in the
form of the sacred asp worn on the headdress of ancient
Egyptian sovereigns, Taharqa Is depicted wearing the typical
Ethiopian skull-cap. Missing from the statue are the tall feathers,
the attributes of the warrior god Onuris, with which the
headdress was originally adorned.
Built during the 2nd and 1st centuries BC, this group of
pyramids, fourteen. metres in height, forms part of a royal
necropolis at Gebel Barkal, near Napata. Although at the time
they were built the capital of the empire of Kush had been
transferred to Meroe, a number of rulers were still taken to
Napata for burial.
57
