THE most outstanding feature of poli¬
tical power in Nubia and central
Sudan from the eighth century BC
to the fourth century AD seems to have
been its remarkable stability and continuity.
Unlike many ancient kingdoms, the coun¬
try escaped the upheavals associated with
violent dynastic changes. Indeed one can
say that basically the same royal lineage
continued to rule uninterruptedly following
the same traditions.
Some of these traits are significant in
helping us to sketch the character and
nature of the political and social structure
of the empire of Kush.
One of the peculiar features of the
political system was the choice of a new
sovereign by election. Classical authors,
from Herodotus in the fifth century BC, to
Diodorus of Sicily in the first century BC,
express their surprise about this usage, so
different from that of other ancient
kingdoms, in their accounts of the "Aethio-
pians", as the inhabitants of the Kush em¬
pire were then generally called.
They insist on the oracular choice of the
new king. Diodorus affirms that "the
priests previously select the best of can¬
didates and from those that are summoned
the people take as a king the one whom the
god chooses as he is carried round in pro¬
cession... Straightaway they address and
honour him as if he were a god since the
kingdom was entrusted to him by the will
of the divinity."
An analysis of all the relevant texts
shows that the office of king was
hereditary in the royal lineage. In contrast
to the Pharaonic or any other ancient
Oriental system where the succession nor¬
mally followed the father-son pattern, in
Napata and Meroe the king was chosen
among his royal brethren.
The initiative in choosing a new
sovereign came from the army leaders,
high officials and clan chiefs. Any claimant
of doubtful ability or unpopular with the
electors might well be passed over. The
oracular confirmation was merely a formal
ratification of a previous choice and had
rather a symbolic character designed for
the public which was persuaded that god
himself had elected the new ruler.
Further it is plain that in theory the
crown was to pass to the brothers of a king
before descending to the next generation;
from among twenty-seven kings ruling
before Nastasen (d. about 310 BC), four¬
teen were the brothers of preceding kings.
There were, of course, exceptions when
this or that king usurped the throne, but in
such cases he tried to justify and legalize
his action.
There are also some signs that the right
AHMED ALI HAKEM, of the Sudan, is head of
the department of history at the University of
Khartoum. He is the author ofseveral books and
articles on ancient Sudan.
IVAN HRBEK, of Czechoslovakia, is a pro¬
fessorat the Oriental Institute of Charles Univer¬
sity (Prague). He is the author ofseveralpublish¬
ed works on the history of Africa and the Arab
countries.



The matriarchs
of Meroe
A powerful line of Queens
who ruled the Kushite Empire
by Ahmed M. Ali Hakem
with the collaboration of Ivan Hrbek and Jean Vercoutter
Dedicated to Apedemak, the
Meroitic warrior god with the
head of a lion and the body of a
serpent (photo right), the lion
temple at Naga, to the south of
Meroe, is famous for its
inscriptions and reliefs which are
among the finest examples of
Meroitic art. The temple dates
from the late 1st century BC or
early 1st century AD during the
reign of king Natekamani and his
queen Amanitere, depicted
(above right) on the towers flanking
the entrance to the temple. The
importance of the role of the
candaces (queens) in the Meroitic
monarchical system is apparent
from the fact that the sculptor
has given equal importance to
both figures and from the
imperious gesture with which
Amanitere, like her royal husband,
strikes down the enemies of the
kingdom. Although their attitudes
and gestures and the style of the
relief show Egyptian influence,
clothing and ornaments are
typically Meroitic.
Photos © Almasy, Paris
58

to the throne might depend even more on
claims through the maternal line than on
royal paternity. The role of the queen-
mother in the choice of a new king is seen
from many inscriptions. Some of these
traits have close parallels among kingdoms
and chiefdoms in various parts of Africa.
The exact role played by royal ladies in
the earlier periods is not quite clear but
there are many indications that they oc¬
cupied prominent positions and important
offices in the realm. During the Kushite rule
over Egypt the office of the chief priestess
(Dewat Neter) to the god Amon in Thebes
was held by the daughter of the king and
gave her great economic and political in¬
fluence. Even after the loss of Egypt, and
consequently of this office, royal ladies
continued to hold prominent positions
coupled with considerable power among
the temple priesthood of Amon at Napata
and elsewhere.
The queen-mother's important role at
" the election and coronation ceremonies of
her son is mentioned in inscriptions relating
to the coronation of Taharqa (690-664 BC)
and Anlamani (623-593 BC) in such a way
as to leave no doubt about her decisive in¬
fluence and specific status. She also exer¬
cised an influence through a complicated
system of adoption, whereby the queen-
mother, designated by the title Mistress of
Kush, adopted the wife.of her son.
The iconography confirms the enhanced
status of queen-mothers. In religious
scenes on temple walls they occupy promi¬
nent positions, second only to the king
himself, whereas on the walls of the
pyramid chapels the queen appears behind
the deceased king participating as the prin
cipal person in the offerings presented to
him.
In the later period these queens either
mothers or wives started to assume
political power and proclaim themselves
sovereign, even adopting the royal title Son
of Re, Lord of the Two Lands (sa Re, neb
Tawy) or Son of Re end King (sa Re,
Nswbit). Many of them became famous,
and in Graeco-Roman times Meroe was
known to have been ruled by a line of Can-
daces, Kandake or queens regnant.
This title is derived from the Meroitic
Ktke or Kdke meaning queen-mother.
Another titleqere meaning ruler, was
not used until the Meroitic script appeared.
As a matter of fact only four queens are
known to have used this title, namely
Amanirenas, Amanishekhete, Nawidemak
and Maleqereabar, all by definition being
candaces.
It is noteworthy that in the royal tombs
of Nuri, from Taharqa to Nastasen there is
no evidence of a queen having the full
burial of a reigning monarch and during
this period no reigning queen is known.
The earliest attested reigning queen was
Shanakdekhete, early in the second cen¬
tury BC, and she was allowed a full royal
burial. Most probably, in the beginning, the
title and the office did not mean more than
queen-mother. She was entrusted with
bringing up the royal children.
She was thus in a position to exercise
great power and influence which were
manifested by her special role in the cor¬
onation ceremony and her adoption of the
wife of her sbn. At some stage the queens
would outgrow their sons or husbands and
take a favourable moment to assume all
power to themselves.
From Shanakdekhete onwards we have
a series of reigning queens, but beginning
with Amanirenas in the first century BC
there seems to be another development.
This was the close association of the first
wife of the king and, perhaps, their eldest
son on many of the important monuments.
This suggests some degree of co-regency
since the wife who survived her husband
often became the reigning candace.
However, this system did not last for more
than three generations and seems to come
to an end after Natekamani, Amanitere and
Sherkaror in the first half of the first cen¬
tury AD.
All this points to the internal develop¬
ment of a local institution which was not a
copy of a foreign practice such as that of
the Ptolemies in Egypt (cf. Cleopatra). In¬
deed we can observe how these institu¬
tions grew in complexity over the cen¬
turies.
This kingship system had some advan¬
tages over a rigid system of strict direct
succession since it eliminated the danger of
an unsuitable successor, whether a minor
or an unpopular personality. The injection
of new blood into the royal family was
assured by the system of adoption. The
various checks and controls inherent in this
system, the prominence given to the
queen-mother and the insistence, on
rightful descent ensured the rule of the
same royal family. All this may have con¬
tributed to the continuity and stability en¬
joyed by Napata and Meroe for such long
centuries.
59
