A moment of delight and concentration at a school in a Paris neighbourhood heavily
populated by migrant workers. When children from many different countries are brought
together, the classroom can become a seed-plot of international understanding.



What's in
a name?
by Hélène Gratiot-Alphandéry
HÉLÈNE GRATIOT-ALPHANDÉRY, French specialist in child psychology, is honorary
director at the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes in Paris and teaches at the René Descartes
University. Her six-volume Traité de Psychologie de l'Enfant ("Treatise on Child
Psychology"), written in collaboration with R. Zazzo, was published by Presses Universitaires
de France, Paris, between 1970 and 1976.
ONE of the first things a child is
required to do in the famous Binet-
Sirnon intelligence test is to give
his name.
Children seem to know their names by
the time they reach the age of three. In
other words, three-year-olds are capable of
placing themselves in a given set of sur¬
roundings and of providing this indication
of where they belong in society.
But it would be arbitrary to consider a
child's ability to identify himself by name as
merely a sign that he has reached a certain
level of intellectual development. A name is
more than a label ; it is a token of a
person's individuality. It is by our names
that we are known ; we make a name for
ourselves in the world.
The French philosopher Ignace Meyer-
son made an analysis of the social function
of the name in which he highlighted the
importance of names in ancient societies.
"A child does not exist until it has been
named," he wrote. "The name both repre¬
sents and confers individuality. It is the
measure of the place which the group allots k
to the individual and of the protection it F
27

The ¡mage the migrant
worker has of the host
country, based on
fantasies about its
wealth, comfort and way
of life, contrasts painfully
with the discomfort of
the shanty-town in which
he often finds himself
living. He feels isolated
and excluded. But his
children have additional
problems to face. If they
do not go to school, they
remain entirely dependent
upon their family and
their social development
is retarded. If they go to
school, they are plunged
into a strange
environment and a
bewilderingly wide range
of activities and
relationships with other
children and adults for
which they are totally
unprepared.
Photo H.W. Silvester © Rapho, Paris
28

k affords him. .. It is a big moment, for exam¬
ple, when his signature begins to carry
weight. A name represents and confers a
very special kind of identity: to give a child
the name of a forebear is to give the fore¬
bear a kind of continuity and even, in a
sense, to transform the child into the fore¬
bear." Meyerson goes on to make the point
that people sometimes change their names
when they change their social status, or
when they are in danger and want to cover
their tracks.
Meyerson also recalls that in Ancient
Greece and Rome, anyone such as a son,
a daughter or a slave placed by birth in
the power of another person, had no name
of his own. He was given that of the house
to which hé belonged.
But this link between the person and his
name is more than just a footnote to his¬
tory; psychological studies reveal that a
child's name has a bearing on the for¬
mation of his personality.
There is a time in early childhood when a
child amuses himself by becoming first one
personality and then another. Then comes
a moment when he speaks of himself as a
single person; the words / and me are con¬
stantly on his lips. This personality crisis,
which occurs around the age of three, is an
affirmation of selfhood and individuality,
which is expressed as opposition to others.
The child's given name is a crucial factor
in this assumption of individuality. It sin¬
gles him out from others and also indicates
his sexchildren tend to take a poor view
of given names which can be used for boys
and girls alike. The given name is more per¬
sonal than the surname. The child learns it
first and uses it in his earliest contacts with
others. It is used by his brothers and sisters
and his playmates. The surname indicates
attachment to a group and offers less per¬
sonal information to the outside world.
Both names assume great importance
when the child steps out of the family circle
and enters the world of school. When a
child utters his name he introduces himself,
exposes himself to the scrutiny of others.
At this point it becomes apparent that there
is a difference between "local" names and
"foreign" names, especially the given
names which are used by the teacher and
the other children. The foreign child is dis¬
tinguished by his given name just as much
as, if not more than, by the colour of his
skin, his hair and his eyes. Now perhaps
more than at any other time he realizes that
he is in some way different from the other
children.
This difference may be oppressive. It
may lead the child to behave aggressively,
to adopt a negative attitude to life, or to cut
himself off from other people. It may also
lead him to make some kind of appeal to
others those others who are both so near
to him and yet so unlike himself. His name
has taken on a far wider significance: it
denotes a country, a homeland.
I OME years ago, Jean Piaget
and Anne-Marie Weill traced the way in
which the idea of the homeland originates
and develops in the child's mind. Around
the age of six the child is still unable to
detach himself from his immediate circle,
but between ten and thirteen he acquires a
broader conception of the national group,
together with an understanding of the ele¬
ment of give-and-take in human relations.
"From the affective point of view", Piaget
has written, "the child initially shows no
preference for his own country over others
(what counts is the immediate unit such as
the family or the home town). Then, once it
is accepted that he belongs to a given
country, he imagines that anyone born
elsewhere would want to belong to the
same country too, if only he had the
choice. It is only when the child is on the
threshold of adolescence that he starts to
feel real patriotic sentiments, which he jus¬
tifies by reference to his birth and his
family. He believes that everyone prefers
his own country for the same reasons".
But logically satisfying though this analy¬
sis is, it does not do full justice to the
intense emotions which the idea of the
homeland evokes in those who live in exile.
When questioned about his nationality, a
child living in a host country conjures up an
image, which may be either fantastic or
nostalgic, of a faraway land where he may
never have set foot. For him the right to a
homeland means the right to say that he
comes from "somewhere else". The chil¬
dren and often the adults who question
him are at home; he is not.
He may realize that he has been up-

rooted, either because he has heard his
parents say so or because he still remem¬
bers a country where he lived, played and
spoke in his own language. But whether
this memory is based on real experience or
whether it is a figment of his imagination, it
is overshadowed by a much more impor¬
tant problem. Every day of his life the
foreign child must cope with the fact that
he belongs to two countries at once.
Beneath the scrutiny of other people he
becomes aware of his identity. In relation
to other people he feels either a friend or an
outsider, depending on the circumstances.
Other factors as well as name, language
and physical type combine to immure the
foreign child in his foreignness. He soon
sees that his life is different in many res¬
pects from those of the children he meets
each day: his living conditions are different,
so are the social and economic status of his
parents and his family's customs and edu¬
cational models. He sees how groups form
according to nationalities and even regions
of origin; and both he and his family expe¬
rience the warmth and security of these
groups, through which he discovers a
homeland of whose landscapes, traditions
and recent history he is ignorant.
The foreign child's image of the home¬
land is thus an ambivalent one. It inspires a
lasting fidelity; he may hope to return there
one day; perhaps some members of his
family still live there. At the same time his
picture of this country may be coloured by
the fact that he has been compelled to
leave it because of poverty or oppression.
In the course of his psychological and
social evolution the child is constantly
making choices, and in this situation he
faces problems which make choosing
extremely painful or even impossible. He is
not equipped to choose between the
country in which he lives and whose cul¬
ture he is acquiring and the country to
which he "belongs". Or else he dares not
choose. Other people, however, do the
choosing for him.
The American sociologist Otto Klineberg
has shown how national stereotypes form
in the child's mind. Many factors are invol¬
ved in this process, including the image the
child has of himself, the image he forms of
others, and the image others form of him.
All these judgements are influenced by fac¬
tors which reflect the insecurity of the
foreign child and his unfailing need to be
recognized and accepted for what he is.
At school foreign children experience dif¬
ficulties of adaptation which all too often
produce a false, distorted picture of their
abilities and their potential. In some
schools they even outnumber and tend to
drive away the other children. As a result
the authorities may apply the principle of
"tolerance thresholds", a measure which
may in itself accentuate the cleavages bet¬
ween nationalities and which certainly does i
not foster "universal brotherhood". I
29

k If the foreign child feels that he is diffe¬
rent from children of the host country, he
also feels different from other foreign chil¬
dren whose nationality is different from his
own. He discovers that being a foreigner
does not necessarily bring you closer to
other foreigners. What he shares with
other foreign children is essentially a wish
to be accepted and to give a good account
of his country of origin, and above all, as
he grows older, a half-formulated desire
not to be an intruder or a parasite.
The child does not work all this out
alone. He gradually absorbs what he hears
at home and learns from the experiences of
his family. But these feelings eventually
become a part of him and influence what
he expects from the world.
The problem is not so much the child's
distinctive cultural situation as the way in
which this situation is appreciated and
valued. The child seeks recognition of his
right to a homeland but he also wants his
homeland to be considered as equal to any
other and worthy of an equally strong
attachment.
But is it not time we realized that such
terms as "the children of migrant workers"
or "the children of refugees" actually
sound like a denial of the right to a home-
One out of every two of the estimated ten
million refugees in the world is a child.
Among the 30,000 refugees from
Zimbabwe (Rhodesia) who have reached
shelter in Zambia, either directly or via
Botswana, seventy per cent are children
or adolescents of whom some 12,000 are
of school age. This has placed a huge
burden on the Government of Zambia
which, with the help of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, has established camps and an
educational centre for young
Zimbabweans not far from Lusaka. Above,
Zimbabwe refugee children in Zambia.
Top left, improvised living quarters for
boys at the H.Z. Moyo Camp. Left, a class
for some of the 5,000 girls housed at the
Victory Camp.
30

^/4¿í
/ ét^r
\
>r
land because they associate the children
with the terminology of distress and flight?
Is it not high time to do away with such
oppressive labels? Should we not insist
that the social services and the bureau¬
cracy cease to mark out these children
from the rest? After all, no distinctions are
imposed on people who move about within
a single country. From north, south, east
and west they come, bringing with them
their own traditions and ways of speech.
But they are not given a special social or
professional status.
- i >
Photos Peter Marlow © Sygma, Paris
Should we not recognize at once that
foreign children have a right to a homeland
of their own? They may be Algerians,
Argentinians, Chileans, Spaniards, Italians,
Ivorians, Laotians, Moroccans, Portu¬
guese, Senegalese, Tunisians or Yugo¬
slavs. Let them be recognized as such from
the moment they set foot in the host
country. Their dignity and their hope will
grow out of their legitimate pride in their
name and their homeland.
Hélène Gratiot-Alphandéry
