Corals, jelly-fish and sea anemones are among the 9,000 species that make up the group of aquatic
invertebrates known as Cnidaria. Many cnidarians live in very close relationship with certain forms of algae
and some substances apparently extracted from corals, for example, for possible medicinal use may be
derived from the algae living in symbiosis with them. Above, a soft coral of the Cnidaria alcyonaria family.



Neptune's
pharmacopoeia
by Mario Piattelli
MARIO PIATTELLI, of Italy, is professor of
organic chemistry at the University of Catania.
The author of some hundred scientific publica¬
tions, his research work has been concerned
mainly with the biochemistry of natural pro¬
ducts. In recent years he has concentrated on
the study of compounds of marine origin.
THE seas and the oceans, which cover
two-thirds of the earth's surface
and contain around five hundred
thousand species, including twenty thou¬
sand algae, represent an immense and
almost untapped reserve of natural,
biologically active and potentially useful
products.
Yet the abundance of medicines ex¬
tracted from land organisms, particularly
from higher plant forms and micro¬
organisms, is in striking contrast with the
scarcity of those obtained from marine
organisms.
The lack of interest that organic chemists
have until recently shown in marine pro¬
ducts is probably due to a combination of
several factors: the general perception of
the sea as a hostile milieu, the relative dif¬
ficulty of gathering material, and the par¬
ticular problem of identifying marine
species.
It is reasonable to assume that marine
organisms, being adapted to an entirely dif¬
ferent milieu than that of earth species,
have developed different secondary
elements not universally found in living i
species. A significant number of elements I
29

of rare composition have already been
' isolated. The most recent research has
been concerned primarily with products
derived from organisms which are seden¬
tary and relatively primitive from an evolu¬
tionary point of view, that is to say, in¬
vertebrates (particularly sponges, jelly-fish,
corals) and algae.
Because of the great interaction that ex¬
ists between plants and animals which in¬
habit the oceans, it is not always easy to
ascertain the true origin of a compound ex¬
tracted from a particular species. For exam¬
ple, many substances which have been ex¬
tracted from jelly-fish and corals and
therefore are usually considered animal are
probably derived from monocellular algae
which live in symbiosis with such in-
vertebrae.
Awareness of the possible biomedical
benefits to be had from algae is certainly
not new. Ancient Chinese pharmacology
suggested their use in the cure of many
diseases from cancer and dropsy to
menstrual disorders. Popular remedies in
fashion during past centuries and in certain
cases still employed today, used marine
algae for their therapeutic properties. For
instance, a red algae known as "Dulse"
was used in the 18th century in England to
stimulate sweating.
Other red algae, including one popularly
known as "Corsican moss", are employed
in many countries in the treatment of
worms. Varieties of the Sargasso weed are
used in India for bladder infections and in
South America as a remedy for kidney
disease and goitre (the rarity of this last
disease among the Chinese or Japanese is
certainly due to the high iodine content in
the algae which is part of their diet).
If the idea of using algae for therapeutic
purposes is old, however, scientists are
now exploring this form of marine life, us¬
ing new methods which are often extreme¬
ly refined (and expensive). Some thousand
marine species have been examined for the
purpose of establishing the presence of
potential anti-cancer agents. These studies
have revealed that algae cannot be con¬
sidered particularly suitable material in the
search for substances which could even¬
tually be used in cancer therapy.
The prospects look better with regard to
antibiotics, even if only one compound of
marine origin has up till now been adapted
for clinical use. Cefa/osporina C, the com¬
pound in question, extracted from a fungus
gathered in the vicinity of a sewage
The oceans of the world cover
some seventy per cent of the
surface of the globe. They
have been described as "inner
space" and "the last
unexplored frontier",
expressions which evoke their
vast resource potential. Fish
have long been an important
food source and today
scientists are examining
marine plants as a possible
source of new medicinal
extracts. Photo shows fish
traps off the coast of
Sjaelland, Denmark.
discharge along the coast of Sardinia, has a
similar composition to penicillin and is ef¬
fective against a wide spectrum of bacteria,
including penicillin-resistant ones, a
characteristic which it owes to its lack of
sensitivity to penicillinase, a bacteria en¬
zyme capable of destroying penicillin.
In addition to this example, which has
reached the stage of practical application,
there exists a lot of data concerning the an¬
tibiotic activities of marine flora, particular¬
ly with regard to species of red, brown and
green algae. The percentage of species,
which present these characteristics (anti¬
bacterial, antifungal) is rather high, pro¬
bably greater than 10 per cent.
Another potentially useful phar¬
macological activity is found in the sterols
of marine algae, which are known to
reduce the level of cholesterol in the blood,
or in the hypotensive properties of an
amino-acid isolated from brown algae.
Numerous more or less recent works
have been devoted to the pharmacological
study of complex carbohydrates known as
polysaccharides extracted from algae. The
most common compounds of this
category, whose composition is the result
of the union of many molecules of plain
sugar, are agar and carrageen, both ex¬
tracted from red algae, and laminarin and
alginates, both found in brown algae.
These compounds are used widely and
often in fields other than pharmacology
and present remarkable biomedical proper¬
tiesagar, for example, is extensively
used in bacteriology in the preparation of
cultures, and alginates are used in the
nutritional sector. Agar and carrageen, as
30

ï
well as laminarin after the appropriate
chemical reaction has transformed it into a
sulfate, have anticoagulant properties.
These polysaccharides also have anti-
peptic and antiulcerous properties : in
many cases of ulcers the oral administra¬
tion of carrageen has proved to be an effec¬
tive remedy. Introduced intravenously, car¬
rageen and laminarin sulfate lower the fat
content in the blood serum and prevent the
development of arteriosclerosis. Alginates
and carrageen, administered orally, inhibit
the absorption of cholesterol by the in¬
testines. The polysaccharides of the algae
have also shown inhibiting action with
regard to numerous viruses.
The ability of alginic acid to form salts
with metal ions is at the origin of its use as
a protective agent against radio-strontium
contamination. The presence of alginic
acid in the intestinal tract effectively checks
one of the most harmful consequences of
radioactive fallout, the absorption and fixa¬
tion of strontium in human tissue. The acid
combined with the radioactive metal
creates an insoluble alginate which is
eliminated in the faeces.
The usefulness of alginic acid is not
restricted to the field of preventive
medicine but extends to therapeutic
medicine as well. Alginic acid is effective
not only in the prevention but in the treat¬
ment of radioactive strontium poisoning,
since the substance already deposited in
the bones is resecreted into the intestines
where in the presence of alginic acid it is
immobilized, to become an insoluble form.
The pharmacological study of algae
should not be limited to compounds which
may possibly be used in the treatment of
disease but should also include the toxins
which some algae produce. These toxins,
whose effects are known to be particularly
strong (a toxin derived from Gonyau/ax
catenella is one of the most lethal venoms
known today), sometimes accumulate in
edible organisms such as mussels and
other bi-valve molluscs, crustaceans and
fish, where they can cause serious food
poisoning if ingested. It is clear that food
poisoning due to such toxins can be
treated more effectively if we have greater
knowledge of their effects. Moreover, the
composition of these toxins can serve as
models for analogous synthetic chemical
compounds which would conserve their
medicinal properties.
This rapid and necessarily incomplete k
review of the present state of research con-
31

. cerning active substances which can be
found in marine flora may appear rather
discouraging, particularly since researchers
may sometimes present the results of tests
for biological activity in a far too optimistic
light in the hope of being granted further
funds to continue their studies. Further¬
more, the clinically useful results we
possess and these are far from substan¬
tial mostly been obtained by
sporadic and not very recent research.
Nevertheless, in order to evaluate the
question properly we must consider two
very important points: above all, con¬
siderable and continued efforts in this field
of scientific research have only begun in
the last few years and it is well known that
the development of a new medicine from
the time of its discovery to its use usually
takes from three to ten years, in some
cases longer. In the second place only one
biologically active compound out of
thousands succeeds in overcoming the
severe tests of its efficacity and reliability
before being put to practical clinical
application.
In the light of such considerations, it is
reasonable to believe that a systematic
study of substances produced by marine
algae (and by other marine organisms)
should be actively pursued in the hope of
obtaining useful results within the next
decade.
Mario Piattelli
Photo .£> Claude Carré, Station Marine, Villefranche-sur-Mer, France
32
The
jewels
of the sea
With their intricate shapes
and geometric designs,
diatoms, the microscopic,
single-celled algae to be
found in all the waters of
the earth, have been aptly
called "the jewels of the
sea" (photos left). Among
the most prolific sea
organisms one litre of
sea water Is said to contain
from a few thousand to a
few million diatoms they
serve as food for many
marine creatures. They are
divided into two orders on
the basis of their symmetry
and shape: the round
Centrales have radial
patterns and the elongated
Pennales have feather-like
markings. Diatoms are
believed to have
contributed to the
formation of oil deposits
and a substance composed
of fossil diatoms is used in
filters, abrasives and some
paints and varnishes. More
recently, certain diatoms
have been found to possess
antibacterial and antifungal
properties.
