African childhood
by Cámara Laye
CÁMARA LAYE, Guiñean writer, attended the
Koranic school and, later, the French primary
school at Kouroussa, northern Guinea. Coming
to France, he continued his studies in Paris
while, at the same time, working in a factory.
When Guinea achieved independence, in 1958,
he returned to his country where he assumed
important administrative functions. Since 1965,
he has lived in Senegal. He is the author of
L'Enfant Noir (The Black Child), published by
Plön, Paris, in 1953, in which he recounts his
African childhood, and of two novels. Le Regard
du Roi (The King's Regard), Plön, 1954, and
Dramouss, Plön, 1966.
KOUROUSSA in Guinea, West Africa,
my birthplace and the traditional
home of my forebears, is a typical
Malinke village; the Djeliba River which
flows past it dominates the life of its mainly
agricultural population. Kouroussa is situ¬
ated some seven hundred kilometres from
the coast and is reached by train or auto¬
mobile.
In my childhood, Kouroussa was a clus¬
ter of round banco (clay-walled) huts top¬
ped by conical, thatched roofs. The village
housed various kapila, or extended fami¬
lies, bound together by a love that welded
them into united, close-knit groups.
From my studies of the oral tradition of
West Africa, undertaken over the past
twenty years, I know today that Tabon
Wana Fran Cámara was an ancestor of
mine. He was a contemporary of Tira Mag¬
han Traore, the great general of Manden,
of Do Samo Conde, king of Sosso, of
Fakoli Koroma, leader of the Koromas, of
Famandjan, king of Sibi, of Sundiata Keita,
15

> emperor of Mali in the thirteenth century.
The original Mandingo were a people
formed of a confederation of the differ¬
ent tribes which constituted the basis of
the Malian empire.
According to our elders, the snake spirit
of our race belonged first to Fran Cámara
and /Tjade hinj^a^skilled and respected
.craftsman. "As à child iwas taken by my,
father to see the snake spirit whom I got to;
1<now very well. The source of my father's
skill in the shaping of wood and the work¬
ing of metal, the snake spirit was also his
trusted adviser in the art of controlling his
colleagues.
In those days men protected themselves
with all manner of greegrees (charms); it
was a time of revealers of things hidden,
and of healers, some of whom really could
heal.
A child in Kouroussa did not belong to
his parents but to his lineage group which
was responsible for him and took care of
his education. The individual remained link
ed to the group which was held to have
given him life, and it was within the group
that he continued to live.
This solidarity, or rather this source of
life, made itself felt on important occa¬
sions. Every birth was attended by the
whole village. As soon. as the cries of the
woman in labour "Were heard, all the, old
women pushed itp.jhêr aid, whlle^trje/elders
gathered in thefshade;of the great bombax
tree, in the'centre of the village and
anxiously awaited the announcement of
the birth. When the infant arrived, the
father made the rounds to thank the
villagers, for the child had been born
thanks to the efforts of all. Throughout the
day, all the villagers in turn visited the
woman in childbed to thank her for having
given them a baby.
Should a villager fall ill, the men and
women would visit the sufferer on the way
to work in the fields in the morning and
again on their return in the evening. But it
was above all at the time of a death that the
Photo © Giraudon, Paris - Musée de l'Homme, Paris
solidarity of Kouroussa was seen at its
best. Work was abandoned so that
everyone could lavish attention on the one
who was dying and on his or her family.
Today, many of the ancient customs are
unsuited to the modern age and have had
to be abandoned. But the solidarity arising
from these exchanges created a current of
sympathy and was a positive aspect of tra,-.,
ditionalsociety. Solidarity was a vital force :
that existed in 'all African villages.
There were many customs like these
which astound our children when we speak
of them today and which will astound our
grandchildren even more. Many things
which were commonplace in Africa's past
were a source of astonishment to Euro¬
peans. Yet the Europe of long ago had its
own mysteries which, though different
from ours, could have helped to ensure
European acceptance of our mysteries.
Did all these things of which I have
written really exist? Why should this be
doubted? Is the world no more than what
a cursory glance around us reveals?
In the past, the face, the figure or the
animal that took shape from the wood in
our sculptors' hands and the varied output
of our sculptor-blacksmiths were imbued
with mystery and were designed for use in
worship and magic. It was a time when the
sculptor-blacksmith was not merely a
craftsman, but a sorcerer, a priest in cons¬
tant contact with fire, which he used first
to melt the ore and then to breathe shape
into the metal. It was a time when the hoe
was not merely a tool for turning the soil,
but an instrument which controlled the
earth and the harvest.
This was a time when the art of the
blacksmith ranked above all others. It was a
truly noble art which required more know¬
ledge and skill than any other. In our
society the smith was probably the first
specialized craftsman; the knowledge he
had to possess, the operations that had to
be gone through to transform the ore into a
weapon or an agricultural implement made
specialization essential.
Once his special skill was recognized, it
was natural for people to turn to the
blacksmith when they wanted something
carved in wood. Not, of course, for the
ordinary utensil that anyone could rough
out, but for likenesses of ancestors and for
the most ancient images of all totems and
the masks for ritual dances, indeed, all the
cult objects his skills enabled him to pro¬
duce. And though these skills have never
been completely lost, they have, inevitably,
become rarer in a society whose ancient
animism has been confronted with new
ideas.
This is not to say that mystery is no
more, but simply that it is to be found
elsewhere it has emigrated. I became
aware of this in 1956 when, on returning to
Africa for good, I visited a Malinke crafts¬
man in Kouroussa. I still recall my amaze-

ment and my efforts to guess what would
emerge from the shapeless block under the
sharp, precise blows of the chisel. Yet
there was no mystery; only the wonder of
the head of a doe emerging unexpectedly
from the wood. Suddenly, I knew exactly
what was coming into being. It was not a
very mysterious mystery. It was the answer
to a riddle I had asked myself. But what of
the craftsman? What was he seeking as he
carved and shaped the wood?
He was looking for his own reality; he
sought to be true, as true as a man can be.
He had produced the most beautiful of
heads, an idealized head that epitomized
every doe.
Today, African sculpture is on display in
the world's leading museums and, more
than African literature whether expressed
in English or in French, it reveals the
extraordinary power and sympathy rooted
in the African soul.
Although it has not yet found its defini¬
tive place in the history of art, the influence
of this African sculpture swept through the
art world with the force of a tidal wave.
Yesterday's painters, who are still the great
painters of today, were obsessed with the
new plastic forms this sculpture provided.
These were the forms they seized upon and
experimented with, for they lent them¬
selves to all sorts of new styles and com¬
binations.
The discovery of our sculpture did not,
however, endow them with any greater spi¬
rituality. When we look back over the past
sixty years and examine the styles of that
period and those of today, almost the only
difference we can detect is an increased
formalism, no better and no worse than
what had gone before.
When I attended the French primary
school at Kouroussa, in 1940 and 1941,
when classes were over for the day, I often
liked to visit a craftsman in his workshop
and watch him as he set to work carving a
piece of wood. It all seemed so strange to
me at the time and it has taken me years to
understand that, whereas in the West the
artist was considered to be a giant among
men, in Africa the artist, the d/e/i or griot,
the poet, the belentigui, or master of the
word, the noumou, or blacksmith, the
siakl, or goldsmith, were always held to be
people of lesser importance than the ordi¬
nary man. That is why they felt more inten¬
sely than other men the weight of their pre¬
sence in the world.
Thus, curiously, the sculptor of the past,
placed before reality, did not copy it, he
transformed it. And at times he transform¬
ed it so much that he introduced a measure
of abstraction. By this, of course, I do not
mean abstraction to the point of confusion,
but a non-systematic abstraction which
therefore is unrelated to what Europe cur¬
rently calls abstract painting or sculpture; I
mean an abstraction which remains rather
unusual in African art and which is more a
Above, musician of the Bassarl people (Republic of Guinea). Opposite page, mask from
the Guiñean region of Nzerekoré. "Here (in Africa) everything Is on a familiar footing and
there is no break in the fabric of history," writes the Togolese sociologist F. N'Sougan
Agblemagnon, evoking the harmony of traditional ways of life In Africa. "The ancestors
are close to the children, the dead and the living are side by side, animals and men alike
participate in the same mystery. All form part of a single whole which is Nature... People
must live in the world of Nature, coordinating their rhythms with those of Nature. This is
a form of happiness which African children learn in their earliest years."
form of expressionism stretched to its not
clearly perceived limit.
Bent over the block of wood he was
fashioning with his adze, the craftsman of
the past did not calculatedly set out to
transform reality; he allowed his heart to
express itself with greater spontaneity, and
this led first of all to transformations which
brought out and accentuated expression
and spirituality. This later entailed other
purely plastic transformations intended to
balance the early ones and to complete
them.
But, it may be asked, if these transform¬
ations were not gratuitous, were not simply
stylistic, how is it that they appear in all
their mastery in all African sculpture? Why
do these planes and volumes make us think
of variations on a given theme? Why is the
rhythm here more striking, infinitely more
so, than in any other sculpture?
Here we are reaching down into the pro¬
fundities of the African soul the feeling
for rhythm that enables us, untaught, to
play the tom-tom, that means that not one
of us, from Senegal to Zaire, can hear the
beat of a tom-tom without wanting to
dance, that makes us born musicians and
born dancers.
What was achieved by the artists of the
past in negro-African sculpture can be
attempted and achieved in African litera¬
ture, in both the French and English
idioms. When I write, I too am seeking the
frenzied rhythm of the African tom-tom.
Cámara Laye
17
