THE ARMS RACE
Three myths
that die hard
MYTH I : Military
expenditure boosts
economic growth
THE international arms market has
grown in recent years at a rate
which contrasts sharply with other¬
wise sluggish trends in world markets, and
in many industrialized and some developing
countries the arms industry is now one of
the fastest growing sectors of the
economy.
High levels of military expenditure have
not been noticeably affected so far by the
economic recession which hit many coun¬
tries after 1973. Indeed, in some countries
there is a marked contrast between a still
buoyant military sector on the one hand
and, on the other, a depressed civilian
economy and a tightening of government
budgets, in some cases even to the point of
austerity. In certain limited areas the arms
race has even gathered a new momentum
directly related to the economic crisis,
since some countries have been able to im¬
prove their balance-of-payments positions
by increased arms exports.
But growing expenditure on armaments
is not an efficient way of combating reces¬
sion. Expenditures on such items as
education, health, housing and social
welfare are more effective for both
economic and social reasons.
First, the maintenance of high and rising
armaments expenditures in the face of
stagnating or falling government revenues
may lead countries to economize in such
areas as health, education and welfare with
all the negative social consequences this
entails.
Secondly, recession nowadays tends to
go hand in hand with high rates of inflation
("stagflation") and, in some cases, with
heavy balance-of-payments deficits, and
high arms expenditures have proved to be a
hindrance for economic policies leading out
of recession. High government expen¬
diture on armaments increases demand
without increasing the volume of saleable
or exportable goods. It thus intensifies the
problems of inflation and of the external
balance.
Military expenditures, therefore, reduce
the effectiveness of expansionary policies
or even lead to restrictive measures in other
fields which tend to prolong recession and
unemployment. To the direct waste con¬
tained in armaments production is added
the indirect wastage of unused resources.
In most countries, therefore, there is
MYTH II: the arms
industry offers
a panacea
for unemployment
A major factor in the growth equation,
manpower is today being diverted to
military ends on a massive scale. Labour
constitutes a real resource that could be
employed to useful ends if released from
occupations connected with the military
sector.
This is not contradicted by the fact that
in many countries a considerable fraction
of the work force is now either unemployed
or underemployed. For people are not
unemployed because there are no more
needs to satisfy. They are unemployed or
underemployed because of recession or
structural problems in the economy, and
these are themselves aggravated by high
military expenditures.
In most developed market economies the
use of demand stimulus to deal with
unemployment has been inhibited by fears
that it would enhance inflationary tenden¬
cies and adversely affect the balance of
scope for significant rises in investment if
military budgets are reduced. Even crude
calculations indicate that the potential ef¬
fects of this growth could be substantial. If
the greater part of world military expen¬
diture could, instead, be allocated to in¬
vestment, growth rates might be expected
to increase by one or two per cent. This is
in fact very large perhaps one third of the
growth rate achieved in the world as a
whole in the early 1970s, and probably
larger than the growth rate of world output
in the mid-1970s.
If such higher rates of investment are
sustained, the effects on growth cumulate
over the years. Thus, if half the funds
spent on armaments throughout the world
in the period from 1970 to 1975 had instead
been invested in the civilian sector, annual
output at the end of this period could have
been perhaps $200 thousand million larger
than it was. The sum of $'00 thousand
million is somewhat more than the ag¬
gregate gross national product of southern
Asia and the mid-African region, the two
large regions of acute poverty and slow
growth in the world, with a total population
of over one thousand million people. Over
a longer period the effects on world output
of the reallocation of part of world military
expenditures to investment purposes
would be even more spectacular.
Serigraph U.G. Satho, Mecanorama exhibition © J. CA., Tokyo
payments. But inflation and, in some
cases, balance of payments deficits have
probably been aggravated by high rates of
military spending sustained over a long
period.
In any case, under appropriate condi¬
tions funds released from military budgets
can be used to raise demand in the civilian
sector without stimulating inflation, and,
generally speaking, without affecting the
balance of trade either way. Indeed, to the
extent that military procurement is more in¬
flationary than most other forms of expen¬
diture a dollar for dollar reallocation of
monetary resources to civilian ends would
in the longer run ease inflationary pressures
and leave greater scope for policies to curb
unemployment.
Despite these obvious facts there is a
tenacious myth, dating back to the German
rearmament prior to the Second World
War, that high arms budgets protect
against unemployment or at least mitigate
it. This belief is seemingly self-evident and
is reinforced when, as has often happened,
governments have given publicity to the
supposed employment benefits of arms
procurement they were contemplating,
without adding that alternative uses of the
same funds would create jobs as well, and
normally many more.
26

As a consequence it is still today a
widespread belief that disarmament, or
discontinuation of a specific weapons pro¬
gramme, would swell the ranks of the
jobless, particularly when unemployment is
already high. It should be stressed that
such conceptions are wrong. Military
' outlays are not unique in their ability to
generate employment. In fact, whereas
military expenditures obviously create jobs
in the industries supplying the armed
forces, the growing high-technology com¬
ponent in military expenditures has eroded
their direct and their overall potential for
creating jobs.
Today there is rapidly accumulating
evidence that high military budgets con¬
tribute substantially to overall unemploy¬
ment instead of alleviating it. According to
United States Government estimates (and
only for this country do figures seem to be
available) a thousand million dollars of
military expenditure creates 76,000 jobs.
But if the same amount is spent on civilian
programmes of the Federal Government it
creates an average of over 100,000 jobs,
and many more than this if channelled into
activities that are particularly labour-
intensive.
Calculations indicate that if the same
thousand million dollars were released for
private consumption by means of tax-cuts
112,000 new jobs would be created. In
other words, a 10 per cent cut in the
military budget, that is to say a cut of $8 to
9 thousand million and a corresponding tax
reduction, could diminish unemployment
by 300,000 and more than this if cuts and
alternative programmes were selected with
a view to maximizing the effect on
unemployment. Thus, the proposition that
military expenditure generates employment
at least as effectively as, if not more than,
non-military expenditure is demonstrably
false.
MYTH III: military
research is
the major spur
to technological
progress
In the case of technological innovation,
no less than in the case of manpower and
unemployment, the true impact of high
military expenditure has mostly been cloud¬
ed in myth. The basic fact of an enormous
diversion of resources has been disguised
by excessive claims about the importance
of civilian spin-offs from military research
and development.
The drive for continuous improvement in
weaponry and military equipment, so the
argument goes, has been an important
spur to technological progress, and, so it
continues, without the urgency of military
demands, funds on a sufficient scale would
not have been forthcoming.
A limited number of examples, always
the same, are cited to prove the
case nuclear power, air transportation,
radar, space technology and a few more.
Yet a sober assessment indicates that the
claims are grossly exaggerated and even
the standard examples are not all convinc¬
ing. In fact it is remarkable how many in
ventions of the greatest civilian importance
in production techniques, in materials, in
power generation, engines and appliances,
in all fields of surface transportation and in
communication owed absolutely nothing
of their origin and very little, if anything, of
their subsequent development to military
research and development,, even if they
were often adopted by the armed forces
and adapted to military requirements at a
later stage.
Military spin-offs from civilian research
have been incomparably larger than civilian
spin-offs from military research. The truly
remarkable fact is how little that is new, not
how much, has come to the civilian sector
from military research and development ef¬
forts. Product development in the sense of
incremental improvements in materials, in
miniaturization, in performance, in reliabili¬
ty, etc., has in some cases been made
under military auspices, simply because
this is where research and development
funds have been readily available.
The typical emphasis of military research
has been on devices which can perform the
same function as the old ones, only more
accurately, more effectively and more
reliably. The post-war association of the
military sector with advanced and dynamic
sectors of industry and research has
therefore been conducive to an emphasis
not on basic research and genuine innova¬
tion, but rather on product improvement
geared to details of specifically military
devices to such an extent that civilian spin¬
offs of importance have been few and far
between.
Military technology is moving further
and further away from any conceivable
civilian use, and is anyway focusing on
fields which are mostly irrelevant for the
solution of major world problems. There
can be no doubt that in the final analysis
technological innovation in the civilian sec¬
tor and, with it, growth are not furthered
by military research and development but
are greatly impaired by it.
