A medical thesaurus
from the roof
of the world
by Lydia Khundanova
Text and photos © copyright
Reproduction prohibited
WIDELY practised in many countries of south-east Asia
as far back as two to three thousand years ago, the
Tibetan system of medicine was a synthesis of the
traditional medicines of Tibet, India, China, Mongolia and other
countries.
The system was based on the notion of the integrity, the
wholeness of the organism, and treatment, by a combination of
natural medicines of animal, vegetable or mineral origin, was
aimed at the entire organism and not at curing any individual
part of it.
Among the many treatises and manuals on Tibetan medicine,
the main canonical work and the fullest manual is the four-
volume Rgyud-bzhi (literally, the four principles) which con¬
tains both theory and practice. According to tradition it was
written in Sanskrit in the fifth century BC and was translated
into Tibetan in about 820 AD. The original Sanskrit manuscript
has long been lost.
The four volumes which make up the Rgyud-bzhi consist of :
Volume I, Basic Principles, which presents a six-chapter outline
of the framework of the manual and an introduction to Tibetan
medicine; Volume II, Theoretical Foundations, in which the
general theory of Tibetan medicine is developed, in thirty-one
chapters; Volume III, Fundamentals of the Doctor's Art,
ninety-two chapters dealing with general pathology and practi¬
cal prescriptions for treatment; Volume IV, Supplementary
Principles, twenty-seven chapters giving additional information
on diagnostic methods and treatment.
Towards the end of the seventeenth century, a high-ranking
Tibetan physician wrote the Vaidouria-onbo, a 1,283-page
commentary on each of the 156 chapters of the Rgyud-bzhi.
The commentaries contained in the Vaidouria-onbo were illus¬
trated by the Atlas of Indo-Tibetan Medicine. This consisted of
seventy-seven stylized colour plates containing a total of over
ten thousand individual illustrations (see front cover and colour
pages 22, 23 and 24).
Compiled at the monastery of Serkog-Manba in north¬
eastern Tibet, the Atlas was acquired by a Buryat doctor who
had gone there to study medicine ; it is now preserved in the
Ethnographical Museum of Ulan Ude in the Autonomous
Soviet Socialist Republic of Buryat.
Only twelve of these plates, including that reproduced on
page 24, have been published before ; the plates shown on our
cover and central colour pages are here published for the first
time ever.
Tibetan physicians still use many of the methods and reme¬
dies handed down from ancient days and, today, in India and a
number of European countries, Tibetan medicines are being
scientifically investigated. In the USSR, the Siberian section of
the Academy of Sciences has established a special department
at which the biologically active components of Tibetan medic¬
ines are being tested under experimental laboratory conditions.
LYDIA KHUNDANOVA, of the USSR, is director of a unit of the Buryat
branch of the Siberian section of the USSR Academy of Sciences that is
studying the biologically active components of Indo-Tibetan medicine. A
physician, she is the author of some sixty works including an important
monograph on Tibetan medicine.
Colour page
In the Middle Ages, Islamic scholars made a great contribution to
the study of botany and in particular of medicinal plants.
Compiled in the 9th century al-Dinawari's six-volume Book of
Plants was of outstanding importance. It combined a
philological, historical and botanical approach to the study of
plants whose medicinal properties he listed in detail. Avicenna
dealt with. medicinal plants in his pharmacological studies and al-
Biruni listed in his Book of Drugs some 850 drugs of every
conceivable origin, giving their names in several languages. The
first Arabic work on drugs in their simple or natural state,
compiled by Masarjis, preceded by a century the translation into
Arabic of the famous Materia Medica of the Greek physician
Dioscorides. The first Arabic version of the Materia Medica was
compiled in the 9th century. Colour photo right Is of a page of a
15th-century Persian edition of this work, now preserved in the
Topkapi Museum, Istambul. It shows, top left, the formula for
the preparation of a remedy extracted from various aquatic
plants such as papyrus. The main text describes a powder
preparation used in the treatment of hepatic infections, disorders
of the spleen and menstruation problems.
Photo Roland Michaud © Rapho, Paris.
Central colour pages
Coloured plates from the Atlas of Indo-Tibetan Medicine which
illustrates the Vaidouria-onbo, a commentary on the most
famous and most complete manual of Tibetan medicine, the
Rgyud-bzhi (see article this page). Colour page 22: plate 24 from
the Atlas, with illustrations referring to chapter 20 of the Rgyud-
bzhi on Medicines and Officinal Plants. Colour page 23: top left,
detail from plate 24 and, top right and bottom, details from plate
30 which illustrates some of the remedies given in the same
chapter. Although the first two volumes of the Rgyud-bzhi were
translated into Russian at the turn of the century, the complete
text has never been translated into any European language.
Today, at Ulan-Ude, in southern Siberia, orientalist, historians,
physicians, pharmacists and linguists are working together on a
new, more accurate translation of the Rgyud-bzhi, a task made
more difficult because the text contains many cryptic passages
inscribed in numbers or in the form of allegories.
Photos © V. Shumakov, Russian edition of the Unesco Courier, Moscow Buryat
Department, Siberian section of the USSR Academy of Sciences
20

cT
-r. J^~


SS
-^=ö£ 1
^"^¿~ l
»V*;^"4no
ft«yr»gtyy^
	
ID
rü.
7P.Ull / *r~i«.

.-:. M¿
r\ *.** na

Colour page
This plate, like those on our front
cover and central colour pages, is
taken from the Atlas of Indo-
Tibetan Medicine. It illustrates
various mineral and vegetable
medicinal substances mentioned in
chapter 20 of the famous Tibetan
medical manual, the Rgyud-bzhi,
including precious stones (after
pulverization), mineral salts, plants
and the fruit and leaves of trees.
The original of this illustration is
now preserved at the Institute of
Tibetan Medicine, Lhasa, People's
Republic of China.
Photo © China, Illustrated Review,
People's Republic of China
