1- ü'KW^SÄ^wÄffe
'suS ^r^-^r "'
3 Sir #
IB "tVi
K/ J^Bk '^
Pi!
HtH
M
m
.:?
, -; .i:'.
*u< "
.*.-*
Sees '
ÜH :-
..<

V
: .
M
1*8
*;>.

One of the opening scenes of the Mystery of Elchethe Apostles and the angels enter the
Church of Santa Maria in procession. The Mystery was filmed in its entirety for the first time
last year by a group under the direction of Michael Dodds and journalist and film-director
Gudie Lawaetz whose idea it was to preserve for posterity a complete record of this unusual,
centuries-old spectacle. The latest cinematographic techniques were used in the project,
which was partly financed by Unesco's International Fund for the Promotion of Culture.



The Mystery of Elche
A seven-century-old sacred drama
performed each year in a Spanish city
by Juan Carlos Langlois
JUAN CARLOS LANGLOIS, of Argentina, is
executive secretary at Unesco of the Interna¬
tional Fund for the Promotion of Culture. He has
undertaken a number of artistic and literary
studies in his own country and his paintings
have been frequently exhibited. A specialist in
international co-operation for development, he
was formerly European representative of the
Inter-American Development Bank.
THE profusion of Romanesque and
Gothic monuments which rose in
Christian Europe during the Middle
Ages form a precious part of the world's
cultural heritage. These religious buildings
are an intrinsic part of Europe's physical
and spiritual landscape, and European
Governments today are rightly concerned
with preserving and restoring them.
It is relatively easy to restore stonework.
But is it possible to recreate the human and
religious atmosphere of medieval times?
And if so, can it be done without recourse
to stage or screen reconstructions which
only give a rough idea of the feelings of
medieval people for whom the Church was
the centre of community life?
The answer to this question is to be
found in the Spanish city of Elche, in the
province of Alicante. There, ever since the
fourteenth century, a medieval mystery
drama has been staged on 14 and 15
August to celebrate the feast of the
Assumption. In the sixteenth century the
Council of Trent forbade the performance
of drama in churches, but the Elche
Mystery was exempted from this prohibi¬
tion by a special dispensation from Pope
Urban VIM.
The survival of this production, the only
one of its kind in Europe, owes much to the
devotion of the people of Elche. For nearly
seven centuries they have preserved the
form and spirit of the "Misteri d'Elx" in an
atmosphere of collective enthusiasm which
32

authentically recreates the world of
medieval religious drama.
Between the twelfth and the sixteenth
centuries the staging of scriptural dramas
or "mysteries" in churches became widely
popular in France, England and Spain.
Hundreds of actors took part in these pro¬
ductions, which went on for days at a time
and involved the use of highly elaborate
scenery and equipment. Some of the texts
which have survived have over 30,000
verses.
These medieval dramatizations of the
scriptures, whose lineage in some respects
stretches back to the ancient Greek and
Roman mysteries, were the precursors of
Renaissance drama and music in Europe.
But nothing in the West changes more
rapidly and more constantly than the
dramatic arts. Apart from certain texts,
musical notations and, since the last cen¬
tury, a handful of productions which are
for the most part merely pious attempts to
reconstitute a vanished tradition, little re¬
mains of medieval scriptural drama and the
upsurge of fervour with which it was im¬
bued.
This is why the Elche Mystery is so im¬
portant and why there was a pressing need
to record for posterity this presentation of
the mystery of the Assumption, the only
one to have survived virtually intact the
vicissitudes of European history and the
changing pattern of religious practices and
customs in Europe.
Elche is situated near the Mediterranean
littoral, twenty-four kilometres from
Alicante. Founded during the Roman Em¬
pire, it was subsequently occupied by the
Visigoths and then by the Arabs. During
the reign.of Abd ar-Rahman III in the tenth
century Elche enjoyed a period of spec¬
tacular development, with the construction
of buildings, fortifications and an irrigation
system which led to the creation of the
most important oasis in south-eastern
Spain and a 600-hectare palm grove, the
biggest in Europe.
The combination of Arab-Muslim ar
chitecture, palm-trees and the blue
Mediterranean sky make a setting not
unlike that in which Christianity began, and
explains why Elche is sometimes known as
the "Spanish Jerusalem".
Elche is not a remote, inaccessible town
but a major industrial and agricultural cen¬
tre with a population of 160,000, situated
twelve kilometres from a busy international
airport. Rapid expansion in recent decades,
industrial development and a growing in¬
flux of tourists have brought many changes
to the city but have in no way affected the
Mystery play. Why, it might be asked, has
the Elche Mystery survived in an age when
urban growth, the spread of tourism and
the mass media have tainted or even
destroyed so much traditional popular
drama and ceremonial in many parts of the
world?
One of the answers surely lies in the
complex links which have for centuries
bound the people of Elche to "their"
Mystery. Today, as in the Middle Ages, the
community as a whole is committed to its
success. The actors who year by year
polish their performance as Apostles,
angels or members of the crowd, are
workmen, craftsmen and technicians who
live and work in the modern world; but
they are very much aware of being the
repositories of a remarkable tradition.
One surprising and reassuring feature of
the Mystery is that the participants do not
belong to a single age-group. People of all
ages take part, united by a common en¬
thusiasm. Children and youths, for exam¬
ple, take female roles, in accordance with
medieval custom. The Virgin Mary is cur¬
rently played by an eleven-year-old boy,
Manolito.
The Mystery consists of two parts, the
"Vespra" and the "Festa", which take
place on 14 and 15 August respectively.
The former begins when the Virgin enters
the church and ends with her death, or dor-
mition, in the midst of the Apostles. Mean¬
while four angels descend from "heaven"
and then return to the cupola bearing an
¡mage of Mary symbolizing her soul. On the
15th, there is a dramatization of the solemn
burial of the Virgin and her coronation,
which takes place to applause and cries of
jubilation from the crowd, while the organ
plays, bells ring and fireworks explode.
The Catalan writer Eugenio d'Ors, who
first attended the Elche Mystery in 1934,
noted that in a lifetime as a theatre-goer he
had never experienced such depths of
emotion: "Here nothing separates the
stage from the public", he wrote. "Nothing
separates drama from religious ceremony,
heaven from earth, domestic anecdote
from supernatural crisis. The apse becomes
a nave; the altar an alcove. Temple and
street are one. Plain-chant merges into
polyphony; polyphony into operatic
melody. Flourishes of organ music punc¬
tuate the recitative. The distinctions disap¬
pear between psalmody and chant, chant
and prayer, cries and sobbing. We applaud
in the church and pray in the street".
For Eugenio d'Ors the Elche Mystery, the
oldest opera in the world, combines an
even vaster range of forms of expression
than those of Wagnerian Bayreuth. "The
cosmic rapture and ecstasy unleashed by
the Elche Mystery are not even attained in
the Holy Week processions in Seville," he
wrote. "The immersion in the unconscious
brought about by such a unique spectacle
is a profound revelation of the very essence
of theatre".
From an artistic point of view, the
Mystery may be considered as one of the
most important precursors of the operatic
music and drama of Renaissance Europe.
The poetry of the text, recited in Valencian,
a dialect of the Catalan language, probably
has roots in the literature of the Provençal
troubadours. Both text and music were
modified after the expulsion of the Jews
from Spain in 1492 and assumed their pre¬
sent form in 1639. Their power is undimm-
ed by time.
A few years ago it was suggested that
the Elche Mystery should be filmed in its
entirety so that the unique spectacle could
be preserved for posterity. The project was V
carried out with aid from Unesco's Interna- f
Mary, the mother of St. James
the Less, and Mary, the mother
of St. John, are seen seated,
left, next to two angels, on the
enclosed podium on which lies
the body of the Virgin Mary. The
podium forms the stage on
which various scenes from the
Mystery are enacted. In the
background, the public watch as
the drama unfolds.
Photo James Wedge
© Folger Shakespeare Library, Washington, D.C

Manolito, the eleven-year-old boy from Elche who plays the part of the Virgin Mary, at
home with his father and grandfather, both of whom have taken an active part in the
performance of the Mystery in previous years. The Mystery has taken deep root among
the people of Elche and each year hundreds of families of the city are involved in the
spectacle. The tradition of having a feminine role played by a boy was not peculiar to
sacred medieval plays; in Shakespeare's England and in some other countries female roles
were normally played by boys.
tional Fund for the Promotion of Culture,
and filming was completed in August 1978.
The technicians triumphantly surmounted
the technical obstacles of recording the
Mystery; to ensure the maximum of
authenticity there was no trial run-through
before filming. It was also imperative not to
hamper the movements of actors and con¬
gregation, a total of more than 3,000
persons.
From the resulting three-hour-long
recording a 110-minute film was made, the
first ever of a complete medieval scriptural
mystery. It was shown for the first time in
Washington last April and has already been
bought by a number of national television
networks.
With aid from the Unesco Fund further
studies are being carried out on the origins
of the Elche Mystery, the reasons for its
survival and also its possible influence out¬
side Spain. Certain popular religious rituals
in Latin America, for example, may well be
offshoots of medieval Spanish mysteries.
Will all the mysteries enshrouding the
Elche Mystery ever be cleared up? Perhaps
not, since according to one definition a
mystery is "something inaccessible to
reason which must be considered as an ar¬
ticle of faith".
Scientific and technological develop¬
ment is an imperative of our time, but its
aims and consequences are today no
longer regarded as "articles of faith". The
respect for cultural identity and the desire
felt by communities and individuals to
rediscover, safeguard and promote their
traditional cultural values are re-emerging
as preoccupations of overshadowing im¬
portance. Elche is a community in which
these values have never been forgotten.
Juan Carlos Langlois
