Mass media
the new
Pied Piper
by Kazuhiko Goto
Asociety is defined as an "informa¬
tion-oriented" society when it
places more weight on knowledge
and information than on things; and the
fact that Japan is on the verge of the era of
the information-oriented society has been a
matter of discussion in Japan for some
time.
In fact, what we really mean when we
speak of the information-oriented society is
the "mass media information-oriented"
society, with all the profound effects on
children that this implies. For in addition to
the world of nature and of other people, .
children are now surrounded by an artificial
environment created by the mass media.
Japan is certainly one of the most
television-oriented societies in the world.
Indeed, in Japan it would probably be
easier to track down a missing person than
to find a child who does not watch tele¬
vision.
It is easy to see why television is such an
attractive medium to both children and
adults. It is available in the home and we
can watch it in comfort whenever we
please, it provides easily digested entertain¬
ment after a day's work, it enables us to
see places and people and their way of life
that we would otherwise be unable to see
directly, and it is accessible even to viewers
with little education or knowledge.
Unfortunately, television takes up our
time; to watch it we must sit in front of it,
watch as long as a programme lasts, and
do nothing else while watching it. This
exclusive aspect of television, the fact that
it prevents us from doing other things,
poses more serious problems than is com¬
monly realized. While television may pro¬
vide an acceptable form of relaxation for
adults after a day's work, it robs children
of the time they must have to accumulate a
variety of experiences at first hand.
However, not everything that television
offers us is desirable. Even when well-
intentioned programmes suitable for chil¬
dren are provided, there is no guarantee
that these are the only programmes chil¬
dren will watch. In fact, as matters stand
now, children watch more programmes
intended for adults than programmes spe¬
cifically designed for children.
One likely outcome of this will be the eli¬
mination of the boundary between the sub¬
culture of the adult and the child. Children
may come into contact with the adult world
too soon, while they are at their most vul¬
nerable. Unless the adults in the home fulfil
KAZUHIKO GOTO is senior researcher at the
NHK (Japanese Broadcasting Corporation)
Radio and Television Culture Research Institute,
Tokyo. A former programme director with the
NHK, he is a lecturer at the University of Tokyo
and has written a number of anieles and books
on the mass media.
10

Drawing © Osborn, Salisbury, USA
the role of interpreter and mediator, the
children will absorb the view of society,
and of adult roles in it, depicted on the
screen, rather than the spontaneous, natu¬
ral view they would otherwise have ob¬
tained from the experiences of daily life.
Furthermore, the models of society, of
the roles and occupations of men and
women in it, that children will learn will be
simplified models adapted to meet the pro¬
gramme producer's need to provide enter¬
tainment. Inevitably the adult sub-culture
of the future will be affected.
An important but often overlooked fea¬
ture of television is that the images and
sound it provides, though similar to reality,
lack the dimension of interaction and res¬
ponse that we experience in direct contact
with the real world and offer only one-way
communication. For the child, the parent's
response and his interaction with the other
children and adults around him are crucial
to his comprehension of the world and his
insertion into society. The tendency of
busy, working parents to use television as a
surrogate nurse to occupy the children and
to keep them quiet has the effect of depri¬
ving them of a factor vital to their proper
development.
This passive role of the child viewer takes
on an additional significance in countries
where broadcasting is financed, whether
wholly or in part, by income earned from
advertising.
Television commercials are exceptionally
attractive to children. An advertisement is
always "good* news". Repeated, slickly
produced commercials for attractively dis¬
played goods stress the virtues of the pro¬
ducts concerned but never mention their
weak points. Children are given the illusion
that there is an infinite supply of new
goods and services available to all and
there is no countervailing incentive for
them to control their desire to buy. There is
no attempt to teach them to be discrimina¬
ting consumers. On the contrary, their
desire is aroused for essentially unneces¬
sary consumer items, for tempting sweets
and snacks and processed foods.
Great though the impact of television
commercials is on children, it may well be
surpassed by that of the slot-machines to
be found in the amusement centres or
"games corners" that have sprung up all
over Japan. Often the haunt of gangs of
juvenile delinquents, these centres even
have slot-machines that feature the killing
of men. Unlike television programmes
which, however bad they may be, even¬
tually come to an end, slot-machines are
available for play for just as long as the
player's supply of coins lasts.
Even if a child resists the temptations of
the street corner amusement centre, he is
liable to succumb to the attractions of the »
many weekly, fortnightly or monthly maga- 1
11

. zines that are available not only from
bookstores, kiosks and news-stands but at
drug-stores and supermarkets as well.
Most of these are comics containing serial¬
ized stories so that once a child begins to
read one he wants to read subsequent
issues as well. Most of those who fear the
effects of these magazines on children con¬
centrate their criticisms on the vulgarity,
the violence and the sexual explicitness of
their contents. In this respect their effect
on children can be compared to that of
television programmes of similar content.
More important, perhaps, is their effect
on reading habits. This type of magazine
has been on the market now for several
years and many of those who first read
them as children continue to read them
now that they are adults. It is probably true
to say that the increase in the number of
children and adults who do not read con¬
ventional books is directly related to the
spread of comics and of television.
Television, slot-machines, comics is
there a common link between them? As
machines or the product of machines and
deriving from industrial activity, they form
part of the modern mechanical-electronic
environment which tends to diminish or
exclude direct, personal communication
between people and to arouse and distort
human desires and expectations.
If the present trend for both mother and
father to work and to be absent from the
home all day continues, our children will
find themselves more and more the cap¬
tives of this artificial, indirect, inhuman
environment.
Kazuhiko Goto
Left, when actors dressed in costumes
from the American space fantasy film Star
Wars mingled with shoppers in Kobe
(Japan) as part of a publicity campaign for
the film, grave-faced tots exchanged
handshakes with the galactic strangers.
Cinema and TV bring entertainment to
millions of children by creating a world of
adventure and fantasy. But with
youngsters there is a real danger that
over-exposure to fictional films and
programmes may induce them to blur the
distinction between reality and make-
believe and even that the simulated world
brought to them by the media may
become more real than life itself.
12
