
Tongues that span
the centuries
POWER OF THE SPOKEN WORD is symbolized by this
ceremonial carved axe of the Lele people of Zaïre. It
would be virtually impossible to overemphasize the
importance of the oral tradition in Africa where, it has
been said, whenever an old man dies a whole library
disappears with him. In societies that have opted for oral
rather than written records, it is by word of mouth that
the guardians of the collective memory hand down from
one generation to the next stories and legends, society's
moral values and religion as well as detailed accounts of
actual events of yesterday or today. Any authentic
history of Africa must take the oral tradition as its raw
material and approach it with the same objective rigour
as other forms of historical evidence.


The faithful guardians
of Africa's oral tradition
by Amadou Hampâté Bâ
WHEN we speak of African tradition or history we mean
oral tradition; and no attempt at penetrating the history
and spirit of the African peoples is valid unless it relies
on that heritage of knowledge of every kind patiently transmitted
from mouth to ear, from master to disciple, down through the
ages.
This heritage is not yet lost, but lies in the memory of the last
generation of its great repositories, of whom it can be said: "they
are the living memory of Africa."
For some scholars, the whole problem is whether we can place
the same trust in the oral as in the written when it comes to
evidence of things past. In my view, that is not the right way to put
the problem. Written or oral, evidence is in the end only human
evidence and it is worth what the man is worth.
What is involved, therefore, behind the evidence itself, is the ac¬
tual value of the man who is giving the evidence, the value of the
chain of transmission he is part of, the trustworthiness of the in¬
dividual and collective memory, and the price attached to the truth
in a given society. In short: the bond between man and the spoken
word.
Now it is in oral societies that the function of the memory is
most highly developed and, furthermore, the bond between man
and the word is strongest. Where writing does not exist, man is
bound to the word he utters. He is committed by it. He Is his word
and his word bears witness to what he is. The very cohesion of
society depends on the value of and respect for the spoken word.
In African traditions at least the ones I know, which pertain to
the whole savannah zone south of the Sahara the spoken word
had, beyond its fundamental moral value, a sacred character
associated with its divine origin and with the occult forces
deposited in it. Superlative agent in magic, grand vector of
"aetheric" forces, it was not to be treated lightly.
Many religious, magical or social factors, then, combined to
preserve thé faithfulness of oral transmission. .
If a true African traditionalist were asked, "What is oral tradi-r
AMADOU HAMPATE BA, Mal/an writer and diplomat, was a member
of the Executive Board of Unesco from 1962 to 1970. Founder and former
director of the Mali Institute of Human Sciences, he specializes in the
study ofAfrican literature and ethnology and, in particular, of the peoples
of the Niger Bend. His many books include L'Empire Peul du Macina (The
Peut Empire of Macina), Les Religions Africaines Traditionelles (Traditional
African Religions) and L'Etrange Destin de Wangrin (Wangrin's Strange
Destiny), a work for which he received the 1974 Grand Prix of Black
African Literature.
17

tion?" he would probably be nonplussed. He might perhaps reply,
after a lengthy silence: "It is total knowledge", and say no more.
What does the term oral tradition cover, then? What realities
does it convey, what knowledge does it transmit, what science
does it teach, and who are its transmitters?
Contrary to what some may think, African oral tradition is not
limited to stories and legends or even to mythological and
historical tales, and the man whom the French call a "griot" a
wandering minstrel/poet is far from being its one and only
qualified guardian and transmitter.
Oral tradition is the great school of life, all aspects of which are
covered and affected by it. It may seem chaos to those who do not
penetrate its secret; it may baffle the Cartesian mind accustomed
to dividing everything up into clear-cut categories. In oral tradition,
in fact, spiritual and material are not dissociated.
The oral tradition is able to put itself within men's reach, speak
to them according to their understanding, unveil itself in accor¬
dance with their aptitudes. It is at once religion, knowledge,
natural science, apprenticeship in a craft, history, entertainment,
recreation, since any point of detail can always take us all the way
back to primordial Unity.
Based on initiation and experience, oral tradition engages man in
his total being, and therefore we can say it has served to create a
particular type of man, to sculpt the African soul.
Linked with the everyday behaviour of man and community,
African culture is not, then, something abstract that can be
isolated from life. It involves a particular vision of the world, or
rather a particular presence in the worlda world conceived of as
a whole in which all things are linked together and interact.
African tradition conceives of speech as a gift of God. It is at
once divine in the downward direction and sacred as it rises up¬
wards. Let us look at the traditions of the savannah to the south of
the Sahara (what was formerly called the Bafour and constituted
the savannah zones of former French West Africa).
The Bambara tradition of the Komo (one of the great initiation
schools of the Mande group of peoples of Mali) teaches that the
Word, Kuma, is a fundamental force emanating from the Supreme
Being himselfMaa Ngala, creator of all things. It is the instru¬
ment of creation: "That which Maa Ngala says, is I " proclaims the
cantor, the singing priest of the god Komo.
The myth of the creation of the universe and of man which the
Komo Master of Initiates (who is always a smith) teaches circum¬
cised youths reveals that when Maa Ngala felt a yearning for an
interlocutor he created the First Man: Maa.
The story of Genesis used to be taught during the sixty-three-
day retreat imposed on the circumcised in their twenty-first year,
and then twenty-one years were spent in deeper and deeper study
of it.
On the edge of the sacred wood, where Komo lives, the first of
the circumcised group would chant to a rhythmic beat:
Maa Ngala! Maa Ngala!
Who is Maa Ngala?
Where is Maa Ngala?
The Komo cantor would respond:
Maa Ngala is infinite Force
None can place him in time.
Nor yet in space.
He is Dombali (Unknowable)
Dambali (Uncreated- Infinite).
Then, after the initiation, the recital of the primordial genesis
would begin:
There was nothing except a Being.
That Being was a living Emptiness,
Brooding potentially over contingent existences.
Infinite Time was the abode of that One Being.
The One Being gave himself the name Maa Ngala.
Maa Ngala wished to be known.
So he created Fan,
A wondrous Egg with nine divisions.
And Into It he introduced the nine fundamental
States of existence.
"When this primordial Egg came to hatch,- it gave birth to twen¬
ty marvellous beings that made up the whole of the universe, the
sum total of existing forces and possible knowledge.
"But alas! None of those first twenty creatures proved fit to
become the interlocutor (Kuma-nyon) that Maa Ngala had craved.
"So he took a bit of each of those twenty existing creatures and
mixed them; and then, blowing a spark of his own fiery breath into
the mixture, he created a new Being, Man, to whom he gave a part
of his own name: Maa. And so this new being, through his name
and through the divine spark introduced into him, contained
something of Maa Ngala himself."
Synthesis of all that exists, pre-eminent receptacle of the
supreme Force and confluence of all existing forces, Maa, Man,
received as his legacy a part of the divine creative power, the gift
of Mind and the Word.
Maa Ngala taught Maa, his interlocutor, the laws according to
which all the elements of the cosmos were formed and continue to
exist. He installed him as guardian of his Universe and charged him
with watching over the maintenance of universal Harmony. That is
why it weighs heavy, being Maa.
Initiated by his creator, Maa later passed all that he had learned
A wealth of cosmological meaning was carved into this granary
door by 'a sculptor of the Dogon people of Mali. The rows of
figures represent men and women from all over the world,
sprung from the remotest ancestors. The lock takes the form of
an altar to the ancestors, while chevrons at each side of the
central panel symbolize the flow of water and of speech. The
two door-posts are decorated with turtles. In Dogon lore a turtle
replaces the patriarch of each family during his absence.
18

"The smith forges the Word, The weaver weaves it. The leather-
worker curries it smooth", goes an African saying that expresses
the close relationship between traditions of craftsmanship and
the power of the word. According to tradition, craftsmen
accompany their work with ritual chanting, while their gestures
retrace the mystery of the creation. The weavers know the
secrets of their looms : of the eight main pieces of wood that
constitute the frame, the four vertical struts symbolize the
elements (earth, water, air and fire) and the four cardinal
compass-points, while four cross-pieces symbolize the four
collateral points. The weaver, placed in the middle, represents
the first man, Maa, at the centre of these eight dimensions of
space. Before setting to work he must touch each piece of the
loom, uttering words or litanies which correspond to the forces
of life embodied in them. The movement of his feet to and fro on
the pedal recalls the original rhythm of the creative word. Photo
shows a weaver of the Dogon people (Mali).
on to his descendants; and that was the beginning of the great
chain of initiatory oral transmission of which the order of Komo
(unlike the orders of Nama, Kore, and so on in Mali) claims to be a
continuator.
In the image of Maa Ngala's speech, of which it is an echo,
human speech sets latent forces into motion. They are activated
and aroused by speechjust as a man gets up, or turns, at the
sound of his name.
Speech may create peace, as it may destroy it. It is like fire. One
ill-advised word may start a war just as one blazing twig may touch
off a great conflagration.
Tradition, then, confers on Kuma, the Word, not only creative
power but a double function of saving and destroying. That is why
speech, speech above all, is the great active agent in African
magic.
It must be borne in mind that in a general way all African tradi¬
tions postulate a religious vision of the world. The visible universe
is thought of and felt as the sign, the concretization or the outer
shell of an invisible, living universe, consisting of forces in
perpetual motion.
Within this vast cosmic unity everything is connected,
everything is bound solidly together; and man's behaviour both as
regards himself and as regards the world around him (the mineral,
vegetable, animal world and human society) is subject to a very
precise ritual regulation, which may vary in form with the various
ethnic groups and regions.
Violation of the sacred laws was supposed to cause an upset in
the balance of forces which would take expression in disturbances
of different kinds. Therefore magic action, that is, manipulation of
forces, generally aimed at restoring the troubled balance, re¬
establishing the harmony of which, as we have seen, Man had
been set up as guardian by his Creator.
The word "magic" is always taken in a bad sense in Europe
whereas in Africa it simply means management of forces, a thing
neutral in itself which may prove helpful or harmful according to
the direction it is given. It is said: "Neither magic nor fortune is bad
in itself. It is use of them that makes them good or bad."
Good magic, the magic of initiates and "master knowers", aims
at purifying men, animals and objects so as to put forces back into
order. This is where the force of speech is decisive.
But for spoken words to produce their full effect they must be
chanted rhythmically, because movement needs rhythm, which is
itself based on the secret of numbers. Speech must reproduce the
to-and-fro that is the essence of rhythm.
In ritual songs and incantatory formulas, therefore, speech is the
materialization of cadence. And if it is considered as having the
power to act on spirits, that is because its harmony creates
movements, movements which generate forces, those forces then
acting on spirits which themselves are powers for action.
In African tradition, speech, deriving its creative and operative
power from the sacred, is in direct relation with the maintenance or
the rupture of harmony in man and the world about him.
That is why most traditional oral societies consider lying as
moral leprosy. In traditional Africa the man who breaks his word w
kills his civil, religious and occult person. He cuts himself off from Y
19

himself and from society. It is better both for himself and for his
family that he should die rather than go on living.
The cantor of the Komo Dibi at Koulikoro, in Mali, sang in one of
his ritual poems:
Speech is divinely accurate.
One must be accurate with it.
The tongue that falsifies the word
Taints the blood of him that lies.
Here blood symbolizes the inner vital force whose harmony is
disturbed by the lie. "Who spoils his word spoils himself", says the
adage. When a man thinks one thing and says another he cuts
himself off from himself. He breaks the sacred unity, reflection of
cosmic unity, creating discord in and around him.
Now we can better understand the magico-religious and social
context of respect for the word in societies with an oral .tradition,
especially when it comes to transmitting words inherited from
ancestors or elders. The thing traditional Africa holds dearest is its
ancestral heritage. Its religious attachment to all that has been
passed down comes out in phrases like "I have it from my
Master", "I have it from my father", "I sucked it at my mother's
breast".
The great repositories of this oral heritage are the persons who
are called "traditionalists". They, the living memory of Africa, give
the best evidence as to Africa. Who are these masters?
In Bambara, they are called Domas or somas, the "knowers", or
donikebas, "makers of knowledge." In Fulani, they are called, ac¬
cording to region, silatiquls, gandos, or tchioriknes, words which
have this same sense of "knower".
They may be Master Initiates (and Masters of Initiates) in one
particular traditional branch (initiations of the smith, the weaver,
the hunter, the fisherman, etc.) or may possess complete
knowledge of the tradition in all its aspects. Thus there are domas
who know the blacksmith's science, the shepherd's, the weaver's,
arid there are also great initiation schools in the savannah in Mali,
for instance, the Komo, the Kore, the Nama, the Do, the Diarra
Wara, the Nya, the Nyawarole, and so on.
But let us make no mistake. African tradition does not cut life in¬
to slices and the knower is rarely a specialist. As a rule he is a
generalist. For example, one and the same old man will be learned
not only in plant science (the good or bad properties of every plant)
but in earth sciences (the agricultural or medicinal properties of the
different kinds of soil), and water sciences, astronomy,
cosmogony, psychology, and so on. What is involved is a science
of life in which knowledge can always be turned to practical use.
Keeper of the secrets of cosmic genesis and the sciences of life,
the traditionalist, usually gifted with a prodigious memory, is often
also the archivist of past events transmitted by tradition or of con¬
temporary events.
Therefore a history intended to be essentially African must
necessarily depend on the irreplaceable testimony of qualified
Africans. "You cannot dress a person's hair when he is away",
says the adage.
Generally speaking, the traditionalists were brushed aside if not
actually pursued by the colonial, power, which needless to say
sought to uproot local tradition in order to implant its own ideas
for, as they say, "Neither in a planted field nor in a fallow does one
sow". For that reason initiation usually took refuge in the bush and
quit the large towns, which were called tubabu-dugus or towns of
the whites meaning the colonizers.
Yet in the countries of the African savannah that made up the
Bafour, and doubtless elsewhere too, there still exist knowers who
continue to transmit the sacred deposit to those who consent to
listen and learn and show themselves worthy of receiving instruc¬
tion by their patience and their discretion, basic rules required by
the gods.
In ten or fifteen years all the last great domas, all the last old men
who have inherited the various branches of the tradition, will pro¬
bably have vanished. If we do not make haste to gather their
evidence and their teaching, the whole cultural and spiritual
patrimony of a people will go down into oblivion with them and a
rootless younger generation be abandoned to its own devices.
More than all other men the traditionalist-cfomas, great and
small, are bound to respect the truth. For them lying is not merely
a moral blemish but a ritual ban, violation of which would lay them
under interdict and make it impossible for them to continue to fulfil
their function.
This ritual prohibition exists, to the best of my knowledge in all
the traditions of the African savannah.
More than all others, the domas are bound by this obligation, for
as Master Initiates they are the great holders of the Word, the prin¬
cipal active agency of human life and of spirits.
A Dogon Master qf the Knife from the Pignari country (Ban-
diagara district) whom I knew in my youth was once led to lie in
order to save the life of a hunted woman whom he had hidden in
his house. After that incident he voluntarily resigned his office,
deeming that he no longer fulfilled the ritual conditions which
would make his tenure valid.
If the traditionalist or knower is so respected in Africa it is
because, to begin with, he respects himself. Inwardly in good
order, since he must never lie, he is a well-regulated man, master
of the forces that inhabit him. Round about him things fall into line
and disturbances subside.
Given this way of looking at things, the importance traditional
African education attaches to self-control can be better
20

As the "Master of Fire" and possessor of the secret of
transmutations, the smith plays a major role in African
oral culture. According to the tradition of the Bambara
people of Mali, the smith's skills go back to Maa, the
first man, to whom the mysteries of the forge were
revealed by his creator, Maa Ngala. In the language of
the Bambara the word Fan, meaning forge, is the same
as that denoting the Egg from which the universe
emerged at the moment of creation, for this "Primordial
Egg" was the first sacred forge. Far left, a young
apprentice of the Dogon people (Mali) keeps the smithy
fire alive by working the bellows. The forge, like the
smelting furnace and other work-places, provided the
ancestors with an opportunity to transmit to the young,
often through play, the group's cultural values. Left,
finely carved pair of bellows from Gabon surmounted by
a representation of a human head. Iron staff of office for
a priest, bottom left, was produced at Ife (Nigeria). It is
capped by two birds, one above the other.
understood. To speak sparingly is the mark of a good education
and the sign of nobility. Very early the young boy learns to master
the expression of his emotions or his suffering, to contain the
forces that are in him, in the ¡mage of the primordial Maa who con¬
tained within him, submissive and orderly, all the forces of the
cosmos.
Of a respected knower or a man who is master of himself people
will say: "He's a Maa!" (or in Fulani a Naddo): that is, a complete
man.
We must not confuse the traditionalist-cfomas, who know how
to teach by amusing and by putting themselves within their au¬
dience's reach, with minstrels, story-tellers and public enter¬
tainers, who are usually of the dieli and woloso castes. The
wolosos (literally, ones born in the house) or house-captives were
servants or servant families attached for generations to one
household. Tradition allowed them complete freedom of gesture
and speech as well as considerable material rights over their
masters' possessions. For these, the discipline of truth does not
exist; and as we shall see later tradition recognizes their right to
travesty or embellish the facts, even grossly, so long as they con¬
trive to divert or interest their public. "The dieli', people say, "is
allowed to have two tongues."
By contrast, no African from a traditionalist background would
dream of questioning the veracity of what a traditionalist-t/oma
says, especially when it is a matter of passing on knowledge in¬
herited from the chain of ancestors.
Before speaking, the doma out of deference addresses the souls
of former men and asks them to come to his aid and save him from
a slip of the tongue or a lapse of memory that would make him
leave something put.
A traditionalist-cfoma who is not a smith by birth but knows
sciences relating to the forge will say before talking of it: "I owe k
that to so-and-so, who owes it to so-and so, etc." He will pay*
21

t homage to the ancestor of the smiths, crouching in token of
allegiance, with the tip of his elbow on the ground and his forearm
raised. Always there is reference to the chain in which the doma
himself is but one link.
In all branches of traditional knowledge the chain of transmis¬
sion is of supreme importance. If there is nb regular transmission
there'is no magic, only conversation or storytelling. Speech is then
inoperative. Transmitted through the chain, it is supposed to con¬
vey, from the original transmission on, a force that makes it
operative and sacramental.
This notion of respect for the chain or respect for transmission
means that the non-acculturated African will generally tend to
report a story in the very form in which he heard it, aided by the
prodigious memory illiterate persons have. If contradicted, he will
merely answer: "So-and so taught it to me like that!" always
naming his source.
Beyond the traditionalist-cfomas' personal integrity and their at¬
tachment to a chain of transmission, an additional guarantee of
authenticity is provided by permanent control by the peers or
elders who surround them, who keep a jealous guard on the
authenticity of what they transmit and pick up their slightest error.
Traditional education, especially when it concerns knowledge
associated with an initiation, is linked with experience and in¬
tegrated into life. That is why the researcher, European or African,
who wants to get close to African religious facts condemns himself
to remaining on the outer edge of the subject unless he consents
to live the initiation that corresponds to them and accept its rules,
which presupposes at the very least a knowledge of the language.
For there are things that are not to be explained but are experienc¬
ed and lived.
The traditional artisanal crafts are great vectors of the oral tradi¬
tion.
In traditional African society, human activities often had a
sacred or occult character, particularly those activities that consist
in acting on matter and transforming it, since everything is regard¬
ed as alive. Every artisanal function was linked with an esoteric
knowledge transmitted from generation to generation and
originating in an initial revelation.
Traditional craftsmen accompany their work with ritual chants
or sacramental rhythmic words, and their very gestures are con¬
sidered a language. In fact the gestures of each craft reproduce in
a symbolism proper to each one the mystery of the primal creation,
which, as I indicated earlier, was bound up with the power of the
Word. It is said:
The smith forges the Word,
The weaver weaves it.
The leather-worker curries it smooth.
The smith must have knowledge covering a vast sector of life.
Since he is reputed to be an occultist, his mastery of the secrets of
fire and iron make him the only person entitled to perform circum¬
cision; and, as we have seen, the grand Master of the Knife in the
Komo initiation is always a smith.
The smelting smith, who is both extractor and smelter of metal
is the one who \s furthest advanced in knowledge. To all the skills
of the founder he unites a perfect knowledge of the Sons of the
womb of the Earth (mineralogy) and the secrets of plants and the
bush. Indeed, he knows what kind of vegetation covers the earth
where it contains a particular metal and he can detect a lode of
gold merely by examining plants and pebbles.
The craft or the traditional function can be said to sculpt man's
being. The whole difference between modern education and oral
tradition lies there. What is learned at the Western school, useful
as it may be, is not always lived; whereas the inherited knowledge
of the oral tradition is embodied in the entire being. The in¬
struments or tools of a craft give material form to the sacred
words; the apprentice's contact with the craft obliges him to live
the word with every gesture he makes.
That is why oral tradition taken as a whole is something more
than the transmission of stories or of certain kinds of knowledge. It
generates and forms a particular type of man. One can say that
there is the smiths' civilization, the weavers' civilization, the
shepherds', and soon.
If the occult esoteric sciences are the apanage of the Master
of the Knife and the cantor of the gods, music on the other hand.
as well as lyric poetry, tales which enliven popular recreation, and
often history as well, are the province of the dieli, a sort of
troubadour or minstrel who may wander about the country or may
be attached to a family.
It has often been wrongly supposed that the die/is were the only
possible traditionalists. Who are they?
They can be divided into three categories: the musicians; the
ambassadors and courtiers; and the genealogists, historians or
poets (or men who are all three in one), who are usually also
storytellers and great travellers.
Tradition confers a special social status on die/is. Unlike the
borons (nobles), they have the right to be shameless, and they en¬
joy a very great freedom of speech. They may act uninhibitedly,
even impudently, and they sometimes joke about the gravest,
holiest things without its mattering.
They are under no compulsion either to be discreet or to hold the
truth in absolute respect. They can sometimes tell brazen lies
without being held to account. "That's what the dieli says! It isn't
the true truth, but we take it as it is." This maxim shows well
enough how, without being gulled by them, tradition accepts the
fabrications of the dieliwho, the maxim adds, has "a torn
mouth".
Since African society is fundamentally based on dialogue bet¬
ween individuals and discussion between communities or ethnic
groups, the dielis are the natural agents in these exchanges.
Authorized to have "two tongues in their mouth", they can if need
be unsay what they have already said without being held to strict
account. This would be impossible for a noble, who is not allowed
to go back on his word or change a decision overnight. A dieli will
even shoulder responsibility for a fault he has not committed in
order to remedy a situation or save face for the nobles.
Their Bambara name, dieli, means blood. And indeed like blood
they circulate in the body of society, which is cured or falls ill ac¬
cording to whether they temper or exacerbate conflicts with their
words and songs.
I should say at once, though, that all this is a matter of general
characteristics only and that dielis are not all necessarily impudent
or shameless. Far from it. Among them there are men who are call¬
ed dieli-faamas These are in no way inferior to
noblemen when it comes to courage, morality, virtues and
wisdom; and they never abuse the rights they have been granted
by custom.
The dielis took part in all the battles in history at the side of their
masters, whose courage they inspired by recalling their high
pedigree and the high exploits of their forefathers. For the African,
the evocation of his family name has great power. Even today one
greets him and gives him praise by repeating the name of his
lineage.
The secret of the die/is' power and influence over the horons
(nobles) resides in their knowledge of genealogy and family
history. Some dielis have been real specialists in this. Such dielis
seldom belong to a household, but travel throughout the country
in quest of more and more extensive historical information.
It is easy to see how the genealogist dielis, specializing in family
history and often endowed with prodigious memories, have quite
naturally become as it were the archivists of African society and,
occasionally, great historians. But let us keep in mind that they are
not the only persons with such knowledge. The historian dielis
can, admittedly, be called traditionalists; but with this reservation,
that theirs is a purely historical branch of tradition and that tradi¬
tion has many branches.
The fact of being born a dieli does not necessarily make a man a
historian, though it gives him a certain inclination in that direction.
Nor does it make him learned in traditional matters, a knower far
from it. Generally speaking the dieli caste is the one farthest
removed from matters connected with initiation those requiring
silence, discretion and control of one's speech.
The opportunity to become knowers is not closed to them,
however, any more than to anyone else. Just as a doma-
traditionalist (the traditional knower in the true sense of the term)
can be at the same time a great genealogist and historian, so a
dieli, like any member of any social category, can become a
traditionalist-cfo/ra if his aptitudes permit and if he has gone
through the corresponding initiations (with the exception, though,
of the Komo initiation, which is forbidden him).
22

Photo Naud © A.A.A. Photo, Paris
A griot, or musician-entertainer, chants one of his
stories to the accompaniment of the kora, a
traditional instrument of the Malinke people of West
Africa. The griots are among the transmitters of
the oral tradition which is the very fibre of African
history. Above all else they are popular performers
who take liberties with words which are strictly
forbidden for the other custodians of the oral
tradition, known as domas, who embody the
solemnity of the spoken word.
The dieli who is also a t/oma-traditionalist constitutes an ab¬
solutely reliable source of information, for his being an initiate con¬
fers a high moral value on him and makes him subject to the pro¬
hibition against lying. He becomes another man. He is the "dieli-
king" whom people consult for his wisdom and his knowledge and
who, albeit able to entertain, never abuses his customary rights.
Generally speaking, one does not become a cfoma-traditionalist
by staying in one's village. The man who travels discovers and lives
other initiations, notes the differences or similarities, broadens the
scope of his understanding. Wherever he goes he takes part in
meetings, hears historical tales, and lingers where he finds a
transmitter of tradition who is skilled in initiation or in genealogy;
in this way he comes into contact with the history and traditions of
the countries he passes through.
One can say that the man who has become a cfoma-traditionalist
has been a seeker and a questioner all his life and will never cease
to be one.
The African of the savannah used to travel a great deal. The
result was exchange and circulation of knowledge. That is why
the collective historical memory in Africa is seldom limited to one
territory. Rather it is linked with family lines or ethnic groups that
have migrated across the continent.
Many caravans used to plough their way across the country, us¬
ing a network of special routes traditionally protected by gods and
kings, routes where one was safe from pillage or attack. To do
otherwise would have meant exposing oneself either to a raid or to
the risk of violating, unawares, som'e local taboo and paying the
consequences dearly. Upon arrival in a strange country travellers
would go and "entrust their heads" to some man of standing who
would thereby become their guarantor, for "to touch a guest is to
touch the host himself."
The great genealogist is necessarily always a great traveller.
Thus Molom Gaolo, the greatest genealogist I have been privileged
to know, possessed the genealogy of all the Fulani of Senegal.
When his great age no longer allowed him to go abroad he sent his
son Mamadou Molom to carry on his survey of the Fulani families
that had migrated through the Sudan (Mali) with El Hadj Omar.
When I knew Molom Gaolo, he had succeeeded in compiling and
retaining the history of about forty generations.
He had the habit of going to every baptism and every funeral in
the leading families so as to record the circumstances of deaths
and births, which he would add to the list already filed in his
astonishing rnemory. So he was able to declaim to any important
Fulani: "You are the son of So-and-so. . . Each of them died at such
and such a place of such a cause and was buried in such and such
a spot", and so on. Or else: "So-and-so was baptized on a certain
day at a certain hour by the Marabout So-and-so..." Of course all
this information was and still is orally transmitted and recorded by
the genealogist's memory alone. People have no idea of what the
memory of an "illiterate" can store up. A story once heard is
graven as if on a matrix and can then be produced intact, from the
first word to the last, whenever the memory calls on it.
Molom Gaolo died at the age of 105, around 1968 I believe. His
son Mamadou Gaolo, now 50, lives in Mali where he is carrying on
his father's work by the same purely oral means, being himself
illiterate.
Everyone is something of a genealogist in Africa, and capable of
going far back in his own family tree. If not, it would be as if he
had no "identity card." In Mali in olden times there was no one
who did not know at least ten or twelve generations of his
forebears.
But today the great problem of traditional Africa is in fact the
break in transmission. Fleeing the large towns, initiation has taken
refuge in the bush where, because of the attraction of the large
towns and because of the new needs, the old men find fewer
docile ears to which they can transmit their teaching.
For the oral tradition and all that bears on it, therefore, we stand
today in the presence of the last generation of great depositories.
That is why the work of collecting must be intensified over the next
ten or fifteen years, after which the last great living monuments of
African culture will have vanished, and with them the irreplaceable
treasures of a special kind of education, at once material,
psychological and spiritual, based on a feeling for the unity of life
the sources of which are lost in the night of time.
Amadou Hampâté Ba
23
