Photo Robert Levin © Rapho, Pans
Margaret Mead in 1966. In December 1971 the noted
American anthropologist became the first woman to be
awarded Unesco's Kalinga Prize for the popularization of
science.



Remembering
Margaret
Mead
by Claude Lévi-Strauss
STRICKEN with cancer, Margaret
Mead went into hospital on 4
October 1978 and died on 15
November, the very day on which the
seventy-seventh General Assembly of the
American Anthropological Association
took place. Margaret Mead herself would
have been seventy-seven a month later.
There is something symbolic in the repeti¬
tion of the number seventy-seven, so
closely was Margaret Mead connected,
one might even say identified, with
American anthropology all through her life.
Margaret Mead was born on 16
. December 1901 in Philadelphia. But her ties
were unquestionably Middle Western. If I
am not mistaken, her great-great-
grandparents had founded the little town
of Winchester in Ohio. Her grandmother
was a schoolmistress, her father a pro¬
fessor of economics and her mother a
sociologist who had written a thesis on the
Adaptation of Italian Immigrants. So her
roots in a particular territory and her roots
in a scientific environment both went back
several generations. She was, in fact, a
third generation "blue stocking".
She herself told how throughout her
childhood her parents moved house no less
than four times a year, going from one
university to another, for, as we know, a
university career in the United States is
CLAUDE LEVI-STRAUSS, world-renowned
French anthropologist and philosopher, has
been professor of social anthropology at the
Collège de France, Paris, since 1959. From 1934
to 1938 he was professor of sociology at the
University of Sao Paulo and led several scientific
expeditions to the Mato Grosso and the
Amazon. During the Second World War he
taught at the New School for Social Research,
New York. He is the author of many
authoritative works which have been widely
translated; those available in English include:
Race and History, Unesco, 1952; The Savage
Mind, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1966; Struc¬
tural Anthropology, Allen Lane, 1968; The Raw
and the Cooked, Jonathan Cape, 1970; From
Honey to Ashes, Jonathan Cape, 1973; Tristes
Tropiques, Jonathan Cape, 1973. This article is
based on an address given at the Centre Na¬
tional de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, and
published in MSH Informations, the bulletin of
the Maison des Sciences de l'Homme.
largely itinerant. It is perhaps because of
this contrast between her dual deep-
rootedness and this constant uprooting
from her surroundings that she was able to
keep to the unshakeable convictions that
spurred her on right through her career,
and to acquire her unbelievable powers of
adaptation.
After a period of undistinguished study
in small provincial universities she went to
Barnard College, Columbia University, and
worked under the prestigious supervision
of Franz Boas and his assistant at the time,
Ruth Benedict. We know how Margaret
Mead revered these two scholars. She ob¬
tained her Bachelor of Arts Degree in 1923,
her Master's in 1924 and her Ph.D in 1929.
She had not yet got her Ph.D. when she
set off on her first expeditions, to Samoa in
1925 and to Manus in the Admiralty Islands
in 1928-1929. She was also to work among
various tribes in the United States, around
1930, in New Guinea with her second hus¬
band, Reo Fortune, from 1931-1933, in Bali
and again in New Guinea with her third
husband, Gregory Bateson, between 1936
and 1938.
Then war broke out. I would not go so
far as to say that this prompted Margaret
Mead to break completely with the past
(for she never gave up her original voca¬
tion), nevertheless, there was a superficial
change, for she spent the next ten years on
national research in the United States
itself, interviewing minority groups and im¬
migrants.
Her colleagues did not give her their
whole-hearted support. I remember a
rather lively discussion in June 1952 at the
headquarters of the Wenner-Gren Founda¬
tion during a large symposium on "An¬
thropology today", attended by about
eighty anthropologists. She had been
taken to task for converting to applied an¬
thropology, and gave a spirited definition
of what she understood by applied an¬
thropology: it was not, she said, a kind of
anthropology that had practical 'applica¬
tion, but one which was undertaken more
from necessity than from an unselfish
desire to learn and understand. And she
added, "If someone were to give me a
guarantee that everything in the world
would remain pleasant and comfortable,
and that no research of this kind need be
done for the next twenty-five years, I
wouldn't touch national character for the
next twenty-five years because I think it is
more important to go back to New
Guinea". And she ended by saying, "Near¬
ly all of us who have dedicated our time to
these studies for the last ten years would
much rather have done something else".
So we see that she was not pleading in
favour of a new anthropology nor of a
complete shift in our aims and methods.
But she was a woman inspired by a sense
of civic duty and profound religious feeling,
for she had been converted when she was
very young, although her parents were not
practising Christians. It was the feeling that
she owed herself to her contemporaries, to
her country and to the international com¬
munity that set her on the path she was to
follow during the second half of her life,
the path of untiring campaigning across
the United States and across the world,
through the medium of broadcasts, univer¬
sity lectures, articles and books. It also ex¬
plains her feminist struggle whose source
of inspiration was so different from that of
all the others which the United States and
other countries have known.
As far as she was concerned, it was not a
matter of trying to replace various norms
with new ones, but rather of helping to
establish a social order that would allow all
differences to find expression. In this
respect, she remained faithful to the end of
her first book. Coming of Age in Samoa,
published in 1928 more than fifty years
agowhere she expressed the hope that
by studying societies with different norms
from ours, people would be able to attain
that high degree of individual choice and
universal tolerance to which only a
heterogeneous culture can aspire. Samoa
only recognizes one kind of life and this she
imposes on her children. But why
shouldn't we, who have learnt to under¬
stand many different kinds of life, leave our
children free to choose from among them?
It was, therefore, a lesson in tolerance
and freedom that she tried to give her con¬
temporaries. Like all her other philo- 1
sophies, her feminism was never dogmatic. I
39

Honours were relatively late in coming to
' her, if we consider the importance of her
work. She received the gold medal of the
Viking Fund in 1957 and only in 1975 was
she elected a member of the National
Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A. But
she received many memorable tributes in
her last years. For her seventy-fifth birth¬
day in 1976 the American Museum of
Natural History set up the "Margaret Mead
Fund for the Advancement of An¬
thropology" which is, in a way, an institu¬
tion designed to help American an¬
thropology over the bad patch it is going
through along with other institutions, as a
result of the world crisis. Also, a five-day
film festival in which she took part was
organized in her honour at the American
Museum of Natural History in 1977.
What I would most like to say is that
Margaret Mead was a great ethnologist.
She is known to a vast reading public
through books that can, in some respects,
be regarded as works of popularization.
These are: Coming of Age in Samoa and
Growing up in New Guinea; but we must
not overlook the fact that each of these
books had a counterpart in the form of a
technical treatise: for the first, Social
Organization of Manua, and Kinship in the
Admiralty Islands for the second.
It so happens that this year for my course
at the Collège de France I have had to delve
once more into these treatises which are
the work of a very young anthropologist;
she was only about twenty-five to twenty-
eight years of age when she did her first
research in the field. I was very surprised to
find with what accuracy and acumen she
had identified a number of problems which
our New Guinea-specialist colleagues
thought they had discovered in, shall we
say, about 1950, and which are still a topic
for discussion.
Some of these problems are, firstly, the
very special place reserved for cross
cousins as a result of complex systems of
relationships which make them related by
both blood and marriage and, consequent¬
ly, the element on which the whole social
structure hinges; Margaret Mead had
already described it as the "nodal point" of
the whole system. Secondly, the change
from kinship to barter as the basis of the
social structure and the fact that to achieve
this societies had to suppress "the binding
forms of purely blood ties". Thirdly, the
way in which these societies manage to
become emancipated from blood ties
through the medium of procedures such as
adoption and the financing of marriage by
"All over the world a new age is struggling to be born, an age
in which all children can grow up in families and all
adolescents can have time to become individuals who are
able to meet the demands of a fully adult life." Margaret
Mead saw the family as the basic unit of human living in
every society and the strength of the relationships within this
unit are powerfully captured in these studies by her long-time
collaborator Ken Heyman. For Margaret Mead, Heyman was
more than a photographer; he was a fellow anthropologist
who, she declared, "brought individuals and scenes literally
and symbolically into focus. Behind the single caught gesture
there would always be the intricate social and political
realities." (1) Ghana, (2) Japan, (3) Turkey, (4) Ireland,
(5) Mexico.
intermediaries who later came to be known
as "big men". Margaret Mead had correct¬
ly identified what she so aptly described as
the idea "of translating kinship form into a
basis for extra-kinship activity".
I remember that a few years ago I again
had occasion to use the documents that
Margaret Mead had brought back from
Sepik and, more particularly the ones from
Mundugomar, and I tried to draw diagrams
from them. I was a little afraid that they did
not quite correspond to reality, so I sent
them to her along with my text. A few
weeks later she wrote me that after con¬
sulting her old notes she had arrived at the
same conclusions with regard to the
diagram. I mention this not boastfully, but
only to show that at no time, not even dur¬
ing that period of her life when she was
thought to be completely engrossed in
social and political activities, had she turn¬
ed her back on New Guinea or on
theoretical anthropology, to which she in
fact returned at regular intervals.
Her most original contribution was cer¬
tainly that she was not content to make a
merely surface study of customs, beliefs
and institutions. She sought to understand
how people live their culture from the in¬
side, how they learn it from the moment of
their birth and during their infancy; also,
how they react to this culture, whether
they conform by adopting it or whether
they rebel or try to cheat it.
Now (and this is the dual background to
which I referred at the beginning), by
breaking new ground in this way, Margaret
Mead was using to best advantage some of
what she had learnt from Boas who had
already paid a fair amount of attention to
what different individuals felt. She herself
tells us that it was Boas too who first in¬
terested her in Polynesia, by giving her as
her first assignment a study of adolescents
and the extent to which they succeeded in
integrating into their group.
We should also pay tribute to Margaret
Mead for her exalted conception of an
thropology. As far as she was concerned, it
was not a special field working alongside
others, but the only field capable of syn¬
thesizing all the different types of research
on the subject of man. "The rôle of an¬
thropology", she said, "is to try and bridge
the gap between the humanities which
have never realized that man is an animal,
the natural sciences which would like to ig¬
nore the fact that man has a conscience,
and social science which merely rehashes
outmoded theories of physics". She took
the sociologist to task for relying on the
psychologist who, in turn, relied on the
biologist... Anthropology alone operates
on various levels. t
She apparently said in 1977, "My body is
not going to last as long as I thought it
would". So she could feel that the end was
near.
When, after her first stay there, she left
the village of Pere in the Admiralty Islands
to which she was to return many times, the
natives cried out in tears, "You are like an
old turtle who is taking to the sea and will
never come back". And it is true that late in
life Margaret Mead was a little like an old
turtle. But I would say a Lewis Carroll turtle
who could sometimes be sententious and
dictatorial, but sometimes too could be as I
saw her only two years ago in Uppsala
when, despite her age and illness, she
dropped the most graceful curtsey to the
young King of Sweden.
We parted at Stockholm airport; she was
on her way back to the United States and I
to France. The last thing she said to me
was that almost as soon as she got home
she expected to set off again for New
Guinea. That, no doubt, is where she
would have liked to end her days. But this
was not to be. However, we are sure that
she will be remembered both as a great
research worker in the field, and as the per¬
son whose work did most to earn for an¬
thropology its rightful place in today's
world.
Claude Lévi-Strauss
t&m*
40

