Mask with wing-like flaps, above, is typical of the works of art inspired by the malanggan
ancestor and initiation ceremonies of New Ireland (see article). This example, which
actually comes from the Tanga Islands off the northern coast of New Ireland, is made of
painted tapa or bark-cloth (a papery material obtained from the inner bark of certain trees
such as the muiberry) stretched across a rattan frame. With financial aid from Unesco,
the Institute of Papua New Guinea Studies has assembled an important collection of
photographic documentation on malanggan art in the Australian Museum in Sydney.



Malanggan art
of New Ireland
by Patrice Godin
NEW Ireland, which forms part of the
Bismarck Archipelago north of
New Guinea, is the home of an
outstanding traditional art of richly carved
wooden objects known as malanggan.
These carvings were of fundamental impor¬
tance to the community, for they symboliz¬
ed the continuity of life.
PATRICE GODIN, a French ethnologist on the
staff of the Museum of African and Oceanian
Arts in Paris, specializes in the study of the arts
of the Bismarck Archipelago (northeast of New
Guinea).
The malanggan sculptures were the focal
point of the festivals which were held in
memory either of distant ancestors or of
those who had died more recently (between
one and five years before). These festivals
were also known as malanggan (in Raluana,
one of the languages spoken by the Tolai
people today, the word malanggan means
"to dance in honour of the dead"). These
ceremonies were also concerned with the
initiation of youths into manhood.
The malanggan sculptures, carved and
painted in fantastic openwork designs,
originated in the north of New Ireland,
although the ceremonies themselves are
associated with the southern part of the
island, and also with the Gazelle Peninsula
and other parts of northern New Britain,
the biggest island in the Bismarck k
Archipelago. f
17

, ,. The ornamental designs and motifs with
which the wooden figures were decorated
were the property of the elders of the clan,
who directed the wood-carvers and saw
that the appropriate symbols and forms
were used in their proper context.
Sometimes one clan would grant to another
the right to carve its ceremonial figures; if it
did so it was obliged to acquire a new set of
sculptures made by another clan.
Malanggan art thus established both a
"vertical" line of communication through a
genealogical transmission of motifs and
designs, and a "horizontal" line through the
buying and selling of the right to reproduce
these motifs and designs.
It might take years to prepare these im¬
posing wooden sculptures, which
presented a wealth of mythological themes
and totem animals, as well as depictions of
actual historical events. The individual
figures, each of which symbolized a dead
kinsman, were gathered inside a special
bamboo stockade, usually near to the clan's
cremation or burial ground. The craftsmen
also made masks adorned with cloth,
feathers, leaves and fibres; these too played
a part in the festivities.
The malanggan ceremonies thus formed
a link between the living and the dead, and
celebrated the initiation of young men. But
the full sequence of rites, which could last
for months, also had for the community as
a whole a wider significance, which reveal¬
ed itself in three main ways.
Firstly, the commemoration and in¬
vestiture ceremonies were an opportunity
for the dead person's material wealth to be
distributed among the community of the
living. The heirs and descendants took it
upon themselves to share among kinsfolk
and allies the dead man's pearls (which
served as money), pigs, household goods,
and so on.
Then too, the malanggan was a time to
strengthen alliances (marriage alliances as
well as political and military alliances) and
to step up exchanges between different
groups and clans.
Some of the guests might have to travel
great distances, for marital alliances and
commercial exchanges extended not only
throughout the Bismarck Archipelago but
beyond, to New Guinea, to Bougainville
and the Solomon Islands.
Thirdly, the malanggan provided for the
transmission, from one generation to the
next, of property rights as well as rituals
and prerogatives which were to be held in
trust. He who directed the ceremonies ac¬
quired the land, fishing rights, coconut
groves and magic powers (over wind, rain,
and plants) which had belonged to the dead
forebear. The heir thus achieved a higher
social status which enabled him to in¬
fluence decisions of local interest.
And so malanggan sculptures were
something more than "works of art". They
were part of a ritual which was one of the
most distinctive and spectacular features of
an entire system whose purpose was to
control the life of the community, through
marriages and deaths, festivities and ex¬
changes.
Once the ceremonies were over, the carv¬
ings were either burned or abandoned to
the rigours of the tropical climate. Their
fate thus matched either the slow putrefac¬
tion of the corpse or its cremation on the
territory of the clan. The cycle of existence
was now complete; what the dead could
not hand on had been recuperated by the
malanggan. Imagery had been used to
establish, in the face of the death of in¬
dividuals, the permanence of life.
Patrice Godin
The two side-panels flanking many malanggan-sty\e masks are
not ears but stylized representations of the planks which were
used to maintain a corpse's head upright before cremation.
Right, a bapong mask from the east coast of New Ireland.
Photo Jennifer Steele. Australian Museum. Sydney
:TTS #PyT
The fantastic combinations of forms, materials, techniques and
colours which typify the traditional sculpture of New Ireland all
went into the making of this mask from the island's northeast
coast. The bird, a motif which dominates the face and the high
openwork panels on each side, is a symbol often found in New
Ireland's malanggan art.
Photo Jennifer Steele, Australian Museum, Sydney
Wood, rattan and fibres are the materials of the nit mask, right.
As often, mollusc shells have been used as eyes ; they peer out
in a fixed, glittering stare from the elaborately intertwined
carvings of the face. Notice the vertical slot into which one of
the two missing side-panels once fitted.
18
Photo Ethnological Museu

il^H' 1
Bjg
&
fiäk
ir
'**
S
Mask from the northwest coast of New Ireland is made of wood,
fibres, bark-cloth and shells. In it are combined images of the
fish (each side of the face) and the snake (around the eye), while
bird motifs adorn the nose, fastened to the face by twine.
Photo Ethnology Museum, Berlir
