Twelve 'musts' for development
by Joao Frank da Costa
THERE is today a widespread consen¬
sus that the traditional concept of
development, which focused prim¬
arily on economic growth, needs to be
redefined. A new concept of development is
emerging, which might be summed up in
the following twelve "musts".
1. Development must be total, that is
to say it must transcend purely economic
dimensions in order to include social con¬
siderations health, living conditions
and employment and the whole dimension
of cultural and spiritual self-realization em¬
bracing creativity, quality of life, and the
rights of man.
2. Development must be original,
which is to say that imitation of models is
undesirable. This means that styles of
development should not only be diverse and
respond to country-specific economic and
current social structures, natural and human
environment and cultural integrity, but
should also be in accordance with the objec¬
tives of each country and the way it
perceives its own future. In this sense, the
notion of "gap" between developed and
developing countries acquires a different
significance. Without rejecting the objective
of reducing sharp contrasts in standards of
living, one should strive to abandon the
limited concept of "gap" which is usually
somewhat negatively defined on the basis of
external indicators and instead substitute a
positive and voluntary strategy of develop¬
ment.
3. Development must be self-
determined. This applies not only to the
capacity for selecting a development style,
but also must assure its application in order
to eliminate or at least reduce dependency
and vulnerability, to unify and amplify inter¬
nal markets and to ensure the production of
basic foodstuffs and goods.
4. Development must be self-
generated. This should not mean that full
self-reliance can be achieved by national ef¬
fort alone. Often, indeed in most instances,
self-reliance is achieved on a larger scale
than that of an individual nation, within a
broader framework, either "horizontally" by
co-operation among developing countries,
or in a "triangular" pattern, that is to say,
with the added participation of the
developed countries. In this sense, develop¬
ment must be co-operative.
5. Development must be integrated.
"Truncated" growth of certain sec¬
tors the consequence of redeploy¬
ment policies of transnational corpora¬
tions not correspond to real develop¬
ment and causes growing dependency and
vulnerability. Strong horizontal and vertical
linkages must bind together the several pro¬
ductive units (in particular between the
agricultural and the industrial sectors) and
ensure complete communication and in¬
terdependence, and full integration with na¬
tional supply and demand.
6. Development must respect the in¬
tegrity of the environment, both natural
and cultural, as well as the traditional struc¬
tures which are often necessary for the con¬
servation of a country's social cohesion.
This includes the safeguarding of the na¬
tional heritage and protection against all
forms of imposed alien values.
7. Development must be planned and
requires constant attention from and in¬
tervention by national authorities. This does
not mean, of course, the mandatory exclu¬
sion of private interest and free market
mechanisms. It appears, however, to be
generally accepted that the free play of
economic forces does not automatically lead
to an equitable diffusion of scientific and
technological potential, but instead, it leads
frequently to concentration and polarization
of capabilities and benefits in highly
developed centres. The alignment of the in¬
terest of private enterprise with national ob¬
jectives needs to be ensured by appropriate
mechanisms.
8. Development must be directed
towards a just and equitable social order
which requires for its establishment, in
general, structural transformations allowing
for the participation by all sectors of the
population in the benefits of science and
technology, and not only in their negative
effects. In developing countries, it is
necessary in particular to eliminate the
dichotomy of demand that may exist where
elites have consumption patterns similar to
those in highly developed countries, in con¬
trast to a mass which does not participate in
the market for lack of purchasing power.
9. Development must be democratic,
that is to say, it must respond to the choices
made by the population as a whole. The idea
that technological decisions are dictated by
an internal scientific-technological logic and
are self-executory must be categorically re¬
jected. The goals of society are not purely
scientific or technological and scientific and
technological considerations must not be
allowed, to impose their control. This pro¬
blem involves nothing less than the freedom
of mankind to determine its own destiny.
10. Development must not insulate
less developed countries or regions into
"reservations", where they would barely
survive and lead a marginal life far from the
main flows of growth and dynamism. On the
contrary, it should make them all participate
actively in a new optimal division of labour
which is at the heart of the objectives of the
New International Economic Order. Par¬
ticularly, such a new division of labour
should lead to structural changes in
developed countries which would promote
expansion into new types of productive ac¬
tivities. This requires a reconceptualization
of development and the design of measures
that can only be conceived in a long range
perspective.
11. Development must be innovative.
It must neither depend on the importation of
outmoded technologies from developed
countries nor even advanced technology
developed somewhere else. Only the
mastery of world scientific knowledge, in¬
cluding the knowledge which for economic
reasons has never been applied in developed
countries, can assure an original, creative
technological development.
12. Development planning must be
based on a realistic definition of na¬
tional needs and on consumption models
that are consistent with the national'
characteristics of a country including its
resources, gross national product, capacity
of accumulation, and the possibilities of in¬
tegrated interaction of science and
technology with production activities.
10
JOAO FRANK DA COSTA, Brazilian diplomat, was Secretary-General of the United Nations Con¬
ference on Science and Technology for Development held in Vienna last August. A former chief of the
Division of Science and Technology in Brazil's Ministry of Foreign Affairs (1973- 1975) and a member of
his country's National Council on Scientific Research, he has also served at the United Nations and at
Unesco, where his functions included the chairmanship of the General Assembly of the Latin Centre of
Physics, created under Unesco's auspices.

