The frontiers
of science
by Arkadii B. Migdal
THE transformation of an idea into an
accepted scientific truth, of a hypo¬
thesis into a rigorously formulated
physical law, is a long and often tortuous
process. But is it possible to retrace the
various steps in this process? And what ex¬
actly is the difference between the scien¬
tific assessment of a phenomenon and the
comprehension of it that common sense
dictates?
ARKADII B. MIGDAL, noted Soviet theoreti¬
cal physicist, is a member of the USSR Aca¬
demy of Sciences and adviser to the Academy's
Landau Institute of Theoretical Physics. A spe¬
cialist in the field of the theory of elementary
particles and atomic nuclei, he is the author of
over 150 scientific papers and five longer stu¬
dies. His Qualitative Methods in Quantum
Theory was published in the USA in 1977 by
Benjamin-Cummings Publishing Co., Menlo
Park, California.
The first step in any scientific undertak¬
ing is to draw up the boundaries which
mark off the area of indisputably establish¬
ed scientific truths from the area of "im¬
possibilities" which conflict with the data
yielded by repeated scientific experiment.
Between the two lies a no-man's-land em¬
bracing phenomena which have not been
studied but which, a priori, seem to lie
within the bounds of the possible.
In our time the frontiers of the possible
have been pushed back so far that they
merge into those of wonderland. Men cir¬
cle the earth in spacelabs for months at a
time. Televiewers can watch a sporting
event while it is taking place thousands of
kilometres away. Equally miraculous, com¬
puters can play chess, translate, write
verse and above all carry out in a matter of
minutes calculations which would other¬
wise take years.
It is tempting to ask whether science
knows its limits, and to wonder whether a
scientific revolution may not lie ahead,
which will turn our ideas upside down. The
history of science and epistemology rule
out the possibility of such an upheaval.
Even the astonishing concepts of the
theory of relativity did not constitute a total
revolution; they were a consequence of
scientific evolution, solidly based on earlier
scientific discoveries. Furthermore, they
only affected a relatively limited number of
problems and did not change the existing
laws of mechanics and the electrodynamics
of bodies moving at normal speeds.
What happened was that our knowledge
was extended in the then unstudied field of
speeds near to that of light. Before the
theory of relativity was developed, it was
logical to suppose that the laws of j
mechanics and electrodynamics were valid I
29

at speeds higher than those for which they
had been established experimentally.
Doubts only emerged when this
hypothesis was contradicted by scientific
experiments. This is the usual path of
scientific progress.
Science, it has been said, is the product
of truth multiplied by doubt. At the begin¬
ning of the nineteenth century, descrip¬
tions of meteors, "celestial stones", were
dismissed by many scientists as the fruits
of fantasy. Stones, after all, could not drop
from the sky. Such a refusal to accept the
inexplicable is highly dangerous and often
leads to error.
Many examples could be cited of the
way in which preconceived opinions have
slowed the development of science. The il¬
lustrious inventor of the theory of relativity
himself made a mistake of this kind, draw¬
ing a false conclusion from a preconceived
idea when he attempted to establish an en¬
tirely new cosmology.
After demonstrating that the laws of
Euclidian geometry were not valid in the
vicinity of a large mass, Einstein wished to
take a new and staggeringly audacious step
forward. He applied his theory of the
gravitational field to the universe, replac¬
ing, as is the practice in the study of a gas,
the real distribution of masses in space
with the notion of the average density of
matter.
It transpired that the equations of
gravitation for a universe such as ours did
not admit a static solution. To achieve a
solution corresponding to his description of
a finite universe whose radius of curvature
was independent of time, Einstein artificial¬
ly introduced into the gravitational equa¬
tions an additional factor which upset their
harmony.
Around the same time, an outstanding
Petrograd mathematician named Alex¬
ander Friedmann was studying various
possibilities of solving Einstein's equations
without introducing this new factor. He
came to the conclusion that the universe is
expanding and that beside the "closed"
model, there can exist for certain values of
average mass density, an "open" model in
which the dimensions of the universe in¬
crease indefinitely. At first Einstein was
critical of Friedmann's work, but later came
round entirely to his position and rejected
the introduction of an additional factor in
the gravitation equations.
"After reading Friedmann's letter, which
Mr. Krutkov [a famous Soviet theoretical
physicist] communicated to me", wrote
Einstein, "I am now convinced that my
criticisms were based on an error of
calculation. I consider that Friedmann's
results are correct and throw a new light on
the question." Friedmann learned of the
existence of this text shortly before his
premature death in 1925. His solution was
later confirmed experimentally when the
U.S. astronomer Edwin Hubble
demonstrated that the galaxies appear to
be moving away from each other.
Several cases of scientific error have
been analysed and methodological conclu¬
sions drawn from them, the most
unassailable being that scientists should
avoid taking up categorical positions in in¬
sufficiently studied fields. When scientific
errors occur today, they are soon rectified.
Science does not, however, confine
itself to defining the bounds of the possi¬
ble, it also rigorously sorts out hypotheses,
even the most likely ones, from
demonstrated propositions. In this way it
draws attention to propositions which re¬
quire further research. It is possible to
believe, for example, that the earth has
been visited by emissaries from another
world, but scientists have no grounds for
affirming that this is so.
This weeding out process, disagreeable
though it may often be for the scientist,
has the effect of highlighting certain
phenomena which though apparently
strange are in fact real. Such a
phenomenon is the "twin paradox". Ac¬
cording to the theory of relativity, if one of
a pair of twins were to go on a journey in a
spaceship travelling at a speed approaching
that of light, when he returned he would be
younger than his brother who had remain¬
ed on earth. This astonishing affirmation
has been demonstrated not only
theoretically but experimentally. Time
measured during a space flight by a high-
precision atomic clock is less than that
shown by an identical clock which remains
on earth.
Here is another example of a peculiar
phenomenon which is nevertheless authen¬
tic. It has always been thought that marine
animal and plant life only exist near the
ocean surface where the sunlight can
penetrate and make photosynthesis possi¬
ble. However, volcanic areas of seabed, in¬
accessible to sunlight, have recently been
discovered several kilometres beneath the
surface where temperatures are high and in
which specific forms of animal and plant
life subsist, possibly as a result of pro¬
cesses of chemical synthesis.
It cannot be said of such phenomena
that "I'd like to believe in them but there
are no grounds for doing so". The expres¬
sion "no grounds" signifies that the ques¬
tion has been studied and that initial con¬
jectures have turned out to be unjustified.
To put the scientific approach into a nut¬
shell: "one would like to believe" in a given
proposition, but if "there are no grounds"
for doing so then it must be rejected.
Human nature is such that mankind
spontaneously aspires, not only to the
beautiful but also to the mysterious and the
unusual. In Pushkin's words, "an illusion
which exalts us is dearer than the shadows
of shabby truths". I would add to
Pushkin's words the following remark by
Einstein: "The most beautiful thing that we
can experience is the mysterious". For
Einstein the sense of mystery lies at the
root of the fundamental tendencies of art
and science. Alas, the same aspiration
towards the mysterious is at the origin of
much unscientific thought.
The task of science is to select the most
likely explanations and to stick to them un¬
til experimental results demand that others
be found. This does not mean that there
should be an embargo on research into
unlikely phenomena. As the U.S. physicist
Richard Feynman pointed out: "One of the
surest ways to stop scientific progress is to
limit experimentation to fields in which the
laws have already been discovered".
The following hypothesis, which is both
simple and convincing, was adopted by
science long ago. The processes which
operate in nature are governed, in the last
analysis, by the same laws which govern
interactions in experimental physics. Until
The twin
Drawings studic Philippe Gentil © Unesco Courier
^r-S^^
m ; JB
Y 1
m il II T H
W\\}\ V3 J
FH
mW'gf
r s
(^ ,»-
te $tW
mmym
30

now this hypothesis has never been dis¬
proved; in fact it has shown itself to be so
fertile that it has explained such a mys¬
terious phenomenon as heredity.
The different branches of the exact
sciences have many procedures in com¬
mon. Methods exist, for example, which
can prove an idea to be false even before
research into it is begun. But the most im¬
portant factor, without which success will
elude even the most brilliantly gifted scien¬
tist, is the capacity for enthusiasm and
astonishment at even the smallest achieve¬
ment, and for approaching science with the
veneration Einstein described when he
wrote: "Full of astonishment, I simply
make conjectures about mysteries and
humbly try to paint a mental picture, which
is far from being complete, of the perfect
structure of the being".
Arkadii B. Migdal
paradox
The assertion of the relativity theory that
time and distance are not absolute values,
but are dependent upon the relative
motion of observers, and that the only
absolute constant is the speed of light
leads to some apparently very bizarre
conclusions about events occurring at
ultra-high speeds. For example, to a man
standing on a launching pad and watching
a spacecraft moving away at a speed
approaching that of light, a clock in the
spacecraft (if he could see it) would
appear to be moving very slowly. To the
space-traveller looking back it would be
time on earth that appeared to be slowed
down. This apparent contradiction gave
rise to a famous brain teaser known as
the "twin paradox". If the man on the
ground and the space-traveller were
twins, what difference, if any, would
there be in their ages on the return of the
spacecraft to earth ? Ultra-high-speed
travel, it seems, helps to keep you young.
Einstein showed that, because of other
relativistic effects, including, for instance,
the effect of acceleration on the space-
travelling twin involved in turning the
spacecraft and bringing it back to earth,
the astronaut would age more slowly than
his stay-at-home twin. The English
astrophysicist Herbert Dingle, however,
maintained that this conclusion was
absurd. If, as the theory of relativity
states, there Is no absolute movement,
only movement in relation to other
objects, it could be argued that the
spacecraft had remained motionless and
that the earth had moved away from it at
great speed and then returned. In this
case the earthbound twin would be the
younger. But, obviously, both brothers
cannot be younger than each other. There
is, however, a fundamental difference
between the relative movement of the
astronaut twin and that of the stay-at-
home. If the earth were said to move
away from the spacecraft, the entire
universe would have to move with it. In
other words, the earth would remain
motionless in relation to the universe and
the relativistic effects associated with
acceleration would still only apply to the
twin in the spacecraft. So after all high
speed travel does keep you young.
Albert Einstein and Robert Oppenheimer. In 1943 Oppenheimer was appointed director of
the Los Alamos Atomic Research Laboratory where the first nuclear bomb was
developed, and in 1947 became director of the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton.
"Einstein is often blamed or praised or credited with these miserable bombs,"
Oppenheimer wrote. "It is not in my opinion true... His part was that of creating an
intellectual revolution, and discovering more than any scientist of our time how profound
were the errors made by men before them... Einstein himself is really not answerable for
all that came later."

