IN his recent science-fiction story about
the development of a "wonder boy"
the American author, Joseph Shallit,
describes an experiment conducted by a
psychologist. Doctor Elliot, who, by ex¬
posing an embryo's brain to special rays,
succeeds in activating to an extraordinary
extent the child's aptitudes and in creating
a considerable and constantly increasing
disparity between his physical age and his
mental age.
At the age of one, Donny's mental age is
that of a three- to four-year-old; at two,
that of a child of ten, and so on. The head¬
long but unilateral development of Donny's
aptitudes, the obvious incompatibility bet¬
ween his appearance and his actual age
begin to embarrass seriously those around
him, first and foremost, his father and
mother. Before long, Donny is preparing to
eliminate his parents who have become
Obstacles to the realization of his selfish
ambitions.
Shallit's gloomy tale, of course, exagger¬
ates the dangers of too intensive develop¬
ment of children's mental aptitudes. But
the uncommon situation of a "miracle
child" always contains the potential danger
of deviation and the monstrous develop¬
ment of the personality.
The Soviet educationalist Anton Maka¬
renko has devoted a chapter of his remark¬
able Book of Parents to an experiment
which somewhat resembles that of Dr.
Elliot.
True, Piotr Ketov, who had decided to
make his only son a famous man, did not
have access to a fantastic "mind maturer",
but this was more than made up for by the '
excessive and unthinking love of the
mother, her anguished fear for her son and
the attitude of the father, who systema^
tically placed the son in exceptional situ¬
ations, subordinating the entire life of the
family to the single task of developing the
intellect and talents of his child.
Victor, the son, quickly outstrips the
other children of his age and shows not the
slightest interest in them. At five, he
speaks Russian and German correctly; at
ten, he is studying the classics; at twelve,
he can read Schiller in the original and skips
the fifth form; at seventeen, he enters the
mathematics faculty and astounds his pro¬
fessors by his brilliant talents and scholar¬
ship. In short, he has followed the typical
path of a gifted child. But, in other res¬
pects, he has become a thorough-going
egoist, cold, cynical and calculating, indif¬
ferent to anything not connected with his
success and his pleasures. Victor's story
has a tragically banal ending:
"Coming from the kitchen, his mother
rushed towards him and said in a trembling
and weary voice:
ARTHUR V. PETROVSKY, Sower psycholo¬
gist, is vice-president of the Academy of Peda¬
gogical Sciences of the USSR and was a mem¬
ber of Unesco's International Commission on
the Development of Education. The author of
many books and articles on general, social and
pedagogical psychology, he was one of the con¬
tributing authors of Learning to Be, published by
Unesco in 1972.



What should
we do
with whizzkids?
by Arthur V. Petrovsky
A boarding school for exceptionally gifted children from distant parts of the U.S.S.R. has
been set up in Moscow on the urging of Academician Andrei Kolmogorov, a leading
Soviet mathematician. Each year over 200 teenagers from the central and southern
regions of European Russia are accepted at the school, which Is attached to Moscow
University. After a course of study in which maths and physics play a major part, almost
all the pupils go on to higher educational institutions specializing in science. At least half
enter Moscow University or the Moscow Physico-Technical Institute. Similar schools have
been established in Leningrad, Novosibirsk and Kiev. Here, Kolmogorov and his students
enjoy a moment of relaxation between lectures.
Victor, could you go to the chemist's?
The medicine is ready and paid for. It is
urgent.
Turning his tousled head on his pillow,
Piotr Alexandrovitch Ketov looked at his
son; a forced smile was on his lips. The
sight of his grown son gave him pleasure
despite the suffering caused by his ulcer.
Victor looked at his mother and replied
with a cold smile:
No, I cannot. My friends are waiting for
me. I'm taking the key. "
The presence of a gifted child in a family
does not make the educational tasks faced
by the family unit any easier. On the con¬
trary, it makes them more difficult. This is
why it is necessary not only to create
favourable conditions for the development
of the child's talent, to feed his extra¬
ordinary energy, but also to pay particular
attention to encouraging those aspirations
which will enable him to become a part of
the community.
He must be made aware that his great
aptitudes do not give him the right to make
greater demands on those around him, but
that they, on the contrary, especially his
parents and teachers, have the right to
demand more of him. If he understands
that his talent creates not only rights but
also special duties, then a favourable deve¬
lopment of his personality can be expected.
Today, it is generally accepted that a
pedagogical doctrine concerning gifted
children reflects the general principles and
pedagogical methods used in a society.
In order to understand this phenomenon
of gifted children a phenomenon more
widespread than is generally believedwe
32

must bear in mind that gifted children
remain children with all the special attrib¬
utes of children, even if these have been
modified and transformed by the exceptio¬
nal character of their gifts. Psychologists
are interested in gifted children not
because they want to record their achieve¬
ments but because they want to try to pick
out those characteristics of their person¬
alities which make us consider them to be
gifted children.
If we only take the exceptional traits of a
gifted child into account, he is liable to see
himself as an exceptional being and to
become arrogant, presumptuous or
unhealthily timid.
Gifted children easily perform school
exercises which are beyond the compre¬
hension of older children. However, chil¬
dren do not develop in a uniform manner;
nor is an individual child's intellectual, prac¬
tical, moral and affective development uni¬
form either. Thus, it is possible for a gifted
child to surpass all the other children of his
age in a specific field while lagging behind
in all the others.
Even when those around him consider
him to be a prodigy, a child remains a child.
And this simple proposition must govern
our attitude towards him. This means that
he must be given 'intellectual and creative
work corresponding to his special capabili¬
ties in a specific field and be provided with
the means to succeed. He must not be han¬
dicapped in this respect. Nor is it desirable
to attempt to speed up his intellectual
development artificially or to want him to
skip a class and outstrip his age group, not
because he "could not stand the strain" (a
greatly exaggerated danger) but because,
in such a situation, personality develop¬
ment may be upset.
The child prodigy who, for example,
solves a number of complex equations and
then returns enthusiastically to his toys, is
sometimes laughed at and made aware of
the illusory nature of his maturity. This can
The education of highly
gifted children raises many
questions. Should they be
taught in special schools
for child prodigies? Should
they be schooled with less
able children, at the risk of
becoming apathetic and
losing their Intellectual
sharpness? Should they be
pushed to their limits and
treated as if they were
older than their years?
Many approaches have
been tried; each has
advantages and
disadvantages. Left, three-
year-old Olga concentrates
on a game of draughts.
induce morosity, arrogance and mistrust.
We should, therefore, concern ourselves,
first and foremost, not with the develop¬
ment of his gifts, but with the harmonious
formation of his personality of which intel¬
lectual aptitudes are only one element.
An unthinking desire to widen the gap
between a child's mental and real age could
lead to a situation in which a gifted child,
while moving out of the child's world from
an intellectual point of view, cannot find
his place in the adult world because of his
moral and affective immaturity. These
internal contradictions are a source of con¬
flict and could lead to a highly explosive
situation.
Nowadays, the problem of talented chil¬
dren and their education is a major social
problem and a concern of the State. In the
Soviet Union, the detection of special
talents has always been aided by various
competitive examinations and through
olympiads in mathematics, physics, bio¬
logy, chemistry and literature held all over
the country every year and which attract
hundreds of thousands of students. But
this method can do no more than reveal the
"raw material" for further action.
Today, experts are devoting themselves
to this task. Several boarding and special¬
ized schools have already been established
to offer the most favourable conditions for
the development of the aptitudes of stu¬
dents in mathematics and in other fields.
The author of this article has seen this
system in operation at one of the special
mathematics schools. The students work
under the supervision of teachers from the
Faculty of Mechanics and Mathematics of
Moscow University. The preliminary selec¬
tion and the development of the mathema¬
tical aptitudes of the children take place at
an evening school for mathematics at
which the courses are given by university
seniors assisted by final-year students from
the special mathematics school. Thus,
when the entry examinations for the
mathematics school are held (examinations
every bit as serious as those for admission
to higher educational institutions), the
school administrators and the representa¬
tives of Moscow University can choose
from among the pick of the students.
This is the start of a life of intensive and
fascinating work for "the happy few". In
addition to the usual scholastic courses,
they have to follow a special programme,
attend lectures by university professors,
take part in seminars and solve extremely
complicated mathematical problems.
Although emphasis is on the specialized
disciplines, there is no lowering of the level
demanded in other subjects of the school
programme. It should be noted that the
child prodigies, contrary to preconceived
notions, are not "eggheads" with puny
bodies, but children full of vigour and the
joy of living, excellent at sports who say
jokingly: "We're attending a physical edu¬
cation school with a mathematical bent".
But mathematics, music and chess have
always been a special case. Talent in these
fields shows itself at an early stage and a
child with a gift for music or mathematics
can be singled out very early on.
But what of other aptitudes which are
not so easy to detect? For several years, for
example, a school sponsored by the Chem¬
istry Faculty of Moscow University has
been in operation in Moscow. The system
of olympiads for districts, cities, regions,
republics and, finally for the whole Soviet
Union offers the opportunity to distinguish
from the mass of students the best of the
literary-inclined, geographers or biologists
and to undertake the creation of new
specialized secondary schools for these
students.
Another important aspect of the way in
which these schools operates is that even
the strongest students do not feel that they
are "different", "not like the others",
because the general level of these schools
is very high. They are, in fact, places for
large-scale, long-term experimentation,
where children receive the training for their
social role that could not be provided by
the family.
The ways and means of detecting talent
and encouraging it are the subject of end¬
less discussions which are far from being
resolved. How and where should we teach
these children? Should we educate them
like the others and let the talented ones
emerge spontaneously?
The experiment continues for benefit of
the only truly privileged persons: the chil¬
dren.
Arthur V. Petrovsky
33
