Music of the Gulf
The song of
the pearl-fishers
by Habib Hassan Tourna
At a time when traditional music in many parts of the world is fading into
oblivion, in the coastal regions of the Gulf, the shallow sea between the Arabian
peninsula and Iran, time-honoured forms of musical expression have not only
survived but are showing renewed vitality. Here, sailors and desert nomads,
farmers and craftsmen, villagers and townsfolk, as well as peoples who have
come to the Gulf from many different lands, all have their own distinctive
musical forms which spring spontaneously from their lives, occupations and
cultural backgrounds. In this colourful kaleidoscope a notable place is held by
the Ifgeri music of the pearl-fishers, described in the article below. Here and in
photos on the next two pages, we present a medley of instrumentalists from the
Gulf who are keeping a diversity of cultural traditions alive in the modern world,
a diversity exemplified in the contrast between the precise, delicate movements
of the Ifgeri drummer, below, and the ecstatic fervour of the oboe player, right.
HABIB HASSAN TOUMA is a musicologist
specializing in Arabian music, on which he has
written several full-length studies and articles.
Born in Nazareth in 1934, he has since 1969 been
lecturing at the Free University of Berlin on Ara¬
bian and Middle Eastern Music. A staff member
of the International Institute for Comparative
Music Studies, he is in charge of the Institute's
Festival of Traditional Music, held each year in
Berlin.
FOR more than 4,000 years, the pearl-
fishers of Bahrain have been
harvesting the riches that lie beneath
the waters of the Gulf. Sumerian tablets
speak of trade with the "Isle of Dilmun" in
the "Lower Sea", as the ancients called the
Gulf, and the "fishes eyes from Dilmun",
referred to in an Assyrian inscription, were
in all probability pearls from Bahrain.
Like seafaring men the world over, the
pearl-fishers sang at their work and over
the centuries they have developed an
authentic musical tradition. Ifgeri, as this
music is called, has a wide and varied
repertoire and is very popular along the
coast, particularly in Bahrain and Qatar.
Ifgeri is mainly vocal and is performed ex¬
clusively by men.
Special songs have been devised to ac¬
company particular tasks aboard ship: the
khrab is sung as the anchor is weighed, the
mejdaf as the sailors bend to their oars, and
the basseh or the gaylaml as the sails are
hoisted. The job being done has a direct in¬
fluence on the musical structure of each
28

Photos © Carlos Saldi, Paris
song. The khrab, for instance, is sung in
high key by a soloist, while the rest of the
crew chorus a background chant two oc¬
taves lower; this chant is punctuated at
regular intervals by audible exhalations
denoting the pauses for breath between
successive heaves as the anchor is raised.
The words of the Ifgeri songs describe
the hard life and lot of the pearl-fishers, the
dangers of the sea and sea-floor, and the
joys of reunion with one's family; they
often contain prayers to Allah, Mohammed
and AN.
Musically speaking, an Ifgeri song con¬
sists of a series of sections to oe sung by a
soloist and a male chorus. Each section is
characterized by the rhythmic structure
which accompanies the vocal part, and is
named accordingly. The rhythmic structure
underlying the first three sections must be
developed during the performance in
perceptible stages; that of the following
sections is clearly predetermined and con¬
sists of quite short forms.
Ifgeri is sung not only during the long
pearl-diving voyages but also ashore. Bet¬
ween trips the pearl-fishers and other
seafarers meet regularly, usually on
Thursdays, at a kind of community house,
known, as a aar, to drink tea, smoke, talk,
eat, sing and dance. In the 19th century
there were hundreds of dars on the Gulf
coast. Today far fewer remain. Each dar is
distinguished from the others by the
predominance of a particular kind of "sea-
music", the musical quality of the perfor¬
mances and the range of the soloist's
repertory.
For Ifgeri only percussion instruments
are used: double-skin torn toms (tabal and
mirwas), single-skin "flat drums" (tar,
plural tiran), little metal cymbals (tus) and
water-jars (gahlah). The tabal, related to
the Indian pakhwaj, hangs sideways across
the musician's chest and shoulder and is¡
played with the hand or a stick of natural
palm wood. The mirwas is a smaller torn
torn; four to six of them are used in a:
29

> Ifgeri performance. The tiran have a
diameter of about 70 centimetres and their
skins are generally decorated with names,
pictures of flowers and a crescent; before a
performance, they are set out in a circle
and warmed up to heighten the tension of
their skins. The gahlah is a water jar some
60 centimetres high; the opening is struck
with the flat of the hand; the resulting dull
tone can be supplemented by a further
sound, produced by scratching the side of
the jar.
The pearl-fishers learn Ifgeri from their
fathers, who in turn learnt it from the
previous generation. However, the pearl-
fishers of Bahrain recount a legend which
gives a different account of the origin of
this art-form.
Once upon a time there were three
friends; two of them came from Muharraq
Island, the third from Manamah (Bahrain).
They used to walk a few miles out of town
to a place called Abu-Subh, where they
could sing together without disturbing the
neighbours and without being disturbed
themselves. One afternoon, on the way to
Abu-Subh, as they passed a mosque (it still
stands today), they heard strange singing
which seemed to come from within. Their
curiosity was aroused; they wanted to see
who was singing; but as they approached
the entrance to the mosque they were met
by a hail of stones. On entering the court¬
yard they saw a group of seated figures
whose bodies seemed human above the
waist but looked like donkeys below. One
of these creatures asked the young men:
"Are you human beings or jinns?" (the
demons of Arab mythology). The men
replied that they were ordinary decent
human beings and wished the group no
harm; they merely wanted to spend the
evening listening to the others' songs. One
of the seated figures asked the three
friends not to say what was "in their
hearts" i.e. not to speak the first three
verses of the Koran aloud otherwise the
group would disappear: which meant that
they were jinns, because a jinn has to
disappear immediately the name of Allah is
pronounced.
So the three young men sat down with
the others and were allowed to learn the
group's Ifgeri songs by heart: but only
when they had promised never to repeat
what they saw and heard that evening; if
they did they would perish. From that time
on the friends met secretly in a cemetery to
sing these songs. After many years two of
them died. Soon the third also the one
from Muharraq felt that his last hour was
approaching. He called his family and
friends together and told them what had
happened on that distant evening with the
jinns. Then he sang the Ifgeri songs to
them; they learned them immediately and
they have been sung ever since.
With increasing competition from the
cultured pearl industry, pearl-fishing in the
Gulf went into decline and today only a
handful of men follow this ancient occupa¬
tion. Nevertheless the Ifgeri music of the
pearl-fishers and sailors of the Gulf survives
to form part of the proud Arab musical
tradition.
Habib Hassan Tourna
Music of the Gulf
With the financial backing of the International Fund for the Promotion of
Culture, the Co-ordinating Committee for International Voluntary Service
recently completed a programme of recordings of traditional music of the Gulf.
The recordings, totalling twenty-five hours ofplaying time, were made under the
supervision of the musician Boulos Mattar and the performances were
photographed by Carlos Saldi.
An audiovisual presentation of a selection of these recordings will be made at a
Unesco-sponsored intergovernmental conference on cultural policies in Arab
States to be held next year in Tunis.
Marital harmony is the theme song of this musical group, right. Adid ensembles, as these
all-women groups are called, play at weddings and other important family celebrations,
beating out a series of complex rythms on the tar, a shallow drum with a single skin,
usually decorated with names, flowers and a crescent.
Goats' hooves and swaying hips combine to form the mangur, below, one of the most
original of the percussion instruments of the Gulf. Goats' hooves sewn on to a kind of
short skirt strike each other as the performer sways to music of a six-stringed lyre, the
tanboura, to produce an unusual and agreeable pattering sound.
Pied Piper of the Gulf charms all hearers with magical melodies coaxed from the surnai, a
double-reed oboe, below right. Surnai players have developed a technique of inhaling
through the nose while continuing to blow out through the mouth; this enables them to
play for long periods without rests or pauses to take breath.
30

31
