Twenty lucky ones with
enough to eat in the
world today some 100
million children under the
age of five suffer from
malnutrition.
by Fernando
Monckeberg Barros



Cradled in hunger
Half the world's children under six
are victims of malnutrition
THE care and protection of children
has always been a major preoccupa¬
tion of human society, and this
concern has found expression in the atten¬
tion lavished on children during the early
part of their lives. Since human beings are
born helpless and without defence, the
species is of necessity endowed with a
strong maternal instinct.
As man has progressed and as society
has become more complex, the need to
extend this care and protection to older
children has become apparent. With the
increase of knowledge it has become evi¬
dent that the social environment is a key
factor in the all round development of the
FERNANDO MONCKEBERG BARROS, Chilean pae¬
diatrician and former professor at the universities of
Chile and Harvard, is the author of a large number of
articles and books on problems of food and nutrition,
many of which, such as his Checkmate to Underdeve¬
lopment, have been published in English. He has served
on severe! Unicef and World Health Organization com¬
mittees and is a member of many Chilean, Latin Ameri¬
can and North American scientific societies.
child and in his or her future prospects as
an adult. It is not surprising, therefore,
that, as early as 1924, the "Rights of the
Child" were proclaimed in Geneva or that
later, in 1959, these rights were unani¬
mously adopted by the United Nations.
Principle no. 4 of the Declaration of the
Rights of the Child refers specifically to the
care and protection of the child and the
mother: "The child shall enjoy the benefits
of social security. He shall be entitled to
grow and develop in health; to this end
special care and protection shall be pro¬
vided both to him and to his mother, in¬
cluding adequate pre-natal and post-natal
care. The child shall have the right to ade¬
quate nutrition, housing, recreation and
medical services."
However, as we reach the twentieth
anniversary of the United Nations Declara¬
tion, it must be admitted that the rights of
the child are by no means fully exercised
and that for far too high a proportion of
children they remain no more than a decla¬
ration of principle.
The enormous amount of knowledge
acquired and applied over recent decades
has resulted in substantial social advances
from which children as well as adults have
benefited. During the seventeenth century,
for example, the child mortality rate in
Europe is estimated to have been in the
region of 500 per thousand; already by the
end of the nineteenth century this had been
reduced to 200 per thousand. Recent esti¬
mates fix the current world infant mortality
rate at 98 per thousand, although it is true
that this average figure conceals variations
in rates ranging from 10 per thousand in
some countries to 200 per thousand in
others.
Nevertheless, as a result of the tremen¬
dous population explosion that has occur¬
red during the twentieth century, there
have never before been so many children
suffering from poverty and malnutrition. It
is estimated that 500 million people in the
world today, most of them children, are
suffering from malnutrition and that a fur¬
ther 2,000 million are suffering from under- .
nourishment. I

y Research carried out in recent years indi¬
cates that a child can be at risk from malnu¬
trition even before birth and that the
growth of the child within the womb
depends upon the mother's state of nour¬
ishment. The outward indication of this
condition is a sub-normal birth-weight
(below two and a half kilos). Whilst in
industrialized countries only two or three
per cent of children are born under-weight,
in the developing countries the proportion
is between twenty and thirty per cent.
These figures do not refer to premature
infants but to those suffering from pre¬
natal malnutrition as a result of inadequate
nourishment of the mother.
Children born under-weight run a very
grave risk of illness and death. Among
those that survive, abnormalities of growth
and development have been noted. In
many cases the head is smaller than
average and psychomotor difficulties are
apparent.
Today, many children are born into an
unfavourable environment. Lack of ade¬
quate food delays both their physical and
their mental development and reduces their
resistance to disease.
The most recent studies show that lack
of food is not the only problem; other fac¬
tors, such as lack of affection and of men¬
tal and social stimulation, also have a nega¬
tive effect on the child's intellectual and
physical development. Families living in
poverty are affected by all these factors.
Thus poverty in itself, with all that it
implies, is a direct cause of psychomotor
retardation in the child.
The sombre, crushing, twilight world of
poverty provides no stimulation for the
child's curiosity or imagination. It is a world
from which everything bright and colourful
is banished and in which games and other
stimuli so necessary to the development of
the child's natural capacities are exceed¬
ingly rare. Furthermore, the parents' lan¬
guage ability is often limited and their chil¬
dren lack verbal stimulation. The ties bet¬
ween child and adult are weak and, in
general, there is little common family acti¬
vity. Love and understanding are reduced
to a minimum and the child feels perma¬
nently unprotected and insecure.
As well as retarding psychomotor deve¬
lopment, all this affects the child's persona¬
lity and results in a lack of self-esteem. In
conditions of poverty the family structure
usually becomes heavily distorted; the
father's image is debased or is non¬
existent. Thus, in the end, it is the crushing
weight of poverty which causes retardation
of the child's psychomotor development
and which leads finally to what might be
summed up as "society-induced/
biological" damage.
It is this damage which later will make it
difficult for the child to become a fully inte¬
grated, useful member of society. In Latin
America, for example, of every hundred
children who manage to embark on primary
education only ten complete it. There are
many possible causes for this high drop¬
out rate, but the most important is the
intellectual limitation which prevents so
many children from matching up to the
requirements of a normal education.
There are several degrees of underdeve¬
lopment. In some countries the situation is
desperate; in others a certain level of deve¬
lopment has been achieved. The poorest
countries have been defined as those in
which the annual income per head of the
population is less than three hundred dol¬
lars. These countries account for fifty-six
per cent of the population of the develo¬
ping world and include: Afghanistan, Ban¬
gladesh, Burma, Cameroon, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Guatemala, India, Madagascar,
Mali, Mozambique, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri
It can today be asserted that approxima¬
tely half the children of the world under the
age of six present some degree of malnutri¬
tion and that, as a result, their health and
the development of their overall genetic
potential is endangered. This is clear evi¬
dence that the proclaimed rights of children
remain, in reality, a dead letter.
For the child, the family unit forms a
micro-climate, an ecosystem which, when
all its different elements are in harmony,
provides the setting for balanced, integra¬
ted development. On the other hand, when
the ecosystem is not in equilibrium,
because basic needs cannot be met, the
effect is disastrous for the child and will
probably lead to irreparable damage. The
child's possibilities for development are
limited and the child becomes an easy prey
to illness or to early death.
Estimated numbers of children aged 0-4 years suffering from severe or moderate protein-calorie malnutrition
(PCM) in three regions of the world
Region
Latin America
^
Africa
1
Asia (excluding China
and J
Total
Severe PCM
700 000.
2 700 000
6000000
I
9400 000
I
Moderate PCM
9 000000
16000000
64000000
89000000
Total
9 700 000
18 700 000
70 000000
98400 000
Source : WHO Chronicle, No. 1 Vol 28, Jan 1974
Lanka, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda and
Upper Volta.
In these countries, the percentage of
children suffering from the ravages of
poverty is very high. Thus, for example,
between twenty-six and fifty-four per cent
of children under six years of age suffer
from malnutrition and almost all of them
are affected by undernutrition to a greater
or lesser degree. Almost all of them are
retarded in their physical development as
can be seen from the fact that they are
below average height for their age.
In the other developing countries, the
percentage of severe to moderate malnutri¬
tion varies from fifteen to twenty-five per
cent.
In the developing world, a very high per¬
centage of families is unable to satisfy basic
needs: housing, education, cultural needs,
health and nutrition.
All these basic needs are important, but
paramount among them is the need to eat.
Why do so many families fail to meet this
need? There may be many reasons, but the
root of the problem is neither ignorance nor
lack of access to adequate foodstuffs, but
that such families simply do not possess
sufficient means to obtain a healthy and
balanced diet.
Ignorance or cultural barriers may com¬
plicate matters further, but a simple mathe¬
matical calculation is enough to show that
10

in most cases malnutrition is a result of low
family income. In this situation it is always
the child who suffers most, for he depends
on other people to provide him with food
and is growing so quickly that he needs a
high level of nutrition.
Studies of the diet of different social
groups in poor countries show that there is
a close link between the income of the
family and the amount of calories it con¬
sumes. Quality of diet, consumption of cal¬
ories and animal protein are directly propor¬
tionate to the level of income.
In the social structure of underdevelop¬
ment, incomes are almost always unjustly
distributed; the lion's share tends to be
concentrated among a small segment of
the population. Even so, this is not the
main reason why lower income groups are
unable to get an adequate diet. In almost all
developing countries (except for the oil-
producing countries) the revenues simply
do not exist. Even if the national revenues
of these countries were equitably shared
out, it would only be an equitable distribu¬
tion of poverty.
In the United States in 1970 the average
annual outlay on food was just over six
hundred dollars per head, a figure much
higher than the total average per capita
income in almost all the developing coun¬
tries at that time. Even today over half the
population of the developing world have an
income under three hundred dollars a year.
The average United States citizen
spends 16.8 per cent of his income on
food. In Latin America and India, however,
incomes are low and a much higher propor¬
tion must be devoted to food: 64 per cent
in Latin America and over 84 per cent in
India. Even so, 46 per cent of Latin Ameri¬
cans and 78 per cent of Indians consume
less than the number of calories recom¬
mended, by FAO (the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations) and
WHO (the World Health Organization).
There is no way for the children of the
poor countries to enjoy their rights to the
full unless there is a substantial increase in
the gross national product of these coun¬
tries and unless steps are taken to distri¬
bute national income more equitably within
them. As long as poverty and misery per¬
sist, the rights of the child will be nothing
but a piece of rhetoric.
As far as the future is concerned, the
biggest question-mark is that which hangs
over the size of tomorrow's world popula¬
tion. According to United Nations fore¬
casts, demographic growth between now
and the year 2000 will run at an annual two
per cent, which means that world popula¬
tion will rise from 4,000 million to 6,257 mil¬
lion. Of this increase, only 250 million will
be in the industrially developed world;
2,000 million will be in the developing
countries.
According to FAO figures, world foodw
production is theoretically sufficient to pro- f

vide adequate nourishment for everyone on
earth. In practice, however, the popula¬
tions of the rich countries currently enjoy a
diet which is usually much more than capa¬
ble of meeting their basic needs, while the
diet available to the people of developing
countries is totally inadequate.
The world's cultivated land today
amounts to 1,400 million hectares, and this
area could be extended to 2,300 million
hectares. Most of this virgin land is in
Africa and Latin America.
The yield of land now being cultivated
could also be considerably increased, but
attempts to boost productivity should be
largely concentrated in the developing
countries since yields in the rich countries
are already high.
It has been estimated that some 700,000
million dollars must be invested in order to
double food production between now and
the end of the century. Most of this must
go to the developing countries, which will
require an average of 32,000 million dollars
a year. They will be unable to find this out
of their own pockets, and the money will
have to come from the industrialized world.
The figure may seem high, but it is only
one-tenth of the world's current annual
expenditure on arms.
In the poor countries, insufficient food
output is only one aspect of a serious social
and economic problem whose complexity
varies from country to country. A variety of
conditions and problems are found in the
developing world. Some developing coun¬
tries are overpopulated, whereas in others
there is room for population growth. Some
dispose of abundant and unexploited
resources, others have practically none. In
some poverty and malnutrition are despera¬
tely serious problems, while others are in a
stage of "intermediate" development.
Some have a subsistence economy, others
have already embarked on industrialization.
In some the population is overwhelmingly
rural, in others the number of town- and
city-dwellers is mounting rapidly. Each
country has different prospects for the
future.
But whatever their situation, they all
need large-scale capital investment and
new technologies. The industrially develo¬
ped countries could provide this aid, but so
far they have been extremely reluctant to
loosen their purse-strings. Those who pos¬
sess an advanced technology do not find it
easy to give it away; on the contrary, they
use their know-how as an effective new
instrument for boosting profits.
And so if all the world's children do not
yet enjoy the "Rights of the Child", it is not
for lack of human ingenuity but because
mankind is not yet fully determined to fight
for the cause. The profound humanitarian
impulse which the task requires has not yet
been born. The necessary generosity and
willingness to make sacrifices for others
still do not exist. Is it too much to ask that
some give up a modicum of their comfort
so that the quality of life of others may be
improved?
In 1963 the General Assembly of the Uni¬
ted Nations recommended that the indus¬
trialized countries devote at least one per
cent of their gross national product to
helping the developing countries. Fifteen
years have gone by and this paltry sacrifice
is still far from a reality. None of the rich
countries is yet committed to devoting this
small proportion of their GNP to develop¬
ment aid.
Of course, this spirit of humanitarian
solidarity should not be confined to the
international scene; it should also infuse
developing countries where the few live off
the fat of the land at the expense of the
many who endure wretched living condi¬
tions.
History provides abundant examples of
mankind's immense capacity for solving
problems which once seemed insurmoun¬
table. Will mankind take up this challenge
and respond to this crisis of our times?
Today when the very existence of our spe¬
cies is threatened, the time has come to
transform hopes into realities.
Femando Monckeberg Barros

"The little girl was scared to light the firecracker. Her brother was trying to give a helping
hand", ran the photographer's description of the scene below. Firework-time is only one of
many occasions when children must act with the utmost care. Every year many thousands
of young people die or are maimed in fires or explosions, on the roads, from drowning and
from accidents in the home. Photo is a prize-winning entry in a 1978 photo contest on the
theme of "Children of Asia" organized by the Asian Cultural Centre for Unesco in
collaboration with the Japanese National Commission for Unesco and several private
organizations in Japan.
Photo © Ee Hon Teck, Singapore
