If all the children in the world
under the age of fourteen were to
stand one on another's shoulders
they would form a column
stretching about three and a half
times the mean distance from the
earth to the moon.
Drawing © Sophie and David Brabyn, aged 7
THE International Year of the Child is
not only an occasion to consider the
needs of children in a world all too
full of violence, hunger and social depriv¬
ation, it is also an occasion to note the
many things that children and young peo¬
ple contribute to the lives of adults their
imagination, their sensitivity, their capacity
for work and play and invention. It is time
to celebrate their presence on the great
wheel of life along which we all move, and
their partnership in creating the world we
live in.
In the eyes of the law, particularly in the
Western world, persons remain "children"
until they reach the legal age of majority.
Only then do they have full rights of con¬
tract and social choice. There is a great
contrast between what children really do in
the world, and what the law permits. Most
adults, even those that are parents, are
largely unaware of this contradiction. In
what follows the young are presented as
thinkers and doers, as shapers of society.
Ageism is a new word in the new human
rights vocabulary. Unesco documents
about youth sometimes use the term "anti-
youth racialism," to refer to the hostility
toward youth which is expressed both in
public policy and private utterance.



The silenced
Two thousand million children
in search of their rights
by Elise Boulding
elderly to do what they want them to do
without using force. The alternative rela¬
tionship of mutual respect and mutual sup¬
port for continued growth throughout life
is all too rarely seen.
Most Western adults would not dare to
talk to their peers the way they talk to chil¬
dren. Nor would they accept the ¡nterrup-
ELISE BOULDING, U.S. sociologist, is secretary of
the Programme Advisory Council of the United Nations
University's Human and Social Development Pro¬
gramme. She has carried out many transnational stu¬
dies on conflict and peace, development, family life and
women in society and is the author of The Underside of
History: A View of Women through Time, a study of
women's social, economic and political roles over four
millennia. Her study Children's Rights and the Wheel of
Life, written especially for the International Year of the
Child, will be published later this year by Transaction
Press, New Brunswick, New Jersey, U.S.A.
tions, corrections, demands for attentive-
ness and instant displays of affection that
children accept as a matter of course.
The theme of all human rights cove¬
nants, and the motif of all liberation move¬
ments, is participation in the shaping of
one's own life and that of the society
around one, and reasonable access to the
resources that will make that participation
possible. In the case of children, either it is
true that they are ignorant and incapable of
significant social participation, and must be
segregated from the adult world until the
age of majority, or they are developing their
ability to participate from early childhood
and should be involved in decision-making
in the family and public spheres to an
extent determined by their interest and abi-

"Ageism" is a better term because it covers
both ends of the age spectrum. Hostility
toward the elderly receives more guarded
expression, but it too is present. Ageism is
the denial of certain rights and responsibili¬
ties to persons simply because of their age.
Emphasizing the "responsibility" compo¬
nent of the word rights helps us to see how
inappropriate it is to conceive of rights as
offering only protection. Even the most
democratic society has strong authoritarian
elements, particularly when it is wearing its
protective face. The individual to be pro¬
tected has no option but to receive that
protection when and how the protecting
institutions of a society decree. As the
Unesco 1972 Report on Rights and Res¬
ponsibilities of Youth says, "Seen in this
light, the responsibilities of young people,
instead of meaning an opportunity for the
young to take the initiative in actions which
concern them and which ultimately con¬
cern society as a whole, seem more like
duties imposed on them by adult
society the duty of submission to the
authority of the family, the community or
the State; the duty to receive education
devised in the main by adults or not
receive it if they belong to underprivileged
social groups; the duty to work, often at an
early age and under harsh conditions, or,
conversely, to be the first to be affected by
unemployment; the duty, lastly, to respect
a world order established independently of
them and which is becoming more and
more alien to them."
In striking at the roots of ageism we
strike at the drive to dominate, to mould
others. Authority, power, statuswords
we could not do without in describing
modern social organization turn sour
under examination when we consider
parent-child relations, or adult-elderly rela¬
tions. Authority is the power of people in
their middle years to get children and the
Photo © Ed van der Elsken, Edam, The Netherlands
Children make up over fifty per cent
of the population of the world, yet
they have little say even in the
ordering of their own lives. During
the International Year of the Child,
the attention of the world will be
focused on this "silenced majority" ir
an attempt to ensure worldwide
compliance with the articles of the
United Nations Declaration of the
Rights of the Child (see page 18).
lity. If the latter is true, some substantial
changes in the current United Nations
Declaration of the Rights of the Child, and
in associated concepts of the rights and
responsibilities of children in families and
communities will be required, both in cus¬
tom and in law.
More than that, some substantial
changes in our conception of society and
the civic order will also be required. Since
children represent well over fifty per cent of
the world's population at present, and are
completely excluded from the reporting,
evaluating and policy-making processes of
every society, an opening up of these pro¬
cesses to all young persons able to express
interest and concern, of whatever age,
would in the long run represent a revolu
tion of unimaginable proportions in every
country in the world, to say nothing of the
United Nations itself.
The Year of the Child can be the occa¬
sion for a basic rethinking of personhood
and human rights because it points to the
only minority human condition that is uni¬
versally experienced, childhood, and the
only human process that is universally
experienced, aging. Here is an opportunity
for every individual to link, in imagination,
his or her own personal life span with those
of the young and old among us today, to
re-experience and rethink the familiar old
dominance patterns, and see afresh what
they mean in terms of stunted physical,
social and spiritual growth for everyone.
The same exercises of power that limit
5

y personhood also support institutions and
processes of social and economic injustice.
Children, adults and elderly alike fall sick,
go hungry, die prematurely as a result of
war, disease and hunger, because
dominance/submission, centre/periphery,
haves/ have-nots struggles are played out
within and between nations as well as in
families and local communities. The young
and the old belong to the world's periphery
and they are always the first to go hungry,
especially if they are poor; and most of the
world's poor are either very young or very
old.
The arena of public policy is both the
first and the last place to look for signifi¬
cant social change toward a more just
social order. If "United Nations Years"
mean anything, they mean an opportunity
to re-examine ends and means with regard
to policy issues. The International Year of
the Child offers policy-makers a fresh place
to start with issues of human welfare: at
the point where child, adult and local com¬
munity relationships intersect. A change in
social attitudes toward children would
affect every nook and cranny of society,
and every person in it.
Adult-child relationships offer a critical
intervention point for breaking the vicious
circle of dominance behaviour that per¬
vades public and international life. These
patterns are laid down in the home every
day through the inappropriate exercise of
power, invisibly interwoven with the acts
of human caring that sustain the institution
of the family as a continuously viable set¬
ting for human growth. We may be unne¬
cessarily sabotaging our present and our
children's future by being blind to the
inconsistencies and irrationalities of the
relations between adults and children in

family and community in this century.
Mass media programmes about the right to
a happy and secure childhood, and to a
happy and secure retirement, are no substi¬
tute for the actual experience of frank and
honest confrontation between generations
when perceptions, needs and interests dif¬
fer, in a context of mutual acceptance of
responsibility for each other. Neither can
special feeding, health and education pro¬
grammes undertaken for children be a
substitute for joint community projects car¬
ried out by adults and children together, in
which the capacity of the young to contri¬
bute to the welfare of all receives full reco¬
gnition.
We pride ourselves in the West on
having applied the findings of a century of
child development research to the handling
of infants, children and youth. We have
structured their environments, designed
their toys and learning materials, analyzed
their readiness to receive teaching of
varying degrees of complexity. We are the
potters, they are the clay. The friends of
children in every age have always intuitively
known that there was more to it than that.
New findings are emerging from child
development laboratories that point to an
autonomous self-organized learning pro¬
cess that begins with birth and can be
easily interfered with by adults who treat
the newborn as a blind and cuddly bit of
protoplasm. Observant workers with pre¬
school children are noting the self-
organizing nature of their learning, the
complexity of judgements about body
movements in time and space that they can
develop when not over-organized in their
activity, the sensitive mutual aid that goes
on among them when they are left free to
solve their own problems. We are also
Article 9 of the Declaration of the
Rights of the Child declares: "...The
child shall not be admitted to
employment before an appropriate
minimum age; he shall in no case
be caused or permitted to engage
in any occupation or employment
which would prejudice his health or
education, or interfere with his
physical, mental or moral
development." Official figures for
children under fifteen in the labour
force are relatively low, but they
represent only the tip of the
Iceberg; many children work
unrecorded, whether for their own
parents or as paid labourers,
particularly in the world's rural
areas where they often work in the
fields or help with the housework.
In urban areas the children of the
poor comb the streets in search of
food and odd jobs. t «%**>v^.t.-.

k rediscovering how children create the
world anew through play. The role of this
most spontaneous of human activities in
the continuous re-creation of society by its
youngest members, is perhaps the major
discovery of the twentieth century.
If we go back to the pre-industrial era in
Europe, and to less industrialized Third
World countries today, we can see people
aged from ten to twelve and over functio¬
ning as adults with full responsibility for
themselves and contributing to the econo¬
mic welfare of family and workplace. The
film. Invention of the Adolescent, pro¬
duced by the Canadian Broadcasting Corp¬
oration in 1970, documents the transition
from pre-industrial to post-industrial
society for children of the first world, and
shows how recent and contrived is our
¡mage of the adolescent as immature and
irresponsible.
At present, adults professionally concer¬
ned with children are somewhat confused
about what position they should take in
regard to child labour. Much of the spirit of
protection that we see in the 1970s stems
from the necessary drive to protect children
from the abuses of an earlier era of the
industrial revolution. Today's generation of
middle-class children in the urban areas of
both the more and less industrialized coun¬
tries are told to run and play, or to study
more. The children of the poor comb the
streets for odd jobs or adventure. Most of
these children feel trapped, whether in the
streets, in the playroom or in the school¬
room, and would love to have their own
job. Their despair is variously exhibited in
high frequencies of suicide, or drug and
alchohol use, and in rising school drop-out
rates.
Why this despair? Play is an empty word
in the absence of free spaces where a child
can shape her environment to suit her
needs and desires. A recent Unesco study
of urban children in different world regions
by Kevin Lynch, Growing Up in Cities,
brings this out with startling clarity.
The situation is different in the country¬
side. In the world's rural areas most chil¬
dren are expected to be at work by ten or
twelve years of age. In fact, they are fre¬
quently at work from the age of five. Boys
work in the fields, girls help with younger
children, and help in household and field
work also. They have always done so, from
earliest times. With urbanization, working
conditions become harderwhether in tra¬
ditional settlements or modern cities. In the
era of the 1970s, when a high social value is
set on keeping children in school, there is
little incentive to report child labour, and
most children work unrecorded, whether
for their own parents or as wage labourers.
If there has been confusion about poli¬
cies regarding children and youth in the
labour force, there has never been any con¬
fusion about policies regarding military ser¬
vice of young persons. Minors have always
been put into armies, and there have been
many teenage military heroes in history. A
substantial part of the burden of national
defence in the modern world therefore
rests on the shoulders of youth under
twenty-one.
We are so accustomed to legal and social
rhetoric about protecting minors that we
forget that a lot of the work of rearing and
protecting the young is done by persons
who are themselves still minors. In 1976,
delegates from thirty-nine countries atten¬
ded a Conference held in the U.S.A. on
Right, a young girl lavishes her
affection on something that was
once a doll. Almost thirteen
million of the sixty million
women who had babies in 1975
became mothers before they
became adults. Not only is the
adolescent mother physically at
risk, she also faces enormous
social and legal handicaps.
Unmarried teenage mothers and
their children. In particular, are
among the most disadvantaged
categories of minors despite the
fact that the first article of the
Declaration of the Rights of the
Child calls for equal rights for all
children regardless of the
circumstances of their birth.
adolescent fertility. According to the Con¬
ference report, entitled Eleven Million Teen¬
agers, close to 13 million of the 60 million
women who became mothers in 1975
became parents before they became
adults. Early child-bearing is increasing
everywhere, is emerging as a serious pro¬
blem in many countries, and has reached
alarming levels in others where it is associa¬
ted with serious health, socio-economic
and demographic implications for young
women, young men, their offspring, and,
indeed, for the whole society.
One significant aspect of teenage preg¬
nancy is that it is not simply a phenomenon
of less industrialized countries, but of the
most industrialized countries, with the Uni¬
ted States a leading producer of teen¬
age child-bearers. Childbearing before the
age of twenty involves high risk to the
mother, and considerably lowered chances
of survival for the infant. Yet in many coun¬
tries large numbers of teenage girls take
these risks, at least in part because their
status as minors prevents them from gain¬
ing access to the preventive measures they
CONTINUED PAGE 34
^¡r ,-f"
F ^M^M^MwMmL
ML
f
¡Nelson©Magnum,P Is
1^ 1
jv
A^i
c
.c
o
->
o
o
.Ci^H
8

Two thousand million children
Continued from page 8
could employ if they knew about them. In
no society does minority status make
sexual activity inaccessible, whatever the
official norms might be.
The onset of fertility ranges from the age
of ten to the mid-teens. One of the trage¬
dies for girl children is that while the majo¬
rity of them live in countries where family
planning services are available and abortion
is legal under certain conditions, the ten-
to-fifteen year olds who are at risk of preg¬
nancy almost never have access to these
services.
The responsibilities of the teenage mar¬
ried woman who is also a mother may be
light compared to the responsibilities of the
teenage unmarried mother. A majority of
these young women keep their babies, and
have their lives programmed for them in
terms of the double task of working to sup¬
port the mother-child household, and of
being sole parent to the child. Economic
support from the father, even if paternal
filiation is legally established, is rare.
Unwed adolescent and teenage mothers
and their illegitimate offspring are among

the most disadvantaged categories of
minors. While the United Nations Declara¬
tion of the Rights of the Child guarantees
whatever rights there are to all children
regardless of birth, in fact only twenty-two
countries recognize one status for all chil¬
dren whatever their circumstances of birth.
In all the rest, both the unwed mothers and
their illegitimate children carry lifelong
handicaps.
In the industrialized countries, the
increase in the number of school years has
brought about a prolongation of childhood
and of the child's dependence. Conse¬
quently adults have gradually come to for¬
get the roles that children and youth have
always played in social change. And yet the
young are everywhere at work, helping to
create alternative structures in community-
based movements the free schools, the
people's clinics, the refuges for children
who fear to live with their parents. The time
has come when we must cease to under¬
estimate their competence and skills.
Elisa Boulding
