Science and technology:
the development dilemma
by Ibrahim Helmi Abdel Rahman
CAN the developing countries take
advantage of available technology to
further their own development along
lines suited to their needs? This important
but so far unresolved question was the
underlying theme of the United Nations
Conference on Science and Technology for
Development, held in Vienna from 20 to 31
August 1979.
During the early 1950's, development
economists hoped that the latecomers to
technological advance would so to speak
ride on the bandwagon of technology and
achieve accelerated development without
paying the high costs of research or having
to run the risks of innovation. As it turned
out in practice, this hope was not universally
nor adequately realized. To many it seemed
that the developing countries were, on the
contrary, being crushed under the wheels of
the technology bandwagon. Even in those
cases where technology was successfully
transferred and applied in some developing
countries, the development which resulted
seemed to be merely an extension of
Western patterns and not really attuned to
the prevailing social and cultural conditions.
So the question remains with us and the
delegations that flocked to Vienna have
gone back home to reconsider policies, pro¬
grammes and procedures of technological
developments and applications. Some
general principles seem to have been re¬
asserted by the Vienna conference. These
include the need to strengthen the scientific
and technological capacities of the develop¬
ing countries and to restructure the existing
patterns of international scientific and
technological relations. The conference did
not, however, reach complete agreement
about two major aspects of the problem: the
role of transnational enterprises, and the
conditions of technology acquisition and
transfer agreements; these will continue to
be the subject of further discussion and con¬
flicting claims in many forums. Agreement
was achieved on strengthening the role of
the United Nations system in the field of
science and technology and on a modest ex¬
pansion of voluntary contributions to sup¬
port international co-operation.
Can we, then, expect that the developing
countries will be more successful in the
coming years in grasping the elusive new
technology, without themselves being
caught in its web? One critically relevant fac¬
tor is that of the integration of technology
and development in the developing coun¬
tries. In the past, because of certain short¬
comings of their own as well as cir¬
cumstances imposed upon them, the
developing countries have handled science,
technology and development almost as
three separate, independent, partial
systems; yet the successful development of
technology and its application, in any

Science and technology lie at
the very heart of development,
but harnessing them rationally
and equitably is turning out to
be much harder than it once
seemed. Only a matter of years
ago, few foresaw the limitations
and constraints on the rapid
transfer of science and
technology from the
industrialized countries to the
developing world. Among the
most urgent challenges today
are the linking of scientific
activities to technologies that
best serve development
priorities and the promotion of
technological capabilities within
each country as a step towards
real autonomy in decision¬
making. Here, two examples of
international co-operation in the
late 1970s. Dome (left) of an
Indian atomic energy
establishment near Bombay
houses a nuclear reactor built
with Canadian collaboration.
Receiving station (opposite
page) at Assuan, Egypt, part of
a communications network
using the "Symphonie" satellite
developed by France and the
Federal Republic of Germany.
Several other developing
countries have used
"Symphonie" for educational TV
and the development of their
communications facilities.
society needs a process of integration and
harmonization between these three closely
interrelated systems.
Science, which is the search for
knowledge through the logic of observation,
inference, deduction and experimentation,
is increasingly becoming the foundation and
origin of many technologies. Scientific
endeavour is not aimed at application and
scientific efforts are judged successful and
become accepted (but not necessarily for
ever uncontested) on the basis of their own
logic of observation and deduction and not
on the basis of the use made of them. Scien¬
tific studies are explorative and con¬
templative and scientists must be left free to
widen the frontiers of human knowledge,
and open new paths to the unknown,
whether in the exploration of the innermost
structure of matter or the widest reaches of
the space-time continuum. The theories of
science are logical structures invented by
science as temporary "scaffolds" to build
knowledge. They are dispensable, and may
eventually be replaced by others. Science
attempts to match theories to observations,
and predict phenomena from theories and k
previous observations. Y

Technology, on the other hand, is the
' knowledge of "how" to get things done.
Technology is older than science and just as
not all science has practical technological
application, so not all technology has a
known scientific basis. Domestication of
animals, fishing, hunting, fire, agriculture,
metal implements are all very ancient
technologies, which man acquired, by trial,
error, and inventiveness, centuries before
acquiring the scientific basis of animal
husbandry, plant breeding, heat and fric-
tional energy and modern metallurgy.
Technology, therefore, is acquired through
practice and also even by chance, develop¬
ing through trial and error. Its success can
only be judged by application and use.
Technology as knowledge does not lead
to application unless certain other factors
are present, which in the modern language
of economics are called entrepreneurship
and factors of production. The water-wheel
and the windmill, and even the steam-
rotator-jet, were all known in their rudimen¬
tary form long before the specific conditions
arose in which they could be fully applied
and developed. Thousands of "inventions"
are patented every year, but only a few of
them find their way to application. Many
steps are needed to move a piece of
"technology information" from the stage of
knowledge to the stage of production,
which will satisfy the economic and social
criteria of application, namely profitability
and use by a client. The proof of the "pud¬
ding" of technology is in the "eating" by a
customer.
In certain cases the customer is ready to
try all possible new ideas irrespective of
cost. This is the case of war, hence the
association, quite logical, between military
expenditure and the surge of innovations.
Because of this association, technology has
mistakenly been considered to be evil in
itself.
Technology was, and still is, transferred
through the movement of men and goods.
The necessary conditions and factors of
useful application cannot however be
transferred from one place to another.
Hence the obvious, almost trivial, observa¬
tion, that the mere transfer of knowledge or
know-how does not by itself ensure suc¬
cessful application. It is easy then to ap¬
preciate the difficulty of achieving
technological advance in a country where
there is no base of previous experience, nor
the conditions and factors for successful ap¬
plication.
But this is exactly what the developing
countries are trying to do, and what the ad¬
vanced countries are advising them to do.
Much modern technology information is
openly available, and specific technologies,
protected by patent, can be transferred at a
price. The real difficulties are at the receiving
end, namely in the developing countries,
which do not have the technological capaci¬
ty to apply the open knowledge, nor to app¬
ly the know-how bought from outside, even
when it is fairly priced and properly selected.
This is almost a typical "chicken and egg"
situation, which requires a careful manipula¬
tion, to build up the technological capacity
gradually and selectively by interlocking it in
stages with economic activities of design
and production. This is a difficult and
delicate operation, without which
technology slips through the fingers of the
developing countries whenever they try to
seize it.
Fourteen West African nations,
almost all of which are today
rice importers, are taking part in
a co-operative agricultural
research and training project to
make themselves self-sufficient
in rice by the 1980s. Right, seed
researcher at the University of
Liberia's experimental farm sorts
samples of rice. Lower photo,
baby son of a rice merchant at
Cotonou market, Dahomey, in
an African region where rice and
manioc form the staple diet.
Photo Richard Saunders © International
Communication Agency, USA
The brain-drain is an example of how
elusive technology can be. A developing
country attempts to build a strong and
qualified "human base" of highly educated
personnel in the different branches of
science and technology. But, once
qualified, many of the trainees fail to find
satisfying jobs corresponding to their voca¬
tion and training. The level of remuneration
and availability of equipment and facilities
are such that they are lured back to their
training grounds abroad or shift to ad¬
ministrative or other jobs for which their
sophisticated training is unnecessary. Those
who stay in universities and local research
institutes are forced to lower the standards
of their scientific activities. Herein lies the
paradox you cannot get science and
technology moving in a developing country
without trained personnel, and you cannot
keep those persons, unless you have a
strong science and technology set-up.
Another example is the establishment of
research institutes. In many instances a start
is made with foreign imported equipment,
foreign personnel, and problems not
specifically pertinent to the local environ¬
ment. Attempts are made to identify pro
blems of local relevance to agriculture, in¬
dustry, housing and other branches. The in¬
dustry and business communities in princi¬
ple would like to benefit from the national
research and development centres, but they
find them, naturally, rather inadequate to
handle the current jobs of designing an in¬
dustrial process, or building large bridges
and dams. Business and industry invariably
play safe by seeking the experience of inter¬
national experts and firms. By-passed in this
way time after time, the national institutes
never gain enough experience to mature;-
they become remote from their own
economic and industrial community.
It should be added that the holders of
technology are not concerned with
strengthening the local technological base in
a country. They do not object to it being
done, but they cannot be expected to pay
for it. Their concern is to strike a financial
deal, which, because of ignorance or lack of
bargaining power, may include many restric¬
tive clauses, which inhibit the full benefits
accruing to the recipient country.
The constituent components of a viable
technology system include trained person¬
nel at different levels, especially technicians,

Brazil and Paraguay are collaborating in the
construction of the world's biggest
hydroelectric plant, the Itaipu dam on the
Parana River which forms the frontier
between the two countries. Some twenty-
eight thousand persons are working on this
gigantic project which when completed
should supply electricity to the whole of
Paraguay as well as consumer centres in
southern and southeastern Brazil. Aerial
photo below shows man-made diversion
channel (lower part of photo) with the
control structure and sluicegates.
Photo © Itaipu Binacional, Brazil
research equipment and institutes, libraries
and reference facilities, scientific and
technological publications and discussion
forums, pilot and semi-industrial plants,
patents and technology transfer rules and
regulations, design and consulting services,
and appropriate financing and management
capacities. Those components are all
necessary for a healthy scientific and
technological structure, but they need to be
integrated into a combined system that
works without much and repeated outside
injection and stimulation. The building of
each component separately would be similar
to bringing together components of a clock
mechanism. The pieces of such a
mechanism are all essential, but they only
tick if put to work together.
An integrated technology system does
not become completely viable, however,
unless it is interlocked with the productive
and investment sector. It is only through the
cycle of production, marketing, profit and
saving, then re-investment, that innovations
are likely to be injected into the economic
system, and find later, directly and indirect¬
ly, the necessary financial and other support
for growth and advance.
Developing countries tend to over-invest
in equipment and under-invest in training,
management and soft technology. The in¬
itial steps of co-operation and association
between the integrated technology system
and industry should thus include the
development of soft technology to increase
productivity using human skills, with better
selection of less equipment and much im¬
proved maintenance and skills.
Increasing co-operation between
technologists and research workers on the
one hand, and entrepreneurs and business
managers on the other hand, can thus form
a starting point for a viable development ac¬
tivity. After a number of years, this co¬
operation would lead to a self-sustaining ad¬
vance, which would generate new
technology, some of which could be ex¬
ported to other developing countries. Thus
technology takes hold in the society.
The developing countries should
therefore be selective, choosing a small
number of key sectors or problems, to be
adopted as starting points for technological
development. Integrative and intensive ap¬
proaches should be adopted to ensure the
effective and gradual interlocking between
technology and production in these
specifically selected areas. ¿
Statistically speaking, the developing
countries spend on research and develop¬
ment 10 times less per capita than is spent
by the advanced countries. The developing
countries, in many cases, distribute these
limited resources on a very wide front of
sectors and problems, hence the lack of ef¬
fectiveness. With the selective and in¬
tegrated approach, the developing countries
are likely to be able adequately to finance
technology development and application in
a number of key sectors, for which they can
attain the minimum threshold of finance and
concentration of resources for effec¬
tiveness.
Three examples seem to support this
argument. The first is the case of trans¬
national enterprises, which succeed
technologically and economically in most
cases in establishing viable production units
in different branches in developing coun¬
tries. There is of course the higher bargain¬
ing and manipulative power of such enter¬
prises, but there is also the political and ad¬
ministrative power of the State with which w
they have to come to terms. The point that Y
7

In Malaysia a government-sponsored
research and development programme
concerned with rubber production and
processing has helped maintain the
competitiveness of natural rubber in the
face of a strong challenge from synthetic
materials. Malaysian rubber technology is
now so advanced that Malaysian specialists
have been advising other countries on
rubber production. Right, rubber
processing in a Malaysian factory.
concerns us here is the integrative aspect of
the activities of the transnationals, in which
they combine technology, capital manage¬
ment, marketing and skills and put them all
together under one control, hence realizing,
for their own objectives, the successful in¬
tegration and interlocking of technology and
production.
The second example is the colonial ex¬
ploitation system, by which agriculture and
mineral raw-material production in a
dependency or a colony was carefully plann¬
ed and supported to integrate with the in¬
dustry at the metropolitan base, using the
most modern techniques of organization, ir¬
rigation selection, grading, standardization,
inspection and supervision. Such highly ar¬
ticulated systems existed in connexion with
plantations and industrial enclaves, as well
as in the intricate systems of trading cor¬
porations and strict quality control
mechanisms, for the raw materials destined
for export, but not for the productive sec¬
tors as a whole.
The third, and perhaps the most obvious
example, is the procedure by which
technology has developed, and is develop¬
ing, in the advanced countries. It goes
through a number of steps almost identical
to the two main proposals mentioned
above, namely technology integration and
interlocking with production and economic
activities. For historical reasons, the institu¬
tions that take part in those cyclic sets of ac¬
tion have grown rather autonomously in the
Western countries, but in a more planned
manner and according to special designs in
the centrally planned economies and in
Japan.
A new surge of technological advances is
in the offing in the advanced countries, with
vitally important implications for the
developing countries. The latter cannot af¬
ford to lose any more time in building their
technological capacities, to deal with their
accumulated problems of population,
unemployment, poverty, and social change,
and in addition face the implication of the
advancing technologies of the industrialized
countries. Hence the importance of making
doubly sure that technology will not slip
again from their hands.
The development objectives in the poor
countries (as well as in the industrialized
countries) are not simply the numerical in¬
crease of goods and services available to the
citizens. There is the need for greater equity
and better income distribution, which is a
form of economic democracy necessary for
social stability and greater participation.
8
New priorities for the types of goods and
services to be produced are emerging. In the
advanced countries greater concern for the
environment and quality of life, and even¬
tually, it is to be hoped, diversion from
escalating military expenditures, are impor¬
tant factors shaping future demand. In addi¬
tion the slow population increase, longer life
expectancy and the need to escape physical¬
ly and culturally from the oppressive unifor¬
mity of modern factories and hustling urban
megacities, will move technology towards
new phases.
In the developing countries, on the other
hand, there will be more insistence on pro¬
viding the basic human needs for the in¬
creasing populations in which the number in
the "youth" age group will be multiplied two
to three times by the end of the century.
Considerable political and economic
changes will be required to shift the
priorities of production towards the more
essential services and goods, and to create
gainful employment for the billions of young
people in the working age bracket, especial¬
ly in the heavily populated countries of Asia,
and the least developed countries, which are
mostly in Africa.
The demand structure and the social
priorities are thus expected to undergo con¬
siderable changes in all countries in the next
two decades. Technology and production
capacities will have to meet these changes..
Most of the new technology will be still
generated in the advanced countries, and
will be directed in the first place to solving
their specific problems. The developing
countries will therefore have to develop their
own technologies to the greatest extent
possible and to supplement them by careful¬
ly selected and considerably adapted
technology from the outside.
The patterns of development, the social
priorities for production, the cultural iden¬
tities and value systems are all sources of
guidance and re-orientation of those com¬
plex processes of technology generation,
acquisition and application in the developing

In 1975 Brazil launched an ambitious
programme to produce alcohol from
fermented sugar cane for use as motor
fuel, either in a blend as "gasohol" or by
itself. The target is to meet one-fifth of the
country's automotive fuel requirements
with alcohol by 1980, thus reducing
dependence on imported petroleum. Brazil
is now regarded as a world leader in this
technology. Existing vehicles can run on
gasohol without engine modifications, and
several countries are now engaged in
research into the feasibility of vehicles
fuelled by pure alcohol (below).
Countries of the Andean Pact, formed in
1969 to harmonize the economic and
technological policies of its members
(Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and
Venezuela) have strongly criticized the way
in which existing technological transfer and
patent licensing policies have increased the
dependence of the developing on the
industrialized world. To increase control
over the development and use of
technology in their own countries, they
have launched a number of joint research
programmes. One of the first was to
improve techniques for copper production
(bottom photo) a major source of revenue for
Peru, Bolivia and Chile (a member of the
Pact until 1975).
Photo Stoppelman © Rapho, Paris
countries. For these purposes endogenous
technological capacities will have to be
created, in an integrated and dynamic man¬
ner, otherwise the developing countries will
run the risk of being crushed again under the
heavy wheels of the new technologies. B
IBRAHIM HELMI ABDEL-RAHMAN, of
Egypt, was the first Executive Director of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organiza¬
tion (UNIDO) from 1967 to 1974, and his
country's Minister of Planning and Administrative
Reform in 1975- 1976. He is now senior adviser to
the Prime Minister of Egypt. His long association
with Unesco goes back to 1947 when he was con¬
cerned with the establishment of the Unesco
Science Co-operation Office for the Middle East
(now the Regional Office for Science and
Technology in the Arab States). This article
draws on material submitted officially as a docu¬
ment to the United Nations Conference on
Science and Technology for Development, held
in Vienna in August 1979.
Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris
