Sundiata and Mansa Musa
Architects of Mali's
golden empire
by Djibril Tamsir Niane
THE Manding historical tradition as
taught by the griots forms a corpus
centred on the character of Sun¬
diata, founder of the Empire of Mali. Yet it
is probable that if Ibn Battuta, in 1353, and
Ibn Khaldun, in 1376, had not mentioned
the great conqueror in their writings,
classical historians would have gone on
regarding Sundiata as a mythical or legen¬
dary ancestor, so great is the part at¬
tributed to him by oral tradition in the
history of Manding or Mali.
History relates that Nare Fa Maghan,
king of the Mandingo (1210-1230), had
several wives, one of whom was called
Sogolon Conde. She gave birth to a sickly
child who did not walk until after the age of
ten. This child was named Sundiata.
Because of his infirmity, his life was spared
by Sumaguru, king of the neighbouring
Soso people, when he overran Manding.
Tradition has it that, resolved to succour
his country, Sundiata called for an iron bar
with which to hoist himself to his feet, but
the bar bent i-nder his weight. A member
of his entourage cried out: "Give him his
father's sceptre to lean on", and with the
aid of this royal symbol Sundiata rose to his
feet.
But the harsh rule of Sumaguru con¬
tinued and Sundiata went into exile. He
settled at Mema where a delegation from
the Mandingo clans called on him to lead
the revolt against Sumaguru. At Kirina,
between Bowako and Kangaba, on the left
bank of the River Niger, the rebels led by
Sundiata defeated Sumaguru thus laying
the foundations of the great Empire of
Mali.
Manding tradition attributes to the
young victor of Kirina the codification of
the customs and prohibitions which still
DJIBRIL TAMSIR NIANE, of Senegal, is
Director-General of the L.S. Senghor Founda¬
tion, Dakar. He is the author of Histoire de l'Afri¬
que de l'Ouest au Temps des Grands Empires du
11« au 16« Siècle (History of West Africa in the
Time of the Great Empires of the 11th to the 16th
Century), as well ofa number ofstudies on Man¬
dingo oral traditions. He is editor of Volume IV .
(Africa from the 12th to the 16th Century) ofThe
General History of Africa, now in preparation
under the auspices of Unesco.
govern relations between the Mandingo
clans and their relations with the other
clans of West Africa. Many things have
been ascribed to this African "Alexander"
which belong to a much later date. But the
main outlines of the Constitution and the
administrative structures are to a large ex¬
tent the work of Sundiata.
According to tradition it was at Kurukan
Fuga that the Gbara or Great Assembly
took place at which Sundiata was solemnly
proclaimed Emperor, King of Kings. Each
ally was proclaimed king or governor
(Farm) of his territory. In fact, only the
chiefs of Mema and Wagadu bore the title
of king.
The Assembly decreed that the Emperor
must always be chosen from the line of
Sundiata, that the princes must always
choose their first wife from among the
Conde. clan (in memory of the happy mar¬
riage of Sundiata's parents Nare Fa
Maghan and Sogolon Conde), and that in
accordance with ancient tradition, the suc¬
cession was to be fratrilinear. The Mansa
was the supreme judge, the patriarch, the
"father of all his subjects", whence the for¬
mula "M'Fa Mansa" (king, my father) for
addressing the king.
The Malinke (Mandingo) and the allies
were divided into sixteen clans of free men
or nobles (Tonta-Djon Tanni Moro), the
sixteen clans who bore quivers. The five
marabout clans, the first of Sundiata's
allies, among them the Toure and the
Berete, who had actively sought out Sun¬
diata in exile, were proclaimed the "five
guardians of the Faith, or Mori Kanda
Lolu". Men practising special trades were
divided into four clans (G'hara Nani). These
included the griots, the shoemakers, and
certain clans of smiths.
As the tradition says, Sundiata "divided
up the world". That is to say, he fixed the
rights and duties of each clan. A special
measure dealt with the defeated Soso:
their territory was declared the property of
the empire, and they were distributed
among the various craft castes or clans.
Some of them fled to the Futa-Djallon
mountains.
This Constitution was very important in
itself, and had far-reaching effects. It
reproduced the age-old pattern of the Em¬
pire of Ghana, in which the individuality of
each region was recognized. But above all,
Sundiata codified the system of craft clans
so that professions became hereditary. It
seems that in the days of the Ghana Empire
every man exercised the trade of his
choice, but henceforward the son had to
practise the same trade as his father,
especially within the four craft clans or
castes.
Each province or kingdom retained a
large degree of autonomy. The name Man¬
ding or Mali applied to all countries with a
large Mandingo population, and the official
title of the Emperor was Be Bara Mansa,
"Emperor of all the peoples".
Al-Omari, adviser and secretary to the
Sultans of Cairo and Damascus, has left us
a list of twelve provinces and fourteen
towns. They have not all been identified
(Arabjc manuscripts are difficult to read
because most of the Arabic writers who
provide the sources of the history of Mali
were translated at a period when little was
known about the toponymy and geography
of the Sudan).
Al-Omari's town of Nyeni can certainly
be identified as Niani, a little village on the
borders of Guinea and Mali. Al-Omari
wrote: "The town of Nyeni is the same in
length and in breadth, being about one
berid long and the same distance wide. It is
not surrounded by a wall, and the houses
stand separately for the most part. The
king has a group of palaces surrounded by
a circular wall. A branch of the Nile (Niger)
surrounds the town on all four sides...
"The houses are built in layers of clay,
like the walls of the gardens at Damascus.
This is how they proceed: they build in clay
to a height of two-thirds of a cubit, then
leave it to dry. Then they repeat the pro¬
cess until all is finished. The ceilings are
made of beams and reeds. They are mostly
in the shape of a cupola or of the hump of a
camel, like arcades. The floors of the
houses are of earth mixed with sand".
Excavation of the tumuli at Niani is now
providing confirmation of Al-Omari's ac¬
count. The stone foundations under the
accumulation of banco or beaten earth;
fragments and whole examples of fine pot-
60

J
öf^j I >*V
*>
<?
vy
-.-"V.-,^
*
(O
O l '
á0&S 1 >
"V .
*w\*i
J
'
The international renown of the Mali Empire, which covered much of West Africa
between the 13th and 15th centuries, is reflected In the famous "Catalan Atlas" (1375)
produced by Abraham Cresques for King Charles V of France. Mali ("ciutat de Melli") is
prominently shown along with this portrait of its Mansa (Emperor) wearing a European-
style crown. The ruler Is holding a large nugget symbolizing Mali's fabulous wealth in
gold. In front of him is a Tuareg chief on a camel.
Photo © Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris
tery; traces of the ground plan of a mosque
and of a wall round the palace all these
now make it possible for us to say with cer¬
tainty that it was on the banks of the
Sankarani that Sundiata set up his capital,
which for more than a century was the
political centre of the western Sudan.
Beautifully situated, on a huge plain by
the Sankarani, Niani was surrounded by a
semi-circle of hills crossed by passes and
dominated by a rocky peak. The Sankarani
was deep and navigable all the year round.
Mani, as the town was originally named,
was on the edge of the Guinea-Ivory forest,
a source of gold and palm oil where
Malinke traders sold cotton and copper
goods. Hitherto it had been just a small
town made famous by the resistance of its
king against Sumaguru. When he settled
there, Sundiata changed its name to Niani,
which in Malinke means "suffering". Oral
tradition calls it Niani ma bori, the exile of
Sundiata (the flight of sorrow). The new
name indicated that the conqueror's
troubles were over.
Niani spread swiftly over the plain and at
the foot of the mountains, served by two
ports on the Sankarani, a northern port and
a southern port, and linked to Man'ding
(Bouré) by the Manding Road or Manding
Sila, and to the Niger valley by the
Sarakolle Road or Sarakoule Sila. Niani at¬
tracted both the black merchants and the
Arab/Berbers.
There are several legends cencerning the
death of Sundiata. It is almost certain that
he was drowned in the Sankarani, some
ten kilometres upstream from Niani where
there is a place called Sundiata:dum (Sun¬
diata's shelf). This part of the river is very
deep and the pirogues take care to avoid it.
On either side of the river the Keita set up
sacred places, stone altars where from time
to time, on great occasions, the descen¬
dants of the Conqueror met to sacrifice
fowls and sheep and oxen.
Roughly speaking, Mali at its height
covered the Western Sudan from the
saltpans of Teghaza in the Sahara to the
Ivory-Guinea forest in the south, and, west
to east, from the Atlantic (Tekrur, Gambia,
Bambadinka or Guinea-Bissau) to the Air in
the Es-Souk region, where the copper
mines were then being actively exploited.
It is difficult to estimate the size of the
Empire's population. In the sixteenth cen¬
tury Mahmoud Kati said Mali had 400
towns, and it is certain that the Empire was
well populated, especially in the Niger
valley between Djénné and Timbuktu.
Tekrur and Casamance had a large rural
population. In its heyday in the fourteenth
century, Niani and its many towns must
have had at least a hundred thousand in¬
habitants.
The old principle of succession passing
from brother to brother was not observed
after Sundiata's death, when his eldest
son. Mansa Yerelinkon (or Oulin or Ouali)
seized power and reigned from 1250 to
about 1270.
In about 1307 Kanku Musa, a nephew of
Sundiata, came to the throne. As Mansa
. Musa I he reigned from about 1307 to .1337.
Under him, Mali reached its height.
Mansa Musa is the best known of the
Emperors of Mali, largely because of his
pilgrimage to Mecca in 1325 and his visit to
Cairo, where' he gave away so much gold
he caused a depreciation on the market.
The pilgrimage had important conse¬
quences for the subsequent history of the
Western Sudan, for after it Egypt, the
Maghreb, Portugal and the merchant cities
of Italy took an increasing interest in Mali.
Mansa Musa, who was very proud of his
power, did much to make the rest of the
world think of his Empire as an El Dorado.
Mansa Musa made elaborate prepara¬
tions for his pilgrimage. In accordance with
tradition he levied special contributions
from every trading town and every pro- l
vince. He left Niani with a vast retinue. Y
61

Djénné, described by the 14th-century
Arab historian Es Saadi as "one of the
greatest markets in the Muslim world",
still boasts a number of fine buildings.
Particularly outstanding Is the Imposing
mosque which, with the equally famous
mosque at Timbuktu, is one of the jewels
of "Sudanese style" architecture. It was
built in 1905 of banco (beaten earth)
strengthened with wood, the material
used centuries before in the prestigious
monuments erected by the Mali Empire's
great ruler Mansa Musa. Far right, rooftop
view of the mosque. Right, one of the
minarets, surmounted by ostrich eggs.
Below, four-cornered shelter affords
much-needed shade.
Photos © Monique Maneval, Paris
^Although the figures given by the Arab
writers are probably exaggerated, they give
some idea of the resources Mali could
muster: 60,000 porters and 500 servants
decked in gold and each carrying a golden
staff. ; At the beginning of the sixteenth
century, Mahmoud Kati relates how accor¬
ding to tradition the Emperor was still in his
palace when the head of his caravan arriv¬
ed in Timbuktu.
He was received in Cairo with the
honours due to a great sultan, and created
a great impression by his bearing and Ara¬
bian Nights lavishness. He is one of the few
kings of whom we possess a description.
"He was a young man with a brown skin",
wrote Maqrisi, the contemporary Arab
historian, "a pleasant face and good figure,
instructed in the Malekite rite. He appeared
amidst his companions magnificently
dressed and mounted, and surrounded by
ten thousand of his subjects. He brought
gifts and presents that amazed the eye with
their beauty and splendour".
Tradition says that he bought land and
houses in Cairo and Mecca to accom¬
modate pilgrims from the Sudan. But the
important thing is that he established
sound economic and cultural relations with
the Mamelukes.
Impressed no doubt by the majestic
palaces he saw in Cairo, Mansa Musa
returned home with a famous architect,
Ishaq al-Touedjin, who built the great
mosque at Gao, of which only a few re¬
mains of the foundations and a part of the
mirhab survive. In Timbuktu he built
another great mosque or Djinguereber, and
a royal palace or Madugu. .
But his finest work was certainly ther
62

Situated on the flood lands of
the Niger, Djénne was a leading
city of the historic Mali Empire
and later the capital of the
Songhay Empire (see photo
caption page 14). It is still a busy
trading centre today. Every -
Monday hundreds of colourfully
dressed Peul, Bozo, Tuareg and
Bambara, many from distant
villages, flock to buy and sell at
Djénnó's bustling market, right,
in the shadow of the great
mosque.
Photo © Gert Chesi, Schwaz, Austria

Map Philippe Gentil Studio, Paris, © Editions Armand Colin, Paris, 1977
i famous audience chamber at Niani, on
" which he lavished all the resources of his
art. The Emperor wanted a strong building
covered with plaster, and Touedjin "built a
square room surmounted by a cupola...
and having covered it with plaster and
decorated it with arabesques in dazzling
colours, he produced a wonderful edifice.
The sultan was delighted and gave Toued¬
jin twelve thousand mitqals of gold dust as
testimony to his satisfaction".
No doubt the Emperor's architect had to
use the most common material in that part
of the Sudan, i.e. beaten earth. Buildings
made of earth need constant repair and
restoration in such latitudes as that of
Niani. Further north where the rainfall is
lighter, buildings last better, as is the case
with the mosques at Djénné, Timbuktu and
Gao. In the absence of stone, the banco or
beaten earth is strengthened with wood;
hence the characteristic Sudanese mos¬
ques bristling with bits of timber.
With the successive destructions of
Niani, the wearing away of the plaster,
years of rain, the poet-architect's great
achievement was finally reduced to a heap
of clay. Perhaps one day the archaeologists
will discover beneath it the stone founda¬
tions of the building that so delighted Man¬
sa Musa.
In Cairo Mansa Musa had been very
, ready. to answer the questions of courtiers
and men of learning, and he described his
empire in detail, not without some exag¬
geration. He said he had "the exclusive
right to gold, and that he gathered it in like
a tribute". Mansa Musa exaggerated the
size of his empire: "The inhabitants are
very numerous", he said, "a vast
multitude. Yet if you compare it with the
black populations which surround it and
stretch to the south, it is like a little white
spot on the coat of a black cow". Musa
was well aware of the existence of large
populations and powerful kingdoms in the
south, and especially of the large popula¬
tion of the Western Sudan.
He also revealed that he had a town call¬
ed Tiggida (the modern Azelik) "where
there is a mine of red copper which is
brought in bars to Niani. There is nothing in
all my empire which is such a large source
of taxes as the import of this unworked
copper. It is got from this mine and from no
other. We send it to the lands of the
heathen Negroes where we sell one mitqal
of it for two-thirds of its weight in gold...".
It was also in Cairo that Musa revealed
that his predecessor on the throne had died
at sea, "for he would not allow that it was
impossible to get to the other side of the
Surrounding Sea, and did all he could to
achieve this purpose...". After the failure
of 200 ships filled with men, and others fill¬
ed with enough gold, water and provisions
to last for years, the Emperor himself took
charge of operations, fitted out a thousand
ships, and set off. He was never to return.
What was'the fate of this expedition and
how far Musa is to be believed are in¬
teresting questions. But at least this anec¬
dote shows that the Mandingo conquerors
who reached the coast, including Gambia,
were not indifferent to the problems of
navigation.
After his famous pilgrimage, the
Marinids of Fez and the merchant cities of
the Maghreb began to take a lively interest
in Mali, and there were exchanges of gifts
and embassies between the rulers.
Musa set up Koranic schools, for he had
bought many books in Cairo and the holy
places.
As a builder. Mansa Musa left an endur¬
ing mark on all the cities of the Sudan, with
their characteristic buildings of beaten
earth strengthened with wood. The
mosques at Djénné and Timbuktu were the
prototypes of what is called the Suda¬
nese style.
As a patron and friend of literature.
Musa helped lay the foundations of the
Negro-Arab literature which was to bear its
finest fruit in the cities of Djénné and Tim¬
buktu in the fifteenth and sixteenth cen¬
turies.
It was under the Mali Empire that urban
development really began in the Sudan. In
the North, Walata was the great crossroads
for the caravan routes. Djénné on the Niger
and Timbuktu on the Niger bend began to
expand. But undoubtedly Niani, the
capital, was in the fourteenth century the
great meeting point for the merchants.
Islam became strongly established in the
towns. The king of Djénné, a vassal of
Mali, was converted in 1300, probably
under pressure from the many Sarakolle
and Malinke traders. While gold played an
important part in the development of trade
across the Sahara, it must not be forgotten
that the economy of the Sudan was also
based on many other kinds of wealth.
Since the time of Sundiata, agriculture
had been, developing fast. Cotton, in-
64

traduced by the Arabs before the tenth
century, was grown in the Sudan-Sahel
belt, and weaving and dyeing had soon
become the specialities of certain clans. Al-
Omari and Ibn Battuta both speak of the
growing of rice, millet and fonio.
The inner delta of the Niger, in the region
of Djénné, was the rice reserve of the Em¬
pire. The city itself, the apanage of the Em¬
presses, grew in importance daily, becom¬
ing a sort of depot for the export of oil,
rice, kola nuts, millet and honey to the
semi-desert regions of Timbuktu, then the
second most important caravan crossroads
after Walata. The western and Atlantic
regions, especially Gambia and
Casamance, produced large quantities of
rice and cotton. Weekly fairs were the oc¬
casion for the exchange of goods by barter.
Several monetary systems were in use
within the Empire: cotton strips, twists of
iron and, above all, cowries were the most
common currencies. Small lumps of rock
salt were also used. The Emperors of
Mali, like the Emperors of Ghana before
them, had regalian rights over gold and
copper. The customs levied on imports and
exports were strictly organized, and there
was a heavy duty on goods exported to the
north. Ibn Battuta observed how closely
the governor of Walata inspected the
caravans.
The Emperors of Ghana, and after them
the Mansas of Mali, were well aware of the
importance of gold in their transactions
with the Arab/Berbers, and strictly forbade
traders from the north to enter the gold-
producing regions. Sudan's control of the
Sahara saltpans gave them still more
power, for there was a severe lack of salt in
the interior of Africa.- Salt was a great
source of revenue for the merchants and all
the Sudanic Empires would try to control
the salt trade.
But, for medieval Europe, Mali was
above all a great exporter of gold, and
before the discovery of America, gold from
the Sudan supplied almost all the Arab
Mediterranean trade. In the fifteenth cen¬
tury the merchant cities of Italy and the
kings of Portugal would vie for access to
the fabulous Sudan.
This great commercial activity fostered
the development of cities, and Niani,
Djénné, Gao and Timbuktu attracted more
and more Arab/ Berbers, while the Malinke
and the Sarakolle (the Diula) set up
markets and fairs all along the border of the
forest. As a result the Mandingo spread far
and wide, from the coasts of Gambia to the
gold-producing regions of Ashanti.
Mali flourished until the sixteenth cen¬
tury, its merchants rivalling the Portuguese
since they controlled the sources of gold in
the African hinterland. Between 1550 and
1599 the last sovereigns struggled in vain to
restore Mali to its former glory; but the
years of greatness were past.
Djibril Tamsir Niane
Wisdom good as gold
and bold as brass
These tiny ornamental figures are
examples of the brass or gold weights
once used in parts of West Africa for
weighing gold dust. Each one illustrates a
popular saying or proverb. The two
drums, left, of the Akan group of peoples
who live in Ghana and the Ivory Coast,
convey a stark message: "The hide of the
doe who does not follow her mother
always ends up on a drum".
Left, Akan "Adjabia" (Throne of State)
weight symbolizing the King, the State
and the Nation. On seats of this kind the
Akan make sacrifices to the shades of
their ancestors. The moral : "Where there's
no throne there can't be a King" and "The
King is mortal but Adjabia is eternal".
"True solidarity is a matter of arms and
legs" is the saying associated with this
"Atatafé" (solidarity) weight. In other
words if you really want to help others
then be ready to use your muscles.
Another proverb, "We are united because
we have eaten the same food", is even
more explicitly related to the figurine. It
alludes to the unity that comes from
sharing the same spiritual sustenance.
Photos © Niangoran-Bouah, University of Abidjan, Ivory Coast
Backward-looking bird, above, is a royal
emblem meaning "The King sees
everything". The moral: sometimes it's a
good idea to see what's going on behind
your back.
65
