The cradle
of mankind
by Joseph Ki-Zerbo
ALTHOUGH there cannot be any
absolute certainty in the matter,
if only because the history of
human origins, the hidden history of
mankind, is not yet entirely exhumed,
discoveries so far made point to Africa as
one of the great centres, if not the principal
centre of man's development.-
Kenyapithecus (Kenyapithecus wickeri),
considered by some to be the initiator of
the human dynasty, appeared twelve
million years ago. Ramapithecus of Asia is
but one of its varieties which probably
spread to India from Africa. But
Australopithecus (Australopithecus
africanus or prometheus) is ¡ncontestably
the first hominid, the biped explorer of the
savannahs of eastern and central Africa,
mouldings of whose brain case revealed a
development of the frontal and parietal
lobes of the brain indicative of an already
advanced level of intellectual faculties.
Thereafter came the Zinjanthropes and
the variety bearing the prestigious name of
Homo habilis, all representing a new leap
upward in the progression towards the
status of man. There follow the Archan-
thropes (Pithecanthropes and Atlan-
thropes), and Paleanthropes or Neander-
thalians, and finally the Homo sapiens type
(man of Elmenteita in Kenya, of Kidish in
Ethiopia) of whom many authors have
noted the frequently negroid features in the
upper Aurignacian period.
Whether polycentrist or monocentrist,
every scientist recognizes that it is in Africa
that all the links are found in the chain con¬
necting us with the most ancient hominids
and prehominians, including those varieties
which appear never to have developed
beyond the stage of manlike creatures, and
were unable to make the final step in evolu¬
tion to rise to the stature and status of
Adam. Furthermore, Africa is where the
ancestors, or rather the supposed cousins,
of man are still to be found. According to
W.W. Howells, the "apes of Africa, the
gorilla and chimpanzee, are more closely
related to man than is any of the three to
the orangutang of Indonesia."
And there is good reason why! Asia in its
lower latitudes, and particularly Africa
because of its remarkable extension into
the southern hemisphere, escaped the
discouraging climatic conditions of the nor¬
thern zones. Thus Europe, covered by ice
sheets during the roughly 200,000 years of
the Kageran (a period also known as the
Gunz Glacial Stage), offers no trace of ear¬
ly stone age implements, whereas the same
period in Africa produced three successive
varieties of progressively sophisticated
palaeolithic tools. During that period the
tropical latitudes had the advantage of a
temperate climate that favoured the
development of animal life. Indeed, in order
to survey the influences that led to man's
emergence one must first consider the
geographical and ecological environment.
Thereafter, technology and, finally, social
development must be taken into considera¬
tion.
The capacity to adapt to the environ¬
ment was one of the most powerful factors
affecting Man's development from the time
of his origins. The physical characteristics
of African populations were elaborated
during that crucial period of prehistory.
Thus the glabrous skin, its brown coppery
or black colour, the abundance of sweat-
glands, the expanded nostrils and lips of
many Africans, the curly, crisp or frizzy
hair, all stem from tropical conditions.
CONTINUED PAGE 42
39

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 39
Melanin and frizzy hair, for example, pro¬
tect from heat. Moreover, the adoption of
an erect posture, which was such a
decisive step in man's development and
which involved an adjustment of the pelvic
girdle, was provoked, according to certain
prehistorians, by the need to adapt to the
geographical environment of the high
grassest of the savannahs of the East
African plateaux: it was always necessary
to stand erect to see over them to stalk
prey or flee from hostile beasts.
The technological conditions they
created was the second factor that enabled
the African hominians to feel distinct from
the rest of nature and later to dominate it.
It was because he was a faber (artisan)
that man became sapiens (intelligent).
With his hands freed from having to sup¬
port his body man was able to relieve the
muscles and bones of the jaw and cranium
of numerous tasks. This both freed and in¬
creased the size of the brainpan, in which
the motor-sensory centres developed.
After having learnt to hew stone crudely
by breaking it into parts of haphazard sizes
(pebble culture of Olduvai man), prehistoric
African men progressed to a more con¬
scious stage of creation.
From the beginning prehistoric man
made constant progress in the technique of
tool-making; in the changes in the
materials used and in the finish of tools and
weapons can be seen that constant striving
for greater efficiency and for adapting to in¬
creasingly complex ends which is the mark
of intelligence and places man above the
purely instinctive level. This progress,
which is marked by continual exchanges
and borrowings between techniques, takes
on the form of waves of invention which
led up to the period of historical antiquity,
following the mastery of agricultural and
pastoral techniques and the invention of
pottery. The cultivation of wheat, barley
and plants for textiles, such as the flax of
Fayum, became widespread, as did the
raising of domestic animals.
Two principal centres of agricultural
selection and exploitation doubtless ex¬
erted a marked and widespread influence
as early as the sixth or fifth millennium: the
Nile valley and the Niger Bend. Sorghum,
millet, certain varieties of rice, sesame,
fonio, and farther south the yam, the oil
palm and possibly a certain variety of cot¬
ton were domesticated.
In addition, the Nile valley profited by
Mesopotamian discoveries, such as emmer
(wheat), barley, onions, lentils and peas,
and melon and figs, whilst from Asia were
introduced sugar cane, other varieties of
rice, and the banana, the latter doubtless
through Ethiopia. The latter country also
developed the cultivation of coffee.
Numerous plants domesticated during
prehistory still persist, sometimes in im¬
proved forms, as part of African diet to this
day. Their use encouraged the settling and
stabilizing of men, without which there can
be no progress towards civilization. The
true Neolithic, which did not develop in
western Europe till between 3000 and 2000
BC, began three thousand years earlier in
Egypt. Moreover, the pottery of Elmenteita
(Kenya), which probably dates from 5000
BC suggests that knowledge of pottery
reached the Sahara and Egypt from the
uplands of eastern Africa.
The mastery of food production in the
Neolithic must have given rise to a sharp in¬
crease in population which in turn set
migrations into motion; the characteristic
dispersion of certain prehistoric workshops
with stone artefacts of similar style attests
to this. The radius both of forays and of
permanent migrations increased with the
efficiency of implements and weapons,
facilitated by the fact that they were
becoming less unwieldy. Africa is a conti¬
nent where men wandered about in every
direction, as if drawn on by the immense
horizons of that vast land.
The inextricable overlappings which an
African ethnic map presents today is a
jigsaw puzzle that would discourage a
computer and is a result of this complex
movement of peoples over a period of
thousands of years. As far as can be judg¬
ed, the initial migratory impetuses seem to
have come from the Bantu in the east and
north-éast and to have radiated west and
north. Then, from the Neolithic onward,
the general trend seems to have been a
southward movement, as if under the
repellent effect of the giant desert. This
ebb-tide to the south and east (Sudanese,
Bantu, Nilotics and so on) was to continue
during the historical period into the nine¬
teenth century, when its last waves died
away on the coasts of the southern sea.
The final results of these migrations,
prompted by successes (or failures) in the
original environment, were ambiguous. On
the one hand, they assisted progress
because their successive and convergent
waves gradually ensured that the conti¬
nent, if not mastered, was occupied, and
through the exchanges they involved, they
gave rise to numerous innovations which
were cumulative in effect. But on the other
hand, the migrations, by diluting the
population over an enormous space,
prevented human groups- from reaching
that threshold of concentration which
human multitudes must achieve to surpass
themselves in invention in order to survive.
Dispersion over a wide geographic range
increases the ascendancy of the environ¬
ment, and it tended to pull back the first
African clans to those dark origins whence
man painfully struggled to maturity
through the opaque crust of the unfeeling
universe.
If the beginning of history is dated from
the use of iron objects, it can be said that
prehistory continued in a number of
African regions until around the year 1000.
As late as the nineteenth century, the pro¬
ductive forces and socio-economic rela¬
tions of numerous African groups (and not
only the palaeo-negritic groups) were
substantially no different from those of
prehistory, save for the use of metal im¬
plements. Even in our own century, the
hunting techniques of the pygmies are the
same as those of prehistoric. Africans of
thousand of years ago.
Obscured perhaps by the dazzling sum
mit of Egyptian civilization and the glorious
achievements of so many African
kingdoms and empires, that weighty reality
remains, giving body and texture to the
development of African societies, and
deserving to be dwelt on here.
So it is that in primitive communities,
contrary to European experience (ancient
and Germanic), where the private owner¬
ship of land developed from its common
ownership, in Africa there is no sign of
private ownership. In African village com¬
munities, the higher authority, the State,
was no more the owner of the land than
were private individuals. Moreover, the
State generally did not undertake any ma¬
jor projects.
In spite of instances of sanguinary
autocracy, the State authority in black
Africa nearly always took the form of a
limited monarchy within a framework of
corporate bodies and customs, veritable
unwritten constitutions, institutions most
often inherited from an earlier organization
or social stratification.
Even when prestigious and efficient
States such as the Empire of Mali, describ¬
ed with admiration by Ibn Battuta in the
fourteenth century, spread over immense
territories, their decentralization, adopted
as a deliberate choice, allowed the basic
communities to function with a very real
measure of autonomy. In any event, since
writing was generally little used and tech¬
niques of travel were still not very well
developed, the sway of the capitals was
always mitigated by distance. Distance also
rendered very real the constant threat that
subject peoples would evade any attempt
at autocracy by running away.
Moreover, production surplus to the
needs of the basic communities appears to
have been modest in Africa, save where
there was a State monopoly of precious
commodities such as gold, in Ghana or
Ashanti, ivory and salt. But even in such
cases, the counterpart services (security,
justice, markets) provided by the chieftain¬
cy must not be overlooked, nor the fact
minimized that a good proportion of the
taxes and levies was redistributed at the
customary festivals, in accordance with the
code of honour governing those obliged to
live nobly. This explains the lavish
generosity of Kanku Musa the Magnificent,
Emperor of Mali, at the time of his sump¬
tuous pilgrimage in 1324 (see article page
60).
As for production based on slavery, did it
exist in Africa? In almost all the societies
south of the Sahara, slavery played only a
marginal role. Slaves, or more precisely
captives, were nearly always prisoners of
war. However, captivity did not reduce a
man to the state of chattel, of property
pure and simple. The African slave often
enjoyed property rights. He was not ex¬
ploited like an instrument or an animal. In
Ashanti, to ensure national integration, it
was strictly forbidden even to allude to the
servile origin of anyone, and so a former
captive might become a village chief. "The
condition of captive, although common in
Africa... did not imply the restricted role in
production that characterizes a social
class."
In places where slavery takes on a
42

HISTORICAL TIME
50.000
200.000
500.000
1,000.000
1,500.000	
2,000,000
©I
Homohabilis 2,500,000
Recent discoveries in East Africa of
primitive stone tools have pushed back the
estimated emergence of Homo habilis to
around 2,500,000 years ago. If the period
of prehistory is taken as being equivalent
to twenty-four hours, the whole of
historical time (about 5,000 years) would
represent just under three minutes.
massive and qualitatively different
character, as in Dahomey, Ashanti and
Zanzibar in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, the social structures involved
stem from an already dominant mode of
production, which was capitalism, and
were in reality the result of external
economic influences.
Finally, one must take into account the
socio-economic structures such as the
matrilineal family system which originally
so strongly characterized African societies,
at least before later influences like Islam or
Western civilization gradually introduced
the patrilineal system. This social structure,
so important in defining the prominent role
of women in the community, also had
economic, political and spiritual conse¬
quences, since it played a remarkable role
in the inheritance both of material wealth
and of the rights to royal succession, as in
Ghana. Uterine kinship appears to have
come from the depths of African
prehistory, at the time when permanent
settlement during the Neolithic exalted the
domestic functions of women, to the point
where they became the central element in a
social entity.
Given these conditions, how then can
the characteristic evolution of prehistoric
African societies be described? The first
thing to note is that, during this period,
Africa served in intercontinental relations
as a pole and a central source for the inven¬
tion and dissemination of techniques. But a
subordinate and peripheral status rather
quickly followed that exalted role, not only
because of the conflict of internal factors
mentioned above, but also because of the
tapping of African resources and services
without any adequate counterpart, in the
form, for example, of an equivalent transfer
of capital and techniques.
This exploitation of Africa lasted several
thousand years and had three peak
periods. First, in Antiquity, following the
decline of Egypt, the Nile Valley and the
other Roman provinces in North Africa
were exploited to become the granary of
Rome. In addition to food, Africa supplied
the Roman Empire with an enormous
quantity of imports, including wild animals,
slaves and gladiators.
In the sixteenth century the sinister era
of the slave trade began. Finally, in the
nineteenth century, dependence took the
form of territorial occupation and coloniza¬
tion. The simultaneous and complementary
phenomena of capital accumulation in
Europe and the rise of the industrial revolu¬
tion could not be conceived of without the
enforced contributions of Asia, the
Americas and especially Africa.
Parallel to these phenomena, even dur¬
ing the centuries when external rapacity '
was not too pronounced (from Antiquity to
the sixteenth century), many internal con¬
tradictions in the African system itself con¬
stituted home-bred structural handicaps,
which prevented any moves from within
the societies towards more progressive
structures.
The Africa of clans and villages which
was still in existence, was little given to
private possession of land (a common asset
as widespread and as precious, but also as
free, as air), and was for a very long time
ignorant of the acquisition of land as a
source of conflicts between social groups.
But that was not the only archaic social
form found in Africa. The vicious circle of
low-level techniques and production was at
once the cause and the consequence of a
dwindling population within a continental
space that was virtually unlimited.
Natural obstacles impeded long-range
commercial traffic which, as a result, never
became widespread and too often concer¬
ned luxury products usually destined for
the palaces. But it should be noted that,
wherever barriers to trade were overcome
either wholly or in part, as in the Nile Valley
and, to a lesser degree, in the Niger Valley,
social development blossomed as a conse¬
quence of an increase in population and
private ownership.
Thus, in black Africa, apart from a few
exceptions, there was neither slavery nor
feudalism as they are understood in the
West. One cannot even say that there were
African variations of these systems as their
characteristic elements were missing.
In short, Africa presents a remarkably
continuous indigenous mode of production
similar to other "primitive" communities
but with fundamental differences, in. parti¬
cular its avoidance of private or State
ownership.
Then there was a gradual and sporadic
transition toward State forms, themselves
long immersed in the network of
underlying pre-State relations, but gra¬
dually extricating themselves by internal
impetus and external pressure from the
matrix of destructurized primitive collecti¬
vism, and restructuring themselves on the
basis of private property and the growth of
the State, in a capitalist mode of produc¬
tion, first dominant, then monopolistic.
The colonial State was in fact created to
administer capitalist commercial agencies,
before giving way in the middle of the
twentieth century to an independent capi¬
talist State. Alternatively, the transition
was from a dominant community to a
dominant colonial capitalism, and thereaf¬
ter to a socialist type of development.
In any case, one fact in Africa compels
recognition: since the structure of society
has not changed for at least five hundred
years, and in spite of an increase in popula¬
tion, the productive forces have stagnated,
though not to the exclusion of sporadic
localized growths which usually failed to
flourish. This stagnation does not exclude
the extraordinary blossoming of art, nor
the refinement of personal relations. It is as
if the Africans devoted the essence of their
creative energy to these domains.
The more productive forces increase, the
more antagonisms sharpen the edge of
interested motives and the will to power.
The liberation struggles which today are
still raging in certain territories of Africa are
both the indicator and the negation of the
attempt to domesticate the continent
within a system that might be called the
African mode of under-production.
In Africa, the creation, the self-creation
of Man which began thousands of millen¬
nia ago still continues.
Joseph Ki-Zerbo
43
