Children's
books
in an
audio-visual
age
by Marc Soriano
As elusive a quarry as the butterfly? Among the flood of
children's books and periodicals being produced today, how
many communicate to children an awareness of humanitarian
values, of their own rights and the rights of others? This design
was. drawn by the Pakistani artist Aysha Aziz Khan for an
International Poster Competition on the Right to Education, held
as part of the 7th International Film Festival on Human Rights at
Strasbourg (France) in November 1978.
THE invention of printing and the large-scale production of
printed books sparked off one of the greatest revolutions
in communications since the invention of writing. The
creation of a mass audience through the spread of the printed
word forced writers, artists and thinkers to express their ideas as
clearly as possible and to aim for greater universality and greater
objectivity.
From the seventeenth to the eighteenth century the printed
word created a great pool of informed people, specializing in criti¬
cal reflection, who, by their contributions to literature, the arts and
the sciences, helped in a certain way to raise the level of awareness
of the masses. In Western Europe, the struggle for the rights of
man and democratization in general may be seen, as early as the
late eighteenth century, and everi more clearly at the beginning of
the nineteenth century, to have been linked with the spread of
literacy.
Nowhere has faith in the written word been expressed more
clearly that is to say, more naively than in children's literature.
Certainly in the nineteenth century, the period when children's lite¬
rature emerged in most West European countries as a specific lite¬
rary form, the idea gained ground very quickly that adults were not
particularly receptive to education, and that it was more worth¬
while writing for children, who we're more malleable.
MARC SORIANO is professor of modern French literature at the Univer¬
sity of Paris (VII) and of the methodology of the socialsciences at the Ecole
Pratique des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales. He has specialized in
interdisciplinary research in the social sciences on the basis of special-
purpose types of literature, teaching with audio-visual media and the tea¬
ching of reading. He is the author of a number of books including: Les
Contes de Perrault, Culture Savante et Traditions Populaires, Gallimard,
1968, and Guide de la Littérature pour la Jeunesse, Flammarion, 1959. This
anide is taken from a longer study by Marc Soriano, Children's Books and
Human Rights, published in Unesco's education quarterly Prospects,
Volume VII, no. 2, 1977.
This ideological concern, coupled with a desire to exercise
effective influence, was the hallmark of all those who were to take
an interest in children's books. Publishers and writers all seemed to
be seeking an ideal text, a work of fiction appealing to parents as
well as to children, offering information as well as entertainment
and fostering an awareness of their country, their traditions, their
rights and their duties.
But this expectation of salvation through the printed word and
literacy was soon to be disappointed : although literacy made
headway and books came to occupy a place of importance, there
was no corresponding improvement in the recognition of human
rights. Another unexpected twist occurred with the introduction of
new means of expression and communication, the audio-visual
media, which, while presenting information more cheaply, seem to
encourage audience passivity, and actually to conflict with the
printed word, thus contributing to a certain decline in literacy.
In Western Europe, the production of children's books has
become concentrated in the hands of a limited number of publish¬
ers. A craft industry in the nineteenth century, it is now governed
essentially by the law of maximization of profit, the child's interests
being only one of many factors to be taken into consideration in
"market research" based largely on the exploitation of existing
tastes. The result ¡s a market inundated with mass-produced,
stereotyped products which concentrate on entertainment and
whose educational value is slight or questionable.
Pitted against the publishing giants are a number of smaller
companies, often inspired by advanced educational ideas or ideo¬
logical, political or religious considerations. Their products are
interesting, often of very high standard, but their appeal is limited
by the efforts which they require of the readers. In this sphere, as
in others, bad money drives out good. Formula-produced fiction
based entirely on suspense makes the public even more passive
and thus encourages it to turn to the audio-visual media, which, it
20

must be remembered, offer immediate gratification, whereas the
pleasures of reading require a long apprenticeship.
At the same time, intermediate forms of expression are develop¬
ing, half text and half picture, the comic-strip or photo-strip story.
As a result of this process which is going on under our eyes, the
very meaning of the word "book" is changing from the sense
which it has had for centuries into the sense it already has for mil¬
lions of children .and young people: a series of connected and
.systematically, organized images, framed and centred as in the
cinema, in;which the bubble-enclosed text/although exp'ressive;
répresenté'oniy a very small proportion of thetotal message' v "
What, then, remains of the great expectations which our for¬
bears and even our parents' generation entertained of books and
literacy? Is it possible or reasonable, in this last quarter of the twen¬
tieth century, to expect books (or series of books) to inculcate
humanitarian values in children? Do such books already exist or
have they still to be written? What should be the target age group
or groups? Should they be "all-purpose" books, suitable for diffe¬
rent cultures and the different levels of development of the various
countries, or differentiated to meet different requirements? How
should they be distributed? Through a private, national or inter¬
national organization? Although these are very broad questions,
they are neither gratuitous nor abstract.
Perhaps the type of book which we describe no longer exists,
but it did exist once. At various times and in various countries,
works have been published which were very closely in keeping
with the needs of the children for whom they were intended and
gave them not only pleasure but also a clearer awareness of their
rights and those of others. Cuore by De Amicis, for example, has
perhaps dated, but in 1886 it gave an exceptionally warm-hearted
insight into socialist thinking. The same is true of Mark Twain's
Huckleberry Finn, which, even today, represents a worthwhile
attempt to escape from racist patterns of thinking.
But before we go any further, what is a children's book exactly?
A children's book is a message, a historical communication bet¬
ween an adult ¡ri a given society and its intended recipient a child
belonging to the same society and who, by definition to some
extent, has not yet acquired the knowledge, experience of life and
emotional maturity which are the signs of adulthood.
The importance of the historical context
î For communication to take p&pé,'yvhàt is needed -in. fact all
that ¡s'needédtofor the sender arid receiver of the message to
share a cómmon^code, and for iriîs obde to relate to the historical
context. It is therefore quite impossible to disregard real situations
which affect not only the speaker but also the hearer. This analysis
helps us to avoid the mistake of thinking that the problem is our
own invention.
In fact, the adult has always tried to establish communication
with the children of his society, even before the invention of
printing or indeed of writing, in order to pass on to them his under¬
standing of rights and duties. Before it took the forms with which
we are familiar, this message used other channels of communica¬
tion, for example the oral tradition, or dances and games.
In seeking to formulate a new message a book which really
accomplishes what it sets out to dowe have nothing to gain by
setting it in a limbo outside time and place, since the children for
whom it is intended will exist in a particular time and place. It
would, on the contrary, be helpful to situate it within a tradition, so
that it can draw upon that tradition and so that any new message it
contains may be more clearly distinguished against that familiar
background.
This rules out the illusory idea of a single book, effective in any k
country and at any period of time. The structure of our bodies and f
This drawing by the artist Ba Kyi illustrates "The Four Puppets", a Burmese story which appears in the
third volume of Folk Tales from Asia for Children Everywhere, published by the Asian Cultural Centre for
Unesco in collaboration with the Tokyo Book Development Centre. The same book also contains folk
tales from Afghanistan, Indonesia, Iran, Japan, Singapore, Sri Lanka and Vietnam. The stories were
selected in consultation with Unesco Member States in Asia. Children's books published by the Centre
have today been translated into 19 Asian languages.
21

minds is doubtless universal, which means, in Sartre's fine phrase,
* that "tout homme me vaut"; but from birth onwards every indivi¬
dual has been continually worked on and altered by his personal
history and that of his country.
Every man is like every other man, but yet develops into an indi¬
vidual unlike any other, belonging to a group, large or small, with
its own specific needs. The battles have yet to be fought and won
for reason and consciousness to become universal.
We should not allow ourselves to be misled by the very complex
case of the "classics", which, in the last analysis, create their own
public. These works are usually firmly rooted in a local soil and, by
reason of their very specificity, make the young reader curious to
discover his own roots or to find new ones.
The type of book for which we are looking must emerge and
establish itself in the educational environment with which the child
is familiar. The best potential authors of this type of book should
be sought not in the artificial milieu of the "general without sol¬
diers" (educational theorists, all-purpose "experts" who always
find the right solution to fit any situation) but among the teachers,
research-workers and artists of each country who are the only peo¬
ple really familiar with their national traditions and aware of the
power of persuasion which they still wield.
Careful analysis of specific historical contexts teaches us not to
minimize or to exaggerate the influence of the printed word. Does
it indeed can itserve the cause of human rights as long as the
real power is in the hands of certain strata who do not stand to
gain if other men exercise their rights?
There ¡s a strong temptation for anti-democratic authorities to
use the audio-visual media not to give effective information and to
stimulate critical and political awareness, but to "depoliticize" pro¬
blems and to deny the existence of the social sciences, which
amounts to encouraging audience passivity and systematically
"disinforming" the public in order to maintain the status quo.
It is thus impossible to study the influence of books in isolation
from the historical situation in which they are produced and dis¬
tributed: reading habits, the structure of publishing houses and
libraries, educational legislation, actual school attendance rates,
the nature of production relationships, of the State, etc.
One should not, therefore, rely on books, nor even on literacy,
to inculcate in men an awareness of their rights, much less the will
to defend them. To attribute to books the almost exclusive power
to inculcate human rights is implicitly to endorse a number of erro¬
neous assumptions.
The first concerns the reading process itself. The fact that some
people can read does not necessarily mean that we know how one
learns to read. There are several levels of reading ability and pro¬
gress from one level to the next is achieved only by long practice.
To be able to read is not to be able to spell out letters of syllables
or to have mastered the skill of silent reading, or even to be able to
switch from one sense to another, picking out key works by rapid
and creative anticipation i.e. it is not only the ability to read
rapidly and "identify" with the reading-matter, but also and above
all the ability continually to vary one's pace and to adopt a critical
attitude to what is being read.
To place undue reliance on literacy and books, in our historical
context, is to forget that our system of education (due to the in¬
adequacies of our teaching methods and the forces working
against critical inquiry) turns out large numbers of non-readers or
poor readers; it is also to forget the crucial factor of the relapse
into illiteracy, what Albert Meister calls "l'ana/phabétisation de
retour" (the illiteracy backlash). This phenomenon does not only
occur in developing countries and countries which are economi¬
cally underdeveloped, where the mother tongue tends to conflict
with the official language required for "getting ahead". It is much
more general. We know more or less how to teach the skill of
reading, but not the pleasure of reading, which is why a good
third of the "school population", after spending ten years of its life
learning how to read, spends the rest of its life forgetting.
Unless the reading habit is made an integral part of the reader's
personality, it is not to be relied on as a means of spreading aware¬
ness of human rights, for this requires an active rather than a
passive attitude on the part of those concerned, whether children
or semi-literate adults.
Another mistaken assumption involved in undue reliance on
books is that human rights can then only be preached to those old

enough to learn to read, or, in the case of illiterate adults, those
' who are able to understand a code and a system of explanation
based on reasoning.
In fact contemporary psychology and psychoanalysis tell us that
the individual's basic options (attitude to the opposite sex, be¬
haviour patterns connected with "race" and with "difference" in
general) are determined before the age of 5 or 6, which is consider¬
ed to be the normal age for learning to read.
Psychopathology also reveals that the majority of behavioural
disturbances and of the main "neuroses" are formed during the
"Oedipus complex" stage, which is to say between 2 1 12 and 5
years, or even earlier, during the "oral" phase.
It is as if, out of respect for the printed word, which, historically,
is only one of several systems of communication, we were allow¬
ing such major diseases of civilization as racism and anti-feminism
to get a good hold before turning to books and to reasonto
combat them. Prevention, however, is always easier than cure.
Dead ends, wrong targets, right approaches
It would be extremely useful to build up a file on early childhood
and the pre-reading age based on study of the interests and mental
make-up characteristic of these early stages of development,
including, for example the development of what the English paedia¬
trician and psychoanalyst Donald Winnicott refers to as the "tran¬
sitional object", a blanket or item of clothing impregnated with the
mother's smell which the very young child uses for the "ritual" of
going to sleep, since it would appear, from the present state of our
knowledge, that the book is a successor to this "object".
It would be an unforgivable mistake to limit the inculcation of
"humanistic" values to age-groups which can read fluently and to
books proper, as the main prejudices and ideological afflictions of
humanity (racism, anti-feminism, war-mongering, passivity, dis¬
regard of the rights of others) have had time to become firmly root¬
ed in the conscious and, even more important, in the unconscious
of the 8- to 12-year-old child.
The real battle must be fought with children under the age of 6,
and must be waged with the spoken word, games, pictures and
mime, the written message being used only to consolidate what
has already been assimilated. ;
This calls into question the traditional concept of authorship,
which is already in practice undergoing some changes; in some
branches of children's literature, particularly the production of
encyclopaedias, but also fiction based on contemporary problems,
the author is replaced by a team in which one person is responsible
for "ideas", another for dialogue, another for illustrations, another
for layout, etc., these individuals sometimes being chosen for their
particular skills, but more often at random or simply for reasons of
cost.
The author should be reinstated as the person responsible for
ideas (or the lack of them) and at the same time supported by a
team which should include as a matter of course the "customers"
and educational experts, i.e. children or teachers.
H Marc Soriano
