A
worlcTs-eye
view
of
history
by Geoffrey Barraclough
WHEN I was asked, seven years
ago, to plan and edit a new Atlas
of World History (1), the chal¬
lenge was too exciting to resist. The great
events of our generation the end of the
colonial empires, the Chinese revolution,
the emancipation of Asia and Africa, the
changed position of Europe in the
world had completely altered our vision
of the past.
Beginning in 1963 with the six-volume
Unesco History of Mankind, a number of
historians had attempted to describe the
GEOFFREY BARRACLOUGH, noted medieval
historian, is a former Chichele Professor of
Modern History and Fellow ofAll Souls College,
Oxford. He is the author of several important
historical works including: An Introduction to
Contemporary History, 1964, Eastern and Wes¬
tern Europe in the Middle Ages, 1970, The Cruci¬
ble of Europe, 1976.
(1) The Times Atlas of World History, of which
Professor Barraclough is the general editor, is
published by Times Books Limited, London. Edi¬
tions of the Atlas in German, Italian, French,
Dutch and Japanese are to be published during
1979.
new dimensions. But could they be shown
visually and graphically? Could we use
maps in such a way as to convey the drama
of human history to a generation which is
at least as responsive to the impact of
visual appeal as to the written word ? That
was the challenge, and it was a formidable
one.
If we were to succeed, two things were
necessary. First, we had to take a com¬
pletely new look at the course and content
of history, think again about what was
important and worth recording and what
was not. Second, we had to translate these
ideas into reality, and in the end everything
depended upon effective presentation and
imaginative use of the mapmaker's art.
Let me give just one example of the out¬
come of this marriage of new ideas with
flexible' and resourceful mapmaking. I
announced, rather arbitrarily, at one stage
that our map of "The Expansion of Islam"
should be centred on Mecca, since Mecca
is the heart of the Islamic world. When the
finished product came to hand, no one \
could have been more astonished than 1. 1
35

My whole inherited perception of the
expansion of Islam was changed. I saw
immediately that its progress in the east
was far more significant than its advance in
the west, and that the famous battle of Poi¬
tiers (famous in west European tradition),
when the westward thrust was halted by
theFrankish ruler Charles Martel, was in
Islamic eyes little more than a minor border
incident.
Anyone who looks through the Atlas will
find a score of other plates where things
which seemed familiar suddenly take on a
new dimension as a result of the map-
maker's skills. What more can one ask of
an atlas of world history? Our object was
not to lay out an established body of know¬
ledge so much as to stimulate the reader's
imagination and make him or her think
again about the meaning of mankind's pro¬
gress through the ages.
So far as my own share in shaping the
new Atlas was concerned, my primary
taskwhich for long I thought despairingly
was impossible was to subsume the
whole of human history in 127 large,
double-spread plates. I had, to begin with,
a better idea of what I did not want than of
what I did. First of all, I knew that no histo¬
rical atlas which makes sense in today's
world could concentrate on Europe in the
way that most conventional historical
atlases do.
My first resolve, therefore, was to hold a
balance between the continentswithout
bending over, in an excess of zeal, to mini¬
mize the European impact. Secondly, I
knew that the maps must show the dyna¬
mism of history; they must not just be sta¬
tic pictures of particular situations at parti¬
cular times. Thirdly, it was to be an atlas of
world history, not just a compilation of
national histories. And finally, it was to be
an historical atlasthat is to say, it was to
pay attention to what was important then
(even if 5,000 or 10,000 years ago) and not
merely to what is important now. That
meant, for example, that we were determi¬
ned to give fair weight to civilizations for
example, the great Ottoman civilization or
Moghul India or the Byzantine
empirewhich no longer seem to be of
decisive importance today.
On the other hand, we passed over many
things that loom large in national histories.
One example, for which we have been criti
cized, is that, though the atlas was first
published in London, it nowhere specifi¬
cally mentions the Battle of Hastings,
which looms so large as a turning point in
the history of England. Our reply would be
that we are not dealing with English his¬
tory, but with world history.
It was, of course, easier to decide what
to exclude than what to include. Back in
1972, I spent some months studying earlier
historical atlases. Then, at the beginning of
1973, I set out to draw up a positive plan. I
began with no preconceived scheme of
world history. It seemed to me important to
emphasize that there were, from a surp¬
risingly early date, connexions between dif¬
ferent civilizations and different cultural
groups (hence our map showing the "Silk
Route" linking China with the eastern
Mediterranean across central Asia). But we
took great care not to suggest that there is
a single thread or a single historical process
uniting all mankind; indeed, no one who
seriously considers the history of Austral¬
asia or of sub-Saharan Africa could sub¬
scribe to that view. The Atlas, or at least
the thinking behind it, is pragmatic, not
ideological, and certainly not schematic.
Nevertheless it is also true (as Marx long
ago pointed out) that no attempt to take an
overall view of world history can ever be
"devoid of premises." Looking back in
retrospect, I think that two main premises
underlie the plan of the Atlas. The first is
that the conventional view which treats the
four hundred years between Vasco de
Gama and Lenin as (in the words of the
well known English historian, E.H. Carr)
"the centre-piece of universal history, and
everything else as peripheral to it", is "an
unhappy distortion of perspective." Hence
our endeavour to hold a balance between
the seven different periods or ages into
which we have divided the Atlas. The
second is that a central theme of human
history, common to the whole of mankind,
is the struggle to exert control over nature
and to extract a livelihood from a grudging
environment. This struggle is fundamental
because it gives rise to different political
systems and intellectual responses.
It was important also in planning our pro¬
ject because it provided us with a criterion
for deciding what is and what is not signifi¬
cant from a global perspective, and in parti¬
cular because it shifted the emphasis from
events on a national or local level, which
affect only one people or ethnic group, to
broad movements for example, the Neo¬
lithic agricultural revolution which in¬
volve whole civilizations or the whole of
mankind.
This is why, instead of treating the com¬
plex details of the political history of early
feudal Europe, we devoted instead a whole
plate to its economic recovery between 950
and 1 1 50, a recovery which laid the founda¬
tions for the great age of cathedrals and
universities. This seemed to us the more
important aspect, both in the short run and
in the long run.
Within these broad general guidelines
the principles upon which the Atlas was
constructed were, in theory at least, very
simple. The main one, as already indicated,
was to avoid "Eurocentrism." Europe in
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, as
Kwame Nkrumah frequently insisted, was a
Map taken from The Times Atlas of World History, 1978 © Times Books Limited, London
36

backwater compared with Mali and Song-
hai; and so we gave as much prominence
to the university of Timbuktu as to the uni¬
versities of Paris and Oxford. It is perhaps
significant that six whole plates (or seven if
the plate on ancient Egypt is in¬
cluded) out of 127 are devoted exclusively
to Africa, apart, of course, from innumera¬
ble plates where north Africa appears as
part of the Roman empire or of the Islamic
world. It can safely be said that no other
atlas of world history devotes so much
attention to Africa before the coming of the
Europeans; and that may be regarded as
characteristic of our effort to take a truly
global view of history.
Nevertheless we have avoided novelty
for novelty's sake, and have not eschewed
more conventional maps. People want
them and need them. For example, we
have included a map of the rise of the Fran-
kish kingdom, a conventional subject in all
European histories. But we have balanced
it by a map of the Eurasian world in 814
which shows how relatively unimportant
the Frankish empire was at that time by
comparison with T'ang China, the Abbasid
caliphate, and the East Roman empire of
Byzantium.
Every atlas has a map of the westward
expansion of the United States between
1785 and 1890. But we have balanced it by
a map which looks at the expansion of the
white settlers through the eyes of the abo¬
riginal Indian population, for whom expan¬
sion became contraction, prosperity be¬
came poverty, and liberty became confine¬
ment. We have included the usual map of
European imperialism between 1890 and
1914; it was on all counts a major event in
world history. But we have complemented
it by a plate on "The Anti-Colonial Reac¬
tion" in Asia and Africa between 1881 and
1917, which I believe is unique. That is an¬
other way in which we have tried to put
familiar events into a new perspective.
At the end of the account, am I satisfied
with the Atlas as it stands? The answer is
both "Yes" and "No". I know that it is not
perfect. The task of compression the
almost impossible task of getting the whole
of human history from the Ice Age to the
uneasy, divided world of poor nations and
rich nations in which we live, into the com¬
pass of 127 plates probably pre¬
cluded perfection.
Looking back after the event, I am aware
that certain peoples for example, the
Welsh have probably received less atten¬
tion than they might rightly claim. The
same, perhaps, may be true of Québécois,
Kurds, Armenians, and doubtless others.
Nevertheless, we believe that the Atlas
sets a new standard and we hope that it
fulfils its object of doing justice, without
prejudice or favour, to the achievements of
all peoples, in all ages and in all quarters of
the globe.
Geoffrey Barraclough
37
