Bertina goes to Rome
A lot of people thought it rather risky; what would an eleven-year-old girl do and how
would she react when confronted with a World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural
Development?
Bertina Wijngaarden showed them that they need not have worried, writes Netherlands
author Matthijs de Vreede. When she arrived in Rome this summer to cover the
conference as a correspondent for the Netherlands children's monthly development-
magazine Samsam, she acted as professionally as the professionals.
Bertina had been sent to the conference because the staff of Samsam (a word borrowed
from Malaysian which means "all together") wanted to produce a special issue about
rural development and to have one of the magazine's readers as a special correspondent
in Rome. Bertina, who lives on a 33-hectare mechanized farm in the Weringermeer, one of
the new polders of the Netherlands, was chosen from all of Samsam's readers.
So Bertina and her mother were invited to Rome and she was accredited to the
conference as an official correspondent, the youngest ever to cover a UN meeting.
Bertina's performance appeared to be very rewarding indeed. Not only did she write a
good story, she also proved that a child of her age can be well aware of development
issues if he or she is regularly supplied with adequate information, written especially for
his or her age-group.
Bertina Wijngaarden, the youngest ever
reporter to be accredited to a United
Nations world conference, interviews Mr.
Hohamame Brah, Minister for Rural
Development of Niger, in the main
conference hall of the U.N. Food and
Agriculture Organization, Rome.
T
Jl É^^^HIS conference is meant for you and all the other chil¬
dren in the world. We cannot change the world of
today. But here, at this conference, we are trying to
make a better world for the future."
This is what I was told by Mr. Hernán Santa Cruz, the Secretary-
General of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural
Development that was held this summer in Rome from 12 to 20
July. I had been asked to go to the conference as a correspondent
for Samsam, a Dutch magazine about poor countries. My mother
went with me.
When we entered the room of Mr. Santa Cruz, with two photo¬
graphers, he kissed me on both cheeks and he told me that he was
63 years older than I was. "Once more", the photographers said.
One of them was lying on the floor to make a better picture.
Then I started to interview Mr. Santa Cruz. I asked him what the
conference would mean for the peoples in the poor countries and
he said : "The most important thing is that all those millions of far¬
mers who do not have enough land will get more of it, as well as
machines and all the rest they need to become good farmers".
'but don't they have to learn how to use these"Yes", I said,
machines?"
Mr. Santa Cruz told me that was also necessary and that the far¬
mers themselves should be involved in the making of the decisions.
For example, the people from the rich countries should not say:
"We will give you that and that". The farmers themselves should be
allowed to tell us what they think they need. We should help them
to be able to help themselves, in order that we will not have to help
them any more in the future. Mr. Santa Cruz also told me he hoped
that all the children who read my article would understand what
the conference was about and how very important it is for us to
help the peoples of the poor countries to solve their own problems
now. Because if we don't, things will be far worse when we are
grown up.
Then, we went into the big conference room. There, I inter¬
viewed the Minister of Rural Development from Niger, which is one
of the countries of the Sahel. He told me that there was still not
enough rain. I asked him why they did not irrigate the land. He
explained that there was enough water beneath the surface, but
they did not have the machines and the money to get it out and to
irrigate the land with it. When I wanted to know if there was
enough land for all the farmers in his country, he told me this was
not a problem and that there were enough agricultural schools. So
it is only a matter of money and equipment in this case.
Later that day I spoke to someone from the Dutch Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and I asked him what the Minister of Niger should
do. He told me that if Niger wanted machines and money, it should
make a plan and give it to the ambassador of the Netherlands or
another rich country. The ambassador would send the plan to his
government and if that government thought it was a good plan,
Niger would receive the money and the machines. So that's how it
works.
In the meantime, we had also been in the pressroom. There, I had
to work out the interviews. I had borrowed a little cassette recorder
which was no thicker than two pocketbooks. It was very handy
indeed. During the interviews I did not have to write down anything
and afterwards I could make notes from the tape.
In the pressroom, there were many journalists who wanted to
interview me. But in the end I only spoke to some reporters from
children's magazines in developing countries. I talked with people
from Ghana and Kenya and Tanzania and Iraq. That was very nice
indeed. In fact, I think it was very important to speak to people
from other children's magazines and to explain to those children
about the conference. All the other journalists were not so impor¬
tant. They only wanted to talk to me because I was the youngest
reporter that had ever been at a conference of the United Nations
and because of the International Year of the Child.
The conference itself was also very interesting. You could listen
with a little language-machine to what everybody said. It had seven
different languages. But everybody only talked about the use of dif¬
ferent words and sentences in a text that had been prepared before
the conference by Mr. Santa Cruz. If you wanted to hear about the
problems themselves, you had to talk to people outside the con¬
ference room.
While I was in the pressroom, I received an invitation to go to a
demonstration of agricultural helicopters the next evening. I went
there with my mother because we have a farm at home too, and it
was a good opportunity to see the countryside outside Rome.
There was a free dinner as well. During that trip I spoke to a lot of
people from developing countries. There was a gentleman from
Ghana who had a daughter of ten years old. That is about my age.
Her name was Ramata. He asked me if I wanted to be her penfriend
and he gave me her name and address. That night, we got back to
the hotel at two o'clock in the morning.
At the conference, I also spoke to representatives of women's
organizations, who explained that they had all kinds of program¬
mes to help mothers and children in developing countries. And
there was a lady from the Food and Agriculture Organization, the
FAO, who explained what she had been doing in Rwanda. That ¡s a
country I had never heard of because we have not yet had Africa in
school. But in Rwanda, people eat mainly beans. And, of course,
there are not enough vitamins in beans. Thus, the lady had gone
there for the FAO and had explained to the people about other
vegetables. The water is also bad in Rwanda. In fact, people should
boil it before they drink it, but there is not enough firewood to boil
the water. And so people get sick and have all kinds of worms. We
also had a look at Rome. We saw St. Peter's and the Colosseum
and the Forum and we did some shopping.
The last day, we went back to the conference because they wan¬
ted to have me in a film they were making. I had to work in the
pressroom again and also I had to sit in the big conference room,
listening to the language-machine. Afterwards we had to run back
to the hotel because we had a plane to catch. But the plane was
delayed and we arrived back in Holland very late. My father was at
the airport and he had been waiting for more than an hour and a
half. We went to eat something and then I wanted to go home
because I was very tired. Bertina Wijngaarden
22
