The mole
and the butterfly
Reflections on Einstein,
science and subjectivity
by Pierre Thuillier
Text Copyright © Pierre Thuillier, 1979
Reproduction prohibited
J[§ F we consider science as a completed body of knowledge,
I it is the most impersonal of human works; but if we see
I it as a continuing project, it is just as subjective and
psychologically conditioned as any other human undertaking."
This declaration of Einstein's may surprise the defenders of a cer¬
tain form of logical positivism. But it constitutes a sort of invitation
to scrutinize the "subjective" genesis of relativistic ideas.
Let there be no misunderstanding. "Special relativity" and
"general relativity" are scientific theories; only by considering the
state of physical science at the beginning of the 19th century can
we understand the nature of these theories and evaluate their im¬
portance. If our only interest lies in the "progress" of knowledge
per se, we may even feel justified in ignoring (or condemning as
too anecdotic) all psychological or sociological contributions to the
history of science. The fact remains that Einstein himself was
always at pains to analyse his ideas and the influences he had
undergone.
Let us seriously consider the objection implied above that
science is essentially "objective", or at least is only of value insofar
as it is "objective". If this is so why deliberately place so much im¬
portance on the "subjectivity" of the scientist, even if his name is
Einstein? In other words, it would be ill-advised and even
dangerous to confuse art and science. Artists do not seek to
describe reality "as it is": they interpret it and reconstruct it ac¬
cording to the dictates of their sensitivity and imagination. But
scientists, we are given to understand, go about it quite different¬
ly; they prefer to silence their "subjectivity" and listen only to the
"voice of facts"; relying on a strict methodology they succeed in
establishing perfectly precise "laws of nature".
According to this view of science, what counts is that the con¬
cepts be precisely defined and workable and the results confirmed
experimentally. Scientific "geniuses" are, undoubtedly,
remarkable in their own way: but their work would seem to have
nothing "subjective" about it.
This approach has all the appearances of everyday common
sense. However, it may well conceal the difficulties inherent in the
notion of objectivity. No one would dream of denying that scien-
PIERRE THUILLIER, professor of the history of science at the University
of Lille III and the University of Paris VII, is a member of the editorial staff
of the French scientific periodical La Recherche. His interests in
epistemology (the theory and science of knowledge) and the broader
questions of the relations between science and society are reflected in his
Jeux et Enjeux de la Science (Games and Stakes of Science) published by
Robert Laffont, Paris, 1972.
tifie Statements must be able to stand up to experiment. But even
when the "verdict of the experiment" is favourable, can it really be
said that the theory's "objectivity" has been established?
In fact, only the value (or validity) of the theory has been con¬
firmed. Strictly speaking, a positive result does not prove that the
statements tested are absolutely "true". For another theory may
turn out to be as good or even better. In other words, one is never
sure of having complete and definitive knowledge of the "objects"
studied. Experiments can show that, in certain conditions and
within certain limits, a given theory explains phenomena. But they
do not prove that this knowledge is absolute and completely true.
Examples abound. Thus, for a long time it was thought that
Newton's mechanics offered a strictly accurate ("objective")
description of nature. But it is this very idea that the theory of
relativity calls into question. We must admit that science aims at
giving an objective description (or explanation) of phenomena. But
it would be going too far to assert that scientific theories, such as
they exist in reality, are wholly objective constructions, that is to
say, devoid of any "subjective" element. It is for this very reason
that theories are constantly evolving.
The approach adopted to the problem of subjectivity in science
is closely linked to the solutions given to certain purely
epistemological questions (questions concerning the nature and
value of scientific knowledge). Einstein himself was well aware of
this, as is attested by his analyses concerning the connexion bet¬
ween "facts" and "theories".
Newton, he said, believed that "the laws and basic concepts of
his system could be derived from experiment". But this is not so.
Contrary to what some empiricists think, "any attempt logically to
deduce concepts and fundamental postulates from elementary ex¬
periments is doomed to failure". In fact, the foundations of
theoretical physics must be "freely invented". Which means that
to develop their science physicists do not passively record sense
data, but build a theoretical framework with the aid of principles
and concepts that they have not only selected, but, as Einstein
repeated time and again, freely selected.
This view could be described as constructivisme. Not only does it
allow that the theoreticians' "subjectivity" is involved, it also ad¬
mits that this involvement is practically unavoidable and entirely
legitimate. True, some theories are better than others. But, as
Einstein observes, "there is no logical bridge between phenomena
and the principles intended to explain them". But if these prin¬
ciples do not stem from the phenomena, then what is their source?
Einstein's view can be summarized, as follows: although the
scientist seeks to give a "rational" ¡mage of the world, he has no
24

Einstein at his desk at
Princeton University in
1948. When someone once
asked him where his
laboratory was he took a
fountain pen out of his
breast pocket and said :
"Here".
Photo © Parimage, Paris
access to unique and absolute Reason which will present him, in a
purely logical way, with the concepts and principles he needs. It is
by using their own resources and their own experiences that men
try to invent intellectual tools that are more or less suited to
"reality". So the genesis of scientific theories lies not only in logic
and epistemology, but in psychology, sociology and cultural
anthropology.
The so-called advanced societies propagate an image of science
which, more than anything, emphasizes its stringent, logical,
"objective" aspects. But Einstein, both by his declarations and his
scientific activity itself, gives us a wonderful opportunity to get a
better look at the reverse side of this ¡mage with its concomitant
emotions, flights of fancy, philosophical convictions, even
"mystical" passion.
We know that Einstein and Michèle Besso enjoyed a long
friendship. One day Besso's sister asked Einstein: "Why hasn't
Michèle made any major discovery in mathematics?" Einstein
laughingly replied: "But that's a very good sign. Michèle is a
humanist, a universal spirit, with too much interest in too many
things to become a monomaniac. Only a monomaniac gets what
one calls 'results'." Urged by Besso to explain, he went on: "I still
believe you would have developed significant ideas in the field of
science if you had been obsessive enough. A butterfly is not a
mole, but no butterfly should mind that".
And so it would be nice to know: to what extent was Einstein a
"mole", a "monomaniac"? What was the obsession that could
more or less directly engender special relativity and general
relativity? In answer Einstein suggests: the real scientist is totally
imbued with "cosmic religious feeling".
According to him, this is the third degree of religious life, the
first two being religion-fear and religion-morals, in that order. "I
maintain (...) that cosmic religiosity is the strongest, most noble
incentive to scientific research.. Only someone who can measure
the enormous efforts. and, even more,- the dedication without
which scientific creations opening up new ways cannot be
realized, is in a position to appreciate the strength of feeling which
alone can engender a work of this kind, detached from everyday
living. (...) It is cosmic religious feeling that gives man this
strength".
So on this point Einstein thinks very differently from the
positivists: "In our materialistic age, serious scientific researchers
are the only men who are deeply religious". Remarks like this are
two a penny in Einstein. Sometimes we even get the impression
that hé is rather overstating his idea: "I cannot imagine a genuine
scientist who does not have deep faith. The situation can be
summed up in a metaphor: science without religiop is lame,
religion without science is blind".
A few observations on this Einsteinian religion would not come
amiss. First of all, it has no connexion with religions which accept
the existence of a personal God who dispenses punishments and
rewards. Einstein feels that this sort of doctrine is impure and that
religions should reject it out of hand. True, the idea of a personal
God breeds hopes and fears and gives priests enormous power
over the minds of men. But in the long run it can only cause
"incalculable harm to the progress of mankind". Therefore
Einstein prefers to call himself a pantheist. To be religious is to
endeavour in all modesty to understand the order of the world.
In this way Einstein makes an almost systematic connexion
between the idea of "religion" and the idea that the world is
intelligible and rational. More precisely, the scientist must believe
that the world is so. If he is brave enough to dedicate himself to the
study of nature, it is precisely because he is convinced that nature
is constructed according to harmonious laws.
For Einstein this means, among other things, that everything is
determined by strict causality. The real scientist thinks "that causal
law determines all events", from which it is easy to understand
why he cannot accept the idea of a personal God, that is a being
who dictates the course of events. In his own way, Einstein is very
lucid. Instead of using causality as absolute evidence, he makes it k
the object of religious belief, of personal commitment. This*
25

( evidently does not prevent him in practice from using the principle
of causality as a decisive criterion in evaluating scientific theories.
So it was that he consistently refused to recognize the
legitimacy of quantum mechanics. For "God does not play dice".
With this oft-repeated formula Einstein declared his faith in a rigid
determinism of natural phenomena. He could not accept "the
statistical craze" as evinced in the speculations of the Bohrs,
Borns, Heisenbergs and Paulis.
The major stumbling-block of quantum theory, in his view, is
that it does not provide a complete description of reality ; "pro¬
babilities" cannot be the last word in knowledge. The Eins¬
tein/Born correspondence is eloquent on this point: Born never
succeeded in shaking Einstein's "cosmic religion" Einstein found
it shocking that a particle might be considered not to behave in a
totally predictable way.
But the belief in universal causality is rather commonplace: it
could never on its own have "inspired" the theory of relativity. On
the other hand, it is quite remarkable that Einstein often defined his
"religious" position by contrasting "the inanity of man's longings
and objectives" with nature's "sublimity" and "wonderful order".
Individual existence is a "kind of prison". So the quest for
knowledge has a thoroughly fundamental significance: man, as an
individual, does not amount to much, but he has the capacity to
contemplate and understand the universal order. Through
knowledge "the individual endeavours to experience the universe
as an entity with a meaning". A religious man is a man who has, as
far as he can, freed himself of the trammels of selfish desires, and
turned towards thoughts, feelings and aspirations of supraperso¬
nal value.
In his Autobiographical Notes, Einstein returns to this theme:
we must "free ourselves from the shackles of the purely personal"
and endeavour to discover an "extra-personal world" which will
constitute a new paradise. Thus is established the existence of a
"real world", independent of ourselves, the contemplation of
which has (or will have) a liberating effect.
Einstein's epistemological realism, we see, is deeply and directly
rooted in his "subjectivity". And here we are in a position to ad¬
vance a crucial hypothesis: if Einstein worked out special relativity
and general relativity, it was precisely in order to enjoy a world that
is more real and more satisfactory than the poor world in which we
live from day to day.
What is in fact the essence of the "theory of relativity"? It is suf¬
ficient to read Einstein to realize that, despite its name, this theory
expresses the wish to find "laws of nature" the form of which re¬
mains constant regardless of the system of reference adopted.
Special relativity only applies to the Galilean systems, that is to.
say, systems in which there is validity for "the fundamental law
known as the law of inertia: a body sufficiently removed from other
bodies persists in its state of rest or uniform rectilinear motion".
The general theory of relativity can be expressed as follows: "All
systems of reference, regardless of their state of motion, are equal¬
ly valid in the formulation of the general laws of nature."
To put it more simply, let us say that the theory of relativity
represents the wish to find an image of the world independent of
the position of different observers. For some time now various
authors have been struck by the fact that a "postulate" of this sort
quite faithfully reflects Einstein's personal ideas mentioned earlier
on. Everything seems to point to the fact that relativistic physics is
the realization, in a particular field, of a more general programme:
to build a "suprapersonal" world, a world situated beyond our sen¬
sations and perceptions but possessing a superior reality.
The detractors Of the new theory were not mistaken; they clearly
perceived that relativistic speculations were by no means founded
on pure and simple "objectivity". So we have Christian Cor-
nelissen, in a little book published in Paris in 1923, deploring Eins¬
tein's hallucinations. He regretted that Einstein had taken certain
ideas "to the absurd" and "let himself stray into the realm of
metaphysics". In a way he was right! To dare to formulate such
theories, Einstein had to be (there is a tendency to forget this
nowadays) extraordinarily confident about various presuppositions
which were by no means evident. It is not surprising that less dar¬
ing minds than his at the turn of the century were hard put to share
this "faith".
Einstein displayed his originality in the article published in 1905 in
which he laid the foundations of the theory of relativity. But this
originality lay not so much in the novelty of the ideas he used as in
the way in which he deployed them.
The French mathematician Henri Poincaré had seen quite clearly
the new uses to which the "theory of relativity" could be put,
while the Dutch physicist Lorentz developed the "transformation"
which bears his name and the formalism of which was adopted
by Einstein. So much so that Sir Edmund Whittaker, an
Englishman and author of the authoritative History of the Theories
of Aether and Electricity, could attribute the theory of relativity to
Poincaré and Lorentz, which rather shocked Max Born. In fact, far
from being the fathers of this theory, neither Poincaré nor Lorentz
ever really accepted it. Whittaker's mistake is both a psychological
and an epistemological one: he underestimated Einstein's intellec¬
tual courage, what could be called his philosophico-scientific
radicalism.
For Poincaré probably understood the theory of relativity as well
as Einstein did. But he thought of it as being only "a convention
suggested by experience". Physicists, he said, could well do
without it. In other words, Poincaré hesitated to demolish the
classical theory. This sort of timidity is quite foreign to Einstein. He
makes no bones about it. He decides that the "theory of relativity"
is a sine qua non if one is to rebuild the theoretical edifice from
scratch. At least temporarily; it must not be called into question.
Therein lies all the difference between the two: Poincaré
adopted a conservative strategy while Einstein decided to pioneer
an entirely new path. Hence the importance of being a
"monomaniac". For intelligence was not enough to invent the
theory of relativity; one also had to be "mad" to select the new
bases despite their paradoxical nature.
In his 1905 article Einstein showed his audacity by admitting two
basic principles from the outset: the principle of relativity (which
has just been discussed) and the principle of the constancy of the
speed of light. It was all the more daring since, according to Eins¬
tein himself, these two principles were apparently incompatible.
This raised certain questions: how did Einstein get the idea of
asserting the constancy of the speed of light?
Many physicists and philosophers felt that Einstein had been led*


.to this idea by the Michelson experiment (1881) and the Michelson-
Morley experiment (1887). At this time it was widely accepted that
light moved about in an absolutely motionless medium, the ether;
and that it should be possible to show the earth's motion through
this ether. It is unnecessary to go into Michelson's experiment in
detail here. Suffice it to say that he was working on light beams
and that what he hoped to show was the influence exerted on
them by the "ether wind".
But this hope failed to materialize as the mysterious ether proved
impossible to detect. The empiricist interpretation has it that it was
this experimental fact that inspired Einstein; by making a broad
generalization from it he was able to establish that light always
travelled at the same speed (and was therefore outside the sphere
of certain well-known laws of classical physics).
This interpretation is certainly debatable. First of all, it is clear
that various interpretations could be put on Michelson's experi¬
ment. Thus the Dutch physicist Lorentz followed up a suggestion
of the Irish physicist Fitzgerald and put forward an original ex¬
planation: "the ether wind" caused matter to contract, which
prevented any verification of the expected light effects. This
proves that the solution put forward by Einstein (the theory of the
constancy of the speed of light) had not been strictly based on
"facts".
Better still, we now know that Michelson's experiment was not a
determinant in Einstein's approach: "I can't say for certain when I
first heard of Michelson's experiment. I was not aware that it had
any direct influence on me". He made this point time and time
again: "Michelson's experiment played no part, or at least no
decisive part, in my personal struggle". On the other hand, we can
assume that some "subjective" influences intervened.
Einstein explains in his Autobiographical Notes that for ten years
he pondered a paradox which he had spotted at the age of sixteen.
It was a kind of "thought experiment" in which he asked himself
this question: what would happen if I pursued a beam of light
while I myself was travelling at a speed equal to the speed of light?
He suggested the following reply: "I would observe this beam as
an oscillatory electromagnetic field at rest".
But for more reasons than one he considered this to be impossi¬
ble; and for him this was a problem, an exciting paradox. "We
see", adds Einstein, "that the germ of the special theory of relativi¬
ty is already present in this paradox". This confirms that Einstein
had been mentally prepared for some time to manipulate some
basic problems in order to get certain concepts to work.
Naturally, he was conversant with the results of various ex¬
periments. Hethought that, generally speaking, physics should be
developed in contact with experiment and validated by it as far as
possible. But the theory of relativity was not conceived in order to
resolve the difficulties arising out of a particular experiment. It was
the outcome of a much more general and much more theoretical
development.
It was another problem that gave birth to special relativity: the
lack of symmetry of action between electrical conductors and
magnets. In fact if we use the Scottish physicist James Clerk Max¬
well's theory of electricity and magnetism we have to resort to two
different interpretations to explain what happens: 1) when a con¬
ductor is moved in relation to a magnet at rest and 2) when the
same magnet is moved in relation to a conductor at rest. For Eins¬
tein this was nothing less than scandalous. In an unpublished
manuscript he wrote that he found this asymmetry "intolerable".
We must remember, however, that Maxwell's theory takes into ac¬
count the results of experimentation.
But Einstein is guided by aesthetic conviction: since in reality the
only thing that counts is the relative motion of the magnet and the
conductor, the theory must also be symmetrical.The first sentence
of the 1905 article is quite explicit: "We all know that Maxwell's
electrodynamics, as understood today, when applied to a body in
motion, leads to asymmetries which do not appear to be inherent
in the phenomena".
This brings us once more to Einstein's "subjectivity", to his need
to find (and at any rate postulate) a harmonious order in the
universe. He repeatedly resorted to aesthetic considerations to
work out his theoretical conceptions. For that is what "cosmic
religion" is all about: it demands as elegant an explanation as
possible (that is, with as few basic statements as possible) of the
largest possible number of phenomena. So Einstein's
"rationalism" is very deeply rooted; it is nurtured and guided by
personal ideas, personal ¡mages and personal emotions.
To a question put to him by Jacques Hadamard during an in¬
vestigation on invention in mathematics, Einstein replied: "Words
and languages, whether spoken or written, seem to play no part in
my thought process. The psychic entities which serve as elements
to thought are reasonably clear signs or images which can be
reproduced and combined 'at will'. There naturally exists a certain
relationship between these elements and the logical concepts in¬
volved". In his Autobiographical Notes Einstein returned to the
subject: "In my opinion, there is no doubt that our thought func¬
tions mostly without using signs (words) and that, what is more, it
functions unconsciously for the most part."
The implications of such observations are wider than are at first
apparent. In fact, it could well be that the use of "thought in im¬
ages" was effective in helping Einstein to think out the concepts of
time and space in an original way. This statement certainly has the
merit of going straight to the point: "I sometimes wonder how it is
that I was the only person to develop the theory of relativity? I
think the reason is that a normal adult doesn't bother about
problems posed by space and time. He assumes that he has known
all he knows about it from infancy. But I, on the contrary,
developed so slowly that I only oegan to ask myself questions
about time and space after I was grown up. As a result, I was able
to go more deeply into the heart of the problem than a child who
had developed normally would have done." In other words, it is a
stroke of luck that, as his biographers confirm, Albert Einstein as a
child experienced difficulty in speaking.
Deep down, what did the baby Einstein's refusal to speak in¬
dicate if not resistance to certain cognitive schema imposed by
Zurich as it was
in the early years
of this century
when Einstein was
a professor there.
Photo © Zurich
City Archives
28

society? A "successful" education is an education which makes
people accept as natural a number of concepts about, and inter¬
pretations of, "reality". So it is also by definition an education
which makes those who receive it conform; and which deprives
them of the possibility of challenging the generally implicit presup¬
positions which are the basis of the knowledge it transmits.
Another idea dear to Einstein was that certain difficulties
presented by a cognitive system can only be resolved if the more or
less arbitrary and fortuitous bases for the system are first grasped.
A mind that has been too well socialized and too well moulded
cannot have the necessary detachment. So the critical approach
which gave birth to the theory of relativity was only possible
thanks to true intellectual autonomy. From this point of view, it is
important to emphasize that Einstein had adopted an attitude of
detachment with regard to generally accepted ideas. In his own
words, he had arrived at "positively fanatical free thought", which
manifested itself in the form of "suspicion of all forms of authority
and scepticism about convictions in vogue in any social context".
Various historians have also observed that, in his youth, Einstein
lived in an, atmosphere that did not encourage intellectual conven¬
tionalism. He received his higher education at the Zurich
Polytechnic, and he was working in the Berne Patent Office when
he wrote his 1905 article on relativity. At this time, Switzerland
"was opening its doors to a cosmopolitan crowd of students,
émigré revolutionaries and young people who had fled national or
social oppression rampant in their countries". Zurich around 1900
was "a huge permanent club".
Let us mention some important names: Rosa Luxembourg,
George Plekhanov, Mussolini, Karl Radek, Lenin. Discussions
were as numerous as they were heated; and not only about
politics, but about epistemology and psychoanalysis. Einstein was
fond of describing himself as a "heretic", and these details about
his life help us understand the theoretical daring which enabled
him to put forward such novel ideas.
Before we close, let us look at the problem posed by the now
commonplace expression: theory of relativity. Few labels have in¬
spired so many misconceptions as if this relativity had anything
to do with relativism or subjectivism. In fact, it would be better to
talk, as Minkowski suggested, of the "postulate of the absolute
world". This would be less misleading.
True, according to Einstein's theory, our measurements of
space are relative, as are our measurements of time. Which means
that they depend on the observer's point of view; and that there is
no such thing as a privileged observer. But the famous "space-
time" is in itself something absolute; it expresses in theoretical
form the existence of a "reality" which is not directly accessible,
but in relation to which all individual ("local") observations take on
specific significance.
The expression "theory of relativity" does not in fact appear in
the title of Einstein's works prior to 1911. He preferred to speak
about "theory of invariants" (Invariententheorie) and, in 1928, he
said that the theory of relativity would be more accurately called
"theory of covariance" (that is, the principle that demands that all
basic equations keep the same form in all systems of reference).
Why then did he finally agree to a label that was misleading, to
say the least? Doubtless, even here psychological factors played
their part. To speak of "relativity" is to recall that the Newtonian
absolutes were dead; there is no absolute space, there is no ab¬
solute simultaneity. This label underlined the mutation worked out.
by Einstein, a mutation which many scientists and laymen con¬
sidered "revolutionary". As the historian L.S. Feuer put it, the
word relativity is in keeping with the spirit of the time and, more
precisely, with the spirit that was at large in Zurich and in Berne.
Pierre Thuillier

