Ancient gold
from the melting-pot
of central Asia
ON a narrow strip of land below the
foothills of the Hindu Kush in nor¬
thern Afghanistan stand the majes¬
tic ruins of Emshi-tepe, one of the great
cities of ancient Bactria. The flat landscape
around the ruins is dotted with small
hillocks, one of which is known locally as
Tillya-tepe the Golden Mound. This three-
metre-high rise in the ground caught the at¬
tention of a Soviet-Afghan team of ar¬
chaeologists because the shards of pottery
littering its surface were quite unlike any
they had discovered elsewhere.
Test diggings revealed the brick floor,
pillars and surrounding wall of a massive
building containing the vestiges of an altar.
This temple, built at the end of the second
millennium BC, had remained in use for
some five hundred years. Excavations con¬
tinued, and on 15 November 1978 the ar¬
chaeologists working on the Golden Mound
literally struck gold when they discovered
the first of seven ancient graves which turn¬
ed out to contain a veritable treasure trove
of ornaments and jewellery. Coins found in
the tombs made it possible to date the
burials to between 100 BC and 100
AD 500 years after the temple,
whose ruins, it appeared, had been used as
a necropolis by a local ruling family.
THE JOINT SOVIET-AFGHAN ARCHAEO¬
LOGICAL EXPEDITION, which is responsible
for the discoveries described in this article and of
which Viktor Sarianidi is the leader, is sponsored
by the Afghan Ministry of Information and
Culture. Professor Sarianidi, of the Soviet Union,
is a senior member of the Archaeological Institute
of the USSR Academy of Sciences. He is the
author of a dozen major works including studies
of the ancient agriculturalists of Afghanistan
(1978), of the hidden art treasures of Karakum
(1968), and an account of the first excavations at
Ti/lya-Tepe (1972). His Central Asia before the
Achaemenides was published in London in 1972.
by Viktor I. Sarianidi
Of the six graves excavated so far, all ex¬
cept one (which had been infested with
mice) were undisturbed, although the
skeletal remains themselves were in a poor
state of preservation.
The occupants of the graves had been laid
to rest on their backs, dressed in clothing
richly embroidered with gold and pearls and
adorned with small golden plaques. Each
grave contained between 2,500 and 4,000
decorative objects made of gold (some
20,000 have been unearthed so far). As each
layer of clothing rotted away, these artefacts
had piled up haphazardly one on top of the
other, so that it was only by removing them
one by one that their initial arrangement
could be determined.
Foremost among the objects discovered
was a great variety of small, convex plaques
produced by stamping fine gold leaf on
specially prepared matrices. Many of these
plaques are decorated with ornamentation
in relief, and their edges are perforated so
that they can be stitched to a piece of
clothing.
The dead had been dressed in cotton or
silk garments, and the most important of
them had been buried with golden crowns,
their heads resting in silver or golden bowls.
Solid gold pendants, usually in pairs, were
attached to the taller headdresses. One
represents a lordly figure wearing a crown
encrusted with turquoise and lapis lazuli,
with long hair falling to his shoulders. The
face is broad-cheeked, possibly Mongolian,
with narrow, slanting eyes emphasized by
curved brows. The centre of the forehead
bears the imprint of a caste or marriage
mark. The arms are outstretched, and the
clenched fists rest on two winged dragons
with twisted bodies and bent legs. The
dragons, which have horse-like heads, are
baring their teeth; their eye-sockets are in¬
laid with cornelian, and turquoise decorates
their manes (see photo page 31).
A number of equally remarkable pendants
bear the image of an almost naked female
figure, portrayed full face. Her left hand,
holding a fruit, is close to her breast, while
her right arm hangs loosely at her side. This
figure, which may represent a goddess of
fertility, is flanked by wild animals with
snarling wolves, heads and fishes' tails. The
bases of these pendants are richly encrusted
with turquoise and shaped to resemble the
heads of fish, while their top corners are
decorated with figures of birds.
The many discoveries made so far in¬
clude: necklaces of large, hollow beads
decorated with fine pearls and encrusted
with turquoise rosettes; solid gold, open-
ended bracelets; rings (often with precious
stones, some bearing engraved designs);
gold buckles; golden scabbards and belts;
engraved gold plates; silver mirrors with
Chinese inscriptions and mirrors with ivory
handles; gems incised with images of gods
from the Greek pantheon or of fabulous
beasts; golden and bejewelled pendants in
the form of feet or palms with widespread
fingers; ivory combs from India, carved with
human figures; golden clasps, also shaped
in human forms. The number and variety of
the objects are such that specialists in
several countries have described the
treasure as "the find of the century".
The. burials date back to a dark and
enigmatic period in the history of a region
which in ancient times came under many
cultural influences. Although the written
and archaeological evidence is slender, it is
enough to tell us that Bactria was con¬
quered by Alexander the Great in 331 BC
and after his death became first a Seleucid
and then a Greco-Bactrian kingdom,
governed by Hellenized Bactrians and Greek
colonists. This fusion of two different
cultures was to condition the region's
development for many centuries to come.
By the middle of the second century BC,
nomadic hordes were pressing down from!
the steppes towards the fertile oases of the'
29

Statuette of a half-
naked winged
goddess, left, seems
to be a portrait of
Aphrodite, the Greek
goddess of love, but
also has an Indian
caste or marriage
mark in the middle of
the forehead.
Elegant gold bracelets
in the form of
galloping antelopes
(right). Corners of the
eyes and other
teardrop-shaped inlays
are of turquoise.
Right, image of the
Greek goddess Athena
wearing a long fluted
robe was incised into
a ring and probably
used as a seal.
Skeleton key
to a
mysterious past
Remains of a noble (above) as discovered
by Soviet and Afghan archaeologists in a
2,000-year-old necropolis in northern
Afghanistan. Richly adorned with
turquoise-studded gold finery, the body lay
in a wooden coffin with a round bronze
Chinese mirror on its chest, its wrists
encircled with a pair of bracelets (see top
photo page 31). Objects found in the
necropolis reflect an amalgam of
mythological themes and designs from
different regions. Scholars think
that the burial ground contains members
of a ruling family from an obscure
period during the emergence of the Kushan
Empire which eventually stretched
across a vast expanse of Asia.
30
Detailed treatment of
a mountain goat (left)
is worthy of the finest
traditions of realistic
Hellenistic art.
Elaborately worked
pendant, right, depicts
a figure holding at bay
two cavorting dragons
with teardrop-shaped
turquoise manes. The
face with its narrow,
slanting eyes may be
Mongolian; the caste
or marriage mark in
centre of forehead
suggests Indian
influence.

, south. Their advance spearheaded by the
Yueh-Chih, whose previous homeland had
been in the vicinity of Mongolia and who
had themselves been driven westward by
the Hsiung-nu (or Huns), the nomads
reached the Amu Darya (Oxus) river, over¬
threw the Greco-Bactrian kingdom and
established five principalities in its place.
One of these principalities they called Kuei
Shuanga name which would subsequent¬
ly be transformed into the more familiar
"Kushan".
Little by little, the former nomads fell
under the spell of urban life, and finally set¬
tled down themselves. Slowly but surely,
the Yueh-Chih built up the Kushan Empire,
until it ranked with the other great empires
of the time (see Unesco Courier, February
1969). It is the transitional period between
the fall of the Greco-Bactrian kingdom and
the rise of the Kushan Empire about which
the Tillya-tepe excavations can give us so
much information, for the city of Emshi-tepe
outside whose limits it lies may well have
been chosen by the early Kushan rulers as
the residence of a provincial overlord. There
are even grounds for believing that the
necropolis belonged to the Yueh-Chih family
which actually founded the Kushan dynasty.
The burials appear to have been carried
out in a summary fashion, perhaps under
cover of darkness, the bodies being placed
in simple rectangular graves which could be
dug in two or three hours. The wooden cof¬
fins, which were anchored in the soil with
iron staples, seem to have had no lids, but to
have been covered with blankets sewn with
gold and silver discs.
The graves were roofed with logs,
forming a burial chamber which was filled
with earth later on when the vaulting col¬
lapsed. In the earth above one of them the
archaeologists found a horse's skull, which
appeared at some time to have been wrap¬
ped in leather and which recalled the funeral
rites of the nomadic Scythians (see Unesco
Courier, December 1976).
The presence of a number of women's
golden diadems provided further evidence
that the graves contained thé remains of
members of a formerly nomadic people,
since it was only among nomads that the
female sex enjoyed high status a fact
which invariably provoked the astonishment
of the writers of Antiquity.
However, the burials indicate that the first
Kushan rulers had broken almost completely
with certain of their nomadic traditions. For
example, the discovery of a silver coin in¬
serted between the teeth of one of the
skeletons shows that a strong Greek
religious influence had replaced some of the
ancient funeral rituals of the nomads. The
conical form of the burial mound, which
recalls the kurgans in which their ancestors
were buried with great piles of ritually
sacrificed horses is virtually the only link
which these former nomads retained with
their past.
Although technically speaking the Tillya-
tepe jewellery is of a high standard, the
aesthetic criteria of the early Kushan rulers
fell far short of those generally accepted in
the then "civilized" world; the stiff, full-face
compositions of this "official" art produced
for a ruling class are a far cry from the
realistic and lively Hellenistic productions of
earlier Greco-Bactrian craftsmen. If the
rulers wanted jewellery, it was quantity and
variety, rather than inherent artistic value, t
that interested them. As a result, although r
31

> many of the ornaments represent divinities
from the Greek pantheon and even entire
compositions on themes from Greek
mythology, their execution falls short of the
standards of classical Antiquity. The Bac-
trian craftsmen sized up the new market,
strove to keep up with the fashion, and
cared little about the artistic quality of their
work.
This is particularly evident in a series of
moulded buckles representing Eros seated
on a dolphin. The Bactrian jeweller obvious¬
ly had an imperfect grasp of the theme,
which occurs widely in the art of Antiquity,
and replaced what was for him a strange
and unknown creature with more familiar
models the fish which abounded in the
Amu Darya river of his native land. Nor
could any Greek craftsman possibly have
been responsible for the large and graceless
nose of the goddess Athena as she is por¬
trayed on one of the gold rings found at
Tillya-tepe.
But the synthesis of concepts which are
local and traditionally Bactrian with those
which are purely Greek is carried so far that
it is not always possible to determine with
certainty the origin of many of the pieces.
Thus, while certain figurines depicting wing¬
ed goddesses recall Nike, the Greek goddess
of victory, a similar divinity, seated on a
throne or a dragon, is found in numerous
Bactrian Bronze Age carvings of the second
millennium BC. Likewise, the goddess
seated on a lion which decorates a golden
belt from Tillya-tepe may seem at first to be
associated with Cybele, the mother-goddess
worshipped in Ancient Greece, yet a com¬
plex composition which also represents a
winged divinity straddling an animal is found
"on Bactrian seals of the same period.
These examples show how the Kushan
artists turned not only in the traditional
direction of ancient Greco-Roman imagery,
but also to the Bronze-Age beginnings of
local Bactrian mythology.
The golden ornaments also highlight the
cultural influence of Parthia [a land cor¬
responding roughly to the modern region of
Khorasan in Iran], Scholars already knew
from coin discoveries in central Bactria that
Parthia had expanded eastwards into Bactria
and politically dominated the principalities
established by the Yueh-Chih on Bactrian
soil, especially in the region near the modern
town of Shibarghan, a few kilometres away
from the necropolis. The Tillya-tepe
discovery now brings further evidence of
Parthian influence, for the golden or¬
naments bear a strong resemblance to ob¬
jects found in a Parthian burial ground in
faraway Nineveh, in northern Mesopotamia.
This cannot be a mere coincidence.
The animal imagery on the ornaments is
particularly interesting because it seems to
show the direct influence of the so-called
Scytho-Siberian animal style found in the art
of the Sarmatian tribes. This suggests that
the arrival of the nomads in Bactria was of
considerable artistic significance. Although
scholars differ as to the birthplace of this
animal style, some setting it in Eurasia,
others in Central Asia, the images found on
the golden plaques of Tillya-tepe, where
animals are rolled into the form of a ring or
tied together in a knot, frenziedly snapping
at their own paws or tails, certainly seem to
derive from the ancient art forms of the High
Altai in Siberia (see Unesco Courier,
December 1976).
32
Analysis of the human imagery of the
Tillya-tepe jewels suggests that Bactria at
the dawn of the Christian era was populated
by more than one ethnic group. One series
of figures (including the "lord with dragons"
shown on page 31) has broad-cheeked
faces, slanting eyes and stubborn chins of a
Mongolian cast, possibly reflecting the ap¬
pearance of the Yueh-Chih, whose Central
Asian origin is also supported by other data.
Other figures (including the winged god¬
dess shown on page 30) portray an entirely
different type: women whose oval, rather
moon-shaped faces, wide eyes and thick lips
are more reminiscent of the features of the
original inhabitants of the Bactrian plain.
Warriors with classically Greek profiles are
portrayed on a number of gold buckles (pro¬
bably imported from Greece itself), and on
certain other objects. Other external in¬
fluences, revealed in the mirrors from China
and the carved ivory objects from India, re¬
mind us that this region lay astride the Great
Silk route which ran from China to the
Mediterranean.
Tillya-tepe can tell us much, not only
about the streams of imported goods from
Greece and Rome, India and China, that
flowed together in Bactria, but also about
the local culture which resulted from the
bizarre blending of different styles and
cultures from elsewhere. A colourful exam¬
ple of this amalgamation is a gold scabbard
whose decoration includes swastikas from
ancient India, Chinese dragons, and the
branched antlers of the Siberian stag.
The themes treated in the "lord and
dragon" gold pendants are derived from
Eurasian art, but the lord himself looks very
much like a Yueh-Chih. His noble rank is in¬
dicated by a typically Indian caste mark on
his forehead. As for the dragon with which
he is wrestling, its legs are bent backwards
in full accordance with the Scytho-Siberian
animal style. !
But this reconciliation of different cultural
traditions and influences is most apparent in
the objects whose themes are related to
Greek mythology. Some of the winged god¬
desses portraying Aphrodite have Indian
caste marks on their foreheads, while others
have broad-cheeked "Asiatic" faces. There
could be no clearer indication of the extent
to which Greco-Bactrian art had been
transformed.
It may well be that the Tillya-tepe finds are
the first examples of a "Hellenistic art"
derived from the merging of Greco-Roman
and Eastern traditions. Behind this cultural
phenomenon we may also discern the
outlines of the historical circumstances
which attended the birth of the Kushan Em¬
pire, whose builders' roots lay in the distant
Scytho-Altaian world. After heading a con¬
federation of Central Asian tribes and over¬
throwing the Greco-Bactrian kingdom, the
Yueh-Chih found themselves for a time
dependent to some extent on neighbouring
Parthia; then, in the second century AD,
they began to create their own great Kushan
Empire. It was during this period that the
first signs of a truly Kushan culture emerged
from a blend of Greco-Bactrian, Chinese, In¬
dian and Persian traditions. It is to be hoped
that further excavations by the Soviet-
Afghan archaeological expedition will shed
more light on the development of this
culture.
Viktor I. Sarianidi
