How
racism
takes
root
by Beryle Banfield
EXTENSIVE research on the develop¬
ment of racial attitudes in children
has led to general agreement on sev¬
eral important points. By the age of four,
most children are aware of their own racial
identity and the racial identity of others.
By the age of about 10 years, the atti¬
tudes of most children will have been
firmly crystallized and will reflect the racial
attitudes dominant in their society. These
research findings have important implica¬
tions for those concerned with the elimina¬
tion of racism in children's materials.
Racism in textbooks is usually most evi¬
dent in five important areas: the historical
perspective from which the material is pre¬
sented; the characterization of Third World
peoples; the manner in which their cus¬
toms and traditions are depicted; the termi¬
nology used to describe the peoples and
their culture and the type of language as¬
cribed to them; and the nature of illustra¬
tions.
History in textbooks is usually presented
from a Eurocentric perspective omitting or
distorting the history of the Third World
peoples prior to the European contact.
Third World people are portrayed as in¬
capable of having developed their own
institutions prior to the coming of the
Europeans. Encroachment on the land of
the indigenous peoples is glorified as the
opening up of the frontier by gallant and
courageous European men and women.
The slaughter of indigenous people is
glossed over and the defenders of their
homelands are depicted as marauding
"savages" and cruel murderers. The colo¬
nization and slavery experiences are pre¬
sented as beneficial to Third World people
providing them with discipline and skills
previously unknown to them. Rejection of
the people's own culture in favour of
assimilation into that of the European is
regarded as desirable. The following
excerpts are illustrative.
"Fighting broke out between the Maori
and Europeans over whose land was
whose just as in earlier days there had been
battles between one Maori tribe and ano¬
ther. But at last the fighting stopped."
"During all the troubles the new settlers
built towns, made farms and spread
throughout New Zealand. From time to
time the Maori tribes disagreed with the
new ways but by this time the European
settlers had an army to help keep the
peace."
In this passage, the taking of Maori land
and the imposition of foreign rule and cul¬
ture is glossed over. Justification of Euro¬
pean actions is implied by the reference to
earlier wars between Maori groups. The
destruction of Maori culture is dismissed
and the use of force to impose an alien cul¬
ture is justified as necessary to keep the
peace.
"The Eastern Woodland Indians did not
develop a highly advanced culture. But
their culturedid make it possible for them
to live successfully in ways suited to their
needs..."
"Beginning in the mid 1600's the world
of the Eastern Woodland Indians suddenly
changed. The Indians faced Europeans,
who were people with more advanced cul¬
tures. These Europeans had better wea¬
pons, better tools, and more advanced
forms of political organization."
This text clearly evaluated the culture of
the Eastern Woodland Indians from a Euro¬
centric viewpoint. The society they develo¬
ped was in many ways more politically
sophisticated than that of the Europeans in
terms of the participation of women in the
political decision-making process and the
general level of citizen involvement. The
political organization of the six nations of
the Iroquois Confederacy served as the
model for the colonies when they moved to
set up a new nation.
Illustrations provide powerful reinforce¬
ment for the racial stereotypes projected in
textual materials and play a considerable
role in forming a child's first impressions of
other peoples. Such stereotypes have now
become internationalized. There is the Afri¬
can child, naked except for a bracelet on
her ankle; the Mexican, wearing a som¬
brero and reclining under a cactus, the half-
naked American Indian, in a feather head¬
dress and carrying a bow and arrow, the
Chinese coolies and the blond American
cowboy.
These are caricatural figures, as true and
as false as any caricature; their danger is
that they polarize the child's perceptions
and in so doing conceal from him the
immense achievements of other peoples
and the rich variety of other cultures.
BERYLE BANFIELD is president of the New
York-based Council on Inter-racial Books for
Children and co-director of B/yden Associates,
an educational consultant firm which provides
technical assistance to school systems in the
field of multi-cultural education. A former New
York City school administrator, she is the author
ofseveral curriculum guides dealing with African
and African-American history.
31
