The ancient ways
of the Mayas
THE newborn Mayan babe was brought
to the priest "so that he could look
into his destiny, determine his future
' occupation and give him a name". A text on
portents, dating back to the colonial period,
tells us that babies born on the days of Kan,
Chuen and Men were destined to become
craftsmen, on the days of Khish and
Kibwarriors, on the day of Khets'-
nab doctors, etc. The priests were thus in
a position to classify children immediately
by occupation and advise parents how to
bring up their children.
Children were breast-fed until the age of
three or four. Girls grew up under the
watchful eye of their mothers.
The Mayas considered a squint as a sign
of beauty, a condition they induced by sus¬
pending a small ballattached to the hair
by a string between the child's eyes.
The age of maturity for the Mayas was
fourteen to fifteen years for girls and seven¬
teen to eighteen for boys. Initiation rites,
after which marriage was permissible, took
place earlier, however, to facilitate parental
arrangements for marrying their children.
Following their initiation, sons helped their
fathers in their work. A young man bore his
father's name, but on marriage, added his
mother's name.
YURI KNOROZOV is senior adviser at the
Miklukho-Maklai Institute of Ethnography of the
USSR Academy of Sciences and a leading
authority on the theory of signs and on the
ancient civilizations of India and the Americas.
The author of over a hundred scientific papers,
he was awarded the State Science Prize in 1978.
During the first years of marriage, the
husband worked for his father-in-law, living
with his wife in a small hut on the family
grounds. If he complained about his work,
he could be sent packing.
Most women wanted to have many sons
and made special sacrificial offerings to six
gods and to deities at the four cardinal
points, the goddess of the moon and five
other goddesses. On special days, women
spent the night in the temples hoping to be
visited by a benevolent god.
A woman meeting a man would turn her
back on him or, at least, lower her eyes. If a
girl happened to look at a man, her mother
would rub her eyes with pepper. On festive
days, men and women feasted and danced
separately, although, according to an
ancient tradition, men and women danced
together a special "rocking dance". If a
woman was unfaithful, she was censured,
but her seducer was stoned to death.
Filed teeth were considered stylish for
women. After marriage, both men and
women were tattooed above the waist,
except for the breast; they also rubbed
themselves with a red ointment which pro¬
tected them from the heat, the cold and
mosquitoes. Women perfumed themselves,
applying to their skin a red aromatic bar of
resin; they garlanded their hair with flowers
and, after dark, with glow-worms.
During the nomadic period it was the cus¬
tom to kill off the elders because of the
scarcity of food. The Itzas killed off their
old people after they had reached the age of
50 (52 years was regarded as the maximum
life span) to prevent them from becoming
sorcerers. Agricultural communities, how-
by Yuri Knorozov
ever, valued their elders for the wealth of
experience they had accumulated (in the
choice of land, in seed selection, in weather
forecasting, etc.).
Notions about the dead changed fre¬
quently and these were reflected in the
burial rites. Some drawings represent a
dead body in the shape of an embryonic
child, conveying the idea that the dead
ancestor is incarnated in the newborn child.
The dead were painted red (a very ancient
custom which has been diversely interpre¬
ted) and tightly swathed. The dead were
considered to be very dangerous, a belief
probably connected with instances of con¬
tagion resulting from contact with a
corpse.
The dead person was clearly made ready
for a journey. He was wrapped in a travel¬
ling robe, bits of precious nephrite and a
ball of dried dough were placed in his
mouth, things a traveller would bring along.
The statuettes of gods and various other
articles were placed in the grave.
In connexion with the tales that had been
told about ancestors having arrived from
the north, it was believed that when a per¬
son died he set off for his legendary home
in the north. According to other beliefs,
probably of much later origin, the dead per¬
son left for an underground world Uch-chab
or ich kab = "in the ground"). The ghost of
a dead person passed successively through
nine spheres of the nether-world before he
could be incarnated in the newborn child.
15
