The
Minaret
of Jam
A Unesco project
to restore
an historic
Afghan monument
by Andrea Bruno
IN the barren highlands of central Afghanistan, 1,900
metres above sea level, a magnificent twelfth-century
minaret stands at the junction of two narrow, steep-
sided valleys. Although it towers some seventy metres above
the two mountain streams which meet at its base, it is dwarf¬
ed by the surrounding mountains, some of them 2,300 metres
high, which also emphasize the minaret's isolation and in¬
accessibility.
It is only some thirty-five years since historians learned of
the existence of this remarkable edifice, and not until 1957
was it finally located, near the modern settlement of Jam, by
a team of specialists who believed that it might stand on the
site of Firuzkuh, the legendary capital of the Ghuridi Sultans
who ruled Afghanistan from 1100 to 1215. The only survivor
of a compound of fortified buildings located in a strategic
position for the control of the valley of the Hari-rud, the
ANDREA BRUNO, Italian architect, is Unesco consultant with the
programme to preserve the minaret ofJam. He lectures on the resto¬
ration of monuments at the Faculty ofArchitecture of the University
of Turin, and has worked on a number of restoration projects in Italy
and Iraq, and in Afghanistan where he was a consultant with
Unesco's programme to preserve and restore the town of Herat.
32

^W Ja ' ^Ç
Lonely
splendour
of a leaning
tower
Decorative brickwork spells out
Koranic inscriptions on the minaret
of Jam (left) built some eight
centuries ago in a rocky fastness
walled in by the mountains of
central Afghanistan. Spectacular
aerial view (below) shows full
grandeur of the minaret's remote
setting. Like a tiny "needle in a
rockstack" the edifice is just visible
near bottom left corner of photo. It
stands where river crossing photo
horizontally intersects with another
mountain stream flowing down a
steep-sided valley (which shows up
as dark shadow at bottom of
photo). Today the minaret is
leaning sideways owing to water
erosion. In collaboration with the
Afghan Government Unesco is
carrying out a rescue operation,
described here by its architect,
Andrea Bruno. Right, scale
drawings of vertical and horizontal
sections show features of the
restoration project.
Photos © Andrea Bruno, Turin
bigger of the two rivers which meet
beneath it, the minaret is a striking
testimony to the brief rule of the Ghurid
dynasty.
It is built of bricks and mortar, and is
decorated with a bas-relief in which bricks
are arranged to form highly elaborate
geometrical motifs and inscriptions, in
Kufic writing, of verses from the Koran.
The main inscription, however, is a band of
light-blue lettering which evokes the
Ghurid Sultan who built the minaret during
his forty-year reign. Literally translated, the
legend reads: "The magnificent Sultan, the
august king of kings, Ghiyat al duny Wal-
di, who extolled Islam and the Muslims,
Abdul-Fath Muhammad, ibn Sam, the
associate of the Emir of the Believers, may
god preserve his reign".
The minaret has a circular base, ten
metres in diameter. As it rises, it gradually
tapers to form a cone shape which is "trun¬
cated" forty metres above ground, where
there is an outside balcony (see drawing).
From this balcony rises the minaret's se¬
cond, slimmer section, whose base has a
diameter of eight metres. It too tapers to
form a truncated cone. Inside the lower,
forty-metre-high section, two spiral stair¬
cases wind around a pillar of masonry
which extends for three metres into the se¬
cond stage.
The minaret's stability has been affected
by water erosion and the tower is now
leaning perceptibly towards the Hari-rud
river. The masonry of the foundations has
considerably deteriorated; debris from
landslides surrounds the base and blocks
the original entrance.
In 1961 a preliminary survey was carried
out and suggestions were made for restor¬
ing the minaret, or at least for protecting it
temporarily against water erosion. Two
years later, with the help of the villagers of
Jam, a temporary embankment of stones
and timber was built around the founda¬
tions on the side abutting on the Hari-rud.
This embankment is still the monument's
only form of protection.
A plan of operations was drawn up in
June 1964. It called for the analysis of
samples of bricks and mortar, tests on the
foundations, reinforcement of the founda¬
tions with piles, and the restoration of the
masonry and the facing. Archaeological
surveys were also to be carried out around
the minaret.
It proved impossible to bring this short-
term programme to fruition. Progress was
hindered by a host of practical problems in¬
cluding those of transporting material to a
site which could only be reached on foot or
on horseback. Only in the last few years
has the construction of a road suitable for.
motor traffic made it possible to take really
practical steps to restore the minaret.
In 1974, at the request of the Afghan
Government, Unesco took a fresh look at
the project. The Organization decided to
finance an emergency plan and operations
began on 20 August 1978. An embankment
of large metal cages filled with stones was
built to keep out the water. As a result of k
this preliminary work it was possible to f
33

carry out surveys of the foundations and to
begin removing the rubble covering the
base of the minaret.
Saving the minaret is not going to be an
/ easy job. Apart from the problems involved
in getting equipment to such a remote spot
and organizing a building site there, climate
and geography will limit work to only a few
months per year. Furthermore, the area has
a degree of seismicity which had to be
carefully taken into account when con¬
sidering how to safeguard the minaret.
In order to stabilize the structure in its
present position, the project provides for
the construction of a reinforced concrete
ring around the minaret's foundations. This
ring will be linked elastically to a reinforced
concrete tank which will be ballasted by
water from the river and will be so con¬
stituted as to counterbalance any further
increase in the slope of the minaret (see
drawing).
The overall structural stability of the pro¬
posed project has been tested by com¬
puter, full account being taken of the
minaret's present state and of the seismic
activity to which the area is liable. These
tests supported the viability of the idea of a
tank elastically connected to the base of
the minaret.
The execution of the project will depend
on a series of complex operations which
will have to be carried out in particularly dif¬
ficult conditions. In 1978 it took a whole
season merely to transport to the site
material needed for the first emergency
operation devised by Unesco.
The next step will be to carry out surveys
to establish the size and nature of the foun¬
dations; the minaret's original entrance will
be uncovered from the debris. The rates of
flow and the water levels in relation to the
minaret's foundations will be controlled.
Excavations will be carried out within a
radius of some forty metres of the minaret
in order to obtain an accurate stratigraphie
picture and to bring to light archaeological
remains, if any. New archaeological
discoveries could partially modify the
restoration programme. Next, the base will
be strengthened and its broken masonry
repaired, before the reinforced concrete
ring is constructed. The size of the ring will
depend on data gained from tests on the
stability of the foundations. The final stage
of restoration will be the construction of
the concrete tank: during this phase it will
also be possible to restore the external
decoration of the minaret; this requires the
erection of metal scaffolding, which is not
possible at present.
The concrete reinforcement structure,
which will be built at the original ground
level (some 3.5 metres below the present
level) will be left visible if the rubble now
covering it can be transported away from
the site; if not it will be covered with earth
so that the area around the minaret will
look much as it does today.
The Minaret of Jam is a monument of
outstanding historic and architectural in¬
terest; through the importance attached to
its preservation by the Afghan Government
and by Unesco, it will continue to dominate
the river valleys it was built to protect eight
centuries ago.
Andrea Bruno
