The
Huichol Indians
A- pre-Columbian culture in Mexico today

A group of Huichol Indians crossing the
imposing landscape of Mexico's Sierra
Madre Occidental on the traditional
pilgrimage to the holy desert land in
search of peyote. The Huichol, or Wixitari
as they call themselves, form a compact
ethnic and cultural group with a whole
system of mystic and religious beliefs and
a highly original art (see central colour
pages). The yearly ritual pilgrimage, which
may last up to three months, is a period
of fasting and abstinence during which
the Huichol not only emulate their
forefathers, they temporarily "become"
their sacred ancestors.
by Juan Negrin
''
THE men who came to Mexico in
search of gold and souls ripe for
conversion, and stayed to beget the
people of mixed race who inhabit the
country today, paid little heed to certain
groups of the indigenous population who
retreated into the fastnesses of their steep-
flanked sierras.
The 6,000 or 7,000 Huichol Indians, who
today live on communal land in the south
of the Sierra Madre Occidental in the Mexi¬
can States of Jalisco and Nayarit, are survi¬
vors of one of these marginal groups. The
area they occupy is impenetrable, except
on foot, formed as it is of a jumbled land¬
scape of canyons anything up to 500
metres deep and of peaks over 2,000
metres high. The Huichol do not constitute
a single ethnic group but are divided into
three tribes, the Huautiiari, the Tuapuritari
and the Tateikitari, which differ in both lan¬
guage and culture. Their languages belong
to the Uto-Nahuatl family, and they had
settled in the Sierra before the Aztecs -
entered the valley of Mexico.
The strength of their culture was such
that, far from allowing themselves to be
absorbed, they continued to develop their
art along the lines which they had followed
before Cortés appeared on the scene.
Today, just as in the past, the Huichol peo¬
ple give renewed vigour to their collective
memory by the intense celebration of com¬
plicated rites, and thereby aspire to develop
a strong and healthy "spiritual heart"
(¡yari). They live in conditions of poverty
and impose on themselves additional priva¬
tions in the form of vows and sacrifices. In
the words of the Huichol artist José Bení-
tez: "This is how the xuturite suffer (xutu-
rite are "paper flowers", which is the name
given to the Huichol in the "language of
the gods"): they go without eating or
sleeping, without possessions and without
JUAN NEGRIN, Mexican scholar and writer,
has been carrying out research on the art and
religion of the Huichol since 1970, living among
them and undertaking a number of expeditions
to their holy places. He has organized several
important exhibitions of Huichol art in Mexico
and the United States and his writings on Hui¬
chol religion and culture include : The Huichol
Creation of the World, E.B. Crocker Art Gallery,
1975 ; El arte contemporáneo de los huicholes
(Contemporary Huichol Art), Guadalajara Uni¬
versity, Mexico, 1977 ; and Apreciación subje¬
tiva de la cultura huichola (A Personal Apprecia¬
tion of Huichol Culture), UNAM, Mexico, 1978.
knowing where they are going. They are
poor and innocent, but they are rich in their
kupuri (soul) and life".
There is nothing negative in the indiffe¬
rence of the Huichol to material depriva¬
tion. The ¡yari that grows out of their self-
discipline imbues them with the dignity and
integrity that are such striking characteris¬
tics of the people of the Sierra. The first
study on the development potential of the
Huichol region, carried out by the Mexican
Government in the mid-1960s, concluded
with the observation that the Huichol had
scarcely altered their outlook on life over
the centuries, if at all, and that they had
upheld and preserved the traditions of their
world, which they considered to be incom¬
parably superior to the civilized world, even
when the latter was presented to them as
highly desirable.
In contrast to modern man, the Huichol
esteem life for its transcendental and
immanent aspects. The "spiritual heart"
consists of a sediment of impersonal
memories which have formed since the
dawn of mankind. The ancestors, such as
Fire ("Our Grandfather"), the Sea ("Our
Mother"), and the first animals, sacrificed
their physical hearts to give life to the Hui¬
chol and to invest them with ¡yari and the
power of supernatural vision. The Huichol
try to follow the example set by the crea¬
tors and to make themselves worthy of the
spiritual life through material sacrifice.
The most menial tasks of the Indians are
all linked to the creation of the world which
finds echoes in the microcosm of each indi¬
vidual life and in the essence of all that sur¬
rounds us in the plant and mineral world.
The present is blended with the eternal, eli¬
minating the need for "distraction" since,
as the Romanian historian of religions Mir-
cea Eliade has written: "any occupation
entailing responsibility is in itself a means
of escaping from time". These tenets of
the Huichol are at the very root of pre-
Hispanic thought in Latin America and of
universal religious feeling.
Huichol art takes a number of forms, the
first of which is sacred, mystical, transcen¬
dental and collective. It is a religious art
"dedicated to worship" that is "capable of
arousing, as well as describing, spiritual
experiences". Only the shamans or "chan¬
ters", known as the maraacate (singular:
maraacame), understand the exact forms
and precise significance of this art, which
can be considered as the manifestation of a
CONTINUED PAGE 23
17

The Huichol gods and the creation of the world
On the colour page right and the two central colour pages, we
reproduce six yarn paintings by two leading Huichol artists, José
Benítez Sánchez and Tutukila Carrillo. Below, extracts from the
artists' own accounts of the myths portrayed in the paintings.
See also front cover with yarn painting by another great Huichol
artist, Juan Martinez.
Colour page, right
Top, The Womb of the World, by José Benítez Sánchez
Here we see the world. It was formed by Kauyumarie (the deer-
spirit, soul of the gods) from a woman. Her name is Tatéi
Yurianaka. Indeed, the earth was originally a woman who lived in
the first world of Watetuapa. There, Kauyumarie asked her if she
would like to become a world which would be inhabited by the
most important gods. She accepted and Kauyumarie entered her
womb, which started expanding as though she had become
pregnant. Thus Kauyumarie is represented as a Deer-Person (at
upper centre) within a round ball, which is Tatéi Yurianaka's
womb. He is implanting the seeds of the fruits and the plants
which will sustain our lives. At the very centre he planted the
first plants which man would collect before he learned the art of
cultivation. Amidst this produce he also placed an edible worm,
kawi, and the iguana to serve as food for his "angels," the future
Huichol. Helping Kauyumarie are his divine assistants. He placed
Tatewari, the Master of Fire, (at left) in charge of the Blue Deer,
the ancestor of our deer, whose blood is the nurture of his soul.
Tatewari, who cooks our food, has a sacrificial knife in his hand.
He walks on flowers as does the other great deity Taweviékame,
the Sun (represented on the opposite side). Below, Pariya (right),
the Spirit of Dawn in the land of peyote, and Vieruku Temaiku,
the Young Vulture as a person (left), are in charge of the prayer
gourds. The world is surrounded by water. Four eagles appear
from the foam of the seas which circle the earth. Each eagle is a
guardian of one of the four corners of the earth.
Photo © P. Lloyd Baker, Oregon
Bottom, After Their Death, the God-Spirits Gather in Wirikuta,
by José Benítez Sánchez
The ancestor-gods have died in flesh, but they are still alive in
spirit. Every year the god-spirits gather to visit their chief. Elder
Brother Kauyumarie. Even after the ancestor-gods became
disembodied their womb remained in the holy desert of Wirikuta.
Here they meet after a year has elapsed. Their hearts, their souls,
their pulse and their words are all placed together upon the altar
of Parietsié (at bottom centre) where they first saw the light of
the earth's surface. Tatéi Yurianaka, Our Mother Moist Earth, and
Tatéi Werika Wimári, Our Mother, Young Eagle Girl who is the
spirit of the sky (perched atop Yurianaka), are above the altar.
Our Elder Brother Kauyumarie is depicted as a deer (at right) with
Our Mother Corn, represented above his back (top right) as a
corn plant. Emerging from the right of the altar, Tatewari, the
god-spirit of Fire, is depicted with his flames rising about
Kauyumarie. Our Father the Sun (at lower left), appears at the
gathering of the god-spirits in multiple forms. His heart is a deer
(far left) whose red vertebrae are visible.
Photo © Juan Negrin, Guadalajara, Mexico
Central colour pages
Top left, Kieri Awatusa Is Feasted and Consecrated,
by Tutukila Carrillo
All the god-spirits gather in Teacata and prepare a celebration to
grant White Antler status as a god-spirit. In recognition of his
attributes, he received the votive arrow, the greatest symbol and
instrument of power. The arrow, decorated with a bow, small
footwear and a mat on which his spirit can rest, are placed at the
base of his plant form. A bull is sacrificed to him so that its
blood may nurture his spirit. Incense is burned in a three-legged
clay vessel to honour the bull. Great Grandmother Growth and
Grandfather Fire dedicate votive candles to the spirit of Kieri.
Tsitsika Temai conveys his felicitations from all the other god-
spirits. Xaye, the rattlesnake, conveys his gratitude to the god-
spirits for receiving charge of guarding the Kieri. Awatsay, the
crested woodpecker, will alert the Kieri spirit to the presence of
those who approach. The Moon and the Sun each offer him their
personal nierika so he can be in contact with their spirits.
Bottom left. After the Flood.
by Tutukila Carrillo
The ancestors found the first dry land after the flood at
Xápaviyemeta. In the canoe (upper right) sit Watákame with his
rowing stick, Tacutsi, the mighty deity of growth, with her staff,
itsu, and the black bitch of Watákame, embodying Tatéi
Yurianaka (Our Mother Moist Earth), with the squash, maize and
grains they saved. They consecrate this spot by leaving an arrow
and a nierika. Tacutsi begins her search for Nierika Mamna. It is
found near where it had been left, at Kiewimuta. Gathered again
before the nierika are Tacutsi (at left) with her staff and
Tatewari, God of Fire, seated on their sacred chair, uwén, while
Tamatsi Kauyumarie (Elder Brother Deer-Spirit) and Tamatsi
Waxakuaxi (Elder Brother Deer-Tail) appear above, flanking a
large arrow. Seeking his spiritual being, Tamatsi Kauyumarie
takes his bow and arrow (at right below the canoe) to hunt the
peyote, hikuri, which is also himself as a deer. At Teacata, near
Tuapuri, Tacutsi, Tatewari and Tamatsi Kauyumarie (clockwise at
lower right) founded their god-houses and placed their sacred
arrows. From the bowl beside the lower god-house is served
ground peyote as the ancestors celebrate the feast of hikuri.
Tatéi Yurianaka (bottom centre) has decided to return to the
coast, accompanied by Watákame and his black bitch. She
carries with her a pot and a votive gourd containing all the seeds
for new growth.
Top right. The Ancestor-Gods Try Peyote,
by José Benítez Sánchez
Here we see the major ancestor-gods : Kauyumarie, Our Elder
Brother Deer-Spirit, Tatewari, Our Grandfather Fire and
Taweviékame, Our Father Sun. This is the way they saw
themselves when they ingested the peyote cactus, which is their
own heart. They each took the same amount of peyote (which is
represented as three barrel-like figures with roots projecting to
the right). Under the effects of peyote, Kauyumarie saw himself
transformed into a deer (upper left). He then turned to see a
human face on his tail, with which he began to converse. Our
Grandfather Fire (lower centre), was the most affected by
peyote ; he saw himself crawling like a serpent, spreading out as
ashes from which he saw flowers appear. Our Father Sun took
on the shape of a mountain lion as he was still consuming the
roots of this peyote. He felt as though he were precariously
balanced on a tree about to fall because of its swaying motion.
Bottom right. The Creation Of Salt, by José Benítez Sánchez
Tacutsi Nakawé, Mother of the Gods, went to the oceanside
where she prepared to die. She pulled out her bones (upper left)
which she ground with a stone, and they became salt mixed with
earth. She ground the teeth of her jaws and they turned to pure
salt, which she sprinkled on the sea. Watákame (far left) watches
in awe the transformation of her bones and teeth to salt. When
Tacutsi, with black wing-like extensions, stepped into the sea
(lower left margin) a large wave rose along the coastline (wavy
blue line in centre). Here Tamatsi Maxayuavi, the Blue Deer, was
born.
Photos © Juan Negrin, Guadalajara, Mexico
The ecstatic vision
of Haitian art
Colour page 22
In an explosion of creativity Haitian artists today are producing
highly original works in which tumultuous forms and vivid
colours are directly inspired by the experiences and traditions of
the Haitian people. Often, perhaps unjustly, labelled "naive" or
"primitive" these artists present what the Haitian writer Jacques
Stephen Alexis has termed "the imagery in which a people
enwraps its experience and reflects its conception of the world
and of life". Shown here, two typical examples of their work :
above. Bird Island by Jasmin Joseph ; below. Paradise on Earth
by Wilson Bigaud. See also back cover.
Photos Warren E. Leon Jr. © Delroisse publishers, Pans, Museum of Haitian Art of the Collège
Saint-Pierre collection, Port-au-Prince
18


msi
/-
/ \
r?îf<t%
i
ol
v
li >



(continued from page 17)
collective effort which they control and
summon up on ritual occasions, when hun¬
dreds of Huichol flock to a ceremonial cen¬
tre (Tukipa), often located more than a
day's hard travelling from their scattered
homesteads. There they foregather to take
part in a supernatural drama, whose pur¬
pose is to recreate the propitious atmos¬
phere needed to regenerate the life of the
world.
Taking the place of the gods, the partici¬
pants have to restore harmony between
water ("Our Mothers of the Sea, of the
Rain, the Sky and the Earth"), fire ("Our
Grandfather"), the sun ("Our Father Crea¬
tor"), and "Our Elder Brothers the Wind
and the Deer". For several days and nights,
they surrender themselves in a state of fer¬
vour to a ritual imitation of the Ancestors
through dancing, fasting, and night-long
vigils kept to the hypnotic beat of their
music.
The Ancestors are invoked, solicited by
the chanting of the maraacate, libations
and animal sacrifices, and placated by the
striving of their human descendants. Thus
the immanent spirit of the Ancestors and
the vigorous human spirit are blended
together in a mutually-sustaining commu¬
nication between the macrocosm and the
microcosm in which the eternal brings ferti¬
lity to the present.
Boys and girls, young people and old, all
take an active part in this union of the
human with the divine. Individuals combine
their endeavours and enthusiasm to sup¬
port the extraordinary skills of the maraa-
came, who chants for the people as a
whole. The feast of the Ancestors is fol¬
lowed by the feast of the men who have
drawn close to the gods through fire, peni¬
tence and spontaneous representation. In
this way families from isolated homesteads
enter into tribal communion.
The creation of magical time and space
in the rites conducted at the ceremonial
centre reflects and exemplifies the pattern
lived out in the family homesteads. The
feast is the dramatic culmination of a cycle
of daily tasks centred on the cultivation of
corn ("Our Mother"), and the most impor¬
tant moment in the ceremony is the "dance
of Our Mother", in which she is asked to
pardon them for eating her.
This attitude is symptomatic of tha Hui¬
chol feeling for ecology. "Everything is
sacrificed on our behalf: the Corn gives us
its daughters, the Deer its young, the Sun
its arrows and the Sea its plumed-serpent
daughters, the rain-filled clouds." This is
the very basis of the customs which the
family observes in self-abnegation from day
to day. The members of the family live
together in imitation of the divine order and
apportion their functions and responsibili¬
ties accordingly. Four-year-old children, for
instance, care for their younger brothers,
and share responsibility for them with their
parents. Grandparents in their turn hand
down the wisdom they have accumulated
over the years.
Huichol children are brought up with a
religious sense of life which gradually
reveals the meaning of the mysteries sur¬
rounding them. They listen while the elders
recount a miscellany of myths and person¬
al experiences. They learn that everything
in their environment is imbued with life and
links them to the transcendental reality
Two Huichol sacred objects relating
to Tatéi Nuarihuame, Our Mother
Messenger of the Rain, whose
symbol was the water-snake. Top
photo, this coiled serpent, carved in
stone, guarded the altar of a temple
dedicated to Tatéi Nuarihuame.
Lower photo, a sheet of wood on
which pieces of yarn are stuck with
campeche wax to form illustrations
representing the fertility of women
and the abundance of maize, both of
which were influenced by Tatéi
Nuarihuame. Objects such as this
were the forerunners of present-day
Huichol yarn paintings.
concealed in every natural phenomenon,
that plants, people and animals change into
each other, change their names and lose
their material form, in the way ice melts to
water to nourish the sea and can transform
itself from foam into dew, in the way
pilgrims with a frivolous cast of mind are
turned into rocks and peaks as eternal signs
of mindless arrogance.
"Magical" cures frequently occur, and
children witness all manner of "para¬
normal" events. In addition, they are
taught how to represent sacred writing
through needlework and weaving, stone-
carving, and the use of wax-coated boards
to form mosaics made of glass beads and
threads of yarn.
The level of expression of Huichol artists
depends on their grasp of myth and their
personal vision, which requires them to
enter into the spirit of the thing they per¬
ceive rather than see it as a separate object,
to the extent that a highly skilled maraa-
came is said to be capable of perceiving the
earth on which he stands as if it were a per¬
son and of conversing with it as Our
Mother Earth. The aim is to attain the stage
where we can see the interior of other
beings from within our own being, to com¬
mune from heart to heart.
However, in order to acquire the spiritual
heart or ¡yari which makes such vision pos¬
sible, the Huichol have to learn to control
their bodies by dominating their appetites
and purging themselves of the thoughts
which sully their consciousness and distort
their visionary powers. To see us with the
spirit, as the Ancestors see, the human
condition has to be transcended through
the nierika, which reflects all that exists on
both the spiritual and material planes. In
the words of José Benítez: "To achieve
nierika, we make sacrifices by fasting, by
not sleeping with our wives, by not think¬
ing evil thoughts but by thinking instead
only of achieving nierika, so that we may
learn something of the ¡yari and kupuri
(soul) of Our Mother Earth".
To obtain nierika, the Huichol must set
out on journeys which take them up to 500
kilometres in search of peyote, a species of
cactus growing in the desert from which
the psychotropic substance mescalin is
extracted. The peyote-seekers, known as
peyoteros, have to develop two personali¬
ties in the course of this long pilgrimage.
The first of these is the divine, inner
personality, which grows as the traveller
moves further away from his everyday
world. After many days' physical effort
spent travelling on foot without being able
to quench his thirst until nightfall, and in
the night-long vigils he often keeps around
l the communal fire, bodily needs take
second place and the way is paved for the
emergence of the spiritual sustenance that
is needed to replace the energy of the
body. The inner strength of the ¡yari sets
out to dismantle the facade of the outer
social being, and the pilgrim is reborn with
a new name consonant with his newly puri¬
fied and consecrated personality.
The second personality, .the external,
profane personality, is evolved to conceal
the intense inner reality from the destruc¬
tive public gaze. People who sacrifice all
bodily pleasures do not betray any sign of
the suffering they undergo in their spiritual
self-gestation. The peyoteros discover the
true names of the Ancestors as they follow
in their steps. They know that physical
reality is deceitful and absurd.
The peyotero knows that peyote con¬
tains the spirit of Our Elder Brother, the
Deer of the Sun (Tamatsi Kauyumarie), |
who immolated himself to give birth to the J
23

i peyote and now offers himself up again to
be consumed by the happy pilgrim. This is
the moment of authentic communion,
when the ecstatic peyotero comes directly
into contact with the gods, since Our Elder
Brother represents them all.
The invisible "fawn" speaks to the pil¬
grim from within. It proclaims the words of
the gods and, by causing him to see their
changing countenances, leaves some trace
of the memory of them in his iyari. But it is
a lifelong task to enter into ever-closer
communication with the gods and with the
spiritual essence of our being. In the course
of the first pilgrimage, only the outermost
veil of the mystery is drawn aside to reveal
a luminous and cosmic vision which cannot
be immediately assimilated but becomes a
tangible experience under the effects of the
peyote.
The peyoteros return after an absence of
several weeks or even months, having ful
filled their misson by bringing back the pre¬
cious consignment of peyote to be shared
in the sacred rites. Throughout their jour¬
ney, they have endeavoured to recreate
their language to accord with their new
vision. If we do not grasp the mystical and
poetic themes inspired by the complex Hui¬
chol ritual, we can only perceive the super¬
ficial aspect of this deep-rooted culture,
and will fail to understand the significance
of its highly original art.
Whenever Huichol art is really authentic,
it conveys much more to the Indian than
our own art now conveys to us. The obser¬
vations which Paul Westheim makes on
pre-Hispanic art are directly applicable to
Huichol art, when he says: "Reality is not
reproduced, it is created. It is the reality of
magical thought. It is not enough that the
artist should see; to describe the occult
mythical meaning of a phenomenon, his
vision is needed". Westheim has also
remarked how "Contemporary realism sets
out to reproduce the visible world, whereas
the aim of Meso-American realism is to
give visible substance to that which is invi¬
sible". It follows, therefore, that in order to
produce works of art in the Meso-American
sense, the creative artist has to live com¬
pletely immersed in a mythical vision if he is
to be capable of representing invisible rea¬
lity. Such a reality also has a "magical"
quality because the artist's creation must
both attract and be a home for the spiritual
energy of the human being or ancestral god
it represents.
The people who produce Huichol craft-
objects are often semi-urbanized Huichol
who have forsaken their work in the coamil
(fields of corn, cultivated on the hill-slopes
with a planting stick or pole, the coa), and
have severed their roots with the commu¬
nity. They fear the wrath of the Ancestors,
whom they do not wish to "know", either
The hypnotic rhythm of
music and dance is an
essential element in
Huichol rites and festivals.
During the festival to
celebrate the first fruits of
the harvest, a youth, top
left, beats out a rhythm on
the tepo, or three-legged
drum. Throughout the day¬
long ceremony the younger
children, ringing bells and
beating drums, appeal to
the sun to ripen the crops.
They are taken in spirit on
a journey to the land of
their sacred ancestors.
Below left, a Huichol
market scene.
24

through the traditional sacrifices or
through the invocatory magic of ideo-
graphy. Craftsmen who produce objects
for sale therefore usually do not engage in
such activity out of "divine inspiration" or
as a form of prayer. In addition to the
"deculturation" from which they suffer,
they are part of a market system which
exploits them. Private traders have a mone¬
tary stake in the "decorative" products
which the dependent Indians bring to
them. Furthermore, since these objects
have very little artistic value, these middle¬
men display little interest in them. Natu¬
rally, neither the craftsmen's self-esteem
nor their desire to create is encouraged by
this trade, in which their work is treated
with contempt.
Nevertheless, some of these craftsmen
dedicate themselves to a more significant
task, seeking to re-assert the identity that
has been submerged in their enforced
anonymity and to recover the original sen¬
sibility which they have sacrificed to the
need to produce a large output in order to
survive.
Huichol art, like any great art, stems
from its creator's need to communicate
something that is important to him, some¬
thing which so moves his heart that it over¬
flows with faith or pain or joy, and has to
be exteriorized and communicated by con¬
verting feeling into action. The Huichol
craft paintings shown on our cover and on
the central colour pages are such acts of
communication which bear witness to
vibrant visions and to symbols that have
been organized in such a way as to crystal¬
lize an idea and convey a message.
The artistic gifts of the people who made
them, José Benítez Sánchez, Tutukila Car¬
rillo, Juan Ríos Martínez and Guadelupe
González Ríos, are rooted in the magical
and religious education they assi
milated so intensely in their youth. After
living and working among "civilized" peo¬
ple, these artists have turned again to their
ancestral culture, in a desire to reforge their
weakened links with it and fulfil the tradi¬
tional vows.
Their "yarn paintings" are made on
plywood boards covered with a thin layer
of viscous wax (campeche wax) which,
according to the Huichol, is produced by a
stingless bee. The wax is warmed in the
sun to make it malleable, and it is then
spread on the board by hand. In some
cases, the artist outlines the figures in the
wax. The brightly-coloured aniline-dyed
strands of yarn are then pressed into the
wax base, preferably one by one, with the
thumb-nail.
In symbolic terms, the picture is an ¡tari,
a bed on which the ancestral gods come to
rest, and also a field that is prepared for the k
planting of corn seeds, beans, squashes t
With his sparse provisions
and his ritual objects in the
basket on his back, a
Huichol pilgrim, or
peyotero, sets out in search
of the sacred peyote
cactus, a quest which will
take him up to 500
kilometres away, across
the Sierra Madre and the
San Luis Potosi desert. The
peyoteros set out in groups
of about a dozen men,
marching from dawn to
dusk in withdrawn silence
and enduring all kinds of
privations, under the
guidance of a priest or
shaman. No other
American Indian religious
manifestation is more
complex or more surprising
than this annual ritual
pilgrimage.
25

Photo © Juan Negrin, Guadalajara, Mexico
^and amaranth flowers [huaute). The edges
of the board are first prepared by making a
frame in three contrasting colours, and
these colours to some extent determine the
tones of the colours used inside the pic¬
ture. The outlines of the figures are then
formed before the background is finally
filled out in one or more colours.
These "yarn boards" first appeared on
the market in 1951, when Professor
Alfonso Soto Soria held an exhibition of
them in Guadalajara in Mexico. However,
the technique dates back to before the
Spanish Conquest, and it was used for reli¬
gious purposes in the form of small votive
offerings. Even today, prayers addressed to
the Ancestors are drawn on them.
Before yarn and glass beads came to be
used, the wax was used to mould small
bas-reliefs inside bowls made out of gourds
or on roughly circular pieces of wood,
while grains and seeds and cotton and
agave (pita) fibre were adhered to the wax.
All these materials are still used, but the
sharp contrasts and bright colour combina¬
tions that can be obtained with commercial
woollen yarn are more successful at evok¬
ing the visions conjured up under the
effects of peyote.
For Huichol artists in general and José
Benítez in particular, artistic creation is the
only effective means of bridging the deep
gap separating the subconscious and spiri¬
tual culture from the culture acquired from
living in modern Mexican civilization.
Through expressing his culture in ideo¬
graphs, the Huichol artist defends an in¬
digenous way of thinking which confers
meaning on his personal life. As a spokes¬
man for his culture, the Huichol artist iden¬
tifies himself with the mythical personages
participating in the drama of the pictures.
His inner conflict is exteriorized in the
figures in his pictures, which are full of
movement, magnetism and polarity, and
are held together almost as if by muscular
tension.
In any event, the expression of Huichol
artists is authentically personal and is
bound up with the experiences which have
had an impact on their hearts and memo¬
ries. For instance, there is a noticeable
change in the pictures which José Benítez
or Guadelupe Gonzalez produce on their
return from a pilgrimage. Their themes are
drawn from events connected with the
time of the year, such as the rainy season
or the time when the soil is prepared or the
crop is harvested, or refer to intimate hap¬
penings such as a disturbing dream, or the
birth or death of a child. Since the expe¬
rience which moves the inner being does
not repeat itself, each work is unique. The
pictures are a testimony to what the artist is
striving to see through his nierika, his inner
mirror which has been polished by his
sacred experience. The forms emerge from
the ¡yari, that heart which, according to the
Aztec tradition, is a "picturebook". The
worst possible calamity for the Huichol
would be for him to "lose the ¡yari' which
enables him to enter into contact with the
vast genetic memory stored in "Our Ances¬
tors", who are Nature itself.
This art form has arisen out of a combi¬
nation of commercial craftsmanship and
the peculiar genius of a few acculturated
Huichols who are nevertheless committed
to abiding by their ancestral traditions.
Their art has the virtue for us of being an
excellent means of making contact with
Huichol culture. It is a visual intermediary
which speaks to us through the common
denominator of beauty. Through it, the
Huichol artist succeeds in transmitting his
subjective vision to which we respond by
participating in its universal values through
its poetry and beauty. It is a modern art
form, stemming from the sense of identity
which the artist has of himself, and it has
been created with the idea of communica¬
ting with the non-Huichol public. That is
why the artists have insisted on our spelling
out the "grounds" on which their visual
execution is based. Their works are evoca¬
tions of sacred memories springing from
what the heart remembers of what their
grandfathers or the maraacame used to tell
them, which is now all stamped with the
imprint of their own experience. This is
why José Benítez stated in an interview
that, if his pictures were exhibited as mere
ornaments, lack of respect would be
shown to his "forebears".
26

The antiquity of Huichol culture can be
judged by the fact that the Huichol had
settled in the mountains of the present-
day Mexican States of Nayarit and Jalisco
even before the Aztecs arrived in the
Valley of Mexico. The Huichol are not a
homogeneous ethnic unit but a grouping
of three linguistically and culturally
distinct tribes. Left, three Huichol women
in richly ornamented festive dress. Below,
a young Huichol.
It is to be hoped that this authentic cul¬
ture with its striking beauty will be able to
follow its own course of independent and
"endogenous" development and maintain
its own integrity.
We must not lose sight the universal aes¬
thetic values and deep-rooted philosophy
of the last people to bear witness to the
complex aboriginal vision of Meso-
America.
We have seen how the urbanized Hui¬
chol living by the mestizo system of values,
are burdened by their awareness of a sup¬
posed inferiority and their despair at having
lost their roots. We have seen amongst
them the havoc wreaked by alcoholism,
crime and total destitution, and by illness
and destruction of the family unit.
When we speak of 'educating the
Indians, we should not forget that they
have been brought up in close harmony
with their environment, which they know
through and through, and with a deeply-
rooted system of rites and oral traditions.
What we should offer the Huichol, and
other indigenous groups throughout the
world, is a bicultural education, conceived
in part by "wise men" versed in their own
traditions.
Juan Negrin
27
