The latticework of lines that decorates the torso of this mother-to-be of an Amazonian Indian tribe, the Je,
was painted with an extract from the genipapo tree. The extract, which turns black in contact with human
skin, also has antibacterial properties.



Plant prophylactics
from tropical Brazil
by Otto Gottlieb and Waiter Mors
OTTO R. GOTTLIEB, a Brazilian of
Czechoslovak origin, is professor of chemistry at
the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil. A member of
the Brazilian Academy of Sciences, he is a
leading specialist in the chemistry of naturalpro'-
ducts and biochemical systematics.
WALTER B. MORS, of Brazil, is a member of
the Brazilian Academy of Sciences and an ex¬
pert at the Ministry of Agriculture. He is a
specialist in the chemistry of natural products
and the economics of botany.
BRAZIL is blessed with a wealth of
plant lifeone estimate suggests
some 120,000 different species
and plant extracts, so botanists and
ethnologists tell us, have played an impor¬
tant part in Brazilian life, being used
throughout the ages as medicines and as
arrow poisons in hunting.
While a great deal of research on these
plants has been carried out in recent years,
much still remains to be done. This is a
matter of urgency since, with the advance
of modern society and the deforestation
this entails, the natural habitat of many
plant species is being destroyed and several
of them are now on the verge of extinction.
The first methodical description of plants
used for medicinal purposes by the in¬
digenous people of Brazil was undertaken
by a scientific mission brought by Maurice
of Nassau to the north-eastern part of the
country during the Dutch occupation
(1630-1654). William Pies, physician to the
expedition, described the most important
medicinal plants, including ipecacuanha,
jaborandi and tobacco.
One hundred and seventy years later,
another mission, brought to the newly-
independent State by Leopoldina of
Austria, the bride of Pedro I, the country's
first emperor, was to play a decisive role in ^
the beginning of scientific activity in Brazil. Y
35

> Two of the mission's most famous
members, the zoologist Johann Baptist
von Spix and the botanist Karl Friedrich
Phillip von Martius, carefully documented
their thorough observation of the country's
natural wealth. Then, in 1847, at the in¬
stigation of Martius, Theodor Peckolt, a
little-known pharmacist from Silesia, arriv¬
ed in Brazil and with admirable drive and
enthusiasm analysed over 6,000 plants,
publishing his results in more than 150
papers.
Although his analyses were necessarily
crude by present-day standards, his
descriptions of a number of chemical en¬
tities have withstood the rigour of modern
scrutiny. Peckolt was probably the first, in
1870, to isolate and describe a new
substance which he extracted from the
bark of the agoniada shrub and which he
named agoniadin. Its structure was
elucidated eighty-eight years later.
Agoniadin and related compounds are an¬
timicrobial and sometimes have a purgative
effect. One related compound, genipin,
isolated in 1960 from the genipapo tree,
forms a black pigment in contact with skin,
a property exploited by Amazonian Indians
in their warpaint.
These and many other investigations on
naturally occurring compounds were spark¬
ed off by observation of the use made by
local populations of the plants from which
they were derived. Thus emetine is obtain¬
ed from ipecacuanha, pilocarpine from
jaborandi and curarizing alkaloids from
several Loganiaceae and Menisper-
maceae ; these are all classic drugs widely
used in modern medicine.
Ipecacuanha is a small herb encountered
in the undergrowth of the virgin forest of
the Mato Grosso. The plant requires special
ecological conditions and its cultivation is
therefore rather difficult. The roots, which
look rather like knotted rope, are the source
of the drug. This is taken in the form of a
powder or syrup as an emetic, or in smaller
doses as an expectorant. Its action is due
to emetine, an alkaloid present in a propor¬
tion of about 1 .5 per cent. Emetine is also a
most important remedy for amoebic
dysentery.
Although ethnobotanical sources con¬
tain many references to Pilocarpus jaboran¬
di and suggestions as to its use in the treat¬
ment of a variety of diseases, a recent
study failed to pin down the use of jaboran¬
di to any particular purpose among South
American Indians. The plant occurs in
north-eastern Brazil which includes Per-
nambuco, the native State of Symphronio
Coutinho who, in 1873, called the attention
of French physicians to the copious
sweating and salivation brought about by
jaborandi leaves. Soon these were used in
the treatment of many diseases. Their ac¬
tive constituent, pilocarpine, was
discovered in 1875 and was used in the
treatment of eye diseases ; it is still used to
alleviate pressure in the eyeball in
glaucoma.
The curares are the famous arrow
poisons of South America. Innocuous if
taken by mouth, a single drop in the blood
stream paralyzes the prey without killing it.
This particular muscle-relaxing action is
due to a blocking of the nervous impulses
at the nerve/muscle junction.
TT^if;,^,,/,.,,,,,,,,,; TU^auwfL/Ttxmùm**.*
^ eunxccti . jy> tiuryu* « Tee t tan* (utinqn* u UL .
The natural curares can be divided into
two classes: tube-curares, which were
kept in bamboo tubes, and calabash-
curares, which were stored in gourds or
clay vessels. They were in use in different
geographical areas, being of different
botanical origin and chemical nature and
being handled in different ways. Curare
and its derivatives, both natural and syn¬
thetic, are used to this day as local
anaesthetics or as pre-anaesthetic muscle
relaxants, as well as for the treatment of
the symptoms of various kinds of spastic
conditions.
Brazilian pharmacologists have only very
recently begun to make detailed studies of
the aetiotropic properties of plant pro¬
ducts, that is to say their action against
organisms which are the causative agents
of diseases such as schistosomiasis and
Chagas' disease which affect millions of
people throughout the world.
Although non-existent in Europe and
North America, schistosomiasis affects one
tenth of the population of Brazil and is
spreading. It is caused by a blood fluke, the
Schistosoma mansoni, which localizes
itself in the liver and the intestines. The
females produce hundreds of eggs which,
by clogging capillaries in the liver, spleen
and intestines, cause severe malfunction of
these organs and, consequently, physical
disability of the host.
In order to complete its larval cycle, the
parasite depends upon an aquatic snail as
an intermediate host. Eggs of the fluke are
carried from the faeces of affected humans
into the waterways in the vicinity of their
dwellings. From these eggs, the first larval
forms are hatched and these infect the
snails. Inside the snail the parasite
multiplies to emerge later as fork-tailed lar-
36

CTfnfn<rT\-oc,/'t/l
4L n*
fie i i'.í: r.tni
Ancient Mayan
medicines
Before the arrival of the Spaniards, the
peoples of Mexico, like those of other ancient
cultures, made use of certain plants for
medicinal purposes. These plants, and the
use to which they were put, were recorded in
the Codex Barberini. This document was
compiled in 1552 in the Náhuatl language by
Martín de la Cruz, "an Indian doctor... whose
sole qualification was his practical
experience", as an inscription on the title
page tells us. It was later translated into Latin
by another Indian, Juan Badiano. The Codex
found its way to Spain where it was acquired
by the papal nuncio Cardinal Francesco
Barberini (hence its name), later passing into
the possession of the Vatican Library. Colour
paintings of plants adorn most of its pages,
three of which are reproduced here. Left,
seven medicinal plants and their names:
temahuiztilli cuahuitl, tlapalcacahuatl,
texcalamacoztli, cohuaxocotl, iztac cuahuitl,
teoezcuahuitl and huitzcuahuitl. Their
therapeutic properties are not given. Above,
the tlatocnochtli, a plant used to treat burns.
Right, the cuauhtla xoxocoyolin, used to
encourage salivation and thus to assuage
thirst.
Photos Almasy, Unesco. © Mexican Institute,
for the Study of Medicinal Plants, Mexico
fttctatrfatti , a&Morsa. */.<*< ^*Utm acma >mu
/.iw ti*>no ?'> * y i r it i
d*£L fib»*- C«?* .u^jHfcrfvn/ifn *******
MA
¿ï mue"»" r>» v -V 4, ' .
cms ' hunntt >jcn btic iffi
vae known as cercariae which eventually
again invade humans by penetration of the
skin.
The problem is being attacked from
every angle : education, hygiene measures,
elimination of snails, etc., but progress in
combating the disease has been extremely
slow. The discovery of chemical agents
which inhibit skin penetration by the larvae
has, however, drawn attention to a possi¬
ble new approach. In practice, application
of these active compounds on to the skin
constitutes, at present, the only possible
prophylactic measure. It has been shown
experimentally in mice, however, that one
compound introduced internally appears to
have an inhibiting effect.
The first compound recognized as in¬
hibiting skin penetration by cercariae was
discovered in 1967 and was derived from
the leguminous species Pterodon
pubescens. Another compound, lapachol,
which occurs in the heartwood of a
number of tropical trees, and several of its
derivatives are among the most active
agents inhibiting skin penetration.
Although lapachol was originally isolated
about one hundred years ago, its phar¬
macological properties and those of many
derivatives and transformation products
have been extensively investigated only in
recent years. They have the effect of
preventing the abnormal division of cells
(and therefore may be of use in cancer
therapy) and they are antimicrobial, as well
as acting as a prophylactic against
schistosomiasis. Lapachol is now produced
in the State of Pernambuco for oral ad¬
ministration as an adjuvant to other drugs
in cancer therapy and; in view of its low
general toxicity, has been approved for w
human clinical trials. *
37

, Recent important studies place this class
of compounds in the foreground among
possible weapons against Chagas' disease,
which affects some ten million Brazilians.
Not only have some of these substances
been shown in laboratory tests to have an
inhibiting effect against Trypanosoma
cruzi, the protozoon which causes Chagas'
disease, one of them has been shown to be
most effective in treating blood intended
for transfusions, which is often the vehicle
by which the disease is transmitted. Hopes
of finding an actual cure for this form of
trypanosomiasis are growing with the pro¬
gress of this research.
With the increasing exploration of
Brazilian forest reserves many extracts
from wood, bark and leaves could be made
available in significant quantities. But use
of the natural substances themselves is not
necessarily to be advocated. In many in¬
stances the plants themselves are rare or
the active agents occur in low concentra¬
tion or are only minor . constituents.
Research, however, is well justified if these
natural substances are looked on as model
compounds whose effects warrant their
synthesis.
An extreme case is that of glaziovine, an
alkaloid from the bark of the very rare tree,
the Ocotea glaziovii (Lauraceae), only two
examples of which are known to the
authors. Glaziovine is a compound which
relieves anxiety states but has no depres¬
sant, muscle-relaxant or anticonvulsant ef¬
fects. It has been shown to counteract
experimentally-induced gastric ulcers in
rats.
This final example shows once more the
fruitful results that can be expected from
work on the chemistry of Brazilian plants
once it is taken up with vigour by
biologists, pharmacologists and the phar¬
maceutical industry. Those instances
where purposeful investigations have been
conducted show how an intensive inter¬
disciplinary approach can lead to a com¬
plete knowledge of the facts. Only in this
way can the immense legacy nature has
bestowed on us be put to good use.
Otto Gottlieb and Walter Mors
The harmful effects of certain plant
extracts can sometimes be
countered by treatment with
derivatives of other plants. The
medicinal properties of the fruit of
the Papaver somniferum or opium
poppy (right) have been known
since antiquity, but unfortunately
abuse of the narcotics derived from
it, such as opium, heroin and
codeine, can lead to addiction. The
traditional healers of Malaysia use
infusions of various plants in the
management of drug-addiction.
One such infusion, an extract of
buah mengkudu, the fruit of the
morinda tree (above) has been
shown to have a general sedative
effect and to alleviate withdrawal
pain in drug-addicts treated with it.

