The General History
of Africa
by Amadou-Mahtar M'Bow
Director-General of Unesco
THE face of Africa has long been concealed from
the world by myths and prejudices of all kinds.
African societies were regarded as societies
without a history; in spite of major studies produced in
the early decades of this century by such pioneers as Leo
Frobenius, Maurice Delafosse and Arturo Labrlola, many
non-African scholars, wedded to preconceptions rooted in
their own background, maintained that such societies
could not be studied scientifically because sources and
written documents were lacking. This amounted to a
refusal to see Africans as the creators of original cultures
which blossomed and perpetuated themselves for
centuries in distinctive ways of their own which historians
can only grasp by adopting new methods.
Furthermore, the African continent was virtually never
considered as a historical entity. On the contrary, stress
was laid on everything which might give credence to the
idea of a division, since time immemorial, between a
"white Africa" and a "black Africa", each ignorant of the
other. The Sahara was often presented as an impenetrable
expanse which completely prevented any mixing of ethnic
groups and peoples, any exchange of goods, beliefs,
customs and ideas between the societies established on
each side of the desert. Impassable frontiers were traced
between the civilizations of ancient Egypt, of Nubia, and
those of the peoples living south of the Sahara.
Today it is generally recognized that the civilizations of
the African -continent, through the variety of their
languages and cultures, form, to varying degrees, the
historical contours of an ensemble of peoples and
societies united by links stretching back for centuries.
Another phenomenon which has had a deleterious
effect on the objective study of the African past is the
existence of racial stereotypes, which appeared with the
slave trade and colonization, bred contempt and
incomprehension, and became so deeply rooted that they
actually perverted the conceptual basis of historiography.
From the moment when the notions of "whites" and
"blacks" were adopted to serve as generic descriptions of
the masters and the dominated peoples respectively,
Africans had to struggle against a dual enslavement,
economic and psychological.
Identifiable by the pigmentation of his skin, earmarked
for labour in mines and plantations, one commodity
among others, the African came to symbolize in the minds
of his oppressors an imaginary racial abstraction, falsely
infused with the notion of inferiority, which was
categorized as negro. This spurious process of
identification reduced the history of the African peoples to
the status of an ethno-history in which any appreciation of
their cultures was bound to be distorted. As for the image
of themselves which the colonizers gave to the Africans,
need it be said that all too often, alas, this was no more
than a caricature of the civilizations whose values they
were supposed, to embody?
The situation has changed radically, especially since the
African countries have achieved independence and now
actively participate in the life of the international
community and the mutual exchanges which it exists to
promote. In exercising their right to take the initiative
where their own history is concerned, the Africans
themselves are profoundly aware of the need to re¬
establish on firm foundations the historical nature of their
societies.
Herein lies the importance of the eight-volume General
History ofAfrica, upon whose publication Unesco is now
embarking.
The specialists from many countries who have
participated in this work decided to begin by defining Its
theoretical and methodological basis. They have
scrupulously re-examined the unjustified simplifications
originating from a restrictive, linear conception of history,
and, whenever necessary and possible, have revised
accepted positions so as to present the facts in their true
light. They have made every effort to bring into focus the
historical data through which it is possible to comprehend
the development of the different African peoples in their
specific social and cultural contexts.
Work on this immense task, made even more complex
and arduous by the diversity of sources and the dispersion
of documents, was undertaken by Unesco in three stages.
The first (1965-1969) consisted of work on documentation
and planning: the collection of oral and unpublished
written sources in the field; the preparation of a Guide to
the Sources of the History ofAfrica based on an inventory
of the archives of European countries; meetings of experts
to discuss questions of methodology and to trace the
broad outlines of the project. During the second stage
(1969-1971) international meetings of experts held in Paris
(1969) and Addis Abeba (1970) confirmed the
interdisciplinary character of the method chosen. The third
phase is that of the drafting and publication of the work,
under the intellectual responsibility of a 39-member
International Scientific Committee, two-thirds of whose
members are Africans.
The General History ofAfrica throws a new and original
light on the continent's past, considered as a totality,
because its authors have avoided the pitfalls of
dogmatism in tackling such fundamental questions as the
slave trade, which was responsible for one of the cruellest
deportations in the history of mankind and emptied the
continent of part of its lifeblood; colonization and all its
consequences; the relations between Africa south of the
Sahara and the Arab world; the process of decolonization
and the accession to independence of the new African
States. The General History brings into focus both Africa's
historical unity and it's relations with the other continents,
notably with the Americas and the Caribbean islands,
where the African heritage has left its imprint on ways of
feeling, thinking, imagining and acting, and where the
descendants of Africans have actively contributed to the
fashioning of national identities.
I am convinced that the whole sense and thrust of the
future draws its force from an intensely felt consciousness
of history, faithfully transmitted from generation to
generation through education. In Africa, as elsewhere, this
consciousness is one of the essential conditions of the
independence, development and affirmation of peoples.
Unesco is thus serving the entire international community
by helping to make known and by restoring to its proper
perspective Africa's contribution to human progress.
