Préfète Duffaut is one of the leading exponents of Haitian "naive", or popular painting.
All the imaginative power and unfettered creativity of his art, so deeply rooted in the
Haitian heritage, is to be seen in his work The Harbour, reproduced above.



The bewitched reality
of Haitian art
by René Depestre
RENE DEPESTRE, Haitian author, has publish¬
ed several volumes of poems, essays and fiction
including Un Arc-en-ciel pour l'Occident Chré¬
tien (published in English as A Rainbow for the
Christian West, University of Massachusetts
Press, 1977) and Poète à Cuba (shortly to appear
in English as Poet in CubaA He has collaborated
on two collective works produced by Unesco,
Africa en América Latina ("Africa in Latin Ame¬
rica") and América Latina en sus Ideas ("Latin
America through its Ideas") and is currently a
Unesco consultant. He has taught at the Univer¬
sity of Havana, Cuba, and at the University of
the West Indies at Mona, Kingston, Jamaica.
IF the word wonder can be taken to
denote everything that differs from the
natural and settled order of things,
then few countries have travelled so far, so
boldly and so gracefully as Haiti along a
road paved by wonders. A sense of won¬
der, in all its burgeoning, multifarious
forms, is one of the historic components of
the Haitian awareness.
Our people have their own unique way of
perceiving the relation between the mind
and the faculty of the imagination. Haitians
"find tongues in trees, books in the run
ning brooks, sermons in stones, and good
in everything". They hear the voice of the
gods in sun and rain, in shellfish, in river-
fish, in the fluttering wings of humming¬
birds and butterflies.
In response to the problems of slavery, a
complex fabric of correspondences, myths
and symbols evolved between society and
the world of nature in Haiti. As a result of
this process, which savours of the marvel¬
lous, the contradictions inherent in colonia¬
lism led not only to voodoo with its states
28

This is how the contemporary Haitian artist Jean René Chéry visualized
Christopher Columbus Landing in Haiti. At his first sight of the island,
the great explorer cried out in wonder at its luxuriant beauty. Today,
this same feeling of wonder and fascination still inspires Haitian
literature and art.
Photo © Editions Skira. Geneva
of auto-hypnosis but to dreamlike forms of
speech and behaviour in which the best
and the worst of human nature rub shoul¬
ders or else collide with unusual violence.
The "bewitched reality" of Haiti is a
maelstrom of currents which interpenetrate
and commingle: the natural and the super¬
natural, the picaresque, the erotic, the inef¬
fable, the absurd, the comic, the magical
and the entrancing. It has left its imprint on
religion and the political mysteries, on
orally transmitted folk-stories and literature
written in French or Haitian (Creole). It
lends an added enchantment to the
delights of love, dancing and music ; and it
has imbued the plastic arts with scintilla¬
ting magnificence.
One December morning in 1492, Christo¬
pher Columbus, dazzled by the beauty of
the Haitian bay, mountains and skyall
equally bluewhich stretched before his
eyes, exclaimed: £s una maravilla (It is a
marvel). With his cry of wonder on that
fateful day he annexed yet another be¬
jewelled island to the Spanish crown and at
the same time opened the horizons of Haiti
to the fantastic currents of universal his¬
tory. He named the new-found island Espa¬
ñola, later anglicized to Hispaniola. That
morning, although they did not know it,
the indigenous population of Haiti, the Ara-
waks, were transformed by the mysterious
workings of providence into the "Indians of
Hispaniola".
In the following decades, Europeans
practising the same semantic sleight-of-
hand would sweep across the "new
world". In the minds of these colonizers
the blacks were created by lumping to¬
gether Ibo, Bambara, Wolof, Peul, Man-
dingue and other African peoples stripped
of their identity. In equally specious fashion
(this time with promotion rather than
"denigration" in mind) the whites were
created from the peoples of Spain,
England, France, Portugal and Holland,
who carved up between them the Americas
(another blanket-expression which the
colonizers produced like a rabbit from a
magician's hat).
Later, the effervescence of procreation
in these regions brought forth a kaleido- .
scope of mulattoes, mestizos, quadroons^
One of the great heroes of the Haitian struggle for independence,
Toussaint Louverture was arrested on the orders of Napoleon and
deported to France where he died a prisoner at the Fort de Joux in the
French Jura. This engraving of his final moments is the work of an
unknown artist of the period.
Photo P Bastin © Explorer, Pans
1
¿r¿á8Br i
f (4sí* /I 1 1 *?sP*
rJSw1 à
J/ .-¿ßr>
i^^^
SUB
fcyt
	

I and octoroons who took their place along-
I side the already-invented Indians, Negroes
and Whites and in their turn gave shape, in
misfortune and fantasy, to a spectrum of
conflicts and colours so breathtaking as to
outdo a rainbow.
From then on the history of Haiti is in¬
separable from a kind of popular, baroque
surrealism which has displayed itself with
equal exuberance in collective events and
individual lives. Between 1492 and 1697,
when the Treaty of Ryswick established a
modus vivendi between the French and
Spanish empires on the island of Hispa¬
niola by dividing it into two separate colo¬
nies, a world of skirmishing buccaneers
was brought to life in a mass of legends
and tales, thousands of improbable yarns
were spun of corsairs and freebooters, and
the resistance and genocide of the Indian
tribes of the Caribbean were recorded in
many a hair-raising story.
This imaginative ferment was part and
parcel of the economic exploits achieved
Speaking of Haitian painting, the artist
Philippe-Auguste Salnave declared: "In my
opinion, all these wonders emerging from
the heads of men with no culture, no
technique and with no guidance are the
fruit of pure imagination." Salnave himself
took up painting at the age of fifty-two.
Above, detail from his Garden of Eden.
Opposite page, one of a number of
portrayals of Baron Saturday by the
Haitian painter André Pierre, who is also a
priest of the Voodoo cult. In Voodoo
mythology. Baron Saturday is the chief of
the loas, or spirits connected with the cult
of the dead. Right, a Voodoo believer
possessed by a loa draws a vevó (mystic
symbol of a loa) during a Voodoo
ceremony. Above, a magic vevé. Voodoo
is an amalgam of Catholic and African
religious beliefs and practices and is
similar to the Brazilian candomblé and the
Cuban santería cults.
30

by a reign of terror in plantations and slave
workshops. The legendary prosperity of
Santo Domingo (as Haiti was also known)
filled the galleons to bursting-point with
gold, indigo, pearls, precious stones,
spices, cotton, coffee and sugar, in the flux
of a traffic in human beings which filled the
world with unprecedented sound and fury.
While the trade in slaves (known as
"pieces of India") and ebony wood was
being practised in conditions which defy
belief, the prodigies which mark the history
of Haiti did not die out in the cruel and
monotonous regime of forced labour; in¬
stead they found new nourishment in the
resistance of the slaves to their terrible fate.
Reduced to the zombie-like state of biologi¬
cal fuel, the Africans and their descendants
drew from the insecurity which permeated
every fibre of their being a dynamism ena¬
bling them to reconstitute the dismantled
foundations of their identity. The slaves
withstood the pressures of an evangelism
armed with whips, branding irons and
racism, and transmuted their distress into
creativity.
Instead of passively assimilating the
lessons of the colonial catechism, they
syncretized them with the religious beliefs
of the Yoruba, Fanti-Ashanti, Bantu,
Congo and Fon, to which their memory
and collective imagination added new func¬
tions linked to the affective and moral
needs of the American plantations. Thanks
to this mutation of identity, the mytholo¬
gies and traditions of the African past
acquired a truly astonishing force, express¬
ed in new norms of behaviour, highly ori¬
ginal ways of feeling, dreaming,
"imagining", thinking and acting. The sla¬
ves transformed the contradictory patterns
of their double, and even triple, cultural
heritage (tugged as they were between
Africa, Europe and the Amerindian world)
into new models with the dynamism to
mould through suffering a national cons¬
ciousness and to nourish the roots of "Hai-
tianity". At the end of the 18th century
voodoo was for Haitians a psychodrama, a
trancelike system of psychological release;
with the coming of the Men of the En¬
lightenment who led Haiti's war of inde¬
pendence, it was turned into a movement
for mobilizing the masses.
The struggle for emancipation began on
19 August 1791 with a ceremony famed in
the annals of Haitian history. In a scene
worthy of the imagination of a Gothick
novelist, bands of runaway slaves gathered
at Bois-Caiman ("Crocodile Wood") in res¬
ponse to a call from their leader Boukman
and swore allegiance to their cause in the
midst of a violent thunderstorm. Buffeted
by gusts of wind and rain, the insurgents
drank the blood of a freshly-killed pig in an
ecstatic frenzy, while the lightning-flashes
affixed a cosmic signature to their pledge
to win freedom or to die. From that night
until the Haitians won the decisive battle of
Vertieres on 18 November 1803, the island
lived through a holocaust of fire and blood.
During their epic resistance to slavery, no
feat of prowess, no sacrifice was too great
for the oppressed masses as they fought to
achieve the first victory of the decoloniza¬
tion movement in world history.
All the leaders of this pioneer movement,
both the circumstances of their chequered
lives and the tragic circumstances of their
deaths, still live in the Haitian imagination.
The first of them, a one-armed prophet
named Mackandal, held the plantations in
the north of the island in a four-year grip of
terror and fascination, until he was captu¬
red and burned alive on a square in Cap-
Français. Long after his execution on 20
January 1758 his spirit would be discerned
in a "walking tree" or in the clairvoyance of
a domestic animal or a bird of prey.
After Boukman, the black giant of Bois-
Caiman, came Toussaint Louverture, the
great figure who navigated the storms from
which Haiti was born. His singleminded
drive for the emancipation of the slaves of
San Domingo was proof against every
blandishment. Then, at the height of his
grandeur, on the brink of realizing this
grand design, he was captured on Napo¬
leon's orders and shipped to captivity in
France. Stricken with nostalgia, he would
die one glacial morning, a prisoner in a
fortress on a Jura hilltop.
Under his inspired successor. Dessali¬
nes, new roots grew on the tree of liberty
which had been buried beneath distant
foreign snows with the lost visions of Tous¬
saint Loüverture. Then, only two years
after welding together a nation. Dessalines
himself fell beneath a hail of Haitian bullets
at Pont-Rouge. The last act of this Passion
of the Tropics was accomplished when his
remains, scattered about the murder site,
were gathered and buried one dark night by
an old, half-crazed woman mumbling a dis¬
tracted incantation.
Another father of Haiti, Henri Christo¬
phe, who has been called the "Peter the
Great of the Sun", fanned even higher the
flames of the legends whose glow had kept
the island alive. After his coronation, he
pierced one door in his palace of Sans¬
souci for every day of the year, and built
on a mountain peak the Citadelle Lafer-
rière, the fortress which André Malraux so
aptly described as "the Saturnian citadel,
never attacked, never inhabited except by
31

, the zombies of those who built it". One day
in 1942, in a Port-au-Prince cinema, I first
heard the Cuban novelist Alejo Carpentier
reflect on these haunted ruins in a lecture
which brought an incandescent glow to
their desolate magnificence. Carpentier
spoke in tones which echoed those of
Pablo Neruda when he set eyes on the ver¬
tiginous site of Macchu Picchu in Peru. The
Cuban master had experienced the revela¬
tion of America's bewitched reality, which
would later enrich his novels, especially his
masterpiece A Kingdom of This World,
which is directly inspired by the crazy geo¬
metry and the dreams which King Christo¬
phe in his glory transformed into reality.
Christophe was followed by President
Alexandre Petion, who was catapulted
from a humdrum existence into a grandiose
dream when the fraternal aid he granted to
the fugitive Simon Bolivar in 1815 led
directly to the battle of Ayacucho (1824),
the culminating point in Latin America's
struggle for independence from Spain. It is
to Petion's credit that, by extending the
hand of welcome to Bolivar, Haiti (often
despised as a poor relation of the Hispano-
American world) became the first country
in the Western hemisphere to turn to its
neighbours the visionary countenance of
the solidarity of peoples.
A country which entered the history of
the Americas proffering such fantastic gifts
might have expected to see its promise
blossom quickly in art and literature. That
this did not come about is one of the para¬
doxes of our story. The stranglehold of
colonialism had not been fully loosed from
Haiti's social structure and colonialist atti¬
tudes returned in force to influence the
lives and aesthetic canons of the indige¬
nous intelligentsia. For many years this
recrudescence of ideas that had been incul¬
cated in servitude froze the sense of won¬
der that could have revitalized our culture.
Our first creative artists in the nineteenth
century were parodists of literary theories
and concepts totally at odds with the reality
of Haitian life and with the dreams that the
popular consciousness had moulded into
the myths, fables and stories of oral litera¬
ture. Haiti's search for an artistic identity
really began with the poetry of Oswald
Durand and Masillon Coicou, and with the
prose of Frédéric Marcelin, Justin Lhéris-
son, Fernand Hibbert and Antoine Inno¬
cent. These were the men who first began
to tap the wellsprings of an original Haitian
creativity.
But it was not until 1927, when Haiti was
under a military occupation, that another
generation gave this hitherto tentative
search for identity a definite direction
among the refreshing waves of wonder and
realism. In 1928 the ethnologist Jean Price-
Mars published his Ainsi Parla L'Oncle, a
classic study of Afro-Haitian folklore which
signalled the emergence of a new form of
vindication of our idiosyncrasies and natio¬
nal values. Men like Normil Sylvain, Jac¬
ques Roumain, Emile Roumer, Carl
Brouard, Léon Laleau and Philippe Thoby-
Marcelin began to devise new ways of
expressing in literary form what it feels like
to be a Haitian and the difficulties Haitians
encounter in their lives.
Other distinguished members of this
group of pioneers included Jean-F. Brierre,
F. Morisseau-Leroy, Roussan Camille and
Clément Magloire Saint-Aude. Yet another
blaze of imagination brought to the fore
writers such as René Balance, Paul Lara-
que, Edris Saint-Amand, Jacques Stephen
Alexis, Marie Chauvet, Roger Dorsinville,
ques Stephen Alexis. In Gouverneurs de la
Rosée (published in English as Masters of
the Dew), Compère Général So/eil and
other equally powerful works, they have
woven a rich allegorical tapestry of the
struggle for a better life in Haiti, evoking
the tenderness and beauty of everyday life
through an inspired mingling of the imagi¬
nary and the real. Alexis has defined the
significance of the Haitian quest for identity
through literature: "What is the marvel¬
lous", he has written, "if not the imagery in
which a people enwraps its experience and
reflects its conception of the world and of
life, its faith, hope, confidence in mankind
and in a high form of justice..." In a stirring
manifesto he has called on his country's
poets, novelists, musicians and painters to
use "the treasury of stories and legends, all
forms of musical, choreographic and plas¬
tic symbolism, and all the forms of Haitian
popular art, to help the nation to solve its
Open-air Market, by Casimir Laurent, one of Haiti's best known painters.
Lucien Lemoine and others, who showed
both in poetry and in fiction "the possibility
of a dynamic integration of the marvellous
into realism". The same ferment of lyricism
is still at work in the astonishing composi¬
tions of writers such as Davertige, Anthony
Phelps, Georges Castera junior. Serge
Legagneur, Franck Etienne, Jean-Richard
Laforest, Emile Ollivier, René Philoctète
and others. Meanwhile, the members of
the rising generation of creators publish
their candid reflections in the columns of a
magazine called Le Petit Samedi Soir.
And so in the past half century Haiti has
abandoned the imitation and parody of
imported aesthetic systems and ventured
boldly along the path to truths and myste¬
ries illuminated by its own inner flame and
sustained by its own historic roots.
The two uncontested masters of this
renaissance are Jacques Roumain and Jac-
problems and acomplish the tasks which lie
before it".
So far it is the painters of Haiti who have
realized the aesthetic programme outlined
by Roumain and Alexis with the greatest
rigour and panache. They have miracu¬
lously succeeded in expressing in paint the
Haitian's extraordinary sense of rhythm
and through a frenzy of shapes and colours
have ushered the Haitian consciousness to
the incandescent centre of its identity.
One day at the end of 1943, our English ,
teacher at the Lycée Pétion, a North Ameri¬
can of Dutch origin named DeWitt Peters,
bade farewell to my class. He was giving up
teaching in order to found an art centre at
Port-au-Prince, a seemingly overambitious
project which came to fruition on 14 May
1944 with the opening of the first exhi¬
bition of Haitian painting ever to be organi¬
zed. At last the realism and enchantment of
32

-..#>:
S'W M H M M HR H W
Haiti had found their language and inspira¬
tion in the visual arts! Painters steeped in
the workings of the popular imagination
and versed in the vicissitudes of the "Hai¬
tian dream" seized on the humble tales that
delight our children and began to transform
them into expanses of radiant colours and
forms. Through works that were an incan¬
tation to justice and showed a fine dis¬
regard for academic trends and rhetoric,
the droplet of dew that had trembled for
centuries from the leaf of suffering Haiti
became an event in the history of world art.
Some of the leading figures in this move¬
ment, which is less "naive" than a super¬
ficial acquaintance with it may suggest,
include: Hector Hyppolite, Philomé and
Sénèque Obin, Rigaud Benoit, Castera
Bazile, Wilson Bigaud, Enguerrand Gour-
gue, Louverture Poisson, Préfète Duffaut,
Micius Stéphane, André Pierre, Philippe
Auguste, Saint-Brice, Jasmin Joseph,
Dieudonné Cédor, Antonio Joseph, Luck-
ner Lazare, Luce Turnier, Max Pinchinat, J.
Chéry, Bernard Wa, Davertige, Léontus,
Roland Dorcély, Minium Cayemitte. But
such a list is far from complete; the dazz¬
ling skills of many other hands have helped
to beckon in Haiti's new dawn of creation.
It may be that the creative artists of our
country, and especially our naive painters,
possess gifts which enable them to span
the animal, vegetable and mineral worlds
as well as society's most secret dreams; it
has been granted to them to express with
grace and integrity everything in the
entranced, entrancing Caribbean islands
that enlightens and delights the eyes and
heart and creates a world in which human
relations can flourish forever in poetry and
dignity.
René Depestre
Landscape (top of page) and Voodoo
Vision (ce.itre) are part of Préfète
Duffaut's Imaginary Cities series, inspired
by his native town of Jacmel. Left, Ball at
Port-au-Prince, by Rigaud Benoit, an artist
noted for his meticulous attention to
detail.
33
