The search
for a global strategy
by Dzhermen Gvishiani
UNISIST-,4 philosophy,
a movement
and an organization
Rational planning for development requires
a solid basis of readily accessible scientific
and technological information. But many
countries lack the personnel or the facilities
to cope with the rising flood of information
(around two million scientific articles are
published in some fifty languages every
year). To make this mass of information
more readily available and to help scientists
and decision-makers to select more swiftly
the information appropriate to their needs,
Unesco launched in 1971, in close
collaboration with the International Council
of Scientific Unions, an intergovernmental
programme known as Unisist. The aim of
Unisist is to promote the unimpeded
exchange of published scientific
information and data among scientists of
all countries by encouraging compatibility
between different systems through
standardization in the presentation of data
and removal of the barriers of language and
by the development of trained manpower
and information resources in all countries.
Unisist makes it easier for developing
countries to select the scientific and
technological information that they
themselves consider important for their
development. Unisist has been described as
"a philosophy, a movement and an
organization" and it provides the
conceptual framework and helps to
harmonize the activities of the hundred or
more information systems or services of
the United Nations and its Agencies, some
examples of which figure in the diagram.
The meaning of these acronyms and the
Agencies which sponsor them are:
UNISIST: Intergovernmental Programme for
Co-operation in the fields of scientific and
technological information.
SPINES: International System for the
Exchange of Information on the Application
of Science and Technology to Development
(Unesco).
MEDI: Marine Environmental Data Referral
System (Unesco).
POPINS: Population Information System
(United Nations).
AGRIS: International Information System
for the Agricultural Sciences and
Technology (FAO).
ASFIS: Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries
Information System (FAO).
ISIS: Integrated set of Information Systems
(ILO).
INTIB: Industrial and Technological
Information Bank (UNIDO).
PIN: Patent Information Network (WIPO).
INIS: International Nuclear Information
System (IAEA).
STILL fresh in everyone's memory are
the days when, for the first time,
mankind had to face up to problems
on a global scale, when the world was finally
obliged to consider the possible
catastrophes that might be brought about
by the "reckless" actions of an exploding
population on our shrunken earth.
Various alternative causes of disequili¬
brium between man's activities and his en¬
vironment came under consideration. And
as if to justify our fears, the real crises broke
one after the other: food, energy, raw
materials, and, finally, the ecological crisis.
The world began to heed the voices calling
attention to the problems of the ocean and
the climate and demanding proper manage¬
ment of the ozone layer which protects the
earth against the damaging effects of
cosmic radiation..
It must be admitted that alarmist
dramatization of the future turned out to be
more effective in attracting attention to
these new questions than was impartial
analysis of the vivid facts of everyday reality.
The reason for this is that people are inclined
to underestimate a danger with which they
are actually faced and that is evident to
them, and to overestimate the risk when
they have only a vague understanding of the j
nature of the processes involved. I
25

The bounty of the earth
Science and technology have brought great benefits to mankind by freeing men from many
of the constraints imposed by nature and giving them the means of exploiting the earth's
resources. The question remains, however, how far man can go In the manipulation of the
environment without risking disruption and breakdown. Although environmental and
resource use problems take specific forms in different geographic areas of the world, they
have to be viewed in a global or at least a regional perspective since nature takes no
account of man-made frontiers. It is not by chance, therefore, that Unesco's major
intergovernmental scientific co-operation programmes have evolved around disciplines that
are geographical in character, such as geology, ecology, hydrology and oceanography.
Thus, the International Geological Correlation Programme (IGCP) is concerned with
advancing our knowledge of the processes involved in the evolution of the earth's crust
and of the origin and extent of the earth's mineral and energy resources and with ensuring
their rational use; the Man and the Biosphere Programme (MAB) aims to improve our
knowledge of the earth's biological resources and of man's interaction with his
environment; the International Hydrological Programme (IHP) seeks to promote the study
and the rational management of the world's water resources; in the Marine Sciences
Unesco's programme is concerned with examining the possibilities for man of what has
been described as "the last frontier", the vast ocean masses that cover some 70 per cent of
the surface of the globe. Today the social sciences, the humanities, culture, education and
communication are all contributing to the solution of one of the crucial problems on which
all development hinges how to conserve and to make rational use of the earth's bounty.
Below, green circles, over a kilometre in
diameter, inscribed in the Libyan desert
some 900 kilometres south-east of
Benghazi, are irrigated fields supplied with
water from a vast underground reservoir. In
this "centre pivot" irrigation system water
is pumped from a source at the centre of
the field into a huge sprinkler pipe
supported at intervals on wheels. Like the
hand of a clock the pipe slowly sweeps
round spraying out life-giving water.
Photo Derek Bayes, Fortune »£) Aspect Picture Library, London
, But neither alarmism nor complacency are
good advisers where complicated and im¬
portant global problems are concerned.
What is needed is a realistic evaluation of
the situation, mobilization of the necessary
resources, and exploitation of the options
open to us. And it is only natural that in fac¬
ing global problems, in searching for the
wisest and most rational solutions, mankind
should draw more and more actively upon
the accumulated store of scientific
knowledge and upon the know-how offered
by technology.
The past decade has seen the emergence
of a new approach to the consideration of
the long-term laws that govern the evolution
of human civilization. Now generally known
26
as global modelling, this approach brings
together representatives of various scientific
disciplines possessing the professional
knowledge and skills acquired previously
within their individual disciplines. This
results in attempts to solve global problems
within the framework of approaches of a
wide spectrum of disciplines with different
objectives and methods and at the same
time it creates favourable conditions for
alternative and even contradictory concepts,
thus offering hope that a comprehensive
analysis can be achieved. If the contradic¬
tions between various approaches turn out
to be major and substantive, a basis is pro¬
vided on which global modelling, suggesting
theories of its own, can establish itself as a
new conceptual approach.
The first work in the field of global modell¬
ing was undertaken in an attempt to explain
the process of mankind's development, tak¬
ing into consideration multiple factors
which, in the view of scientists, could in¬
fluence the future of civilization on the
planet. What these attempts revealed most
clearly, however, was the existence of a
number of serious methodological problems
in the elaboration of theories and in situation
simulation.
The modest results so far achieved in
global modelling can thus be explained by
the lack of a sound theoretical basis and by
the tendency to use short-term interactions
among system elements for the analysis of
long-term patterns.

Left, the rich harvest of the sea.
Anchovetas from the Pacific arrive at a
fishmeal factory at Callao, Peru. This
species of anchovy, caught in the Peru
Current, constitutes the largest single catch
of any marine species more than 11
million tons annually.
Below, the majestic architecture of the
tropical forest, photographed here in the
Banco National Park, to the west of
Abidjan, Ivory Coast. Covering some two
thousand million hectares of land in Africa,
south and central America and south-east
Asia, tropical forests form the habitat of
some of the world's most rare and
interesting plants and animals. Over one
thousand million people live in the world's
tropical forest zones; wise use of forest
lands is vital to their well-being and is the
very foundation of national economic and
development planning for many tropical
countries.
The potential contribution of science to
the solution of global problems is not,
however, limited to the development of a
methodology for their analysis. Problems of
the interactions of human society with
nature and of the interactions between
societies with varying potentials for ac¬
cumulating natural wealth to satisfy their
domestic needs cannot be resolved without
the direct involvement of scientists and
engineers. A wide range of problems, both
fundamental and technological, must be
solved before the population of our planet
can be assured of an adequate supply of
energy, food and raw materials, before
dangerous diseases can be checked and
before environmental pollution and the
degradation of the soil can be halted.
Even the most elegant scientific solu¬
tions new method of increasing crop
yields known as the "Green Revolution" is a
good example may be incompatible with
the socio-economic environment in which
they are to be implemented. It is in these
situations that a purely mechanistic,
technocratic approach is insufficient and the
systems approach, broadly interpreted, is
needed to identify in good time possible
contradictions, to establish new objectives,
sometimes in unexpected areas, and to sug¬
gest valid solutions.
One important stimulus to modern
development is the contradiction between
the universality of scientific knowledge and
technological skills on the one hand, and the
specific origin of many of today's dominant
technologies on the other. This contradic¬
tion is quite natural, since knowledge of the
world is gained unevenly, while specific
achievements in certain branches of science
respond to the requirements of the time and
the social environment.
<
Which scientific discoveries can be ap¬
plied in the form of appropriate technologies
is after all a question of a socio-economic
character, rather than one to be resolved by
the natural sciences. It is regrettable that
those who determine scientific and
technological policies in governments or
corporations do not always take this obvious
factor into consideration.
Quite often we come across certain con¬
cepts which are based on the idea that the
universality of natural laws implies identity
of methods in their use by all the peoples of
the earth. This leads to the simplistic conclu¬
sion that peoples with a wider experience of
interactions with nature and possessing
more powerful means of transforming
natural wealth into economic benefits can
pass on their experience to countries that
are less developed in this respect; since the
latter are not adequately prepared to absorb
new technologies, they have to simplify
and adapt them first, and only then can
they introduce them into their economic
structures.
Reasoning along these lines, the authors
of certain global projects make suggestions
whose implementation would perpetuate
the unnatural situation obtaining in the
capitalist world, and would not be con¬
ducive to solving the global problem of the
international division of labour. These
authors regard the future of mankind as a
realization of the so-called "organic growth"
concept, according to which each region of
the world, guided by a wish to minimize
costs, specializes in the most readily
available activities. The final result of the
whole chain of logical consequences pro¬
ceeding from a seemingly harmless
hypothesis of the integrity and universality
of principal technological decisions is sum¬
marized by the American futurologist Her¬
man Kahn, who states in his book "The
Next 200 Years": "The poor and the un¬
trained have always done the dirtier and less
pleasant work, and this is true among coun¬
tries as well as within them".
The application of the comparative costs
principle as the only basis for shaping the
strategy of long-term development of coun¬
tries and regions of the world is not only in¬
sufficient, but is fraught with the dangers in¬
herent in a simplified interpretation of com¬
plex processes of socio-economic develop¬
ment. The development of world economic
relations in line with this principle brings
about stratification of the productive struc¬
ture of the world economy, that is to say,
specialization of some regions in raw
materials production, others in their pro¬
cessing, and still others in the manufacture
of consumer goods and equipment and in
development of new technologies. In the
longer term such stratification would modify
the conditions of foreign trade exchange in
favour of the regions that occupy the upper
levels of the production process and result in
the export of inflation by these regions in ex¬
change for import of higher growth rates
from other, mainly developing, regions.
Thus the solution of the more radical |
global problems of today's world calls for a I
27

fundamentally different strategy of long-
term development, one that provides for all-
round development of every region. In par¬
ticular, developing nations need their own
scientific capability so that they can meet
their urgent needs through the creation of
adequate technologies of their own. These
technologies may have nothing in common
with the so-called "adaptive" technologies
that reproduce, in a simplified form, pro¬
duction techniques used in the advanced
countries.
It is quite possible that new technologies
would have to be developed that would
meet the same demands but by quite dif¬
ferent means and would be suited to the
economic potential of the nation concerned.
In many cases the accomplishment of these
tasks would be impossible unless the
developing countries are provided with the
infrastructure for modern fundamental
research and a constantly evolving scientific
and technical basis of their own.
The solution of vital scientific and
technical problems and the quest for alter¬
native technological options requires so
much manpower and such vast financial
resources that the duplication of research
in several countries is an unjustifiable
extravagance.
The development of international scien¬
tific and technical co-operation and the
search for ways and means of making it
more effective are thus particularly urgent
issues. In this context, the attitude of the
developed capitalist countries at the recent
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development) Session in Manila
to the question of transfer of technologies
was disappointing. Their position appears to
be dictated inter alia by the desire to
minimize the threat of active competition
from the developing nations, some of which
have already achieved some success in
developing their own industry and possess a
substantial potential for certain types of
mass production based on the processing of
their own natural resources.
This attitude on the part of the developed
countries may well compromise any pro¬
gramme or strategy of scientific and
technological development, no matter how
enthusiastically it is adopted.
I believe that the task of rendering the
achievements of modern scientific and
technological progress genuinely interna¬
tional has now become so urgent that it ex¬
cludes any other alternatives, all of which
are fraught with catastrophic conse¬
quences. Never before in human history has
the need for co-operation between the
peoples of the globe been so acute as it is
today. All proposals aimed at setting up
adequate and effective international
mechanisms deserve the most careful
consideration.
In this context the reinforcement of the
activities of the United Nations, its
Specialized Agencies and the Regional
Commissions in organizing international
scientific and technological co-operation is
of particular importance. Not enough has
been achieved and there must be a constant
search for new and efficient organizational
forms of co-operation. The developing
countries should be given all possible sup¬
port in their efforts to establish regional and
subregional scientific centres, and to
achieve international integration of their na¬
tional goals.
Above, Sequoia trees in the Yosemite
National Park, California, United States.
The giant sequoia is one of the oldest and
largest living organisms on earth. Below,
the gray kangaroo, one of some 120 species
of Australasian marsupial mammals.
Concern is rising about the rapid reduction
of the kangaroo population in Australia due
to habitat destruction resulting from the
rapid spread of rangeland agriculture and
uncontrolled shooting for meat and fur.
Conservation fordevelopment
The biosphere, the thin layer of soil, water
and air surrounding our planet, to which all
life is confined, consists of a number of
complex self-sufficient units, known as
ecosytems, within which a balance is
maintained through the interactions of
animals, plants and other organisms and
chemical and physical elements. At first,
man had no more impact on these
ecosystems than any other mammal, but
the moment he mastered fire and invented
tools and agriculture, he began to modify
the "natural" environment in ways
favourable to himself. Unfortunately, the
achievement of the high present day levels
of agricultural and industrial productivity
has involved increasingly extensive
Left, giant tortoises from the Galapagos
Islands are thought to be among the oldest
living creatures on earth. Charles Darwin,
the great English naturalist, visited the
islands in 1835 and drew inspiration for his
theories on natural selection from
observation of the unusual animal life he
found there. Many of the islands have been
declared nature reserves with animals and
plants coming under the protection of the
Darwin Foundation. Right, the peaks of
Mount Kenya. Although situated near the
equator, the 5,199-metre-high mountain has
a permanent covering of ice and snow. The
mountain above the 2,896 metre contour
line was designated a biosphere reserve in
April 1978.
28

modification of ecosystems and a rapid
attrition of natural areas and the animal
and plant species within them. If this trend
continues, many more species will become
extinct, with a consequent diminution of
the world gene pool and the loss of
important sources of potential evolutionary
material. To counter this threat, Unesco,
through its Man and the Biosphere (MAB)
Programme and in co-operation with
Member States, has established a network
of "biosphere reserves". These are
protected natural areas (tropical rain
forests, deserts, prairies, tropical
savannahs, etc.) in which valuable plant
and animal genetic strains can be
safeguarded and in which scientific
research on man's impact on his
environment can be carried out. Already
162 such areas (indicated by black dots on
the map below) have been designated
throughout the world and it is hoped that
eventually every type of habitat and
ecosystem will be represented. Biosphere
reserves are not limited to completely
untouched natural areas. They may include
areas that have been ravaged by man for
example by strip mining in which
experiments in restoration can be effected.
The whole concept of biosphere reserves,
therefore, adds a new dimension to the
traditional conservation approach. Going
beyond the initial stage of conservation, it
involves research into the broader question
of the rational use of natural resources and
the maintenance of mankind's biological
life-support system. With this approach,
conservation of our heritage becomes not a
hindrance to but a means of achieving
rational development.
Above, proud father ostrich guards a clutch
of eggs in the Askaniya-Nova nature
reserve, a protected steppe area in the
Ukraine. Below, bison in the Bialowieza
National Park in east-central Poland.
Located in the centre of a great primeval
forest, the area has been under protection
since 1919. At that time the original bison
herds had been exterminated, but bison
were successfully re-introduced in 1929 and
now number some 250 head. The Park
became part of the biosphere reserve
network in June 1976.
H&HJ
Below, monitor or giant lizard from Sri
Lanka. Monitor lizards can vary in length
from 20 centimetres for the smallest
species to over 3 metres for the largest.
29

WORLD PATTERN OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Developing
countries
5.8%
Developed
countries
93.9%
Least
developed
countries
0.3%
Developing
countries
2.5%
Developed
countries
97.4%
Least
developed
countries
0.1%
Percentage Distribution
of R Et D Scientists and Engineers
A total of 2,978,204 scientists and engineers
were engaged in R & D throughout the
world in 1974. Of these 93.9 per cent
worked in the developed countries, 5.8 per
cent in the developing countries and 0.3 per
cent in the least developed countries.
R Et D Expenditure, 1974
In 1974, world expenditure on Research and
Development (R & D) totalled $101,785
million. Of this figure $99,158 million were
spent in developed countries, $2,544 million
in developing countries and $83 million in
the least developed countries.
Diagrams taken from Estimation of Human Financial Resources Devoted to R & D at the World and Regional Level, 1979, Office of
Statistics, Unesco.
Not only international governmental
organizations but a broad range of interna¬
tional non-governmental institutions should
be actively involved in the search for solu¬
tions. The potential of the international
scientific community, which within the last
few years has greatly improved its
understanding of the problems confronting
mankind, should be more effectively
employed. In this connexion particular
stress should be laid on the importance of
independent expert assessment, based on
deep and objective analysis of the complex
processes of scientific, technological, social
and economic development, as a means of
keeping pace with global development pro¬
cesses, enriching understanding of the com¬
plexity of global problems and enhancing
the awareness of individual countries of the
problems mankind as a whole is facing to¬
day and will face in the future.
The time has come to end the mean¬
ingless debate over whether the scientific
and technological community has the right
Below, satellite image of the southern end of Lake Rukwa in south-west Tanzania. Many
countries are making use of data from satellites to identify the major land resources of
their remoter regions quickly and cheaply for the preparation of regional and national
development plans. Tanzania's main centre for remote sensing work is the Bureau of
Resource Assessment and Land Use Planning at the University of Dar-es-Salaam where a
number of maps showing vegetation, land units and crop potential have been produced.
and the responsibility to make recommenda¬
tions on policy issues relating to the
management of global problems, or whether
these should be left to the politicians. The
contributions of both governments and of
the non-governmental community are need¬
ed. We should strive for the creation of a
new and powerful partnership of effort in¬
volving the international scientific and
technological community, national govern¬
ments, and the United Nations system.
Similarly, we should develop a partnership
of effort between the developing and
developed countries as well as between the
East and the West.
If the most urgent problems of human
development are to be successfully solved,
the efforts of world science and of interna¬
tional scientific co-operation should be
focussed on the following extremely impor¬
tant areas:
the incorporation of natural systems into
economic structures through the utilization
of new types of raw materials and sources of
energy, with due consideration for en¬
vironmental concerns;
the development of new technologies,
potentially applicable in all the regions of our
planet under conditions of a just interna¬
tional division of labour, with the natural
resources of each region serving its effective
and independent development;
the development of technologies that will
meet the requirements of developing na¬
tions with due regard to specific tasks facing
them in achieving socio-economic progress;
the concentration of the efforts of scien¬
tists, inspired by a progressive world
outlook, on the development of the social
sciences and on the elaboration of
theoretical concepts which will establish a
comprehensive, scientific; basis for an
analysis of the causes of the most acute pro¬
blems of today, including global problems,
and provide strategies for their solutions.
the consideration of different types of in¬
ternational division of labour and of the
long-term consequences of their introduc¬
tion, and the analysis of long-term trends in
socio-economic development;
the elaboration of the methodology and
techniques of long-term socio-economic
and scientific and technical forecasting,
making use of all the achievements of the
social sciences and employing a systems
approach.
DZHERMEN MIKHAILOVICH GVISHIANI,
Soviet philosopher and sociologist, is a member
of the USSR Academy of Sciences and Deputy
Chairman of the State Committee for Science and
Technology. He is also president of the Council of
the International Institute for Applied Systems
Analysis at Laxenburg (Austria) and a member of
specialized scientific associations in various coun¬
tries including Czechoslovakia, Sweden and the
United States. He is the author of over 300
articles and studies which have been published
in many countries.
30
