A Chinese emperor's
clay army
by Gu Wenjie
IN March 1974, villagers from a
people's commune near the city of
Sian in Shençi province, China, were
responsible for one of the century's most ex¬
traordinary archaeological finds. While drill¬
ing a well they struck, not water, but a tun¬
nel which turned out to be filled with an ar¬
my of life-size warriors, horses and chariots,
all modelled in terra-cotta.
The clay phalanx, several thousand
strong, was found buried just over a
kilometre east of the tomb of the Emperor
Qin Shihuang (Chin Shih Huang), the ruler
who unified China's warring states over
2,000 years ago. When all the pieces have
been lifted from the earth, restored and put
on display in a permanent museum, they
may capture the world's imagination as
strongly as the other monumental achieve¬
ment for which the mighty Emperor is
remembered, the Great Wall of China.
The villagers reported their discovery to
the authorities and a team of archaeologists
was called in to supervise scientific excava¬
tions of the area. They discovered a subter¬
ranean pit, 210 metres long by 60 metres
wide, filled with pottery figures. A
preliminary dig over an area of 1,000 square
metres revealed 520 clay warriors (each bet- k
ween 1 .78 and 1 .87 metres high) and f
For two millennia, a 6,000-strong legion of
life-size warriors, modelled in clay and
complete with weapons, horses and war
chariots, have kept a silent, subterranean
vigil over the tomb of Qin Shihuang (Chin
Shih Huang Ti), a fitting escort for the man
who built the Great Wall and ruled from 221
to 210 BC as the first emperor of a unified
China. This long-buried army is gradually
being uncovered at a site to the east of the
emperor's tomb, near the city of Sian in
Shensi province. The legion was interred in
battle array in a huge earth and timber
vault. As the photos (exclusive to the
Unesco Courier) on these two pages show,
not all the figures survived intact the
collapse of the roof following a fire caused
by a rebel army three years after the
emperor's death, and their shattered
remains are now being painstakingly pieced
together by Chinese archaeologists. The
site is protected by a huge hangar which
will eventually become a permanent
museum.
GU WENJIE, of the People's Republic of China,
is a specialist in archaeology and a staff reporter
of China Features.-
5

m ft
a <i s. - Ji Í
««( a >J«+x
« .j. » n t m
*"h « -v » *
100 . 0 . . 100«
Map shows location of emperor Qin
Shihuang's tomb (1) and of the
underground vault (2), 1,225 metres to the
east, in which the clay army was found. A
modern highway runs close by the northern
side of the tomb which has not yet been
excavated and is believed to be intact. The
emperor's last resting place, a veritable
underground palace, is reputed to have
taken 700,000 workmen thirty-six years to
complete. Experts say that it will take two
generations to unearth all the treasures
buried within the tomb complex.
Below, plan of the underground vault,
drawn up in 1975, showing (1) trial
exploratory trenches, left and centre, and
excavated area, and (2) the sloping
entrance passageways. Right, detailed
diagram of the excavated area of the vault
In the eleven corridors can be seen the life
size figures of warriors and horses.
twenty-four life-size pottery horses. Experts
have since estimated that there may be as
many as six thousand ceramic models on the
site.
The warriors, which are in an excellent
state of preservation, are well-proportioned,
and the delineation of their features in¬
dicates craftsmanship of a high order. Some
of them are stamped with the names of the
potters who made them. Armour, belts, leg¬
gings and boots are all modelled with careful
attention to detail. But perhaps the most
remarkable thing of all is that each figure is a
unique portrait. One soldier, perhaps a
veteran, is shown with knitted brows and
tightly compressed lips; another, with arch
ed eyebrows and blazing eyes, might have
been a raw recruit; a third has a curled
moustache and the cheerful look of an op¬
timist untroubled by thoughts of death on
the battlefield. No two of them are alike.
Flecks of colour on the models and in the
earth where they were found indicate that
they were originally painted in an array of
mineral colours: red, pink, purple, blue,
green, yellow, orange, black, brown, grey
and white.
Study of the site has shown that the army
was buried in a massive underground vault
Whose ceiling, supported by wooden
beams, collapsed after a great fire. The ar¬
chaeologists began work at the east end of
the rectangular vault. They unearthed five
downward-sloping entrance passageways
leading into the chamber, where they came
upon a host of warriors, three deep, all fac¬
ing eastwards in battle formation. Three
figures, one in the middle and one at each
end of the first row, were probably the com¬
manders.
These lightly equipped warriors, armed
with cross-bows or hand-bows and quivers,
appear to have been the vanguard. Behind
them is deployed the main body of the
force, densely packed columns of infan¬
trymen interspersed with chariots, each of
which is drawn by four horses. Most of
these soldiers were armed with lances or

The astonishing individuality of each
member of emperor Qin Shihuang's terra¬
cotta army seems to indicate that these
figures are true-to-life portraits of actual
members of the imperial bodyguard (see
portrait gallery at left). The kneeling
figure, second from top, is an archer who
originally held a real hand-bow. The top
three figures wear variations of the
distinctive hair-style with a bun on top of
the head adopted by most of the warriors,
while the fourth figure at the bottom of the
page wears a flat cap held in place by an
elaborate chin-strap (see also detailed
drawings, above).
halberds, although some carried short-
handled weapons. Some wear robes; others
are in armour. The horses, just as lifelike as
the warriors, have forward-pointing ears and
curly manes. They look ahead intently, alert
for a sign from their masters. Their tails are
knotted, as if to allow them to gallop more
freely.
The northern and southern flanks of this
main phalanx are each guarded by a column
of warriors two deep, facing outwards.
These "side-guards" are armed with the
same weaponry as the vanguard.
Trial excavations at the western edge of
the pit have also brought to light the soldiers
of the rearguard, who face west. The whole
well-organized symmetrical array of war¬
riors, horses and chariots armed with a
diversity of weapons and ready for battle in¬
dicates the terrible array of the Emperor's
legions.
After comparing the model soldiers and
horses with previously unearthed pottery
figures of the Qin (Chin) dynasty, ar¬
chaeologists concluded that they were
funeral accessories which had been buried
with the Emperor Qin Shihuang
(259-210 BC), whose tomb has never been
excavated. According to historical records,
the construction of Qin Shihuang's tomb
began long before the Emperor's death, and
it seems almost certain that the manufacture
of the ceramic figures formed part of these
preparations.
Qin is one of the most important figures of k
early Chinese history. During his reign, f
Right, Chinese experts put the finishing
touches to figures resurrected after their
2,000-year interment.

Fashioned in terra-cotta and with the same
extraordinary vigour and realism as the
warriors, hundreds of magnificent horses
have been unearthed at the site near Sian.
Some served as mounts for the light
cavalry, while others, harnessed four
abreast, pulled the emperor's war chariots
which had proved themselves to be a
battle-winning element on the rolling plains
of China. Each chariot carried a driver and
two other soldiers armed with spears,
swords and cross-bows.
China's system of writing was standardized,
as were its weights and measures, coinage
and calendar. He ordered the construction
of irrigation canals and post roads which
linked the whole of his empire. He joined up
walls built earlier by individual states, thus
forming the Great Wall, a solid barrier
against the threat from nomadic tribes to the
north.
He dragooned millions of men into work¬
ing on these immense construction projects,
and forced rich and influential people to
move from the provinces to the capital.
Hundreds of intellectuals were massacred
for daring to criticize the Emperor's policies,
and books dealing with subjects other than
agriculture, medicine, pharmacy and
astronomy were burned because he con¬
sidered such knowledge to be subversive.
Only a small portion of the vault near the
Emperor's burial mound has so far been ex¬
cavated but it has already yielded, as well as
warriors, horses and chariots, a rich store of
iron farm implements and objects of gold,
jade and bone, linen, silk and leather. Many
well-preserved bronze weapons have also
been unearthed: arrowheads, and swords
which have remained shiny and sharp; and
cross-bows found in such numbers as to
suggest that they must have been a widely
used weapon in the China of Qin Shihuang.
A museum is being constructed over the
site. It will shelter both the finds and the ar¬
chaeologists, who are faced with years of
painstaking work before the vault gives up
all its secrets.
Gu Wenjie
8
