THE study of extractives of medicinal
plants is without doubt the most
commonly chosen field of research
among organic chemists in Africa. Many
people think that it is an obvious and
natural subject of study for an African
chemist.
This is not only because of the abun¬
dance of plants in our environment but also
because of the important role they have
played in our system of traditional
medicine. It has been virtually assumed
that if only one took the trouble to find out
what the African herbalist uses, and ex¬
tracted it, one would without fail come up
with something new to modern medical
science.
Indeed the study of African medicinal
plants is a field with many promising pro¬
spects and one which should be given high
priority in terms of research effort and fun¬
ding. But this is not because plant use in
traditional medicine is unique to Africa.
Most countries of the world at one time or
another have had a traditional system of
medicine similar to that of Africa which in¬
volved the use of plants.
In countries such as those of North
America, Europe, Australasia, Japan and
the Indian subcontinent in which scientific
investigation of plants has been intense
and of long standing, few of their medicinal
plants if any at all have survived as such in
present-day medical practice. However
these investigations have made tremen¬
dous contributions to scientific knowledge,
particularly organic chemistry, and inspired
the development of new synthetic
DONALD E.U. EKONG, of Nigeria, is professor
of chemistry at the University of Ibadan and first
Vice-Chancellor of the University of Port Har-
court, Nigeria. He is the author of a number of
papers on the chemistry of natural products in
which he has a special interest.
16

African medicinal
plants under
the microscope
by Donald E.U. Ekong
Photo © CNRS, Paris
Plant extracts being separated by a process known as column chromatography at a
laboratory of the French Centre National de Recherches Scientifiques. Using this
technique, chemists can separate the components of a mixture without having detailed
prior knowledge of the type, number or relative amounts of the substances present.
medicines with far superior properties to
those of the traditional medicinal plants.
Not that African medicinal plants have
not been investigated before. Indeed there
is hardly any common African plant which
has not been studied, mostly in Europe and
North America, and the results of the in¬
vestigations recorded in the world scientific
literature.
Some of them have yielded active
substances which were already known
from other sources. An example is the bark
and latex of Antioris africana from which
cardiac glycosides (heart poisons) were
isolated, which were already known to oc¬
cur in Digitalis species, and are used in
modern medicine for the treatment of heart
diseases. Most of the plants already in¬
vestigated have yielded substances with
either no significant activity or with inferior
activity to those of other well-known pro¬
ducts used in modern medical practice.
A few new substances have, however,
been discovered and are now used in
modern medicine although such use is
often different from that to which the plant
was applied in traditional medicine. A well-
known example is physostigmine isolated
from the "esere bean" (Physostigma
venenosum) which is now used in oph¬
thalmology, but was traditionally used for
trial by ordeal.
Some of the importance of research on
extractives from African medicinal plants
derives from the fact that naturally occurr¬
ing substances which have biological ac¬
tivity often inspire chemists not only to
synthesize them, in order to obtain them
more easily than by extraction from plants,
but also to synthesize derivatives of the
parent drug which often have superior
medicinal properties to the natural
products.
Some of our research in Ibadan (Nigeria)
has been concerned with studies of this i
nature. For instance we have studied the
17

r
v\
<..
Photos © A.D. Pasquale, University of Messina, Italy
Photo Georges Viollon © Rapho, Paris
f

roots of the tree Fagara xanthoxy/oldes
commonly used in traditional medicine and
also as chewing sticks which are chewed to
a brush and used to clean the teeth.
Various natural products were isolated in¬
cluding a good yield of xanthoxylol which
had earlier been isolated from the wood of
the same tree and its structure elucidated.
It was reported that crude aqueous extracts
of the roots had antimicrobial and anti-
sickling activity. Sickling makes affected
red blood cells assume strange crescent
forms, deprives them of the ability to
transport oxygen, and causes their destruc¬
tion by dissolution of the cell. This' promp¬
ted us to have bioassays tests of the
strength of a substance by comparing its
effect with that of a standard prepara¬
tion out on the pure compounds
that we had earlier isolated from the roots.
In a preliminary bioassay carried out at
University College Hospital, Ibadan, xan¬
thoxylol seemed to possess some anti-
sickling activity. In an attempt to enhance
this activity, various modifications of the
structure of the compound were carried
out. This was facilitated particularly by the
fact that the substance could be obtained
in good yield from the roots of the plant. Of
the modified products, a compound called
DBA appeared the most interesting and
detailed bioassay studies carried out in the
Sickle Cell Centre, Harlem Hospital, New
York, showed it to be a very active anti-
sickling agent. DBA has many properties
such as lack of acute toxicity and non in¬
terference with oxygen delivery which
make it superior to most known anti-
sickling agents and suggest that it might be
a useful therapeutic agent for sickle cell
anaemia.
Another promising approach to the
study of extractives of African medicinal
plants arises from the possibility of
isolating in adequate yield certain com¬
pounds which, though themselves not ac¬
tive medicinally, might provide the raw
materials for the synthesis of already
known and accepted drugs. For instance
most of the steroids, which represent a
CONTINUED PAGE 42

African medicinal plants... continue* *om page 19
large and very important class of drugs and
have a wide range of therapeutic and other
uses (as oral contraceptives for example),
are generally manufactured by processes
that originate from the saponin diosgenin,
a substance available in large quantities
from a Mexican yam species. Unfortunate¬
ly African yam species contain very low
quantities of this saponin. But many
African plants are rich in steroidal saponins
and continued search might reveal new
sources of this or other steroids that might
serve as starting materials for the synthesis
of steroidal or other drugs.
Many interesting new compounds have
been discovered in the last decade or two
from African medicinal plants as a result of
the application of modern methods of
isolation and structural elucidation. While
hardly any of these compounds has found
clinical application in modern medicine,
some of them have shown activities which
give credibility' to the use of the plants in
traditional medicine.
An example from our own work in
Ibadan is our investigation of the fruit of
Xy/opia aethiopica. The dried fruits of this
plant are used in many parts of Africa as a
spice and in many folk medicinal prepara¬
tions. We investigated the dried fruits and
found, besides large quantities of an essen¬
tial oil, an acid component obtainable in
good yields of up to 1.5%. The new com¬
pound was named xylopic acid and its
structure determined by spectroscopic
analysis and chemical degradation.
Publication of our work eventually
prompted other researchers in Ghana to
study the antimicrobial properties of ex¬
tracts of the dried fruits and they found
xylopic acid very active against two
bacteria, Staphylococcus aureus and
Bacillus subtilis, and the yeast Candida
albicans. The demonstration of an¬
timicrobial activity by xylopic acid against
this yeast, a common agent of vaginal in¬
fections, is of interest because of the use of
the dried fruits in traditional obstetrics and
preparations of vaginal douches.
There has also been considerable interest
in alkaloids leading to the isolation of a
large number of either known or derivatives
of otherwise well-known classes of
alkaloids, such as the alkaloid funiferine
from the roots of Tiliacora funifera which
exhibits significant anti-leukaemia and
antibacterial activity.
Most of the work described above was
prompted either by a reputed use in folk
medicine or an interest in a particular class
of compounds or groups of plants. But the
studies were not directed at isolating com¬
pounds of any specific activity and were
therefore not monitored by bioassays.
They consisted usually of extraction with
solvent, separation of the fractions by a
chromatographic process and isolation of
the compounds that happened to be ac¬
cessible usually through crystallization. The
chances of this method of investigation
leading to any further results of interest are
now very small, one might almost say
negligible.
This is not because the vast resources of
the plant kingdom have been fully tap¬
ped is very far from being the case.
About the middle of this century there was
a fall in interest in plants as a source of new
drugs because of advances in the ability of
the chemist to synthesize new compounds.
However the success rate in finding new
drugs from such purely synthetic com¬
pounds has been very low and since the
1960s there has been a growing revival of
interest in plants as a source of new
biologically active substances.
The approach is however different from
the classical one. Extraction is carried out
with well defined objectives, as part of a
search for substances possessing
specifically selected activities. The extrac¬
tion and fractionation procedures are
therefore monitored and guided by con¬
tinual bioassays of the various fractions,
until the active substance is isolated.
By this method active compounds have
been discovered which would otherwise
have been overlooked because of their oc¬
curence in minute quantities. A well-known
example in the field of anti-cancer drugs is
the alkaloid vincristine which was isolated
from Catharanthus roseus.
Vincristine is now one of the drugs in
clinical use for treating certain forms of
leukaemia. Since the discovery Of vin¬
cristine there has been an intensive search
for anti-cancer drugs from plants, guided
by bioassays at every stage of the frac¬
tionation procedures. Many tens of
thousands of plants have been investigated
by this method including several thousands
of African plants. Most of the investiga¬
tions even of the African plants are taking
place in the U.S.A. and Europe and a large
number of active anti-cancer compounds
have already been discovered, which are
undergoing further studies to determine
Photo L. Allorge,
© National Museum of Natural History, Paris
When a German botanist landed on one of the
Molucca islands in the Malay Archipelago, in
1742, the inhabitants told him of the virtues of a
small tree with red fruit and yellowish wood
Ochrosia, the plant that cures. More than two
centuries later, extracts derived from Ochrosia
appear to offer hope of beneficial results in the
treatment of certain types of cancers. (See back
cover for details of the action of a compound
derived from a plant of the Ochrosia genera).
their suitability as potential therapeutic
agents.
At the same time these compounds have
provided incentives for the synthesis of
modified derivatives which might have
superior properties to the original natural
products. One of the most promising of
these new anti-cancer compounds is the
macrolide maytansine isolated from a
Kenyan medicinal plant Maytenus ovatus.
Maytansine occurs in such small quantities
that it might never have been found if the
investigation of the plant had not been
directed towards the isolation of an anti¬
cancer agent and the fractionation of the
extract guided by bioassay.
At present intensive work is going on to
develop an efficient synthesis to avoid the
tedious extraction procedure. This is to
say, if it does prove successful as a
therapeutic agent, there is not likely to be a
booming trade in the export of the plant or
its extracts, let alone the compound, from
Africa to the rest of the world. In other
words, if maytansine turns out to be effec¬
tive in therapy, a synthetic procedure
would probably have been developed in the
meantime for preparing the compound,
which would make it available more cheap¬
ly and in larger quantities than would other¬
wise be possible by extraction from the
plant.
The lesson for African scientists is clear.
They do not have a monopoly of the study
of African medicinal plants. The old screen¬
ing techniques as well as the blind frac¬
tionation of extractives without bioassay
are of little interest. The traditional use of a
plant in folk medicine serves only as an in¬
dication of the possible occurrence of ac¬
tive substances whose significance for
modern medicine may not necessarily be
related to the traditional use of the plant in
folk medicine.
Extraction and fractionation must be
directed towards a clearly defined objective
of isolating compounds possessing a
specific activity of interest. Consequently
the fractionation procedure must be
monitored by bioassays of each of the frac¬
tions. This implies close collaboration bet¬
ween chemists and scientists trained in the
life sciences. If close day-to-day collabora¬
tion between chemists and life scientists is
not practicable, an alternative is to develop
simple bioassay techniques that can be car¬
ried out in a chemical laboratory by a
chemist during fractionation of extracts.
Such simple bioassay techniques need
not meet all the requirements for full in¬
vestigation of the biological activity in
which the chemist is interested, but need
only be adequate to give an indication of
activity in a fraction, leaving detailed in¬
vestigation of the activity to be carried out
later by the appropriate life scientist after
isolation of the pure compound. It is only
by such an approach that African scientists
can expect to contribute to the worldwide
search for new substances of medicinal
and other economic value which African
medicinal plants have and without doubt
will continue to afford.
Donald E.U. Ekong
o
z
<
5
q
3
O
(3
Q
DC
<
Q
O
42
