Avicenna
Hearts and flowers
Type of plant: Rosa Damascena (red
damask rose)"Owing to its aromatic
volatile matter, it resembles the vital
spirit in temperament. Used to cure un¬
consciousness and fainting, especially
when these are due to hot abnormal
temperament."
Avicenna (980 to 1037 AD),
Treatise on Cardiac Drugs
"Flower buds are astringent and are us¬
ed in cardiac troubles, and as a tonic
and aperient. Rose water prepared
from the petals is said to have a cooling
effect."
The Wealth of India, Volume IX (1972)
DESPITE the tremendous scientific
advances that have been made in
the close on one thousand years
that separate the Treatise on Cardiac
Drugs, written by the great Islamic
physician-philosopher-scientist Avicenna,
from the late twentieth century inventory
of India's natural resources, The Wealth of
India, little has changed in the scientific
assessment of the medicinal properties of
the red damask rose. Indeed, Avicenna's
evaluation of many of the sixty-four cardiac
drugs mentioned in his Treatise closely
resemble the assessment made by modern
scientists.
Divided into seventeen sections, the
treatise explains the psychological and
physiological basis of the principles of
treatment of cardiac patients together with
the action of the relevant drugs. The left
human ventricle is mentioned as the place
of origin and repository of the cardiac soul
which is the vehicle of animal faculties of all .
organs of the body. Illustrating further he
says that when the cardiac soul reaches the
brain it acquires such a temperament there
that it becomes capable or receiving the
faculties of sensation and movement and
when it reaches the liver it acquires there
such a temperament as is capable of receiv-
HAKIM MOHAMMED SAID, of Pakistan, is
adviser on traditional Islamic medicine to the
Pakistan Ministry of Health, Social Welfare and
Population Planning. President of the Hamda: i
National Foundation, he is editor of the journal
Hamdard, the organ of the Institute of Health
and Tibbi Research. He is also editor of the Urdu
edition of the Unesco Courier.
ing the faculties of nourishment and
growth. Similarly on reaching the
reproductive organs it acquires such a
temperament as to befit it to accept the
faculties of procreation.
Proceeding further Avicenna mentions
that the cardiac soul is particularly affected
by and reacts to emotions such as
pleasure, sorrow, -fear, etc. This means
that the heart is the place where emotions
make themselves felt. But the organ which
reacts to them and the faculty of reacting
to stimuli is possessed by all individuals but
in different degrees.
Recording his findings about sensation
he says that it is dependent on the dif¬
ference or changes between, the perceiv¬
ing organ and the object of perception.
When this difference is lost, the perception
of it also disappears. This, according to
him, is illustrated by the feeling of discom¬
fort experienced in fever and the indif¬
ference of a tubercular patient to his raised
temperature. Discussing these points in
detail he holds that sick persons are not
capable of enjoyment because of the
temperamental imbalance of the soul.
Similarly old persons or those who have ex¬
cess of black bile, whose soul is thick,
coarse and dark are incapable of enjoying
themselves.
Later in the Treatise he discusses the
physiological causes of the capacity for en¬
joyment or grief and suggests measures for
creating this capacity. He distinguishes
between the weakness of the heart and dis¬
quietude which is felt as a pressure on the
chest. He discusses the relation between
qualities of blood and soul and analyses the
difference between anger or malice and the
mode of action by virtue of which cardiac
medicines produce exhilaration. He states
that the soul is instrinsically attracted
towards fragrant and sweet substances
and describes the meanings of the words
temperament, property and the action of
DORONICUM HOOKERI
Idoronicuml
"Its action as a cardiac tonic and
exhilarant is extraordinary. "
(Avicenna)
"Used as an aromatic tonic. Some
species are reported to prevent
giddiness during high-altitude
mountain ascents. The roots of the
European species are used as a
constituent of cardiac and nerve
tonics."
(The Wealth of India, Vol. Ill)

ROSA DAMASCENA (red damask rose)
Photos and drawings © H. Said, Karachi, Pakistan
by Hakim Mohammed Saïd
substances. He also explains the occasion
and the aim of using drugs and ends by giv¬
ing prescriptions which he himself found
useful.
Thus a careful and critical study of the
whole Treatise gives an insight into the
mode of treatment of cardiac patients with
drugs, diet and environmental adjustment.
It is therefore worth scientific study so that
humanity may reap the benefit from the
researches of the past in the curative
sciences.
OCIMUM BASILICUM (sweet basil)
"Contains volatile matter; acts as an astringent and an exhilarant; has a
warming effect. "
(Avicenna)
"Diuretic; useful in diseases of the heart and brain, chronic pain in the joints,
asthma and enlarged spleen."
(Indian Medicinal Plants, Vol. Ill, 1962)
MELISSA OFFICINALIS (lemon balm, sweet balm)
"Regarded as an extraordinary drug which exhilarates and strengthens the
heart. "
(Avicenna)
"A cardiac tonic also used as a gargle for sore throat."
	 (Indian Materia Medica. Vol.1. 1954)
See also next page


HEARTS AND FLOWERS (continued)
CROCUS SATIVUS (saffron)
"Tones the vital system and exhilarates;
produces a sense of luminosity, brilliance
and well-being; regarded as a cardiac tonic. "
(Avicenna)
"Stimulant, aphrodisiac and stomachic;
slightly anodyne and anti-spasmodic; in over¬
dose it is a narcotic poison; owing to its
essential oils it stimulates the central ner¬
vous system."
(Indian Materia Medica, Vol.1)
ONOSMA BRACTEATUM
"As a cardiac stimulant and exhilarant it is a drug of
choice. "
(Avicenna)
"Used as a tonic, alterative, demulcent, diuretic
aod refrigerant; also reported to be useful as a
spasmolytic."
(The Wealth of India, Vol. VII)
CITRUS MEDICA (limette)
"Citron is also a cardiac tonic and re¬
garded as a useful remedy for cardiac neurosis
and palpitation." ,A .
(Avicenna)
"Fruit is expellent of poisons; pulp is aromatic,
stomachic, bitter; rind is aromatic, stimulant,
tonic and anti-scorbutic; distilled water of the
fruit is sedative, refrigerant and digestive."
(Indian Materia Medica, Vol.1)
LAVANDULA STOECHAS (Roman lavender)
"An exhilarant and cardiac tonic; purifies the intel¬
lectual faculties of the mind. "
(Avicenna)
"In Eastern medicine it is known as the 'broom of
the brain'; strengthens the brain; it is a good
stimulant, aromatic, general carminative,
diaphoretic, expectorant and anti-spasmodic."
(Indian Materia Medica, Vol. I)
Photos and drawings © H. Saïd, Karachi, Pakistan
KOREAN SCHIZANDRA
Used in traditional medicine as a tonic and an ana¬
leptic, as a remedy for coughs and shortness of
breath, and to improve eyesight. In modern medi¬
cine: lessens fatigue and is used as a preventive
against senility and arteriosclerosis; contains active
vitamin F and vitamin E.
Photo © Permanent Delegation to Unesco of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
