The artist
and his models
A mercurial, unceasing analysis
of the human face
by Dominique Bozo
WE shall never finish discussing
Picasso and his universe, for his
work does not fit in with any re¬
assuring and convincing definition. The
great stream which surged through our cen¬
tury, swollen by all it had gathered and
assimilated from the art of the past and the
new art then developing, remains something
of a mystery to the "general public", art-
lovers and historians alike: all the answers to
their questioning seem inadequate and
incomplete.
This is true of all modern art. But with
Picasso the challenge is greater. Under¬
standing of his work is increasing, as
countless studies make it more widely
known. And laymen are becoming more
familiar with an art which they find
fascinating, but experience as a kind of
violent, barbarian aggression punctuated by
periods of calm and, thus, all the more dif¬
ficult to assimilate.
The real question one must ask therefore
is why the Picasso myth should bear the
brunt of the public's reticence about modern
art in general? Why should Picasso be con¬
sidered the scapegoat of modern art when
the work of Braque, Matisse, Mondrian and
the abstract painters, to mention only these,
gives equal cause for. questioning and
criticism?
The answer is to. be found not only in
Picasso's exceptionally long life: his work,
rooted in the late nineteenth century, spans
nearly a hundred years, almost to the end of
the twentieth century. Neither can it be
found in the continuous calling in question
of his painting, his apparent contradictions
and his successive and complete changes
in genre, or his fluctuations between
classicism and revolution. Again, it cannot
be attributed to the fact that Picasso is the
only artist of this century who introduced |
history as well as his autobiography into his I
.47

Weeping Woman, 1937, Oil on canvas, 60x49 cm.
work and borrowed to such an extent from
the legacy of universal art.
There is something deeper which goes
beyond facile acceptance of the myth
Picasso himself helped to create. "Rejec¬
tion" seems to stem from a simplistic view
of the iconoclastic relationship the painter
was said to have maintained with the
models I mean the human face he ques¬
tioned ceaselessly throughout his career,
particularly during his most prolific period in
the 1930s and 1940s.
For most critics, Picasso remains the
great destroyer of the face. Abstract
painters were content with ignoring it com¬
pletely; Picasso attacked it directly not
merely the image of the classical ideal defin¬
ed by Renaissance artists. Those who reject
his painting do so less because he deformed
nature, objects and man himself, than
because he dared to disfigure and mutilate
the ¡mage of woman. I am sure that most
people looking at one of the portraits he
painted in the 1930s refer unconsciously to
the standards implicit in the classical virgins
of Raphael or Bellini. Picasso's detractors as
well as those who worship his early works
such as the acrobats of the "Blue" and
"Rose" periods, or who admire his realistic
portraits of his wife Olga and his son Paulo,
find it even harder to understand how so
great a talent could have given birth to such
"evil".
'His Cubist paintings are considered less
disturbing, for the face counts for little in
these compositions which most people find
difficult to interpret and many regard as a
closed book. Indeed it ¡s«not easy to identify
or recognize forms in the flat, "analytical"
jigsaw puzzles of symbols. But though the
subject-matter often vanishes in a quasi-
abstract structure painted in monochrome
tones, there is never "disfigurement" in the
proper sense of the word.
After 1917 and up to 1926, Picasso
reverted to realism in the classical tradition.
Most of the work he produced during this
period is "reassuring", even when he takes
pleasure in contrasting huge classical
figures as in Three Women at the
Springwith the Cubist figures of Three
Musicians (illustrations page 26). These
geometrical men, articulated like pieces of
machinery, are portrayed in a theatre setting
which gives them a metaphysical, almost
immaterial quality; they belong to the realm
of dreams and the mind; nothing in them is
aggressive.
But with the first pictures of bathers, also
painted during the 1920s, one again ex¬
periences a feeling of uncertainty and
unease. The giant Venuses born of the
tradition of Ingres' drawing who are seen
running on the beach, athletically muscular
and energetic, full of pure air and propelled
and deformed by physical effort, are
somehow too free and rather terrifying.
Perhaps it is the realism of the setting that
makes them monstrous the fact that they
are depicted in an everyday, down-to-earth
world. Their counterparts are to be seen in
the Vollard suite of etchings devoted to the
"Sculptor and his model".
In the mid-1 930s Picasso again establish¬
ed a . dialogue in his work between
tenderness and terror, using a technique of
explosive colour and arabesque design. It
was these pictures which earned him a
reputation as a "disfigurer", violently ag¬
gressive rather than savage in the manner of
his earlier Demoiselles d'Avignon (illustra¬
tion page 8). Distortion here is in the Cubist
tradition i.e. it results partly from an in¬
tellectual "destructuring" of the model in
order to achieve formal, psychological and
synthetic expression of what, for the
painter, is visible or invisible, known or
discernible. What disturbs in these pictures
is the violent realism which remains after
this process has taken place: one can almost
perceive an identifiable portrait,
reconstituted, magnified and given fresh
unity.
Michel Leiris expressed this clearly as ear¬
ly as 1930: "For [Picasso]", he wrote, "the
object is not to recreate reality just for the
sake of the exercise; an infinitely more im¬
portant aim is to express all the possibilities
and ramifications of reality in order to get a
little closer to it, and truly touch it."
In order to express "all possibilities", the
artist needed absolute freedom. This is how
Picasso himself described his work to the
publisher Tériade: "Time and again, just as I
was about to add some blue, I found I had
none. So I put in some red instead. So much
for the vanity of things of the mind." And
when he says, "I don't seek, I find", he
describes better than any learned treatise or
analysis the extraordinary freedom with
which he conducted his experiments. For
every work involved change or manipulation
of some kind.
When one looks through collections of art
reproductions, it is surprising to find the
portraits of Marie-Thérèse (cover) and Dora
Maar (page 28) along with such familiar
works as Byzantine ikons, Cranach's
Venuses and paintings by Frans Hals or
Velazquez. The two portraits stand out as
48

powerful, self-contained expressions of the
art of our century. All the elements of
Western culture are represented there, from
Ingres' arabesques to the free colour of Van
Gogh.
Tenderness, elegance and stateliness
surge from the portrait of Dora Maar. The
eyes dominate the picture from side-view
and full-face, for both are seen at the same
time, and this adds a mobile, hieratic quality
to the expression. The colour of the
eyes one red, the other green testifies to
the artisfs complete freedom of invention. It
contrasts with the three-quarter stance of
models in classical paintings, yet at the same
time the elegance of attitude recalls the
great portraits of universal painting.
Classicism combines with the most avant-
garde modernism. And this freedom of ex¬
pression and inventiveness gives Picasso's
art a timeless, permanent quality.
The same freedom of line and play colour
can be observed in the portrait (see cover)
of Marie-Thérèse. In this second formulation
of absolute beauty, the artist remains
faithful to the model though one would
never suspect it without comparing picture
and photograph. At the same time, Picasso
gives full reign to his inventiveness, painting
yellow lips and nails, one pink eye, one blue,
and green hair. One is reminded of Van
Gogh and at the same time of Ingres' por¬
traits of La Comtesse d'Haussonville and
Madame Moitessier. Where Ingres used a
looking-glass to reveal the hidden profile of
his model, Picasso resorts to a synthesis of
lines, depicting a head with a full-face ex¬
pression in a three-quarter position. The
fingers are distorted as in Ingres' paintings,
and there is a similar play of hands, the
fingers with their coloured nails branching
out to form a bouquet.
It would take a lot of time and space to
compare these portraits with the great
masterpieces produced by Western classic
art since the Renaissance. Yet such a study
would show that Picasso had assimilated all
the permanent plastic features of classical
art and incorporated them into his painting
in successive waves. This led to the develop¬
ment of new formal concepts are in
fact new ways of expressing
reality capable of expressing psychological
truth in which humour, sadness and a zest
for life mingle.
Why then did Picasso paint his "weeping
women" of 1937, those hysterical, terribly
mutilated, deformed and grief-stricken
figures, who claw at their own faces or
feverishly grasp their handkerchiefs? Prob¬
ably because there were women who cried
in Picasso's own surroundings, as there are
everywhere. Such figures are born in the
drama of war, and Picasso felt he must ex¬
press the horrors of the Spanish Civil War
and, in a premonitory vision, the horrors of
the greater war to come.
These crying' figures do not only sym¬
bolize the tragedy of Spain. However iden¬
tifiable they may be, they are not meant to
portray a particular or individual woman, but
reflect the grief and suffering of the whole
human race. Portraits painted during this
period show an evolution in Picasso's work
from the expression of individual sorrow and
pain to that of universal suffering and death.
One has only to compare the crying figure of
Dora painted in 1937 and the emaciated,
disfigured face of the 1939 portrait, in which
the image is duplicated as by an optical ef-
Portrait of Dora Maar. 1942. Oil on panel, 92x73 cm.
feet, one part of it appearing to be detached
from the portrait while it examines the other,
grief-stricken face.
"I never painted war", Picasso said, "but
war is certainly present in my work". This
makes it easier to understand why the sym¬
bolism of suffering is most poignantly ex¬
pressed in the face of the most cherished
being. Reality for the artist meant the every¬
day universe, and a threat from any quarter
was directed first and foremost against the
loved one who shared his daily life. Above
all, his model, with whom he maintained a
permanent dialogue and whom he
ceaselessly questioned.
Of course, there are other examples of
such psychological motivation in Picasso's
work. It is understandable that a classical ar¬
tist conscious of his responsibility both as an
individual and to contemporary society
should strive to express in his painting the
horror he sees reflected in the human face,
or in inanimate objects a skull, a hunk of
bread, a candle and jug those still-lifes of
war which proclaim the drama being
enacted and the ordeals to come.
But Picasso's painting is that of a
humanist who counterbalances every reac¬
tion with its opposite. By this, I mean that
he had faith in man, and during the darkest
hours of the Second World War, his prewar
pessimism gave way to a more positive ap¬
proach. The year 1942 marked a return to his
great naturalistic figures, with Man Carrying
a Sheep (see illustration on page 38). In this
sculpture, as in the portraits of Dora painted
during the same period, twentieth century
humanism is expressed with immense force
and feeling. One portrait in particular a j
stern, stately figure whosei sombre, t
49

meditative face stands out against a
background partly blue and partly black-
strikingly evokes the transition from
darkness to light.
Such works are landmarks in helping to
understand Picasso's approach. They
enable one to view his creation as a series of
alternating styles and forms of expression,
sudden projections into the future, avant-
garde experiments, and reflections and
reversions.
Like Titian, he remained active as a
painter and creator to the end of his life,
forever examining and analysing his own
face. This can be seen in the self-portraits he
drew in pencil, where the features pro¬
gressively change, gradually taking on the
expression of death. Seated Man Wearing a
Hat (see back cover), most probably a self-
portrait, contains in brief the major themes -
of Picasso's painting. The old man seated in
an armchair, like a broken manikin disap¬
pearing beneath the paint, conjures up the
Harlequin of 1909 as well as the memory of
the crippled Renoir as Picasso himself
depicted him in 1919. It also contains an allu¬
sion to Matisse, whom Picasso evokes with
the Romanian blouse motif, and Van Gogh
with a straw hat. It epitomizes the tragedy of
the painter and painting expressed not in the
staid, academic strokes of an old man's
brush, but with all the vigour and freedom of
a young artist who has assimilated the ex¬
perience of his contemporaries and is con¬
fident that the work he is abandoning is as
alive and strong today as it was at the start
of his career. M
DOMINIQUE BOZO, of France, formerly cura¬
tor of the Musée National d'Art Moderne, Paris, is
at present curator of the Musée Picasso which is
to be opened in 1983. The new museum will .
house a vast collection of the great Spanish
artist's work (paintings, sculptures, papiers col¬
lés, sketchbooks and ceramics) as well as works
by other artists (Cézanne, Matisse, Renoir,'
Douanier-Rousseau) from his private collection,
handed over by his heirs to the Musées de France.
The new museum will be housed in an historic
17th century building, the Hôtel Salé.
Portrait of Renoir, 1919. Charcoal and pencil drawing, 61.2x49.1 cm. Towards the end of
his life Picasso painted Seated Man Wearing a Hat (see back cover), which, if not a self-
portrait in the strict sense, is the image of Picasso himself. It clearly harks back to this
drawing, made from a photograph fifty-two years earlier, of the great French painter
Auguste Renoir in the year of his death when his fingers were so paralyzed that he
worked with his brushes tied to his hand. After half a century the wheel had turned full
circle ; in Seated Man Wearing a Hat Picasso was bidding farewell to his art and to life.
50
