Costa Rica :
the country that
abolished its army
by Julio Rodríguez Bolaños
IN a world which spends 500,000 million dollars a year on
weapons, it may seem strange that one country, Costa Rica,
has had no army for the last thirty years.
Costa Rica became independent of Spain on 15 September 1821,
along with the rest of Central America. The region immediately
became the scene of power struggles, but the Costa Ricans sat down
to thrash out a political constitution. This document, completed only
a matter of days after the achievement of independence, was signifi¬
cantly entitled the "Pact of Concord".
From the document and its title three conclusions may be deduced
about the Costa Ricans. Firstly, they were not interested in exploita¬
tion nor in enjoying the prizes of power but in establishing a legally
constituted State, based on laws and respect for the rights of others.
Secondly, faced with the choice between liberty and peace, the
Costa Ricans were able to preserve both without bloodshed. Thirdly,
the man of law, the statesman and the citizen prevailed over the mili¬
tary, a situation which led to what became a permanent feature of
Costa Rican democracy: a deep-rooted concern for education.
This unflagging commitment to education was the underlying pre¬
mise of the abolition of the army in 1949. A poor country cannot
afford the luxury of maintaining soldiery and at the same time educat¬
ing its people. Army and education, barracks and school, military
ranks and academic degrees are contradictory concepts for a
developing country, especially one set on guaranteeing to all its citi¬
zens the right to health.
Under the Costa Rican constitution, policing and security are
carried out by Civil Guards, workmen and peasant farmers who leave
their workshops every four years when a new government takes
office. Four years later they return to their usual occupations. If this is
not a model of professional efficiency, it has proved its worth in
maintaining a democratic system.
Rejection of force has brought force to Costa Rica. It is a mark of
the country's pride. The Costa Ricans are convinced that the only use
of armies and arsenals would be to imprison their fellow citizens, and
that if man was endowed by God with reason, then he has no cause
to seek security in arms. The abolition of our army has brought us a
number of advantages, the most important of which is the opportu¬
nity to devote 35 per cent of the national budget to education and an
equivalent amount to health.
It was against this background that the President of Costa Rica,
Mr. Rodrigo Carazo, presented to the 33rd General Assembly of the
United Nations on 27 September 1978, a project for the creation of a
University for Peace, which would be based in Costa Rica and would
be the country's contribution to the attainment of this fundamental
human right. The project was approved on 14 December 1979. The
structure of the University is being handled by a Commission which
has met twice this year, in June at United Nations Headquarters, and
in September at San José, the capital of Costa Rica.
Hitherto peace has been the end of one war and the prelude to new
armed conflicts. The aim of the University for Peace is to make the
study of peace a genuine discipline for research and teaching which
will be central to all educational programmes from the kindergarten
to the university. Peace can and should be taught. As Costa Rica's
President declared at the United Nations : "The 21st century will be a
peaceful one or it will not be at all".
JULIO RODRÍGUEZ BOLANOS, Costa Rican journalist, is adviser to the
President of the Republic of Costa Rica and co-ordinator of the project for the
creation of a University for Peace.
17
