Nubia unearthed
THE, first traces of human life in
Lower Nubia date from hundreds
of thousands of years ago and
consist of extremely primitive tools used by
our earliest ancestors, long before the ap¬
pearance of homo sapiens. But in contrast
to findings in Kenya and Tanzania, skeletons
or human remains found in Nubia or Egypt
proper date only from rather late in
prehistoric times.
The earliest remains are the traces of
what seems to have been a human tragedy.
Just north of Wadi Haifa, fifty-eight
skeletons were found covered by a thin layer
of sand and stones. Arrowheads found
among the bodies and scars on the bones
show that they were probably all killed in a
battle or a massacre.
An analysis of the bodies and their ages in
combination with what is known from food
remains and other finds in settlements
dating from the same period (around 10000
BC) makes it possible to reconstruct their
living conditions in detail: how they hunted
the big game which came down to the valley
to drink before retiring into the savannah
areas which are today desert. Fishing and
the hunting of migratory birds also con¬
tributed to their diet. Recent research has
led to the even more amazing conclusion
that a primitive cereal agriculture probably
already existed at this time.
Similar living conditions are also found at
a later stage of prehistory, during a period
with a wet climate. Thousands of rock draw¬
ings along the valley, which have all been
recorded by archaeological expeditions,
illustrate the fauna and the life of hunters
during the very late Stone Age. The same
types of rock drawings are found all over the
present desert areas of the Sahara and
presumably indicate connexions between
the inhabitants of immense savannahs and
steppes where nomads could roam freely
unhindered by drought.
20

The Great Temple of Abu Simbel in its
original setting, before the construction of
the Aswan High Dam. The temple is now
situated sixty metres higher up on top of
the hill from which it was carved over 3,000
years ago (see central colour pages).
These rock carvings of giraffes were discovered by the University of
Strasbourg archaeological expedition in the Tomas area in the heart of
Egyptian Nubia. The thousands of rock drawings of a rich fauna,
including elephant, hippopotamus, giraffe, gazelle and goat, found in
this region indicate that at one time the desert of today was a
steppeland rich with life.



From prehistory
to Pharaonic times by Torgny Säve-Söderbergh
The most interesting conclusions re¬
garding cultural development and the in¬
terplay between different civilizations and
cultures are usually drawn from simple ob¬
jects such as potsherds. This was borne out
by the oldest potsherds found during the
Nubian campaign; the same general types
occurred over vast areas from Nubia in the
north to the neighbourhood of Khartoum
some 1,500 kilometres further south. The
entirely unexpected discovery in Nubia of
types previously known only from areas
much further south opens up new vistas of
the cultural development of this part of
Africa, where we can now study cultural in
terrelations over immense areas and thereby
connect southern cultures to their better-
known and better-dated counterparts fur¬
ther north.
Such so-called "techno-complexes",
groups of "cultures" with similar
technologies but not necessarily politically
or ethnically closely connected, may have
provided a basis favourable to the rise of the
first States in human history. This was the
case in the Egyptian part of the Nile valley,
where the earliest State was organized by
the Pharaonic rulers around 3000 BC.
Contemporary with this development in
the north a special type of civilization, called
by archaeologists the "A-Group", spread all
over Lower Nubia. The Nubians of the
"A-Group" produced wonderful handicraft, k
especially pottery, and imported luxury f
TORGNY SÄVE-SÖDERBERGH, of Sweden, is
professor of Egyptology at the University of
Uppsala and president of the Royal Swedish
Academy of Letters, History and Antiquities
(1978). He is the author of a number of articles
and books including an outstanding study entitled
Egyptians and Nubians. He has been a member of
the Executive Committee of the International
Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia since
1962 and was leader of the Joint Scandinavian
Expedition to Nubia.
21

o
«f
E
These clay figurines depicting a mature woman and a girl were
found by the Joint Scandinavian Expedition in the tomb of a
woman at Haifa Degheim in Sudanese Nubia. They date back
some 5,000 years to the "A-Group" culture which developed in
Lower Nubia at about the time of the first Pharaonic dynasties.
They represent, perhaps, a kind of magic "insurance" to
guarantee a life after death, rather like certain Egyptian
funerary statuettes. The terracotta hippopotamus head, is from
Qustul in Egyptian Nubia and also dates from the "A-Group".
The stylized head was probably part of a statue of a complete
animal; it must have been of considerable size since this
fragment alone measures 19.7 cm in height.
t goods from the Pharaonic State in the
north.
Rich tombs excavated by a Chicago ex¬
pedition near Qustul just north of the
Sudanese frontier indicate the presence of a
political centre ruled by a dominant chief or
king. These tombs may even be earlier than
the first royal tombs in Egypt and perhaps a
development towards a centralized State
had started in Nubia as well as in Egypt. But
if so, this Nubian kingdom never achieved
the efficiency and " power of the first
Pharaonic State.
To begin with. Nubia traded peacefully
with Egypt to the benefit of both countries,
but as the power of the Egyptians grew,
they started to take by force merchandise
which they had previously paid for. Before
the end of the Second Egyptian Dynasty
(c. 2650 BC) the "A-Group" population of
Lower Nubia disappeared. They may have
been massacred or driven out by the Egyp¬
tians, or they may have left this part of the
Nile valley because of climatic changes.
It seems to be a common trait in the pat¬
tern of Nubian history that Nubia is poor
when Egypt is rich. The Egyptian apogees
often correspond to a cultural or political
vacuum in Nubia. This was the case during
the Old Kingdom, when Egyptian civilization
reached one of its highest peaks, and Egypt
was the biggest and richest State in the
world of its time.
Recent research has clearly shown that
there is no evidence for the assumption that
the "A-Group" still existed in Lower Nubia
after the first two Egyptian Dynasties, and
there are practically no finds illustrating an
22
indigenous culture in Nubia during the Old
Kingdom before the Sixth Dynasty, that is,
in the several centuries during which the
great pyramids at Saqqara and Giza were
built.
Egyptian activities in Lower Nubia are
only illustrated by two find complexes. The
first complex, known since the 1930s, is a
series of rock inscriptions and Egyptian tools
found in the quarries in the western desert,
where the Egyptians extracted diorite for the
famous royal statues of Chephren and other
rulers.
The other complex is an Old Kingdom for¬
tified town excavated by Professor Emery
just north of the Middle Kingdom fortress of
Buhen in northern Sudan. To judge from the
finds, consisting of Egyptian ceramics and
the remains of kilns for copper smelting, this
was an Egyptian strongpoint for the ex¬
ploitation of Nubian raw materials.
These Egyptian enterprises seem to have
taken place during a vacuum in Nubian
history, and when King Snofru tells us that
he "hacked up the land of Nubia, taking
7,000 prisoners and bringing away 200,000
cattle and sheep", we are at a loss from an
archaeological point of view, for no traces
have been found of this population with its
vast herds.
The fact that King Snofru mentions cattle
as characteristic of the Nubian economy of
his time indicates that his opponents were
pastoralist nomads, probably living in the
areas which are now desert which were
more habitable at that time thanks to a more
humid climate. They may also have lived in
Dongola in the south where recent research
has uncovered a transitional stage between
the "A-Group" and the "C-Group", the lat¬
ter constituting the later population of
Lower Nubia.
So it seems that the farmers of the
"A-Group" became nomads again, leaving
Lower Nubia, either because of political or
climatic factors, or maybe both.
Many questions remain unanswered. This
is often the case for similar periods when
there are no archaeological finds to
enlighten us about what really happened.
Such a vacuum also exists for nearly one
thousand years after 1000 BC and again
from the beginning of the Middle Ages to
the 19th century AD.
Towards the end of the Old Kingdom we
find a series of texts relating to the expedi¬
tions of Egyptian caravan leaders to Nubia,
including the famous text of Unis in his
tomb at Saqqara, and others in the tombs of
Herkhuf, Pepinakht, etc., at Aswan. They
tell of peaceful trade or warfare in Lower
Nubia and also perhaps in Dongola.
These texts, the earliest records of travel
abroad, are already classical and much has
been written in attempts to reconstruct the
journeys and to identify the countries men¬
tioned. Thanks to new finds of inscriptions
in Lower Nubia we are now in a better posi¬
tion to do so. These finds constitute the
earliest remains of what archaeologists have
long called the "C-Group".
We can again see how peaceful trade

developed into armed conflicts, with dif¬
ferent Nubian tribes uniting under one
leader to oppose the Egyptian attacks. The
interrelations between Egypt and Nubia
broke off when the centralized political
power in Egypt was weakened and inner
conflicts made trade or warfare abroad
impossible or ineffective. Nubian civilization
now developed into a cultural structure of its
own, quite different from the Egyptian
way of life but to some extent influenced by
it, as attested by imported goods.
When Egypt was still weak after the fall of
the Old Kingdom, its influence on the early
"C-Group" testifies to peaceful relations and
trade which benefited the Nubians. After
the unification of Egypt, with the rise of the
11th Dynasty, the Egyptian rulers tried to re¬
establish their prestige in Nubia by more
violent means and there was a decline in the
quantities of Egyptian goods reaching
Lower Nubia. At the same time Egyptian
texts tell us that the Nubians were made to
pay tribute, thus bringing about a negative
balance in the exchange to the detriment of
the Nubians.
Egypt regained its full power with the 12th
Dynasty and conquered Lower Nubia as far
as Semna in the region of the Second
Cataract. Thanks to the epigraphic expedi¬
tions in the 1960s, especially that of
Czechoslovakia, we now have new historical
documents relating to this conquest, and
the excavations at Buhen, Mirgissa, Semna
and at other sites have given us an insight
both into the sophisticated art of fortifica¬
tion practised by the Egyptians and into the
history of the military occupation (see article
page 62).
The chain of Egyptian fortresses in the
region of the Second Cataract was con-
to defend the Egyptian border at
Semna and to protect the trade route
southwards. To the south of the Egyptian
frontier was the realm of the "Ruler of
Kush", with its capital at Kerma in Dongola
and a subsidiary centre on the island of Sai,
to judge from recent excavations there.
The culture of Kerma was already known
long before the Nubian Campaign through
excavations by the American archaeologist
G.A. Reisner before the First World War.
The main monuments were a huge brick
building, called the Western Deffufa, and a
cemetery with what seems to be the first
large royal tombs in Africa outside Egypt.
The rulers were interred with their wives in a
central chamber, and their courtiers,
sometimes up to 400 individuals, were
buried alive in a corridor on both sides of the
royal burial chamber.
Some of the objects found are in¬
digenous, but so many Egyptian goods were
found that Reisner even came to believe that
the tombs were those of Nubianized Egyp¬
tians. Later analysis has shown that this in¬
terpretation is untenable.
The wealth of the Kerma kingdom is il¬
lustrated by these archaeological finds, and
the Egyptian defence system against the
Kerma rulers shows their political and
military strength.
After the end of the Middle Kingdom and
at the time when foreigners, the so-called
Hyksos, ruled Egypt, the military control of
Lower Nubia ceased and the fortresses were
abandoned. This is when the kingdom of
Kerma flourished, and the richest and
largest tombs date from this period. Lower w
Nubia now belonged to the realm of the*
These curious, well-like
structures are in fact tombs in a
typical "C-Group" cemetery
discovered at Serra West, in
Sudanese Nubia. They date from
about 1900 BC.
This terracotta woman's head,
5.4 cm high, was found in the
cemetery at Aniba in Egyptian
Nubia. It dates from between
1900 and 1550 BC and is a
product of the "C-Group"
culture. The eyes and mouth are
portrayed by simple horizontal
incisions. The holes at the back
of the head represent the hair.
Photo Alexis Vorontzoff, Unesco, © Egyptian
Museum of Karl Marx University, Leipzig
Photo © Joint Scandinavian Expedition
Photo © Oriental Institute Museum, Chicago
Discovered in a "C-
Group" cemetery at
Adindan, this terracotta
bowl measures 13.9 cm
in diameter and is
decorated with three
rows of unhorned cattle.
It dates from between
1900 and 1650 BC.
23

i^ "Ruler of Kush", who probably resided in
Kerma; Egyptians in his service have left in¬
scriptions in the former Egyptian fortress of
Buhen, which was now a Kushite political
centre in Lower Nubia.
The Unesco campaign demonstrated that
many problems could not be solved in
Lower Nubia because of lack of evidence:
the disappearance of the "A-Group" and the
ensuing vacuum in Nubian history; the com¬
ing of the "C-Group"; the interrelations with
the south; and the nature of the Kushite
domination at the time when the Hyksos rul¬
ed in Egypt. Solutions to these problems
had to be looked for elsewhere, and as a
result archaeological investigations were in¬
tensified at Kerma, on the island of Sai and
on other sites in the Dongola province.
According to preliminary reports, the
development of the Kerma culture can be
followed from the Old Kingdom down to its
disappearance during the New Kingdom,
when Kerma was conquered by the rulers of
the 18th Egyptian Dynasty. Moreover a tran¬
sition from the "A-Group" to the "C-Group"
during the time of the vacuum in Lower
Nubia seems to have taken place in
Dongola.
Three archaeological groups, probably
corresponding to different ethnic groups,
dominate the picture of Lower Nubia during
the time of the Hyksos and the early New
Kingdom: the "C-Group", the "Kerma
Group" and the "Pan Graves", representing
a desert tribe called the Medja (modern Bed-
ja) and also found in Egypt as mercenaries.
All three seem to have had a common origin
in Dongola and were closely related to one
another at an earlier stage there than when
we find them further north.
Around the Western Deffufa at Kerma
(where all these stages can be studied in dif¬
ferent cemeteries) a fortified town has been
found, the oldest known urban centre in
Africa outside Pharaonic Egypt.
The end of the Hyksos rule in Egypt is
marked by several texts of the Theban
liberator of the country. King Kamose, in
which the political situation is described.
The Asiatic Hyksos ruled the north, Kamose
the central part of Egypt down to Aswan,
and the "Ruler of Kush" (from Kerma) from
Aswan southwards. The Kerma domination
of Lower Nubia did not change its cultural
character.
The Lower Nubian civilization of the
"C-Group" developed along different lines.
Part of the population adhered to the old
traditions in such matters as burial rites and
pottery, and to this indigenous basis they
added Egyptian luxury goods. Others,
however, seem to have become more Egyp-
tianized, and from now on the situation is
such that it is difficult to distinguish bet¬
ween Egyptianized Nubians and Egyptian
immigrants.
The most plausible interpretation, to my
mind, is that once the Nubians were free
from the Egyptian military occupation, their
aversion to Egyptian culture and Egyptian
goods ceased. The free Nubians were rapid¬
ly Egyptianized and did not hesitate also to
call in Egyptians to serve them. As a result
their power of resistance was weakened and
their opposition to Egyptian aggression at
the beginning of the 18th Dynasty was
ineffective.
The texts of King Kamose provide some
details about the interrelations between the
Hyksos and the Nubian ruler of Kush. The
Asiatic Hyksos in northern Egypt had tried in
vain to make the Nubians, the people of Ker¬
ma, attack Kamose from the south at the
same time as he was waging war against the
Hyksos in the north. This plan failed for
unknown reasons, and Kamose and his
brother Ahmose managed to throw the
Asiatic Hyksos out of Egypt and also to con¬
quer Lower Nubia. Their successors, Thut¬
mose I and Thutmose III, pushed further
south, put an end to the kingdom of Kerma
and established the Egyptian frontier at the
Fourth and Fifth Cataracts, thus incor¬
porating the whole of Dongola into the
Egyptian empire.
Nubia under Egyptian rule during the New
Kingdom (1550-1080 BC) provides a
fascinating chapter of human history from
many points of view. For this period, we
have an overwhelming amount of material,
both archaeological and textual, and we also
know much more about the individual actors
in the drama. A recent doctoral thesis deal¬
ing with the Egyptian administration of the
Nubian colony, used some 800 textual or
pictorial documents, to describe the ad¬
ministrative machinery, the persons
employed and their careers, the taxes paid,
and the revenue exported.
Were the Nubians replaced by Egyptian
immigrants, did they leave Nubia on their
own initiative or did they stay on and
become Egyptianized? The Egyptian texts
and pictures describing Nubia in the New
Kingdom tend to indicate the last alter¬
native.
A number of early New Kingdom
cemeteries of traditional Nubian types
belong to population groups which largely
resisted Egyptian influence and adhered to
their old beliefs and culture.
Otherwise the archaeological picture is
dominated by burials of Egyptian types.
How are they to be interpreted? Were their
occupants Egyptians or Nubians? Here -the
specialists do not agree and perhaps both
answers are correct. In the countryside, far
away from the Egyptian administrative cen¬
tres, there are strong indications that the
tombs tended to belong to Nubians, and
even in the cemeteries of the Egyptian
towns misunderstandings of Egyptian burial
customs in some cases indicate the
presence of Egyptianized Nubians rather
than ordinary Egyptians.
That the Egyptians did by no means exter¬
minate or drive out the Nubian population of
Lower Nubia is quite clear from the evidence
from tombs of Nubian princes which came
to light during the Nubian Campaign.
The older ones, from the reigns of Queen
Hatshepsut and Thutmose III (about 1450
BC), were investigated by the Scandinavian
Joint Expedition in the northernmost part of
the Sudan, in the district of Debeira (see
page 41). They belonged to two brothers,
Djehuti-hotep and Amenemhet, born of Nu¬
bian parents to judge by their names. They
bear the titles of Egyptian officials but also
that of "Great One of (the district)
Teh-khet", "Great One" being the
denomination of royal persons or even kings
of foreign countries. The tomb of Djehuti-
hotep, the elder brother, is decorated in the
style of the tombs in the capital, Thebes.
The tomb of the younger brother,
Amenemhet, is also entirely Egyptian and all
the finds in the tomb are of good Egyptian
craftsmanship.
So those tombs which are the most Egyp¬
tian by their form, decoration and burial gifts
belong, according to the texts, to Nubian
CONTINUED PAGE 70
This terracotta pot (left) with its
rounded shape and ram's head
spout is typical of the "Kerma"
culture which was
contemporary with the "C-
Group". It is 22 cm in height and
dates from between 1750 and
1550 BC. It was found in 1914 by
the famous United States
archaeologist George Reisner
who dubbed vessels of this type
"teapots". Rams with horns
curling around the ears were a
frequent decorative motif on
pottery from Kerma where
sheep had religious and
ritualistic significance. The
identification of the ram with
the god Amon, which had
developed in Egypt by the time
of the 18th Dynasty is believed
to have originated in the ram
cult in Nubia.
Photo © Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York
Detail from the famous painted relief in the
tomb of Huy,. at Thebes, the ancient capital of
Egypt, depicting a procession of tribute from
the southlands. Huy was the viceroy of Nubia
under the Pharaoh Tutankhamun. Between the
horns of the cattle can be seen the heads of
Nubians adorned with feathers. The horns of
the cattle terminate in the form of hands, or
gloves, stretched out in an attitude of adoration.

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 24
princes. Thus it seems natural to assume
that tombs which are mainly Egyptian but
deviate in some details from the orthodox
model should also be regarded as belong¬
ing to Nubians.
A third tomb is quite as instructive. The
tomb in Thebes (modern Luxor) of the
Viceroy Huy, who governed Nubia for the
famous king Tutankhamun, contains a
series of paintings showing how he levied
the taxes in Lower Nubia. Among the tax¬
payers is a dark-skinned man, dressed as
an Egyptian but with some exotic additions
to his dress; he has, moreover, a typical
non-Egyptian face. The text calls him
Heka-nefer, "the Great One of Miam",
which is the name of the administrative
centre of Lower Nubia (Aniba in modern
times).
One of the sensations of the Nubian
Campaign was that Professor Simpson
from Boston found the tomb of this Nubian
prince, a figure well known since the early
days of Egyptology, thereby definitely pro¬
ving that Heka-nefer was a historical per¬
son and not simply a conventional figure in
Egyptian iconography (see page 44).
Now, thanks to the titles of these Nubian
princes we know that they were all
educated at the Eygptian court together
with the Egyptian princes, that they then
pursued the usual career of an Egyptian of¬
ficial and were finally sent to rule their
countrymen in their home district of Nubia.
In Nubia there was also an Egyptian
Viceroy with a staff of Egyptian officials,
and the tribute lists show that slaves and
raw materials, such as gold, minerals, cat¬
tle, African wood, and exotic African
goods, were exported from Nubia to
Egypt. Egyptian goods, not mentioned in
the official texts, but occurring in the
tombs of Lower Nubia, demonstrate that
there was at least to some extent a return
traffic from Egypt.
Lower Nubia seems to have been a
flourishing colony, to the benefit both of
the rulers and of their subjects. But this
situation gradually changed during the
New Kingdom, to judge from the decreas¬
ing number of tombs and cemeteries which
can be dated to the later half of this period.
In fact, in the thirteenth century, when
Ramses II built his famous temples in
Lower Nubia Abu Simbel, Wadi es
Sebua, and Derr the population of Nubia
was rapidly becoming smaller.
Very few tombs can be dated to his reign
and practically no traces of settlements,
although enough is preserved to show that
it was not a period of a total vacuum. The
temples needed a certain number of priests
and servants to function, so we must not
exaggerate the implications of the scarcity
of archaeological remains.
On the other hand further south, in
Dongola, outside the area of the Nubian
Campaign, big cities of Ramesside times
have been discovered, which show that the
economic centre of the Nubian colony had
shifted southwards and that Nubia had
become only a country of transit to richer
regions further south. Later, owing to the
disruption of the Egyptian State, this part
of the colony also declined and about 1000
BC there is no longer any trace of Egyptian
rule.
I Torgny Säve-Söderberg
