World opinion the weapon
to end all weapons
by
Liselotte Waldheim-Natural
THERE is today a-widespread feeling
that the arms race is made possible
in part by public attitudes belief
tnat wars are inevitable, long-nurtured tradi¬
tions associating military strength with
national security, fascination with the
machismo and magic of modern weaponry,
and a deep-seated apathy which these other
attitudes compound. Fortunately, this
apathy is not universal; where it exists it is
due not to indifference but to a lack of
understanding of the complex problems in¬
volved and of the power of public opinion to
influence events.
Learning about the problems of disarma
ment is not a simple matter. The average
person may find it difficult to imagine the
cataclysmic effects of a nuclear war, may
not grasp the technical complexities of
weapon systems or may not understand the
jargon and concepts involved in disputes
of the military theologians over strategic
doctrines.
Disarmament is not a topic that readily at¬
tracts public interest it is too complex, too
technical, too political. Take a popular sub¬
ject and we can generate a world campaign
which nearly everyone hears about (the In¬
ternational Year of the Child, for example)
but the effort to make the world a safer and
more hospitable place for our children
through disarmament has little appeal and
not enough followers.
Disarmament is a long-term objective. It is
a pursuit that will depend on the support of
all citizens of the world today and on
generations to come. But initially it involves
governments with whom lies responsibility
for reducing and eventually eliminating the
arsenals of the world. However, each
government operates within a climate of
public opinion which, to a greater or lesser
degree, places limits on the range of actions
open to it. The purpose of disarmament
education is to help create an informed
public opinion able and willing to propose,
encourage and support policies aimed at
achieving international security through
disarmament.
In dealing with disarmament education
we confront the question not only of the
best modes and methods of teaching but
the question of content. What is the infor¬
mation we want to convey, and where do
we get it?
Of course, it is not difficult to draw up a
list of subjects to be taught. Such topics
might include the status of arsenals and
military forces of the nations of the
world. ..the threat posed by nuclear
weapons. ..the nature and deployment of
nuclear systems... the relative balance of
forces between countries or alliances... the
cost of armaments and the military expen¬
ditures in each nation.. .the world arms trade
and its role in promoting the arms
race. ..trends in weapons-related research
10

and development.. .the costs of armaments
of each nation. ..the role in national policy¬
making of the military establishment, of
industry, of scientific and technological cir¬
cles, and of the public... the prospects of
redirecting military resources and facilities to
peaceful purposes.. .disarmament and de¬
velopment... disarmament and the new in¬
ternational economic order... current arms
.. control and disarmament negotiations, in¬
cluding those for a comprehensive nuclear
test ban and a ban on chemical weapons...and
of course the efforts of the international
community to achieve disarmament agree¬
ments and to develop a system of internatio¬
nal security based on the principles of the
United Nations Charter.
We can also point to the variety of ways in
which disarmament issues can be introduc¬
ed in school courses: in biology, the effects
of radiation on the organism... in chemistry,
the nature of chemical weapons... in science
courses, the nuclear fuel cycle, the effects
of nuclear weapons, and the dangers of pro¬
liferation. ..in sociology, public attitudes
towards concepts of military strength and
disarmament... in economics, technological
and industrial forces tending to perpetuate
the arms race.. .in geography, the regional
efforts to create nuclear-weapon-free
zones... in history, the decades of proposals
and counter-proposals for disarmament,
and consideration of why there has been so
little progress... even in language or seman
tics courses, which could examine such
terms as "defence needs", "security in¬
terests" and "non-interference in the inter¬
nal affairs of States".
Information is the core of education and it
is necessary to recognize the difficulties that
arise over questions of information, par¬
ticularly in regard to sensitive information in
the disarmament field. In fact, the informa¬
tion problem is central to the disarmament
process itselfwhether in regard to ex¬
change of information for confidence-
building purposes, verification methods to
provide facts about compliance, questions
of determining the facts on the level of
forces or facts about the extent of military
spending. Indeed, the lack of information
universally accepted as reliable adds
substantially to the difficulties of disarma¬
ment negotiations.
We need to have reliable, thorough, fac¬
tual information, in order to develop sound
and effective education programmes and
that brings us to one of the obstacles we
face.
Let us take as an example the question of
theatre nuclear weapons in Europe. NATO
argues that it has fallen behind in its nuclear
strength in Europe and requires the in¬
troduction of new missiles to restore the
balance. The Warsaw Treaty countries
maintain that there is approximate equality
or even a favourable edge for Western
forces, and that new missiles will upset the
balance. Here is a crucial issue on which all
Europeans would need to be well informed.
But what are the facts? Can a judgement
be made unless we know the details concer¬
ning the relative capacities of arsenals,
deployments, operational capabilities? Is
such information available? Perhaps not. If
one cannot tell students or the public the
answers, then at least they should be made
aware of the questions. To be aware of what
you don't know is also necessary in develop¬
ing an inquiring attitude.
If I seem to emphasize the need for factual
reliable information, that is because I feel it
is the only kind that can lead to qualified
judgements capable of commanding the at¬
tention of sceptics. This may not be a
problem in regard to the primary-level ap¬
proach aimed at teaching the evils of war¬
fare and weapons. But as the level of
teaching or the sophistication of the au¬
dience goes up, so does the need for
something more than slogans because the
military and political establishments are
more likely to be influenced by an analysis of
the facts than by mere slogans.
Yet even with the best intentions, it will
not be easy for schools or the media to meet
the need for accurate and objective informa¬
tion. While there is no lack of material on
disarmament discussions, negotiations and
treaties, it consists largely of United Nations
documents and publications written mainly
for professionals which reach only a limited
The views expressed in this article do not
necessarily represent those of the United Nations
Centre for Disarmament.
Far left, masked and robed to
symbolize horror and despair, anti-war
demonstrators march through the rainy
New York streets. Left, tombstone in
Père-Lachaise cemetery, Paris.
11

>< K K X X
The story of Janusz Korczak (1878-1942) is both a tragic and
inspiring example of individual heroism and a reminder that
children are always the innocent victims of war. A Polish
doctor and writer who devoted his life to the education of
orphans, Korczak spurned offers of a safe escape from the
Warsaw ghetto because he refused to be separated from the
children in his charge. He accompanied them on their last
journey and died with them at the Treblinka death camp (see
Unesco Courier, June 1979). Drawing, left, by fourteen-year-
old Maria Springer, was a prize-winning entry in a
competition held in Poland to mark the centenary year of
Korczak's birth.
The audio-visual media can powerfully dramatize the moral
responsibility of each individual when faced with choices of
peace and war. The film Joseph Schultz is the reconstruction
of an event which actually took place during the Nazi invasion
of Yugoslavia in the Second World War. After burning
villages, a detachment of young troops was ordered to form a
firing squad for a mass execution of partisans and civilians.
The victims had been lined up against a haystack when
Joseph Schultz, one of the members of the firing squad,
refused to shoot and instead took his place among those to
be killed. Photo below was taken at the time by one of the
soldiers.

It is often said that the arms industry is a vital driving force in
the economy, providing essential jobs and contributing to the
balance of payments. However, many studies have shown that
the reconversion of arms industries to non-military production
would not present an insoluble problem. The life of the little girl,
below, depends on an artificial kidney. The machine was one of
several socially useful products featuring in a constructive plan
prepared, when jobs were threatened by a cut-back in arms
programmes, by employees of an engineering firm heavily
dependent on military work.
Photo © Philip Asquith, U.K.
h audience. U.N. files and publications are full
of this kind of information which is both fac¬
tual and objective. Facts about the arms
race itself, however, come largely from
private institutions and authors, each
writing from his own standpoint. This kind
of information also reaches only a limited
public.
There is probably no government in the
world which considers its own military
establishment to have an accelerating im¬
pact on the arms race, or that it could con¬
ceivably have an "aggressive" purpose. On
the contrary, each government maintains
and believes that its forces are only for
defence, that because of country A's
weapons or country B's supposed ambitions
it must call for just one more round of
weapons or one more strategic foothold.
For you and me, this means only one
thinganother leap in the arms race. But to
those involved it means "keeping the
balance" or "closing the gaps", or "ensur¬
ing adequate defence" even, in some
cases, that old favourite, arming to build
a position of strength in disarmament
negotiations.
So the truth is elusive, lost or hidden
behind excuses for remaining armed to the
teeth. Yet we must make the effort to find
the truth, to learn the hard facts about hard¬
ware while gaining insight into our percep¬
tions of one another that give rise to
automatic suspicions and exaggerated and
dangerous fears. To be effective, the case
put forward by proponents of disarmament
must be sufficiently well-informed to refute
the positions of the military experts involved
in decision-making, and solid enough to
convince the vast segment of the public
which in many countries tends to accept the
official view on the need for more rather
than less arms.
Let me state the problem in another way:
if the information made available for
dissemination differs from country to coun¬
try and is tailored to each country's par¬
ticular viewpoint, will that kind of informa
tion and education really help to mobilize
public opinion in such a way as to promote
disarmament? Or might it in fact merely en¬
courage enthusiasm for arms reductions to
be carried out by others? Disarmament
education must clearly be undertaken to the
furthest possible extent on an international
and universal basis.
I do not believe there is a need to create a
demand in one country for the disarmament
of another. That mobilization may con¬
tribute to the arms race rather than oppose
it. What we need to do, in all frankness, is to
invite all people east or west, north or
south to consider the possibility that yes,
their country too may also be a participant in
the arms race. There is a chance to achieve
progress if people will take an inquiring at¬
titude towards their own national policies.
Liselotte Waldheim-Natural
LISELOTTE WALDHEIM-NATURAL is head of
the Geneva Unit of the Centre for Disarmament,
United Nations Department of Political and
Security Council Affairs.
13
