Yardsticks
of
social status
by Erwin S. Solomon
WHAT is an indicator and why
do we need indicators of
women's participation in
socio-economic development? The
simplest answer to the first part of the
question is that an indicator is a measure
or piece of information which indicates
something. This may first appear as a
simple truism but it is far more complex
than it seems. For to indicate something
implies a reason or a concern for doing
so, which, in turn, implies (dare I say
"indicates?") a value or goal behind the
concern.
Thus, indicators, by their nature, are
more than descriptive statements
(although they can be used for that also)
for they imply a certain dynamic ap¬
proach in relation to a target or goal.
Statistics are the main building blocks of
indicators, and are sometimes used as
simple descriptive indicators but they
are not themselves indicators. One may
visualize statistics as bricks and mortar
and indicators as the edifice that can be
built from them. Thus, the same bricks
can be used to build a roadway or a wall,
a temple of learning or a labyrinth.
Indicators are very often misused and
can thus easily mislead. A well known
economic indicator like the Gross Na¬
tional Product (GNP) may be used as an
example. GNP (or GNP per capita) is a
composite indicator reflecting, in
monetary terms, the value of goods, ser
vices and trade. It is commonly misused
however as an indicator of develop¬
ment, or even, of levels of living or of
quality of life. This it is not, although it is
certainly a part of development and
quality of life itself.
Indicators, especially dynamic ones,
are powerful instruments of policy
analysis and of social action and
nowhere is this more true than in the
area of concern of improving the status
of women and their participation in
development.
On the analytical level, the way we
describe the social situation of women is
crucial to our very understanding of the
true situation.
On the policy level the indicators used
and the system in which they are con¬
ceived will determine the very limits of
possible social action.
If, for example, we accept as an in¬
dicator of our concern with women's
role in employment the commonly used
statistic/ indicator of the per cent of the
labour force that is female we im¬
mediately limit the scope of analysis and
potential action to the formal employ¬
ment of women in the labour force.
Under this scheme, a goal of "equality"
could be expressed simply as achieving
more or less a 50 per cent female labour
force.
Analytical and policy relevant in¬
dicators which reflect women's role in

employment would obviously need to be
far more complete and include elements
relating to the quality of women's
employment, their distribution relative
to men, work situations specific to
women's role in the family as well as the
economy, etc. Indicators would, by their
very nature, be tied to concerns relating
to women's employment.
Indicators are thus potential in¬
struments of great significance for ac¬
tion. But understanding and elaborating
indicators are not enough. They have to
be used as well, and used well by
analysts, policy-makers, planners and
managers of social action programmes.
In this context it can be seen that
while many social concerns, especially
fundamental ones, may be considered
to be "universal", indicators themselves
are most assuredly not universal. Nor
are they value free, quite the contrary,
for policy relevant indicators are goal-
oriented, which is why they have to be
elaborated and used within their own
socio-economic and socio-cultural set¬
tings. This is why we at Unesco refrain
from proposing normative lists of in¬
dicators in favour of promotion and
co-operation with planners and policy¬
makers in Member States in their
elaboration and use of indicators.
Erwin S. Solomon,
Director
Division for Socio-Economic Analysis,
Unesco
