Africa: a new look from the inside
by Zenebework Tadesse
"Africa and Africans have
historically been the object of
research by non-Africans. This
historical reality is much more
true concerning research on
women in Africa." The authors
of these research studies have
often adopted a."tourist"
approach to the women of
Africa, seeing their physical
characteristics, their costumes
and their customs, not in terms
of the individual, but as an
expression of the exotic folklore
of an entire ethnic group. Left, a
tourist and a Masai woman at a
designated "tourist village" in
Kenya.
Photo Margaret Murray, UNDP
TO focus on the question of research on women in Africa is at
once to point to the vast potential it has and the constraints it
now faces. Globally, the struggle against the subordination of
women has taken a multiplicity of forms. One of them is to suspect
and query all hitherto standard and accepted conventional wisdom,
posing new questions and constantly examining even those assump¬
tions that might have resulted from the struggles against the subor¬
dination of women and portrayed as beneficial to women. In line with
that tradition,, one ought to start by asking what is research on
African women? Who carries out this research? What purpose does
this research or lack of it serve?
Research strictly defined in the academic sense as the production
of scientific knowledge is a relatively new and peripheral discipline in
Africa. I am thinking here of research as a full time and a major form
of preoccupation by Africans. For Africa and Africans have
historically been the object of research by non-Africans. This
historical reality is much more true concerning research on women in
Africa.
Political independence and the crisis of conventional development
theory have led to the creation of more local research institutes,
recruiting of local researchers and defining research priorities in ac¬
cordance with what are considered to be local needs. However, even
today, only a handful of local women researchers have joined these
research institutes and problems specific to women have not been
seriously included in the long list of research priorities.
There is a wide difference between research concerns, topical,
conceptual and methodological choices by external researchers and
local researchers. In most cases "research" is limited to "action-
oriented research", i.e. areas considered to be of primary concern to
women, such as Home Economics. "Outside" research tends to
focus on discipline-tied topics, topics that are trendy in the West or
appropriate case studies to prove a point in a particular ongoing
debate in the West.
The largest portion of social science research carried out on
women in Africa is by anthropologists. Books and articles that came
out in the decade 1960-1970 were mostly descriptive and focused on
women in relation to kinship, types of marriage, systems of in¬
heritance and types of production. Currently, and as a result of the
feminist movement, anthropologists, mostly women, have begun to
expose androcentrism in existing data, and, informed by a feminist
perspective^ to generate and reinterpret ethnographic data that
directly and indirectly relate to the status of women in society.
A large number of articles, conference papers and textbooks have
been concerned by the tendency, commonly known as "male bias"
in anthropology and the other social sciences. The current debate
revolves around the controversy about sociological versus biological
determinants of gender roles. The questions that most writers raise
seem to be: is male dominance universal? Was there a primitive
matriarchy and what cross-culturally accounts for variations in
women's status? There is no consensus on the critical issue of the
universality of female subordination although most anthropological
works by women and men assume some measure of subordination
for all human society past and present.
In spite of these differences in approach, long-standing male-
biased assumptions have been challenged. Most writings have con¬
vincingly demonstrated that there is no inherent natural connexion
between biologically determined sex differences and sexual hierar¬
chies. More importantly these studies have argued that what has
been taken to be natural and given is historically variable and
changeable.
The issue of power relations is the point of focus in the discussion i
and revolves around the control of production and distribution of I
ZENEBEWORK TADESSE, Ethiopian social scientist, is Secretary-General
of the Association ofAfrican Women for Research and Development (Dakar)
which has a continent-wide membership of women social scientists, medical
practitioners and community development workers.
31

y economic resources, rights to participate in or lead political, religious
activities, and autonomy regarding decisions about sex, marriage,
residence, divorce and children's lives.
Challenging previous assumptions these studies demonstrated
that the argument that women in hunting-gathering societies were
dominated by aggressive males, thus setting patterns for contem¬
porary sex roles, was false. Women participated in public decision¬
making in an egalitarian society in accord with their control over the
products of their labour. Their declining status accompanied the
privatization of their labour. Reinterpreting the relationship of sym¬
bolism to that of women's status, spirit possessions are believed to
be thinly disguised protest movements, that served as anti-male
outlets and provided small numbers of women with long-term posi¬
tions of high status. Food taboos reflect the symbolic expression of
sexual inequality as manifested by food prohibition and male control
of the forces of production.
Those who posit universal subordination of women mainly at¬
tribute it to the indirect result of child-bearing and child-rearing under
conditions of limited technology. Another side argues that child-
bearing and child-rearing did not prevent women from furnishing the
majority of foodstuffs among hunter-gatherers and "simple" hor-
ticulturalists and hence women's autonomy was undercut and
transformed due to colonialism and missionary influences. Another
trend within the group argues for "complementary but equal" status.
Women are to be valued for themselves and the contributions they
make to society. They are neither inferior nor superior to men, merely
different, and the ways women feel about themselves are the prime
determinants of women's experience. Recent debates focus on
analysing the division of labour, marriage relationships and suppor¬
ting male-oriented ideology as fundamental in reproducing the
subordination of women.
Sociological studies on African women show similar trends to the
anthropological ones. From being merely descriptive, they have gone
on to become slightly analytical and more critical of sexist assump¬
tions. Topics covered by sociological studies include social change
and its impact on the family, marriage and divorce, socialization,
education, migration, prostitution, occupational choice and occupa¬
tional mobility.
Economists focus on gainful employment, salary differentials and
occupational segregation. This type of research is at its nascent
stage quantitative and confirms the universal pattern of women's
concentration in the tertiary sector. Numerous studies have
documented women's participation in the "informal labour sector".
In spite of this special emphasis, much research cuts across fields
and variables.
The interdisciplinary nature of studies on African women in the
1970s is best exemplified by the type of research which has come to
be known as "Women and Development". While the details vary,
the main theme of these studies is that structural and historical pro¬
cesses have eroded women's power in men's favour. These pro¬
cesses include the territorial displacement of women through mar¬
riage from one group to another, religion, colonization, capitalism
and migration. Processes such as industrialization, modernization
and development, with their components of knowledge, new skills,
professions and resultant rewards are only accessible to men. Thus
the transformation of traditional economic organization has resulted
in an increased dichotomization of sex roles and concomitant sexual
inequalities.
In a review of a book entitled. Women and World Development
Ester Boserup wrote:
"It is a central theme in many of the papers that development had
a negative impact on women because foreign experts failed to
understand the position of women in traditional societies. Therefore
women have only rarely been involved in the development process,
be it as participants or as beneficiaries. The experts failed to assign
any roles for women in programmes of training for agricultural
modernization and in other development projects. This was probably
due to the experts' lack of awareness of the important contribution
which women are making in most traditional societies, especially in
rural areas."
Zenebework Tadessa
Photo '£. Eva Bauer-Völkel, UN/FIAP international photo competition
"Most social science research on women in Africa has been carried out by anthropologists..
Currently, and as a result of the feminist movement, anthropologists, mostly women, have
begun to expose androcentrism in existing data and... to generate and reinterpret
ethnographic data that directly and indirectly relate to the status of women in society."
Above, a Touareg family in the Algerian Sahara.
32
