The magic of Abu Simbel
by Christiane Desroches-Noblecourt
THE name Abu Simbel, today a byword
for technological expertise and a
landmark in international co-op¬
eration, was unknown to the general public
only thirty years ago. In those days, few
even among Egyptologists could boast that
they had visited this holy site in Egyptian
Nubia where, in two rocky bluffs rising from
the Nile downstream of the Second
Cataract, Ramses the Great had hewn for
himself and his favourite queen, Nefertari,
two speos or cave-temples decorated with
magnificent reliefs and statues carved from
the cliffside.
Abu Simbel was doubtless so little known
because of its inaccessibility (the boat which
linked the Egyptian and Sudanese railway
systems only plied between the First and Se¬
cond Cataracts once a week), but also
because of declining interest in a region
which had been partially flooded for nine
months of the year since the height of the
original Aswan Dam had been raised for the
last time.
When the "Father of Egyptology", the
Frenchman Jean-François Champollion
(1790-1832) discovered the Egyptian past by
seeking the testimony of its monuments,
which revealed their story to him for the first
time in 1827 and 1828, he did not stop half¬
way up the Nile as the famous Commission
des Sciences et des Arts set up by Napoleon
Bonaparte had had to do when its accompa¬
nying army led by Desaix halted across from k
the Island of Philae in 1799. t
CHRISTIANE DESROCHES-NOBLECOURT,
of France, is chief curator of the Egyptian
Antiquities Department of the Louvre Museum,
Paris. She was Unesco consultant to the
Documentation Centre for Ancient Egypt in Cairo
and participated from its inception in the
International Campaign to Save the Monuments
of Nubia. A member of the directorate of the
French Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, she is the author of many works on
Egyptology including Life and Death of a
Pharaoh, published by Rainbird Ltd., London,
and the New York Graphic Society, New York.
Photo Dominique Roger - Unesco
Below, façade of the smaller of the two temples of Abu Simbel after being
dismantled and re-erected on its new site (see photo caption page 11). This
rock-hewn sanctuary built by Ramses II on the left bank of the Nile is
dedicated to the goddess Hathor and to Nefertari, the Pharaoh's favourite wife.
On each side of the door two colossal statues of Ramses flank a statue of the
queen. The rebuilt temple faces the rising sun, just as it did on its original site.
53

The image of the sun-god Re
(left) dominates the entrance to
the Great Temple of Abu
Simbel. It is flanked by two bas-
relief figures of Ramses II, each
offering to the god in an
outstretched palm the figure of
the goddess Maat. The god's
right hand rests on a sceptre,
called ouser in ancient Egyptian;
beneath his left hand is another
small standing figure of the
goddess Maat. The ensemble
forms a representation in figures
of Ramses' coronation name:
ouser-Maat-re. The Great
Temple was dedicated to the
three principal gods of the age
of Ramses: re-Horakhty the sun-
god, Amon and Ptah.
> It was from Abu Simbel that Champollion
set out in order to survey and study
systematically all the monuments he had
noted as he travelled up the Nile from Cairo.
His disciple, M. de Vaucelles, had already
been able to read without difficulty the
name Ramses on the walls of the great tem¬
ple, using his teacher's method of decipher¬
ment. That was over one hundred and fifty
years ago.
When the monuments of ancient Nubia
stood in the greatest danger (the crucial
years being, of course, those of the first
third of the twentieth century), the Govern¬
ment of Egypt's Antiquities Service called
on Egyptologists from various countries to
make rapid surveys and to publish details of
the most endangered sanctuaries. The latter
were those which had been partially or com¬
pletely erected of layers of sandstone (from
Egyptian Nubia) and which stood very close
to the Nile, such as the Ramesside
hemispeos (temples partially constructed on
and partially carved from the rock) of Derr
and Wadi-es-Sebua (North), and the Greco-
Roman temples and chapels of Dabod, Ker¬
tassi, Taffa, Kalabsha, Dendur, Dakka and
Maharraqa.
The charming temple of Amada, dating
from the glorious age of theThutmoses, was
built higher up and escaped immediate
danger, but it too was rapidly surveyed. On
the other hand, the famous speos of Beit-el-
54 .
Wali, Gerf Hussein, Wadi es-Sebua (South),
Abu Simbel and Abu Oda, were at that time
beyond the reach of the rising waters and
were not covered by the surveys; nor was
the temple of Ellesiya. However, the con¬
struction of the new Aswan High Dam
meant that the sites of these monuments
would almost completely disappear beneath
the risen waters of the river.
One of the tasks assigned to the Centre
for Study and Documentation on Ancient
Egypt, established in 1955, was to carry out
a systematic survey, in the most scientifical¬
ly exhaustive manner possible, of all these
temples except one, and to publish the
results. The exception was the hemispeos of
Beit e)-Wali, where the Oriental Institute of
the University of Chicago was authorized to
conduct archaeological excavations (see
page 43).
On the island of Philae, which liesto tne
south of the original Aswan Dam,
meticulous precautions had been taken early
in the century by the French Egyptologist
Gaston Maspero (1846-1916), the Director-
General of the Antiquities Service. Maspero
organized the reinforcement of the founda¬
tions of the Philae monuments, and handed
over responsibility for them to Captain
Lyons, himself supervising the clearing and
excavating operations, as well as the
restoration of the superstructures of various
sanctuaries. He strove to alert public opinion
in order to save the island from submersion,
but the time was not yet ripe for the magnif i- .
cent display of solidarity which Unesco later
called into being. Nevertheless, Maspero's
appeal did not entirely fall on deaf ears, and
his efforts were echoed in the French writer
Pierre Loti's famous book La Mort de Philae
(The Death of Philae). The survey of the
religious buildings dedicated to the goddess
Isis, assigned to the French Egyptologist
Georges Bénédite (1875-1926) was begun at
this period but could not be completed for
lack of time.
Now that the Campaign to Save the Nu¬
bian Monuments is reaching its conclusion,
and that its most prestigious achievements
have been marked at Abu Simbel and at
Philae by the dismantling and transfer of
cave-temples and a group of stone-built
sanctuaries, it is perhaps appropriate to ask
what inspired the Pharaohs, during certain
periods of history, to construct along the
Nubian Nile far from the capital, so many
sanctuaries which were not intended for use
by the indigenous population; for in these
temples, only the priests performed ritual
acts of worship of the divine forms, in¬
cluding that of the Pharaoh himself.
The Philae monuments, comprising the
great sanctuary of the goddess Isis and the
Mammisi (or "birth house"), the chapels of
Osiris, of Hathor and of the sacred Barque,
reveal above all through the texts inscribed
on their walls, the overall symbolism and
hence the significance of the rites celebrated
in them; rites which marked the passing of
the seasons, the trials of nature and of man,
and the incarnations of divinity, the concept
of which would be bequeathed by Late
Egypt to the Western world.
The redoubtable fortresses at the Second
Cataract were provided, doubtless during i
the first Kingdoms, with magnificent

Ramses the God
The temples built by Ramses II in Nubia are an expression of the
divine nature of the Pharaoh and queen Nefertari, his favourite
wife. In the small temple of Abu Simbel, dedicated to Nefertari,
is a scene showing her coronation by the goddesses Isis and
Hathor (left). Woman, queen and goddess, Nefertari is portrayed
wearing a crown with two lyre-shaped horns framing a sun-disc,
and two tall feathers. Another bas-relief in the small temple
depicts the coronation of Ramses himself (below left). The gods
Seth and Horus, each standing on a pedestal, hold in eternal
balance the emblems of royalty they have bestowed on the
Pharaoh. An even more striking illustration of Ramses as a god is
the relief (bottom photo) from the temple of Wadi Es Sebua. It
shows the Pharaoh venerating four divinities, including himself
(the others are Onuris, Tefnut and Nekhbet). In bas-relief from
the small temple of Abu Simbel (below) Ramses, accompanied
by Nefertari who is shaking a Sistrum, offers flowers to Taurt
goddess of births. The plant offerings of papyrus buds and stems
are a symbolic allusion to the birth in the marshes of the Delta of
the child-god Horus, son of Isis and Osiris, and to the world's
first blossoming. The scene is an affirmation of the divinity of the
descendants hoped for by the royal couple, themselves part of
the cosmic forces on which Egypt depended.

.chapels intended to ensure that their bas¬
tions would be impregnable, as well as to
pay tribute to the glory of the sovereign.
Similarly, during the Late Period, the temple
of Dakka was reconstructed on the ruins of
the Thutmosid sanctuaries, located on the
parallel which marked the end of the road to
the Wadi Allaqi gold mines (see page 34).
What was the fundamental concern of
Ramses II when he decided, several times in
the course of his long reign, to establish
cave-sanctuaries and hemispeos at Beit el
Wali, Gerf Hussein, Wadi es-Sebua, Derr,
North and South Abu Simbel, and Aksha?
At least seven such temples have been
found: six scattered from north to south
along the left bank of the Nile in Egyptian
Nubia, and one, the temple of Derr, on the
right bank. Seven sanctuaries, hewn or
erected along a 300-kilometre-long strip of
land, where the cultivated area was in some
places no more than TOO metres wide and
where by the time of the New Kingdom
many men were living and working in an
Egypt which had become their metropolis.
It has been suggested, with some
justification, that these temples may have
been a form of political propaganda. But this
hypothesis is not wholly satisfactory. It is
true that in the chief divinity worshipped in
each of these holy places may be found
traces of the gods of the Empire who, under
Ramses the Great, formed in an audacious
syncretism the image of the all-powerful.
This triunity, constituted by Amon, Re and
Ptah, was conceived of as a large body, con¬
trolled by a head, but powerless without all
its members. Amon, Re and Ptah were also
the three divine forms which protected the
armies of Ramses II at the battle of Kadesh
in 1285 BC, when the Egyptian army was
saved from defeat at the hands of the Hit¬
tites. The fourth army was placed under the
guidance of the god Seth, who was con¬
sidered to be beneficent under the Ramessi-
dle rulers since their family and ancestors
had adopted him as their protector. In his
Nubian temples, it is possible that the
audacity of the king, thus playing the role of
Seth, led him so far as to substitute statues
of himself for those of his divine ancestor.
For in each sanctuary the Pharaoh is in¬
cluded in the group of divinities. The royal
statue, sculpted in the recesses of the deep
rock caves and surrounded by divinities,
adopts the features of the godly form that
he represents in each of these holy places:
Ptah in the temple of Gerf Hussein; Amon at
Wadi es-Sebua; and Re at Derr. This prac¬
tice reaches its highest expression at Abu
Simbel, where the two cave-temples, the
most famous in the whole of upper Egyptian
Nubia, may help us to unravel part of the
mystery.
Set into the rock wall in the depths of the
great temple are four statues representing
Ptah, Amon, Ramses and Re-Horakhty
seated side by side. At the equinox, when
the first rays of sunlight appear on the
horizon and penetrate the temple, they
reach the divine figures in the depths of the
sanctuary, and Amon, the King and Re-
Horakhty are suddenly illuminated. Only the
shoulder of the earth-divinity, Ptah, who
decides when the earth's crust will split
open, permitting the growth of all living
things, is touched by the sun's rays. The
King, a god among gods, is linked on one
side to the hidden forces coming from the
south, personified by Amon of Napata, who
flows with and in the life-giving current of
the Nile. On the other side of the royal
statue, with Re-Horakhty, the King is touch¬
ed with the light and heat of the sun, which
is renewed each year on New Year's Day,
and he is assimilated into these forces of
light and heat.
Ramses II thus wished in his Nubian
monuments to express in material form his
total identity with the divine, of which he
was no longer the earthly offspring, but
would soon become the true incarnation.
When he had finished building these
temples throughout Nubia, he had left a
record in stone of a Pharaoh who had
become a god.
Thus the sculptor depicted him in the bas-
reliefs on the walls of the Wadi es-Sebua
sanctuary as the third figure in the triads of
gods. As a god he receives homage, and
pays homage in his turn, as King, to the
gods amongst whom he figures.
Ramses must have been in at least the for¬
tieth year of his reign when he returned to
his great temple at Abu Simbel, built long
before, and ordered the iconography to be
changed. His silhouette was to be inserted
This low-relief on a wall of the Great
Temple of Abu Simbel depicts scenes from
the battle of Kadesh, when Ramses II led
the Egyptian forces to victory over the
Hittite army. The Pharaoh, colossal in
proportion to the other figures, is holding a
council of war with a group of officers.
Upper frieze shows the charge of the
Hittite cavalry. Below, the Egyptian camp
can be seen protected by warriors armed
with shields; in the centre two spies are
forced to yield their secrets. Far right,
chariot-borne archers of Ramses ll's army.
Ramses II is here portrayed as a child.
Falling across his right temple is the tress
of hair, curled at the end, which indicates
his status as a royal child. The right index
finger touching the mouth is a convention
often used by the Egyptians to denote
childhood.
5 58 am 6.03 am
At certain times of the year, the rays of the
rising sun, after illuminating the colossal
figures on the façade of the Great Temple
of Abu Simbel. pierce no less than sixty
metres through the galleries and chambers
hewn into the mountainside until they
reach the very heart of the temple. Here, at
as that of the son-divinity of each divine
couple: on the south wall he takes the place
of Khonsu between Amon and Mut, and
between Ptah and Sekhmet he replaces
Nefertum.
In the light of these phenomena, Egyp¬
tologists have come to grasp the
significance of the figures on the temple
walls. Anyone who subscribes to the theory
that the many Ramesside sanctuaries were
designed as a means of political or even
religious propaganda must also admit that it
was the very presence of these monuments
which had an impact on the Nubians, for
they, like the Egyptians, were denied access
to the sanctuaries. Thus the rich
iconography adorning the walls had been
created solely as part of the internal func-
' V * . fi .1 il H il te - -3fe
¡i *
ssäL'
mx
litt mm
56

6.08 am 6 12 am
the far end of the inner sanctuary, they
pick out the seated figures of three
immortals: Ramses, the god Amon, and the
sun-god Re-Horakhty. A fourth statue
portraying Ptah the god of creation does
not fully emerge from the shadows. The
moment when the radiant sunlight
6.15 am
penetrated the darkness within the temple
must have coincided with a key stage in
the performance of the rites. To achieve
this astonishing play of light the Egyptian
architects and engineers left nothing to
chance in their choice of site nor in the
construction of the chambers within the
6.20 am
mountain. This series of photos showing
the gods at sunrise was taken on 19
October 1963. Today, rebuilt on its new site
high above the Nile, the temple faces in
exactly the same direction as before.
tioning of these sacred shrines. Its principal
role lay in the "sympathetic magic" it was
expected to perform: whatever was
represented in the temples was conjured in¬
to existence and became "operative" for all
eternity.
And so we can see why Ramses II should
have been determined to make some of the
reliefs in his great temple consonant with
the concept of royalty which he had
developed. Each year an important
ceremony would be held at Abu Simbel to
mark the predominant role of the sovereign
in Egyptian life and the sovereign's assimila¬
tion, once and for all, into the great cosmic
forces upon which Egypt relied.
Indeed, the meticulous study of the two
temples which we carried out when we
organized the Documentation Centre's
scientific survey in Nubia, has revealed how
closely related they were, paralleling, in fact,
the male-female relationship of the royal
couple. The temples were undoubtedly so
designed, by order of the Pharaoh, that the
axes of the two sanctuaries should converge
in the Nile. Similarly the northern temple, in
the direction associated with the female,
was dedicated to the queen while the
southern speos was reserved for the
Sovereign. The façades alone of Abu Simbel
present a striking resume of their imagery:
above the entrance of the great temple,
Ramses appears in all the power and
dynamism of majesty as the Sun-god, his
falcon-head dominated by the Heavenly
Body. This image is also a rebus, spelling
out the king's coronation* name.
îl'ÊS
The façade of the smaller temple is adorn¬
ed with two pink sandstone statues of the
young and radiantly beautiful Nefertari,
flanked by statues of the Pharaoh. She
seems ready to spring from the cliffside, to
stand radiant on the horizon.
The reason why the great Nubian temples
of Ramses (and probably even those built
before and after them) were implanted in
far-off Egyptian Nubia was undoubtedly
connected with the life-giving Nile, with the
Pharaoh's role as guarantor of the life and
wealth of Egypt, and with the responsibility
which in a sense he bore for the flooding of
the Nile.
The temples of Abu Simbel must have
been the site of most of the ceremonies
marking the return of the floodwaters which
each year brought renewed life to Egypt.
This miraculous annual inundation, which
inspired the Greek historian Hecataeus of
Miletus (late 6th century BC), well before
Herodotus, to write that Egypt was a gift of
the Nile, coincided with the 19th of July in
the Julian calendar and was announced in
the Egyptian sky by the reappearance of the
star Sothius, which had disappeared from
view seventy days before.
A few moments after the rising of the
star, and in approximately the same spot,
the sun would suddenly appear on the
horizon. This celebrated heliacal rising of
Sothius (Sirius) heralded the rejuvenation of
the earth and the beginning of the new year.
This New Year's Day also marked the King's
jubilee and the celebration of his revitaliza-
tion.
Late Egyptian texts tell us how on this oc¬
casion the King also made a mystic voyage
on the floodwaters of the Nile which had
come to regenerate the land of his
ancestors. It was at Abu Simbel, north of
the Second Cataract, where these flood-
waters entered Egyptian Nubia, that the
sanctuaries dedicated to the royal couple
provided the stage for a sublime mystery. It
was here that preparations were made for
the heliacal rising of Sothius. On the sand¬
stone façades the event was portrayed in the
forms of Nefertari-Sothius and Ramses-
Sun, the reinvigorated guarantors of the fer¬
tility of an Egypt whose eternal productivity
was heralded by the many offspring which
escorted their sacred images.
Christiane Desroches-Noblecourt
57
