As a sculptor Picasso was an
innovator who succeeded in
transforming the most
unlikely materials into
masterpieces in which
humour and Inventiveness
combine. Perhaps his most
famous transformation was
his juxtaposition of the
saddle and handlebars from a
derelict bicycle to form Head
of a Bull (1943), opposite
page.
In Man Carrying a Sheep
(1944),bronze, 225x78x78
cm., (Museum of Modern
Art, Philadelphia) Picasso
returned to traditional
methods. This vast sculpture
on an ancient, archetypal
theme, has been described as
"a work of resistance to
oppression", and seems to
signify faith in man's ability
to restore peace to the
world.



Picasso
the
by Julian Gallego
ONE of the outstanding sculptors of
this century, the Spaniard Julio
Gonzalez, once declared: "In my
view, the mysterious side of Picasso's
work its nerve centre, as it were is his
sculpture".
There is, however, a general tendency to
consider Picasso almost exclusively in terms
of his painting and to regard his sculpture as
a secondary activity, little more than a hob¬
by. Yet taken in its entirety, his sculpture
alone could well represent the full-time ac¬
tivity of a hard-working and inspired artist.
If, by some misfortune, all his other
works paintings, drawings, prints and
ceramics were to disappear, his sculpture
alone would suffice to situate Picasso at the
very summit of the history of the art of this
century.
It was only to be expected that certain
Cubist painters, such as Laurens and
Braque, should have produced some fine
pieces of sculpture. Yet none of them even
approached Picasso in quality or quantity of
output. He once said to Julio Gonzalez :
"All you need to do to produce sculpture is
to carve up pictures. The colours are simply
guides to different perspectives and sloping
pla nes. . . 0 nee you have eu t u p a pictu re you
have only to follow the lines indicated by
each colour and you are left with a piece of
sculpture".
In retrospect this advice seems to apply to
not a few of Picasso's works in both media.
Indeed, there are grounds for thinking that
despite the fact that he was one of the
greatest painters of the modern era, Picasso
had little regard for purely pictorial qualities.
It was in this that he diverged most from his
friend Matisse, whose conceptions he seem¬
ed at times on the point of sharing.
Picasso's canvases sometimes seem more
like a guide to painting than works compos¬
ed with loving care. The effects he sought
could perhaps be achieved more directly
through sculpture. Especially since, in his
sculptural work, Picasso was so far removed
from academic orthodoxy, replacing the
marble of Carrara which was totally alien to
him with all kinds of odds and ends sheet
metal, wires, planks, stones, ragswhich
he daubed with paint as the fancy took him.
Cubism, with its "collages", and
Dadaism, with its randomly assembled ob¬
jects absurdly elevated to the status of art,
opened up a boundless field of experience in
which Picasso, as in many other fields, was
one of the most indefatigable seekers.
Although, when commenting on the
pseudo-scientific pedantry of the
technological painters, he said : "I do not
seek, I find", he nevertheless spent his
38

sculptor
whole life seeking out and, with extra¬
ordinary genius, transforming junk into
masterpieces.
Jean Cocteau called him "the king of the
rag-pickers", and this was especially true of
that happy period that started in 1943 with
the Bucranio, or Head of a Bull (illustration
this page), made out of a bicycle saddle and
handlebars, which, when assembled, pro¬
duced an overwhelming plastic effect.
But Picasso's attraction to sculpture goes
much further back, to the beginning of the
century. His Seated Woman dates from
1901, and this was followed immediately by
the Blind Man and the Picador, during what
is known, in his painting, as the Blue Period.
Somewhat later, during the Rose Period,
came his bronze bust of The Jester. It is a
fine, very pictural bust on which the light
seems to glide like the strokes of a soft
paintbrush, rather in the manner of a Rodin.
The head of his mistress Fernande Olivier
(illustration this page), produced in the same
year, '1905, displays an exquisite sense of
luminous values and, typical of his skill at
reconciling opposites, enormous strength
and determination.
Fernande was the muse of early Cubism
and her fragmented features appear in both
paintings and sculptures. The head, compo¬
sed of small plane surfaces, which Picasso
made of her in 1909 is the exact three-
dimensional equivalent of the heads which
he drew or painted. It is perhaps even more
striking than the portraits because it offers
us the reality of volume in space rather than
its illusion on a plane surface.
This calls to mind the distinction that the
Prussian critic and philosopher Johann von
Herder drew between sculpture, the art of
the real, and painting, the art of deception.
What the sculptor shows us exists, we can
touch it in our own space rather than see it
only in the illusory space of the canvas.
Picasso was always a "realist" in the sense
in which the Russian sculptors Gabo and
Pevsner used the term "realism" in their
celebrated Manifesto of 1920, that is, as
being something that is not a transposition
or a copy of something else but that has an
existence of its own and that did not exist
before the artist created it. It should be
noted that, ten years before the Manifesto
appeared, Picasso had already sensed one
of the principles it proclaimed that of
emphasizing hollow effects in sculpture as a
means of expressing space.
During the period of "Synthetic Cubism"
Picasso astonished the world with the abun¬
dance of his inventions, although some of
these were little known because they were
made of fragile, short-lived materials. The
exhibition at the Grand Palais in Paris, in
1979, of the so-called Picasso Bequest
(works made over to the French State by his
heirs in payment of death duty) provided an
opportunity to admire a large number of
works made of materials such as cardboard,
metal plate, wood, paper. Some of these
works were tiny and were apparently
preserved in packing-cases by the artist
once the miracle of creation had taken
place. The musical themes of the Cubist
still-life oil paintings re-emerge with added
force and intensity by being expressed in
paltry materials. The most famous of these
works, the Glass of Absinth (1914), seems
to combine all the preoccupations of
Futurism, Cubism and Dadaism. One of the
last examples of that unprecedented series
was the post-Cubist Guitar (1924), which is
made of sheet metal.
During the Surrealist period, when
Picasso collaborated with the group led by
André Breton by designing the cover for the
celebrated magazine "Minotaure", he pro¬
duced several three-dimensional works
which were even more revealing than his
paintings, using unconventional materials
such as the wire in the Woman in a Garden
(1929), or the grains of sand combined with
rope, canvas and so on, in compositions
protected under glass, like the Construction
with Glove, or the Construction with But¬
terfly, both dating from 1930, in which a real
glove and a real butterfly were used.
The first Crucifixion, painted at
Boisgeloup in 1930, marked the beginning of
an expressionist phase which was to con¬
tinue for several years, culminating in 1937
in the celebrated Guernica. During the same
decade, Picasso produced the tranquil,
classical illustrations for Ovid's Metamor¬
phoses, for the publisher Albert Skira. In his
sculptural work, the small wooden figurines,
in the style of ancient votive offerings, and
especially the magnificent women's heads,
free-standing or in relief, with the curve of
the nose projecting beak-like from the centre
of the forehead, had much more in common
with his engravings than with his paintings.
Then, at a time of deep crisis, he began to
produce his exquisite bronze statuettes;
using leaves, shells and corrugated paper to
make impressions in the clay from which
they were cast, he succeeded, with these
humble materials, in resurrecting an idyllic
Greece of hamadryads and water nymphs.
The Bucranio, or Head of a Bull, (1943)
marked the beginning of a very happy and
prolific period of pictorial and sculptural out¬
put during which Picasso's optimism seems
to have known no bounds.
Head of a Woman (Fernande), 1909. Bronze,
40.5x24x26 cm. This head of Fernande
Olivier, Picasso's companion at the time it
was made, is considered to be one of the
finest examples of Cubist sculpture.
Photos Réunion des Musées Nationaux, Paris © SPADEM 1980, Paris.
Musée Picasso, Paris

But most astonishing of all was the way in
'which, like a conjuror, he assembled and
transformed all kinds of discarded objects.
Surveying a scrap heap or rubbish dump
with his practised eye, Picasso picked out,
for example, a toy car which would be
transformed into a monkey's head. Inspired
by his passionate desire to live his life afresh,
any object was grist to his mill, giving rise to
curious sculptures such as Girl with the
Skipping-rope, Woman with Baby Carriage
(illustration this page), Pregnant Woman
and Woman with an Apple; this was his bid
to make his art accessible to everybody. In
1943-44 he produced Man with Sheep (il¬
lustration page 38), his version of the
Moscophoros, which has since adorned the
main square of Vallauris in the south of
France.
He produced a whole bestiary of domestic
animals presided over by owls, both serious
and comic, and among which the She-goat,
made of palm-leaves and wicker, raises her
peaceful horns. This more naturalistic, less
intellectualized art was symptomatic of a
world-wide tendency in the post-war years
which was shortly to be swamped by the im¬
penetrable new wave of triumphant abstract
art.
Picasso was never to be an abstract
painter. But his figures of women of the
1950s, with their large flat surfaces, the
monumental head of Sylvette, in black and
white sheet metal, now admirably set in a
garden of New York University, and, even
more, the "weathervane" women and dolls,
The Bathers of 1956, and the gigantic plate-
steel figures of the following decade all sug¬
gest that Picasso was weary of facile art, the
art of playfulness and popular rejoicing, and
was retreating into attitudes harking back to
the Cubism of almost half a century earlier.
This general survey of Pablo Picasso's
career as a sculptor leads to the conclusion
that it was as astonishing and as pregnant
with discoveries as his career as a painter. In
his latter years he produced hardly any
sculpture, which is a mach more demanding
art physically than the drawing and engrav¬
ing on which he concentrated most of his
efforts.
It is easy to distinguish a number of con¬
stants in this varied panorama. "Art that
bores people is good for the wastepaper
basket", wrote Jean Dubuffet. Picasso was
never a bore because he himself was never
bored. His sculpture always has an
uninhibited, improvised air, far removed
from the academic solemnity in which that
art form is so often shrouded. Picasso
astonishes us with his miraculous resuscita¬
tions of discarded objects, his metamor¬
phosis of the obsolete and his re-invention
of the everyday. Despite the much-noted
borrowings from Negro sculpture, it is the
dominant classical trait, the Mediterranean
spirit that constantly surfaces in his
sculptural figures, female figures for the
most part, which Picasso shapes, twists
and breaks down, the better to hold them in
his grasp.
JULIAN GALLEGO, Spanish art historian, is a
professor at the university of Madrid. Among his
many published works are Visión y Símbolos en la
Pintura Española del Siglo de Oro ("Vision and
Symbols in Spanish Painting of the Golden Cen¬
tury"), Pintura Contemporánea ("Contemporary
Painting"), and studies on Velazquez, Goya and
Zurbarân. This article is an edited and abridged
version of a hitherto umpublished paper
presented to the Congress on Picasso held at
Santander (Spain) last summer.
Above, Picasso with Françoise Gilot
and their son Claude on the beach
on the Côte d'Azur in 1950, an
occasion that may have inspired,
right. Woman with Baby Carriage
(1950, bronze, 203x145x61 cm).
Elements that went into its
construction include the remains of
a strainer (one of the wheels), old
pottery handles (the child's legs and
arms), an earthenware vase (the
child's hat and head) and a
chimney-pipe from a stove (the
woman's skirt).
40
