Women and the social sciences
Breaking
the male
stranglehold
by Marcia Westkott
Text Copyright © 1979 by President and Fellows
of Harvard College. Reproduction prohibited.
The crusade for women's eman¬
cipation has catalyzed a vital in¬
tellectual movement which is pro¬
ducing a growing body of literature
inspired by a new awareness of
woman's experience in the modern
age. In the world of education this
movement has stimulated the
growth of academic interest in the
status and problems of
womenwhat has come to be
known as "women's studies". In
May 1980, as part of its programme
for the advancement of women
and its activities in connexion with
the Decade for Women, Unesco
organized a meeting of specialists
in women's studies from the dif¬
ferent world regions. Articles on
the next six pages are based on
papers presented to the meeting.
That by Lourdes Arizpe on page 34
is adapted from a study prepared
for an earlier symposium held in
Mexico City under the aegis of the
College of Mexico and the National
Autonomous University of Mexico.
Photo © Giraudon, Paris
"The concept of the human being as a universal category is only man writ large. 'Woman' is
considered an abstract deviation of this essential humanity; she is a partial man, or a
negative man, or the convenient object of man's needs... A woman is defined exclusively in
terms of her relationship to men." Above, Jupiter and Thetis, by the French artist Jean
Auguste Dominique Ingres, in the Museum of Aix-en-Provence.
28

"... We exploit
ourselves as objects
of knowledge..."
Above, the
Palaeolithic Venus de
Lespugue, now in the
Musée de l'Homme,
Paris.
Photo © Musée de l'Homme.
AMONG the major arguments that feminist criticism directs at
social science is that it concentrates on the distortion and
misinterpretation of women's experience. Women have
not only been very largely ignored in traditional approaches to know¬
ledge; where women have been considered at all we have been mea¬
sured in masculine terms.
The concept of the human being as a universal category is only the
man writ large. "Woman" is considered an abstract deviation of this
essential humanity; she is a partial man, or a negative ¡mage of man,
or the convenient object of man's needs. In any case, a woman is
defined exclusively in terms of her relationship to men, which
becomes the source from which female stereotypes emerge and are
sustained.
Moving beyond these stereotypes requires renaming the
characteristics of women, not in terms of deviations from or nega¬
tions of a masculine norm, but as patterns of human responses to
particular situations. In this view, masculinity and femininity are
simply different human possibilities that have emerged historically.
This understanding has led feminist scholars to rethink the concept
of the person to include traditionally female characteristics.
Another strand of feminist criticism of the content of knowledge
about women as defined by the social sciences concerns the
assumption that the human being and "his" social environment are
mutually compatible. According to this assumption, the personality
is formed by and therefore reflects its social contexts. The male
character structure and patriarchal culture mutually reflect and sup¬
port one another through social, political, and economic institutions.
For this approach to person and society to remain consistent,
women and other deviants must either become invisible or their
estrangement from, or failure in, such a society must be explained in
terms of their "natural" inferiority.
In calling attention to women's invisibility in social science and in
rejecting the notion of women's natural inferiority, feminists have
challenged the assumption that self and society are mutually reflec¬
tive and. supportive. Instead, they have stressed the idea that girls
and women have grown up and have lived in social contexts that are
opposed to their needs as human beings. These social contexts, they
argue, are patriarchal: through the organization of social relations,
women are controlled by men and are culturally devalued. Whether a |
woman manages to struggle against this subjugation or succumbs to I
MARCIA WESTKOTT is assistant professor of sociology at the University
of Colorado at Colorado Springs (USA) and the author of several studies on
feminist social theory. A longer version of this article appeared in the Novem¬
ber 1979 issue of the Harvard Educational Review.
"... Women have
become the latest
academic fad... we
are in the situation of
gathering any and all
information we can
about ourselves so
long as it sells..."
Photo © Léon-Claude Vénézia, Paris
29

( it, or more likely both, in a patriarchical culture, she is still an out¬
sider, an other, a marginal person, a deviant. In short she is
alienated.
As well as criticizing the content of social knowledge about'
women, many feminists also criticize the methods by which this
knowledge is obtained. According to this criticism, the patriarchal
bias is reflected in the ways in which questions about women are
posed: the absence of concepts that tap women's experience, the
viewing of women as an unchanging essence independent of time
and place, and the narrowness of the concept of the human being
reflected in limited ways of understanding human behaviour.
Like the Marxist tradition within which she works, the criticism for¬
mulated by the Canadian sociologist, Dorothy Smith, challenges the
norm of objectivity that assumes that the subject and object of
research can be separated from one another through a
methodological screen. The subject-object dichotomy in social
science refers to the distinction between the person conducting the
research and the person about whom knowledge is being developed.
The ideal of objectivity was advocated by nineteenth century
positivists who argued that the object of social knowledge should be
regarded as any other physical phenomenon and that the subject
who conducts research must always be on guard not to let feelings
"infect" research.
Smith argues that the methodological norm of objectivity is itself
socially and historically constituted, rooted in an ideology that at¬
tempts to mystify the social relations of the knower and the known
through procedures that appear anonymous and impersonal. This
aura of objectivity can be maintained so long as the object of
knowledge, the "known", can be an "other", an alien object that
does not reflect back on the knower. It is only where women are also
brought in as the subjects of knowledge that the separation between
subject and object breaks down.
This emphasis upon the idea that subject and object are humanly
linked converges with the interpretive tradition in the social sciences.
The interpretive tradition emphasizes the idea that social knowledge
is always interpreted within historical contexts, and that truths are,
therefore, historical rather than abstract, and contingent rather than
categorical. The questions that the investigator asks of the object of
knowledge grow out of her own concerns and experiences. The
answers that she may discover emerge not only from the ways that
the objects of knowledge confirm and expand these experiences, but
also from the ways that they oppose or remain silent about them.
The third criticism that feminist scholars direct against traditional
social science is concerned with the purpose of the social knowledge
of women. It certainly takes no more than a modicum of perception
to realize that women have become the latest academic fad. As ob¬
jects of knowledge, women have become marketable commodities
measured by increasing profits for publishers and expanding
enrolments in women's studies courses. While women are riding the
crest of the wave which we ourselves have helped to create, it may
be a rather sobering, albeit necessary, task to reflect on the
ephemeral nature of the academic market in which we are now
valued.
In this respect we have much to learn from the academic social
science exploitation of the poor, especially the Blacks, in the sixties.
In the name of academic liberal concern and compensation the black
ghetto was measured, analysed, processed, dissected in short,
reduced to manipulate data that advanced the career interests of the
investigators but did little to improve the plight of the investigated.
The fact that research on the black ghetto is now passé, although
black ghettos continue to exist, and research on women is now au
courant, should give us pause. Once women have had "their day",
once the academic market has grown tired of this particular "area",
once the journals are glutted with information about women, how
then shall we justify the importance of studying women? Shall
knowledge of women also recede in the shadow of benign neglect?
The issue here concerns the exploitation of women as objects of
knowledge. So long as we endorse the idea that the purpose of the
study of women is justified solely in terms of our past exclusion as
objects of knowledge, we inadvertently contribute to this exploita¬
tion as well as to its faddish nature.
Women are an attractive subject to exploit so long as we hold that
the purpose of social knowledge is simply getting more information.
In social science's unrestrained pursuit of information, any new ob¬
ject of study that can generate mounds of data is of interest so long
as it is a prolific source. When the data are no longer new, the object
of study loses its primacy.
Along with this flimsy market valuation of content is the problem
of simply recording the present or past conditions of women. The
30
methodological approach which recognizes as valid only the factual
recording of what is allows no justification for attending to alter¬
natives to present conditions. The effect of this approach is to justify
the present.
Opposed to this social science about women is an alternative
social science for women. A social science for women does not ex¬
clude information about women, but informs the knowledge it seeks
with an intention for the future rather than a resignation to the pre¬
sent. This dialogue with a future suggests a social science that is not
simply a doleful catalogue of the facts of patriarchy, but an opposi¬
tion to the very facts that it discovers.
The opposition to patriarchal domination within both subject and
object, knower and known, is a profound expression of a longing for
freedom from that domination. For those of us who are seeking
knowledge of women, this idea of freedom can be expressed as a
future intention which indicates to us which, facts in the present are
necessary to know. Without this sense of what knowledge is impor¬
tant for our liberation, we are in the situation of gathering any and all
information we can about ourselves so long as it sells, and thus we
exploit ourselves as objects of knowledge.
The difference between a social science about women and a social
science for women, between the possibilities of self-exploitation and
those of liberation, is our imaginative capacity to imbue our
understandings of the world with a commitment to overcoming the
subordination and devaluation of women.
The feminist criticisms of social science content, method, and pur¬
pose are not tightly integrated into an academic discipline. They are,
rather, strands that are just beginning to emerge. As a result,
women's actions are being reinterpreted and profoundly illuminated
from the perspective of women's consciousness. Social institutions
such as motherhood are being re-examined for their patriarchal
assumptions and are being countered with a vision of decent and
humane parenting.
A psychology of women emphasizes its intention to be for women
by not only explaining the conditions that affect the psychology of
women and men, but also by exploring the bases from which those
conditions can be transformed. To attend to the feminist criticism is
to open the social sciences to both the feminist challenge
and its hope.
Marcia Westkott
E
o
5
©
THE WEAKER SEX
