The dawn of greatness
'Had he produced nothing after 1907, Picasso would still
have been one of the great masters of 20th century art'
by Vitali A. Suslov
AMIDST the kaleidoscopic searchings
of the young Picasso, the canvases
of his Blue and Rose Periods stand
out as remarkable examples of purity of ar¬
tistic thought. They are infused with
humanistic ¡deals, not yet eroded by the
poison of scepticism, and imbued with a
belief in man. They are marked, too, by the
nobility of pure artistic achievement.
The Hermitage Museum in Leningrad and
the Pushkin State Museum of Fine Arts in
Moscow contain a number of magnificent
early works which are broadly representative
of Picasso's artistic strivings during those
early years.
Only works produced during the first fif¬
teen years or so of Picasso's creative activity
are represented in Soviet collections. They
reveal nonetheless all the complexity and
paradoxically of Picasso's art with' its sud¬
den and mercurial shifts of imagery, man¬
ners and style. This limited space of time
embraced his Blue, Rose and "Negro"
Periods, it witnessed his explorations in
Cubism, his passion for collages, his ex¬
periments in abstraction.
The beginning of the Blue Period is
customarily associated with Picasso's sec¬
ond trip to Paris, in 1901. On his return to
Barcelona around Christmas of that year, he
brought back with him some finished and
unfinished works which were quite different
in style from anything he had done before.
Art is born of melancholy, he now told his
friends. His paintings were filled with the
blue world of taciturn solitude, the world of
the outcasts of society the sick, the poor,
the crippled, the old.
Picasso already had a predilection for the
paradoxical, the unexpected and the discor¬
dant. The years 1900-1901 are usually re
ferred to as the "Lautrec" and "Steinten"
period to describe the influence of these two
Parisian artists on Picasso's work. And yet it
was during this second trip to Paris, where
he spent a full eight months, that Picasso
made a complete break with Parisian con¬
temporary art. In substance, form and
mood, his Blue Period was strongly inspired
by the Spanish tradition.
The new trend can be clearly seen in two
paintings of the period, The Absinth Drinker
(1901) in the Hermitage, and The Embrace
(1900) in the Pushkin State Museum of Fine
Arts. Both stand on the threshold of the
Blue Period, anticipating many of its themes
and concluding a whole period of ex¬
perimentation in which Picasso was moving
towards the attainment of his own artistic
truth.
By the time he was fifteen, Picasso was
already an accomplished "academic" artist.
Driven by an irrepressible desire for innova¬
tion, he now set out in search of his own
path amidst the tangled web of trends and
schools that characterized European art at
the turn of the century. In pursuit of this
goal, he revealed one remarkable facet of his
talent the ability to assimilate and master a
variety of artistic trends and styles.
The Embrace (opposite page) and The
Absinth Drinker (page 6) date from this period
when Picasso encountered the work of the
Paris School at first hand. The former is
highly reminiscent of Steinten the subject-
matter, the down-to-earth nature of the
characters, the rather thick application of
colour. An exhibition of Steinlen's work
then showing in Paris provided Picasso with
a wealth of material.
It was in Paris that Picasso saw for the
first time some of Van Gogh's paintings in
the gallery of the picture dealer Ambroise
Vollard. They were, he admitted later, a
revelation to him. The Embrace is marked
with a morbid tension, an aura of tragedy,
and was unquestionably inspired by
Picasso's own encounter with the tragic art
of Van Gogh. Despite an element of am¬
biguity in the scene, Picasso was trying to
give shape to an idea that he would develop
later: by drawing together in friendship peo¬
ple can shield themselves from adversity and
the hostility of the outside world.
In The Absinth Drinker Picasso was in¬
spired by Toulouse-Lautrec's scenes of Paris
café life, with their melancholic irony and
sharply defined compositional structure.
The influence of Gauguin is apparent in
Picasso's colour scheme, whose laconism
and inventiveness are suggestive of the
French painter's palette. But Picasso injects
his own dramatic tone into the picture's
fabric. The private world of solitude unfolds
before our eyes. We see a woman sitting in
a café; she is frozen in a state of torpor, cut
off from everything and everyone around
her, lost in her own world of thoughts and
memories. And yet there is a flicker of hope
in the image of this forlorn soul. The artist
believes in the strength of the human spirit.
The Embrace and The Absinth Drinker still
reveal the influence of other masters, but
the young Picasso was already begin¬
ning to speak with his own voice. The things
that troubled and tormented him now
demanded other artistic solutions. He had
slaked his early passions.
Paradoxically, as we have seen, it was in
Paris that Picasso came to this realization
and in Paris that his Blue Period, the purely
Spanish period of his art, began. The fact

that he now turned his talent to the depic¬
tion of poverty, suffering and black despair
is often attributed to the conditions of his
life during his second trip to the French
capital in 1901 and to the tragic death by
suicide of his friend Casagemas, a poet and
painter. But although it is true that Picasso
was living in extreme poverty at that time,
the springs that fed the Blue Period ran
deeper and wider.
They are to be found in the social climate
of the period, in the atmosphere of life in
Barcelona and in the outlook of Picasso
himself in those days. Barcelona was a
centre of revolutionary and anarchist ideas,
reflecting the harsh contrasts and the pover¬
ty that were features of Spanish life at that
time. All this had an impact on Barcelona life
with its impassioned discussions in clubs,
cafés and meetings. One of these cafés, the
Els Quatre Gats, had become a popular
meeting place for artists and writers since it
had opened in 1897. It was in this semi-
Bohemian atmosphere, where the spirit of
freedom and independence prevailed and
where compassion for "the insulted and the
injured" had been elevated to the status of a
moral principle, that the young Picasso
developed his fundamental attitudes
towards life.
As for Paris, it not only gave Picasso a
multitude of new artistic impressions, it also
laid bare in all its ugliness the amorality of
modern society, characterized by the
egoism of the "haves" and the bleak ex¬
istence of the "have-nots". With the cool
detachment of the truly great artist, the
twenty-year-old Picasso focussed his atten¬
tion on the city's poor. He visited hospitals,
asylums, and doss-houses, and found there v
the heroes of his paintings beggars, f
Young Girl on a Ball. 1905. Oil on canvas, 147x95 cm.
The Embrace, 1900. Oil on cardboard, 51.2x55.3 cm.

cripples, vagabonds, the derelicts and the
outcasts of society. It was more than sen¬
timental compassion that he sought to ex¬
press in his paintings. The blue world of
silence that envelops his subjects is not
merely a symbol of suffering and misery; it is
also the world of proud solitude and moral
purity.
Two Sisters (colour page 7), which is now
a part of the Hermitage collection, was one
of the first works of the Blue Period. In it, as
in other works of that time, he looked back
to certain traditions of medieval art. He was
attracted by the Gothic, especially Gothic
sculpture and the spiritual expressiveness of
its forms. During this period Picasso also
drew close to the tradition of Spanish art.
He visited Toledo where he "discovered" El
Greco; shortly before, he had come upon
Luis de Morales in the Prado in Madrid. In
their works he found a psychological ex¬
pressiveness, a symbolic use of colour,
sharply delineated forms, and an ennobling
spirituality of figures, all of which were in
harmony with his current mood and artistic
experiments. It was probably in the natural
order of things that Picasso first felt impelled
to steep himself in French art and reinterpret
it before returning to his native sources and
trying to resurrect the ancient Spanish
tradition.
Two Sisters is, in all respects, highly
representative of the Blue Period. Picasso
constructed his picture in the manner of a
bas-relief, striving for a balance in the fusion
of the figures of two women set against a
blue abstract background. In the two timidly
inclined, almost embracing figures can be
seen the melancholy of suffering, silent ac¬
quiescence, unspoken affection and all-
forgiving ness. If a musical analogy is per¬
missible here, it is a Requiem that comes to
mind. The cares of everyday life, the
troubles and misfortunes of the earthly
world pale before the grandeur of the eter¬
nal, of the universal. It is not surprising that
Two Sisters has been likened to the New
Testament parable of Mary and Elizabeth.
In the polyphonic construction of Two
Sisters, the theme of the friendship of two
beings as a safeguard against the misfor¬
tunes of life and the hostility of the world is
heard once again. It would occupy an in¬
creasingly prominent place in Picasso's later
work.
Another typical Blue Period picture in
Soviet collections is The Old Jew (illustration
page 10). It belongs to the series of works
whose subjects are beggars, blind men and
cripples. Here the artist seems to be pointing
an accusing finger at the world of the pro¬
sperous and the complacent, the money¬
bags and the philistines. Picasso wanted to
see his heroes as bearers of truths hidden
from the grasp of ordinary men and accessi¬
ble only to man's inner vision and inner life.
It was no accident that most of the subjects
of the Blue Period seem to be sightless and
faceless. They live in their own internal
world, their slender nervous "Gothic"
fingers do not recognize the external form
of objects, they grasp their secret inner
meaning.
In the spring of 1904 Picasso settled for
good in the French capital, in Montmartre.
With his move to Paris, his Blue Period
came to an end. Delicate tones of pink now
began to pervade the monochromatic blue
of his canvases, soon becoming their domi¬
nant hue. Thus began the "Rose Period".
Below, The Absinth Drinker or The Aperitif, Paris,
1901. Oil on canvas, 73x54 cm.
But much more than a simple change of col¬
our was involved in Picasso's new depar¬
ture. This period is also sometimes called his
Circus Period, a description that more aptly
conveys its content. For Picasso's canvases
now entered an entirely new world, the
world of wandering actors and circus
performers.
There is no single explanation for this tur¬
ning point in Picasso's work. Many factors
were involved, including the versatility of his
effervescent talent, the conditions of his life
and the influence of his surroundings.
Barcelona had ceased to be a source of ar¬
tistic stimulation and the theme of the lower
depths of society was spent. A new ethic in¬
spired him he viewed the future with hope
and was imbued with faith in man. The loyal
Fernande Olivier went to live with him in his
studio. Among his new friends were such
outstanding figures as the poets André
Salmon and Guillaume Apollinaire. It is
worth noting in passing that by this time
Picasso had read widely in modern French
and Spanish literature and had even taken
an interest in Russian literature (Turgenev,
Gorky).
His Parisian friends introduced him into
the literary circles of the city and drew him
into the Bohemian life of the artists and
poets of Montmartre with its romanticism,
its materially uncertain but congenial at¬
mosphere where everyone was always ready
to lend a helping hand to everyone else. It
was undoubtedly Salmon and Apollinaire
who fired Picasso's interest in the circus: at
CONTINUED PAGE 9

CONTINUED FROM PAGE
the beginning of 1905, the three friends
became regular attenders at the Médrano
Circus.
Not that the circus and circus perfor¬
mances became the subjects of Picasso's
works. What interested him was the per¬
former, the circus artist as a creative per¬
sonality, the classic members of a travelling
troupe the acrobats, the clowns, the harle¬
quins. They are usually depicted outside the
ring, in everyday life, in their families; on
rare occasions, they are shown rehearsing.
They are always dressed in their circus
costumes, which sets them off from other
members of the human family.
For Picasso, a travelling troupe of actors
was a fraternity of free spirits, bound by ties
of deep affection, leaving no place for self-
seeking or duplicity. Together they shared
their good luck and misfortunes. And
Picasso felt himself to be a part of this
world. In The Harlequin with a Glass, we see
him dressed as a harlequin, seated pensively
at the bar among the habitués of a café. A
harlequin or jester he may be, but it is he
who senses the drama of life and feels the
brunt of the days to come.
Picasso keenly, even morbidly, felt life's
contradictions and the conflicts of his times.
He realized how fragile and illusory was the
world of his clowns and mountebanks, lost
as it was in the confusion of the vast real
world. The artisfs anxiety was reflected in
the sadness and weariness delicately im¬
printed on the face of his heroes. His major
Rose Period compositions. Travelling Actors
and Actors at Halt, graphically convey a
mood of great uncertainty and anxious
anticipation.
For Picasso, happiness and harmony
were attainable only in the bosom of the
family. In a series of works which may be
classified under the general title of "The
Harlequin's Family", he developed his own
version of the Holy Family, where the
warmth of love and the tenderness inspired
by love for children provided a haven from
the harsh realities of life.
Another leitmotif of Picasso's early works
was faith in the goodness of human nature.
This became the dominant theme of the
Rose Period, in an affirmation of belief in
friendship between two creatures in which
one who is strong and experienced protects
and succours another who is weak and
defenceless. It may be the friendship bet¬
ween an old, worldly-wise clown and a
callow youth; between a robust athlete and
a delicate young girl acrobat; between a
man and an animal, as in Boy Leading a
Horse {illustration page 10).
The Young Boy with a Dog (in the Her¬
mitage) belongs to this period. It is painted
in soft, warm, pink tones with the simplicity
and sobriety of form that characterized his
work between 1905 and 1906.
Another important work of the Rose
Period in Soviet collections (in the Pushkin
Museum of Fine Arts) is the Young Girl on a
Ball (illustration page 5). It provides a
brilliant example of Picasso's verve. The
composition and rhythmical structure of the
picture is built on the creative juxtaposition
of contrast and balance, which ensures the
dramatic unity of the whole: a powerful
athlete and a frail young girl, a massive block
and a slippery ball; the solid, thickset figure
of a man sitting on the block and the slender

wisp of a girl swaying like a straw in the
wind. Take away a single element from the
picture and the whole edifice crumbles:
without the athlete, the girl loses her
balance; without her precarious instability
the athlete collapses under his own massive
weight.
The Young Girl on a Ball is full of associa¬
tions and metaphors. The figures of the girl
and the athlete, in their contrasts and con¬
vergences, conjure up associations of the
unity and contrariety of the various prin¬
ciples existing in nature, life and man. The
picture also evokes other associations that
go back to the symbolism of the Middle
Ages. The athlete is reminiscent of the
allegory of Valour; the young girl on a ball,
of that of Fortune.
The picture foreshadows a new trend in
Picasso's artistic thought his interest in
classical simplicity of line, symmetry and in¬
ternal harmony. Painted at the close of 1905,
Young Girl on a Ball lies at the source of his
first Classical Period when he became ab¬
sorbed in the art of antiquity, especially
Greek painted vases.
Nothing was more natural for him than to
turn to clear-cut, harmoniously pure and
vigorous pictorial forms, motivated as he
was by a belief in the goodness and ra¬
tionality of man. This explains the flawless
perfection of the physiques of the young
boys and girls portrayed in his works of
1906. Nude, strapping youths spring forth
from the canvas, giving expression to the ar¬
tist's vision of an ¡deal world in which people
are free and proud.
No sooner had Picasso struck out on this
new path than he abruptly abandoned it. It
was as if his strength had failed him, his
faith waned and disillusionment set in. On
his return to Paris in the autumn of 1906
after spending the summer in the Spanish
village of Gósol, he began painting Les
Demoiselles d'Avignon; he completed it the
following year.
It marked the emergence of a new and dif¬
ferent Picasso. He seemed to have begun
his descent into the primeval chaos of the
dawn of creation, where good was in¬
distinguishable from evil, and ugliness from
beauty. It is doubtful that Picasso himself
knew where he was heading at the time; he
was carried away by an irrepressible and all-
consuming passion to discover the truth,
the passion of the experimenter in search of
a mode of pictorial expression in keeping
with his times.
Regardless of the attempts that have been
made to differentiate the "real" Picasso
from the "unreal" Picasso of the Blue and
Rose Periods, it was during those early years
that the fundamental ethical principles of his
art, his moral criteria, his humanistic ideals
and the major themes of his works took
shape. When all is said and done, had
Picasso produced nothing after the year
1907, he would have still been one of the
great masters of the art of the twentieth
century.
VITAD ALEXANDROVICH SUSLOV, Soviet
art historian, is deputy director of the Hermitage
Museum, Leningrad, and Vice-President of the
International ; Council of Museums (/COM). A
specialist in the history of the art of Russia and
Western Europe in the late 19th and early 20th
century, and in questions of museology, he is the
author of many published works. '
9
