26
Peace begins in the
HOW can the powerful force of
education be made to serve peace
and not war? How can it produce
individuals free from' aggressivity and from
the disastrous influences of nationalists,
chauvinist and racist prejudices? How can
the younger generation be brought up to
become convinced and active fighters for
peace and social progress? In a world in
which sixty times more is spent on training
in the science of destruction each one of the
twenty-five million people now clad in
military uniforms than on the training of one
child in creative activities, these questions
are uppermost in the minds of all those con
cerned with the education of youth for
peace.
It has become increasingly evident that
the arms race is not only undermining
mankind's economic health but is also caus¬
ing direct moral and psychological damage.
As the political scientist Pyotr Fedoseyev
declared at the 11th World Congress of the
International Political Sciences Association,
held in Moscow in August 1979: "The very
atmosphere of preparation for a new war, of
fomenting war hysteria and the reign of
militarism, limits the creative powers of the
human mind... On the other hand, efforts to
develop and strengthen the process of

ploccrAAm bv Emi,ia sokoio^
LI ClO M VJVJIII and Inna Ivanyan
détente and to achieve mutually beneficial
co-operation and friendship among nations
contribute to personal fulfilment of the in¬
dividual and the development of all man's
most noble qualities".
Thus, although socio-economic factors
may play a decisive role, the individual, pro¬
perly educated in the spirit of international
co-operation and peace and respect for fun¬
damental human rights and freedoms, can
have an enormous influence in normalizing
and improving the political climate in the
world.
Seen in this light the problems of educa¬
tion for disarmament take on a new urgen
cy. This was recognized by the 1974 General
Conference of Unesco which adopted a
Recommendation Concerning Education for
International Understanding, Co-operation
and Peace and Education Relating to Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. The
Recommendation is a comprehensive docu¬
ment applicable to all stages of education
which indicates concrete steps which can be
taken in the educational field. Many Unesco
Member States have already taken action on
these proposals.
In Finland, for example, 30,000 copies of
the Recommendation have been circulated
among students and teachers. Seminars for
teachers are held regularly at which the
Recommendation is discussed. The Final
Act of the 1975 Helsinki Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe is also
a subject of study in Finnish schools.
In Poland, a special programme of peace
education begins at kindergarten level and
continues through primary and secondary
schools and higher educational institutions
as well as in clubs for teenagers.
In Japan, the All-Japan Teachers'
Associations (NIKKIOSO), the Hiroshima In¬
stitute for Education in the Spirit of Peace k
and the Hiroshima Teachers' Association F
Photo © APN, Moscow
As this Soviet poster (left) vividly illustrates, stockpiles of
explosives accumulated in the world now amount to the
equivalent of 15 tons of TNT per head of the population. Above,
the stark ruins of Stalingrad (now Volgograd) in 1943 after the
battle that proved to be a turning point in the Second World War.
27

Lhave jointly compiled textbooks that con-
' demn militarism and stress the value of
peace and human life.
In Austria, a number ot non-governmental
organizations have established the Austrian
Committee for Co-ordination of. Activities
for Peace. The Committee has drawn up a
"Plan of Action for Disarmament and
Education in the Spirit of Peace" which pro¬
vides for the preparation and translation of
instructional material on disarmament
problems for use in schools and in teacher
training institutions,
i
These recent examples of positive action
taken by a number of countries reflect the
notion that for schoolchildren textbooks
provide a window on the world. The first let¬
ters, the first words, the first systematized
ideas of life around them are learned by
children from textbooks. So it is vitally im¬
portant to ensure that their pages do not
become a source of misinformation, a
"distorting mirror", and that they do not
plant in children's minds seeds that will
grow into a scornful attitude towards other
people and an urge for violence and
aggression.
The bilateral and multilateral co-operation
that has been developing over the last few
years in the revision of the contents of
textbooks has proved very fruitful. Recom¬
mendations for the revision of history texts
have been drawn up, for instance, by
representatives of the Federal Republic of
Germany and Poland, and commissions
with similar tasks have been set up in the
USSR and the United States and in Finland
and the USSR.
Work in this direction should be con¬
tinued. Textbooks must make children
aware of the social nature of war and in¬
dicate the real rather than the illusory paths
to peace. There should be no place in
textbooks for the myth that the arms race
maintains employment or for notions of the
inevitability of war. A Soviet sociology
textbook for secondary school students
reads, for example: "In our day peaceful co¬
existence is an objective requirement of
peaceful development, the foundation of
the stability of the entire system of present
day international relations. It can be said
with confidence that there is no acceptable
alternative solution to peaceful co¬
existence."
Soviet textbooks on physics, biology and
chemistry emphasize the international
character of science and technology. In the
chapter on atomic energy in the physics
course textbook, for example, emphasis is
laid on the need to fight for a ban on nuclear
weapons tests and students are informed
about the principal international agreements
in this field. In the biology course instruction
on the biological processes in the cell in¬
cludes information on the deadly effect on
human beings of exposure to radioactivity.
The course on the geography of continents
incorporates the subject "Protection of
nature in the Antarctic as a model of interna¬
tional co-operation".
Education for international co-operation
and peace and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms starts with the
teaching of these rights and freedoms so as
to provide students with a solid background
on which to base their behaviour throughout
their lives. Study of this subject begins in
the eighth year of general secondary educa¬
tion (i.e. before the age of sixteen when


youngsters are issued passports and formal¬
ly become citizens of the USSR) under a
special subject heading: "The Foundations
of the' Soviet State and Law"
The basic principles implemented at
secondary level are applied at the univer¬
sities and other institutions of higher educa¬
tion. In the natural sciences attention is
drawn to the global problems involved in
protecting the atmosphere, bodies of water,
vegetation and wildlife which can only be
solved through the joint efforts of all coun¬
tries. In history, philosophy, political
economy and law courses emphasis is
placed on the comprehensive study of the
problems of safeguarding peace, interna¬
tional security and disarmament.
Present world realities demand that the
education and upbringing of children be
made an active "zone of peace". All who are
involved in the education of the younger
generation the family, the school, the
university, the mass media, literature, the
theatre, the cinema should play their part
in educating them in the spirit of peace and
disarmament, of safeguarding international
security and an atmosphere of mutual trust
as the only hope for the existence and future
development of mankind.
This, indeed, was the unanimous opinion
of the delegates attending the World Con¬
gress on Disarmament Education, held at
Unesco headquarters in Paris from 9 to 13
June, 1980. The final Document of the Con¬
gress points out the enormously important
role to be played in this process by teachers
and instructors on whom it largely depends
whether the new generation will value peace
as the greatest treasure of mankind.
Emilia Sokolova and Inna Ivanyan
EMILIA SOKOLOVA, of the USSR, is
laboratory director at the Research Institute for
General Educational Problems of the USSR
Academy of Pedagogy. The author of a number
of works on educational problems, she has con¬
tributed a chapter on "International Peace,
Security and Disarmament and the Teacher's
Role" to a teacher's methodological manual now
being prepared by Unesco.
INNA IVANYAN, of the USSR, is senior
researcher at the International Organizations
Department of the Institute of World Economics
and International Relations of the USSR
Academy of Sciences. She is the author of
several works on the problems of education for
peace and disarmament.
29
