Tikal National Park, Guatemala
More than 3,000 architectural structures, including temples and stelae, ball-
game courts, dams, canals and majestic highways, reveal the past splendour of
Tikal, one of the most important religious centres of the Maya civilization.
They also trace the history of the Mayas from the time when they lived by
hunting and food-gathering (c. 600 BC) until the heyday of a complex society of
farmers, priests, astronomers, architects and sculptors. The artistic styles and
hieroglyphic writing created by the Mayas spread throughout Central America;^
and then, around 900 AD, the Maya civilization disappeared. An area of 576 km2
surrounding the Ceremonial Centre of Tikal has been set aside as a national
park for the protection of plant and animal life. Photo shows a temple
(c. 700 AD) which rises almost 50 metres above Tikal's great square.
jW*-
fr~ I
-1

The City of Quito, Ecuador D
In the fifteenth century, seeking to consolidate the northern part of their great
kingdom, the Tahuantinsuyo ("the four parts of the world") the Incas established
their second capital at Quito on the slopes of a volcano, 2.800 metres above sea
level. A century later, the same rugged site was covered by the churches,
convents, spacious squares and university buildings of a Spanish colonial city, San
Francisco de Quito. A seat of government and a major political and cultural centre,
the city soon became distinguished for the quality of its artists. Architecture,
sculpture and painting alike were such that the "School of Quito", in which
indigenous traditions and European techniques were intermingled, is considered to
be one of Latin America's outstanding contributions to world art. The capital of
modern Ecuador, Quito is determined to preserve its historic centre, whose original
layout of streets and squares closely follows that of the old colonial city. Photo
shows richly decorated door in the church of El Sagrario.
Antigua Guatemala
In 1543, after previous attempts to establish a
settlement there had been thwarted by the
resistance of the Indians and by an avalanche
from the slopes of the volcano Agua, the
Spaniards founded the city of Santiago de los
Caballeros de Guatemala. After earthquakes had
reduced it to rubble in 1586, it was rebuilt, and
along streets running north-south and east-west in
straight lines rose churches, monasteries and
palaces in which Gothic blended with a variety of
styles inspired by the Italian Renaissance. After
further earthquakes in 1717, the transfer of the city
was envisaged but then a stubborn decision was
taken to rebuild. Baroque and Ultra-baroque now
came to the fore and ornately decorated columns
and pilasters and animal and plant motifs in
moulded stucco appeared. In 1751 the earth shook
once more, partially destroying the city; in 1773
earthquake struck again. This time, Antigua
Guatemala (the name by which the city had
always been better known) was abandoned. Today
the Guatemalan authorities, undeterred by the
earthquakes of 1976, are endeavouring to preserve
the remains of this beautiful, ill-fated city. Photo
shows the façade of the church of San Francisco.
Galapagos Islands, Ecuador O
Offspring of the volcanoes of the Pacific, a thousand kilometres from
the continental mainland, the nineteen Galapagos Islands have a flora
and fauna whose uniqueness has become more widely known in recent
years. Giant tortoises, marine iguanas (in photo) and the birds which
taught Charles Darwin the secrets of adaptation to the environment,
peacefully welcome the large mammals the sea lions and seals which
come ashore to breed. The first sailors who set foot on the islands, less
than 500 years ago, were amazed that all the creatures there were
harmless. Today, the Government of Ecuador, which took possession of
the archipelago in 1831 and colonized it, is trying to put an end to
hunting. But the protection of the islands' original ecosystem depends
on the expulsion of all the creatures introduced by man, including dogs,
monkeys, goats and pigs, as well as harmful insects.

The Valley of
Kathmandu, Nepal
According to legend, the
Kathmandu Valley was originally
a lake at the foot of the
Himalayas where the primordial
form of the Buddha emerged
from a golden lotus. Its cultural
history began when the
Bodhisattva Manjushri cleft
open the lake's barrier with a
blow of his sword and its waters
flowed away. Although the early
history of the Kathmandu
Valley, from the time of the
Kirati and Lichchavi dynasties
2,000 years ago until the Mallas
of the fourteenth century, is
shrouded in mystery, in every
age Nepalese culture has
succeeded in taking advantage
of Nepal's location between
Tibet and China in the north,
and India in the south between
Buddhism and Hinduism. Out of
the flourishing coexistence of
these two religions came a
unique blend of influences in
architecture and the arts and a
cultural blossoming whose
apogee lasted three centuries
from 1500 to 1800. The legacy of
that period, now protected,
comprises seven groups of
buildings scattered over the
valley: the royal squares of three
large towns Kathmandu, Patan
and Bhadgaon (Bhaktapur)
and the sacred complexes of
Swayambhu, Bodhnath,
Pashaputi and Changu Narayan.
These seven sites include a total
of 132 buildings which the
Government of Nepal wishes to
safeguard in accordance with
the Master Plan for
Conservation which it has
recently approved. Shown here,
temples on Durbar Square,.
Patan.
Sagarmatha National Park, Nepal D
The Nepalese prefer to call earth's highest mountain
"Sagarmatha" ("Whose-head-touches-the-sky") rather
than "Everest" after the British civil servant George
Everest who saw it in the distance around 1840.
Sagarmatha National Park includes the 8,848-metre-high
peak, as well as six other mountains over 7,000 metres
high. It also contains glaciers which feed the rivers that
flow down through deep gorges to the Ganges river
system. There were several reasons for establishing a
park on the daunting slopes of the Himalayas. First, it had
become necessary to protect the forest (the silver fir, the
tree juniper, and the silver birch are in greater danger
than the many varieties of rhododendron such as
Rhododendron arboreum, Nepal's national flower) and its
fauna (the musk deer, the snow leopard, the Himalayan
black bear, the wolf and the lesser panda animals which
it is now forbidden to hunt). But equally vital was the
protection of the culture of the Sherpas who began to
come here from Tibet in the sixteenth century and now live
within the perimeter of the Park. The Sherpas, who
belong to the Myingmapa sect of Tibetan Buddhism, built
temples and monasteries, the most remarkable of which
is perched on a rocky spur some 4,000 metres up. Many
other religious monuments are maintained and even still
built by them: tomb-sanctuaries known as chortens in
and around the villages and along paths; rocks and mani
walls of stone slabs engraved with inscriptions; white
prayer flags and retreats high up the hill slopes, and
water-driven prayer-mills in streams. For the Sherpas,
who believe that compassion towards all living creatures
is the root of perfection, Sagarmatha Park is sacred for
spiritual as well as for ecological reasons.
8

The ancient city of
Damascus, Syria
Perhaps the most famous building in
Damascus is the Omayyad mosque, built
between 705 and 715 AD on the orders of
caliph Walid I. But Damascus, thought to
be the world's oldest capital, contains
many other riches. The outer walls of the
mosque are those of the Temple of Jupiter
constructed in the third century AD under
the emperors Septimius Severus and
Caracalla on the site of another temple
dating back to the eleventh century BC.
The quarters clustered around the early
Aramaean town show countless traces of
the city's long history. The Islamic heritage
is of course the richest, and the buildings
(110 of which have been classified as
historic monuments) are often in a good
state of preservation if they are still being
used like most of the mosques,
schools, mausoleums and other religious
edifices. On the other hand, the condition
of non-religious constructions such as
hammams, souks and palaces is
deteriorating, as is the urban fabric itself.
The Syrian authorities hope to halt the
ravages of "modernization" by subsidizing
historical monuments, preserving the
traditional activities of shopkeepers and
craftsmen, and adapting the flow of traffic
to the structure of the city.

Persepolis, Iran
When Darius the Great built a new
capital on the arid plains of Fars, he
wished to proclaim the power of his
empire and his calling as a uniter of
peoples: his rule then extended from
the steppes of central Asia to the banks
of the Nile, and from the Indus to the
Danube. Work on the capital began in
518 BC and was continued over more
than sixty years by his successors
Xerxes and Artaxerxes. The result was
Persepolis, an architectural complex of
a sumptuousness the world has rarely
seen. The bas-reliefs (see photo) lining
the monumental stairway leading to the
enormous audience hall known as the
apadana attest to the grandeur of the
Persian empire. Thirteen huge columns
give an idea of the apadana's
breathtaking size, even though the
colossal capitals consisting of
gryphon's heads and roaring lions
which once supported the twenty-
metre-high roof now lie in the dust.
Darius, who was influenced by the
teachings of Zoroaster, was the author
of noble inscriptions which still survive.
"I wish to think of justice for as long as
I can", reads one of them. Once a
dynastic capital into which flowed
offerings and tribute from the "twenty-
three peoples of the empire", a royal
necropolis dedicated to the notion of
universalism, Persepolis had few
inhabitants left by 330 BC when
Alexander burnt it to the ground.
10

*
tj*
!
« «
Meidan-e Shah (Royal Square), Isfahan, Iran D
îim
w\
Isfahan, in the centre of Iran, was already a large city
when the Safavid Shah Abbas the First transferred his
capital there in the late sixteenth century, but he turned
it into a place of such beauty that it became known as
Nesfe Jahan ("Half the World"). His most remarkable
innovation was the Royal Square, a piece of town
planning whose like had never before been seen in the
Muslim cities of Iran, where the only airy, open spaces
amidst the serried ranks of buildings were in the
courtyards of the caravanserais and the biggest
mosques. A rectangle surrounded by a double row of
barrel-vaults (¡wan), the Square is 500 metres long and
165 metres wide. It was used for processions, military
parades, and games of polo. Four superb buildings
decorated with murals and brilliant enamelled tiles
stand symmetrically around the Square: the Royal
Mosque; the Sheikh Lotfollah Mosque (the sovereign's
private oratory); the Ali Qapu ("the lofty gate") Palace,
which led from the Square to other palaces surrounded
by gardens; and the gateway to the Qeyssariyeh, where
each evening the crowds were entertained by a concert.
Photo shows aerial view of the Royal Mosque.
Tchogha Zanbil, Iran
The site of Tchogha Zanbil is located in
southwestern Iran, north of the city of Ahwaz
and not far from ancient Susa, on the edge of
a plateau overlooking the Ab-e Diz river and
surrounded by tamarind forests. The complex
consists of three concentric mud-brick walls.
The first encloses a large cistern, three palaces,
five underground tombs and a shrine dedicated
to the fire-god Nusku. Seven temples stand
within the second wall, and three more within
the third. In the centre of the whole complex is
a twenty-five-metre-high ziggurat, or storeyed
tower (it was originally twice as high). It
consists of a mud-brick core covered with a
facing of fired bricks, many of which bear
cuneiform inscriptions in the Elamitic
language. The complex was created by King
Untash Napirisha, who ruled from 1265 to
1245 BC. The city, known as Dur Untashi (the
city of Untash) was still unfinished when its
founder died and for the next six hundred
years, until the Assyrian invasion led by
Assurbanipal around 640 BC, its only
Inhabitants were priests.

Nahanni National
Park, Canada O
The regular meanders of the Flat
River; the 290-kilometre-long
canyon carved out of the
Cordillera by its sibling, the
South Nahanni; cave-like frost
pockets; piping sinkholes;
hundred-metre-high waterfalls;
granitic peaks; hot springs;
underground rivers and deep
caves such as the Grotte Valérie
with its multi-hued stalactites
and stalagmites; the Grande
Galerie de Glace, incrusted with
intricate crystals of ice; and the
Galerie des Moutons Morts
which contains the skulls and
skeletons of sheep which
perished several thousand years
ago... these are some of the
natural wonders of Nahanni
National Park, in the Canadian
Northwest. Species which live in
the park are typical of Boreal
forest and Alpine tundra
ecosystems. Nahanni's 4,770 km2
are the home of some
500 species of vascular plants,
more than 260 species of
bryophytes, 170 species of birds
(including the rare and
endangered Peregrine Falcon
and the Golden Eagle) and over
40 mammal species including
Dall's Sheep, Caribou, Grey Wolf
and Grizzly Bear. Photo shows
the Gate and Pulpit Rock in
Nahanni's Third Canyon.
Kluane National Park, Canada
and Wrangell-St. Elias National Monument, USA D
The world's largest nature reserve lies on both
sides of the L-shaped frontier that separates
Alaska from the Yukon Territory of Canada. In
jointly nominating the area for inclusion on the
World Heritage List, the Governments of the
USA and Canada declared that "the Kluane
National Park and Wrangell-St. Elias National
Monument are... a joint resource which remains
intact as an unbroken natural system... (and)
which we believe possesses World Heritage
significance". It would be hard to disagree. The
region is a huge chain of glaciers, many of
which are still advancing, in a mountain system
which has twelve peaks over 4,500 metres.
Under the pressures caused by plate tectonics,
the mountains move and grow. Earthquakes are
common; volcanoes abound; hot springs burst
out of the earth. Over thirty major rivers,
carrying immense loads of silt and rocks
scraped by the glaciers from the mountain
walls, ceaselessly make and unmake terraces,
plains and deltas. Photo shows the Nabesna
Glacier in northern part of Wrangell-St. Elias
National Monument.
Photo M. Woodbridge Williams © National Park Service, U.S. Department of the Interior

Dinosaur Provincial Park,
Canada
In the south-west corner of the Canadian
province of Alberta, the eroded badlands
are a geologist's dream of fantastically
shaped rock-piles, mesas, buttes, knife-
edge divides and other dramatic features.
The meandering Red Deer River carves out
terraces of lush vegetation, providing
habitats for birdlife of remarkable variety
and abundance. In winter the mild micro¬
climate attracts such animals as the
pronghorn antelope, the mule and the
whitetail deer. Seventy million years ago,
under a different climate, the great reptiles
flourished there. Between 1910 and 1917
there was a veritable "Dinosaur Rush" to
the Red Deer River Valley, as
palaeontologists uncovered fossil remains
of some sixty different species, establishing
the area as the most extensive dinosaur
fossil deposit known. More than 300 major
specimens, representing all the known
families of these vanished monsters, were
extracted from a twenty-four-kilometre
stretch of the Red Deer River. Many are
now preserved in the great natural history
museums of North America and Europe.
(See also back cover).
Pholo © George Lupien, Parks Canada Photo © Bengt Schonback, Parks Canada
L'Anse aux Meadows National Historic Park, Canada
Ever since the publication of the medieval
Icelandic manuscripts that contain the
Vinland sagas, many people tried, in the face
of widespread scepticism, to prove that the
lands discovered by the Norsemen on their
adventurous voyages westward and to
which they gave such enigmatic names,
were on the coast of North America. Then,
twenty years ago, Norse remains were
discovered at l'Anse aux Meadows (or l'Anse
du Midi) on the shore of Epaves Bay in
northern Newfoundland (above). On a
narrow terrace lying between two bogs and
crossed by a small brook, archaeologists
found vestiges of three large dwellings, a
smithy, and four workshops. The buildings
were thick-walled structures of turf with
steeply sloping turf roofs supported by
wooden frames. Floors were of tamped earth
or sand; the hearths were of stone.
Excavations have yielded slag and a quantity
of iron artefacts, together with objects in
bronze, bone and stone, all of Scandinavian
origin. Inset, stone oil lamp of Norse type.
Radiocarbon dating indicates that the
remains are from the eleventh century AD.
Four hundred years before Columbus, l'Anse
aux Meadows was the site of the first
meeting between Europeans whose voyage
had brought them via Greenland from
Iceland, and inhabitants of the New
World the Beothuck Eskimos. Horizontal to
photo, ring-headed bronze pin of Viking Age
Type. Vertical, wooden floorboard from a
small Norse boat.
13

Independence Hall, USA
In 1732, Andrew Hamilton, a prominent
attorney, undertook with the help of master
builder Edmund Woolley the construction in
Philadelphia of a large redbrick building in
the English Classical style. He wished to
provide a dignified setting for the
deliberations of the Pennsylvania Assembly.
The product of this enterprise is one of the
world's best preserved and most lovingly
maintained historic buildings. It was the
scene of the Second Continental Congress in
1775, whose debates laid the foundations of
an independent United States. It was here
that George Washington was chosen as
Commander-in-Chief, and within its walls
the Declaration of Independence was
adopted and signed. Here too, in 1787,
delegates signed the Constitution which
would serve as a model on every continent,
and which is the earliest document of its
kind. Every year some four million visitors
pass through the rooms of Independence
Hall, and beneath the steeple built in 1753 to
house the famous Liberty Bell which bears
the inscription, "Proclaim liberty throughout
all the land, unto all the inhabitants thereof".
14

Mesa Verde National Park,
USAD
In southwestern Colorado, a "green table"
covered with pinyon pine and juniper and
dissected by deep canyons slopes gently
from north to south at an altitude of
between 2,600 and 1,800 metres. In the
sixth century AD an Indian people known
as the Anasazi established camps there and
built semi-subterranean houses, cultivated
maize, beans and squash, and raised
turkeys and hunting-dogs. Their society
underwent rapid change. Between 700 and
1100 AD, they built villages on the high, flat
lands. Their houses were made of wood,
stone and mud, and arranged in compact
"L" or "U" shapes facing a central
courtyard. Circular underground chambers
called kivas, which were used for religious
activities, were placed near the rows of
houses or within the courtyards. As the
population increased, techniques of
architecture, pottery-making and cotton
weaving became more sophisticated, and
farming methods improved. The Anasazi
built terraces and dug reservoirs and
irrigation ditches. And then, suddenly, in
the thirteenth century, the situation
changed dramatically. Settlements on flat
land were abandoned in favour of villages
built in cliff caves, some of which could
only be reached by ladder. Was the soil
exhausted? Was there a period of drought?
Was the population attacked by the
ancestors of the Ute Indians, or did the
society break up as result of internal
quarrels? Whatever the reason, the Anasazi
moved away to the south (where their
descendants the Pueblos live to this day),
leaving in the Mesa Verde, in almost 4,000
archaeological sites, the testimony of their
early history. Shown here, aerial view of
the Sun Temple.
Yellowstone National Park,
USA
In the early nineteenth century, the fur
trappers and gold prospectors who
ventured into the mysterious wilderness of
north-west Wyoming brought back near-
incredible stories: they had seen fountains
of boiling water, thundering waterfalls and
a great lake full of enormous trout. As a
result, three expeditions were organized
between 1869 and 1871, and discovered the
truth to be even stranger than those early
travellers' tales. The landscape of
Yellowstone, which almost defies
description, is an unfinished history of
volcanic evolution. Twenty-seven forests,
buried by eruptions of ash some 50 million
years ago, have been preserved in fossil
form. Hundreds of hot springs and geysers
spurt between the toes of the mountains.
Lava formation accounts for most of
Yellowstone's waterfalls, the best known
of which are to be found between the
precipitous and many-hued walls of the
river's canyon. If the wonders of the site
explain the almost religious awe which it
inspired in the early American discoverers,
the consequences were no less remarkable.
In 1872, the United States Congress set
aside the whole area amounting to some
9,000 km2 as a "Public park or pleasuring-
ground". For the first time in history, a
Government decided to leave in its natural
state, and to protect in perpetuity, a vast
territory, with its rivers, its lakes, its
forests and its animal life.
15

Grand Canyon National Park,
USA
When the majestic Colorado River passes
through Arizona, the curtain rises on one of
geology's most dramatic spectacles. Here
horizontal layers of the earth's crust were
lifted to a height of 2,500 metres above sea
level, then gouged out by watercourses
which transported thousands of tons a day
towards the sea. Today the Grand Canyon
is a great gash, 1,500 metres deep, 440
kilometres long, and between 200 metres
and thirty kilometres wide. Within its walls
we have a view of geologic time that
covers two thousand million years. Each of
the great eras into which geologists have
divided the history of the earth, from
Precambrian to Cenozoic, is represented.
Almost all the earth's climatic life zones
exist and the various environments support
life in abundance: from desert life forms
low down near the river, to the conifer
forest communities on the rims and the
Alpine zone on the topmost peaks nearby.
Photo © John Green. Amherst. USA
Everglades National Park, USA
A paradise of orchids, the Everglades once described as a "River of
Grass" are also the home of a strange fraternity of tropical and temperate
trees: ash and palm, mulberry and gumbo limbo, oak and mangrove. Part of
a shallow basin, the Park covers an area of 567,000 hectares on the southern
tip of Florida. It provides a sanctuary for sixty reptile species (the American
Alligator has survived there; the American Crocodile struggles to do so) and
the last refuge of the Florida Panther, the Manatee and the Florida Black
Bear. There are huge colonies of storks, ibis and herons. Water, in the form
of rainfall or overflow from Lake Okeechobee, is perhaps the most
important factor in the composition of plant life in the Everglades, blurring
the lines of the landscape and creating subtle biological harmonies. The
Park lies at the interface between temperate and sub-tropical America;
between fresh and brackish water; between the vast urban sprawl of Miami
and the wilderness. (Left) Roseate spoonbill.

Virunga National Park, Zaire
Located almost entirely in the Kivu region of Zaire,
Virunga National Park is a place of extraordinary
diversity, stretching from marshy deltas through vast
savannah, lava plains and volcanic mountains up to the
eternal snows of Mount Ruwenzori more than 5,000
metres above sea level (below). Beside its rivers and lakes
are found some of the biggest concentrations of wild
mammals in the world, including 20,000 hippopotami.
Gorillas still live in its mountains. The White Nile has its
source there in the fabled "Mountains of the Moon", so
that Egypt is in a sense a "gift of Virunga". Siberian birds
winter in Virunga. A source of pride to the people of
Zaire, this national park which has been threatened more
than once by foreign poachers, is constantly patrolled by
guards from the Institut Zairois pour la Conservation de la
Nature ; more than thirty of them have given their
lives in its defence.
Ngorongoro Conservation Area, Tanzania
Between two immense national parks, Tanzania has established a
conservation area so large that it could easily fit in two or three
nations from other continents. Centred on the Ngorongoro
Crater, the area covers some 81,000 square kilometres and
contains many other craters which are among the largest in the
world. From the edge of Empakaai Crater, which is now the site
of a deep lake, the active volcanoes of Mount Oldonyo Leng'ai
can be seen. The protection of natural resourceswater, soil,
plants and animals is the priority task of the authorities who
have succeeded in reaching arrangements with the Masai
herdsmen who live there but who have to wage an unrelenting
struggle against poachers in order to save threatened animal
species such as the panther, the rhinoceros and the
hippopotamus. But the best-known site in the area is the Olduvai
Gorge, famed for the discovery of the skull of man's most
remote ancestor. -w-
i^^HH
Forts and Castles in the Volta, Greater Accra,
Central and Western Regions of Ghana D
The coast of the Republic of Ghana boasts a remarkable series of forts
and castles of all sizes, some in ruins, others well preserved. They are not
the vestiges of conquest or exploration. They were built to protect
trade mainly the trade in gold. The Portuguese, who sought to hold the
monopoly of trade with the country which would later be called the Gold
Coast, built the first castles towards the end of the fifteenth century;
Elmina Castle (left) dates from 1482. A hundred years later their rivals
began to construct their own forts on every promontory and at every
river mouth that seemed likely to provide protection for their ships and
aid their dealings with the local population. The Dutch, the British, the
Danes, the Germans and the Swedes all built forts some forty in all. The
castles changed hands several times, usually with the aid of African
chiefs who rented, lent or sold the land they were built on and profited
from the transit of merchandise first of all gold, then timber, ivory,
cotton goods, palm oil and slaves. After the abolition of the slave trade,
the British bought forts from the Danes in 1850, and from the Dutch in
1872. Today the Government of Ghana occupies the vast premises of
Christiansborg Castle in Accra. Elmina Castle houses a police training
college, while the fortress of Cape Coast has been turned into a history
museum and research centre. Seven other forts are used to
accommodate tourists.
Photo Frank Johnson Ç Ghana Museums and Monuments Board, Accra
17

Simien National Park,
Ethiopia
The mountains in the northwest
of the Ethiopian plateau are
famed for their splendour.
Erosion on a massive scale has
gouged out deep gorges and
chiselled peaks and precipitous
cliffs, some with a sheer drop of
1,500 metres. The region, known
as Simien, harbours animals that
are now very rare in Africa, such
as the Ethiopian ibex (Walia
ibex) (inset), the lion-maned
Gelada baboon, and species of
the Simien fox which have no
other habitat. It was chiefly to
protect these species that the
Simien National Park was
created in 1969. Unfortunately, it
is in danger. Local farmers are
using it as grazing land for their
livestock, excessive cultivation
is eroding the shallow soils, and
in the dry season fires started by
these farmers sweep up the cliff
faces, devastating tree, bush
and grass cover. These factors
combined constitute a serious
threat to the survival of the
Walia and the Simien fox. The
authorities are proposing to
resettle the farmers on more
fertile and less fragile soil
outside the park.
Fasil Ghebbi
Gondar Region, Ethiopia
Gondar became the permanent capital
of Ethiopia in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries (before then the
Court had followed the king from place
to place as he moved around his realm)
and today efforts are being made to
preserve the castles and monuments of
this "Gondar period" of Ethiopian
history. The first of these is the Castle
of Emperor Fassilides (1632-1667), a
massive square building of black stone,
with four round corner towers topped
by small cupolas, and a fifth
quadrangular crenellated tower
overlooking the ensemble. Within, the
apartments and reception rooms have
survived, though now stripped of the
sumptuous fittings described by

contemporary visitors. The other,
smaller castles display a number of
architectural innovations, such as
architraves, cornices and stone frames.
Other monuments of the Gondar period
include the Chancellery of Tzadich
Yohannes, a lions' den, a wedding
house, the small palace of Queen
Mentuab, arcades, the houses of
dignitaries and guards, and churches
where the King attended mass every
day. Some aspects of the complex call
to mind the fortified rural dwellings of
Arabia. But the effect is Ethiopian, even
if the building methods used were
influenced by the Portuguese. Left, the
castle of Fassilides.
Rock-hewn churches,
Lalibela, Ethiopia D
For hundreds of years, the inhabitants of
several Ethiopian provinces built churches
in caves or shrines hollowed out of cliff
faces, leaving visible only a decorated
façade reminiscent of the tombs in Petra,
Jordan. But later on (probably in the early
thirteenth century) Ethiopian craftsmen
produced a remarkable accomplishment of
engineering and architecture by hewing
entire churches out of the living rock. The
buildings blocks of stone fifty to 100
square metres in area first set apart from
the pink tufa soil, then hollowed out and
decorated both inside and outside look
exactly as if they were built with separate
stones, but each of them is a single hewn
and sculpted rock. The best-known are the
eleven churches of the holy city of Lalibela,
which was once used as a capital by the
king who gave it its name. Each church has
its own distinctive layout, proportions,
style, bas-reliefs and wall paintings (above).
The group of buildings, virtually invisible
against the vast landscape dominated by
Mount Abouna Joseph, is laid out
according to a secret religious pattern
based on the topography of Palestine or of
a new Jerusalem, with each church being
thought to represent a stage in the life of
Christ.
19

Open Air Museum
of Nubia and Aswan,
Egypt D
The monuments of Nubia are now
familiar to the whole world, thanks
to the success of the international
campaign launched by Unesco in
1960. The names of Abu Simbel and
Philae evoke not only the technical
triumphs of their rescue from the
rising Nile, but also the beauty of
the great temples of Ramses II,
hewn out of the cliffs in the
thirteenth century BC, and of the
island of sanctuaries, where the
Nubians worshipped the goddess
Isis until 552 AD. But other shrines
and monuments were rescued
during the campaign, such as
Amada, with its temples from the
fifteenth and thirteenth centuries
BC; or Kalabsha built during the
reign of the Roman Emperor
Augustus. A number of buildings
and sites which were not
threatened by the waters of the
High Dam are also included in what
is a unique "open-air museum":
monuments to Egyptian officials of
the third and second millennia
which illustrate the importance of
Aswan as a frontier city and the
point of departure for military and
commercial expeditions to the
south. The monastery of
St. Simeon (tenth-eleventh
centuries AD), and Islamic
cemeteries of the twelfth and
eleventh centuries, are more recent
milestones in Nubia's religious
history. Left, detail of a colossus
from the temple of Gerf Hussein.
Islamic Cairo, Egypt B
When, less than twenty years after
the Hegira, the Arabs entered Egypt
as champions of a new faith, Islam,
they settled at some distance from
existing cities. Their first capital
was the camp called al-Fustat (the
Tent), which they set up north of
Memphis, under the walls of an
ancient Roman fort. Then two
centuries later, Ahmad Ibn Tulun
built a residential quarter around
the beautiful Mosque which still
bears his name. Another hundred
years went by, and then, in 969 AD,
a little further downstream on the
eastern bank of the Nile, the city of
al-Qáhira (Cairo the Victorious) was
founded. From then onwards, as a
commercial, cultural and
theological centre, Cairo developed
into the greatest Islamic city of the
Middle Ages. Today, the city
contains some 600 registered
historical monuments of great
value, including mosques, colleges,
churches and monasteries, military
buildings, palaces and bazaars. The
architectural wealth of historic
Cairo is enhanced by the fact that
much of the early urban fabric
remains intact; all the successive
"cities" of Cairo, from its
foundation up to the nineteenth
century, have been preserved.
Above, the Ibn Tulun mosque (See
also back cover).
Ancient Thebes with its Necropolis, Egypt
In the second millennium BC, the city of
Thebes, now hidden beneath the modern
town of Luxor, became the capital not only
of a reunited Egypt, freed from the invader's
rule, but also of a great Empire which
stretched as far as the Euphrates. Thebes
devoted its wealth to the construction of
temples. The two immense temple precincts
of Karnak and Luxor, two-and-a-half
kilometres apart, were linked by an avenue
lined with statues of rams, partly excavated
in recent years. Two thousand years ago,
travellers from Asia, Greece and Italy came,
like the tourists of today, to admire the Great
Temple of Amon, the city's chief god, which
the priest-architects . were constantly
extending. The bas-reliefs and pillared courts
of Luxor reflect the aesthetic refinement of
the fourteenth and thirteenth centuries BC,
from Amenophis III to Ramses II. Across the
Nile from Luxor and Karnak, the richly
decorated galleries of royal and private
tombs hewn out of the rock depict with a
wealth of illustration the beliefs, historical
events and daily life of the period. Perhaps
an even more moving sight is the village
which for centuries housed generations of
masons and artists, and whose surviving
dwellings reveal how these anonymous
workers lived as they created monuments
for kings and gods. Photo shows interior of
the burial chamber of Sennufer.
20

Photo John G. Ross © Rapho, Paris
The Pyramid Fields from Giza to Dahshur, Egypt O
Founded after the unification of the king¬
doms of Upper and Lower Egypt, 5,000 years
ago, Memphis was the capital of united
Egypt until 2150 BC. It subsequently remain¬
ed an important military, administrative and
above all religious centre, where Alexander
the Great and his successors were crown¬
ed as pharaohs. Hardly anything is left of the
great city except for a few colossal statues,
the remains of a temple and the em¬
balming house of the sacred Apis bulls. The
grandest and best-preserved monuments are
the vast pyramid fields to the north and
south of the site. These cemeteries include
the pyramids of kings Cheops, Chephren and
Mycerinus at Giza (see photo); sun-temples
at Abu Ghurah and Abu Sir; pyramid com¬
plexes belonging to ten other kings and
richly decorated tombs of the aristocracy at
Saqqarah; monuments to Snofru and jewel-
packed tombs at Dahshur... No monuments
in the world are more famous; and for
twentieth-century archaeologists the treas¬
ures of Memphis are still far from exhausted.
Abu Mena, Egypt 0
In 296 AD, a group of Christians brought
home a dead soldier from the distant
shores of the Black Sea, and laid his body
to rest in the Mariut desert, west of
Alexandria and not far from a bubbling
spring. Abu Mena, or St. Menas, was an
Egyptian serving in the Roman army, who
had been martyred after proclaiming his
Christian faith. Soon, miracles occurred at
his burial place; the spring water proved
to have healing powers. A church was
built there, and then a monastery, more
churches, pilgrims' rest-houses, ovens,
and public baths. For 400 years, the
humble settlement was a centre of
pilgrimage of such renown that in the
early fifth century the Emperor Arcadius
built there a great basilica, with three
naves and fifty-six marble columns. The
surviving ruins, which include press-
houses, workshops (where phials were
made for the holy water), monks' cells, a
baptistry and the numerous churches are
precious symbols of the marriage between
Egyptian and European architecture.

Archaeological
site of Carthage,
Tunisia
Its green hills, ochre
cliffs and golden beaches
all basking in the
sunlight of the
magnificent bay, the
archaeological site of
Carthage (left), now a
protected area, is slowly
yielding its hidden
treasure. Surrounded by
gardens, the great
houses built for
eighteenth-century
Tunisian nobles seem
still under the protective
influence of the
sanctuaries created in
the Middle Ages by the
warrior-mystics of Islam.
By the water's edge,
scattered here and there
among the modern villas,
or in the middle of the
corn-fields, is all that
remains of a great city,
once the capital of the
Roman province known
as Africa. Further away
in time and deeper
underfoot lie the ashes
of the capital of the
Carthaginian Empire.
Like a breeze from the
sea, the spirit of the
fabled princess Dido,
who came here 2,600
years ago from Tyre in
Lebanon to found her
"new town". Kart
Hadasht, moves quietly
among the ruins. Above,
lamp in the form of a
frog and the head of a
god dates back to the
early third century BC.

The Medina of Tunis,
Tunisia D
Not far from Carthage, and at least
as ancient, Tunis was an obscure
little town on the hills within the
lagoon when Hassan ibn an-Nu'man
furnished it with an arsenal, a
harbour and a mosque in the eighth
century. The mosque, known as the
mosque of the olive-tree (az-
Zaytunah), later housed a
celebrated university, while the
arsenal and the harbour pointed the
way to Tunis's fortunes in trade and
warfare. The city became the
capital of Afriqiyah (Tunisia) in the
twelfth century, and later, before
and after the Turkish-Spanish wars
of the sixteenth century, won a
reputation as one of the wealthiest
cities in the Islamic world; today,
remarkably well preserved, it
remains one of the most
welcoming. The Medina and its two
suburbs are havens of tranquillity
and unostentatious beauty (left) in
the heart of the modern metropolis.
Most of the religious buildings and
patrician houses there still bustle
with life, like the shopping streets
that have been the headquarters of
the guilds since the thirteenth
century. The Tunisian authorities
are committed to preserving the
city's historical monuments, which
run into hundreds. Above all, they
wish to safeguard the Medina,
which is itself a monument in its
entirety.
Amphitheatre of El-
Djem, Tunisia
Some ancient cities are particularly
tantalizing because they are
virtually unmentioned in written
sources. One of these mysterious
places is Thysdrus, in the Tunisian
Sahel, on the site of the modern
village of el-Djem. The wonderful
mosaic floors which are all that
remains of its villas tell of the
prosperity of Thysdrus in the third
century AD but say little of the
origin of its wealth, nor why its
citizens built an amphitheatre
which could hold an audience of
35,000. It is now one of the best
preserved amphitheatres in the
world, although after serving for
games during the Roman era it was
put to a variety of uses: as a
stronghold by the Byzantines, and
as a refuge for local tribes when
they rebelled against the
government, twice being attacked
with cannon by the Bey's troops.
Some of the vaults, stairways and
pillars of the façade were recently
restored. But despite the breaches
made by cannonballs most of the
walls of the podium, the arena, the
underground galleries, the tiers of
Corinthian-style arcades and the
substructure of the seats have
survived the centuries unscathed.
23

The Madara Rider, Bulgaria
The exploits of the earliest Bulgarian nomad tribes, which came from the
eastern steppes to settle in the Balkan territories of the Byzantine empire, are
gloriously commemorated in Madara, a village in eastern Bulgaria. In the sheer
rock of the Madara plateau, twenty metres up from the base of the cliff, an
unknown sculptor carved a monument to the victory of his sovereign or clan. It
represents a horseman, almost life size, with a dog running behind him. The
horse is trampling on a lion. The bas-relief has parallels in Iran and the ancient
provinces of the Persian or Parthian empires, but is unique in Europe. It dates
from the eighth century, and bears Greek inscriptions that refer to events that
took place at the time of the Bulgarian Khans Tervel, Kormisos and Omurtag
(705-831). The bas-relief has survived intact from those far-off times, but is being
affected by the mould, lichens and bacteria that live on the rock. It has been
decided to provide the Rider with a removable protective covering.
The rock-hewn churches of Ivanovo,
Bulgaria D
During the Thracian and Roman periods, people lived in the
caves alongside the Rusenski Lorn river near the village of
Ivanovo in north-eastern Bulgaria. At the end of the twelfth
century, on the initiative of Joachim I, the first Bulgarian
patriarch, monks hewed out cells, chapels and churches in
the rock and connected them with a network of galleries and
wooden arcades. Work continued until 1396, and gradually
almost all the churches and chapels were decorated with
wall paintings. Tsarkvata Church, whose decoration dates
from the fourteenth century, is particularly remarkable. The
anonymous painter of its frescoes departed from the canons
of Byzantine iconography, and in his treatment of the nude,
of landscape, and of the architectural background in his
compositions he showed close ties with expressive
Hellenistic art. The conservation of these works on their
fragile and fissured rock support presents problems requiring
complex study and research. Left, frescoes in Ivanovo
church.

V Tí
r-^r ï'
tí
jw:
* <fc fc *'
r ¿ *M
» «
«
I
r ^ # *' <¿
Photo © Vasil Eftimov, Sofia, Bulgarian National Institute for Cultural Monuments.
The Thracian Tomb
of Kazanlak, Bulgaria
The Thracians, who in ancient times occupied what is
today Bulgaria (as well as part of Turkey) were renowned
among their neighbours and kinsmen, the Greeks, for the
skill of their goldsmiths, the excellence of their
musicians, and the strength of their religious
inspiration the cult of Dionysus and the myth of
Orpheus came from Thrace. Numerous richly adorned
tombs now gradually being excavated also illustrate their
originality as painters. One of the best preserved is a
fourth-century-BC tomb discovered by chance in 1944
near Kazanlak in the department of Stara Zagora. Built of
brick, it comprises a burial chamber 3.25 metres in
diameter of bee-hive shape with a corbelled dome, and a
corridor (dromos) roofed with a pseudo-vault. The tomb's
most remarkable feature is the fresco decoration in the
corridor and the burial chamber. Two bands of frescoes
are painted in the passage, averaging about two metres in
length and thirty centimetres in width. The frescoes in the
burial chamber embellish the plinth, the entablature, and
the upper part of the dome (photo). The paintings were
brilliantly executed using two methods, distemper and
fresco proper. The most interesting fresco in the tomb,
the "funeral banquet", alone deserves to be regarded as
an important landmark in the history of painting.
The Boyana Church, Bulgaria O
In the former village of Boyana, today part of the suburbs
of Sofia, stands one of Bulgaria's most impressive
historical monuments, a complex of three churches
which, although they differ in style and period, form a
harmonious architectural unit. Each of them has a Greek
cross ground-plan with dome, and richly decorated
façades. The Eastern church dates from the tenth and
eleventh centuries, and symbolizes the emergence of a
nation which, through its close contacts with the
merchant cities of the Adriatic, would produce
outstanding achievements in commerce, intellectual life
and the arts. The Western church, built in the nineteenth
century, marks Bulgaria's awakening after a long period
of foreign occupation. In the centre is the so-called
"Kaloyan" church, dating from about 1250 AD. It might be
expected to reflect the feudal anarchy and decadence
which set in after the disastrous Tatar invasion, ten years
earlier, but its frescoes, completed by an unknown artist
in 1259, are both lively and serene. They display a realism
which suggests local folk-art rather than the refinement
of Byzantium. The life-like attitudes and highly
individualized expressions of the figures, whether in
portraits of the church's benefactors, in the scene of the
Last Supper or in the treatment of venerated icons, are
bathed in a vibrant spirituality.
25

The Palace and Park of Versailles, France
The Palace of Versailles was to all intents
and purposes the capital of France from the
end of the seventeenth century until the
Revolution. It lies at the heart of a vast pat¬
tern of lawns, walks and fountains, forming
an ensemble which slowly took shape over
more than a century and a half. Every inch of
it was dedicated to the glory of the King. To
appreciate the setting fully, the visitor
should approach the Palace from the town of
Versailles along one of the avenues which
run beside the immense stables and con¬
verge on the Court of Honour. With no less
than 216 rooms (not all yet restored) the
Palace is a world whose brilliance dazzles
millions of tourists each year just as it did the
courtiers of an earlier age. Outside are the
gardens, the celebrated fountains and the
two smaller palaces, the Trianons. Louis XIV
employed the finest artists of his time: the
architect Le Vau, the decorator Lebrun, and
the garden designer Le Nôtre. The list of
those who have conferred beauty on
Versailles Is still growing, and now includes
the wonderfully gifted craftsmen who
recently completed the restoration of the
Royal Bedchamber and the Hall of Mirrors.
Below, west façade of the Palace.
Photo Jean Feuillie © Archives Photographiques S. P.A. D.E. M., Paris
Mont-Saint-
Michel and its
Bay, France D
Its site, its architecture
and the continuity of its
history have earned for
the Mont-Saint-Michel
the description of
"Wonder of the West". In
ancient times this rocky
islet off the Normandy
coast was a Celtic place
of worship. Then, in the
eighth century, an
oratory dedicated to
St. Michael the
Archangel was
established there, later
succeeded by an abbey.
The full glory of Mont-
Saint-Michel came with
the Gothic age when the
influx of pilgrims was
such that the monks
constructed bigger and
higher buildings resting
on powerful buttresses.
This was the origin of
the five great rooms
crowned by a cloister
which were built on the
northern side between
1211 and 1228 and are
known as La Merveille.
Later the fortunes of
Mont-Saint-Michel went
into steep decline: the
church was partially
demolished and the
abbey was transformed
into a prison. In the last
100 years restoration has
brought back splendour
to this monument which
is not only a major
tourist attraction but is
once again a place of
prayer: on the occasion
of its millennium in 1966,
Benedictine monks were
resettled in the abbey.
Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris
Decorated Grottoes of the
Vezere Valley, France 0
Beneath wooded cliffs, the Vézère river
winds its way through the historic
French provinces of the Limousin and
the Périgord. Over 100,000 years ago
prehistoric men settled in this river
valley in rock shelters where
subterranean streams had hollowed out
caves. Here, until the New Stone Age,
they lived from hunting, fishing and
gathering. In the last 100 years, chance
discoveries and scientifically organized
excavations have brought to light a rich
harvest of remains from this
civilization. Some 150 deposits studied
so far have already yielded over 500,000
flint tools, and fossilized
remains (the skeletons of Cro-Magnon
man) which have enabled specialists to
establish with greater precision the
chronology of the Old Stone Age. A
landmark in our scientific knowledge of
the past, the Vézère grottoes also owe
their universal value to the
masterpieces engraved (as at Les
Combarelles) or painted (as at Lascaux
and Fond-de-Gaume) on their walls,
which shed a new light on the origins
of art. Above, horse painted on the
cave wall at Lascaux.

V
r
ilfffc
Chartres Cathedral, France
Built on a site already dedicated to the worship of the
Virgin Mary, the Cathedral of Chartres is one of the glories
of Gothic art. An earlier cathedral was almost totally
destroyed by fire in 1194. All that remains of it are parts of
the crypt and most of the west front with its Royal Portal,
whose statue-columns prefigure the Gothic style. The rest
dates from the thirteenth century. The cathedral was
rebuilt so quickly that it has a unity of style which is rare
in medieval buildings of its size; the nave was completed
in 1220, the choir in the following year, the transept and its
two porches in 1245. The edifice is remarkable for the
great boldness of its architectural conception: it
constitutes one of the first examples of the use of outside
flying buttresses to bear the thrust of the vaults, thus
making possible the construction of great windows and a
profusion of stained glass. The 173 windows which have
survived, all put in place before 1250, cover more than
2,000 square metres, and constitute the biggest collection
of early thirteenth-century stained glass. Today they are
severely affected by glass disease. The "International
Stained Glass Centre" recently established at Chartres
should help to provide the patient skills needed to save
these unique treasures.
A
1 ]*!&%
Vézelay church and hill, France O
At Vézelay, on a hill overlooking a peaceful valley, stands
one of the great achievements of Romanesque art.
Around the middle of the ninth century a monastery was
founded there which became a great centre of pilgrimage
and grew in size and importance soon after the year 1000
when it acquired the relics of a venerated saint. Vézelay
was also the starting point of one of the pilgrimage
routes to Santiago de Compostela in Spain and it was
there, in 1146, that St. Bernard of Clairvaux preached the
Second Crusade in the presence of King Louis VII and an
immense crowd. The 120-metre long monastic church
comprises a Romanesque nave and narthex (1120-1190).
The interior is remarkable for its unity of style. The
majestic sculpture of the portals, the variety and
inspiration of the twenty-four capitals make Vézelay a
masterpiece of Burgundian Romanesque sculpture.
Nevertheless, it came close to disappearing: in 1840 the
church was crumbling into ruin when its restoration was
put in the hands of a twenty-six-year-old French architect
named Viollet-le-Duc, the first commission in his long
career as a restorer of medieval architecture. Right, the
Christ on the tympanum.
Sr ./vvr
27

The Ohrid Region, Yugoslavia
Lake Ohrid in Macedonia (249 km2, average
depth 145 metres) is one of the oldest lakes
in the world. Its warm dark-blue waters,
transparent to a depth of at least twenty
metres, are drawn mostly from springs and
contain living fossils, creatures which have
scarcely changed since the tertiary era.
Some of its sponges are unique, and along
with many species of snail and certain
species of fish they constitute an animal
life which is considered to be one of the
last remnants of the ancient aquatic region
of the Eurasian continent before the Ice
Age. The lake attracts archaeologists as
well as naturalists, since traces of human
settlement in the area stretch back without
a break to Neolithic times. However, the
main feature of Ohrid's historic and
aesthetic past was created by the monks
who, from the end of the ninth century
onwards, built admirably-sited churches,
monasteries and schools. Today Ohrid and
Struga, towns on the shores of the lake,
are as proud of their region's scientific
resources as of its architecture, frescoes
and icons, and have won a new reputation
for their annual festivals of poetry, music
and folklore.
Stari Ras and Sopocani, Yugoslavia
From the ninth century onwards, the princes of Serbia defended a
clifftop stronghold, Stari Ras, against the assaults of Byzantium and
their Eastern neighbours. In the tenth century, they built a church
there, the oldest in the region, and dedicated it to St. Peter. In the
twelfth century, their fortress. Gradina, became the first capital of an
independent Serbian state, and at its foot the town of Trgoviste and
two monasteries keep alive the memory of those who fought for
independence. In 1170, Stefan Nemanja founded the monastery of
Djurdjevi Stupovi, to commemorate a victory against Byzantium. Its
main church, St. George's, was decorated with frescoes; King
Dragutin's chapel was added later. In the middle of the thirteenth
century, a period of political calm and prosperity, King Stefan Uros I
founded a second monastery, Sopocani, whose paintings rank
among the masterpieces of Byzantine art in the Balkans.
J>$

Historie Split and
Diocletian's Palace,
Yugoslavia
The Roman Emperor Diocletian carefully
prepared his retirement. In 305 AD, having
set up a tetrarchy or system of joint rule by
four emperors, he renounced the imperial
crown and left to spend the last years of
his life in the gigantic palace he had built
near Aspalathos, the Dalmatian village
where he was born. Three hundred years
later, the inhabitants of the nearby town of
Salona, fleeing invaders, sought refuge in
the palace, settled there, and built houses,
workshops, shops and churches within its
precincts. There were many alterations to
the architecture over the centuries, but
throughout their history the citizens of
Aspalathos (later known as Spalato, then
Split) succeeded in exploiting the structure
of the palace while demolishing as little as
possible. They built a harmoniously laid-out
city within the great Roman walls, leaving
in place the peristyle of the palace, the
mausoleum of Diocletian and the temple of
Jupiter.
The old city of Dubrovnik,
Yugoslavia O
Historians of urban planning feel a special
affection for Dubrovnik. Its fortified walls
enclose a perfectly preserved complex
containing buildings, both private and
public, sacred and profane, from each
period of the city's history since it was
founded in the seventh century AD.
Another remarkable feature: the city still
has in its possession the town-planning
documents, decrees and regulations which
governed every phase of its expansion.
They show how the designs of the planners
were followed with a scrupulous fidelity
which is rare in the annals of urban
development. Their plans brought to
squares and streets, residences and even
the most humble buildings a grandiose
style worthy of a city which was the centre
of a distinctive political and territorial
organization known as the Republic of
Ragusa and which was proud of its
freedom and of its trading
accomplishments.
Plitvice Lakes National Park,
Yugoslavia 0
Playing hide-and-seek among limestone
and dolomite rock formations, the Korana
River in Croatia suddenly pauses to form a
chain of some twenty lakes and emerald-
green pools. The lakes rise in tiers
separated by a staircase of dams crossed
by waterfalls that are often over twenty,
and in one case eighty metres high. This
landscape of stone and water was built by
living organisms. Mosses, algae and
bacteria have all been incrusted and
fossilized by deposits of calcium
carbonate: the cave-pitted natural dams
between the lakes grow a centimetre
higher each year. The Plitvice Lakes are
magnificent architecture in movement, in a
site held in awe by man from time
immemorial. The wooded hills overlooking
the water are a refuge for bears and
wolves, and for rare birds like the
Capercaillie and the Great Horned Owl.
Beech, fir and juniper grow in one of
Europe's few remaining virgin forests.

Bryggen, Norway
In the past, the towns of northern Europe were built
of wood. One of them has survived on the west coast
of Norway. Its name is Bryggen ("The Embankment"),
and it was founded in the eleventh century, if not
earlier, on the natural harbour of Bergen. Until about
1300, it was mainly owned by members of the old
Norwegian trading nobility. Later, at the time of the
Hanseatic League, it was gradually taken over by a
colony of German merchants, who were themselves
ousted in 1754 by "The Norwegian Office", which
traded in dried fish. Bryggen had badly deteriorated by
the beginning of this century, but life is slowly
returning to it through the work of a public foundation
which is buying up and restoring buildings, and is
carrying out archaeological excavations on the site of
the most recent fire to ravage the town, in 1955.
Enough of the houses, all wooden gabled buildings
with a single or double courtyard and stone kjellere
("cellars"), have survived to evoke the austere
elegance of Bryggen as it must have looked when last
rebuilt, after another fire had destroyed it in 1702.
Urnes Stave Church, Norway %
The twelfth-century church at Urnes, in Sogn
og Fjordane county, is generally considered to
be the finest of Norway's thirty surviving
wooden stave churches (stavkirke). The
timber in the northern wall of the nave,
including the portal carved with interlaced
fighting animals, was re-used from a building
some 100 years older. Similar carving covers
the western gable triangle of the nave, and
one of the gables of the choir, which must
also be relics of the older building. The
medieval furnishings of the church include a
wooden Calvary group and two candlesticks
of Limoges enamelled bronze. The altarpiece
and pulpit, the gallery, choir screen, pews and
wall paintings all date from before 1700. The
church is as solid as ever as a result of
scrupulous maintenance and protective
measures against fire, insect parasites and
burglary.

Rock Drawings in Valcamonica, Italy D
Systematic investigation during the last two decades has brought
to light some 130,000 rock engravings in Valcamonica, a narrow
Alpine valley in Lombardy. The most recent date from the
beginning of the Christian era; the oldest go back as far as
7000 BC. From the earliest bands of hunters, who depicted the
quarry they wished to kill, to the bellicose farmers of later times,
who adorned their battle scenes with inscriptions in Etruscan
lettering, the creators of the rock carvings set out for
decipherment the history of a people during 8,000 years of
economic, social, cultural and religious evolution. In the Neolithic
age, the first Camunian farmers depicted worship of the sun and
of the dead, propitiatory dances, and initiation ceremonies. Later
their place was taken by stock breeders, and then traders, who
had a more complex economic life and whose carvings feature
idols and spirits with prominent eyes. Then came the cult of
weapons, the powers of the subconscious, priests and
polytheism. The stone engravers of Valcamonica may have been
illiterate, but their work is more informative than the written
evidence left by many an ancient civilization.
Aachen Cathedral,
the Federal Republic
of Germany O
The schoolchildren of the half-dozen
European countries which claim
Charlemagne as a figure in their
national history learn that his favourite
abode was the Frankish city of Aachen
(which now lies at the intersection of
the borders of the Federal Republic of
Germany, Belgium and the
Netherlands). In 790 he began to build
next to his castle the Palace Chapel
which is today the core of Aachen
Cathedral. Its construction, by the man
who had unified Western Europe, lent
weight to his claim to equality, as the
heir of Rome, with the Emperors at
Constantinople. The chapel, with its
monumental cupola, elegantly
combined late Classical and Byzantine
architectural elements with new
conceptions, and remains the finest
symbol of the technical and cultural
renaissance engineered by
Charlemagne after four hundred years
of anarchy and decline. That
renaissance is also reflected in the
bronzes, ivories and gold treasures in
the Cathedral's treasure vault.
Charlemagne's tomb, a classical
sarcophagus with bas-reliefs depicting
the myth of Proserpina, is more than a
museum-piece or a historical curiosity.
It symbolizes the veneration that has
been attached to his name for eleven
centuries.

Wieliczka Salt Mine,
Poland
The Wieliczka salt mine has been
worked since the thirteenth century
and is still in operation. Its miners have
now reached a depth of 327 metres,
and the mine galleries on nine different
levels are three hundred kilometres
long altogether. At Wieliczka a
collection of tools, equipment and
machines demonstrates the
development of salt mining techniques
over 500 years, as well as
improvements in safety measures,
ventilation and lighting systems, and
methods of transporting the salt.
Archaeological finds exhibited at the
mine reveal that surface deposits were
worked as far back as the Neolithic
Period. The mine also contains works
of art subterranean chapels hewn
from the rock-salt and decorated with
salt statues. As far back as the
fifteenth century the "Krakow Salina",
a highly-organized royal enterprise that
was one of Poland's major sources of
revenue, was a "tourist attraction".
Travellers admired its unusual
landscapes and the architectural
grandeur of the excavations in these
mines which are now a museum of
technical ingenuity and a monument to
human effort.
i»*.4.-'«ly. . .. C
iStf* *
>.%
