Photo © Luc Joubert, Pans
Above, La Foule Illuminée, a sculpture by
Raymond Mason. Opposite page, the first
photo of Hiroshima after the explosion of
the atomic bomb.



International law and the
by Bert Holing
BERT ROLING, of the Netherlands, is professor
emeritus at the University of Groningen whose
Polemological Institute he founded and directed
for many years. A jurist and expert on interna¬
tional law, he was the first Secretary-General of
the International Peace Research Association.
BY one of the stranger ironies of fate
the funds that provide the world's
most prestigious award for action in
favour of peace, the Nobel Peace Prize,
were derived from the invention and sale of
dynamite and other high explosives. Yet
Alfred Nobel (1833-1896), the industrialist
and inventor of dynamite who founded the
Nobel Prizes, saw himself as a pacifist and
was convinced that the destructive power of
his inventions would bring an end to war.
Writing to Baroness Bertha von Suttner, the
author of the famous book Die Waffen
Nieder (Down with Armaments) and one of
the first winners of the Nobel Peace Prize,
he declared: "I do more for peace with my
guns than you with your disarmament
lectures".
Nobel eventually came to realize that he
had miscalculated his weapons were not
destructive enough! and in later cor¬
respondence he wrote that armaments
would only bring about the elimination of
war when they were powerful enough to
destroy not only military forces but the
civilian population as well.
Today the world has reached that situa¬
tion. The advance of science and
technology has brought atomic weapons
and missiles with such a capacity for mass
destruction that their use in a war between
nuclear powers would literally wipe out both
20

right to possess arms
parties. And the consequences of such a
war might well also be disastrous for the rest
of mankind. Indeed, many experts fear that
the entire world would become
uninhabitable.
The doctrine propounded by the Prussian
military theorist, Carl von Clausewitz, that
"war is the continuation of policy with
military means", is no longer valid between
nuclear powers. It may, nevertheless, still
have some meaning in the context of Third
World relations cynics have said that war
has become the "privilege" of the poor and
the underdeveloped. But even wars on the
non-nuclear scale have become too risky,
since the superpowers may consider that
their outcome will affect their vital interests
and therefore intervene. If wars continue to
break out as they have done in the recent
past (about 130 wars have occurred since
the end of World War II), the probability is
that in the near future one of them will
escalate into a world war. This is why the
whole world has a vital interest in the
maintenance of peace.
Thus technological advance in weapons
development has brought about a situation
in which modern nuclear weapons can no
longer be used in combat because they
would lead to mutual annihilation, and wars
fought with conventional weapons carry the
risk of escalation into nuclear war. At the
same time, the arms race and the prolifera¬
tion of nuclear weapons (about five hundred
thousand million dollars are spent each year
on armaments) have produced a crazy
overkill capacity which could destroy the en¬
tire population of the world many times
over.
If modern weaponry is unusable, does this
mean that there is a case for unilateral disar¬
mament? Unfortunately not, because if one
party were to disarm unilaterally, the
weapons of the other party would become
usable again since there would be no fear of
retaliation. Thus we are faced with the
paradox that, although weapons may have
become unusable, they cannot easily be
21

^ relinquished in the world as it is today.
The logical conclusion to be drawn from
all this is that the only reasonable function of
armed power is to deter other States from
attacking or threatening to attack. Sabre-
rattling, even with the nuclear sabre, is still a
customary practice among the stronger na¬
tions. But if other States have a deterring
weapon posture, this "coercive diplomacy",
this "political use of military power", this
threat to use force loses all credibility.
If the only reasonable function of national
military power is to provide military security
achieved through the neutralization of the
military power of possible opponents by en¬
suring that their weapons remain unusable,
the question arises as to what level of ar¬
maments is necessary to attain this goal.
On this point opinions differ. In some
military circles the demand is for "enough
arms to enable us to win if war breaks out".
In other words, they want superiority of
weaponry. But if this attitude is adopted,
the arms race will continue endlessly as
States seek to achieve a disarming first
strike capability (the capacity to destroy all
the opponent's strategic weapons in one
surprise attack). Military security, however,
should imply "weapon security", that is to
say, the avoidance of a weapon situation in
which the weapons themselves form an in¬
dependent danger. Human nature being
what it is, such a disarming first strike
capability would inevitably lead to war.
The most satisfactory answer to the ques¬
tion "how much weapon power is enough?"
would seem to be: "just sufficient to ensure
that war will be avoided". A State needs
many more weapons to win (whatever winn¬
ing might mean in a nuclear confrontation)
than to deter the commencement of a war.
"Minimum deterrence", "inoffensive deter¬
rence", "defensive deterrence", "territorial
defence", all these terms have been used to
indicate a military posture which would
make a State powerful enough to deter a
would-be aggressor whilst being itself utter¬
ly incapable of committing aggression.
This function of national military
power that is, to provide for military
security by deterring the use of weapons by
others is the only function recognized in
international law. The United Nations
Charter forbids the use of military force (or
the threat of its use) except in the case of an
armed attack. The standpoint of the Charter
is unequivocal; it amounts to the prohibition
of the first use of armed force. And this
standpoint is clearly reaffirmed in the defini¬
tion of aggression adopted by the General
Assembly on 14 December 1974 which ex¬
pressly states: "No consideration of
whatever nature, whether political,
economic, military or otherwise, may serve
as a justification of aggression".
To rely on law in arguments concerning
international relations is, at best, a pre¬
carious business. Law is only one of the fac¬
tors, and not the strongest, which play a
role in deciding actions in the international
field. Nevertheless, the rule prohibiting the
use of force, this basic ground rule of the
United Nations, is not just some kind of lux¬
ury designed to make life more pleasant; it is
the pre-condition of life itself. It is a law that
follows logically from the present weapons
dilemma that our weapons are unusable
but still cannot be relinquished. The prohibi¬
tion of the use of force is the logical con¬
sequence of that dilemma and it is our
22
Text of one the world's oldest known peace treaties is
carved on the cone-shaped stone, above. Almost
4,500 years old, it commemorates the settlement of a
frontier dispute between two neighbouring Sumerian
cities, Lagash and Umma, in Mesopotamia.

-ffgse"
3k á ft4.Ti^"SplSiíi
"When they are united, the weak become powerful".
Just as the tiny Lilliputians in Swift's Gulliver's Travels
(above) were able to bind Gulliver with their gossamer-
threads, the co-operation of the world's smaller nations
offers a basis for a new approach to questions of
disarmament and arms control by the great powers.
common interest that this rule be observed.
International law has restricted the
freedom of the sovereign States by pro¬
hibiting the use of armed force except in
response to attack. But traditional interna¬
tional law did not restrict the sovereign right
of the State to possess armed power. It was
only after World War II that the right to
possess weapons was limited. A State may
not possess biological weapons nor
weapons based on environment modifica¬
tion techniques, if it is a party to treaties
regulating these weapons. If it is a non-
nuclear power and adheres to the Non-
Proliferation Treaty, it is forbidden to
possess nuclear weapons. Other treaties
limit the numbers of certain kinds of
weapons a State may possess and forbid the
introduction of weapons to certain specific
areas (for example, the sea bed, cosmic
space, the South Pole).
States that adhere to such treaties may
then be said to have recognized the rule that
"the right of States to possess arms is not
unlimited". But this is not a universal rule of
international law since not all States are
bound by these treaties which can,
moreover, be renounced. The question is
whether it should not become a general
principle of international law with precise
and binding rules concerning the extent to
which the sovereign right to have arms is
restricted.
Up till now, restrictions on this sovereign
right to possess arms have forbidden some
quality or quantity of specific categories of
weapons. But technological innovations
have made this approach difficult if not
useless. Hence the need for a new approach
which does not rely on qualitative or quan¬
titative restrictions but considers instead not
weapons but the missions or functions of
armed power. "Missions" or "functions"
are used here to describe the specific tasks
to which military capabilities can be put, and
it is these missions or functions that should
be made the primary focus of agreement.
Some capabilities should be forbidden the
capability of launching a pre-emptive first
strike or a successful surprise attack. As a
general rule a State should not have the
right to possess arms capable of performing
functions that are forbidden by international
law.
If, according to present international law,
the principal function of national armed
forces is to provide military security, should
it still be legitimate to possess armed power
capable of going beyond that function? The
answer must be "No". The logical con¬
sequence of the ban on the use of force ex¬
cept to resist armed attack is a further ban
on the right to possess arms conceived for
aggressive purposes.
One of the "four freedoms" in Roosevelt's
famous State of the Union speech in 1941
was "freedom from fear". It implied a
"world-wide reduction of armaments
such. ..that no nation will be in a position to
commit an act of physical aggression
against any neighbour, anywhere in the
world". And Sumner Welles, the U.S.
Secretary of State at the time, clarified the
issue by stating that this implied "the aboli¬
tion of offensive arms and the limitation and
reduction of defensive armaments and of
the tools which make possible the construc¬
tion of these armaments".
Such a set of all-embracing rules could w
only gradually be established. A start might t
23

k be made with the prohibition of the in¬
troduction of new offensive or de-stabilizing
weapon systems. We might gradually reach
the stage at which the guiding principle
would be a ban on the possession of ex¬
cessive armaments. A new chapter of inter¬
national law concerning arms control and
disarmament is needed and this was stress¬
ed by peace experts at meetings held at
Unesco in 1978 and 1980.
A new approach in the field of disarma¬
ment has been proposed, but proposals
need to be addressed to people or groups
who can act upon them. In our case the
message is destined for the smaller nations.
The time has come to adopt the battle cry:
"Nuclear proletarians of the whole world,
unite!" The smaller nations, members of
military alliances and non-aligned countries
should co-operate more actively on ques¬
tions of disarmament and arms control.
They should collectively develop prin¬
ciples and standards to be applied in
negotiations on the basis of which the
United Nations General Assembly should
outline in its resolutions the standards and
rules of the new chapter of international law
concerning the restriction of national
freedom to possess weapons.
Although the General Assembly does not
have legislative power, it can, by its resolu¬
tions, change the political and juridical
climate in the world, as it did with respect to
colonialism, racial discrimination and the
market mechanism of the existing interna¬
tional economic order. Even in face of the
resistance of the great powers, the smaller
States, who form a vast majority, would be
able to make their strongly held convictions
gain the day. When they are united, the
weak become powerful.
The Special Disarmament Session was
the first occasion on which the small States
gave signs of their impatience and their
misgivings concerning the arms control
practices of the" superpowers. It provided a
demonstration of their protest against the
failure of the States previously responsible
for putting arms control into effect.
The Final Act of the Special Session on
Disarmament provides for institutions in
which the smaller States can fulfil their new
role in giving guidelines that should be
observed in arms control negotiations and
preparing the ground for the acceptance of
new rules restricting national freedom to
possess weapons. In the field of arms con¬
trol and disarmament the General Assembly
has to perform the same role as a law-
creating agency as it has in the field of
human rights and is doing with regard to the
establishment of a New International
Economic Order. In all these fields the pro¬
gressive development of international law
implies a curtailment of national sovereign¬
ty. These curtailments are not unrelated;
they are interdependent. Restriction of the
right to possess arms will only have lasting
effect if in other fields also arbitrary
behaviour by States gives way to behaviour
that fits into an international framework aim¬
ed at world peace and the well-being of
humanity.
Bert Ruling
At Nagasaki, victims of atomic war.
24
