The reading habit
ALTHOUGH statistics on the world's
illiterate populations are relatively
easy to obtain, little is known about
the millions of literate adults, who, in both
the developed and the developing countries,
rarely pick up a book or open a magazine, or
about schoolchildren for whom reading has
come to mean textbooks and little else.
The causes of this phenomenon are all the
more difficult to determine because there is
not one kind but many kinds of reading, and
because reading habits vary considerably ac¬
cording to age group, educational level and
socio-cultural background.
Many influences promote or deter the
development of the reading habit. They are
sometimes -subtle and often interrelated,
and are not always straightforward or evi¬
dent on the surface. Although observers
may be tempted to assign a single deter¬
minate, depending upon their biases or van¬
tage points, no single cause is usually clear.
Some people develop the habit of reading
books. And some do not. Among the latter,
many have learned to read, but do not.
Perhaps they should be called "lapsed
readers".
Special problems exist in developing
countries that have embarked on massive
literacy campaigns. All too often, it has been
found that large proportions of newly
literate adults lapse back into illiteracy for
lack of sufficient reading material geared to
their special needs and interests. Maintain¬
ing and improving reading skills, motivating
adults who have never read before to adopt
the reading habit, and providing the right
books and periodicals in adequate quantities
are among the challenges to be met through
a combination of foresight and careful
planning.
In Brazil, for example, this is being
accomplished through a mass literacy effort
called MOBRAL (Movimento Brasileiro de
Alfabetizaçâo) which has brought literacy to
thirteen million people in less than ten years.
The planners of this well-organized literacy
programme recognized the need for an
ongoing cultural programme to follow its
programmes for Functional Literacy and
Integrated Education. In view of the enor¬
mous size of Brazil and the wide network of
MOBRAL posts, mobile units, "Mobralte-
cas", are proposed to support the various
cultural activities scheduled. It is planned
that the Mobraltecas will have a library, tele¬
vision receiver and video-tape equipment,
sound equipment, film projectors and film-
strips and slide projectors. The Mobralteca
programme is now engaged in preparing
reading material for those people who have
just finished the initial course for illiterates.
An examination of the purposes for which
34
people read suggests that there can be many
reasons for engaging in the reading act.
Some are clearly individual and personal,
while others are societal, with many degrees
of interrelationship between these two ex¬
tremes of influences. The lover's apprecia¬
tion of a certain poem may stem from the
motivation provided by one individual and
by his romantic feelings.
A reader rarely says, "I am reading this
book because..." Reasons are not verbaliz¬
ed. Reading is a tool which is particularly
useful for a given purpose, and it is used
just as a hammer might be used to hit a nail
or a screwdriver to tighten a screw. In other
words, the habit of using reading is based
upon real human needs. Variations in
motivation for reading may occur in various
cultures throughout the world, but this list
of purposes provides a useful foundation:
As a ritual, or from force of habit.
From a sense of duty.
Merely to fill in or kill time.
To know and understand current hap¬
penings.
For immediate personal satisfaction or
value.
To meet practical demands of daily living.
To further avocational interests.
To carry on and promote professional or
vocational interests.
To meet personal-social demands.
To meet socio-civic needs and demands
(good citizenship). .
For self-development or improvement,
including. extension of cultural
background.
To satisfy strictly intellectual demands.
To satisfy spiritual needs.
The "bookaholic", whose story has been
told so amusingly by journalist Tom Zito, is
the least likely to know why he needs to read
books. Tongue in cheek, Zito wrote: "Life
without plenty of books lying around the
house is like a day without orange juice for
the bookaholic. Go a week without an ac¬
quisition and the hands start to shake.
We're not talking of old books here. None of
that snobby first-edition, out-of-print stuff.
Just your basic on-the-shelf material that's
waiting to be taken home. Bookaholism
knows no bounds and blurs all borders..."
Most habitual readers are not nearly so
extreme. Desire and aptitude are not the
only factors involved in developing a habit,
of course. Time is also involved, for habits
grow over a period of days, months and
years. The automatic response of a habit
can come only with long practice.
This article is based on extracts from the book
Roads to Reading, by Ralph C. Staiger of the In¬
ternational Reading Association, published by
Unesco, 1979.
