STRATEGY-



Safety in numbers
Ethics and self-interest demand the preservation
of genetic diversity
THE preservation of gene¬
tic diversity is both a
matter of insurance and
investment necessary to sus¬
tain and improve agricultural,
forestry and fisheries produc¬
tion, to keep open future op¬
tions, as a buffer against harm¬
ful environmental change, and
as the raw material for much
scientific and industrial innova¬
tion a matter of moral
principle.
The issue of moral principle
relates particularly to species
extinction, and may be stated
as follows. Human beings have
become a major evolutionary
force. While lacking the
knowledge to control the
biosphere, we have the power
to change it radically. We are
morally obliged to our
descendants and to other
creatures to act prudently.
Since our capacity to alter
the course of evolution does
not make us any the less sub¬
ject to it, wisdom also dictates
that we be prudent. We cannot
predict what species may
become useful to us. Indeed we
may learn that many species
that seem dispensable are
capable of providing important
Each autumn millions of sparrows, sandpipers and plovers set out
from the north-east coast of North America on their long and
dangerous annual migration to the Caribbean and South America.
The white dashes in this photo of a radar screen installed on the
island of Antigua represent migrating birds flying at between 3,000
and 6,000 metres. Most of them are heading south-east,
but a few independent spirits can be seen making
their way towards the south-west.
products, such as pharmaceuticals, or are vital parts of life-support
systems on which we depend. For reasons of ethics and self-
interest, therefore, we should not knowingly cause the extinction of
a species.
The genetic material contained in the domesticated varieties of
crop plants, trees, livestock, aquatic animals and
microorganisms as well as in their wild relatives is essential for
the breeding programme in which continued improvements in
yields, nutritional quality, flavour, durability, pest and disease
resistance, responsiveness to different soils and climates, and other
qualities are achieved.
These qualities are rarely if ever permanent. For example, the
average lifetime of wheat and other cereal varieties in Europe and
North America is only 5-15 years. This is because pests and diseases
evolve new strains and overcome resistance; climates alter; soils
vary; consumer demands change.
Farmers and other crop-producers, therefore, cannot do without
the reservoir of still-evolving possibilities available in the range of
varieties of crops, domesticated animals, and their wild relatives.
The continued existence of wild and primitive varieties of the
world's crop plants is humanity's chief insurance against their
destruction by equivalents for those crops of chestnut blight and
Dutch elm disease.
This is not a remote eventuality. It happened once with the Euro¬
pean grape vine. In the 1860s Phylloxera, an insect which lives on
the roots of the vine, arrived in Europe from North America. Its ef¬
fect was catastrophic. Almost every vineyard on the continent was
destroyed. Then it was
discovered that the native
American vine is tolerant of
Phylloxera. Europe's wine pro¬
duction was saved only by the
grafting of European vines onto
American rootstocks a prac¬
tice that continues today.
The prospects of similar
disasters' striking other crops'
increase as farmers rely on
fewer varieties. Because of in¬
tensive selection for high per¬
formance and uniformity the
genetic base of much modern
food production has grown
dangerously narrow.
Only four varieties of wheat
produce 75% of the crop
grown on the Canadian
prairies; and more than half the
prairie wheatlands are devoted
to a single variety. Similarly,
72% of US potato production
depends on only four varieties,
and just two varieties supply
US pea production. Almost
every coffee tree in Brazil
descends from a single plant,
and the entire US soybean in¬
dustry is derived from a mere
six plants from one place in
Asia.
These and other crops in a
similar position are extremely
vulnerable to outbreaks of pests and diseases and to sudden un¬
favourable changes in growing conditions. Unfortunately, while the
genetic base of the world's crops and other living resources is nar¬
rowing rapidly, the means by which this dangerous situation could
be corrected (the diversity of crop varieties and relatives) are being
destroyed. Many wild and domesticated varieties of crop
plants such as wheat, rice, millet, beans, yams, tomatoes,
potatoes, bananas, limes and oranges are already extinct and
many more are in danger of following them.
Valuable but primitive or locally distributed varieties are to an ex¬
tent victims of their own utility, since the qualities of higher produc¬
tivity and greater disease resistance that give the advanced varieties
such an advantage over them are in large measure derived from
them.
The rapid replacement of traditional varieties by new ones is a
necessary and positive development given the need for more food;
but it could prove counterproductive if the traditional varieties and
their wild relatives are not saved as well.
Primitive populations of crops and their wild relatives are an im¬
portant source, and often the only source, of pest and disease
resistance worth many millions of dollars, of adaptations to difficult
environments and of other agronomically valuable characteristics
such as the dwarf habit in rice and wheat, which has revolutionized
their cultivation and led to greatly increased yields in many parts of
the world.
Useful breeds of livestock are also at risk. Of the 145 indigenous
cattle breeds in Europe and the Mediterranean region 115 are
CONTINUED PAGE 18 -i r

The return
As part of an international
experiment many species
that now exist only in zoos,
THE BEARDED VULTURE (Gypaetus
barbatusl, an imposing black and
white bird of prey with a wing-span
of three metres, disappeared
progressively from the Alps during
the first ten years of this century.
The youny of five couples raised in
European zoos plus a pair donated
by the USSR are to be released in
the Alps this year.
H *» P.
WV :± t~ i ~ *S^
S I
THE POLAR BEAR (Ursus maritimus) is found only in the northern
hemisphere and usually along the southern fringes of Arctic sea
ice. Although the species is still considered vulnerable,
conservation has improved since the 1960s. In 1973, Canada,
Denmark, Norway, USSR and USA concluded an agreement
which effectively prohibits killing or capturing bears except by
local people using traditional methods, or for scientific or
conservation purposes. The Soviet Government has designated
Wrangel Island, one of the main centres of bear population, as a
protected area.
THE COMMON PUFFIN (Fratercula árctica/ is a
diving bird with a large, brightly coloured,
triangular beak. The successive disasters involving
the oil tankers Torrey Canyon and Amoco Cadiz
reduced the population of the colony at the French
bird sanctuary of the Sept Iles, a group of islands
off the coast of Brittany, from 2,500 couples to 260
couples. In an attempt to avoid the total
disappearance of the puffin from Sept lies, the
French League for the Protection of Birds is to
place puffin chicks taken from the huge colony on
the Faroe Islands in specially constructed burrows
at Sept lies. It is hoped that when, in four years
time, they return from migration to mate and rear
their young, they will return to Sept lies rather
than to the Faroes.
16

of the native
reserves or rare natural colonies
are being re-introduced
to their original habitats
THE BARBARY APE (Macaca
sylvana) is a native of the
cedar and oak forests of
Morocco and Algeria; a
colony also exists in
Gibraltar. The apes have
become vulnerable through
exploitation of their forest
habitat, but populations in
the Moroccan central Atlas
mountains appear to be
moderately stable.
Conservationists in France
have established small
colonies in Alsace and at
Rocamadour and are
planning to re-introduce
viable groups of apes to
other regions of Morocco.
THE LYNX (Felis lynx), formerly
widespread throughout Europe, has
declined sharply in numbers over
the last hundred years due to the
diminution of its forest habitat and
to the activities of fur hunters.
During the 1970s, however, groups
of lynx were re-introduced in
Switzerland, Yugoslavia, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Italy,
Austria and France. Most of these
re-introduced animals originate
from the zoological reserve of
Ostrova in Czechoslovakia.
^. »J
THE ARABIAN ORYX (Oryx
leucoryx), formerly found over most
of the Arabian Peninsula, had, by
1972, been hunted virtually to
extermination. Fortunately, in 1962,
three oryx captured in what was
then the Aden Protectorate,
together with others donated by
Saudi Arabia. Kuwait and the
Zoological Society of London, were
sent to Phoenix Zoo, Arizona,
where they formed the nucleus of
the World Herd of Arabian Oryx. In
March this year, five oryx raised in
captivity at San Diego Zoo,
California, from a group of thirteen
oryx on loan from the World Herd,
were re-introduced to Oman where
they have been placed in the care
of nomadic Harasis herdsmen.
17

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 15
threatened with extinction. Yet, as with crops, many traditional
strains are of great valye for breeding purposes.
The very rare Wensleydale sheep has been used to produce a heat
tolerant breed able to produce good quality wool in subtropical lands;
and the Cornish hen, once of interest only to poultry fanciers, proved
so useful for crossing with other strains to produce a quick-growing
meat bird that it is effectively the basis of the broiler industry.
Although only a minute proportion of the world's plants and
animals have been investigated for their value as medicines and other
pharmaceutical products, modern medicine depends heavily on
them.
According to one analysis, more than 40% of the prescriptions
each year in the USA contain a drug of natural origin either from
higher plants (25%) or microbes (13%) or from animals (3%)as
sole active ingredient or as one of the main ones. In the USA alone
the value of medicines just from higher plants is reported to be about
$3,000 million a year and rising.
The most important applications of higher plants and animals for
medicine are as constituents used directly as therapeutic agents for
example, digitoxin, morphine, and atropine, which are still unsur¬
passed in their respective fields; as starting materials for drug syn¬
thesis for example, adrenal cortex and other steroid hormones,
which are normally synthesized from plant steroidal sapogenins; as
models for drug synthesis for example, cocaine, which led to the
development of modern local anaesthetics.
This application should not be underestimated. As one authority
comments: "without naturally occurring active principles, it seems
probable that neither the principle nor the activity would otherwise
have been discovered. Put yourself in the
place of a chemist who would like to
develop a remedy for cardiac insufficiency;
methods currently available would not lead
him to synthesize a digitoxin-like molecule
without knowledge of the natural
prototype".
Paradoxically, a country's dependence on
its own diminishing store of genetic diver¬
sity well as on that of other coun¬
tries likely to grow as the country
develops. Several developing countries, for
example, are currently setting up their own
pharmaceutical industries in order to supply
their peoples with essential drugs at an ac¬
ceptable cost.
As a service to this effort a UN workshop
recently compiled a basic list of medicinal
plants found in Africa, Asia and Latin
America whose active principles are used in
modern medicine. More than 40 of the 90
species listed are available only from the
wild; and another 20, though cultivated, are
also taken from the wild. Preservation of these species and their
habitats is thus one of the preconditions for maintaining indigenous
pharmaceutical industries.
The history of human use of plant and animal species
demonstrates that vanishing and apparently insignificant species can
suddenly become useful, even . important. The "pescado blanco"
Chirostoma estor, a fish which in the wild occurs in a single Mexican
lake, was until recently in danger of extinction as a result of over¬
fishing, habitat degradation, and prédation and competition by in¬
troduced species. Now, as a result of good management and artificial
propagation, the fish is being stocked in several reservoirs and dams
and a 15 hectare farm is under construction.
Many species for example the armadillo and the polar
bearunexpectedly have been found useful for scientific research,
whether as experimental material or as the providers of clues to
technical innovations. Armadillos are the only animals other than
human beings known to contract leprosy. They are now proving to
be invaluable aids in the search for a cure for this disease. The recent
discovery that polar bear hairs are exceptionally efficient heat ab¬
sorbers has provided researchers with a clue that may help them
design and produce materials for the manufacture of better cold-
weather clothing and solar energy collectors.
Preservation of genetic diversity is thus necessary both to secure
supplies of food, fibre, and certain drugs, and to advance scientific
and industrial innovation. It is also necessary to ensure that the loss
of species does not impair the effective functioning of ecological pro¬
cesses. It is unlikely that the particular communities of plants,
animals and microorganisms that make up the ecosystems associated
18
Trading in endangered animal and plant spe¬
cies has been severely curtailed since the
coming into force in 1975 of the Convention
on International Trade in Endangered Species
of Wild Fauna and Flora. Strict regulations
now apply to a long list of species ranging
from musk deer to molluscs, including the
Parnassius apollo, (below), a rare European
butterfly, and the Chrysocyon brachyurus
(bottom), a South American, maned wolf.

The mighty minnow
By the summer of 1973, the $116 million Tellico Dam was nearly complete.
First envisioned in the 1930s by the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) which
was created to improve life in one of the most impoverished areas of the
United States, it had been many years in the making. Over 15,000 hectares of
land had been bought for the project, and some 6,700 of them would be flood¬
ed in the 50-kilometre-long reservoir that would form behind the Dam, built
across the Little Tennessee River.
Then the snail darter swam onto the scene.
On 12 August 1973, a University of Tennessee zoology professor named
David A. Etnier was exploring the reach of water behind the unfinished Dam
when he noticed a small fish resting on a bed of sand. Intrigued by its ap¬
pearance, he plucked it from the river. "I immediately realized", he said later,
"that I had something nobody had ever seen in Tennessee waters".
The eight-centimetre-long, light-brown fish was one of the numerous
freshwater fish known as darters which are commonly found in streams of the
eastern and central United States. However, Etnier was convinced that this
particular specimen belonged to a hitherto unknown darter species, and after
lengthy research his conviction was scientifically confirmed. In January 1976
the new species was formally introduced to the world in a scientific journal as
Percina tanasi Etnier. Under its more familiar name, the snail darter (derived
from its main source of food) it became headline news.
Two factors made the discovery of the snail darter something more than a
ripple in the placid waters of ichthyology. Firstly, in the year of its discovery
the Endangered Species Act became part of U.S. law. Section 7 of the Act
specified that all Federal Departments and Agencies should take "such action
necessary to ensure that actions authorized, funded or carried out by them do
not jeopardize the continued existence of... endangered species or result in the
destruction or modification of such species which is determined to be critical".
Secondly it was established that the fish's only known habitat was in the Little
Tennessee River behind the Tellico Dam. When the stagnant lake would be
created by the completion of the Dam, the lives of the snail darters would be
jeopardized.
The snail darter was declared an endangered species under the Act and the
courts ordered the TVA to stop work on the Dam. The TVA appealed and a
protracted legal battle began. The snail darter became a household word, and
the issue crystallized the clash of priorities that could arise between a benefi¬
cent public works project pn which millions had already been spent and the
unknown genetic potential of species threatened with extinction. One Con¬
gressman echoed the thoughts of many people when he said: "It seems silly to
have a little three-inch fish stop construction of a dam the tax-payers have paid
over $100 million for".
The fight went all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court which in June 1978
ruled that a lower court had been correct in halting completion of the Dam
because it was a threat to the snail darter's habitat.
The story did not end there. Opinion both inside and outside Congress con¬
tinued to be sharply divided about the priorities involved. Eventually, in 1979,
new legislation was passed enabling work to continue on the Dam, which is
now complete. Meanwhile, snail darters had been removed to two other rivers;
some have reproduced but scientists emphasize that it will take years before it
is known whether the fish can survive in their new environment. The only thing
which seems certain is that, whatever the future may hold for the snail darter,
.its place in history is secure as the tiny fish that held up the big dam.
The Tellico Dam in Tennessee, U.S.A., before completion.
with so many essential processes particularly .pollination and
naturally occurring pest control can readily be substituted by other
communities. The genetic composition of such ecosystems may be
crucial for their performance.
Just as many varieties of domesticated plants and animals are
disappearing, so too are many species of wild plants and animals. An
estimated 25,000 plant species and more than a thousand vertebrate
species and subspecies are-threatened with extinction.
These figures do not take account of the inevitable losses of small
animal species particularly invertebrates like molluscs, insects and
corals whose habitats are being destroyed. Indeed estimates that
do attempt to take, this factor into account suggest that from half a
million to a million species will have been made extinct by the endtof
this century. If these species disappeared, the loss to humanity could
be irreparable.
The most serious threat is habitat destruction, which includes:
replacement of the entire habitat by settlements, harbours and other
human constructions, by cropland, grazing land and plantations, and
by mines and quarries; the^ffects of dams (blocking of spawning
migrations, drowning of habitat, alteration of chemical or thermal
conditions); drainage, channelization and flood control; chemical
nutrient and solid waste pollution (domestic, agricultural, industrial,
mining); overextraction of water (for domestic, agricultural and in¬
dustrial purposes); removal of materials (such as vegetation, gravel
and stones) for timber, fuel, construction and so on; dredging and
dumping; overgrazing; and erosion and siltation.
The two other most serious threats to species are overexploitation
and the effects of introduced exotic' species. Exotic species,
which may be introduced deliberately or inadvertently, can have
adverse effects on native species in one or more of the following
ways: competition for space or food; prédation; habitat destruction
or degradation; and transmission of diseases and parasites.
The native species of fresh waters and of islands are particularly
vulnerable to the harmful effects of introduced species. For example,
introduced trout and bass are threatening many species of fishes in
the USA; and introduced goats and rabbits are destroying the
habitats of plants, birds and reptiles in the islands of the Pacific and
' Indian Ocean.
19
