of Isis and Osiris by François Daumas
Two episodes from the myth of the god
Osiris are shown in these drawings of bas-
reliefs from Pharaonic temples. Scene
below from a Philae chapel depicts a priest
watering an effigy of the god made of river
mud and sprouting with barley shoots. It is
a reminder that Osiris was a god of
agriculture, the personification of Egyptian
soil and its periodic rebirth, before he
became the ruler of the underworld who
guaranteed a life hereafter. After being
murdered and hacked to pieces by his
brother Seth, Osiris was given new life by
his faithful wife Isis and came to symbolize
the triumph of good and innocent creatures
over death. In the 1st century AD the
Osiris-myth was described by the Greek
writer Plutarch who claimed to have heard
it at first hand from the Egyptian priests.
Lower drawing from the temple of Dendara
corresponds to Plutarch's description of the
tomb of Osiris in the abaton, the inviolate
sanctuary on the island of Bigeh in the Nile
(see map next page). The mummified body
of Osiris stretched out an a funeral bed is
shaded by a shrub on which the god's bat
or soul, is perched.
Drawings B. Lenthéric © F. Daumas, France
Sunlight streaming through an aperture in
the roof of the temple of Dendara strikes
the body of Osiris on his funeral bed. This
symbolic scene evokes the death and
resurrection of one of the most important
Egyptian gods, Osiris lord of the
underworld.
Photo © Henri Stieriin, Geneva
IN pre-Christian times in Egypt, the
appearance of the First Cataract of the
Nile was quite different from what it is
today. The shallow river swirled amidst pink
granite rocks darkened and polished by its
waters. On each bank, great drifts of copper
and gold sand were interspersed with rocks
of more sombre hues. Islands of all sizes
emerged from this riot of colours and
sounds.
Upstream from Aswan and Elephantine,
on the eastern side of the river, were three
islands, all close together: the rock-island of
Konosso, where in the days of the Pharaohs
visiting kings and officials engraved inscrip¬
tions; the island of Philae where until a year
or two ago the temple of Isis still stood; and
the island of Bigeh, once the site of the
Abaton, or sanctuary of Osiris (see article
page 46). Although we do not know for cer¬
tain how such an imposing temple came to
be dedicated to Isis at the frontier of Nubia,
legend and mythology furnish their own
distinctive explanation.
Osiris had once reigned over Egypt and
had taught its people agriculture, animal
" husbandry and justice. He had married his
sister Isis, a wise and powerful enchantress,
who was deeply in love with her husband.
Unlike Isis and Osiris, their brother Seth,
God of the barren desert, was incapable of
any creative act and had an evil character.
One day, during a banquet, Seth locked
up Osiris in a coffin and threw it into the sea.
Isis set out in search of her husband's body,
which she recovered at Byblos. She brought
it back to Egypt where it was discovered by
Seth in the marshes of the Delta. He cut up
the body into fourteen pieces and scattered
them in the Nile.
Isis travelled all over the country and
retrieved the dispersed fragments of her
husband's body. In order to thwart Seth's
evil intentions, she pretended to bury each
part of the body where she found it so that it
would be impossible to know exactly where
Osiris was really interred. Consequently, the
various Osirian legends differ on this point.
Some believed that he had been buried at
Abydos, where his head was preserved,
while for others the burial place was at
Memphis, Busiris or Taposiris. Others still
claimed that he was to be found in the
Abaton of Philae. For the local priests, there
could be no doubt that his final resting place
was on Bigeh, the Holy Island as it is called
in the inscriptions on the Temple of Isis.
Here on the island of Bigeh there was a
monument which no one was allowed to ap¬
proach except for the small group of priests
who were in charge of funerary rites. This is
why the Greeks named this site the Abaton,
the inviolate area within which it was forbid¬
den to penetrate. The tomb, probably very
austere, was located inside a sacred grove
where perseas, jujube and acacia trees
grew. This small monument was shaded by
the "Methide" tree about which much has
been written but whose species has never
been identified. It was, at any rate, taller
than an olive tree. In the grove 365 tables of
offerings were set out so that a libation of
milk could be poured out every day of the
year. Up above, in the tree which shaded the
tomb, was perched the bai of Osiris, one of
the elements of the God's personality. In
order that the bai could drink continuously
of the regenerative milk, the tables were
covered with leafy palm stalks which kept
the liquid fresh. Each day this ritual was
celebrated by the highest-ranking priest,
who doubtless also officiated at the temple
of Bigeh, whose ruins are still standing in
the eastern part of the island, facing Philae.
The "pure Island" was supposed to re¬
main in eternal silence, so that the god's
sleep should never be disturbed. Not only
was it forbidden to talk in a loud voice, but
the beating of the tambourine, an action
symbolizing joy, was also prohibited. No
one was allowed to sing to the accompani¬
ment of the harp or the flute. According to
the legend, birds and fish kept away from
the island; in any case it was strictly forbid¬
den to hunt and fish there.
Every ten days, Isis visited her husband's
funeral mound to pour out the libation and
to adorn his tomb. She crossed the river,
which was narrow at this point, on a sacred
barque called The Protectress. The
ceremonies were particularly solemn on the
12th Epiphi which, if our calculations are
correct, corresponds to the 17th of July. On
that day Harendotes, Horus who protects
his father, accompanied Isis on the sacred
pilgrimage. Although the information at our
disposal is incomplete, it seems that the
main purpose of this celebration was to pre¬
sent the funerary offerings. The specific
details remain obscure, but we can be cer¬
tain that Isis offered milk. Sometimes the in¬
scriptions seem to indicate that libations of
water were also offered. However, the same
Egyptian word is used to designate both
water and liquid, and it is hard to be com¬
pletely sure about what exactly took place
during this ritual.
These ceremonies, unique to Philae, were
partly a result of the geographic disposition
of the islands of the cataract. Nonetheless,
it is certain that the major Osirian rites
observed in many other cities which wor¬
shipped Osiris, such as Edfu, Dendara,
Abydos, Memphis, Sais, Busiris, were also
performed at Philae. During one of these
rites, known as the Guard of the Hours, the
gods stood around the body of Osiris and
kept a vigil during the twelve hours of night
and the twelve hours of day. Each of them j
took turns in addressing the body of Osiris I
FRANÇOIS DAUMAS, of France, is professor
of Egyptology at the University of Montpellier. A
former director of the French Institute of Oriental
Archaeology in Cairo, he is the author of
numerous articles and books including a thesis
entitled Les Mammisis des Temples Egyptiens,
(The Mammisis of the Egyptian Temples) and
Civilisation de l'Egypte Pharaonique (The
Civilization of Pharaonic Egypt). During the
Nubian campaign he led a French expedition to
Wadi es Sebua.
49

For the ancient Egyptians, symbolic
suckling marked the transition from one
stage of life to another. When a young
prince became king he passed from the
mortal to the immortal world and drew
sustenance and wisdom from the divine
milk to perform his sovereign mission on
earth. Right, the Nubian goddess Anukis,
who was worshipped on Elephantine Island
with the god Khnum, suckles the young
Ramses II. Far right, the Pharaoh is suckled
by the incarnation of motherhood, the
goddess Isis, who brought up her son
Horus in the marshes of the Delta at
Chemnis, constantly afraid that Seth would
hunt him down and kill him. Photos show
reliefs from the temple of Beit El Wali,
which was saved from the Nile waters
during the Nubian campaign.
Photos © Documentation Centre for Ancient Egypt, Cairo
Map drawn in 1913 of the southern part of
the First Cataract shows the islands in the
lake behind the first Aswan Dam in
summer after the Dam's sluicegates had
been opened and the water level in the lake
had dropped.
( laid out on its bier, and spoke words which
would bring him back to life.
It is difficult to summarize this long
discourse which is known from copies
engraved on the walls of Philae, Edfu and
Dendara. The task is further complicated by
the fact that the inscriber constantly makes
use of allusions, and omits vital information,
for the Osirian religion possessed mysteries,
in the Greek sense of the term, and as with
the Eleusinian mysteries it was forbidden to
reveal them. Plutarch's treatise on Isis and
Osiris, the only work to provide a coherent
account of this myth, is silent about certain
episodes that were absolutely secret. A
famous hymn dedicated to Osiris, engraved
on a stela now in the Louvre Museum, is a
masterpiece of discretion, only alluding to
the death and resurrection of the god in
obscure sentences. Plutarch says nothing
about either of these events.
However, in the Guard of the Hours Isis is
made to say the following words: / clothed
him who was naked on the banks of the
Nedyt. From this we may conclude that
Osiris was stripped of his clothing after be¬
ing murdered in the accursed place cited in
documents dating back to the time of the
pyramids. The same text reduces Isis' search
to the following description: / flew over the
country; I crossed the primordial ocean; I
recognized the thing close by the river.
These sentences obviously refer to the god¬
dess's sustained efforts to re-unite the scat¬
tered parts of the divine body and describe
the success which crowned her search. The
thing is the god's body, whose parts lay on
the banks of the river.
A description of the resurrection rites, the
most sacred and secret of all, is also lacking.
It may be imagined that the air wafted by the
wings of his two sisters, Isis and Nephthys,
breathed life back into Osiris. Their wings
are upon you, the liturgical text states
laconically. Bv comoarinq the half-confi¬
dences of the different versions of the myth
we can make certain conjectures about what
actually happened. A large scene on the
tomb of the great priest Petosiris, with in¬
scriptions that are strangely defaced and
mutilated, informs us that gold, the material
of which the sun-god Khepri was made,
played a role in the rebirth of Osiris. Water
also sustained him with its life-giving power:
[Through] the divine water that his heart
loves,
The august /ot/a-plant grows green with life.
And when it grows green, the country
grows green.
And thus the vindicated Osiris renews his re¬
juvenation.
The generative power of water was used
in a symbolic rite performed during the
festivities of the month of Khoiak, which
corresponded approximately to our month
of December. During this ritual, the priests
commemorated Osiris's return to life. These
festivities were so widespread and important
in the lives of the Egyptians that later the
Coptic Christians of Egypt replaced them
during the same month by a liturgy specific
to Egypt and known as the Holy Psalm for
the Month of Khoiak.
During the Osirian celebrations in this
month, a statuette of Osiris was made of
sand and mud from the Nile, mixed with
spices, in which grains of barley were
planted. It was watered every day and the
grains sprouted. This symbolism reflected
the return to life of Isis's husband, as part of
nature's great cosmic cycle. Each of the
dead who had been initiated into the god's
cult also became an Osiris in his own right,
and hoped to be brought back to life with
him. Thus large wooden frames in the shape
of Osiris and adorned with his distinctive j
crown have been found in several royal!
50

The Winged
Enchantress
By wafting the air with her
wings, the Great
Enchantress Isis (left) slowly
brought new life to her dead
brother and husband Osiris.
On the walls of Egyptian
tombs Isis is often portrayed
with outstretched wings,
and in this bas-relief, now in
the Louvre Museum in Paris,
she is shown protecting the
body of Ramses III. Carved
in bas-relief on the Isis
temple of Philae is the
sacred boat (below left) in
which Isis embarked every
ten days for the nearby
island of Bigeh to offer a
libation of milk at the tomb
of Osiris. Detail from a bas-
relief in the Isis temple of
Philae (below) shows
reliquary containing the
crowned head of Osiris.
Nearby stands the
mummified god, protected
by the wings of Isis.
51

r tombs. The lower part of the frames, adorn¬
ed with plaited reeds or flax, was covered
with sprouted barley, and the entire object
was wrapped up in bandages like a mummy.
Plutarch makes a passing reference to these
practices in his Treatise on Isis and Osiris.
In the Osirian tomb at Philae which
sheltered the fragment of the god's body,
on the roof of the temple of Isis, an extreme¬
ly curious representation illustrated the crea¬
tion of the vegetating Osiris in the month of
Khoiak. A mummy-shaped statuette lies
upon a kind of platform, borne by the sym¬
bols of stability and life. On top of the mum¬
my grows a cluster of stalks ending in ears
of corn, which a priest is carefully watering.
Above, there is an inscription which reads as
follows: It is the unknown mystery produced .
by the water of the flood. In this case, texts,
royal funerary relics and tableaux all coincide
to enable us to grasp the profound meaning
of these rites which assured eternal life to
the devotees of the ailing god. The Egyptian
priests went so far as to believe that the
grains of barley were the very essence of
Osiris's body.
Let us imagine how the island of Philae
must have appeared to the travellers and
Egyptologists of the nineteenth century.
The tiny village of Aswan, with its Bicharin
nomads grouped to the south was truly the
gateway to tropical Africa. Date-palms,
acacias and doom-palms grew side by side.
Calotropes flourished along the sides of the
canals and on the edge of the desert. It
seemed a very different world from that of
Egypt. The copper-coloured sands and
black rocks emerged from an overflowing
river of brick-red water.
If the traveller proceeded southwards to
the end of the Cataract, he would have seen
to the east, the little island of Philae display¬
ing among blue-green palm-trees and airy
groves its kiosk, colonnades, porticoes and
pylons, whose subdued but lively colours
are now only evoked in a handful of plates in
the works of the German Egyptologist
Richard Lepsius (1810-1884).
In spite of the depredations committed by
Justinian's warriors, Isis still seemed to reign
over the harmonious landscape created by
the architects of Antiquity. The size and pro¬
portions of the island perfectly illustrate the
profoundly human quality of its gods and
their transparent mystery: a divine king, just
and benevolent, treacherously murdered; a
dauntlessly faithful goddess, gifted with in¬
telligence and sovereign power, recovers her
husband, brings him back to life, and brings
up his son to succeed his father, after van¬
quishing his enemy. Osiris and Isis will
reward with blessed immortality those who
worship them and those who, like them, act
justly. Since the story echoes mankind's
deepest needs, it comes as no surprise that
this divine couple which reigned over the
southern confines of Egypt should, through
their inspiring and hopeful legend, conquer
much of Europe from the Greek islands to
the distant borders of Germania.
François Daumas
In this bas-relief sculpture from the Isis
temple of Philae, Osiris lord of the dead is
shown as a mummy swathed in bandages
and covered by a shroud. On his head is a
mitre adorned with tall feathers and
twisted horns. He holds a sceptre and a
whip. At right stands Isis with a symbolic
key of life in her left hand. She is wearing a
sun disc set between two cow's horns, the
headdress of Hathor goddess of love, with
whom Isis is sometimes equated.
Photo © Henri Stierlin, Geneva
53
52
