The experience of adults may
complicate the learning task. An
implement (here a hunting knife
from Central Africa) is still an
implement regardless of what
direction it is turned or its
handle pointed. A letter form,
by contrast, may have several
different values (b, d, p, for
example) which are entirely
dependent on its positioning.
For the world's millions of
adults who have never even
encountered a written language
the attainment of literacy means
initiation into a new world of
signs and symbols, the
development of powers of
recognition and association
which may be very different
from those used in everyday life.



the written code
Mother tongues
and access to literacy
by John W. Ryan
EFFORTS to promote literacy depend
upon the learner's motivation to learn
and this inclination is strongly condi¬
tioned by his social, political and economic
circumstances, perceptions and aspirations.
The landless peasant of Asia cannot be
made literate until the basic conditions of his
life are transformed. The same is true of the
Arab housewife, the African tribesman, the
dwellers in a Latin American favella or an
American ghetto. Literacy has meaning and
is actively sought only when it leads to fuller
participation in culture and society and to a
more equal sharing of social, economic and
political rights and privileges.
22
In addition to these social, economic and
political pre-conditions of literacy a number
of important linguistic factors condition the
success of literacy programmes.
In teaching children to read, a great deal
of attention is given to readiness. It is usual¬
ly tacitly assumed that adults because of
their maturity are ready to begin literacy in¬
struction immediately. But it has to be
remembered that the term "illiterate" does
not denote a precise state but rather a con¬
tinuum including, at one pole, those who
have never encountered a written language
and at the other, the semi-literate. The lat¬
ter, who in most developing countries will
be primary school drop-outs, may indeed be
ready to proceed immediately to literacy in¬
struction. Their months or years in school
may not have made them literate, but they
will have acquainted them with the
"secrets" of the written code.
.The "naive" illiterate, on the other hand,
will have to develop powers of recognition,
association and discrimination before lit¬
eracy instruction can be usefully begun. In¬
deed, it has been observed that the life ex¬
periences of adults may complicate rather
than facilitate the learning task to pe
mastered. A hoe, for example, is still a hoe
regardless of what direction its blade is turn¬
ed or its handle pointed. A letter form, by
contrast, may have several different values
which are entirely dependent upon its posi¬
tioning: for example, b, d, p or q.
Knowledge of such conventions cannot be
assumed, but must be systematically and
carefully taught. The danger in classes of
mixed ability the usual situation in adult
literacy courses is that the teacher may
assume that because basic principles are
understood by some, they are understood
by all. When this occurs, the unschooled il¬
literate is lost at the outset.
JOHN W. RYAN of the United States of Amer¬
ica, is a literacy training specialist and a member
of Unesco's Literacy, Adult Education and Rural
Development Division. The author of many
studies and articles on literacy problems, he was,
from 1971 to 1979, Director of the International
Institute for Adult Literacy Methods, Teheran,
Iran.

Word recognition is another area where
essential skills have to be developed before
literacy instruction can begin. A principle of
pedagogy is to begin where the learner is. In
the teaching of literacy, the obvious "entry
point" is with the spoken language, assum¬
ing the learner commands it adequately. The
success of such a teaching strategy,
however, depends not only upon the degree
of correspondence between the written and
the spoken media, but also upon the ability
of the learner to recognize such similarities.
A literate individual is conscious of letters
and words as basic language units and con¬
veys his awareness to those around him. For
the naive speaker, orthographic words do
not necessarily possess psychological reali¬
ty; they are not perceived as the intuitive
units from which language is constructed.
Speech is perceived as a stream of meaning
rather than as a delicate mosaic of words. In
pre-literate or illiterate societies, there may
be a sophisticated language consciousness,
but it is not necessarily focused on those
aspects of the spoken language upon which
the learning of the written language will
depend.
An awareness of these features will,
therefore, have to be developed. Unfor¬
tunately, this is often neglected. It is a per¬
sonal observation, confirmed by the pattern
of drop-out statistics, that the first lessons
of a literacy course are the most critical.
Once the fundamental ideas of the written
language are understood and the requisite
auditory and psychomotor skills developed,
literacy instruction can proceed with sur¬
prising speed and success in supportive
environments.
On the basis of what is known of the
reading process particularly the finding
that fluent reading appears to depend upon
an ability to anticipate the meaning of
passages it would be expected that one of
the important factors in achieving literacy in
a language would be the learner's mastery of
its spoken form. Empirical evidence con¬
firms this expectation. Recognizing this rela¬
tionship, international meetings have
recommended that initial literacy should,
wherever possible, be achieved in the
learner's mother tongue.
Yet, even a cursory examination of the
language situation in developing nations
suggests how difficult it will be to apply this
recommendation. To seek to do so is to con¬
front two obstacles: the vast multiplicity of
languages spoken in many developing coun¬
tries and the meagreness of available
resources, both financial and manpower, for
rendering the spoken languages effective
media for literacy instruction.
Thomas P. Gorman in his review, "Lit¬
eracy in the Mother Tongue: a Reappraisal"
draws a striking comparison between the
language situation in the Soviet Union and
Europe and that in Africa.
"There are more languages spoken in
Tanzania than in the USSR and more
languages spoken in the Cameroon than in
CONTINUED PAGE 26
Outdoor reading lesson with
improvised "blackboard" in the
People's Republic of the Congo.
For many reasons it is preferable
to teach people to read and
write in their mother tongue,
but in some developing
countries problems arise when a
language does not exist in
written form and long-term
research has to be undertaken
to establish an alphabet and
determine linguistic rules. As a
result many adults throughout
the world are seeking to attain
literacy in a second language in
which they may not be fluent.
23

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 23
the Soviet Union and Eastern and Western
Europe combined. Yet there are almost
three times as many languages spoken in
Nigeria as in Cameroon."
The situation in many developing States
outside Africa is similar. There are, for ex¬
ample, over 800 languages spoken in In¬
donesia and over 600 in Papua New Guinea,
a country of fewer than three million in¬
habitants. Moreover, the vast majority of
the languages in developing countries are
unwritten, unstandardized languages
spoken by communities of a few hundred or
a few thousand persons.
Confronted with these facts, it becomes
apparent that a rational policy for literacy
promotion imposes a painful choice: in
which languages should literacy instruction
be offered and literacy be attained? A cor¬
ollary to this is that in many countries a ma¬
jority of participants in adult literacy courses
will be seeking to attain literacy in a
language other than their mother tongue.
The alternative is a long-term one: the
making of orthographies and the standar¬
dization and development of languages into
media capable of conveying information and
ideas that a modernizing society will require.
The planners of literacy programmes are,
thus, in the meantime, faced with a dilem¬
ma. For pedagogical reasons it may be best
to begin with the mother tongue or more
accurately with a language which the learner
commands fluently, be it his mother tongue
or a language learned later in life but this
best choice will often prove a practical im¬
possibility or, if possible, may lead to a dead
end if there are not opportunities and incen¬
tives to read and write regularly in the
mother tongue.
The practical implication of this situation
for the adult literacy class is that many
learners will be seeking to achieve literacy in
languages which they do not command
fluently. Thus, the literacy class is going to
be engaged in two distinct forms of instruc¬
tion: second language learning and literacy
training. It has been pointed out that these
are fundamentally different operations and
should not be confused with one another, as
they too often are. Gorman suggests that in
such situations greater use might be made
of "diglot" materials: i.e., materials using
two languages, one better known to the par¬
ticipants which serves as a bridge to the
language in which literacy is ultimately to be
attained. He notes, however, that such
materials, although often recommended,
have been seldom used because of the prac¬
tical difficulties their preparation presents.
One aspect of the issue of language
choice relates directly to the development of
orthographies. Recognizing that learners in
multilingual societies will frequently be re¬
quired to achieve literacy in more than one
language, it has been frequently recom¬
mended that related or adjacent languages
make use of the same or similar or¬
thographies. In this way, the task of achiev¬
ing literacy in a second language is
facilitated. A related advantage is that the
same typesetting and printing equipment
can be used for several languages.
The outstanding example in this respect is
the experience of the USSR which has com¬
bined a policy of language preservation and
development with measures directed
towards an increasing standardization of na¬
tional orthographies based on the Cyrillic
alphabet. In West Africa, an agreement has
been reached among neighbouring states to
develop a unified orthographic system for
six language groups: Hausa, Kanuri, the
Mande group, Fulani, Songhai-Zerma and
Tamashek. This latter development
represents a considerable departure from
the colonial period where two or more or¬
thographies were sometimes developed and
put into use for the same trans-national
language by different colonial authorities.
The development of orthographies must
be seen as one aspect of national and/or
regional language policies and not as a
technical exercise to be performed in isola¬
tion. The promotion of literacy, in many
countries, rests on the formulation of
coherent language policies and the develop¬
ment of instructional approaches which take
into account the realities of the learning
situation these policies impose.
John W. Ryan
Those who have acquired
the basic skills of literacy
are in danger of losing them
unless they are provided
with a continuous supply of
interesting reading material.
Unesco has for many years
been active in advising and
helping developing countries
to meet this need through
newspapers specially written
for newly literate persons in
rural areas. Left, three of
Africa's rural newspapers:
Kisomo (Education) in
Kikuyu (Kenya); Kibaru (The
News) in Bambara (Mali);
Game Su (It is Time) in Ewe
(Togo).
Photos Unesco
