Women in Soviet
Photo M. Kuschtareva © APN, Moscow
by Alexander Birman
AMONG the many forms of inequality
found in different societies sex
discrimination is perhaps one of the
most important. From the start, the young
Soviet government set itself the goal of
eliminating this discrimination and of secur¬
ing equal rights for women.
Today 51 per cent of the over 110 million
factory and office workers in the Soviet
Union are women. Women constitute 74 per
cent of all teachers, 83 per cent of doctors
and health workers, and 84 per cent of the
workers employed in the distributive trades.
The figures vary from region to region. In
the Russian Federation, for example,
women form 53 per cent of the work force,
in Tajikistan 39 per cent.
There are no women engaged in mining,
26
the steel industry and other industries entail¬
ing hard physical labour, but many in the
textile, clothing and instrument making in¬
dustries. Many work in occupations calling
for firmness and persistence, for instance,
as geologists or meteorologists.
Enterprises often prefer to take on women
rather than men for certain jobs, knowing
them to be more efficient and painstaking.
We find women working as chief accoun¬
tants and in charge of chemical and other
laboratories. Women judges, lawyers and
bank managers are common.
In 1977-78, our higher educational
establishments had 5,037,000 students, and
2,568,000 of them (just over half) were
women. Here again the pattern is not a
uniform one. The lowest proportion of
women students is found at agricultural col¬
lege (35 per cent). The highest is in
economics (64 per cent), the arts and
medical colleges (57 per cent), and in in¬
dustrial colleges (40 per cent).
Over the past 25 years women have con¬
quered the citadel of science. In 1950 they
accounted for a third of all scientific
workers. In 1977 they made up 511,600
(40 per cent) of a total of 1,279,000. More
than 2,700 women are Academicians, cor¬
responding members of the Academy or
professors, and over 5,000 have D. Sc.'s.
Men and women get equal pay for equal
work, and women with young children enjoy
special advantages: no night shifts, no
obligation to travel because of their work,
and so on.
An interesting fact is that while the
average lifespan in the USSR is 70, for men
it is 64 and for women 74. There is much
speculation as to why this should be so. The
probable explanation is that more men are
engaged in mining, building, driving and
other occupations which have a bearing on
their lifespan.
Soviet women play an active part in
political life, serving on trade union, party
and control committees.
One member of the Supreme Soviet in
three is a woman and so are half of our local
councillors. Women account for between 35
and 44 per cent of higher trade union of¬
ficials, and for two-thirds of the committee
members at factory branch level.
There are many more reasons why we
regard women as a cementing force, as one
of the pillars of Soviet society. Besides the
part she plays in industrial and social life, the
woman is a mother, wife, grand-mother,
sister or girl-friend and plays a leading part in
the upbringing of future citizens.
During the Second World War Soviet
women manned the factories, saved the
ALEXANDER BIRMAN, Soviet economist and
educator, is faculty head at the Soviet Trade In¬
stitute in Moscow, an educational institution
which conducts courses by correspondence.
<
©

society today
Opposite page, USSR flying ace Marina Popovitch is the holder of several world speed and
distance aviation records. Above, three generations of Evenski women; the Evenskis, who
live in eastern Siberia, form part of the Altaic family of peoples.
lives of the wounded and treated the sick.
At the front they fought as pilots and
snipers. Thousands were given military
decorations, and many the title of Hero of
the Soviet Union.
Soviet women are full-fledged members
of society, independent and respected.
In other words, there are no problems? Oh
yes, there are!
First, there is the problem of employment
as the following figures reveal:
Percentage of women among gainfully
employed workers	 1940 1977
In the USSR
as a whole	 39 51
In the Russian
Federation	 41 , 53
In Tajikistan
(Soviet Central Asia)	 29 39
Working women find it difficult to raise
several children, and not all want to send
them to nurseries. That explains why the
practice of home working has become more
frequent of late. Enterprises deliver materials
and collect the finished goods.
Shorter hours and a shorter working week
for women are also being introduced. In the
villages, branches of the food industry are
being set up to provide occupations for
women.
Next there is the problem of job distribu¬
tion. Though much has been done recently
to overcome lop-sided economic develop¬
ment, there are still many predominantly
"male" and "female" regions. Women
predominate in the textile industry in the
central part of the country and in "resort"
areas such as the Crimea and the Caucasus,
while men predominate in the mining areas
of Siberia, the North and Far East.
A third batch of problems might be
described as personal and sociological. It
hardly needs any profound research to
discover that women working the same
hours as men get far less time to
themselves. It is men who spend most time
watching television, going to football
matches, fishing and so forth.
The ratio of divorces to marriages has
recently doubled, and more divorce pro¬
ceedings are started by women who are
financially independent. I would not put this
down entirely to the fact that men do less
than their share of the household tasks, but I
am sure it is a factor.
To ease the burden of household chores,
public amenities are being rapidly expanded.
In 1965 there were 193,000 service units
employing 1,300,000 people. In 1977 there
were 264,000 employing 2 1/2 million, and
the services provided have been vastly
improved.
There is still a long way to go yet. But we
are moving ahead.
27
