-ai. -T - A" __ .
Photo © Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris
S% >i. V * V.
Left, gateway leading to
the inner courtyard of a
house on the island of
Argo in Upper Nubia
(Sudan). According to
custom, the decoration is
an integral part of the
architecture, except for
the three plates set into
the upper part of the
structure and, a curious
detail, the headlamp in
the centre of the arch.
Facing page, a Nubian
works the shaduf, an
ancient irrigation device
used for watering the
small riverside plots of
cultivated land.



The blessed land
by Robert A. Fernea
WHENEVER Nubians gather togeth¬
er, they speak of the past, of Old
Nubia, the "blessed land", which
stretched from Aswan south across the
Egyptian border into Dongola in the Sudan,
and which now lies under water. In Kom
Ombo, Egypt, where the majority of Egyp¬
tian Nubians were resettled, the people
wonder whether it will ever be possible to
return to this "blessed land" and settle on
the shores of the new lake. What was this
"blessed land" which is discussed with such
nostalgia ? And who are the people who liv¬
ed there ?
During the Nubian ethnographic survey,
which took place from 1961 to 1964,
66
American and Egyptian social scientists
made an effort to describe the society and
culture of Old Nubia before it disappeared
forever.
What we discovered was that culturally
there was no single Nubian people.
Moreover, the people in Nubia had met a
diversity of environmental circumstances
with a wide range of adaptive social
responses. The emergence of "Nubian" as a
social identity in Egypt, now shared by all
peoples from south of Aswan, has been the
product of the traumatic experience these
diverse people share : the flooding of their
villages and the loss of their homeland.
The first Aswan Dam, built in 1902 and
heightened in 1913 and 1933, flooded all the
communities of Egyptian Nubia, stretching
along the Nile on either side of the valley.
The communities in the north were totally
ROBERT A. FERNEA, of the United States, is
professor of anthropology and Middle Eastern
Studies at the University of Texas, Austin. From
1961 to 1964 he directed the Nubian
Ethnographical Survey, a project financed by the
Ford Foundation and administered through the
Social Research Centre, the American University
of Cairo. He is the author of Nubians in Egypt:
Peaceful People, University of Texas Press, 1973,
for which Georg Gerster did the photographs.

flooded, and the houses were moved to high
rocky ground. Those in the south lost only a
portion of their agricultural land. This was
the reason why during the time of our study,
some northern villages had no resident adult
males, while in the southern districts and in
the Sudan, more than fifty per cent of the
male population was present. Thus the rates
of migration from Nubia to the cities were
high throughout the region, but varied
greatly, depending on the quantity of arable
land available in particular areas.
Language was not a uniting factor in the
old days. From north to south in Egyptian
Nubia, the people spoke three mutually
unintelligible languages: Kenuzi, Arabic,
and Mahasi. However, Kenuzi, the northern
language, was close enough to the
Dongolawi language spoken in the Sudan
that these two groups could communicate.
Thus there are really only two living Nubian
languages: Kenuzi-Dongolawi and Mahasi.
Arabic was the exclusive language of
villagers in the central area of Egyptian
Nubia, near Wadi el Arab.
After government schools were opened in
Nubia in the 1940s, Arabic was taught to all
the children in Nubia, and by the time our
study was made, the majority of Kenuzi and
Mahasi speaking men (and many women)
spoke Arabic in addition to their native Nu¬
bian language, and this was true of nearly all
the children. In addition, individual men
spoke English, French, German, and Italian
according to their experiences as labour
migrants.
Before the flooding and the trauma of
resettlement, the great majority of Nubian
people were far more likely to travel to Cairo
for work than to another Nubian community
only a few miles away. Indeed, we met Nu¬
bian men who had lived in Europe and the
United States but had never set foot in a Nu¬
bian district other than their own. Working
in Egyptian embassies abroad and in the
homes of foreign diplomats, individual Nu¬
bians came home with knowledge of various
parts of the world, both east and west.
This knowledge of customs, geography,
politics, styles of lifewas widely shared
through conversations and anecdotes which
travelled through the Nile-side villages more
easily than the people. Thus Nubian people
combined inward and outward perspectives,
attitudes both cosmopolitan and provincial;
they knew Egypt and Europe from their own
experiences and those of friends and
relatives, but they were not familiar with all
of Nubia.
Historically, the men of Nubia were
known in Egypt as domestic servants, but
by the time our studies were made the Nu¬
bian urban migrants had begun to make in¬
roads into the professions, as well as into
factory work and other blue collar jobs; in
fact, the profile of their employment in
various sectors of the urban economy was
similar to that of other Egyptians.
In Old Nubia, agriculture was the basis of
subsistence despite an almost total absence
of rain. The Nile was used to water the land
with both modern and ancient mechanisms.
The shaduf, a weighted water bucket which
swung a few gallons of water at a time up
from the river, sufficed to irrigate the small
plots of soil which had been dredged up on¬
to sand and rocks after the first Aswan Dam
was built. The shaduf, common in northern
Nubia, was used in Pharaonic times and is at
least 3,000 years old! But in districts such as
Ballana and Dakka, modern diesel pumps ir¬
rigated larger areas of land, basins. of clay
soils which were admittedly not so fertile as
the river banks, but which helped make up
for some of the land flooded by the First
Aswan Dam.
Further south, distinctive hand-hewn
waterwheels were used, particularly in
Adendan and the Sudan. These chains of
buckets, turned by cattle power and often
co-operatively owned, could irrigate an acre
or more of land. The waterwheels were in¬
troduced in Roman times and permitted a
significant increase in the Nubian population
by opening up higher areas of fertile land
along the river.
Almost all that was grown in Old Nubia
was locally consumed or otherwise utilized,
down to the last strip of palm fibre.
Vegetables and grains were eaten locally, as
were most of the dates of the south. Sur¬
prisingly, the one agricultural cash crop of
the region which was exported was animals.
Though the desert which tightly bordered
the narrow valley offered little grazing or ^
fodder, the fallow lands and fields were, f
Photo Abdel Fattah Eid © Robert Fernea, Austin, USA

> after harvest, important sources of fodder
for the sheep, goats and cattle.
Furthermore, fodder could be quickly
grown in the summer when the dam was
open, on land covered by water the rest of
the year. The exportable animals were car¬
ried to market in Aswan or Wadi Haifa on
the Sudanese post boats and the lateen-
sailed feluccas.
Despite the often ingenious uses of the
bits and pieces of land available. Old Nubia
remained a minimal subsistence area
throughout its recent history. Food was
sometimes in short supply in parts of Nubia
and many residents depended on remit¬
tances from sons and husbands working in
the cities. On the other hand, the housing
was far more spacious than most families
would have been able to afford in Cairo or in
other Egyptian villages. The rectangular
walls of the southern homes, for example,
often contained two courtyards, guest
rooms, a summer kitchen and a winter kit¬
chen in addition to family rooms. Enclosures
for animals were built outside, near to the
houses.
However, such homes were rarely oc¬
cupied at the same time by all the people
with ownership rights to the property. Most
residents of the houses we visited could list
several men, often married and with
families, who had a room or a storage space
in their Nubian house, but who lived
elsewhere. Thus Old Nubia was a land of
large partially empty homes, ready to pro¬
vide living space for visiting kinsmen at
times of marriage, childbirth, sickness,
unemployment, or festivals. Twice as many
people were considered residents of Egyp¬
tian Nubia as the 50,000 who actually lived
there. Nubia was a refuge and a shelter for
its absent natives, all of whom were con¬
sidered part owners of the "blessed land".
The architecture of the houses in Old
Nubia was admired by visitors and was a
source of pride for the residents. Rebuilt
since the last heightening of the Old Aswan
Dam in 1933, these homes combined
elements from both Pharaonic and Islamic
styles in a manner which was distinctively
Nubian. Whitewashed and brightly decora¬
ted, plastered with mud and straw, the
homes throughout Nubia were a sign of the
twentieth century prosperity and security.
In the northern Kenuz region, the house
roofs over the guest or bridal rooms were
barrel-vaulted with mud bricks, an older pat¬
tern restored to this region after the flooding
from the first dam killed the palm trees
which once provided roof beams. Here,
where only sand and rock were left above
high water levels, paint and whitewash
restored some of the colour which nature
could no longer provide. Only a small frac¬
tion of the native villagers could live in these
communities; lack of productive means in
northern Nubia had forced the majority of
men and many of the women and children
to live in the cities of Egypt. It was the
moulids, celebrations of saints' days, which
annually reunited many of the migrants with
their relatives in the villages.
The moulids were offered by different
tribally organized villages, each of whom
sponsored the ceremonies for certain
Muslim saints. Processional visits to the
cenotaphs of the holy men, accompanied by
prayers and supplications, were the major
purposes of the moulids. However, dancing
and feasting were also part of the occasion,
along with visits from travelling merchants.
Boatloads of Nubians from neighbouring
villages were added to the city migrants. The
latter were expected to combine their efforts
and financial resources with the resident
villagers to host such occasions.
Southern Nubia was quite different. Here
in districts such as Abu Simbel, Ballana and
Adendan, the effects of the old Aswan Dam
were minimal and vegetation was still lux¬
uriant, with fields of millet and other- crops
green in season along with palm groves fur¬
ther inland, a rich landscape watered by the
Nile. As in the Sudanese Nubian villages
(which continued uninterrupted along the
river to Wadi Haifa and beyond) the tradi¬
tional pattern of life had not been changed
by the Aswan dam and the annually renew¬
ed alluvial soils continued to be farmed as
they had been for thousands of years. In the
southern area, moulids were not as common
as in the north, but the activities of farming
often involved communal labour. Land and
palm trees were owned by co-inheritors and
linked many members of the communities
4 Photo © P.A. Interpress. National Museum, Warsaw
Shown here are four examples, taken from different historical periods, of the crescent
moon and horn designs which the Nubians have used as decorative motifs since very early
times. (1) On the façade of a modern house near Serra; (2) On a bronze statue of Isis;
between the horns is a moon-disc; (3) On a 4th-century-AD king's crown of silver and semi¬
precious stones. The crown was discovered in a tomb at Ballana in Egyptian Nubia. Beneath
the crescent is a ram's head, another typical Nubian motif; (4) In a wall-painting of Christ
protecting an eparch, discovered in the cathedral of Faras (see also page 2). The eparch
was an official who functioned as the metropolitan or bishop of a province. His most
important attribute was his helmet-like crown topped by a crescent mounted on a rod.

economically along with the social ties of
kinship and marriage.
Marriages in particular were occasions for
three days and nights of dancing and
feasting in the Mahasi speaking region,
bringing together men and women from
villages and districts up and down the Nile.
The flat-roofed homes of the south did not
need such elaborate decoration as in the
northern region. Even the dresses of the
women were the more sombre gar-gara-s,
long-trained robes of filmy black material.
The rich land covered with productive fields,
grazed by many animals, and farmed by men
and women, provided the colour and beauty
which all of Nubia had once enjoyed. The
dignified dancing of the women, the athletic
line dancing of the men were joyous celebra¬
tions in this setting; even though many men
were absent as migrant workers the Mahasi-
speaking areas of Egyptian and Sudanese
Nubia were still a setting where both
ceremonial and subsistence activities provid¬
ed a busy yearly schedule of activity for all
the residents.
As our research progressed, we found
that though the villagers of Nubia were
clustered along the banks of great rivers,
much of their economic condition and life
styles resembled that of the oases societies
in the Sahara to the west. For example,
migration has long been a way of life for
many of these oases, in Libya, Algeria and
Morocco. As in Nubia, distance and ter¬
ritorial isolation both protect the local com¬
munities from too much outside interference
and force some of the inhabitants to leave
when the absolute limits of the local
resource base are reached.
We found that for the people of Nubia,
the more obligatory it was to leave Nubia,
the more blessed Nubia became: a land of
security for families, a place of marriage, the
true home among one's own people.
Yet the advantages of the city were also
well understood. Better medical care, better
schools for the children, and above all better
job opportunities were primary considera¬
tions. As in other parts of the world, some
preferred country life and others preferred
life in the cities. Nubians who became doc¬
tors and judges, who became part of the
middle class in the cities, were less likely to
return to their villages of origin.
Nubia was also the home of several
minorities, each of whom responded to the
limited economic opportunities in their own
way. The Halabi, for instance, were pedlars,
who traded toys and trinkets for handfuls of
dates from children and women during the
harvest season. Arabs, such as the Ababda,
were also visitors to the villages, occasional¬
ly marrying Nubian women and settling
down in the communities. Sayiidi farmers
from Upper Egypt worked the land exposed
in the north for two months each summer
while the dam was opened, sharecropping
for the Kenuzi women looking after the
family property. The crops of melon they
produced were found in the Aswan market.
Other Sayiidi fished up and down the Nile or
worked in pump irrigated projects.
In terms of integrating outsiders into
the Nubian communities or transforming
Nubian migrants into urban Egyptians, mar¬
riage has been of key importance. The
cultural and social integrity of Nubia, as
witnessed by the preservation of the Nubian
languages, has been maintained. This has
been true because of the relative isolation of
the region and because Nubians could draw
upon the economic opportunities of the
cities for support.
Nubian history reveals an enduring pat¬
tern of biocultural adaptation; infusions of
foreign peoples into Nubia have been slow
and steady rather than radical and over¬
whelming. When social change is mediated
by kinship and marriage the languages and
traditions, the skills and abilities of the com¬
munities are not lost. Neither migration from
Nubia nor into Nubia ever seems to have
totally disrupted the continuity of local
life till the last decade.
The relocated Egyptian Nubians in New
Nubia are now part of the Aswan-Kom Om¬
bo population and must accept the full im¬
pact of Egyptian life on their new com¬
munities. Arabic is the language of business
and politics, the source of personal ad¬
vancement in the competitive milieu of
modern Egyptian life; everyone is learning it.
But if Old Nubia is now only a memory, it is
nonetheless of great importance, for it
unites the Nubians of Egypt in their new
roles as an ethnic group.
The "blessed land" is thus still of great
importancejust as it was to migrants in
past times who were often unable to return
for year after year. The effort to convince
the Egyptian Government to explore the
possibilities of settlement along the shores
of the new lake now unites many Egyptian
Nubians in a common cause. Already some
preliminary studies are underway and
perhaps one day new villages may be built
near the old ones which have now melted
away.
Robert A. Fernea
The circle painted on the wall meant that
this house was doomed to disappear
beneath the waters of the Aswan High
Dam. The inhabitants had to abandon their
homeland for a new life far from the
"blessed land" of Nubia.
Photo Gunvor Jorgsholm Pressehuset, Copenhagen
