The man and his work
a chronological guide
by Rosa Maria Subirana
Early years
25 October 1881: Pablo Ruiz Picasso born at Málaga in southern Spain, the
son of José Ruiz Blasco and Maria Picasso López. Don José, a painter,
teaches drawing at the School of Fine Arts and Crafts. Eager to emulate his
father, Picasso when very young produces drawings remarkable for their
sureness of line and extraordinary powers of observation.
1 891 : The family moves to La Coruna on the Atlantic coast, settling there for
four years. Pablo's career as a painter begins in earnest. His gifts are so
astonishing, his accomplishment is so great that, according to a story told by
Picasso in adult life, his father was so overwhelmed by the superiority of his
son's talent that he gave him his own palette and brushes and declared that
he would never paint again.
1895: Don José obtains a teaching post at Barcelona. That spring the family
visits Málaga, stopping at Madrid where Pablo sees for the first time pain¬
tings by the great masters in the Prado Museum. Although under age, Pablo
enrolls at the Barcelona School of Fine Arts (popularly called La Lonja).
Makes friends with Catalan fellow artists including Manuel Pallares and
Josep Cardona. Notable works from this period are The First Communion
(1896) and Science and Charity (1897). Each is rigorously "academic" but
shows the artist's wonderful precocity.
1897: The family sends Picasso to study at the Royal Academy of San Fer¬
nando in Madrid, but he spends his time wandering through the city streets
and visiting the Prado.
June 1898: Visits Horta, in the Ebro valley, a place which will be of great
significance in his work. On his return, settles in Barcelona. He soon feels at
home in the city where he frequents the modernist café Els Quatre Gats, a
focus for the most advanced artistic and intellectual trends of the time.
February 1900: Holds his first exhibition, at Els Quatre Gats, showing draw¬
ings and sketches of his friends.
October: Picasso and his friend Casagemas leave for Paris. Picasso en¬
counters the latest developments in art through the works of Toulouse-
Lautrec, Degas, Cézanne, Van Gogh, Bonnard... The results of the first visit
to Paris include The Blue Dancer and Le Moulin de la Galette.
The Blue Period
December 1900: Picasso leaves Paris for Barcelona and then Málaga.
January 1901: Back in Madrid, he founds the review Arte Joven with a
Catalan friend. Returns to Barcelona at the year's end. The style of his work
changes. This is the beginning of the "Blue Period", during which blue is the
dominant colour in his paintings of the poor and underprivileged.
Autumn 1902: After a brief visit to Paris, Picasso again returns to Barcelona.
Blue begins to dominate in the works inspired by the death of his friend
Casagemas, culminating in La Vie, which he painted in 1903 together with
The Abandoned, Celestina and The Old Guitarist. (For this period see article
page 4).
Montmartre and the Rose Period
April 1904: Picasso leaves Barcelona for good and settles in Paris. Moves in¬
to the famous Bateau-Lavoir ("Laundry Barge") building in Montmartre.
That autumn meets Fernande Olivier with whom he will share his life until
191 1 . Pink colours begin to dominate his work during what has been labelled
the "Rose Period". The subjects also change: Picasso turns from painting
the poor and destitute and finds inspiration in circus performers (harlequins,
acrobats, tumblers). Outstanding works from this period are: The Family of
Saltimbanques, The Death of Harlequin and Family of Acrobats with
Monkey (all painted in 1905). (See article page 4).
Les Demoiselles d'Avignon and Cubism
1906-1907: Picasso's painting undergoes a fundamental change. The Portrait
of Gertrude Stein displays an Intensification of formal elements. The Self-
Portrait with a Palette of 1906 is treated along the same lines (see page 2).
1907: After many preparatory sketches and studies, produces Les Demoi¬
selles d'Avignon, a transitional painting of major importance, in which
Picasso concentrates on the essential formal elements, the structure, of the
object. This is the starting point of Cubism. (See article page 13).
Picasso meets Georges Braque with whom he collaborates in founding and
developing Cubism. Inspired by the work of Cézanne, Picasso paints still-'
lifes in which the forms are simplified and geometric.
From 1909, Picasso explores the possibilities of Cubism in increasing depth.
This stage has been called analytical Cubism to distinguish it from synthetic
Cubism which came later (See article page 20).
Spring 1909: Picasso returns to Horta where he paints his first Cubist land¬
scapes (see colour page 7). Applies the Cubist approach to portraits in which
the image is broken up into a disjointed series of planes. Examples include
Head of a Woman (1909) and the 1910 portraits of his friends and dealers
Kahnweiler, Vollard (colour page 26), and Uhde.
During the period of synthetic Cubism Picasso abandons the fragmentation
of volumes and introduces plain colours and elemental forms.
Winter 1912: Makes his first collage using pieces of paper and newspaper
cuttings. Notable works from this period are Portrait of a Young Girl and
Playing Cards, Glasses and Rum Bottle (Vive la France).
1914: The outbreak of the First World War finds Picasso in Avignon with Eva
Gouel, Fernande Olivier1s successor as his companion. He returns to Paris in
late October.
Theatre and the Classical Period
1916: The young French writer Jean Cocteau persuades Picasso to collabo¬
rate with him and Erik Satie in a production for Serge Diaghilev/'s Ballets
Russes. Picasso designs the drop curtain, decor and costumes for the
ballet. Parade.
1918: Marries Olga Koklova, a ballerina with the Ballets Russes. A son,
Paulo, is born to the couple in 1921. During this period Picasso produces a
series of "sculptural paintings" strongly marked with classicism. Most repre¬
sentative work in this new style is Three Women at the Spring, 1921 (See
colour page 26).
Surrealism and sculpture
1924: Picasso is connected with the Surrealist movement but keeps his
distance from it. He and the young Surrealists agree on the fundamental
principle that art expresses what nature cannot express. But there are major
differences between them: Picasso, according to the Surrealists, is too
attached to the external world, to the object, and too remote from the world
of dreams.
1925: Picasso initiates a new type of abstraction, incorporating the discov¬
eries of the Cubist period. Examples include: The Dance (see colour
page 27), The Milliner's Workshop (1926) and the Seated Woman (1927).
Renewed interest in volume and mass brings a new preoccupation with
sculpture (See article page 38).
Guernica
1935: Picasso's marriage with Olga breaks up. His current companion,
Marie-Thérèse Walter, gives birth to their daughter, Mai'a. This is a difficult
and anxious period of Picasso's life.
1936: The Spanish Civil War breaks out.
1937: Produces the aquatints and etchings Dream and Lie of Franco and,
above all, the great mural Guernica (see article page 14).
The Second World War
1939: Picasso moves to Royan, near Bordeaux, where he paints a series of
colourful landscapes. During the Occupation, returns to Paris and shuts him¬
self away to work in his studio. From this period dates a series of images of
seated women, especially his new friend Dora Maar (see colour page 28).
Becomes Interested in lithography. Meets Françoise Gilot, who will bear him
two children, Claude and Paloma.
5 October 1944: After the liberation of Paris, the newspaper L'Humanité
announces that Picasso has joined the Communist Party. This political com¬
mitment will later inspire three major works, in 1951 and 1952: Massacre in
Korea, War and Peace (see article page 41).
1949: In response to a request for a work on the occasion of a World Peace
Congress in Paris, chooses a lithograph of a dove which he has done in
January. This is the "Dove of Peace" which will become world famous.
The Meninas and the Mediterranean
1950: Picasso presents a cast of the sculpture Man with Sheep to the French
village of Vallauris on the Mediterranean, where he had begun to produce
ceramics three years before. Paints paraphrases of earlier pictures: Women
on the Banks of the Seine, after Courbet (1949) and Portrait of a Painter,
after El Greco (1950).
1 957: Paints a series of variations on Velazquez's The Maids of Honour (Las
Meninas) (see article page 41). Interrupts compulsive work on the Meninas
to amuse himself by painting the pigeons he can see from his window. His
canvases are infused with the light and colours of the Mediterranean.
Last works
1961: Picasso marries Jacqueline Roque and in June they move to what will
be his last home, the villa of Notre-Dame-de-Vie at Mougins in the hills above
Cannes.
February 1963: Picasso works obsessively on the theme of "the painter and
his model" and by the end of the year has completed fifty canvases. In these
works Picasso calls in question the role of the painter, introduces us into his
private world, and shows us his struggle to capture the essence of his work.
March-October 1968: Produces a series of 347 engravings culminating in a
group of erotic scenes. Three years later makes another series of 156 en¬
gravings on this and other themes.
1972: The last self-portrait.
8 April 1973: Death of Pablo Picasso at Mougins; he is buried in grounds of
his château of Vauvenargues near Aix-en-Provence.
ROSA MARIA SUBIRANA is director of the Museo Picasso, Barcelona. A
Unesco consultant and a former professor at the University of Barcelona,
she is also a member of the executive council of the International Committee
of Modern Art Museums of the International Council of Museums (ICOM).
The Picasso Museum in Barcelona, whose collection throws an important
light on the artist's early work, was established thanks to donations by
Picasso himself (including the Meninas series), his secretary Jaime Sabartes,
and a number of private individuals, in addition to works acquired by the city
of Barcelona. '
11
