2 3
Two Nudes, 1906. Oil on canvas, 151.3x93 cm. Bather, 1908-1909. Oil on canvas, 130 x 97 cm.



Picasso's distortions
by John Golding
WHEN asked about his relationship
to Surrealism, Picasso replied: "I
attempt to observe nature, always.
I am intent on resemblance, a resemblance
more real than the real, attaining the sur¬
real. It was in this way that I thought of
Surrealism...".
In his attempt to achieve the sort of
hyper-reality he sought for in his art Picasso
resorted to an infinity of devices. Occa¬
sionally, for example, he rendered his sub¬
jects with a detailed precision that by com¬
parison ;can make the products of the
camera look somehow unfocussed and ap¬
proximate. At other times he exaggerated
tonal contrasts of light and dark to achieve
compellingly dramatic effects. But mostly he
was to achieve the "more real than the real"
through his use of expressive distortion by
altering the natural appearances of objects,
and above all of the human body, in order to
jolt the spectator out of conventional modes
of perception and into a new and heighten¬
ed awareness of the visual world. In none of
20
his subject matter is this more marked than
in his treatment of that most traditional of all
themes, the female nude.
Picasso's use of distortion makes an ap¬
pearance instantly in his earliest works, in
the sketches (often characterized by
cartoon-like exaggerations) which he was
executing for his own amusement, whilst
simultaneously demonstrating his talents as
an infant prodigy in the more academic
studies produced at the succession of art
schools he attended. But it was in 1906, and
significantly enough after a period when
Picasso had been studying the art of
classical antiquity and openly acknowledg¬
ing its influence in his work, that the distor¬
tions in his figure pieces become so extreme
as to become in a sense the very subject-
matter of his art.
The culminating work of this particular
period of formal experiment and unrest was
the Two Nudes (illustration this page) ex¬
ecuted in Paris late in the year. Here
Picasso's art seems to be obeying two con¬
flicting impulses. On the one hand the
figures are exaggeratedly bulky and heavy,
with heads and trunks so massively weighty
that the legs have been shortened and
thickened to support them convincingly. At
the same time a very conscious attempt has
been made to stress and acknowledge the
two dimensionality of the picture plane, a
feature which had become the hallmark of
much of the most advanced painting of the
late nineteenth century: here the two nudes
seem to have been pushed forward from
behind and to spread their bulk across the
canvas support. Although the picture ap¬
pears to depict two nudes, closer examina¬
tion would suggest that we are looking at
the same figure seen twice from diametrical¬
ly opposed views, so that the spectator is
receiving information concerning the model
which is not limited to viewing it from a
single, static position.
The extraordinarily daring Bather (illustra¬
tion this page) of the winter 1908-09 shows

Woman with a Mandolin, 1910. Oil on canvas, 187.3x61 cm Woman in an Armchair, 1927. Oil on canvas, 130.5 x 97.2 cm.



7 am intent on resemblance,
a resemblance more real than the real'
Picasso combining different views of the
figure, gained by circling it completely, into
a single image. For some five hundred years
Western painting had been governed by
Renaissance traditions which were in turn
based on scientific or single viewpoint
perspective. These conventions are here for
the first time overtly rejected by Picasso. In
the face, profile and full face views have
been combined. The far side of the figure,
its back and buttock, has been pulled
around towards the spectator and joined to
the left contour. The figure's far, right leg is
dislocated in the opposite direction and
finds its place in the same plane as what (in
a traditional rendering) should be the nearer
limb. And yet so convincing are these distor¬
tions that the effect seems surprisingly
natural.
This picture brought Picasso to the
threshold of Cubism, the first of the major
pictorial revolutions of this century, and one
which relied for its effects on the use of a
variable viewpoint and on a more conceptual
approach to its subject matter. Commenting
on African tribal art, which he had begun to
collect, the artist said he admired it because
of its "reasonable" quality, and of his own
work of this period he said, "I paint objects
as I think them, not as I see them".
Picasso's first, fully developed Cubist
manner is exemplified by a work like Girl
with a Mandolin (colour page 25, top left) of
early 1910, one of the most famous of all
Cubist ¡mages. The same distortions and
dislocations of the body that were being
used to produce the Bather of the previous
year are still in use, but here the effect is
much more subtle and harmonious. The in¬
ternal structure of the figure is rendered in
what are basically angular and geometric
shapes, arranged in complex but lucid rela¬
tionships reminiscent of a faceted sculpture
made out of a two dimensional material
such as stiff paper or tin.
The Bather had stood starkly against a
more or less bare background; here the
space around the figure has been subjected
to the same careful analysis as the figure
itself and seems to surround her in a con¬
tinuum of interlocking planes.
The Girl with a Mandolin owes its par¬
ticular appearance to the fact that it was left
unfinished; and this allows us to see that the
next step in Picasso's Cubism, a move
towards a much greater abstraction of ap¬
pearances, was still being elaborated from
drawings and studies, which although they
are distorted by post-Renaissance Western
standards, still have an immediately iden¬
tifiable subject.
And yet the treatment of the same subject
in Woman with a Mandolin (illustration this
page), painted just a few months later in the
summer of 1910, shows the artist taking
such drastic liberties with naturalistic ap¬
pearances that the concept of distortion, im¬
plying as it does the alteration or dislocation
of an accepted visual norm, seems almost ir¬
relevant; here naturalistic appearances have
21

Woman Dressing Her Hair, 1940. Oil on canvas, 130x97 cm. Woman-Flower, 1946. Oil on canvas, 146 x 89 cm.
been completely reinvented and in the pro¬
cess a new pictorial language has been
created.
It has been seen that in the work of 1909
and early 1910 the structure of the human
body had been rendered in a conceptual
fashion that initially involved a certain
geometric simplification of forms; but the
subsequent analysis of its component parts
had become increasingly complex, and in¬
creasingly difficult to achieve within the
confines of a closed contour, particularly as
a mobile, multi-viewpoint perspective had
become an essential element in Picasso's
vision.
Already in the earlier Girl with a Mandolin
Picasso felt compelled at certain points to
open up the image into the surrounding
space in order to relieve the figure's inner
tensions.
In the Woman with a Mandolin this pro¬
cess has been given a new and dominant
emphasis by the total suppression of a
closed or bounding contour. Now Picasso
sketches in the composition in terms of a
linear armature suggested by the outlines of
the figure and its inner configurations. This
complex but loose linear skeleton has then
been used as the framework around which a
complex of transparent, shifting and interac¬
ting planes has been built up; this complex
suggests both the presence of a human
figure and at the same time the continuum
of space which envelops and surrounds it.
Contemporary critics and commentators
were quick to draw parallels with certain
contemporary philosophical and scientific
ideas, notably those of Bergson (who had
come to see reality as being in a state of con¬
stant change or flux), and of theories about
relativity and the fourth dimension. And
while it was certainly not Picasso's intention
to illustrate such concepts programmatic-
ally, like all truly great artists his work un¬
consciously reflected and at times an¬
ticipated the intellectual climate and
discoveries of his time.
Two years later, towards the end of 1912,
another radical innovation in Picasso's
vision and approach took place, albeit within
a style which can still be accurately
characterized as Cubist, involved as it was
with creation of images that were represen¬
tational but overtly anti-naturalistic, and
which made use of the concepts of form and
space elaborated over the previous year.
A comparison of the images discussed
above illustrates the way in which Picasso
began with a subject which was relatively
naturalistic but which became ever more
hermetic and abstract as it was subjected to
an increasingly complex analysis or
breakdown in the light of the new Cubist
attitudes to volumes and the space which
surrounds them.
Now, in the period of what has become
known as "Synthetic Cubism", the process
was reversed. Having familiarized himself
with a vocabulary of highly abstracted forms
and under the impetus of the principle of
assembling disparate elements to form a
vivid sculptural ensemble, Picasso began
building up his images in terms of shapes
and forms which because of the way in
22

which they are qualified or combined in a
pictorial context, acquire a representational
significance. Thus two circles placed at
either side of an upright linear form can
become eyes, a line of a curved gash below
is made to "read" as a mouth and so on.
The possibilities of expressive distortion in
such a method of work are obvious and
Picasso exploits them to the full in a canvas
like Woman in an Armchair of 1913 (colour
page 25, top right). Here the breasts are
rendered twice, and the upper breasts with
their peg-like nipples, strongly reminiscent
of certain conventions employed in African
art, appear to nail into place the over-size
pendulous projections below, while the
relatively naturalistic flesh-tones underline
the figure's physicality.
There is, too, a sense of displacement and
visual satire in the way in which the features
of the head, traditionally the seat of in¬
telligence and spirituality, are reduced to a
few insignificant dots and dashes, while the
breasts, stomach and even the hairs beneath
the woman's raised arm are given exag¬
gerated emphasis. The distortions in
Picasso's earlier Cubism had been at the ser¬
vice of producing a new pictorial
vocabulary. Here they are used expressively
and sardonically to produce an image which
is simultaneously witty, playful, and more
than a little threatening.
The view of woman as both sex object
and predator, hinted at here, reached its
fullest expression in the second half of the
1920s and the early 1930s. These were years
when Picasso's art shared certain concerns
common to the Surrealists and in which his
use of distortion was to be most trenchant
and extreme.
In the Woman in an Armchair of 1927 (il¬
lustration page 21) the figure's sleeping
state appears to have released her repressed
sexuality. The figure is rendered in a free,
flowing line and her body and limbs are
polyp-like and tumescent; arms and legs are
rendered by more or less interchangeable
forms, all of which are charged with phallic
overtones and from now on it is seldom in
Picasso's work that the naked female form
does not carry in her anatomy a reference to
an aggressive male partner.
A counterpart to the flaccid, languid
Woman in an Armchair is to be found in the
celebrated canvas of 1930 called simply
Seated Bather (colour page 25, bottom left).
Here the woman's face and limbs appear to
have been chiseled out of stone, and the
head, breasts and limbs are held together in
an elaborate feat of balance. In keeping with
his sculptural experiments of the time, much
use is made of negative spaces or volumes:
the stomach, for example, is here present by
its absence. The air of menace about the
figure is intensified by the fact that it is plac¬
ed against a calm blue background of sea
and sky. Her pincer-like arms and jaws and
her expressionless eyes give her the air of an
enormous praying mantis, carved in granite.
In 1932 there was a marked change which
corresponded to the appearance of a new
vision of femininity: full, passive and golden.
In works like Girl before a Mirror (colour
page 25, bottom right) of this year the
model's heavy, pliant limbs are rendered by
the same undulating forms that had
characterized much of Picasso's work since
1925, but their rhythms have become softer,
more welcoming or organic; colour, too, has
become richer and more lyrical. Here the girl
confronts her own mirrored sexuality calm¬
ly, and the tender lilacs of her face and body
have become in the reflected image deeper,
more mature; the breasts seem to have
ripened into fruit. Everywhere, even in the k


patterned wall-paper, there are symbols of
growth and fertility.
A series of nudes executed during the
years of the Second World War make use of
some of the basic tenets of his first Cubist
style, evolved some thirty years earlier, to
produce images that in their sense of
claustrophobia and bestiality, recall also
some of the most unsettling and haunting
apparitions of the late 1920s and early 1930s.
However, whereas in these the female form
had been seen as threatening and at times
obscene, now she appears as both predator
and victima symbol for humanity in
anguish.
In Woman Dressing Her Hair of 1940 (il¬
lustration page 22), for example, the abnor¬
mally distented limbs, elephantine in their
solidity, create the impression of a body for
whom freedom of movement has become
virtually impossible, a sensation further em¬
phasized by the Cubistic distortions which
enable the painter to incorporate a view of
the buttocks of the figure into what is
basically a frontal view, while the figure is
simultaneously compressed into a tight,
airless space.
In complete contrast Woman-Flower of
1946 (illustration page 22) seems to
celebrate the presence of a new companion
in his life and, obliquely, nature's generative
powers: a young woman's body has been
reduced to a single delicate, stalk-like form,
supporting full breasts and a head as open
and innocent as that of a simple convolvulus
opening to the first rays of the sun. The
work is joyous and unsentimental, but it is
lent a dimension of pathos by the fact that
one senses that in it Picasso was beginning
to become aware of the discrepancy in age
between himself and the sort of model who
could stimulate his art to self-renewal.
Picasso's final manner of the fifties and
sixties was to be characterized by an ex¬
treme physicality, a feeling of furious energy
and urgency which would be remarkable in a
man of any age but which is little short of in¬
credible in the light of his advanced years.
He continued to be obsessed by the single
female form, but it was the pageant of both
art and life which had become the real sub¬
ject of his art a vast, panoramic vision em¬
bracing the past and the present, in which
historical figures, artists and philosophers,
jostle and mingle with characters and
models which had thronged Picasso's can¬
vases for over seventy years. |
JOHN GOLDING, English painter, has been
Reader in the History of Art at the Courtauld In¬
stitute, University of London, since 1977 and was
Stade Professor of Fine Art at Cambridge Univer¬
sity in 1976-1977. His published works include
Cubism 1907-1914, New York and London, 1959
(revised edition 1968).
