To the North Pole
on skis
by Dmitri Shparo
In May 1979 the members of a
Soviet expedition became the first
persons to reach the North Pole on
skis. Their long trek across drifting
ice was a both a sporting and a
scientific achievement. The article
below is based on notes jotted
down during the expedition by its
leader, Dimitri I. Shparo. Six other
men took part in the trek: Vladimir
Ledenev, a scientist, Yuri Khme-
levsky, who directed the group's
scientific work; Anatoly Melnikov,
an engineer; Vassili Chichkarev, a
manual worker; Vladimir Rakhma-
nov, a builder; and Vadim Davidov,
a doctor. The expedition was spon¬
sored by the Soviet youth news¬
paper Komsomolskaya Pravda.
ACCORDING to our calculations only
a three-hundred-metre stretch of
ice lay between us and the North
Pole. A vast and beautiful ice-field opened
out before our eyes, like a football stadium
but ten times bigger, with tiers of pack-ice
forming the stands.
We set off across the ice-field. After half
an hour I began to drop behind, only
catching up with the others near to an
enormous sheer-sided block of ice. The
crenellations of pack-ice all around us made
me think of the battlements of a castle.
Flat expanses of ice could be seen
through gaps in the frozen wall, and two
hundred metres further on we found
ourselves in a kind of field at the end of
which was a hummock shaped like a
haystack. I thought that this was where we
should put the Soviet flag, that' we should
pitch camp nearby and take photographs.
We formed a circle, each man with his
hand on his neighbour's shoulder. We had
DIMITRI I. SHPARO is a Soviet mathematician
and physicist who teaches at the Moscow Steel
and Alloys Institute. He has taken part in a num¬
ber ofpolar expeditions organized by Komsomol¬
skaya Pravda, the Soviet young people's daily.
been travelling for seventy-six days and had
covered 1,500 kilometres as the crow flies,
at least 2,000 if detours were taken into ac¬
count. It was ten years since we had first
talked of trying to reach the North Pole on
foot, and seven years since we had actually
started preparing our expedition.
At the turn of the century, the Americans
Frederic Cook and Robert Peary had reach¬
ed the Pole on sledges drawn by dogs. The
same feat was performed by the Englishman
Wally. Herbert in 1969 and the Japanese
Naomi Uemura in 1978. Eleven years ago, a
U.S. -Canadian expedition led by Ralph
Pleysted reached the Pole on motorized
sledges. Aircraft have landed at the Pole
several times and submarines have sailed to
it, and in 1977 the Soviet atom-powered ice¬
breaker Arktika became the first surface
vessel to reach the Pole through the ice. In
1937, the Soviet explorers I. Papanin, E.
Krenkel, P. Chirchov and E. Fedorov
established the first Soviet polar research
station and spent months on drifting ice.
25

But no one had ever reached the Pole on
skis.
...Rudolf Island in the Franz Josef Land
Archipelago is the nearest piece of Soviet
territory to the Pole, which is 920 kilometres
away. Arctic Cape, the northernmost ex¬
tremity of Northern Land (Severnaya
Zemlya), is slightly further. Henrietta Island
in the Longa Archipelago, where we had
begun our journey on 16 March, is 1,450
kilometres from the Pole. Why did we
choose the longest route?
For one thing, the general drift of the ice
on meridian 164° East, just east of the
Longa Archipelago, is northerly and was
thus in our favour, whereas if we had started
from Franz Josef Land or Arctic Cape, we
should have encountered ice drifting from
west to east. The drift of the ice reduces the
difference in the distance between these
three points and the Pole. Even, if distance
and drift had been the only considerations it
would have made sense to start from Arctic
Cape or Rudolf Island.
But when we took into account the
ranges of ice-floes, stretches of open water
and other features of the relief, we decided
that the third route was the best. Besides,
Great Siberia, a vast stretch of open water
which does not freeze even in winter, lies
north of all the Soviet Arctic islands except
for Henrietta Island, which "bestrides" it.
This argument was decisive.
Our expedition was organized by the
newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda and
financed by a students' sports club and a
number of other institutions, some of which
were interested in the scientific research we
would carry out during the journey. In addi¬
tion to us seven skiers, five other persons
were based on Kotelny Island (Novosobirsk
Islands) and at the Soviet "North Pole 24"
scientific research station. They were: dep¬
uty expedition leader and radio operator
Leonid Labutin; trainer and radio operator
Fedor Slokin; radio operator Georgi Ivanov;
and two reserves, radio operator Aleksandr
Chatokhin and navigator Mikhail Deev. Their
main task was to maintain daily contact bet¬
ween us skiers and the expedition's HQ in
Moscow.
Since we would be carrying everything
we needed on our backs, each item of
equipment and provisions had to meet
stringent weight and . size requirements.
Later, when we were asked what had been
the most arduous part of the experience,
five of us replied: "the rucksack". We also
carried reserves of petrol and provisions
(three meals a day for eighteen days, plus a
standing reserve for three days). Every fif¬
teen days an "llyushin 14" dropped five
parachute loads of provisions, petrol, batter¬
ies, skis, gloves, socks and other equip¬
ment.
A fully-loaded rucksack weighed between
45 and 48 kilos and got lighter by just over a
kilo a day. As we travelled, winter turned in¬
to summer, and the average temperature
rose by 24°, from -36° in March to -12° in
May. We had to leave many things behind,
but our rucksacks were none the lighter for
it because we filled them with new
notebooks dropped by parachute. When we
reached the end of the road our rucksacks
were as heavy as when we set out.
During our crossing of the Polar ice-cap
we did not see a soul, but we did often hear
the human voice. Using an "Orbit"
miniature receiver we checked the time each
morning from signals broadcast at pre¬
arranged moments. We tuned in to the
news, and listened to our friends and rela¬
tions. The radio was a godsend and brought
echoes of home and warmth.
The first stretcb of the journey was par¬
ticularly tough. We had to contend with a
torrent of water, shifting blocks of ice and
snow, some as high as two-storey houses,
immense frozen palaces collapsing before
our eyes. Everything around us was moving
at walking pace. Two skis fell into the water
and disappeared without trace. Chichkarev
and Khmelevsky tumbled into the water.
There was no time for them to change
clothes after this involuntary dip, for delay
could have spelled disaster. They had to
press on for another half hour at -30°, with
their clothes completely soaked.
We pitched our first camp on an ice-floe a
hundred metres in diameter. As the evening
wore on it became surrounded by black,
swirling water... The next morning we faced
the problem of how to continue without the
skis which had been lost. We decided to
empty twenty-four kilos out of one of the
sacks and to divide the load among the
other six. Each of us took turns to go for¬
ward on foot carrying the lighter rucksack. It
was much more exhausting than skiing with
a fifty-kilo load on your back.
In the next two weeks we found out what
the word cold really means. The sun hung
low on the horizon and in the evening it
disappeared completely. My tent was buf¬
feted by the north wind, and inside the
temperature was barely 8 degrees higher
than outside. We had trouble getting to
sleep; we felt strange and weak. The cold
dispelled any drowsiness. And so we pulled
our sleeping bags over our heads and as our
breath slowly warmed us up we gradually
dropped off to sleep. Sometimes the sleep¬
ing bags were so damp that they froze solid;
getting into them was like prising open a
clam. "Watch out, don't kill anyone with
your little eiderdown nest", was a barbed
joke that was heard time and again.
I knew that the Norwegian explorer
Nansen had had one of his fingers frostbit-

ten while he was asleep. In my case, when
my feet were so cold that I could stand it no
longer, I would crawl out of my sleeping bag
and bend and stretch each leg a hundred
times. It always worked.
Our faces and fingers were often frozen. It
was painful, but I always remembered
something Peary had written long before:
"We considered the freezing cold and
bleeding from the cheeks and the ears as
slight inconveniences which were part of the
great adventure. Pain and discomfort are in¬
evitable; when all's said and done it's not
bad". I shared Peary's sentiments.
During our laborious struggle across the
ice-floes we sometimes had to remove our
skis and take to our inflatable dinghies, a
small, 1.8 kilo model with a load capacity of
1 50 kilos, and a larger craft weighing 12 kilos
which could carry a load of 700 kilos.
Ice-floes, open water and thin ice were
our main obstacles. There was a risk of colli¬
sion with the ice-floes, while every gap in
the ice was a potential threat to our lives.
Gaps which open up suddenly and unex¬
pectedly in the ice are the great unknown
factor in the Polar region.
As we neared the Pole, we encountered
more water, more thin ice and broken blocks
of ice. During the first three weeks we ran
into southward drifting ice, something
which belied all the information we had been
given. We were equally astonished when an
ice-floe on which we camped on the 88th
parallel became surrounded with water, just
like our very first camp-site. Near to land this
phenomenon may happen when strong
winds whip up wide stretches of water; we
had probably hit on the very spot in mid-
ocean where the speed of the ocean cur¬
rents suddenly changes and breaks up the
ice. From 1 to 4 May we saw Nature's snow-
plough in action as the wind backed from
north to south, then north and back again to
south. This tempest transformed the ice into
lakes, rivers and torrents.
The characteristics of ice came to acquire
a special meaning for us: if it was thick we
felt safe; if it drifted it was either a blessing
or a curse, depending on the direction; salt
in the snow helped our skis to slide more
smoothly and added flavour to our food;
when there was no sun we used snow-
flurries,- ice-floes and water channels as
landmarks. We kept a detailed record of our
experiences, meticulously noting down
what we thought of our equipment and ra¬
tions. I hope that these notes will be useful
to scientists. We cooked three hot meals a
day: buckwheat porridge with milk, melted
butter and dehydrated meat in the evening;
porridge for breakfast; during the day we
prepared dehydrated cottage cheese. Ra
tions also included tea, coffee, chocolate,
sugar, biscuits, bacon, garlic sausage and
dry sausage.
We had to take great care not to overeat
on rest-days. Hungry though we were and
important though it was to restore our
strength, it was essential not to eat too
much. Sticking to a balanced diet was no
easy matter.
During the first stage of the expedition,
the food ration was a kilo per person per
day; later this was increased to 1,200 gram¬
mes. One of the dilemmas facing us was
whether to eat more and carry a heavier
load, or eat less and travel lighter. Eventually
we opted for the first approach. This was
the right decision: we had so far to go that
the more nourishment we could get the
better.
In collaboration with the members of the
expedition based on Kotelny Island and at
the Polar research station, we also had to
solve practical problems of physical
geography. We studied ice formations, drift
phenomena, the size and disposition of ice¬
floes, the dimensions of ice-fields and the
number of water-channels. Throughout the
trek we measured the magnetic variations
and carried out important experiments1 on
the movement of radio waves and the con- w
centration of ions in the atmosphere. f
GLACIAL
ENCOUNTER
with a denizen of the
frozen North
THE SKI'S THE LIMIT,
especially when you
need a framework for
your shelter in the midst
of the Arctic wastes. But
often during the 76-day
journey skis were
impracticable for scaling
mini mountain ranges of
Ice. Then they had to be
carried, adding to to the
burden of equipment and
supplies which the
trekkers remembered as
the toughest part of their
experience.
27

Ti
1
/ POLAR PERSPECTIVES
traced by ski tracks
across a stretch of thin
ice, one of the worst
hazards faced by the
skiers.
But the expedition's principal scientific
purpose was to study human behaviour in
Arctic conditions and the reactions of a
small group of persons to life on drifting ice.
Psychologists are now using our observa¬
tions to help them study the mechanisms of
psychological adaptation to stress, group
dynamics during a long-distance trek, emo¬
tional responses and physical and
psychological aptitudes for work in Arctic
conditions.
The inception of the Komsomolskaya
Pravda polar expedition goes back to 1970,
when five Muscovites trekked across the
Taimyr peninsula to Komsomolskaya Pravda
Island in the Laptev Sea and on towards
Cape Chelyuskin, the northernmost extremi¬
ty of our continent.
In 1971 the members of the expedition
crossed Northern Land. In the years that
followed our group worked in increasingly
close co-operation with the scientists of the
Institute of Medico-Biological Problems of
the USSR Ministry of Health. The depart¬
ments and laboratories of psychology, nutri¬
tion, hygiene and stomatology, as well as
specialists in protective optics, also took a
keen interest in the project.
In 1972 we embarked on our first expedi¬
tion on drifting ice when we set off from the
shores of Chukotka across Long Strait
towards Wrangel Island. That same year, at
the fourth national conference on cosmic
biology and aviation and space medicine at
Kaluga, we put forward the idea of a North
Pole ski expedition which would also carry
out a far-reaching medical and scientific
research programme. When Polar specialists
and well-known scientists pronounced that
such an expedition was not only feasible but
of uncontestable scientific value, prepara¬
tions began in earnest.
It was a historic moment when in 1976 we
set out on drifting ice from Wrangel Island
to station "North Pole 23". For this expedi¬
tion Vladimir Rachmanov and Vadim
Davidov joined the team which had crossed
Long Strait in 1972: Vladimir Ledenev, Yuri
Khmelevsky, Anatoli Melnikov and myself.
Thus the practicability of the Polar expedi¬
tion was put to the test several times.
If I were asked to name the fundamental
quality that enabled us to conquer the Polar
ice, I should say without hesitation: "the
people in the group and their team spirit".
Chatokhin and Davidov had already worked
in the Arctic, but not the others who were
mathematicians, engineers, hydroelectric
construction workers, physicists, and com¬
munications technicians. But during our
years of preparation we had learned to know
and love the Arctic wastes and we were cer¬
tain that in the high latitudes at "the top of
the world" we could reach the limits of
human capability.
B Dmitri I. Shparo
Photo V. Kuzmm © Tass, Moscow
ON TOP OF THE WORLD.
On 1 June 1979
journalists and sports
officials were flown in to
join the seven skiers as
they celebrated their
arrival at the Pole. Here
they pose with
mementoes of earlier
Russian North Pole
expeditions and
explorers. In foreground,
an unsinkable container
full of documents from
the annals of polar
exploration.
28
