Photo © Condotte-Mazzi Estero, SPA, Rome



The holy isle of Philae
Photos on these pages show three episodes in the chequered story of the
monuments of Philae in modern times. Engraving (opposite page, top) shows the
island as it was in the mid-19th century, high and dry above the Nile, its temples
virtually unchanged since Antiquity. The threat to Philae goes back to the turn of
the century when the first Aswan Dam was built downstream of the island and
later raised on two occasions (1907-1912 and 1929-1934). For thirty years (1934-1964)
the temples were engulfed in the Lake formed behind the Dam except for three
months each year when the Dam's sluices were opened and the monuments
emerged in their entirety. When the waters were at their highest only the tips of
the twin towers of the first pylon of the temple of Isis were visible. Photo opposite
page shows Philae during this period. It was taken shortly after the sluice gates
had been closed and the waters were starting to rise. The monuments survived
their plight because the Egyptian Antiquities Service had consolidated their
foundations before the Dam was built. Then, in 1960 the construction of the new
High Dam upstream brought the threat of eventual destruction to Philae. From now
on the monuments would be at the mercy of the waters between the two Dams
(since the original Aswan Dam continues to function). By 1965 the temple of Isis
was permanently flooded to about half its height. Daily fluctuations in the water
level (up to six metres) gradually eroded the monuments. After several rescue
projects had been considered, it was decided to dismantle the monuments and re-
erect them on the nearby island of Agilkia which is always above the water level
(see photo caption page 13). Photo above shows the temple of Isis on Agilkia,
which was specially landscaped to resemble Philae.
46
WHEN the Pharaoh Nectanebo I
(380-363 BC) built a temple at
Philae, no one could have fore¬
seen how prominently the island and its
priesthood would figure in Egyptian politico-
religious history for the next thousand years.
In 332 BC, thirty-one years after the death of
Nectanebo I, Egypt was conquered by Alex¬
ander the Great and, for the three centuries
following his conquest, the throne was oc¬
cupied by rulers of Macedonian stock, all of
whom bore the name of Ptolemy except the
last, who was the famous queen Cleopatra
(51-30 BC). From the outset, they adopted
the Egyptian religion, and in particular the
cult of Osiris and Isis. Philae's principal
monument, the temple of Isis, was built by
Ptolemy II, Philadelphus (285-246 BC), and
Ptolemy III, Euergetee I (246-221 BC), apart
from the main doorway of the First Pylon
which was a relic of the temple of Nec¬
tanebo.
It was not only in Egypt, however, that
the cult of Isis and Osiris had advanced in

Photo Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris
by lorwerth E.S. Edwards
popularity during the Ptolemaic Period.
Greek settlers, many of whom were traders,
had transported it to their native land and its
dependencies, with the result that by the
year 30 BC, when the Mediterranean coun¬
tries, including Egypt, were united under
Roman rule, the cult was firmly established
throughout the Aegean region. It had,
moreover, reached Rome, where Isis ac¬
quired the reputation of being the protec¬
tress of mariners, and thence it spread to the
remotest parts of the Empire.
At first, Philae received no visible proof of
imperial patronage, apparently because
Augustus was disinclined to show partiality
towards Isis, who had been the goddess of
his enemy, Cleopatra, but eventually he
relented and, in the eighteenth year of his
reign (9 BC), he built a temple at the nor¬
thern end of the island. Much of it is now
lost, but those of its architectural elements
which have survived show that it was once a
fine edifice.
Tiberius, Augustus' successor, and seve¬
ral later Emperors also left their mark at Phi¬
lae, mostly by adding reliefs and inscriptions
to existing monuments, but four Emperors
erected new buildings, namely Claudius (AD
41-54) a temple to Harendotes, Trajan (AD
98-117) the most celebrated of all Philae's
monuments, the kiosk on the east side of
the island, Hadrian (AD 117-138) the gate¬
way and vestibule near the temple of Haren¬
dotes, and probably Diocletian (AD
284-305) the ceremonial gateway at the
northern end of the island.
While the cult of Isis was gaining ad¬
herents across the Mediterranean, it was
also making headway in Nubia, even as far
south as the kingdom of Meroe, whose capi¬
tal lay about 75 miles north-east of Khar¬
toum. One of the kings of Meroe, Ergame-
nes, enlarged the temple of Arsenuphis and
travellers from Meroe left graffiti on the roof
of the Birth-House of the temple of Isis.
It was in Lower Nubia, however, that the
cult of Isis made its greatest impact, espe¬
cially in the so-called Dodekaschoenos, the
territory extending southwards for 80 miles
from the First Cataract to Maharraqa. For
the inhabitants of that region Philae became
the religious metropolis.
Philae retained its privileged position even
after the Emperor Theodosius I issued his
decree in AD 391 suppressing pagan wor¬
ship throuthout the empire. Political expe¬
diency was undoubtedly the chief rea-
CONTINUED PAGE 70
IORWERTH E.S. EDWARDS, of the United
Kingdom, was Keeper of Egyptian Antiquities at
the British Museum until his retirement in 1974.
He was a member of the Committee of
Archaeologists and Landscape Architects
appointed by Unesco and the Egyptian Ministry of
Culture to advise on the removal of the
monuments of Philae to Agilkia. He is the author
of several books including The Pyramids of Egypt,
Max Parrish, 1961.
47

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 47
son for this act of toleration. Closure of the
temples of Philae would have met with
strong resistance from the inhabitants of
Nubia, especially from the Blemmyes, a war¬
like people from the eastern desert who had
long caused trouble to the Roman authori¬
ties by their raids on Upper Egypt. In AD
451-452 Maximinus, the general of the
Emperor Marcian, led an expedition against
them and defeated them.
A treaty ensued, by which the Blemmyes
undertook to keep the peace for a hundred
years and, in return, they were allowed to
offer sacrifices at Philae and even to borrow
the sacred image of Isis periodically for the
purpose of obtaining oracles.
Before the expiry of this pact, however,
Justinian sent his general, Narses, around
AD 536, to put an end to the last outpost of
paganism in the empire. The temple of Isis
was closed, the priests were disbanded and
the statues transported to Constantinople.
Soon afterwards, the hypostyle hall was
converted by bishop Theodorus into a
church, dedicated in the name of St.
Stephen, and a Christian community settled
on the island.
During this new phase in Philae's history,
which lasted until the 11th - 13th centuries,
very considerable damage was done to the
monuments. Blocks were extracted from the
monuments and re-used, some in the buil¬
ding of a Coptic church and others in the
construction of a street.
Fortunately the hieroglyphic inscriptions,
both in the temple of Isis and in the other
surviving buildings, have generally been
spared deliberate mutilation. One text on the
north wall of Hadrian's vestibule, in front of
a figure of Mandulis, is dated by an accom¬
panying note in Demotic to 24 August, AD
394; it is thus the latest datable example of
the hieroglyphic script now known.
The Christian iconoclasts also left unda¬
maged many hundreds of Demotic and
Greek graffiti, some written by priests and
others by pilgrims who regularly came to
Philae, either simply to pay homage to Isis or
to seek her intervention in obtaining relief
from their ailments.
Here again, Philae has preserved the latest
known examples of one of the three scripts
in which the Egyptian language was
written in this instance Demotic, a cursive
script ultimately derived from hieroglyphics.
This graffito, which is dated to 2 December,
AD 452 was written by a priest named Esmet
on a wall of one of the Osiris chambers of
the temple of Isis. It shows that knowledge
of the ancient language was not completely
lost as long as Philae continued to serve the
needs of the worshippers of Isis.
Philae, moreover, preserved one inscrip¬
tion which proved invaluable in the recovery
of that knowledge after it had been forgot¬
ten for more than a thousand years. It was a
Greek inscription on the pedestal of an obe¬
lisk which bore a hieroglyphic inscription.
The texts were not two versions of the same
document, one in Greek and the other in
Egyptian, but both mentioned Cleopatra III,
a wife of Ptolemy VII, Euergetes II, and it
was the recognition of her name in the hie¬
roglyphic inscription of the obelisk, when
combined with the previously uncorrobora¬
ted identification of the name of Ptolemy on
the Rosetta Stone, which provided the star¬
ting point in the decipherment of the hie¬
roglyphic script.
lorwerth E.S. Edwards
