&
Ji^ ^
ss*>
m . .,
Over 150,000 figures engraved in rock by prehistoric artists during
an 8,000-year period which lasted until the dawn of the Christian
era have been listed in Valcamonica, an Alpine valley north of
Brescia in Italy. The first figure was discovered at the end of the
last century but it is only since 1956 that a systematic study has
been made of the region. The carved rocks, are carefully cleaned
and photographed, and then reproduced in plaster casts or tracings
(above). Valcamonica constitutes the richest source of
documentation about the life and art, myths and symbols of
prehistoric man in Europe.



Valcamonica
An Italian valley is the world's largest gallery
of prehistoric rock art
PERCHED high up in the Italian" Alps,
the remote Valley of Camonica is the
site of the world's largest gallery of
prehistoric art. Its more than 150,000 pre¬
historic rock figures are authentic
documents created over a period of 8,000
years, which are helping historians to
retrace the evolution of European civilization
from prehistoric times.
The sixty-mile-long Valcamonica lies to
the north of the city of Brescia and stretches
from Lake Iseo on the edge of the Po valley
right up to the Tonale Pass in the heart of
by Emmanuel Anati
the Alps. The Romans built a road, the Via
Valeriana, which crossed the valley from
north to south. Before the Roman period the
valley was accessible from the south only by
boat across the lake, and from the north on¬
ly by two Alpine passes which are still
covered with snow for several months of the
year. High mountains make access from the
east or west very difficult.
Most of the figures engraved on the rock
are concentrated in the central part of the
valley, at the point most remote from all
means of access; 90 per cent of the figures
are located in an area measuring six by fou,r
kilometres.
Various archaeological discoveries have
been made at Valcamonica and in neigh¬
bouring areas: remains of villages, tombs,
ancient terraced farms, old mines and, more
recently, traces of roads and bridges. But
Valcamonica's main archaeological
characteristic is its rock art.
Some of the engravings were uncovered
in the course of excavations, while others
appear on rock surfaces some of which
measure as much as fifty square metres and L
contain more than a thousand figures. The *
29

-NEOLITHIC --3 800
uaumocicu
Humos
EPIPAIAEO-
LITHIC
lENUrifE
Wlti
BEFORE
6000
ac.
CHUCO-
LITHIC
BRONZE
ACE
TRANSITION
OF BRONZE
TO IRON
AGE
IRON
AGE
ANTHROPO-
MORPHS
" CERVIDAE WEAPONS
X
T
r
*
I
Î
Tí
¿
^
rl
Art
É
\(
fir
rfl
t*iW
Äfi
fill
o
90
I
:::))
f
^
figures are descriptive or symbolic, or both:
they are the work of generations of men
who lived in a specific territory and found a
way of expressing their own realities, their
own beliefs and their own feelings,
in an art form that has been preserved up
to the present time.
Research being carried out at
Valcamonica is aimed at evaluating a period
of eight thousand years during which hun¬
ting clans of the old Stone Age were
gradually transformed into tribes with in¬
creasingly complex activities and structures.
When, after four hundred generations, the
Camunians, as the Romans called them,
were incorporated into the Roman Empire,
they were already a nation with the
economic and social structure, the division
of labour and the class divisions which
characterize European civilization from that
moment onwards.
Study of the engraving techniques, the
styles, the various layers and super-
impositions, and the figurative elements that
every style possesses, indicates that Camu-
30
Wooded hill country
surrounds a Camonica
valley prehistoric rock art
site, the Luine hill near
Darfo (right). Rock rising
out of vegetation at
centre of photo is
inscribed with figures
which, like all the others
located in the district,
have been cleaned,
photographed and
recorded on special
tracing paper. Figure of a
deer wounded by arrows
(below) is a carving from
Luine. The artist used
natural cracks in the
rock to depict the
animal's legs. The
engraving, one of the
most ancient in the
Camonica valley, dates
from the Proto-Camunian
or Epipalaeolithic period.
The circular incisions
were added later.
Photo © Seminario e Centro Camuno di Studi Preistonci, Capo di Ponte, Brescia
nian art went through a process of stylistic
and conceptual evolution. These mutations
are of great importance because they open
up a new chapter in the history of art, and
throw light on primitive attempts at compo¬
sition and drawing in perspective. Through
them we can follow the evolution of a
symbolic art, and the birth of a figurative art
which is one of the oldest studied so far.
But this study also shows the ideological
and psychological evolution of a people, and
the relationships it maintained with other
peoples, as well as illustrating the historical
events that determined its destiny. It
attempts to reconstruct the epic story of the
Camunians, a people unknown until recent
times, and lift the veil that has lain over them
for the two thousand years since they
ceased to be an autonomous nation. Who
were they? Where did they originate? How
did they come to form themselves into a
nation? What vicissitudes had they experi¬
enced before the Roman Conquest?
Until about 10,000 years ago Valcamonica
was still covered with ice and neither ani¬
mals nor man could survive in such extreme
climatic conditions. But with the climatic
changes that marked the transition from the
Pleistocene to the Holocene epoch, life
came to the valley. Plant life was followed
by animal life, and after the animals came
the hunters. During the period of the thaw,
millions of cubic metres of ice melted and
the waters swept down on the great plains.
The plains of Padua, the Rhone, the Rhine
and the Danube were transformed into vast
swamps or enormous watercourses. Driven
out by the waters, some groups left the
plains and peopled the valley for the first
time.
Rock-art tells us the history of man from
the time when the clans of semi-nomadic
hunters came to the Alpine area after the ice
had receded, up to the moment when the
might of the Roman Empire drastically
altered their destiny.
The earliest traces date from 10,000 years
ago. In the beginning, during the Proto-

Camunian period, Camunian rock-art resem¬
bled that of other European populations. Its
various forms show similar styles, concepts
and manifestations; so they probably had
common links and traditions. The sub-
naturalist style of rock-art in different parts
of Europe and the Middle East was created
by clans of huntsmen who were gradually
learning about cattle-raising; they were
semi-nomadic human groups who moved
about from valley to valley, and along the
plains, in search of animals to hunt.
The Palaeolithic art of the Franco-
Cantabrian caves (Altamira, Lascaux, etc.)
came to an end in central Europe with the
large-scale climatic changes that character¬
ized the transition from the Pleistocene to
the Holocene epoch, 10,000 to 12,000 years
ago. At that time there were still a few peri¬
pheral human groups outside the Franco-
Cantabrian area and during the early post¬
glacial era figurative rock-art flourished on
rock surfaces and in small caves in the Ibe¬
rian Peninsula, in the Arctic regions of Scan¬
dinavia, in central Anatolia and in southern
Italy.
Proto-Camunian art represents a link bet¬
ween this Palaeolithic rock-art and post-
Palaeolithic art ; but so far, no link elements
between the Proto-Camunian sub-
naturalistic style and the styles of the follow¬
ing periods have come to light in Valcamo¬
nica. From the fifth millennium BC, that is,
from the Neolithic period, however, there is
evidence of a stylistic evolution starting with
profoundly symbolic and hermetic composi¬
tions and moving on to highly complex des
criptive and anecdotal scenes in the later
periods.
Between the late Neolithic and the early
Bronze Age (3200-2500 BC), a wave of
ideological-religious influences served to
unify some of the main rock areas of the
Alps: Valcamonica, Valtellina and Upper
Adigio, the Swiss Valais and the Valley of
Aosta. Later, at the end of the Bronze Age,
around the year 1000 BC, a new wave of
external cultural influence joined the central
Alpine zone to the area under the general
sphere of influence of Urnfield culture (axul-
ture that existed in central Europe at the end
of the second millennium BC).
It is interesting to follow the general evo¬
lution in rock-art themes, from the Proto-
Camunian period when man exclusively
depicted large animals, sketching the con¬
tours with a typical hunter's eye. In the
course of the Neolithic period, animal
figures almost completely disappear, and
man becomes the principal theme of his
own figurative creativity.
At the beginning of the next period, the
Chalcolithic or Eneolithic (characterized by
the use of copper), around the year 3300
BC, among the many cultural acquisitions,
three new elements suddenly appear toge¬
ther: the cart and wheel, metal-work, and a
new type of monument, the menhir-statue.
These three elements reached the Alpine
area simultaneously, in the wake of Indo-
European influences from the Balkans.
The cart, that great discovery, opened up
vast new possibilities for transporting per
sons and objects. This led to an enormous
increase in trade, and greater freedom of
movement for families, clans and even entire
tribes.
One result of these new technological ac¬
quisitions was a change in social and
cultural standards. The man who possessed
metal tools had a physical advantage over
his neighbour who had not acquired them.
The use of metal also produced a new and
much wider trade, and led to far-reaching-
economic, social and political changes. The
man who owned a mine had to defend it;
and in order to defend it he needed men and
arms. The man who traded in metal ac¬
cumulated more wealth than he needed, and
soon had a great advantage over the others,
both in physical strength and economic
power. Society itself changed and became
more complex because the scope of the clan
was no longer sufficient for all the activities
that metal-working and the metal trade
involved.
Finally, the menhir-statues attest to
another type of acquisition: they show the
advent of a new religion, a universal religion,
which soon spread from the Caucasus to the
shores of the Atlantic, taking into orbit
many different populations scattered
throughout Europe.
These three factors, which appear in close
succession at the end of the fourth millen¬
nium BC, transformed the social and
economic structure and the mental attitudes
of the inhabitants of many regions of
Europe. The new religion illustrated by the
menhir-statues involved a new type of social
Ranks of praying human figures seem to march across the rock
in this monumental composition at Naquane near the village of
Capo di Ponte. The prehistoric art of Camonica underwent a
striking change in Neolithic times : animal figures disappeared
almost entirely and the schematized human form became the
dominant motif.
n late Neolithic times (4th millennium BC), the
use of symbols in Valcamonica art began to be
replaced by descriptive representations and the
naturalistic depiction of the human form. A
female divinity is surrounded by symbols, as
yet undeciphered, in this two-metre-long rock
engraving at Sellero in the Camonica valley.
31

Incisions on* the statue-
menhir, (left) may depict
a divinity, with the solar
disc at the top as the
"face" and two axes at
each side as the "arms".
In the centre are
triangular-bladed daggers
and, further below, three
parallel lines which could
represent a belt. The
composition, at Bagnolo
in the Camonica valley,
dates from the
Chalcolithic or Eneolithic
age (3rd millennium BC).
Archaeologists have
unearthed similar axes
and daggers belonging to
the Remedello culture
which flourished in
northern Italy during the
same period.
The "running priest" (right)
is one of the most enigmatic
figures at Naquane, where a
hundred incised rocks have
been discovered. The
Italian department of
antiquities has created a
national park to protect the
district and its sites.
structure and new human relationships. The
new physical and economic power, the
capacity for trade and accumulation of
wealth provided by the discovery of the cart
and metal-work, triggered off a. chain
reaction.
Trade and cultural movements of com¬
pletely new dimensions ensued: the trans¬
mission of information -went hand in hand
with the carts and merchants. With the ac¬
cumulation of wealth, man began to hanker
after more than the bare essentials of life.
The need to establish contact with other
populations in order to develop trade also
gave social relationships a new dimension.
The territory was prospected in the search
for metal, and the inhabitants acquired con¬
scious knowledge about some aspects of
nature, of the structure of soil and stone,
which led to new lines of thought. "Stone"
contained valuable materials and possessed
hidden powers of which man had been
hitherto unaware. This development was to
give rise to a new type of philosophy and
a new ideology.
At the end of the fourth and during the
third millennium BC, the formation of a new
type of stratified society continued, and this
is reflected in rock-art. The conception of
composition in Camunian art changed dur¬
ing this period. Formerly, rock-artists seem
to have attributed little importance to the
precise position of isolated figures within the
whole; but, henceforth, the series of arms,
symbols and animals in monumental com¬
positions are organized in a row, in
keeping with a new concept of order and
space, according to an arrangement
predetermined by a new type of discipline,
and an attempt at rational use of space. This
new way of representing things, of covering
rock surfaces with figures, shows a fun¬
damental change in human psychology, and
in man's way of seeing and thinking; the
mental order evident in the rock engravings
was necessarily a reflection of the new social
system that been established.
Later, in the second and fjrst millennia
BC, in the Bronze and Iron Ages, there was
a further upsurge of political entities, and
tribal societies continued to develop until
they achieved the status of real nations.
In rock-art this evolution is reflected in the
style and series of themes represented in the
various epochs. But what is more important,
each period manifests specific ideas on com¬
position and association, and reflects speci¬
fic ideologies and beliefs. This enables us to
trace the process of accumulation of an
increasingly extensive cultural equipment
and of constant technological and material
acquisitions over eight millennia.
The hunters of the Epipalaeolithic or
Mesolithic Age (the transition period from
the Palaeolithic to the Neolithic), between
the years 8000 and 5500 BC, used a concep¬
tual structure determined by hunting and
the animals hunted up to that time. No nar¬
rative scenes specific to that time, and con¬
sequently, no hunting scenes, have come to
light. There is only the animal, sometimes,
transfixed by the lance that has brought him
down. Man's idée fixe, the idée fixe of the
hunter, was the animal, the largest and the
"finest".
With the advent of farming, man replaced
animals as the fundamental theme. The
idealization of the human being follows an
interesting process between 5500 and 3200
BC. Early on in this itinerary we find man
32

Elegantly stylized figure of
an animal assailed by arrows
(left) dates from the Late
Bronze Age (around 1000
BC). Near the animal is a
figure usually asociated with
the idea of death.
The figure of the god Cernunnos,
crowned with deer horns, a snake
around his waist, is incised in the
stone at a prehistoric site at Zurla
(right). At lower right of the scene,
created in the late Iron Age (around
400 BC), is the figure of a worship¬
per with arms upraised.
Hi
M 4 i '¡11*
TT r\"< « *^éb¿ \b
¥
The document above, a tracing of the central part of the Great Rock at Naquane, gives
some idea of the amazing profusion of figures (876 in all) which were carved into a
fifty-metre-long surface during five historical epochs. In some cases the artists incised
designs in patches of rock already used by their predecessors, creating what at first
sight seems to be an inextricable pictographic maze. Scholars are using the intricate
iconography of the Great Rock to help trace the historical and stylistic development of
rock art in the Camonica valley. One particularly puzzling feature is the square paddle¬
like motif, thought to have been a magic symbol with occult powers.
praying next to the sun's disc, next to the
axè or some other symbol. Later, there is an
extension of this tendency, and many
symbols and anthropomorphic characters
appear in a single scene. There are scenes of
sun-worship, scenes representing the cult of
the dead, scenes of groups of men dancing
or participating in other activities which
seem to represent various actions and
various ideas within a single context.
In the second part of the Neolithic Age,
from the year 4000 BC, we find the develop¬
ment of divinities as such, in anthropomor¬
phic form. At first, we have schematic faces
with large eyes; then, at the end of the Neo¬
lithic Age, around the year 3300 BC, we find
divinities two or three metres tall. These
rock-pictures attest to a mental develop¬
ment which is at the very root of our way of
seeing, thinking and conceiving things.
The Bible states that God created man in
his own image; in the Neolithic Age in the
Alps, we realize that the exact reverse
occurred: man created God in -his own
image. The exaltation of man created the
Superman, the Great Spirit, the Divinity
with the anthropomorphic traits. At the end
of the Neolithic Age, this ideological-
developmental process is interrupted and
there is a change in direction.
During the Neolithic Age, social and eco¬
nomic structures as well as intellectual inte¬
rests underwent a change. During the
Mesolithic Age man was essentially a gath-
rer of food, in the Neolithic he had become a
producer of food; but in the Eneolithic
period, and later in the Bronze and Iron
Ages, the production and gathering of food
played an increasingly minor role in remune¬
rative activities, while craftsmen and mer¬
chants gradually gained economic supre¬
macy. Economic interests underwent a
change; non-essential, luxury goods acqui¬
red more importance and became symbols
of success and social position. The exalta¬
tion of the product led to the worship of
objects, the glorification of what man had
created with his own hands.
Arms and other metal objects had super¬
natural power attributed to them and were
depicted with increasing frequency. Attri¬
butes of divinities or mythological ancestors
in the menhir-statues and monumental com¬
positions, daggers, axes, breastplates, pen¬
dants and belts, were not only transformed
into symbols of power and prestige, but also
acquired autonomy as supernatural powers
in the ideology of the times. Man changed
from being a creator to being a subject, and
became dependent on these luxury articles,
the products which he himself had created.
In the late Bronze Age, social patterns
became more complex; a society of specia¬
lists and a more diversified economy emer¬
ged. This was a polyvalent society; the chief
was a "Father Superior" to the nascent
nobility, to the warriors, to the tradesmen
and craftsmen; and it was thanks to their
economic and military power and their inter¬
national relations that he was able to steer
the destinies of the tribe and enhance his
own power.
Alongside the burgeoning aristocracy, a
polytheistic Olympus developed, where
gods and heroes imitated and exalted the
heroic deeds of mortals. The rock-pictures
of supermen engraved by the Camunian
artists at this time seem to have much in
common with Greek and Germanic mytho¬
logy. Once more Man seems to have created
God in his own image, concentrating his
aspirations and sublimating the reasons for
his frustrations in this ¡mage.
From man's vicissitudes which we find
reflected in the Valcamonica findings, the
history of the heartland of Europe can be
divided vertically into ten millennia. The his¬
torical evolution of the Camunians may well
be the prototype of a history embracing
much wider areas and which, in many
ways, reflects the vicissitudes encountered
during the formative period of European
civilization.
Valcamonica's rock engravings have pro¬
vided an exceptional mass of data and infor¬
mation about their authors. So far, there is
no other cycle of rock-art historical narrative
in Europe, and perhaps in the entire world,
which has endured for so long, offers such a
wide variety of cultural horizons, and whose
cultural stages can be followed with such
precision. H
EMMANUEL ANATI, Italian-born Israeli ar¬
chaeologist and anthropologist, is director of the
Camunian Centre of Prehistoric Studies at Capo
di Ponte (Italy) and general secretary of the Inter¬
national Association for the Study of Prehistoric
and Ethnologic Religion (IASPER). He has led
prehistórica! and ethnological research projects in
Europe, the Near East India and Australia.
Among his works in English are Camonica Valley
(1961) published by Knopf (New York), Rock Art
in Central Asia 14 vols, Louvain, 1972-75), and
Evolution in Style (Capo di Ponte, Italy 1976).
33
