Literacy
and
the liberation
of a people
by Julio Cortázar
Afew months after its liberation, Nicaragua has launched a
nation-wide literacy teaching campaign which will even¬
tually turn the whole country into a vast school in which
one half of the population will teach the other half how to read
and write.
Only once before has Latin America witnessed such a
dramatic and momentous mobilization of forces seeking to
strengthen a people's sense of self-awareness. This was in
Cuba, shortly after the triumph of the revolution in 1959, when
the people embarked on a colossal effort to extirpate
backwardness and ignorance, with results which Nicaragua is
seeking to emulate and if possible surpass. Two small Latin
American countries have thus pointed the way which many
others must one day take in a continent where illiteracy is not
only a brake on development but an oppressive obstacle to that
search for authentic roots and identity whose stirrings have
become perceptible in the Latin American turmoil of recent
decades.
By a curiously ironic twist of fate, the independence
movements of our countries sprang from ideals of education and
popular culture which their leaders and heroes inherited from the
French Revolution and which, bearing the imprint of
romanticism, imbued proclamations, constitutions and acts of
government. The idea that the sovereign people should be
educated and the belief that only a man who could read and
write could possibly be a good citizen were widespread in the
nineteenth century. But civil wars and the rise of authoritarian
regimes, leading to an increasing number of dictatorships and
tyrannies, soon dissipated illusions and notions which could only
have come to fruition if time and more favourable conditions
had been available.
The immensity of our continent, ethnic differences, and
foreign interference which went on parallel to and hand in glove
with despotic régimes these factors combined to isolate and
alienate our peoples and led to a preference for naive and
submissive masses instead of citizens with a capacity for
culture, reflexion and critical appraisal. The case of Nicaragua is
an extreme example: the legacy of forty years of oppression and
exploitation was an illiteracy rate which has been calculated at
over fifty per cent of the population.
The victory of the Nicaraguan people on 19 July 1979 found
immediate expression in a determination to "rebuild" which
went far beyond the literal meaning of that yvord. When the
ruling Junta defined its aims as reconstruction it knew that the
term would be fully understood by those who feel to the depths
of their being the immense disadvantages of ignorance. Not for
nothing does the Government include poets and intellectuals
such as Ernesto Cardenal, Sergio Ramirez and Tomás Borge, for
JULIO CORTÁZAR is an internationally known Argentinian writer whose
novels and short stories have been widely translated. Among his works
which have appeared in English are 62: A Model Kit (1976) and Cronopias
and Famas (1978) both published by M. Boyars, London.
12
whom reconstruction means not only raising the country from
its still smoking ruins but also enabling children and adults to
participate fully, consciously and critically in this undertaking.
Their design is based on an idea of the Nicaraguan as an
active agent in this reconstruction and as an individual capable
of understanding what he is doing, why he is doing it,' and how
he should do it. The notion of a passive and downtrodden
people, as understood during the Somoza régime, has been
replaced by a dynamic notion of participation and consultation;
such a process is inconceivable without a minimum of
intellectual preparation which goes beyond the bounds of
ancestral and traditional knowledge, using such knowledge
when it is deemed to be constructive, discarding it when it is a
cause of backwardness and stagnation.
All this makes it easier to understand the passionate interest
aroused in Nicaragua by the preparation and launching of the
country's literacy campaign. In the absence of the most basic
teaching facilities, the whole country understood that the
campaign had to be organized before the provision of any aid
and solidarity that might be forthcoming from friendly countries.
The appeal launched by Unesco is a wholehearted and
enthusiastic response to this decision made by the Nicaraguan
people, a decision to which it is impossible to feel indifference.
Contrary to what happened during the Cuban literacy campaign
in the 1960s, when Unesco waited for the movement to get
underway, then checked out the results and presented them in
glowing terms, today the Organization has unhesitatingly come
forward and appealed to the world community for aid, thus
showing its full confidence that another Latin American people
will be able to rid itself of ignorance through its own efforts.
According to official reports, it is estimated that the criminal
bombardment of Nicaragua's towns and villages has cost the
country over a hundred million córdobas (about ten million
dollars) in destroyed school buildings, furniture and educational
equipment. This devastation on the one hand, and the terrible
toll of 35,000 dead and some 100,000 wounded on the other,
reveal the full dimensions of the difficulties to be faced in this
new battle being fought for popular education. The problems
are many: shortages of equipment, transport facilities and funds,
the difficulties of communicating with the regions of the interior,
especially the Atlantic coast, and the need to extend the
campaign to regions with a predominant Indian population.
The problems will be tackled in an extremely realistic way:
anyone who can read and write can take part in the campaign
as a teacher. Most of the teaching will be done in fact by young
high school pupils, since they are not yet in employment and
can devote all their time to the task. These members of the
"literacy brigades" will go to the various rural and urban areas
accompanied by more experienced advisors and with all the
necessary logistical back-up. They will live in the fields and
forests, in factories and villages, in mountains and ports, sharing
the lives and occupations of their pupils, most of whom will be
adults. The whole country will become a single school, with
methods and techniques being worked out as the campaign
progresses. The Indians, who belong to communities with their
own deep-rooted culture, must be taught to read and write in
their own languages as well as in Spanish. On the Atlantic coast
English is also spoken; this is another problem which will have
to be solved.
While teaching literacy to adults is indispensable, a visit to
Nicaragua's towns and hinterland brings home the full extent of
the concern of the government and people for the young.
Nicaraguan children have begun a totally different life since the
liberation of their country, which it will be their responsibility to
lead in a few years' time. The fact that they also constitute the
bulk of the army of literacy teachers gives the campaign its
distinctive character. Nicaraguan families are still amazed at the
new atmosphere of life that can be felt in the streets, in the
squares, wherever the people gather. If the change in
atmosphere means liberty and security for them, the most
beautiful and moving symbol of this conquest are the children,
with their vitality, their games and their songs.
On my first visits to Managua I was astonished by the
enthusiasm of my guides, young Sandinista soldiers, whenever
they saw groups of children in the streets. Eventually they
explained to me that under the dictatorship children were never
seen out in the open air because they were suspected or hated
by the guards, through bitterness and cruelty. They knew that
many children and teenagers were carrying out liaison missions,
and that some of them were capable of taking part in military

IwJfcJ '~ -.
ALHUCTCAOON
All available government vehicles, from coaches to open trucks, are being pressed into service to transport Literacy Army squads to
every corner of Nicaragua.
action; they were often captured or killed as a means of
terrorizing the population.
"The mere appearance of a uniform of any kind made children
fly away like sparrows", one of my guides told me. "They
weren't even allowed to play football on patches of waste
ground because the guards suspected that this was a
camouflaged form of training."
At the same time, the participation of children and teenagers
in the campaign raises problems which have no ready-made
solution. First of all, it may be risky for many of them to venture
into regions far from the towns, since the supporters of the
dictatorial régime have made no secret of their intention of
taking revenge.
Consequently, the Junta has decided that only children
specifically authorized by their parents will be allowed to go to
the remote regions where, not surprisingly, most of them want
to Work. In Managua I saw things sometimes take a dramatic
turn when parents refused to give permission for their sons to
leave, creating a tension which was often unpleasant between
them and their schoolmates who had been authorized to go.
The reaction to this may appear surprising to someone who
has not lived with the Nicaraguan people since their victory. The
children who will constitute the literacy teaching brigades have
not only shown solidarity towards those of their comrades who
have not been allowed to join the campaign, more than once
they formed delegations to visit the parents, explain their point
of view, beg them to reconsider their decision, and grant
permission as requested by their sons. This response seems
totally spontaneous, and it is already clear that an overwhelming
majority of the high school children will leave to carry out, with
school and university teachers, a task which fills them with
pride. Each one will take with him a small handbook prepared in
Nicaragua and printed in Costa Ricaa modest piece of
equipment with which to confront inexperience, geographic and
climatic hazards, endemic sicknesses, food shortages and the
harsh conditions of life inoften inhospitable regions.
All of this may contribute to a fuller understanding of
Unesco's urgent appeal for international solidarity with
Nicaragua's literacy campaign. Unesco estimates that the
necessary aid will amount to twenty million dollars. Set against
military expenditure and commercial profits, this may seem a
modest sum; but it will be enough to lead a nation of less than
three million people out of the backward conditions in which it
was kept by dictatorship.
