Aerial photo, right, shows
reforestation in the
Extremadura region of
western Spain tracing the
contours of a hilly area. As
well as providing firewood
and timber, forests prevent
soil erosion and flooding and
can also influence climate.
Between 5 and 10 million
hectares of forest are being
felled each year for
agriculture alone, and world
demand for tropical
hardwood is expected to
triple during the next 20
years, requiring the felling of
556 million hectares of forest.
Perhaps more than any other
issue the fate of the world's
forests highlights the vital
need to integrate
conservation into rural
development.



Against the grain
At present rates one third of the world's cropland will have
disappeared within twenty years
SINCE the day in April 1961 when
Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin
circled the earth in spacecraft
Vostok I, the term "life-support system" has
become common currency. By a life-support
system is meant a combination of supplies
and devices which enables man to live and
work in an environment, such as a
spacecraft or a submarine, in which he
could otherwise not survive. Man needs an
atmosphere he can breathe and supplies of
water and food as well as a means of waste
disposal. On "spaceship earth" the most im¬
portant life-support systems which provide
these elements are agricultural systems,
forests, and coastal and freshwater sys¬
tems. Today, these life-support systems are
under serious threat.
Only about 11 % of the world's land area,
(excluding Antarctica) offers no serious
limitation to agriculture; the rest suffers
from drought, mineral stress (nutritional
deficiencies or toxicities), shallow depth, ex¬
cess water, or permafrost.
The world's cropland currently occupies
14 million km2, and although it may be possi¬
ble to double this area, much of the best
land is already being farmed. Unfortunately
large areas of prime quality land are being
permanently taken out of agricultural use by
being built on.
10
In developed countries at least 3,000 km2
of prime agricultural land are submerged
every year under urban sprawl: between
1960 and 1970 Japan lost 7.3% of its
agricultural land to buildings and roads and
European countries lost from 1.5% (Nor¬
way) to 4.3% (Netherlands).
Soil is a crucial life-support system, since
the bulk of all food production depends on
it. Soil erosion is a natural and continuous
process, but in undisturbed ecosystems
with a protective cover of plants the soil is
usually regenerated at the same rate it is
removed. If soil and vegetation are not in
balance, as often they are not when in¬
fluenced by poorly managed human
activities, erosion is accelerated with
disastrous consequences.
Even under natural conditions of vegeta¬
tion cover, nature takes from 100 to 400
years or more to generate 10 millimetres of
top soil; and 3,000 to 12,000 years would be
needed to generate soil to a depth of the
length of this page. So once the soil has
gone, for all practical purposes it has gone
for good.
Soil loss has accelerated sharply
throughout the food-hungry tropics, which
are generally more susceptible to erosion
than the temperate zone, due to the
topography of the land and the nature of the
soils and rainfall.
More than half of India, for example, suf¬
fers from some form of soil degradation: out
of her total of 3.3 million km2, 1.4 million
km2 are subject to increased soil loss, while
an additional 270,000 km2 are being degrad¬
ed by floods, salinity and alkalinity. An
estimated 6,000 million tonnes of soil are
lost every year from 800,000 km2 alone; with
them go more tham 6 million tonnes of
nutrients more than the amount that is ap¬
plied in the form of fertilizers. It is estimated
that close to one third of the world's arable
land will be destroyed in the next 20 years if
current rates of land degradation continue.
The productivity of agricultural eco¬
systems depends not only on maintaining
soil quality but also on retaining the habitats
of beneficial insects and other animals, such
as crop pollinators and the predators and
parasites of pests.
Effective pest control is no longer a matter
of heavy applications of pesticides, partly
because of the rising cost of petroleum-
derived products but largely because ex¬
cessive pesticide use promotes resistance
(the number of pesticide-resistant insects
and mites has doubled in 12 years), destroys i
natural enemies, turns formerly innocuous I


> species into pests, harms other non-target
species, and contaminates food and feed.
Instead pesticides should be used to supple¬
ment a battery of methods integrated in ap¬
propriate combinations: these methods in¬
clude introduction of pest-resistant crop
varieties, special planting combinations and
patterns, mechanical methods, the use of
repellents and hormones, and encourage¬
ment of natural enemies.
Besides supplying timber and other pro¬
ducts, forests have a vital effect on pro¬
cesses of great significance for people. They
influence local and regional climates,
generally by making them milder, and they
help to ensure a continuous flow of clean
water. Some forests, notably tropical cloud
forests, even increase the availability of
water by intercepting moisture from clouds.
Watershed forests are particularly impor¬
tant because they protect soil cover on site
and protect areas downstream from ex¬
cessive floods and other harmful fluctua¬
tions in streamflow. By thus reducing the silt
load of rivers, watershed forests also help
prevent the clogging of reservoirs, irrigation
systems, canals and docks, and the
smothering by sediment of coral reefs. Yet
watershed forests are being widely
devastated by clearance for agriculture, by
logging and cutting for fuel, by overgrazing,
and by badly managed road building.
The results can be extremely expensive. It
costs Argentina $ 10 million a year to dredge
silt from the estuary of the River Plate and
keep Buenos Aires open to shipping: yet
80% of the 100 million tonnes of sediment
that every year threaten to block the harbour
comes from only 4% of the drainage
basin the heavily overgrazed catchment
area of the Bermejo River 1,800 km
Estuaries, mangrove swamps (above) and other coastal wetlands
provide rich and abundant nutrients on which an estimated two-
thirds of the world's fisheries directly depend. Today the fate of
these fisheries hangs in the balance in many parts of the world
as coastal wetland habitats are being degraded or destroyed by
pollution and various forms of industrial development, while in
some tropical regions mangroves are being used for firewood,
fodder and building materials. Some 70 per cent of the world's
great cities, including Hong Kong (below) are situated on
estuaries. Below right, windmills dot the landscape at Kinderdijk
in The Netherlands, part of a delicately-balanced wetland
ecosystem. Interdisciplinary study of the world's deltas, estuaries
and coastal zones forms part of Unesco's Man and the Biosphere
(MAB) programme.

Regional Distribution of Soils
with or without Limitations for Agriculture
12 3 4 5 6
1. Europa
2. Central America
3. North America
4. South A«ia
5. Africa
6. South America
7. Australasia
8. Southeast Asia
9. North and Central Asia
10. World
No serious limitation
| Drought
I Mineral stress
] Shallow depth
I Water excess
H Permafrost
Source FAO, 1978. The State of Food and Agriculture 1977, FAO, Rome
upstream. In India the annual cost of
damage by floods ranges from $140 million
to $750 million.
Sedimentation as a result of careless use
of watershed forests can cut drastically the
economic life of reservoirs, hydroelectric
facilities and irrigation systems. The capaci¬
ty of India's Nizamsagar reservoir has been
more than halved (from almost 900 million
m3 to fewer than 340 million m3) and there is
now not enough water to irrigate the 1,100
km2 of sugarcane and rice for which it was
intended and hence not enough sugarcane
to supply local sugar factories. Deforesta¬
tion in northern Luzon in the Philippines has
silted up the reservoir of the Ambuklao Dam
so fast that its useful life has been reduced
from 60 to 32 years.
Such problems are not confined to
developing countries: for example, it has
been estimated that more than 1,000 million
m3 of sediment are deposited every year in
the major reservoirs of the USA. Although
they have not been calculated (indeed, pro¬
bably cannot be), the global costs of sedi¬
ment removal, river dredging, reconstruc¬
tion of irrigation systems and loss of invest¬
ment in expensive structures like dams must
be huge. Only 10% of the world's popula¬
tion live in mountainous areas where the
watershed forests are, but another 40% live
in the adjacent plains; so the lives and
livelihoods of half the world directly depend
on the way in which watershed ecosystems
are managed.
In areas under shifting cultivation forests
also act to restore soil fertility. More than
200 million people occupying- about 30
million km2 of tropical forests live by practis¬
ing shifting cultivation cropping an area i
for a few years, then clearing another area, Y
Photos Georg Gerster © Rapho, Paris
13

y leaving the first one fallow to revert to scrub
and forest. The fallow period lasts from 8-12
years in tropical rain forests to 20-30 years in
drier areas, and during this time the forest
cover enables the soil to regenerate.
This is a stable, productive practice if the
population itself is stable; but if populations
are growing, which nowadays they usually
are, the pressure on land increases, fallow
periods shorten, the soil has no chance to
regenerate, and wider and wider tracts of
otherwise productive forest land are des¬
troyed.
Almost two-thirds of the land under shif¬
ting cultivation is upland forest, much of it
on steep slopes, and the resulting erosion is
severe. In the Ivory Coast, shifting cultiva¬
tion reduced the forest cover by 30% bet¬
ween 1956 and 1966 and now only 50,000
km2 remain out of the 150,000 km2 that are
believed to have existed at the beginning of
this century. Similarly, shifting cultivators
clear about 3,500 km2 a year in the Philip¬
pines Mindanao alone they cleared
10,000 km2 between 1960 and 1971.
Coastal wetlands and shallows espe¬
cially estuaries and mangrove swamps-
provide food and shelter for waterfowl and
for fishes, crustaceans and molluscs utilized
by an estimated two-thirds of the world's
fisheries. Some are among the world's most
lucrative fisheries, notably those for shrimp.
Seagrass meadows also act as nurseries and
nutrient suppliers for economically impor¬
tant fish species.
Coral ecosystems are of more local, but
nonetheless vital, significance providing
habitats for the fish on which many coastal
communities in developing countries de¬
pend. In addition, coastal wetlands and cor¬
al reefs are extremely important for coastal
protection: without the activities of corals
and other reef-building organisms, for ex¬
ample, more than 400 islands would not ex¬
ist. Similarly, many freshwater wetlands and
floodplains support important inland fish¬
eries, while floodplain agriculture has long
relied on the regular supply of nutrients by
floodwaters.
Wetlands, floodplains, seagrass beds and
coral reefs are being destroyed the world
over, with severe effects on the economies
that depend on them most closely. For ex¬
ample, the cost of damage to US marine
fisheries caused by degradation of coastal
wetlands has been estimated to be almost
$86 million a year. In Sri Lanka repeated
removal of corals for the production of lime
is so extensive that a local fishery has col¬
lapsed; mangroves, small lagoons and
coconut groves have disappeared; and local
wells have been contaminated with salt.
In many parts of the world the construc¬
tion of dams has blocked the passage of
migrating fish and drowned or otherwise
destroyed the habitats of others; and
although the new reservoir may support a
new fiáhery this does not always compen¬
sate for the loss of the floodplain. The
habitats of many other aquatic animals also
are threatened. For example, many sea tur¬
tle nesting beaches have been wrecked for
roads, housing and other developments;
while the breeding areas of gray whales and
belugas (or white whales) are also at risk.
These are typical effects of the impacts on
coastal and freshwater ecosystems every¬
where: impacts such as industrial and
agricultural pollution; the construction of
dams; siltation from eroded uplands; filling
to provide sites for industry, housing,
recreation, airports and farmland; dredging
to create, deepen or improve harbours; .
quarrying; and cutting of mangroves for
fuel.
As the commercially valuable fisheries for
fish, crustaceans and molluscs become
more fully exploited, so the effects of
habitat destruction and pollution par¬
ticularly on those species depending on
coastal wetlands and shallows or on inland
wetlands and floodplains for nutrients or for
spawning grounds and nurseries will
become more evident.
Coral reefs, limestone
formations in the sea
formed by the skeletons
of millions of tiny
animals, provide the
habitats for fish on which
millions of coastal
communities depend for
their livelihood. Today
coral ecosystems are
widely threatened by
various kinds of pollution,
destructive fishing
methods including the
use of dynamite, and
removal for building or
lime production. Below, a
coral atoll off Western
Australia.
14
