A new partnership in the making by M¡Chei Bat^e
SOME people may be surprised to see the pyramids of Egypt
and the national park of the Galapagos Islands incorporated
within a single framework and inscribed on a single list. What
can ancient monuments have in common with a group of rocky islands throng¬
ed with iguanas and tortoises? -except, perhaps, the equal ingenuity w¡th
whiéh travel agencies arrange organized tours to each of these sites. But are
the travel agents' efforts not proof that our contemporaries, when they have
the opportunity, are attracted both by cultural masterpieces and by the
wonders of nature?
What then is meant by this "common heritage of mankind"?
In addition to books, music, craft and artistry, the collections of paintings
and sculptures in the world's museums, the cultural heritage comprises much
"immovable" property such as monuments and groups of historic buildings. It
is this "immovable" property with which the World Heritage Convention is
concerned.
As for the natural heritage, it consists first of all of the plant and animal
species whose conservation is of vital importance for human survival (see the
"Unesco Courier", May 1980). These species are today protected £S such by
various (still extremely inadequate) conventions which deal notably with inter¬
national trade in or hunting of them. But the natural heritage also includes uni¬
que sites, landscapes of exceptional beauty or of great value from the point of
view of science or conservation, which can neither be replaced nor reproduc¬
ed. It is this "immovable" natural heritage which is covered by the World
Heritage Convention, although certain threatened plant and animal species are
automatically protected when their habitat is chosen for inclusion on the
World Heritage List.
But although the protection of cultural property and the protection of
natural property may be parallel activities, they raise very different problems.
In most countries the two functions are entrusted to separate administrative
structures, and architects who, for example, are concerned with the preserva¬
tion of historic buildings have little to do with the biologists who administer na¬
tional parks. So the question of why nature and culture should now be brought
together within a single international convention might well be countered by
the point that they have been separated, and even treated as rivals, for far too
long.
At the beginning of his long emergence, man was able to make only a very
slight impact on his physical and biological environment. He was, in a sense,
"within" nature. But as soon as he mastered fire he became the agent of im¬
portant modifications, deliberate or accidental, in the natural world. By the
end of the Palaeolithic age, when he still lived from hunting and gathering, he
was already making an imprint on the natural environment in which he was
pursuing his ascent. It is precisely this imprint, the result of his capacity for in¬
vention, that makes man what he is. What had yet to be called culture was
already at odds with nature.
In Neolithic times, with the appearance of agriculture and the domestication
of animals, the imprint would become deeper and the range of transformations
would grow. Some 6,000 years ago, when man enters history, the discord bet¬
ween culture and nature was already etched on the face of the earth in those
places where forests had been burned and where certain types of plants had
been favoured to the exclusion of others.
But this was merely the modest beginning of a long process. The domina¬
tion of the human species over every aspect of its environment would grow
with its mastery of increasingly powerful tools, with its hunger for new ob¬
jects, with the development of new needs, and with the multiplication of its
members.
The material progress of techniques and societies took place essentially at
the expense of nature and natural resources. And many philosophies and
beliefs glorify this successful struggle of man "against" nature.
A tragic misunderstanding arose and persisted down the centuries:
mankind's mastery of his own "animal nature" became confused with his wan¬
ton domination of the world around him. The warning of Francis Bacon, who
announced at the dawn of the scientific revolution that "Nature, to be com¬
manded, must be obeyed", was ignored. The pre-eminence of mind over mat¬
ter, which is the honour and the essence of man, was wrongly identified with a
superiority that culture, especially in its technological forms, was considered
to have over nature, thus confusing the moral order with the material order.
And so we reach the industrial revolution when the tempo quickens and
matters come to a head. Industrial man has begotten prodigious technical
achievements; he has gone some way to solving the problems of hunger and
sickness. But at the same time his numbers grow to excess, he consumes
relentlessly, he perfects lethal weaponry. His progress towards self-mastery is
thus open to doubt.
Meanwhile, he has taken his conquest of nature so far that it is threatened
with extinction. For nature the reckoning is too heavy: massive deforestation;
the erosion and degradation of soils; the disappearance of animal and plant
species; water, air, land and marine pollution of many kinds; proliferating
slums and shantytowns; expanding concrete and asphalt; dwindling open
spaces...
And yet the message is not hard to grasp. Will modern men realize in time
that if they snap the umbilical cord which attaches them to the natural world
then they are bound inexorably to destroy themselves? Will they turn to the
healthiest sources of their different cultures and learn at long last how to live
"with" nature?
It would be possible to cite many examples of the oenefits man has skilfully
reaped from the resources of the biosphere without endangering the
mechanisms which give birth to these resources: the harmonious landscapes
shaped by human toil, for instance, or the natural sites used for cultural pur¬
poses.
It is highly significant that the Convention already covers some of these
privileged places where nature and culture meet: Ohrid and its lake in
Yugoslavia, Tikal and its forest in Guatemala, Mont Saint-Michel and its bay in
France. Let us hope that one day soon these sites will be joined by others of a
similar kind, such as the tree-girdled temples of Angkor or the ruins of Machu
Picchu in their grandiose Andean setting.
And so the association of nature and culture in the World Heritage Conven¬
tion has first and foremost the value of a symbol a symbol of the new alliance
which must now be cemented between these two poles of human develop¬
ment, which only exists when they are combined.
