The world's
forgotten
army of
child
workers
&::
CHILD labour, often thought to be a
problem of the past, is still a
widespread and persistent evil in
the 1980s. The latest estimates made by the
International Labour Organisation (ILO)
show that in the world as a whole there are
no less than fifty-two million child workers
under the age of fifteen.
What is more, even this figure may under¬
estimate the real dimensions of this tragic
situation, since in some countries young
workers under fifteen are simply not includ¬
ed in the labour force statistics, while in
others young people who both work and at¬
tend school are rarely considered as part of
the labour force. In addition, the statistics
cover only those youngsters who have a
fixed job, and thus exclude the majority of
those who work only occasionally.
Children in every type of society have
always taken some part in those economic
activities which are necessary for the sur:
vival of the group to which they belong.
In earlier times children worked within
their family circle. Little by little, through
almost unconscious observation, associa¬
tion and imitation, they learnt the role they
would be called upon to play as adults. Dur¬
ing this process of socialization, of which his
"on the job" training formed a part, the
child grew to physical and intellectual
maturity and was simultaneously prepared
for adult life. Work of this kind can be liken¬
ed to those present day tasks which by
nature are light, sporadic, interesting,
educational and socially useful, and which
serve to integrate the child in the social life
of the group to which he belongs.
But against these pleasurable occupations
should be set other kinds of job: those that
are imposed upon the child, occasioned by
necessity, and carried out under conditions
of exploitation. They demand greater
physical and mental resources than the ex¬
ploited child possesses because they are
monotonous, strenuous, harmful or unduly
prolonged, because they are a source of
anxiety, and because they inevitably imply a
lack of schooling, relaxation and general
well-being. Jobs of this sort may be self-
employed or wage-earning, and are often
found in modern family businesses, albeit |
usually in a less extreme form. The very I
19

( many children who are engaged on work of
this kind grow up prematurely and sadly.
Custom and the law usually hold that the
work children do alongside their parents is
distinct from the exploitation to which they
may be subjected when they work for third
parties. In practice, this is generally the
case, since parents usually look after their
children's welfare. Nevertheless, however
much the physical effort, however the hours
of work and the boredom inflicted on the
child may be reduced, and however satisfac¬
tory his working environment may be, he
will inevitably be involved in the family busi¬
ness and will share with his parents the kind
of problems, preoccupations and uncertain¬
ties which are not usually the concern of
children of his age.
In those Western nations which are today
the most economically advanced countries
in the world, it was taken for granted in the
past that children would work alongside
their parents in the fields or in the home.
However, when the change-over to manu¬
facturing industry took place neither the
institutions nor the legislations of those
countries were adequate to meet the new
circumstances.
Thus in the nineteenth century it became
common for children to work in factories,
especially textile mills, from the age of six
years onwards, toiling some fourteen hours
a day in dreadful conditions, virtually unpro¬
tected from the risk of accidents. At the
beginning of the twentieth century, some
Western children were still being employed
in coal mines or at home on work sent out to
them by manufacturers.
It was therefore in the more developed
countries that people first became aware of
the harmfulness of this kind of child labour
and of the need to introduce compulsory
education and to give children the necessary
opportunities for recreation, and legal and
practical measures were gradually intro¬
duced to this end. It seems, however, that
these measures were not always inspired
purely by humanitarian motives. They were
also designed to protect the employment
and wages of adult workers.
Child workers do work that could very
well be done by adults; in other words,
hiring children deprives adults of jobs.
Moreover, children are paid much less than
adults. There is a vicious circle here: on the
one hand child labour increases unemploy¬
ment among adults and reduces their
income; and on the other, unemployment
and low wages induce families to put their
children to work. Thus child labour has both
a positive and a negative effect on family
income although it seems that the latter
outweighs the former.
If, on the one hand, child labour is pro¬
hibited by law in virtually all countries, on
the other hand the' numerous societies in
which it exists cannot provide all their chil¬
dren with means of subsistence, direct or
indirect, in any other way, nor provide them
with the educational and cultural facilities
and the means of recreation that they so
badly need.

Child labour in cities has greatly
increased following the rapid
urbanization of recent decades. In
developing countries, rural families
migrating to urban centres often
find themselves living in appalling
conditions in the shanty-towns that
have mushroomed on the fringes of
many large cities. Uprooted from
their homes and traditional way of
life and bewildered by a new and
unknown environment, the adults
often have great difficulty in finding
employment; the children are sent
out to work to enable the family to
survive. In many cases the children
become self-employed street
traders exposed to hazards of all
kinds inclement weather, dirt,
traffic risk, detention by the police
for vagrancy, excessive fatigue due
to long hours as well as the
temptation to drift into delinquency.
In many Asian and African
countries children have traditionally
been employed in textile
manufacture, from the spinning of
thread to the hand-weaving of
carpets. They can often work faster
and better than adults and form a
cheap and docile labour force.
In such circumstances there is every
reason to fear that families will continue to
send their children to work illegally and that
employers will continue to engage them
surreptitiously.
Thus large numbers of children are faced
with two alternatives: either to work in vio¬
lation of the law, or to resign themselves to
enforced idleness, with the resulting temp¬
tation to drift into vagrancy or delinquency.
Here is another vicious circle: destitution
compels the children to find an immediate
source of livelihood, and the fact that they
work during their childhood robs them of
the chance to attend school and obtain the
qualifications which might help them to
escape from poverty.
Because child labour is illegal, the law
makes no provision for safeguarding the
conditions in which children work. Children
thus do not enjoy the right to claim the
social benefits which the law provides, and
constitute a submissive and defenceless
labour force. They are unable to negotiate
their conditions of work (which are usually
imposed arbitrarily by the employer); they
have no trade unions to defend them and
virtually no access to sickness or employ¬
ment injury insurance or social security
schemes (where such exist). Many of these
problems also face children who work
legally is, those who work in countries
where the minimum age for admission to
employment is fixed by law at a very low
level (twelve or thirteen years). The great
social advances secured by adult workers do
not in fact apply to working children, who
are exploited as if those advances had never
been won.
The most recent ILO standards fix the
minimum age for admission to employment
at fifteen years and recommend, with
various provisos, that this be gradually
raised to sixteen years. However, at the
national. level the minimum age has been
fixed by law at anything from twelve to six¬
teen years, depending on the country. In
other words, in some countries children who
work from the age of twelve or thirteen
years are not breaking the law.
In the developing countries poverty is the
fundamental cause of child labour, but it is
usually combined with other factors, inclu¬
ding those that have just been mentioned. A
study recently undertaken in Bangkok
among several hundred working children
revealed that the principal reasons why they
were at work were as follows:
Reason given Percentage
Poverty 23.4
Need to assist parents in
household economic activity 32.9
Parents want them to work 26.3
Need to earn their own living 7.9
Better than doing nothing 6.9
Other reasons 2.6
In general, children take up a particular
job either because it is the only type of job
open at the time they are looking for work
(this may well involve a hasty choice which
can affect their whole future life); or
because one or more members of the family
21

LINKING
SCHOOL AND
WORK
The education that children
receive both at home and at
school should be a
preparation for life in the
society in which they live
and must not be too remote
from daily working needs.
In China, practical elements
are gradually introduced
into the school curriculum.
The youngest children are
given simple tasks to do
such as clearing away
dishes after meals (top
photo). Primary schools (7
to 12 age group) often have
small workshops attached
to them in which the
children undertake part-
time, practical, productive
work as part of the normal
school curriculum. Bottom
photo shows pupils at Kilin
primary school making wax
crayons. Secondary schools
are often closely linked with
full-scale industrial factories
where pupils learn
production techniques from
full-time employees (middle
photo).
> are already doing that kind of job; or
because the work in question does not call
for any special qualifications (which means
that the children will certainly remain at a
very low vocational level).
The age at which children usually begin
work depends on several factors tradition,
the size of the undertaking and whether or
not it is a family concern. An inquiry carried
out among a group of child workers in India
revealed the following points: 24.7 per cent
of the children had begun work between the
age of six and nine years; 48.4 per cent bet¬
ween ten and twelve years; and 26.9 per
cent between thirteen and fifteen years.
The results of another inquiry, carried out
a few years ago in Portugal by the Por¬
tuguese Industrial Association among
19,040 adult workers in 230 mechanical
engineering undertakings, showed that 3.6
per cent of the women had begun their
working life between the ages of five and
seven years, that 10.3 per cent of them had
done so between the ages of eight and ten
and that the proportion for those who had
begun to work between the ages of eleven
and thirteen was 41.1 per cent. In other
words, 55 per cent of the women in this
survey had started work before they had
reached the legal minimum age for ad¬
mission to employment.
In the developing countries children begin
their working life in various ways. Those
whose families have their own businesses
are introduced to work gradually by their
parents. In other cases, parents, together
with relatives or family friends, often get in
touch with possible future employers in
order to "place" a child in a job at a later
date. Usually the first employers to be ap¬
proached in this way are those for whom the
parents, relatives, friends or neighbours
work themselves.
In some countries employers recruit
village children as unqualified assistants (for
example, in a pastry shop or a dairy). Female
domestic servants also usually come from
rural areas: Often it is they who make con¬
tact with the families for whom they are go¬
ing to work but in other cases their parents
hand them over to their future employers so
that they can be "adopted" as subordinate
members of the household.
In parts of Africa, Latin America, Asia and
southern Europe it is not unknown for
parents, in return for a small loan or pay¬
ment in cash or in kind, to hand over their
children at the age of eight or nine years, to
an employer for whom they will work as
farm labourers or shepherd boys. (Needless
to say, this practice is a flagrant breach of
the law.) In this way many needy parents
forgo the custody of their children and the
exercise of parental authority. There have
been reports that in south and south-east
Asia some employers take possession of
children, against their will, and exploit them
ruthlessly.
When a child is dependent on the
employer in this way, it is usually the
employer himself who fixes the child's
general conditions of work, arbitrarily and
unilaterally. As a result the treatment meted
out to these young workers varies widely,
and reflects the employer's character and
mood, as well as local customs. Thus the
working child may be harshly treated, being
22

» *
Child workers are more liable than grown-ups to occupational accidents because they
lack experience in handling tools and machinery which are normally designed for use
by adults. Since in many cases they are working illegally, they benefit from no form of
social protection. Accidents often occur when the children are tired and their
concentration diminishes. Above, itinerant petrol-sellers being treated in hospital for
burns received during their work.
subject to corporal punishment, abuses of
all kinds, humiliation and frustration. The
possibilities for exploitation are, in practice,
unlimited. Other employers may be pater¬
nalistic, protective and generous. Between
these two extremes the general tendency is
for the child to be treated rather badly since,
as we have seen, he has no way of de¬
fending himself.
The apprenticeship system also gives rise
to abuses. Many children who are declared
by their employers to be apprentices receive
a negligible amount of training. More often
than not they are kept busy running errands
or doing hard, unpleasant jobs which often
have little connexion with the trade they are
supposed to be learning; or else they are
treated as servants and receive little or no
remuneration. The lucky ones, however, do
serve some sort of apprenticeship, despite
the poor conditions under which they work.
In spite of these bad working conditions,
many child workers seem to be satisfied
with the pay and benefits they receive, with
their hours of work, with their working en¬
vironment and with the attitude of the
employer and older fellow-workers, as well
as with the treatment they receive. The
reasons for their job satisfaction probably lie
in the low level of their expectations and in
the fact that they are earning a little money
and are not unemployed.
It is in urban areas, and especially in
manufacturing industry, that child workers
are treated the worst, exploited the most
and undergo the greatest privations. They
often have to work in very bad conditions,
exposed to the elements or, indoors, in a
restricted space in cramped premises which
are stiflingly hot, badly lit, badly ventilated,
noisy, unhealthy and damp. In these
unhygienic surroundings, in an atmosphere
contaminated with dust or gases, they are
crammed together with other workers,
without adequate means of security, and
without adequate toilet facilities. It is not
unusual for them to have to lift and carry
heavy loads, in violation of the principles
and norms laid down by the ILO.
The number of hours worked by children
each day varies considerably. They may for
example, work for part of every working
day, or they may work eight hours a day for
six days a week. Since, as we have seen, the
general conditions of work are usually fixed
arbitrarily by the employer, all kinds of
abuses occur: working days of ten, twelve
or fourteen hours for six or sometimes seven
days a week, that is to say far beyond what
the child can tolerate either physically or
mentally. Sometimes they do not have a fix¬
ed timetable they stay in the shop or café
where they work until the last customer has
left. '
For both self-employed and wage-earning
children the working week seems generally
to be extremely long. In many sectors the
children work six or seven days a week, and
it is common knowledge that girls in
domestic service usually work very long
hours, since they must be available when
their employers need them, almost on a per¬
manent basis.
In many cases young wage earners do not
enjoy the annual paid holidays that are laid
down by law for adult workers doing the
same job. Nor do young people working at
home enjoy annual paid holidays.
In the less developed regions especially,
children who work in the family business
usually receive no payment for their work,
since the family income is considered to be
one indivisible whole. This is equally true
when the family does farm work for a third w
party: the children take part in the,work and r
23

, the head of the family receives the total
earnings.
When the child is a wage-earner, his
wages are usually derisory in comparison to
the value of the work he does, and are in any
case much lower a half or a third or maybe
even less than those received by an adult
doing the same job. Some children, sup¬
posedly apprentices, get hardly any training
but work sometimes for years, without
receiving any pay.
Even in countries where the legal age for
admission to employment is twelve years,
young people of that age are often not paid
the legal minimum salary. When they work
overtime they are generally paid at the nor¬
mal rate (which is already unfairly reduced).
When the child does not work directly for
the employer but with an adult worker, the
latter usually pays the child only a fraction of
what he has earned.
In some kinds of commercial and in¬
dustrial undertakings it is customary for part
of the wages to be paid in cash and part in
kind. In commercial farming, children
sometimes merely receive board and lodg¬
ing; if paid, their wages are often extremely
low. For many parents the fact that a child is
housed and fed outside the home takes
some pressure off the family budget, even
though the child contributes nothing to it.
The self-employed child who has an acci¬
dent or contracts a disease of occupational
origin has nq.form of social protection. If the
child is a wage earner he is not usually pro¬
tected either, since in the vast majority of
cases he is working illegally, as we have
seen. If he is the victim of an occupational
accident or disease, he and his parents must
be prepared for terrible consequences. For
obvious reasons, official statistics reveal
only a very small proportion of the occu¬
pational accidents and diseases that affect
young people.
Agriculture is one of the most hazardous
sectors where the physical safety and health
of workers are concerned. There are a
number of reasons for this: the dangers in¬
volved in using modern machinery; prolong¬
ed exposure to heat, sunlight, dust, wind
and rain; the almost constant physical effort
that agricultural work demands; contact
with various chemical products, such as fer¬
tilisers and pesticides, whose long-term ef¬
fects on man may be completely unknown
and for the majority of which, in cases of
poisoning, no specific antidotes exist.
Children are particularly at risk from endemic
and parasitic diseases, diseases of the
respiratory tract, and dermatosis, and are
often the victims of fatal accidents.
In industry child workers face greater risks
than adults, because children lack ex¬
perience in handling tools, because their
powers of concentration are less than those
of adults, and because of shortages of
This article is based on Children at Work (edited
by Elias Mendelievich), a book prepared by the
International Labour Office as part of its contri¬
bution to the International Year of the Child.
Children at Work was compiled on the basis
of research carried out by the ILO in Geneva
and by independent investigators in some fifteen
countries.
security and prevention equipment such as
masks and special gloves. For example, in
glassworks children suffer greatly from the
suffocating heat and run the risk amongst
others, of sustaining cuts and burns.
Children employed in carpet manufacturing
breathe in wool dust throughout the work¬
ing day, and this penetrates deep into their
lungs.
It should also be borne in mind that, as
machinery, tools and workplaces in general
are designed for use by adults rather than by
children, they are a further potential source
of more or less serious accidents, and call
for increased effort by the child as well as
causing problems of adaptation.
Although children working in the building
industry are usually employed to do light
work, they are nonetheless exposed to a
wide variety of potential accidents and other
hazards such as falls, injuries, and the ef¬
fects of exposure to bad weather. Accidents
are common in this sector and are more like¬
ly to happen to children because of their im¬
maturity and lack of concentration.
In the less developed regions the provi¬
sion of schooling is meeting a number of
serious problems. There is a severe shortage
of facilities, particularly in rural areas, where
schools are few and far between. Because
of the shortage of capacity most schools are
used by two or more sets of pupils. Con¬
sequently, even if all children of school age
were allowed or able to attend school for the
full period of compulsory schooling, they
could not do so because there would be no
school for them to go to.
Thus, despite the tremendous efforts be¬
ing made by the Third World countries to
make schooling available to all, the idea of
universal compulsory education is still very
far from being a reality. There are still vast
numbers of persons who are either illiterate
or semi-literate not only children but adults
as well.
The exploitation of children is found for
the most part in those societies which are in
the throes of modernization or in modern
societies where marginal sectors continue to
exist. It is a consequence of several impor¬
tant social phenomena and is one of the fac¬
tors in a complex situation comprising the
economic system, the way in which society
is organized, and traditional ways of think¬
ing. The solution to the problem lies in the
orderly, progressive development of society
rather than in the adoption of ad hoc
measures; ultimately it lies in a modification
of the three factors mentioned above. This
modification cannot be imposed from out¬
side, and it cannot be achieved without a
wider awareness of the nature and extent of
the problem. The gradual elimination of
child labour is a large-scale and long-term
goal which will not be attained in isolation
from other social changes but as an integral
part of them.

