Maestro computer
Exploring the new frontiers of sound
by Pierre Boulez
IT often comes as a surprise, and gen¬
erally not an agreeable one, to hear the
words "music" and "computer" pro¬
nounced in the same breath. Indeed, few
words evoke such widely different, if not
frankly antagonistic notions as the former,
with its connotations of free-ranging im¬
aginative power, and the latter, which sug¬
gests scientific rigour at its most strict.
Upon closer examination, however, the
stereotyped nature of this reaction becomes
apparent. Imagination is, of course, essen¬
tial to music; but composition, perfor¬
mance, improvization and interpretation
alike presuppose a degree of familiarity with
many different codes which only a long and
sometimes painfully rigorous apprentice¬
ship makes possible; without constraint,
discipline and knowledge, imagination is
PIERRE BOULEZ, French composer and con¬
ductor, is director of the Paris music research
centre IRCAM (Institut de Recherche et de Co¬
ordination Acoustique-Musique) and professor of
music at the Collège de France. Among his more
recent compositions are Rituel (1974) and Messa-
gesquisse (1976). This article is based on a paper
prepared for an international symposium on
"Informatics and Society", held in Paris in Sep¬
tember 1979.
liable to degenerate into mere fancy, "full of
sound and fury, signifying nothing".
As far as the computer is concerned, the
argument that both the nature and the
mechanics of- such a tool render its use for
musical purposes incompatible with
freedom of invention is, to say the least, a
very simplistic one. Consequently, before
we address ourselves to the question of the
relationship between informatics and music,
we must firmly reject the dichotomy which
sets the candle-lit garrets of genius in op¬
position to the complex institutions of
technocracy.
What, then, are we to make of the state
of affairs brought about by a technical ad¬
vance so rapid that its consequences could
hardly have been foreseen some thirty years
ago, when the possible impact of electronics
on music provoked the first stirrings of
interest?
To begin with, we should make a distinc¬
tion between attempts to enrol the new
technology in the service of musical creation
and invention, and the much earlier trend
towards the invention of new types of
musical instrument based on certain elec¬
tronic techniques. If many of the resulting
instruments enjoyed only short-lived suc
cess, this was probably due more to a lack
than to an excess of originality in their
realization; the possibilities they offered
were too limited. Nor did they always sus¬
tain comparison with traditional in¬
struments, whose output of sound remained
richer and more varied than the relatively
predictable and uniform results produced
electronically.
But once the concept, albeit a somewhat
hazy one, of "electronic music" was admit¬
ted, no time was lost in seeking to clarify its
implications for musical research. What the
new technology proposed first and foremost
was a range of measuring equipment which
could be diverted from its original purpose
and adapted, in a more or less artisanal and
ad hoc fashion, for the reproduction of
sound. The irruption of the computer into
what was essentially an aesthetic domain led
to a number of stormy discussions between
those who saw it as a tool which could be
used to strip the phenomenon of sound to
its essentials and then re-invent it entirely;
and those who thought that the machine
itself should be given free rein, and that its
immense capacities for absorbing, process¬
ing and re-transmitting all manner of infor¬
mation could be used for the creation of
spontaneous poetic "happenings".
28

In practice, however, neither of these
paths proved straightforward. The first
came to a virtual dead end when the tool
was found to be far from adequate for the
satisfactory synthesis of sound. The se¬
cond, in which serious and thoughtful plan¬
ning had been neglected in favour of
reliance on flair and dexterity in operating
the machine, became lost in a sterile and
above all wearisome maze.
In the meantime, science itself had forged
ahead. The synthesis of sound, which only a
short time earlier had appeared to pose in¬
surmountable difficulties, now seemed to be
an attainable objective, if not in the im¬
mediate future. True, a great number of
problems, whose complexity increased
rather than decreased with each step for¬
ward, remained to be solved, but they were
at least beginning to be understood more
clearly.
At this point, musicians themselves, who,
it must be admitted, had so far taken scant
interest in the development of computer
technology, were agreeably surprised to
discover that although the computer might
not necessarily propose a global solution to
their problems, its capacities of analysis and
synthesis could help them in a variety of
ways: not only in the investigation of sound
itself and the philosophy of music as a
whole, but also in the study of such specific
subjects as the language of music, its formal
structures and the rules of composition.
They discovered, too, that the machine
could help with practical, as well as
theoretical tasks and that it was capable not
only of writing scores for performance by
traditional instruments, but also of
reproducing the sounds written into a tradi¬
tionally prepared score.
It is worth noting here that a considerable
number of performing musicians are now
taking an interest in the relationship bet¬
ween computers and music (and not merely
with the aim of arming themselves against
future developments). They set great store
by the principle of real-time working since
they feel that use of the computer to bring
an element of instant transformation of
sound into a performance helps to preserve
the factor of uncertainty without which they
find true communication with their public
impossible. A piece of music, like a work
written for the theatre, constitutes an "ab-
CONTINUED PAGE 32
Photo © Editions Rencontre, Lausanne. Engraving from Histoire de la Musique vol. 14, Bibliothèque des Arts Décoratifs, Paris
Photo opposite page, researchers operate a digital synthesizer, an apparatus for creating
electronic music which, when coupled to a computer, can provide taped recordings of an
almost limitless range of pitch, timbre and volume. Small synthesizers can also be used
for the production of "live" electronic music. Above, thematic graph for an orchestral
composition. Based on an initial analysis by a computer, it guides the composer as to the
options open to him in the development of a composition for orchestra. Top photo, the
"Song of Songs", a Flemish engraving of the 17th century.
29

loudspeaker sound wave
computer
digital-to-analogue
converter
Music by numbers
By making available to the
composer a new gamut of
sounds, ranging from
random noise to pure tones,
and by allowing him, if he
wishes, to dispense with
instrumentalists and address
his audience directly, the
computer has revolutionized
musical composition. In
addition, the computer has
opened up new fields of
acoustical, theoretical and
musicological research and
analysis and can be used to
process musical notation and
to print music. Top right, a
three-dimensional computer-
generated display of two
seconds of playing time of a
melody played on an oboe.
The composer can feed
information into the
computer in the form of
numbers or by writing with a
light-pen on an input screen,
left. Top left, the computer
processes this information
which is then passed
through a digital-to-analogue
converter, an apparatus that
transforms data from the
computer into electrical
impulses that cause a
loudspeaker to vibrate and
produce sound. Right,
computer-produced graphs
of half a second of sound
synthetized by a computer to
simulate the sound of a
trumpet and the same sound
analysed and broken down
by the computer into six of
the most important
harmonics of which the
sound is constituted.
30

31

CONTINUED FROM PAGE 29
^solute" which, by last-minute adjustments
at the moment of interpretation, becomes
"relative"; what creates the musical or
dramatic event is the passage of the per¬
formers along this tightrope between cer¬
tainty on the one hand and uncertainty on
the other. Any future application of com¬
puter technology to music will have to take
account of this need for uncertainty, and of
the question whether machine-made music
should be a finished product or, on the con¬
trary, merely a framework to be filled in at
the moment of performance.
In order to understand what is involved
more clearly, let us look at some of the ways
in which electronic techniques are, or might
be applied in the field of music, beginning
with the reproduction of sound. In a con-,
ventional sound reproduction system, vibra¬
tions picked up by a microphone are
transformed, or "transduced" into an elec¬
tric current, and then converted back into
vibrations by means of a loudspeaker. But
while they are in the form of an electric cur¬
rent, the sounds can be subjected to various
kinds of treatment; they can, for example,
be amplified or recorded.
Suppose now that we connect to the out¬
put of the microphone a device which
measures the current induced by various
sounds and which converts these
measurements into another scale of
values into a set of numbers, for example.
If we feed these numbers into a second
device, which is capable of carrying out the
operation in reverse, we shall obtain a fresh
current; this in turn can be converted into
vibrations, and hence sound, by a
loudspeaker.
But will the current leaving the
microphone be identical with that entering
the loudspeaker? Not exactly, because dur¬
ing the process of measuring the former and
transforming it into a numbered code, the
first device (called by computer scientists an
"analogue-to-digital converter") will have
"dropped" the fragments of current which
passed during the intervals between
measurements, thus failing to encode those
fragments for the second device (the
"digital-to-analogue converter"). In other
words, the output from the microphone is
continuous, while the input into the
loudspeaker is discontinuous. In practical
terms, however, that is to say as far as the
perception of sounds by the human ear is
concerned, and provided that the current is
measured at sufficiently close intervals, the
listener will be unable to distinguish bet¬
ween what goes into the microphone and
what emerges from the loudspeaker.
Suppose now that we eliminate the direct
source of sound, dispense with the
microphone, and replace the analogue-to-
digital converter by a computer, which we
instruct to produce a set of numbers based
on the same sort of values as those
measured earlier, the information provided
by the computer will result in synthetic
sound in other words in sound whose
origins lie nowhere in the natural world, and
which the natural world may well be in¬
capable of producing.
Let us take a specific example to make
this notion of the synthesis of sound more
clear. Percussive sounds, such as those ob¬
tained by striking the surface of a wooden or
hide-covered instrument, are very rich and
complex, but they are of short duration and
not self-sustained. They may be considered
as being similar to "noise" and it may be dif¬
ficult to fit them into any logical arrange¬
ment or pattern because they often depend
on chance and on the varied nature of the
materials with which they are made. With
the use of electronic devices, their distinc¬
tive quality, or timbre, can be produced ar¬
tificially and at precisely the required mo¬
ment, for the length of time required and
with the desired gradations of loudness or
softness; what is more, whole families of
sounds of the same tone-colour, linked by a
scale or an imposed system of values, can
be synthesized in this way.
Thus, solutions can be found to problems
which nature itself pronounced intractable,
the potential of existing sound-making
materials can be extended, and all the condi¬
tions are realized for a leap into the
unknown; although the latter exercise re¬
quires at least as much enthusiasm as scep¬
ticism, because we are still too attached to
"nature" (whether in the domesticated form
beloved of European and other civilizations,
or in its untamed state) to be able to imagine
or perceive without difficulty what is, quite
literally, "unheard of". It is certainly true,
nevertheless, that as far as the synthesis of
sound is concerned, the only limits are those
imposed by the imagination of the
"technician-performer" who operates the
equipment.
In this new context, the musician can no
longer content himself with knowledge bas¬
ed on the heritage of sound transmitted by
his own or other civilizations; he can no
longer rely on the amalgam of musical and
aesthetic notions which has, up to now and
notwithstanding certain developments in
language and signification, prescribed a
priori which sounds are "permissible" in ac¬
cordance with historically-determined
criteria. Moving like an astronaut into the
outer space of aesthetics, exploring and
familiarizing himself with the unknown, the
modern musician must in order to carry
out certain specific tasks have the groun¬
ding in mathematics and physics which will
enable him to determine the relationship
between "physical" and "musical" sound.
This requirement is not as extravagant as
it may appear. For example, when a com¬
poser learns to compose and arrange music
for a particular instrument, he is not ex¬
pected to be able to play the instrument in
question with outstanding virtuosity; nor is
he expected to be able to construct it, or to
analyse scientifically its acoustic potential.
He is expected, on the other hand, to know
the tones the instrument is capable of pro¬
ducing in a particular register, according to
the manner in which it is played, and the
practical applications as well as the limita¬
tions imposed by its construction. He is also
expected to understand, through extensive
background reading, its aesthetic signi¬
ficance within the overall context of musical
expression.
In the field of electronic, or "machine-
made" music, the need to determine the
relationship between physical and musical
sound, and to integrate this relationship in
the creative process, entails the develop¬
ment of new skills. Rare are the composers
who are sufficiently versed in the new
techniques to apply them unhesitatingly, or
who have developed an adequate intuitive
feeling for the unknown. What is required,
in fact, is a judicious blend of knowledge
and intuition, making it possible to look
ahead, and to extrapolate on the basis of
established data. But these same data,
derived from the familiar, instrumental
world, can themselves serve as raw material
which, analysed and then transformed, can
be used to produce results so far removed
from the initial source that the latter is well-
nigh unidentifiable.
Analogue-to-digital conversion which, as
we saw above, involves the transformation
of some physical quantity (in this case,
sound) into a numerical coding, in fact pro¬
vides data which the computer can process
in two different directions. In the first place,
relatively simple operations such as filtering,
the inclusion of echo effects, or various
types of modulation can alter the initial
sound, and lead to substantial transforma¬
tion of the original tone-colour. Although
the results obtained are sometimes very in¬
teresting, they are not easily controllable,
and their use soon leads to tiresome
monotony. Instead of being highly in¬
dividualized, particular and selective, the
timbre imparted by the instrument loses its
character and emerges after processing as
anonymous and banal.
It may prove more interesting and worth¬
while, therefore, to explore the second
possibility offered by the computer that of
analysing and extracting from the data the
parameters which constitute a given sound
or timbre. A whole series of techniques is
available in this connexion, the most impor¬
tant of which at the present time involves
identification, at a given moment, of the ex¬
act note produced by the instrument con¬
cerned. Once this "fundamental sound" has
been extracted, a process of synthesis can
be initiated, following with a very high
degree of precision the sequence of inter¬
vals monodic, naturally produced by the
instrument.
However, a certain number of scientific
and technical difficulties remain to be over¬
come. The richer the sound produced by the
instrument, the harder it is for the detecting
device (on which the analogue-to-digital
conversion depends) to cope with the dif¬
ferent characteristics, some of them of an
extremely fleeting nature, of the sound
received. The risk of inaccuracy is con¬
sequently increased, especially if it is intend¬
ed to extract these characteristics in a real¬
time operation; when this is the case, what
would normally be considered as a perfectly
acceptable margin of error becomes quite in¬
admissible and the whole system is called in
question as a result.
The notion of real-time operation is one to
which musicians are firmly attached, since it
allows for the inclusion, in the act of inter¬
pretation, of an element of chance, or rather
of opportunity in the most positive sense of
the term. This being so, it would appear
logical, if not indispensable, to consider the
computer, in its musical role, as an instru¬
ment just like all the other instruments
which depend on different techniques.
It should be noted, however, that bet¬
ween the emission of two sound signals the
computer must carry out about 100 opera¬
tions (additions, multiplications and other
calculations); but the time interval between
two signals is about 30 millionths of a
second. This means that, in real-time work¬
ing, no more than 300 thousand millionths
of a second are available for each of these
calculations.
No computer at present on the market is
capable of working at this speed, and it is
32

thus necessary to separate the operation in¬
to two parts. In the first stage, the computer
makes the required calculations at its own
speed, and commits the resultant data to
memory. In the second stage, it transforms
these data into sound signals, transmits
them at the required speed, and records
them on a conventional magnetic tape.
When the time comes for the concert, the
tape is available and all that is then required
is a tape recorder on which to play it.
The undoubted advantage of such a pro¬
cedure is that it involves relatively inexpen¬
sive equipment, which can be transported
without difficulty to the concert hall. On the
other hand, pre-recorded music is definitive;
it excludes all possibility of different inter¬
pretations and leaves no room for "chance"
during performance.
It should be possible, however, in the not
too distant future, to introduce micro¬
processors into the system, by means of
which pre-recorded music can, to some
small extent, be modulated during perfor¬
mance. Furthermore, it is possible to con¬
struct specialized machines which, linked to
an appropriate computer, can modify the
functioning of the latter to the extent that
real-time processing and the synthesis of
sound become attainable objectives. In this
case, the computer becomes a musical in¬
strument, in its own right, and can be
"played" by means of appropriate at¬
tachments such as keyboards, poten¬
tiometers or contacts. Since they can be
used both to produce sounds of their own
making, and to modify the sounds produced
by other instruments, these specialized
assemblages allow for individual "interpreta¬
tions"; the operator can combine these two
modes at the moment of performance.
Like the composer of electronic music,
the "technician-performer" must now cope
with new problems; he must have the basic
knowledge which enables him to under¬
stand the instantaneous phenomena pro¬
voked by manipulation of the machine, and
this poses the question of his training. The
rules for "playing" a computer differ from
those which govern the use of traditional in¬
struments, since the former picks up signals
other than those sensed by the human ear
or, at least, reacts to them differently. For
example, variations in the attack of a sound
which pass unnoticed by the ear, can be
detected by the machine, as can fine
nuances of range or pitch. On the other
hand, the ear can notice aesthetic subtleties
which leave the computer unmoved.
The computer can do more than create or
transform sounds. It can also schematize
and analyse the mechanics of musical
language, and convert music itself into
visual displays. This is probably the field of
application in which least has been achieved
so far, and the results of research, con¬
ducted in perhaps too rudimentary or too
academic a fashion, are somewhat disap¬
pointing. Following the example of the
linguists, who have used the computer for
highly specific purposes, certain musicians
have indeed attempted to analyse the
classical techniques of counterpoint and
harmony, but the results achieved are in no
way comparable with those obtainable by
any competent student of music who ap¬
plies his imagination and aesthetic sense to
good effect.
Why, in a contrapuntal composition, and
despite the fact that it obeys exactly the
same laws and interdictions, is one melodic
CONTINUED PAGE 38
Photo All Rights Reserved


MAESTRO COMPUTER ¡continued from page 33)
line more pleasing than another? This is an
aesthetic question which seems difficult to
answer in quantitative terms. Nor do I
believe that the precise reasons will ever be
found. For centuries past, analysts and
musicologists have done all that they can to
prove to us that masterpieces are master¬
pieces, that the melodic inflections of one
composer are extraordinary and that the har¬
monic sequences of another are unique.
Despite literal analysis and an abundance of
grammatical explanation, no convincing
theory has ever been produced to answer
the question of what constitutes excellence
and I fear that the computer will be of no
help at all in this connexion.
But let us turn once again to the much
more immediate problem of training. The
entry of computer technology into the world
of music means that new disciplines will
have to be learned. Mathematics, computer
programming and the physics of sound
must henceforward form part of the cur¬
riculum of the apprentice musician. At the
same time, the new technology should en¬
courage the practitioner to perfect his skills,
and to enhance his own sensitivity to sound;
it should help him to listen more analytically,
to distinguish the components of a harmony
and to modify their relative importance, and
to perceive immediately the effect of this
modification to tone-colour; his under¬
standing of the role and function of timbre
will be facilitated accordingly.
Before concluding, I must refer to one of
the most urgent issues faced by non-
instrumental music, the question of its
storage and diffusion. The past sixty years
have seen revolutionary developments as far
as the conservation and dissemination of
recorded works is concerned; it may be sup¬
posed that the computer and the techniques
of digital computing will bring further im¬
mense changes in this field.
First and foremost, the possibility of
stocking digitally coded sound permits con¬
servation over longer . periods, since the
method of encoding excludes all possibility
of sound interference or degradation. As far
as synthetic sound is concerned all that
need be stored are the parameters required
for its reconstitution by the computer; this
will inevitably lead to a profound transfor¬
mation in the concept of musical scores,
and the characters and symbols employed in
their transcription. With regard to diffusion,
it may be hoped that the incorporation of
digital devices in electro-acoustic equipment
will enable music-lovers everywhere to
become more active listeners, and allow
them to express their individuality by
transforming and to a certain extent
manipulating recorded sounds.
From all the above, it may be seen that
music has nothing to lose from contact with
the computer. For my part, I believe that it
has much to gain, provided that the meeting
takes place on fertile ground. Far from
crushing or annihilating individuality, the
new techniques present a challenge, no
greater and no less than that issued by their
predecessors, to those qualities of inven¬
tiveness, ingenuity and outstanding per¬
sonality which have at all times been
necessary for the creation of new works of
art.
Pierre Boulez
Letters
to
the editor
SOLIDARITY AND
SELF-HELP FOR THE SAHEL
Sir,
International Year of the Child 1979 made us more
aware than ever before of the critical problems
facing the developing countries and especially the
problems of the Sahel region of Africa. We learn¬
ed about the Sahel in geography lessons and from
essays by children in our class who know about
the situation there.
One of our classmates suggested that we
should create a group to help the children of the
Sahel, each of us making a regular contribution of
two francs a week. The idea was Immediately
accepted.
We hope that our project will help to bring a
little more food, technical, scientific and educa¬
tional assistance, and above all moral support, to
the people of the Sahel. To encourage other peo¬
ple in the quest for solutions to the grave pro¬
blems of our time we organized a special exhibi- .
tion in our school's documentation centre.
Would you tell us where we should address our
1,270 francs?
The children in our class would very much like
to make contact with other children in a school in
one of the countries of the Sahel.
Children of class 4A
Yvon Delbos mixed secondary school
Montignac sur Vezere
France
This letter was sent to Unesco's Co-operative
Action (CO-ACTION) Programme, which offers
individuals, groups and institutions the opportu¬
nity to participate in self-help community projects
throughout the world. The contributions from the
children of Montignac sur Vezere will go towards
a Co-Action development project to improve edu¬
cational and nutritional facilities in the Sahelian
region of eastern Senegal. Donations to the Co-
Action Programme, in the form of cheques, inter¬
national money orders or bank transfers, as well
as requests for further information, should be
addressed to: Unesco Co-operative Action Pro¬
gramme, OPI, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris,
France. EDITOR.
YOUTH AND
TOMORROW'S WORLD
Sir,
An ardent reader of the Courier, I admire the
objectivity with which you cover the problems of
this tempestuous world. Your coverages of the
problems of pollution and the arms race were
unique. Children are the hope for the future. Why
should their future be threatened by adult myo¬
pia, insensitivity, greed and conceit? I should like
you to highlight the problems uncontrolled pollu¬
tion and the arms race pose for young people who
are a light in the darkness of this vainglorious and
bewitched era.
Chris Agugdesi
University of Lagos
Nigeria
We regret that owing to a technical
error during the printing of the
colour pages, Wassily Kandinsky's
painting Yellow-Red-Blue (page 21)
is reproduced upside down.
BOOKSHELF
RECENT UNESCO
BOOKS
Time and the Sciences, edited by
Frank Greenaway. Based on papers pre¬
sented at a specialist meeting on "Time
and the Sciences: the Impact of Scientific
Expressions of Time on Differing Cul¬
tures" held at the Royal Institution in
London. The third publication in
Unesco's "At the Crossroads of
Cultures" series, which seeks to establish
communication between contemporary
cultures through studies of concepts that
are fundamental to everyday life and cen¬
tral to any systematic and comprehensive
view of the world. 182 pp. (32 F)
Red Thread Riddles, by Virginia Allen
Jensen and Polly Edman. A fun booklet
for sightless children of six to ten. It has
embossed illustrations in colour, and its
text is in Braille and ink-print, so that
both visually handicapped and non-
handicapped children may use it.
(Requests for copies of this booklet
should should be sent to Mr. F. H. Pot¬
ter, Unesco Courier Division, Unesco,
Place de Fontenoy 75700 Paris, France.
Conservation Standards for Works
of Art in Transit and Exhibition, by
Nathan Stolow. 129 pp. (44 F).
New Values and Principles of
Cross-cultural Communication, by
Alcino Louis da Costa, Yehia Aboubakr,
Pran Chopra and Fernando Reyes Matta.
(No. 85 in Unesco's "Reports and Papers
on Mass Communication" series). 51 pp.
(10 F).
Cultural Policy in the Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, prepared by
the Institute of Art Criticism, Ethno¬
graphy and Folklore of the Academy of
Sciences of the Byelorussian SSR. ("Stu¬
dies and Documents on Cultural Policies"
series). 53 pp. (10 F).
Review of Research on Salt-
affected Soils, by I. Szabolcs, with a
bibliography compiled by G. Varallyay.
(No. 15 In Unesco's "Natural Resources
Research" series). 137 pp. (38 F).
Impact of Urbanization and Indus¬
trialization on Water Resources Plan¬
ning and Management. Report of the
Unesco/International Hydrological Pro¬
gramme Workshop on impact of urbani¬
zation and industrialization on regional
and national water planning, held at
Sandvoort (Netherlands) in 1977. Based
on a draft prepared by Floris C. Zuidema.
(No. 26 in Unesco's "Studies and Reports
in Hydrology" series). 111 pp. (30 F).
School Furniture Handbook, Vol. I:
General and Specific Aspects, Vol. 2:
Practical Examples and Illustrations.
Information and guidance on all aspects
of furniture for educational buildings,
with particular emphasis on conditions in
developing countries. (The two-volume
set: 90 F).
38
