The mythical world
of Picasso
THE bull plays a prominent role in Medi¬
terranean mythology. Divine bulls are
depicted in the frescoes of Minoan Crete
and in ancient Majorcan bronzes, and the
bull's special place is still perpetuated in the
corrida of Andalusia. This mythology was
often used by Picasso, who saw in the
bullfight the symbolism of a basic duality.
The bull is brute force. The horse disem¬
bowelled by its horns is innocence.
At the height of the Spanish Civil War,
horrified by the destruction of the Basque
town of Guernica by the Nazi airforce on
Franco's orders, Picasso took this theme as
the central idea for his great mural Guernica
(illustration page 16). The conception of this
painting was based on the themes which he
by A. Cirici Pellicer
had already handled in his bullfighting
etchings.
The dynamism of the work, like its theme,
is in line with the classical tradition as
represented by the subject of 77?e Rape of
the Sabine Women, a conventional exercise
which enabled painters and sculptors to
tackle the problems of violence, the physical
victory of brute force, and the ethics and
aesthetics of innocence.
The idea of associating brutality with large
animals was as traditional as that of taking
female figures as the incarnation of the vic¬
tims, endowed with the positive forces of
virtue and beauty. The bull and the horse
epitomize the great drama of violence, while
woman plays a humanizing role: the woman
who cries out and the woman who bears her
dead child in her arms; the woman calling
for action and the woman in agony.
Bullfighting and The Rape of the Sabine
Women, the two main vibrant themes of
Guernica, were returned to many times by
Picasso, in his paintings and to an even
greater extent in his prolific output of
graphic work. There is a magnificent prece¬
dent for the mythology of Guernica in the
Minotauromachy, the etching which he
made in 1935 and in which a huge and som¬
bre Minotaur, half-man, half-bull, has just
disembowelled a horse which, as the victim,
is identified with femininity and whose
entrails form the beautiful body of a
woman.
Interior of the "Temple of Peace" at Vallauris In the South of France, showing War (left) and Peace (right), the two vast murals (each
470 cm. by 1,020 cm.) painted in 1952.
41

Joie do Vivre, also called Pastorale, 1946. Oil on fibro-cement, 120x250 cm.
, Joie de Vivre
In 1946, the Spanish Civil War and the Se¬
cond World War at an end, Picasso painted
another major mural. Joie de Vivre (illustra¬
tion this page), at Antibes in the south of
France. The work, a kind of counterpoise to
Guernica, was painted after Picasso had
proposed to the municipality of Antibes that
he should fill all the space in the old Grimaldi
Palace there, turning it into a museum of his
work. This was his way of paying tribute to a
town that had been founded by the Greeks,
and to all that it stood for as a symbol of the
Mediterranean.
The painting is a complete contrast with
Guernica. Whereas in Guernica all is
violence, in Joie de Vivre all is peace. The
blacks and greys have given way to the
purest and softest tones of blue. The exag¬
gerated, relentless movement is superseded
by a sense of calm expressed by the
counterpoint of vertical lines with the
horizontal line of the sea. If Guernica can be
compared to the Rape of the Sabine
Women, then Joie de Vivre can be com¬
pared to Botticelli's Birth of Venus. A splen¬
did female nude is the centrepiece in both
paintings. In both cases the sea forms the
background. The same two groups fill each
side of the two pictures.
These paintings represent the two ex¬
tremes of a single vision of reality. In Guer¬
nica we have the condemnation of Evil,
which is identified with brute force, while in
Joie de Vivre we have a hymn to Good,
which is identified with the sensual pleasure
of beautiful bodies, music, dancing and the
pleasant climate of the Mediterranean. It is a
hymn to freedom.
The identification of the Mediterranean
with freedom is a recurrent theme in
Picasso's work. The Spanish writer Eugenio
d'Ors went so far as to assert that the artisfs
true homeland was the Mediterranean. I
once heard him say that the peoples of An¬
dalusia, Catalonia and Provence were all
made of the same stuff because they were
"Mediterranean", and, he added, "Madrid
and Paris will never understand us". In this
bipolarity, Madrid and Paris clearly epitomiz-
42
ed power, regimentation, the law and the
force of coercion, while Andalusia,
Catalonia and Provence represented life on
the fringe of society, as well as defiance and
even, if necessary, deceit, when there was
any question of breaking free of constraints
and living life to the full.
War and Peace
Unfortunately, the war that ended in 1945
was not the last, and the sky of Joie de Vivre
did not remain cloudless for long. In 1951
and 1952 Picasso produced several paintings
which expressed his reaction to the Korean
War.
His Massacre in Korea of 1951 is another
monumental historical frieze. This time, the
figures are divided into two camps, but not
into two balanced camps as in Velazquez'
Surrender of Breda, nor into two unbalanc¬
ed camps as in Goya's The Third of May
1808, but simply into two, totally separate,
camps treated in a way which perhaps no
one had used since Giotto. The Manichean
dichotomy is highly typical of Picasso. On
one side the shapes are organic, on the
other they are mechanical. Soft contours
confront hard, stabbing forms; smooth,
rounded shapes confront rigid lines; realistic
figures confront monsters.
This dichotomy is fully expressed in the
two panels Picasso painted in 1952 to
decorate a chapel at Vallauris. One depicts
war, the other peace. They are over ten
metres long, bigger even than Guernica.
War is a monstrosity where all is confusion.
The fact that the wheels of the large cart are
square is symptomatic. The horses are not
the limp, broken-down hacks of the
Tauromachies. Their hooves are inordinately
heavy. The warriors are wildly gesticulating
silhouettes. The atmosphere is one of
desolation.
Picasso frequently identifies the male with
mindless violence, and here it is noteworthy
that male figures predominate in the per¬
sonification of Evil. By contrast, the vision
of peace focuses on femininity and
childhood, the two concepts idealized by
the artist, who is unfailingly loyal to the
value he sets on innocence and his
predisposition in favour of the victim.
There is also a horse, but whereas the
horse is the victim of the Tauromachy, here
it has been reprieved and is a winged
Pegasus escaping from ill-fate. A fiery sun,
shaped like a child's kite and decorated with
ears of corn, presides over the scene, in
which the moon is also seen as a kite. There
are vines with clusters of grapes and an
orange tree loaded with oranges, but above
all there are women and children women
who are dancing and children who are run¬
ning or playing the flute. One child is amus¬
ing himself by harnessing Pegasus to a
plough, while the women are tending the
children or are cooking or writing.
The lines and splashes of colour in War
are graceless, hard, angular and weak,
whereas those in Peace display a delicate
sophistication, reaching the very limits of
the impossible foreshortening effects that
are so dear to Picasso and are the spearhead
of his pleasure in playing the game of
creation.
The Meninas
In my view, the cycle of Picasso's main
mythological themes comes to a close with
the series of glosses which he painted in the
late 1950s on Velazquez' celebrated work
Las Meninas ("the little ladies-in-waiting")
(photo 1 overleaf). These are possibly the
most revealing of all his mythological com¬
positions, and by comparing them with
Velazquez' painting, noting the colours
Picasso uses, and the way he increases or
reduces the size of Velazquez' figures, we
can form a precise idea of his system of
values and learn which values he regards as
positive and which as negative (see
overleaf).
From the colours Picasso employs we can
immediately grasp his fundamental position.
"Heavenly" colours such as the yellow of
the sun and the bright blue of the sky he
uses exclusively for the innocent figures: for
the young princess who is the main subject
of Velazquez' painting and who, in spite of

her rank, is still too small to be caught up in
her family's system of aggression; for the
monstrous dwarf María Barbóla (second
from right in Velazquez' painting), who is in¬
nocent because she does not possess all her
mental faculties; and for the smaller dwarf
Pertusato (far right in Velazquez' painting),
who is a harmless and childlike buffoon. The
other figures are either gloomy apparitions
in black or grey, or are painted in colours
( red for fire and green for poison) traditional¬
ly associated with demons in Iberian
folklore.
In one version he uses only greyish tones
because, as in Guernica, he wishes to con¬
centrate on showing us, without the in¬
terference of colour, the sheer force of
draughtsmanship and the values of light and
shadow.
There are even more striking lessons to be
learnt when we turn away from the colours
Picasso uses, so different from the golden
tones that suffuse Velazquez' original pain¬
ting, to examine the linear composition of
his Meninas. The most significant feature
here is the greatly increased size of the
figure of the painter, who in Picasso's pain¬
tings appears as a giant whose head almost
touches the ceiling, making all the other
figures look small. In one of Picasso's ver¬
sions (photo 2 on next page) the painter is
shown with an enormous cross of St. James
on his chest, a cruel satire on the vanity of
Velazquez, who painted the cross on himself
to symbolize the fact that he was a member
of the nobility although in point of fact he
was not. The enormous hooks in the ceiling,
like those used in butchers' shops for hang¬
ing sides of beef, constitute another striking
feature of the same work. Similar hooks ap¬
pear in Velazquez' picture, but they are
scarcely noticeable in the shadow and were
presumably used for hanging lamps. Their
increased size in Picasso's painting makes
the room look like a torture chamber.
Picasso creates a tragic atmosphere in
which the scene depicted by Velazquez in
Madrid's Alcazar Palace is transformed so as
to convey the sinister nature of ab¬
solutism two figures in the
background, for example, are made to
resemble upended coffins. The shapes of
the main figures are highly significant and
Picasso returns to them in each of the varia¬
tions. A round-shaped face is associated
with goodness and innocence. It is the
shape of the sun and the ball used in games.
It has no sharp edges; it is agreeable; it is
feminine.
The princess and the two dwarfs all have
round faces. In contrast, Picasso depicts the
two obsequiously flattering ladies-in-waiting
who flank the princess, with sharp, angular
features and pointed heads. These ladies-in-
waiting, Isabel de Velasco (offering water to
the princess) and Maria Agustino Sarmiento
(kneeling) are made to appear anti¬
pathetic and distinctly aggressive.
The contrast between the round faces of
the good people, painted in yellows or sky-
blue, and the sharp faces, the reds and
greens, of the evil-doers, is a feature com¬
mon to all the variations.
One painting in the Meninas series is par¬
ticularly revealing (see photo 3 overleaf). It
shows María Barbóla flanked by two figures.
Its composition closely resembles the central
part of the Velazquez painting (in which the
young princess is seen standing between
the two maids-of-honour), and yet the foot
of the figure at right, above the dog, is that
of Pertusato. The central figure can thus be
identified as María Barbóla, whom Picasso
has substituted for the princess. The face of
the figure at the left, Isabel de Velasco, is
turned in a different direction from that in
the Velazquez painting: she is shown adop¬
ting the same servile attitude to the idiot
child as she does to the princess in the
original painting. Picasso thus expresses his
egalitarian idea that value is measured in
terms of goodness or innocence. This is why
he equates the princess with an idiot child.
In so doing he also underlines the stupidity
of the courtier who is ready to turn in any
direction if advantage can be gained from
making a bow or a curtsey.
The Meninas series is also interesting
because it includes a number of pictures il¬
lustrating views from "La Californie",
Picasso's Art Nouveau villa at Cannes,
whose balconies offer superb vistas of the
Mediterranean. Flocks of doves, the symbol
of peace which Picasso used so often, flit
across the blue sea and sky. This sea and
this sky, so open and luminous, represent
liberty; they are the diametrical opposite of
the blacks, greys, and other sinister tones
used to depict the world of absolutism. This
helps us to grasp the full mythological
meaning of the Meninas series. Absolutism
is seen to stand for stupidity, confinement,
cruelty and servility and, at the very ex¬
treme, diabolical aggressiveness. Freedom,
on the other hand, is synonymous with
responsiveness, happiness and spontaneous
vitality, and is the handmaiden of peace. |
ALEXANDRE CIRICI PELLICER, Spanish art
historian and art critic, is professor of the
sociology ofart at the University of Barcelona. He
is the author of some 80 published works in¬
cluding Picasso Antes de Picasso (Barcelona,
1946) and studies on the Catalonians Gaud!, Miró
and Tapies. He is also a member of the Spanish
Senate and of Spain's delegation to the European
Assembly in Strasbourg. This article is a hitherto
unpublished version of his contribution to the
Santander congress on Picasso.
A gigantic, 80-
square-metre mural
(right) was Picasso's
contribution to the
decoration of
Unesco's Paris
headquarters
buildings,
inaugurated in 1958.
The theme, the fall
of Icarus with a
beach and bathers,
has been seen as
symbolizing the
struggle of the
mind's living forces
against evil.
43
